==PAGE:1==
1 
 
 
Master’s Thesis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
“EmPowering the Base” 
Sustainable Business Model Innovations at the Base of the Pyramid: Social 
Entrepreneurs and Renewable Energy Provisioning in India 
 
 
Submitted By: 
Debasmita Dey 
Technical University of Munich | Technical University of Denmark 
 
Supervisors: 
Jay Sterling Gregg (UNEP DTU Partnership) 
Siddharth Vedula (Technical University of Munich) 
Francesco Rosati (Technical University of Denmark) 
 
Submitted on: 
July 25, 2021 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
Abstract 
To ensure access to reliable, affordable, and sustainable energy in the poorest rural 
communities of the developing nations, innovative business models are playing an 
increasingly important role. My research is an exploratory study to analyze how social 
entrepreneurs working in some of India‘s most remote villages are using sustainable business 
models to enable local communities to build their own clean energy future. The lens of 
business models combining activity-system perspective and sustainability dimensions has 
been used for this research. Based on in-depth case studies of four renewable energy ventures 
addressing energy inequality at the Base of the Pyramid (BoP), this qualitative research 
explores how these business models work – mapping the activities, their linkages, and 
governance – and how they demonstrate the sustainability characteristics. Despite the 
differences in the activity systems, the research reveals significant recurrent patterns in the 
business models. These include Community Relationship Management, Community 
Capability Building, Non-traditional Partnerships, Micro-entrepreneurship Modelling, and 
Innovative Financial Mobilization that run across all the business model innovations. My 
analysis highlights the significance of a collaborative bottom-up approach followed by these 
entrepreneurs. In each case, their plans include a clear relocation strategy, intended to foster 
self-reliance and sustainability of the local communities leading to empowerment. My work 
builds on the literature related to business models at the BoP in the context of energy 
inequality and has both practical and academic implications. 
 
Keywords: business models, activity system, value creation, sustainable business models, 
base of the pyramid, social entrepreneurship, business model innovations, renewable energy, 
developing economies, India 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
Table of Contents 
1. 
Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 8 
1.1 
Social Innovation, Social Entrepreneurship, and Business Models ............................ 9 
1.2 
Why Focus on India .................................................................................................. 10 
1.3 
Research Question Formulation ................................................................................ 11 
2. 
Theoretical Perspectives .................................................................................................. 13 
2.1 
Business Models ........................................................................................................ 13 
2.2 
Sustainable Business Model Literature ..................................................................... 15 
3. 
Methodology .................................................................................................................... 20 
3.1 
Method and Case Selection ....................................................................................... 20 
3.2 
Data Collection .......................................................................................................... 24 
3.3 
Data Analysis ............................................................................................................ 26 
4. 
Results and Discussion .................................................................................................... 28 
4.1 
Within-Case Analysis Results ................................................................................... 28 
4.1.1 
Orora Global: Business Model & Value Creation ............................................. 28 
4.1.2 
Global Himalayan Expedition: Business Model & Value Creation .................. 30 
4.1.3 
ONergy Solar: Business Model & Value Creation ............................................ 31 
4.1.4 
DESI Power: Business Model & Value Creation .............................................. 33 
4.1.5 
Analysis of Sustainability Dimensions in the Business Models ........................ 35 
4.2 
Cross-Case Analysis Results ..................................................................................... 39 
4.2.1 
Community Relationship Management ............................................................. 40 
4.2.2 
Community Capability Building ........................................................................ 43 
4.2.3 
Non-traditional Partnerships .............................................................................. 47 
4.2.4 
Micro-entrepreneurship Modelling .................................................................... 49 
4.2.5 
Innovative Financial Mobilization Models: ....................................................... 50 
4.3 
Discussion ................................................................................................................. 53 
4.3.1 
Contributions...................................................................................................... 54 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
4.3.2 
Policy Recommendations................................................................................... 56 
5. 
Limitations and Future Research ..................................................................................... 58 
6. 
Conclusion ....................................................................................................................... 59 
7. 
References ........................................................................................................................ 61 
8. 
Appendix .......................................................................................................................... 65 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
List of Figures 
Figure 1. Activity System Perspective of Business Models .................................................... 15 
Figure 2: Sustainable Business Model Characteristics. ........................................................... 19 
Figure 3: Research Flow Chart ................................................................................................ 27 
Figure 4. Business Model of Orora from activity- system perspective ................................... 29 
Figure 5. Social, Environmental and Economic value created by Orora ................................. 29 
Figure 6. Business Model of GHE from activity- system perspective .................................... 31 
 Figure 7. Social, Environmental and Economic value created by GHE ................................. 31 
Figure 8. Business Model of ONergy from activity-system perspective ................................. 32 
Figure 9. Social, Environmental and Economic value created by ONergy ............................. 33 
Figure 10. Business Model of DESI Power from activity-system perspective........................ 34 
Figure 11. Social, Environmental and Economic value created by DESI Power .................... 34 
Figure 12. Recurrent Patterns in the Studied Business Models ............................................... 40 
Figure 13. Collaborative Bottom-up Approach and Relocation post Self-reliance ................. 54 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
List of Tables 
Table 1. Profiles of the Studied Social Enterprises.................................................................. 24 
Table 2. Primary and Secondary Data Collection .................................................................... 25 
Table 3. Business Model Analysis ........................................................................................... 26 
Table 4: Multiple Stakeholder Approach of the Studied Enterprises ...................................... 38 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
List of abbreviations 
BM 
 
Business Model 
CBM  
Conventional Business Model 
SBM  
Sustainable Business Model 
BMfS  
Business Model for Sustainability 
BoP 
 
Base of the Pyramid 
GHE  
Global Himalayan Expedition (case company) 
DESI  
Decentralized Energy Systems India (case company) 
GW 
 
GigaWatt 
UN 
 
United Nations 
SDG  
Sustainable Development Goals 
PV 
 
Photovoltaics 
MNC  
Multi-national Corporations 
GoI 
 
Government of India 
O&M  
Operations and Maintenance 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
1. Introduction  
Social entrepreneurship in a developing economy, especially as a form of entrepreneurship 
directed towards addressing social problems related to energy access (Swanson & Zhang, 
2011) is of critical importance for the Base of the Pyramid communities (Prahalad, 2006). 
Social entrepreneurs use business model innovations as a tool to create social and 
environmental value in an economically sustainable way. 
Social value creation in the world's developing economies is fraught with challenges. These 
include - but are not limited to - scale, coordination, and sustainability (Rao-Nicholson et al., 
2017).  Therefore, in addressing the challenges to bringing about social change and creating 
sustainable value in developing economies, social entrepreneurship plays a crucial role 
(Sinkovics et al., 2014).  
The empowerment of marginalized communities by social entrepreneurial ventures and social 
innovation initiatives is driven by business model innovations (Mongelli & Rullani, 2017). 
Social innovation and social enterprises, mobilized by innovative business models, offer a 
constructive way to develop solutions that empower the marginalized communities and 
produce value in social and economic terms (Mongelli & Rullani, 2017).   
The number of people without access to electricity in developing economies stood at 770 
million in 2019 (IEA, 2020b). Though the number has reduced over the last decade, the lack 
of reliable energy access remains a persistent problem in developing economies, particularly 
with the pandemic thwarting progress that had been made in this area (IEA, 2020b). A 
significant push to promote renewable energy for the underserved communities is needed to 
achieve United Nations‘ Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) Target 7.2. This states that 
the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix must be increased substantially by 
2030 (United Nations, 2015). Thus it becomes imperative to provision for renewable energy 
in developing economies to achieve energy transition and energy equality through 
technological innovations. 
Social entrepreneurship is required for the successful adaption of renewable energy 
technologies to the underserved or the grassroots communities, also known as the base of the 
pyramid (BoP). It is more applicable than conventional entrepreneurship in this segment of 
the population because in addressing energy inequality, it takes into account the socio-
economic circumstances at the BoP (Austin et al., 2006). Therefore, the problem of energy 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
equality at the BoP can be duly addressed by social entrepreneurs with their business model 
innovations.  
Bringing together social entrepreneurship at the BoP, business model innovations, and 
renewable energy provisioning in the context of developing economies, this research presents 
an exploratory study of how social entrepreneurs are enabling renewable energy access in 
rural India. I study the business models of four social enterprises working at the intersection 
of renewable energy and BoP in three widely varied parts of India (South, East, and North). 
This study draws insights into the entrepreneurs' value chain activities, describes their social, 
economic, and environmental value creation, analyses their sustainability characteristics, and 
identifies recurring patterns in the business models.  It also highlights the significance of a 
collaborative bottom-up approach followed by these entrepreneurs. In each case, their plans 
include a relocation strategy once the communities become self-reliant. This is grounded in 
their mission to empower the communities and make them self-sustainable. 
1.1 
Social Innovation, Social Entrepreneurship, and Business Models 
Phills et al. (2008) define social innovation as a ―novel solution to a social problem that is 
more effective, efficient, sustainable, or just than existing solutions and for which the value 
created accrues primarily to society as a whole rather than private individuals‖. Social 
entrepreneurship involves social innovation (Bornstein, 2004) and, creation of economically 
sustainable ventures that generate social value (Robinson, 2006). As per Acs et al. (2013), 
social entrepreneurship creates social value by acting as a change agent and/or providing 
social innovation by relying on a sustainable business model. The existence of a viable 
business model differentiates the value created by social entrepreneurship from other forms 
of social value creation (Sinkovics et al., 2014).  
Social enterprises, as hybrid organizations that pursue a social mission while striving for 
economic sustainability, leverage the capabilities of their beneficiaries to create value, 
empowering them in the process (Mongelli & Rullani, 2017). Social entrepreneurs aim for 
social inclusion, reintegration, and empowerment through social innovation that brings about 
the necessary change in society.  
The push for a renewable energy transition at the grassroots level requires both technological 
and social innovation. To achieve this, social entrepreneurs mobilize collective action in local 
communities. Although often overlooked, the social aspect is an essential component in 
pursuing energy transition (Gregg et al., 2020). The capabilities of the grassroots 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
communities, when harnessed by the social enterprises via innovative business models create 
socio-technical impact in an economically sustainable way. This can initiate and/or accelerate 
the energy transition process through cooperative behavior, thus reinforcing social innovation 
(Gregg et al., 2020). My goal is to explore these interactive and collective activities that bring 
about renewable energy transition as driven by social entrepreneurs working with the local 
communities at the BoP. 
BoP literature often presumes that poverty can be addressed using conventional business 
models with slight modifications (Dembek et al., 2018). The flaw with this approach is that it 
doesn‘t account for the complexity of systemic poverty, thus failing to consider issues that go 
beyond lack of income and wealth to include non-economic factors (Dembek et al., 2018). 
Sustainable business models (SMBs) are more appropriate to addressing poverty as they have 
a much broader outlook towards value creation at the BoP, looking beyond just creating 
products and services to meeting the material needs of this segment. Thus, sustainable 
business models offer a new way of assessing business models beyond customer and profit 
orientation. These models are more attuned to value creation for multiple stakeholders at BoP 
(Bocken et al., 2013). However, research has not fully explored SBMs in the BoP context 
(Dembek et al., 2018). In my research, I try to address this gap. I also explore how SBM 
characteristics create value for the social enterprises and the BoP communities with whom 
they work. 
A literature review of sustainable business models by Silvia and Truzzi (2020) reveals that 
research on SBMs focussed on companies that originate in the United States or EU leaving 
out the emerging economies of the world. Therefore, I try to draw attention to an emerging 
economy by investigating four social enterprises in rural India. This allows me to explore 
how their business models are instrumental in fostering value by merging the social, 
economic, and environmental dimensions. 
1.2 
Why Focus on India 
As the second-most populous country in the world with 1.4 billion inhabitants, India has two-
thirds of its population living in rural areas (IEA, 2020b). As one of the world's fastest-
growing developing economies, the country plays a vital role in global energy markets. The 
Indian economy opened to global trade and investment in 1991 and since then has received 
increasing attention from scholars and policymakers due to its rapid growth (Bhagavatula et 
al., 2019). However, the entrepreneurship engine that fuels this growth remains under-
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
researched (Bhagavatula et. al, 2019). At present, India‘s innovation and entrepreneurship 
ecosystem has achieved global integration with respect to technology, financing, human 
capital, and administration and is one of the largest in the world (Bhagavatula et al., 2019). 
My goal is to throw light on this under-researched aspect of entrepreneurship in the Indian 
economy. 
India has an ambitious renewable energy target of 175 GW of capacity addition by 2022 with 
40% cumulative electric capacity from non-fossil-fuel-based energy resources by 2030 
(Intended Nationally Determined Contributions, 2015). The country has deployed a total of 
84 GW of grid-connected renewable electricity capacity as of December 2019 (IEA, 2020a). 
However, centralized power generation from renewable sources would not reach the poor 
populations in remote rural areas due to poor transmission and distribution infrastructure. 
Thus, social entrepreneurs with decentralized renewable energy solutions play a crucial role 
in the country in the context of energy equality at the BoP. Since social entrepreneurship 
research has predominantly focused on high-income countries and ignored the phenomenon 
in developing and emerging economies (Plutshack et al., 2019), my research tries to address 
this gap by studying the business models of the social enterprises in the renewable energy 
sector in India. My aim is to analyze how sustainable value is created and captured by these 
business models at the grassroots level. 
1.3 
Research Question Formulation 
My research delineates the business model from an activity systems perspective as designed 
by social entrepreneurs. This consists of all activities carried out in the value chain, how they 
are linked and who performs which activities for the governance of the overall system. The 
business model thus becomes the unit of analysis, which is also investigated for sustainability 
and how the SBM characteristics manifest in them.  
The research question is formulated as follows:  
For social entrepreneurs addressing the renewable energy needs of the base of the pyramid 
in India, how do the business models work and how do they create sustainable value? 
The research question is answered by responding to the following sub-questions: 
1. How do the business models of the four social enterprises in this study function from an 
activity-system perspective? How are the value-chain activities linked and governed? 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
2. What are the value outcomes (social, environmental, and economic) of the business 
models? 
3. Do SBM characteristics manifest in the activity system of the business models? If so, 
how? 
4. How is sustainable value created by the business model design? 
To answer this question, I examine the business models that four social enterprises in the 
renewable energy sector in India have undertaken to provide renewable energy solutions to 
underserved communities. An exploratory study is performed to understand the nuances of 
the business models from an activity system perspective. Theoretically, I rely on the literature 
on business models and sustainable business models (SBM) by adapting the activity-based 
approach to business models (Zott & Amit, 2010) of content, structure, and governance and 
further combining it with the SBM characteristics (Dembek & York, 2020; Dembek et al., 
2018; Bocken et al., 2013, 2014). 
The purpose of this research is to gain insight into the creation and sustenance of value by 
social entrepreneurs through their business models. My focus is to understand how 
technology is converted into market outcomes at the BoP and to theorize a comprehensive 
approach for bringing about sustainable change for the underserved. 
The rest of the thesis is organized in the following way. First, I provide a brief overview of 
current perspectives regarding business models, elaborating on why the activity-system 
perspective of BMs combined with SBMs is the most suitable approach in this context.  
Secondly, I elaborate on the methodology of the research strategy, the selection of the four 
social enterprises (Orora, GHE, ONergy, and DESI Power) as case studies, data collection, 
and the analysis methodology employed. In the next step, I present the results based on an 
analysis of the business models to delineate 1. value chain activities, their linkages and 
governance, 2. value outcomes, and 3. the SBM characteristics of the models. Finally, I 
discuss my research findings regarding the collaborative bottom-up approach followed by 
these entrepreneurs and their relocation strategy upon fostering self-reliance in the 
communities leading to empowerment and self-sustainability. I round up by discussing the 
contributions of this study, its limitations, and future research implications. 
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
2. Theoretical Perspectives 
2.1 
Business Models  
Drawing on the literature stream for business models, it has been described generally as ―the 
story that explains how an enterprise works‖ (Magretta, 2002) and specifically as models 
―depicting the content, structure, and governance of transactions designed to create value 
through the exploitation of business opportunities‖ (Zott & Amit, 2010). The business model 
(BM) is a combination of a lot of elements like value proposition, a revenue model, and a 
network of relationships (Zott et al., 2011).  The concept of a business model revolves around 
a firm‘s value proposition, beneficiaries, revenue and costs, and the mechanisms to capture 
value. According to Osterwalder et al. (2010), a BM conveys the rationale, through which an 
organization creates, delivers, and retains value.  
The business model, which is conceptually placed between a firm‘s input resources and 
market outcomes, is mainly seen as a mechanism that connects a technological innovation to 
customer needs and the firm‘s other resources (Zott et al., 2011). Chesbrough & Rosenbloom 
(2002) define the business model as a ―blueprint of how a network of organization cooperates 
in creating and capturing the value from technological innovation‖.  
A firm‘s business model is researched not only to analyze and understand its components and 
mechanisms but also to use it as a frame against which other firms can be compared and 
measured. Zott & Amit (2007) suggest that there is a positive relationship between the 
business model of a firm and its performance. A business model that has already been applied 
with success provides a reference for other firms to emulate with some variations to account 
for success.  
The field of BM research is broad and is characterized by a range of concepts. It is an 
accepted unit of analysis in management research although it still lacks a unifying perspective 
(Foss & Saebi, 2015). A comprehensive theory to explain the phenomenon of business 
models is still missing. 
A shared notion on the topic of BM is that it gives a holistic picture of the business (Zott et 
al., 2011) that explains how a firm creates and captures mutual value i.e. for itself and its 
stakeholders. Scholars in this field agree on the value proposition, value creation, and value 
capture capabilities of a BM. Many scholars also agree that the business model is a source of 
competitive advantage (Baden-Fuller & Morgan, 2010; Chesbrough, 2007) and facilitates 
first-mover advantages (Markides & Sosa, 2013). However, a limitation in the field of BM 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
research has been the emphasis on studying business models as a set of elements rather than 
adopting a systems perspective (Franca et al., 2017).  The focus of research so far has been on 
what business models look like rather than how they function. 
Therefore, for this research to understand how the business models work from a systemic 
point of view, the activity system approach developed by Zott & Amit (2010) has been used. 
The activity system approach of analyzing business models gives a systemic perspective on 
what transpires within a business model. It shows how those activities are arranged, 
connected, and governed, which gives insight into the value creation logic of the business 
models (Dembek et al., 2018). The activity system perspective on business models extends 
beyond the firm‘s boundaries. Instead of focussing only on the underlying components, it 
provides a holistic view of all the activities and the actors (including the external actors) 
involved in it. This boundary-spanning holistic approach is suitable to address the complexity 
of challenges at the BoP that these business models attempt to resolve (Dembek et al., 2018). 
Activity System Perspective of Business Models 
As per Zott & Amit (2010), the business model is described as a system of interconnected 
and interdependent activities that determines the way the company does business with its 
stakeholders. These interdependent activities span the firm‘s boundaries and are characterized 
as ‗structure, content, and governance of transactions‘ (Zott & Amit, 2008, 2010). The 
business model can be conceived as a bundle of specific activities – an activity system – 
executed to meet the perceived needs of the market. It identifies which internal or external 
parties (or partners) conduct the activities, and how these activities are connected with each 
other. The company‘s activity system is characterized by three design elements - content, 
structure, and governance. 
Content: ‗Content‘ refers to the selection of activities that need to be performed to deliver the 
value proposition. It is the ―what‖ of the activity system.  
Structure: The structure of an activity system indicates how these activities are interlinked 
and in what sequence. It is the ―how‖ of the activity system i.e. how the required activities, 
processes, and capabilities add up to deliver the value proposition. This element, therefore, 
refers to the architecture of the value chain activities. 
Governance: ‗Governance‘ refers to who performs which activities. It can be interpreted as 
the ―who‖ of the activity system 
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
The activity system perspective of business models is depicted in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Activity System Perspective of Business Models (Source: Author. Adapted from 
Amit & Zott, 2010) 
Looking at business models from an activity standpoint, including the content (type) of 
activities, structure (how activities are linked), and governance (who performs them), helps 
analyze where and how they create value (Zott & Amit, 2010). Though each design element 
corresponds to an independent dimension, they are highly interdependent and changes in one 
can cause changes in the others. The activity system view of business models allows to 
explain how the business models work and for exploring the logic behind the value creation. 
A change in one or more of these elements changes the whole model which is referred to as a 
business model innovation (Zott & Amit, 2017). Thus the business model, as devised by the 
entrepreneur can be innovated upon to create a social and environmental impact and a 
favorable market outcome.  
The concept of the business model has been used by several scholars to explain value 
creation in networked markets (Zott & Amit, 2009) not only in the economical context but 
also in the social context. Seelos & Mair (2007), for example, have conceptualized a business 
model as a ―set of capabilities that is configured to enable value creation consistent with 
either economic or social strategic objectives‖. Markman et al. (2016) postulate that social 
entrepreneurial ventures cannot be understood without further research in the business 
models specifically business model innovations deployed by them. 
2.2 
Sustainable Business Model Literature 
As per Moratis et al. (2018), companies must adapt, modify or transform their business 
models to address the threats that characterize a dynamic ever-changing environment and 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
seize the emerging opportunities. One of the biggest challenges of our times, as reflected by 
climate change, poverty, inequalities, and the unsustainable use of resources is sustainability 
(United Nations, 2015) which has been acknowledged by the public, governments, and 
organizations alike.  Keeping this in mind, companies must remodel their businesses to 
contribute to sustainable development, which is defined as development capable of satisfying 
the needs of current generations without compromising the needs of future generations 
(World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987).  
The concept of Sustainable Business Models (SMBs) builds on the concept of a regular 
business model (BM). Research on SBMs is relatively new compared with research on BMs, 
which has been thoroughly researched by both academicians and practitioners since 1995 
(Silvia & Truzzi, 2020). Sustainable business models (SBM) broadens the perspective of 
ordinary business models by discarding the idea of BoP as a market segment and relooking at 
poverty as a systemic challenge that needs holistic solutions.  Though the exact definition of 
SBMs is still debated (Dembek et al., 2018), they are most often described as ―a business 
model that creates competitive advantage through superior customer value and contributes to 
a sustainable development of the company and society‖ (Lüdeke-Freund, 2010). SBMs have 
also been defined as BMs that integrate the proactive management of value creation for a 
wide range of stakeholders in both monetary and non-monetary terms from a long-term 
perspective (Geissdoerfer et al., 2018). In SBMs the principles of sustainability guide 
companies in decision-making processes (Stubbs & Cocklin, 2008). As per Schaltegger et al. 
(2016), a model that describes, analyses, manages, and communicates a company‘s value 
proposition to its stakeholders and how that value is created, delivered, and maintained while 
preserving or increasing environmental, social, and economic capital is a BM for 
sustainability (BMfS). 
There is still no consensus on the key concepts of SBMs (Yang et al., 2017). As an emerging 
field, it needs more empirical research. Fortunately, over the past few years, researchers have 
turned their attention to SBMs, and literature on SBMs has increased due to the growing 
concerns over social and environmental problems (Silvia & Truzzi, 2020). 
Even though SBM builds on the traditional customer and profit-oriented focus of BMs, they 
differ from traditional BMs in three fundamental ways: Firstly, they create value for a broad 
range of stakeholders and the environment instead of limiting value creation only to 
customers (Bocken et al., 2014). These stakeholders can be the poor people or non-profits 
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
like NGOs and even societies at large. Secondly, value creation is not limited to financial 
terms but is expanded to include non-financial aspects like social and environmental value 
(Bocken et al., 2014). Thirdly, SBMs take into account the destroyed and the untapped value 
apart from created value to shed light on the negative social and environmental effects of 
traditional business models (Bocken et al., 2013, 2014; Yang et al., 2017). 
The Base of the Pyramid (BoP) denotes the context of poverty in developing countries 
(Dembek et al., 2018). The ordinary business model that takes a conventional customer and 
profit orientation is not suitable at the BoP level because social issues are complex problems 
that cannot be met by just a market solution. Thus organizations working at the grassroots 
level need business models that account for value appropriation for multiple levels of 
stakeholders and sustainable development (Jun et al., 2013).  
Over the years, the BoP approach to business models has undergone several iterations by 
broadening the engagement activities with the poor while integrating environmental 
concerns. This is to attack the problem of poverty in a holistic way and emphasize the idea of 
empowerment of the poor. The first iteration of the BoP approach called BoP 1.0 endorsed 
―selling to the poor‖ by reducing the price points and adapting the products to fit the BoP 
segment. The second iteration of the BoP approach called BoP 2.0 reformed the concept of 
―selling to the poor‖ to ―business co-venturing‖ with the poor, to co-create new products and 
services with the BoP communities by engaging them in the process. The third and the latest 
iteration of the BoP approach called BoP 3.0 extends the engagement efforts of the local 
communities pointed out in BoP 2.0 by incorporating environmental concerns. Thus a triple-
bottom-line perspective characterizes BoP 3.0 for sustainable development of the 
communities (Dembek et al., 2019). There is a call for research in this area to examine how 
social enterprises, and other non-MNC companies, incorporate the sustainability dimensions 
that form the basis of the BoP 3.0 approach (Dembek et al., 2019). 
Bocken et al.‘s (2014) research on SBMs led to the identification of eight SBM archetypes- 
maximize material and energy efficiency, create value from ‗waste‘, substitute with 
renewables and natural processes, deliver functionality rather than ownership, adopt a 
stewardship role, encourage sufficiency, re-purpose the business for society/environment, and 
develop scale-up solutions. Among these, ‗repurpose the business for society/environment‘ is 
a specific type of SBM that suits the BoP context as it caters to ―BoP Solutions‖. The 
application of SBMs in the BoP context remains under-researched (Dembek & York, 2018). 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
Therefore my study attempts to bridge this gap by analyzing how SBMs are being applied in 
the BoP context of a developing economy and how the aspects of sustainability are 
incorporated in the business models of the entrepreneurs enabling renewable energy access in 
this market segment. 
Compared to conventional profit-oriented business models, SBMs are more suitable in the 
BoP context for the following reasons. Firstly, unlike CBMs which seek to maximize 
economic profit, SBMs seek to resolve social and environmental challenges while trying to 
achieve economic sustainability. Thus an entrepreneur adopting SBM will not try to 
maximize profit at the cost of the underserved people or the environment. These 
entrepreneurs are driven by a social and environmental mission and therefore they give 
precedence to social and environmental value creation over economic profit appropriation 
(Dembek & York, 2020).  
Secondly, CBM has a short-term orientation for achieving economic sustainability. On the 
other hand, SBMs stress long-term value creation instead of short-term profit maximization 
(Dentchev et al., 2016). This allows looking at this market segment with patient eyes 
permitting significant investment of time and no expectation of initial economic returns. Thus 
social entrepreneurs working at the BoP can employ SBMs to navigate different time frames 
and balance the firm‘s performance.  
Thirdly, community impact is deeply embedded into the core of sustainable business models 
by the virtue of its multi-stakeholder approach to value creation. While regular business 
models aim to create value only for the customers, SBMs create value for a broad range of 
stakeholders including the environment (Bocken et al., 2014). This aspect of SBMs makes it 
conducive for the generation of social value (Sinkovics et al., 2014).  
Fourthly, poverty is a complex systemic problem that has multiple dimensions that are 
continuously changing like unavailability of healthcare systems, lack of education, societal 
stigma, environmental deterioration, and so on. Solving these multidimensional challenges 
requires good knowledge of systems in which they exist and adopting a holistic lens to cater 
to them simultaneously. The systemic aspects of SBMs help in addressing the broad range of 
challenges such as societal and environmental issues, and thus can produce more value for 
the BoP compared to a conventional business model (Dembek & York, 2020).  
These sustainability characteristics of SBMs are shown in Figure 2. 
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
 
Figure 2: Sustainable Business Model Characteristics (Source: Author. Adapted from 
Dembek et al., 2018; Dembek & York, 2020). 
 
As per Dentchev et al. (2016), there is a knowledge gap on how SBMs work in general. Also, 
research on business models at the BoP using the SBM lens is inadequate (Dembek et al., 
2018). Additionally, studies to date on business models at BoP using the SBM lens have 
focused on what the business models look like giving little attention to how they work.  The 
focus on analyzing business models as a set of elements instead of adopting a system 
perspective has been called out as a shortcoming in its research (Franca et al., 2017). 
My research, therefore, combines the activity-system perspective of business models with the 
sustainable characteristics of business models to answer how these business models, aiming 
for renewable energy provisioning at the BoP, function and how they create value while 
incorporating the sustainability dimensions in them.  
The study seeks to contribute to the literature on sustainable business models by providing 
insights into the building blocks of SBMs, their outcomes, and the mechanisms through 
which self-sustainability and empowerment of communities are achieved.  My aim is to 
provide a new perspective on business models that operate at the BoP segment and the 
underlying theories for the creation of sustainable value. 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
3. Methodology 
The following paragraphs describe the methodology followed in this research and are divided 
into three sections - 1. Method and Case Selection, 2. Data Collection, and 3. Data Analysis. 
3.1 
Method and Case Selection 
This research answers the question - How do the business models of social entrepreneurs 
working at the base of the pyramid in the renewable energy sector in India work? More 
importantly, how do they create sustainable value? As discussed earlier, sustainable business 
models in developing economies are a relatively new research area. Following Eisenhardt 
(1989)‘s theory, which states that the case study approach is the most suitable for new topic 
areas, I conduct a qualitative study using a multiple case study design to answer the research 
question. Limited studies in the selected area also necessitate an inductive approach of theory 
building rather than testing hypotheses through quantitative research.  
To understand how the business models in the renewable energy sector in India work, I use 
the systemic approach rather than an element-based approach of business models (E.g. the 
business model canvas by Osterwalder et al. (2010). Although the business model canvas 
helps to acquire a perspective on the different components of the business model, it gives 
little insight into how the business works holistically and the activities that make it possible. 
Four social enterprises working with the underserved communities in rural India offering 
innovative renewable energy solutions are chosen and their business models are analyzed. 
The combined lens of activity-based BM and SBM which is used for the empirical 
exploration of the business models at the BoP is in line with the research of Dembek et al. 
(2019) who used a similar approach to gather data from ventures in the Philippines and 
Indonesia to create a BoP-based business model matrix consisting of nine elements. 
The research population is social entrepreneurs who have founded social enterprises in India 
in the renewable energy sector and are working closely with the grassroots communities. 
Purposive sampling is used to choose the first member from the population followed by 
theoretical sampling (Eisenhardt, 1989) to choose the other three case companies. 
In my study, the unit of analysis is the business model deployed by the social entrepreneur. 
The sampling criteria for selecting the cases are as follows: 
1. The social enterprise uses renewable energy as a vehicle of innovation 
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
2. The social enterprise offers a product, solution, or service based on renewable energy 
technology to the underserved communities in the rural areas of India. 
3. One of the primary missions of the entrepreneurs is to address the problem of energy 
inequality at the BoP using renewable energy 
4. The entrepreneur is still an active member of the management team 
5. The entrepreneur has been working directly with the grassroots communities  
6. The entrepreneur has been actively involved in seeking investors, partnerships, 
suppliers, and customers for the business 
The four social enterprises selected based on the above criteria are Orora Global, Global 
Himalayan Expedition, ONergy Solar, and DESI Power. These enterprises originate from 
three widely different parts of India, have been founded at different timelines and the 
entrepreneurs come from different cultural and professional backgrounds. A brief on each of 
these enterprises are given below. 
About Orora Global 
Orora Global (Orora) was established in 2014 by Savitha Sridharan as a part of her MBA 
program at Babson College, USA. Orora is a for-profit social enterprise that provides access 
to reliable renewable energy to the rural Indian population with solar photovoltaic 
technology. Orora‘s solutions are co-designed with the communities providing employment 
opportunities for women and the youth. Orora‘s solar-powered village community centers 
enable an ecosystem of innovative solutions for education, healthcare, and water for the 
communities. Orora works closely with the women and the youth of the village to transform 
them into solar engineers empowering them in the process. 
About Global Himalayan Expedition 
Global Himalayan Expedition (GHE) is leveraging sustainable tourism and renewable energy 
technology to bring solar solutions to the remote communities of Ladakh, Meghalaya, 
Nagaland, and Arunachal Pradesh in India. It was founded by Paras Loomba in 2013. 
Recognized by the United Nations World Tourism Organisation (UNWTO), GHE conducts 
―Impact Expeditions‖ to remote Himalayan villages in which the participants work with the 
communities to set up solar micro-grids infrastructure that is later owned and operated by the 
communities. Other than conducting expeditions, Orora also undertakes village electrification 
projects, digital education projects, homestay development, and carbon neutrality projects 
where they collectively work with the grassroots communities to address their challenges. 
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
 
About ONergy Solar 
ONergy Solar, established in 2009, by Piyush Jaju and Shweta Jaju, offers solar energy 
solutions to underserved households and institutions, primarily in Eastern India. This for-
profit social enterprise has the vision of empowering India and creating a sustainable future 
through solar energy for 10 million lives by 2022. ONergy Solar provides solar energy 
solutions through two product lines: (i) rural energy access, consisting of solar lighting 
solutions, irrigation pumps, and microgrids for rural customers as well as communities and 
institutional clients; and (ii) grid and rooftop systems for commercial institutions, 
community-based organizations and government agencies. For this study, the rural solar 
irrigation solutions of ONergy have been taken into consideration where ONergy works 
directly with the farmer communities to transition them to sustainable ways of farming. 
Both ONergy Solar and SwitchON Foundation (a non-profit established in 2008), work under 
the umbrella of ON Conglomerate that creates livelihood opportunities for the poor 
communities, and incubates innovative technologies and business models at the grassroots. 
About DESI Power 
Decentralized Energy Systems (India) Pvt. Ltd., popularly known as DESI Power, is a social 
enterprise producing rural power from renewable energy for the socio-economic development 
of the villages in India. Its mission is to reduce endemic rural poverty through local job 
creation with the provision of renewable energy services. DESI Power develops, promotes, 
builds, and operates renewable energy-based Independent Rural Power Plants (IRPPs). The 
enterprise was established in 1996 by Dr. Hari Sharan. To establish the model of power 
plants with renewable energy technologies, DESI Power builds pilot projects with locally 
managed operations. The decentralized energy provisioning model of DESI Power 
accelerates the development of villages via local community participation. 
The profiles of the cases are summarised in Table 1. 
Company 
Name/ 
Key 
Profile 
Characteristics 
DESI Power 
ONergy Solar 
GHE 
Orora Global 
Founder(s)  
Dr. 
Hari Piyush Jaju and Paras Loomba 
Savitha 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
Sharan 
Shweta Jaju 
Sridharan 
Year Founded 
1996 
2009 
2013 
2014 
Website 
http://www.des
ipower.com 
http://www.ON
ergy.in 
http://www.ghe.co.
in 
http://www.orora
global.com 
Financial Status 
Profitable 
for 
some business 
units 
Profitable 
Profitable 
Breaking 
even 
soon 
Primary Region 
of Operation 
Bihar, India 
West 
Bengal, 
India 
Ladakh, India 
Tamil 
Nadu. 
India 
Core Innovation Small 
scale 
power 
plants 
from solar and 
biomass 
Solar irrigation 
pumps 
Solar 
micro-grid 
installations 
Solar micro-grid 
installations, 
solar street lights 
assembling 
Impact so far 
75+ renewable 
power 
plants 
built (not all 
operational), 
600+ 
locals 
trained, 2000+ 
lives 
benefit 
directly 
from 
15+ villages  
3000+ 
trainings, 
30,000 
tonne 
carbon 
emissions 
saved, 
500,000+ lives 
impacted in 12 
Indian states 
140 
villages 
electrified, 
60,000+ 
lives 
impacted 
in 
5 
regions of India, 
35000 
tons carbon offset 
250+ 
jobs 
created, 
30+ 
women 
trained 
as 
solar 
engineers, 
250,000+ 
lives 
impacted, 131.5 
metric tons CO2 
emissions saved 
Funding 
Seed Funding, 
Rockefeller 
Foundation, 
money won at 
various 
competitions 
Impact 
investors, loan, 
seed funding 
Impact 
investors, 
CSR 
wings 
of 
corporates, 
foundations 
Founder‘s 
savings, 
World 
Bank, 
money 
won at various 
competitions 
Key Awards 
Winner at the 
World 
Bank 
Global 
Development 
Marketplace 
Climate Solver 
Award 2015 by 
WWF, United 
Nations SEED 
Global Award 
UN Global Climate 
Action 
Award 
2020, 
G20 
Sustainable 
Tourism 
Award 
2021 
Social 
Alpha‘s 
Techtonic 
– 
Innovations 
in 
Clean 
Energy, 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
Competition 
2006 
in 
Washington 
with a prize of 
US$ 200,000. 
One 
of 
the 
global winners 
of The Tech 
Museum 
Award 
2008 
with a prize of 
US$ 
50,000 
2014 
in 
Nairobi 
(Kenya), 
Awarded 
by 
Swedish 
International 
Development 
Agency under 
the Innovations 
Against 
Poverty 
Program 
Investment 
2019, 2019 FICCI 
Award, 
India, 
Outlook 
Responsible 
Tourism Initiative 
(IRTA) 
2020 
Award 
2019 
Google‘s 
Top 6 Women in 
Cleantech 
and 
Sustainability, 
2019 India's Top 
8 Clean Energy 
Startups 
addressing 
climate 
change 
by AIC-Sangam 
Table 1. Profiles of the Studied Social Enterprises (Source: Author) 
3.2 
Data Collection 
The primary data for this study comes from semi-structured interviews conducted over the 
Zoom video conferencing tool. India, as a country, has grown accustomed to virtual ways of 
working in the last year due to the pandemic, and therefore, primary data could be collected 
seamlessly through virtual face-to-face interviews via Zoom.  The responses were collected 
from the founders, or the top executives of the social enterprises who were instrumental in 
designing, innovating, and implementing the business models. Interviews were conducted in 
English. A total of five interviews were conducted for the four enterprises. There were five 
interviewees in all, out of which three were the founders of the enterprises, and two were the 
top executives (COO and Director). The face-to-face interviews helped to capture both verbal 
and non-verbal cues as well the emotions of the interviewees. 
To better understand the broader context of the organization‘s operations, secondary data was 
collected including publicly available information and documents provided by the 
organizations such as marketing materials, case studies, and company presentations. These 
data types are summarized in Table 2. Accessing additional data related to these enterprises 
obtained internally (like marketing material) and externally (like websites, blogs, press 
releases, etc.) helped in triangulation with the interview responses of the entrepreneurs. 
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
The data collection protocols focused on understanding different pillars of the business 
modes, the activity systems, and the value outcomes through open-ended, exploratory 
questions. The questionnaire used for the research is given in the Appendix. The questions 
revolved around the motivation of the entrepreneurs, purpose of the enterprise, business 
model activities, who conducted these activities and how, the revenue models, the 
organizational form and ownership, community interactions, value capture mechanisms, 
challenges faced, and success factors. The interviews were audio-recorded with the 
permission of the participants and transcribed. The synthesized transcripts were then sent to 
the interviewees for validation. 
Data 
Type 
Method of 
Data 
Collection 
Description 
Quantity 
Information Obtained 
Data 
format 
Primary 
Data 
 
Interviews CEOs/Co-
founders/Organiz
ational 
leaders 
were interviewed 
via Skype. Each 
interview 
lasted 
between 
90-120 
minutes 
5 
Data 
on 
motivation, 
purpose, business model 
activities, organizational 
form 
and 
ownership, 
tensions, 
community 
interactions, 
value 
creation, and capture 
mechanisms, 
and 
success and failure 
Audio 
recordings
, notes  
Second
ary 
Data 
Document
ation 
provided 
by 
the 
organizati
ons 
Presentations, 
articles, 
reports, 
and case studies 
8 
Data 
on 
business 
activities, 
solution 
portfolios, 
funding, 
operations, and business 
impact 
Text, 
photos  
 
Informati
on 
available 
publicly 
Websites, 
blogs, 
Linkedin 
pages, 
and press articles 
20+ 
Data 
on 
business 
activities, 
business 
approach, 
solutions, 
awards, etc. 
Text, 
videos, 
photos 
Table 2. Primary and Secondary Data Collection (Source: Author) 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
3.3 
Data Analysis 
Two-stage multiple case analysis was conducted as described below: 
1. Within-case analysis to get an in-depth understanding of how the business models 
worked and what value they created 
2. Cross-case analysis to detect patterns in the responses and see how the studied 
business models are similar or different (Eisenhardt, 1989).  
The business models were analyzed according to the theoretical activity system framework of 
business models (Zott & Amit, 2010). The aspects of sustainability that manifested in the 
business models were also ascertained. The focus during data collection was on four specific 
aspects of business models, as summarized in Table 3. The data was coded for these aspects. 
The within-case analysis identified the flow of the value chain and the cross-case analysis 
identified the recurring patterns for value creation and sustenance. 
Business Model Aspects Description 
Activity content 
The novel activities and the type of activities that were created to 
satisfy the energy needs 
Activity structure 
The relationships among the activities that show how they are 
related and organized  i.e. how were the required activities linked 
to each other in novel ways  
Activity governance 
Who performed each of the activities and the novel governance 
arrangements  
Value created 
Explains the value that is created considering it from a social, 
environmental, and economic perspective 
Table 3. Business Model Analysis (Source: Author) 
During the within-case analysis, at first, I examined the activities that are involved in the 
business models. In the second and third steps, I analyzed how the identified activities were 
inter-linked, who performed them, and the governance mechanism, to understand the entire 
value chain and the underlying logic of value creation. The fourth step identified the value 
created by the activities in the business model. Finally, I examined if the SBM dimensions 
appeared in the business models and how they were demonstrated. 
During the cross-case analysis, I discovered significant recurrent patterns that enabled value 
creation and value sustenance over time. This led to my proposition of a collaborative 
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
bottom-up approach followed by these entrepreneurs and a relocation strategy, intended to 
foster self-sustainability of the local communities. 
This analysis was conducted using hand-coding. These business model aspects provided a 
thorough understanding of how each business model worked, the socio-economic context in 
which they operated, and how they generated sustainable value.  
Among the different methods available for qualitative data analysis, thematic analysis (Braun 
& Clarke, 2006), framework analysis, and grounded theory (Weingand, 1993), were chosen. 
In this study, the framework analysis was used to map the business models using the activity-
system framework and the thematic analysis was used to compare all the business models 
across the studied cases. Finally, the grounded theory approach was used to make 
propositions and build theory. 
This research is credible because all the interviewees were sent a transcript of the interview to 
validate before it was analyzed. The research can be replicated by other researchers by 
contacting all the respondents, if necessary. All the transcripts of the interviews are available 
which ensures the dependability of this research. 
The research flow chart is shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3: Research Flow Chart (Source: Author) 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
4. Results and Discussion 
The analysis yielded the following findings –  
1. ‗Within-Case Results‘ showed how the business models function, what the business 
activities are and how they are linked, and who performs the business activities.  It also 
conveyed the broad range of value outcomes in social, environmental, and economic 
terms delivered by these enterprises. Though the business models differed in their activity 
sequence and their linkages, they showed adherence to the SBM characteristics of using 
profit as a tool to achieve social and environmental goals, long-term orientation, value 
creation for multiple stakeholders, and the systemic solution mindset of the entrepreneurs. 
2. ‗Cross-case Results‘ drew attention to the similarities in these business models in terms of 
the patterns that are common to them. What these patterns are and how they recur in the 
business models are discussed in detail. 
The results are discussed to build the proposition that a collaborative bottom-up approach is 
followed by these entrepreneurs that emphasize collaboration from all aspects with all kinds 
of organizations. The bottom-up approach, as opposed to the top-down approach of MNCs, is 
a crucial tool for sustainable development and empowerment. The entrepreneurs also factored 
in a relocation strategy to move to another village or community when the community 
became self-dependent and could make their own decisions.  
4.1 
Within-Case Analysis Results 
The within-case analysis of the responses were used to draw the activity mapping of the 
business models created and innovated upon by the entrepreneurs delineating the activity 
content, structure and governance. This activity mapping provides a thorough insight into 
how the business models work, how they are organized and who performs them. 
4.1.1 Orora Global: Business Model & Value Creation 
Orora offers two lines of technology solutions currently – 1. Orora Power Hubs which is sold 
across the globe, and 2. Solar street lights that are sold in India. Orora Power Hubs are 
formed by solar powering a community center in a village using microgrids. This solar-
powered facility is then used for schooling, providing training to local women and youth, 
garment manufacturing, tailoring, and supporting other micro-enterprises. The power hub 
helps Orora with a platform to divulge further solutions for education, healthcare, water, and 
addressing multifarious problems of the communities. 
==PAGE:29==
29 
 
The business model of Orora from an activity-system perspective is shown in Figure 4. Orora 
chooses a poor community in the southern part of India based on the energy needs of the 
community and the social and economic condition of the women. The main motivation is to 
create livelihood opportunities for these women and to facilitate reliable access to electricity 
using solar energy. In the next step, Orora provides extensive training to the women to train 
and educate them on a broad range of things - from solar engineering to labor rights. The skill 
development program for the women covers United Nations‘ Sustainable Development 
Goals, healthcare and healthy living, setting up development funds, solar street light 
manufacturing, and fabric stitching. After skill development, Orora co-designs solar solutions 
like solar lanterns and solar street lights with the communities. Finally, the installation and 
the maintenance of the solar grids and the lights are carried out by locally trained women and 
youth.  
 
Figure 4. Business Model of Orora from activity- system perspective (Source: Author) 
In the entire value chain of activities, Orora creates social, economic and environmental value 
(as shown in Figure 5) that characterizes business models at the BoP. 
 
Figure 5. Social, Environmental and Economic value created by Orora (Source: Author) 
Social Value 
•Jobs created in the 
community 
•Training to local women 
and youth 
•Reduction of negative 
societal outlook towards 
rural women 
•Increase in self-esteem of 
locals 
•Improve standards of living 
of the communities 
•Transition to clean 
powering solutions 
 
Environmental Value 
•Reduction in Greenhouse 
Gas emissions 
Economic Value 
•Revenue and productivity 
of the power hubs 
•Return on investment and 
profitability of power hubs 
•Energy savings after power 
hub installation 
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
4.1.2 Global Himalayan Expedition: Business Model & Value Creation 
GHE focuses on developing the remote parts of Ladakh, Meghalaya, Nagaland, and 
Arunachal Pradesh in India by leveraging tourism and solar technology to help remote 
communities access electricity. Currently, their impact portfolio consists of solar 
electrification, digital education, solar health access, clean cookstoves, and homestay 
development. 
The business model of GHE from an activity-system perspective is shown in Figure 6. GHE 
starts with a survey of the villages to understand from the communities what their 
requirements are. If one of the priority requirements coming out from the surveys is 
electrification, GHE selects that village to conduct a needs assessment. The needs assessment 
brings out parameters like the topography of the village, the details of the number of houses, 
the existing technology solutions, etc. Based on this, solar grid mapping and designing are 
completed. Once this mapping is done, GHE approaches companies to sponsor these villages 
as part of their CSR initiatives. For some villages that are in touristy places where expeditions 
can be carried out, GHE creates ‗impact expedition‘ offerings through which travelers can 
travel to these remote villages and participate in the electrification. The payment by the 
travelers contributes to the cost of the solar grids. Thus the cost of electrification is financed 
in multiple manners. One financing method is when the travelers join GHE as part of an 
impact adventure expedition, in which the cost of the expedition includes the cost of the solar 
grids that are installed in the village. The other financing methods are through CSR funds and 
international and domestic foundations. On the arrangement of funding, GHE procures the 
material and contract manufactures all the solar material in factories around Delhi, and ships 
it to these remote villages. Once the material reaches the nodal cities it is taken by the 
communities from the last motorable point to their own villages on animal backs. Once the 
material reaches the village, GHE sends out its engineers for installation. GHE maintains a 
pool of several trained engineers locally. With the help of the local engineers along with the 
participation of the community, the village gets electrified. Routine maintenance is carried 
out every six months by the local engineers who have been trained by GHE. 
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
 
Figure 6. Business Model of GHE from activity- system perspective (Source: Author) 
In the entire value chain of activities, GHE creates social, economic and environmental value 
(as shown in Figure 7) that characterizes business models at the BoP.
 Figure 7. Social, Environmental and Economic value created by GHE (Source: Author) 
4.1.3 ONergy Solar: Business Model & Value Creation 
ONergy sells and services a range of solar energy solutions to both rural and urban customers 
in Eastern India. For rural areas, ONergy‘s solutions include solar microgrids, solar street 
lights, solar irrigation pumps, and solar home lighting. Currently, over 80% of ONergy‘s 
revenues come from sales of solar irrigation pumps to agricultural farmers. Since 2016, 
ONergy started promoting solar pumps and rapidly increased its share in the overall product 
mix to turn it into the main focus for the organization.  
Social Value 
• Livelihood opportunities 
•Skill development of local 
people 
•Access to clean energy, 
healthcare and education 
solutions  
•Reduction of migration of 
local men to the cities 
•Last mile development and 
equity 
•Improve standards of living 
•Creation of micro-
entreprepreneurship model 
through homestays 
Environmental Value 
•Reduction in CO2 
emissions 
•Offseting of carbon in the 
environment 
•Reduction in smoke and 
other toxic emissions from 
traditional cookstoves 
Economic Value 
•Increase in the income of 
households from tourism 
•Increment in productivity 
in employment, healthcare 
and education areas 
•Energy savings from solar 
grids installation 
•Improvement in cooking 
efficiency 
 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
 
The business model of ONergy from an activity-system perspective is shown in Figure 8. 
From an activity system perspective, ONergy first undertakes awareness campaigns about 
sustainable farming for farmer producer organizations, farmer clusters, and individual 
farmers. This is done at its Renewable Energy Centres, which are physical facilities located in 
different parts of Eastern India. RECs manage a wide distribution and service network for 
rural clients. The RECs not only run awareness campaigns but also train ONergy Solar staff 
and farmers in managing solar installations. In the next step, ONergy supports its clients and 
facilitates the financing by teaming up with banks so that no upfront costs are incurred by the 
farmers. After the sales, the installation of the solar pumps is done by ONergy‘s engineers 
who are hired locally. The farmers are trained by the ONergy employees for the first few 
months on the usage of the pumps to get them acquainted with the new equipment and to 
build trust in the change management process. The post-sales support is given through the 
RECs by the local ONergy staff. 
 
Figure 8. Business Model of ONergy from activity-system perspective (Source: Author) 
In the entire value chain of activities, ONergy creates social, economic and environmental 
value (as shown in Figure 9) that characterizes business models at the BoP. 
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
 
Figure 9. Social, Environmental and Economic value created by ONergy (Source: Author) 
4.1.4 DESI Power: Business Model & Value Creation 
Founded in 1996, DESI Power builds and operates decentralized electric power plants using 
renewable energy resources such as biomass, biogas, biofuel, and solar in the villages of 
India to cater to the electricity needs of the villages and also promote micro-enterprises which 
forms the backbone of village development. Over decades DESI Power built, tested, and 
modified power plants and mini-grids until it finalized the technology that fitted the rural 
context - stand-alone power plants running on local biomass and solar power. Apart from 
rural households, DESI Power sells electricity to clients like telecom towers, rice mills, and 
other enterprises that need electricity for the viability of the business model. The revenues 
from these clients are used to subsidize the service provided to the households. 
The business model of DESI from an activity-system perspective is shown in Figure 10. 
When DESI Power locates a new village in India, they first find a group of villagers who are 
motivated enough to take part in DESI Power‘s pilot project and can be trained. They do this 
by calling a village meeting where the entire village gets involved. DESI interacts with all the 
villagers about what they want to do and understands what the priority needs of the villagers 
are. With the help of a survey, DESI Power determines which people are interested and will 
be trained by them for the execution of the project. After this, the process of designing the 
plant starts where the pilot plant‘s specifications are determined. The material and the 
necessary equipment are procured by DESI Power and the erection and commissioning are 
executed by the locals who have already been trained by DESI Power. From here, some 
villagers are employed to be the regular operators of the plant to carry out the maintenance 
Social Value 
•Improved living standards of 
rural farmers and households 
•New income streams due to 
micro-entrepreneurship 
•Increase in awareness about 
smart agricultural techniques 
•Acceptance of clean energy 
usage in a traditional 
agriculture industry 
•Skill development of rural 
people 
 
Environmental Value 
•Reduction in Greenhouse 
Gas emissions 
 
Economic Value 
•Increase in farmer‘s income 
and asset ownership 
•Increase in the income of 
households due to micro 
entrepreneurship 
•Financial savings of farmers  
from solar pumps 
•Increment in productivity 
due to healthcare and 
education solutions 
•Percentage reduction in 
fossil fuel consumption per 
household 
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
while the other trained locals go out and work in the micro-enterprises which DESI has 
supported or promoted in the village.  Some power plants are owned and run by DESI Power 
with its own employees while the pilot plants are handed over to the villagers so that the 
locals can run them on their own. The services to handed-over plants are still provided by 
DESI and an O&M fee is charged for it. 
 
Figure 10. Business Model of DESI Power from activity- system perspective (Source: 
Author) 
In the entire value chain of activities, DESI Power creates social, economic and 
environmental value (as shown in Figure 11) that characterizes business models at the BoP. 
 
Figure 11. Social, Environmental and Economic value created by DESI Power (Source: 
Author) 
Social Value 
•New jobs created in the 
community 
•New income streams due to 
micro-entrepreneurship 
support 
•Training to local people 
•Improve standards of living 
of the communities 
•Transition to decentralized 
reliable clean powering 
solutions 
 
Environmental Value 
•Reduction in Greenhouse 
Gas emissions 
 
Economic Value 
•Number of direct and 
indirect jobs created 
•Cost savings in electricity 
due to shift from diesel-
based power 
•Increase in the income of 
households due to micro 
entrepreneurship 
•Net increase in agro 
productivity from selling 
irrigation water 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
35 
 
4.1.5 Analysis of Sustainability Dimensions in the Business Models 
On understanding how these business models work and generate value, I shift my attention to 
analyze if the sustainability dimensions (social and environmental value prioritization to 
profits, long-term orientation, value creation for multiple stakeholders, and systemic 
perspective) are demonstrated in the business models. 
Social and Economic Value Prioritization over Profits: 
Bocken et al.‘s (2014) SBM archetype ‗repurpose the business for society/environment‘ 
entails prioritizing social and environmental benefits over the maximization of profit (i.e. 
shareholder value). Orora, GHE, ONergy, and DESI have focused on social and 
environmental benefits through close collaboration between the enterprise and the local 
communities and other stakeholder groups. While Orora tries to break even, it has been 
reinvesting the generated revenue to build the business first and fulfill its mission of social 
and environmental welfare.  
―Now when we make profits we are reinvesting it in the business, but we hope by the end of 
2021 we'll be able to break-even.” (Founder, Orora) 
As a for-profit social enterprise whose costs are borne by foundations, CSR programs, and 
impact travelers, GHE openly shares the company costs with the funders to be transparent 
about its overall operating expenses. There is no motive to derive extra profit outside of the 
organizational expenses. 
ONergy registered as a for-profit enterprise is deeply committed to developing an ecosystem 
for solar energy solutions in rural India while addressing the gap in the financing and the 
distribution of these solutions. ONergy has been a resilient organization operating since 2010 
and has succeeded in achieving a break-even. A witness to the changing landscape of the 
Indian rural energy access sector, the company has focussed on solar irrigation pumps for 
their sustainability and scalability attributes. Since the beginning, it has been providing 
sustainable farming awareness programs and training to farmers (through RECs) and 
livelihood opportunities (through its non-profit arm, SwitchON Foundation). Even though it 
is a profitable enterprise, it has not deviated from its social and environmental mission at the 
cost of maximizing profit. 
DESI proudly proclaims to be a ‗not-for-profit-to-promoters‘ social business, which means 
that the promoters don‘t take any dividend from the company. Any available surplus remains 
==PAGE:36==
36 
 
within the company for developing new projects. Their purpose to create sustainable village 
projects by empowering locals makes them view the profit as a tool to achieve the bigger 
cause of social and environmental well-being. 
Long-term Orientation: 
Established in 2009, ONergy Solar over the years had to pivot its business from selling solar 
products directly to households to focusing on selling solar irrigation pumps to village 
communities and institutional clients. These changes were made to fulfill ONergy‘s mission 
of community welfare comprising of interconnected needs that changed over time. Thus 
ONergy adjusted its business model to suit the changing landscape of the rural energy sector 
and the market dynamics. With a long-term perspective and a flexible mindset, it relooked at 
the business and pivoted from time to time. 
DESI was founded in 1996 and has taken a slow-growth approach in its business. DESI 
Power‘s experience from its pilot projects is that energy poverty and community development 
were long and slow processes and thus keeping a long-term perspective is absolutely 
imperative for success. Having faced issues in raising funds for its pilot projects, DESI 
believes it is absolutely necessary that social investors who want to invest in sustainable 
projects like DESI‘s should not expect a return for a period of at least 5 years. 
At GHE, the entire process from village survey to solar grid installation can take months to 
sometimes even years. The enterprise has chosen to focus on a few villages and deepen its 
impact rather than broadening it. 
“In eight years we've electrified 150 villages. We have not done thousand or ten thousand 
villages because we tend to focus a lot on what is the kind of impact we are having. We don't 
want to just go around blindly electrifying villages and say we've completed a thousand 
villages. We've done only 150, but we are very confident of the impact we have created in 
those 150 villages. Sometimes we do think whether it’s the  right approach, but the feedback 
that we get is that it’s more important to have a focused impact on a smaller sector than just 
go all out and forget about how the impact is percolating to the last mile.” (COO, GHE) 
It took Orora quite a few years to figure out a for-profit model of running its enterprise at the 
BoP segment. Rooting its business model in a longer time frame, it dedicated a lot of time to 
train the village women because capabilities building formed the crux of the community 
development. The planning and execution was a slow process that incorporated NGOs, the 
==PAGE:37==
37 
 
village women, international organizations, and Orora. The long-term perspective helped to 
build trust with the women and validated Orora‘s focus to work and support them. 
“What worked really well is and is still working very well for us is the partnership between 
the women, the non-profit, and us. All the stakeholders i.e. the non-profit, the women, Orora- 
we are all committed to community development, and each of us understands our roles. We've 
been able to create good stakeholder engagement and understanding over a period of time. 
All of us are looking at this as a long-term investment.” (Founder, Orora) 
Value Creation for Multiple Stakeholders 
All the four enterprises followed the principle of engaging with the communities to build a 
relationship and establish trust in order to identify their problems and address them. To 
device the solutions and activities that were tailored to the specific needs of each community, 
they engaged with multiple stakeholders and created lasting value for all the stakeholders in 
the entire value chain. Stakeholders such as NGOs, self-help groups, local banks, local 
government, local micro-enterprises, and international partners, were involved as necessary 
and value created by mediating among them. The solutions also benefitted the BoP 
communities, the end-customer (in cases where the enterprise targeted customers outside the 
BoP communities), and the natural environment by the transition to renewable energy. All the 
organizations focussed on community well-being instead of single discrete needs within the 
communities and shaped value for multiple stakeholders, thus adhering to the principles of 
SBMs. The stakeholders for whom value was created by these social enterprises are given in 
Table 4. 
Name of the social enterprise 
Stakeholders for whom value was created 
ONergy Solar 
Farmer communities, local villagers, self-help groups, 
banks & financial institutions, policymakers, Farmer 
Producer Organisations (FPOs), local government bodies, 
and agri-NGOs, equipment manufacturers/suppliers 
Orora Global 
Local women and youth, NGOs, self-help groups, local 
government, local households, local micro-enterprises, 
equipment manufacturers/ suppliers, global customers, 
national and international partners 
DESI Power 
Villagers, local households, NGOs, self-help groups, local 
banks, foundations, CSR arms of companies, local 
==PAGE:38==
38 
 
government, local micro-enterprises, national suppliers, and 
international partner organizations 
GHE 
Villagers, 
travelers, 
NGOs, 
self-help 
groups, 
local 
government, local healthcare centers, local households, 
homestay owners,  foundations, CSR arms of companies, 
national suppliers, and international partner organizations 
Table 4: Multiple Stakeholder Approach of the Studied Enterprises (Source: Author) 
As per Dembek et al.‘s (2018) ‗reorganizing models‘ which create value for multiple 
stakeholders the organizations employed a three-level structure for embedding simultaneous 
value creation logic in their business models. In the first level, the best solution was designed 
using iterations as per the changing needs. Next, the necessary stakeholders were linked to 
execute the solution. Finally, a series of activities, configured in different sequences, were 
carried out in the network.  
Systemic Approach 
The four studied enterprises treated communities as systems and addressed diverse 
community issues instead of trying to meet one specific need by supplying one product or 
service. By focusing on the wellbeing of the entire community instead of satisfying a discrete 
need, the enterprises created sustainable business models that analyzed the issues of BoP with 
a systemic lens. The enterprises started with a basic business model of renewable energy 
solutions and with time expanded the business activities to allow for accommodating the 
other complexities of systemic poverty to take care of the overall well-being of the 
communities. 
For example, GHE continues to provide clean energy access to villages through solar 
electrification but over time has added several layers to the initial business model. Now its 
impact portfolio consists of experiential learning for students by providing digital education, 
healthcare improvement by access to solar-powered equipment, clean energy for households 
with clean cookstoves, and livelihood opportunities through homestay development. 
While Orora continues to engage the BoP women for solar street lights assembling, it is solar 
powering village Community Centers to create a stable platform for the community to use as 
education centers, for housing micro-enterprises and to impart training. It is also trying to set 
==PAGE:39==
39 
 
up a platform for children with health issues because access to reliable and affordable 
healthcare has been a problem in the communities in which Orora works. 
ONergy‘s non-profit counterpart SwitchON has set up an incubator to identify and build 
sustainable energy solutions in education, agriculture, and healthcare. Low-cost solar-
powered computer systems have been set by SwitchON as pilot projects to give digital 
education access to rural populations. ONergy has given solar energy access to schools and 
has provided solar lanterns to thousands of school students. It continues to provide technical 
and grassroots mobilization support for the micro-grid systems installed for rural 
entrepreneurs. 
DESI Power is focused on achieving comprehensive development of the regions where it 
operates. Apart from local job creation from the power plants and supporting local micro-
enterprises with energy services, DESI provides water pumping for irrigation, clean cooking 
fuels, clean drinking water, food processing units, and cold storage. Through DESI Mantra, it 
also provides training to villagers on any economic or developmental activity they want to 
conduct in their community, for example, training to teachers willing to impart digital 
education to students.  
All of the above interventions by the organizations have promoted the holistic wellbeing of 
the communities instead of taking a piecemeal approach to solving the problems at the BoP. 
4.2 
Cross-Case Analysis Results 
The cross-case analysis that compared the responses across the studied cases resulted in the 
emergence of clear patterns in the business models in terms of approaches to value, its 
creation, delivery, and capture mechanisms. These significant recurrent themes in the 
business models are Community Relationship Management, Community Capability Building, 
Non-traditional Partnerships, Micro-entrepreneurship Modelling, and Innovative Financial 
Mobilization as shown in Figure 12. 
==PAGE:40==
40 
 
 
Figure 12. Recurrent Patterns in the Studied Business Models (Source: Author) 
 
4.2.1 Community Relationship Management 
Direct relationships based on trust and mutual understanding have been crafted by the social 
enterprises with the communities. This is in alignment with the BoP 3.0 approach to business 
models as summarized by Dembek et al. (2019). Community relationship management has 
two aspects – 1. Relationship Development and Trust building and 2. Decentralized and 
Collective Decision Making 
4.2.1.1 Relationship Development and Trust building 
Over a period of time, Orora built a very strong relationship with the community by spending 
a considerable amount of time with the women to understand their issues and needs. Face-to-
face interactions undertaken by the founder with the women in the villages over several years 
promoted the participation of the local stakeholders in Orora‘s endeavors. To date, the 
founder is a point of contact for all her team members and an open trusting environment 
among all the grassroots stakeholders forms the basis of the business operations of Orora.  
Before implementing the business model, the entire team of GHE dedicates a significant 
amount of time on the ground. They live with the locals in these remote under-developed 
villages to understand the community‘s pain points so that they can create solutions suited to 
the context. The stakeholder relationships that GHE forms with direct interaction with the 
villagers become crucial to solution formulation and value creation. 
==PAGE:41==
41 
 
―I think what has worked well is the on-ground approach and the fact that all the people in 
our team are very much connected with the communities (from the leadership to the ground 
level). It's not like you're sitting in Delhi or Mumbai and trying to implement solutions in 
Meghalaya and Ladakh. We all have been there on the ground. We all have stayed in the 
villages. We all have stepped into the shoes of the villagers to understand their problems and 
then we have come up with solutions.” (COO, GHE) 
DESI Power‘s approach to relationship and trust-building is evident from its value chain 
activities where it gets involved with the whole village through the village meeting from the 
very first day. The enterprise has worked closely with the villagers to build trust and motivate 
them to form cooperatives and societies. These bodies act as the local partners of DESI 
Power and take full management responsibilities like plant operations, sourcing, revenue 
collection, etc. 
“Community Relationship is the main crux of DESI’s EmPower (Employment and Power) 
Partnership Program and strong community engagement has made this program 
successful.‖(Director, DESI Power)  
Over the last ten years, ONergy Solar has developed 20+ Renewable Energy Centres (RECs) 
as hubs in different parts of East India to manage a distribution and servicing network 
catering to rural customers. These establishments help to build trust among the clients by 
storing ONergy‘s products, undertaking awareness campaigns, training ONergy‘s staff and 
clients in managing solar installations, and facilitating financing for the poor clients.  Thus 
ONergy has activated value networks through these hubs to form, manage and deepen their 
relationships with the rural stakeholders. 
Thus the enterprises take communication relationship building very seriously as they 
understand that the business operations in these conditions require cultivating trust over 
medium-to-long timelines. 
4.2.1.2 Decentralized and Collective Decision Making 
Decentralized decision-making characterizes the business operations of GHE. Once GHE has 
finished the electrification of the village, the operations are passed to the village people who 
collectively decide on the future course of action for maintenance, new village identification 
and, community mobilization. 
==PAGE:42==
42 
 
“When we go to a cluster of villages, we find some young enterprising people, men, and 
women, who have the spark, who we know can have the right ownership, have the right skills 
to mobilize communities, to take decisions, to process information. So we work with them to 
hand-hold them, and then we then pass the baton to them, to do the mobilizing. So now we 
have people in Ladakh, and Nagaland, who are surveying more areas for us, who are making 
the decisions on our behalf. For example, if a village needs electricity or not, what is the kind 
of electricity that is required, what is the kind of mobilization to be done with the 
communities. They are making those decisions on their own.‖ (COO, GHE) 
The local team leaders take the opinions of all the participant communities to arrive at a 
decision. This participatory decision-making process at a local level engenders trust and helps 
to create and capture value over the long term. 
“You just can't go into the village and push a solution. It has to be pulled from the 
community. There has to be a participation of all the community stakeholders and it's a joint 
decision that happens because then only you are able to set up things for success because, at 
the end of the day, the community has to own and maintain the infrastructure.” (COO, GHE) 
When it comes to decision-making at Orora, it‘s a collective process where all the women 
workers have an equal say in a situation and they collaboratively make a choice from the 
alternatives in hand. 
―We take a vote on certain aspects. Since the impact is created for the women we consult with 
them for a lot of things. I can't sit here and make a decision for them. We give them 
suggestions; sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn't. But everybody has a role to play. 
Everybody has a say in the decision. And if something doesn't work, we change the rules.‖ 
(Founder, Orora) 
ONergy also practices decentralized decision making through its Renewable Energy Centres 
where rural entrepreneurs take the responsibility to run solar awareness programs and manage 
the solar installations. 
At DESI Power, management decisions do not flow top-down. The management sits with the 
local employees of DESI Power in the village and then decides on the course of action. In 
case of disagreements, the board makes the decision.  DESI has met with less success when it 
comes to the locals feeling able enough to make decisions on their own which they are trying 
==PAGE:43==
43 
 
to break. DESI is working towards reaching the stage when the villagers can autonomously 
decide the next course of action in the power plants, and achieve self-dependence. 
4.2.2 Community Capability Building 
The studied social enterprises not only leveraged the capabilities of the communities to 
produce social and economic value but also enhanced it with continuous training and skill 
development. My findings support Hall et al. (2014) research that argues that an increased 
source of income in the BoP segment must be complemented by a value capture mechanism 
such as training to balance the negative consequences of more income. An interesting aspect 
of the community‘s capability building is how the overlooked and underestimated class of 
BoP women has captured the attention of these social entrepreneurs. While one of the 
enterprises chose to have an all-women workforce, the others empowered women by putting 
them in leadership positions or turning them into local entrepreneurs. Thus, Community 
Capability Building comes to fruition through 1. Community Training and Skill Development 
and 2. Women Empowerment 
4.2.2.1 Community Training and Skill Development 
The enterprises focus on developing the capabilities of the communities to instill them with 
the knowledge needed to sustain the technology change. When building the capacity, they 
focussed on individuals to empower them with training in operation and maintenance and in 
some cases in design of the solution. 
For example, ONergy regularly undertakes awareness campaigns for the farmers and trains 
them and the ONergy staff for the management of the solar installations at their locally 
positioned Renewable Energy Centers (RECs) in the remote areas of East India. ONergy also 
conducts agricultural ecosystem development by sensitizing farmers on changing cropping 
patterns, avoiding flood irrigation practice, growing less water-intensive (but remunerative) 
crops such as millets. So far ONergy has given 3000+ pieces of training to stakeholders led 
by experts and technicians on the implemented technologies. Thus the organization executes 
capacity building of farmers and farmer groups through training. 
At Orora, the local women are trained and employed for the assembling of the solar street 
lamps and for servicing the solar installations.  
“We were able to teach them everything from basic human rights to solar engineering. For 
almost a year and a half, they had full-fledged capability development. We taught them about 
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. We taught them about health care, healthy 
==PAGE:44==
44 
 
living, health care facilities, how to set up a Development Fund for themselves, how to make 
Solar Street lights, how to stitch fabric, and so on. We also taught them a little bit of 
marketing.‖ (Founder, Orora) 
GHE trains the people of the Himalayan communities to become solar engineers, manage 
homestays, run solar-powered digital education centers and medical equipment, and usage of 
clean cook-stoves. Skill development and training is the bedrock of the impact portfolio of 
GHE to successfully help the communities to transition to the green energy systems and 
sustain the change. 
“As an organization, we invest in skill development and capacity building. We roll out solar 
training in the nodal points of the towns where the communities join us. Once we've trained a 
pool of engineers, we engage some of the engineers full-time and some of them as part-time 
on a contract basis.” (COO, GHE) 
DESI Power also places huge importance on community training and capability building and 
runs a Training Center called DESI Mantra to provide skill-building and refresher courses to 
villagers, including women, to take up responsibilities in village projects. 
“We run a training program called DESI Mantra, which train men and women from the 
villages on different aspects of skill development.” (Director, DESI Power) 
"From the beginning, DESI Mantra has trained men and women (so far more than 600) in 
the villages.  Desi Mantra’s job is to train villagers to do whatever is required in the village 
for the products and solutions that we are providing. It is technological training, it is training 
on the users, it's the training of the farmers and training to run the micro-enterprises.  We 
have also trained people on how to grow mushrooms. We have trained people on how to do 
organic farming. We have trained people on how to run a PV mobile pump and trained them 
how to maintain a gasifier. We have trained a lot of women in carrying out accounting. It's 
not training in a conventional way with a syllabus that gives you a certificate at the end. So 
the basic principle of the DESI Mantra is to train people to do the jobs that they want to do in 
their villages.   It trains you to take the responsibility for the jobs in the village." (Founder, 
DESI Power) 
The community is not dependent on outsiders for operations and maintenance and this factor 
increased the acceptance and long-term usability of the technology.  
==PAGE:45==
45 
 
4.2.2.2 Focus on Women Empowerment 
Energy planning in rural areas is tightly linked with women‘s development. Rural women 
spent a lot of their time and effort on gathering wood (to be used as fuel), water, etc. Access 
to clean energy access helps improve the quality of life for women by helping them spend 
less time on daily household chores which can then be devoted to income generation through 
different sources. 
ONergy promotes solar irrigation pumps among vulnerable groups such as women farmers 
and helps local women become water entrepreneurs. Through investment in a solar-powered 
micro-irrigation system, women farmers in the region have not only been able to increase the 
amount of water they have access to daily but also save time and energy which previously 
was being used to draw water. 
―We have created a dedicated corpus only for women farmers.” (Co-founder, ONergy) 
A success story is the case of a woman water entrepreneur called Alpana Pal – the first 
woman to have installed a solar pump in the village of Ujirpur, West Bengal. After tending to 
her fields, Pal sells the excess water to other farmers who have the option to buy water from 
her. Pal‘s business has been running successfully in her village so far. 
Orora‘s founder decided to focus on helping the village women at the inception stage of her 
enterprise. Her explicit intention to work with women came from her earlier experiences of 
seeing very few Indian women progressing and reaching their potential.  
In the beginning, Orora came across a community in Trichy, where women were losing their 
agricultural incomes and were looking for livelihood opportunities within their community. 
Their husbands were migrating to the neighboring cities, but they wanted to stay in their 
community because they had children to take care of.  When Orora started teaching them to 
make solar products, they were exceptionally fast in learning.  
―What impressed me the most was that these women would show up at regular hours. If you 
said 9:00 o'clock in the morning, every day they would come at that time and stay till 4:00 
o'clock in the evening and they were so curious to learn. I was sure that there's potential in 
investing in these women.” (Founder, Orora) 
The women lacked confidence because they had never worked with electrical products. 
Overcoming this mental block was one of the big challenges faced by Orora. Conflicts arose 
even with investors who were not sure if an all-women workforce can deliver results. The 
==PAGE:46==
46 
 
founder‘s determination about working with women and empowering them could not be 
deterred by these challenges. 
―I just had to decide that this is what I want to build in this area and I would like to build it 
the way I want and  just had to be assertive about what I cared for.” (Founder, Orora) 
With this approach, Orora helps create an enterprising rural community for women. They're 
able to be creative and come up with different enterprising solutions for their community.  
―So initially they started with solar products. Now they're able to learn new skills and create 
new products. Thus, they're able to come up with newer solutions to meet their community 
needs.‖ (Founder, Orora) 
The engagement with Orora has helped rural women with self-confidence. Women feel 
empowered socially and take a bigger role in their community. 
―Previously, they used to be really afraid of touching or working with electricity. Now, they 
can go and fix water and electric pumps on their own. In their houses, they don't depend on 
their husbands to fix any of this electric stuff. They can fix it themselves and this has actually 
helped them, I think, culturally in India. I think women doing things on their own is not very 
common. By doing these things on their own, these women are changing the social equation 
in the community. Then they're able to come up with innovative ideas, for example, how to 
generate electricity for example, if there's a windmill or a water pump.‖ (Founder, Orora) 
When asked what has worked well for DESI Power, the founder promptly responds that it is 
women‘s participation in their village projects that has worked very well for them. DESI has 
imparted training specifically to the women in the communities for various levels of 
operations and maintenance (O&M) and management. Village women have moved on to 
become employees at DESI‘s power plants leading the O&M activities.  
Apart from focussing on training women for homestay management, GHE is looking at how 
it can empower women‘s self-help groups in the Himalayan communities. 
“Currently in Ladakh, we are exploring the model of creating market avenues for the product 
that women are making (with pashmina, wool, etc.) so that there are income generation 
opportunities. Similarly, in Meghalaya.” (COO, GHE) 
==PAGE:47==
47 
 
4.2.3 Non-traditional Partnerships 
Literature has pointed out the need for multi-national corporations (MNCs) to acquire new 
resources and build partnerships with local partners such as the NGOs to address the needs of 
the BoP segment (Seelos & Mair, 2007). My research finds that this can also serve as a useful 
strategy for social enterprises to conduct business and create synergies with the grassroots 
communities. 
Non-traditional partnerships are classified into 1. Alliances with local self-help groups, 
NGOs, or government and 2. International partnerships. Given below is a description of how 
and in what ways the studied enterprises win the trust of the locals, pool resources, build 
capability, and generate incomes through these non-traditional forms of partnerships. This 
form of partnership has been leveraged by social entrepreneurs as an important innovation 
tool for social innovation. 
4.2.3.1 Alliances/partnerships with local self-help groups, government, or NGOs 
ONergy utilizes partnerships and alliances to reach its clients in rural India. ONergy partners 
with microfinance institutions, NGOs, and the government to extend its distribution network, 
keep product costs low, and build trust with communities. This works well for rural clients 
because it makes the products affordable and gives them a point of contact within easy reach. 
Over the years ONergy has partnered with government agencies such as the National Small 
Industries Corporation, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, and the Solar Energy 
Corporation of India to diversify products and utilize these associations in the rural circles. 
The non-profit organization that Orora works with is called Sevai. They have acted as 
facilitators to support Orora work with the women of the village.  
―They provide a good backbone and safety for these women to come and work with us. The 
salaries are paid to the women through the non-profit,‖ (Founder, Orora) 
GHE has active alliances with the state governments and conducts community training in 
collaboration with the administration. They seek information on the government‘s 
development agendas and depending on the shortcomings in the plan, strategize their 
electrification projects. This also prevents duplication of effort in electrification projects. 
DESI has promoted local groups as their partners focusing on village associations like self-
help groups of either farmers or women, individual investors, or any local group that can be 
accessed to jointly work towards fulfilling electricity needs and generating income for 
==PAGE:48==
48 
 
themselves and the communities. Some projects of DESI are even run by local self-help 
groups who are up-skilled through training and urged to take ownership while DESI acts as a 
consultant, mentor, and trainer to them. 
4.2.3.2 International Partnerships  
Orora partnered up with an international organization in the garment industry through her 
alma mater Babson College. The company was looking at manufacturing its products in India 
to lower its manufacturing costs and wanted to partner with a transparent organization to get 
full visibility into the supply chain. Orora‘s transparent grassroots engagement along with a 
trained women workforce provided the perfect opportunity to outsource the manufacturing 
process. This diversification of the solution portfolio is part of Orora‘s strategy to move from 
a donation-based financing model to a revenue-based financing model to break even and 
become a for-profit organization in the future. The increased revenue is not only helping 
Orora to become financially sustainable but also providing an additional safety net for 
continued employment of the women workforce. This has been especially useful during 
unforeseen circumstances such as during the pandemic when lots of jobs in rural India were 
forgone due to the local organizations‘ financial losses. The international partnership has 
helped Orora to generate sales and guarantee employment and monthly payment to the 
women workers even during the pandemic. 
“Ideally, I would have done only solar, but given the corona situation, it made sense to get 
into an alternate revenue stream through international collaborations.” (Founder, Orora) 
DESI Power partnered with Rockefeller Foundation to establish the concept of SPEED 
(Smart Power for Environment-friendly Economic Development) program and was actively 
involved in its implementation building 20 power plants in Bihar, India. Rockefeller 
Foundation is also a donor to DESI providing soft loans to invest in new power plants and 
solar microgrids. 
Recently, GHE partnered with the European Space Agency (ESA) to use space technology in 
their on-ground activities. Utilizing space applications such as tourism logistics, mobility 
services, emergency services, as well as electrification for the last-mile communities is a 
testimony to GHE‘s commitment to using innovative technologies to create sustainable value 
for the communities.  
Thus non-traditional partnerships on the international front are playing a big role to help in 
risk mitigation, resource access, and technology development for these social enterprises. 
==PAGE:49==
49 
 
4.2.4 Micro-entrepreneurship Modelling 
The studied enterprises initiated and supported micro-entrepreneurship activities in the 
communities through their business models. These activities were realized by mobilizing 
different micro-enterprises in the villages with renewable energy solutions and by expanding 
the income streams of the local stakeholders. Since provisioning of energy leads to an 
increase in work hours it ultimately improves the productivity of the people. This can 
contribute to additional income generation and the revival of local entrepreneurial 
ecosystems. The findings are in alignment with the evolution of the role of the BoP 
participants from consumers to entrepreneurs or co-creators (Simanis & Hart, 2009). In my 
cases, the business models help the BoP segment become consumers as well entrepreneurs.  
4.2.4.1 Micro-enterprises opportunity generation 
Orora came up with the idea of solar powering the village community center which when 
solar-powered, could be used for a range of purposes like local schooling or garment 
manufacturing or tailoring or as a training center. Thus the first ‗Orora Power Hub‘ was built 
by solar-powering the community center that went on to support various micro-enterprises in 
the village. The local manufactures who needed reliable access to electricity became the 
customers of Orora. 
DESI has helped set up and run many micro-enterprises in the villages which buy electricity 
from DESI. They promote and develop irrigation pumps, clean cooking energy, and other 
agro-based micro-enterprise businesses by training the villagers on the skills to run these 
enterprises. Through DESI Mantra, training is provided to villagers on any economic or 
developmental activity that the villagers wish to conduct in their community, for example, 
training to teachers willing to impart digital education to students. 
ONergy‘s non-profit counterpart SwitchON has set up an incubator to identify and build 
sustainable energy micro-enterprises in education, agriculture, and healthcare. It provides 
financial access and other necessary support to start a small business in these categories.  
4.2.4.2 Income generation opportunities for communities at large 
ONergy created an ecosystem in the villages around the solar water pumps by providing 
income generation opportunities to farmers who had excess water. ONergy focused on 
creating livelihood opportunities and enhancing the productivity of the community by 
promoting a ‗Solar Water Entrepreneur‘ model in which a farmer operates the solar pump and 
sells water to other farmers on an hourly/daily/seasonal basis thus becoming a ‗water 
==PAGE:50==
50 
 
entrepreneur‘. This ‗Water as a Service‘ (WaaS) business model ensures enough income to 
pay off the quarterly/half-yearly EMI through the sale of water to the ‗Water User Groups‘.  
The ‗Water User Group‘ Model is a Joint Liability Group of smallholder farmers or a self-
help group to facilitate financing and optimum water usage in the community. 
Over time, better agricultural productivity and access to water have helped improve 
livelihood exponentially in agricultural regions of West Bengal where ONergy operates.  
ONergy has also developed a strong network of rural entrepreneurs who have worked 
towards training and sensitizing farmers and providing technical support.  
For Orora, the main benefit for the community has been the employment opportunities 
created for the women who work are at their center. Despite the pandemic and numerous 
other family-related challenges, they have employment opportunities with Orora and get paid 
regularly for their work. 
“So initially when they started, they were not earning anything at all. Now they earn about 
6000 to ₹7000 a month, but we want to take them to 15,000 to 20,000 a month.‖ (Founder, 
Orora). 
GHE‘s homestay development projects have created entrepreneurship models for the local 
communities by creating an additional stream of income for them through tourism. Also, 
training of the local medical staff on the installed appliances at the solar-powered health 
centers leads to skill up-gradation and therefore more income for the locals. 
DESI creates income generation opportunities for individuals in the villages by training them 
in the skills that are needed to either set up economic or developmental activity in the village 
or find a job in another enterprise.  
4.2.5 Innovative Financial Mobilization Models: 
As per Sanjay & Koch (2020), social ventures when conceptualizing markets for underserved 
communities develop transaction systems consistent with the income as well as the spending 
patterns of this segment. In line with the above theory, I observed that the founders in my 
studied cases came with innovative financial transaction systems that enhanced the purchase 
and acceptability of their solar solutions.  
Solar irrigation as a technology, requiring high capital expenditure, is considered expensive 
and risky compared to traditional fossil-fuel-powered irrigation technologies. The upfront 
cost of buying solar pumps has been one of the biggest prohibitive factors for the adoption of 
==PAGE:51==
51 
 
this technology among farmers. The bank loans are not easily available to the BoP segment 
because of the reluctance of the financial institutions to give loans to customers, traditionally 
considered ‗unbankable‘. This coupled with a lack of awareness about solar technology 
among farmers makes penetration of the solar-powered irrigation systems below 1%. To 
tackle this challenge, ONergy supported their customer base of smallholder farmers who lack 
the purchasing power with innovative financial mobilization models by partnering up with 
the local banks so that no upfront costs would be incurred by the farmers fully.  
SwitchON Foundation set up First Loss Guarantee Fund (FLDG) that acted as a confidence-
building measure for the banks to lend to smallholder farmers with no credit history. To 
ensure repayment of the loans SwitchON Foundation put forth pre-conditions for selecting 
the appropriate site and promoted the ‗Solar Water Entrepreneur (SWE)‘ model. The farmers 
needed to do a down payment of 10 to 20% and the balance was financed by the bank. In case 
subsidy was available, the loan amount was further reduced upon receiving the subsidy. This 
made bank loans accessible to the interested farmers. With this arrangement, the enterprise 
has helped achieve a 50 to 100% increase in farmer‘s incomes with no cases of loan defaults. 
“Getting a bank’s buy-in in order that they start lending for solar pumps was very critical for 
us. Our objective was to establish a clear payback scheme and financial viability for the solar 
pumping systems to ensure that the farmers are able to repay the bank loans through 1) the 
savings in the diesel that they were not using and 2) additional income by being able to do 
multiple cropping. We were able to demonstrate this successfully.  There were clear paybacks 
in 3 to 4 years but still, there was some hesitation among the bankers to lend. That’s when 
we, through some international funding sources, set up a First Loss Guarantee Fund (FLDG) 
which the banks could draw upon in case of any default.” (Founder, ONergy) 
The second financial mobilization model set up by ONergy to ensure last-mile access to solar 
energy in the country‘s remotest corners was the creation of a ‗Joint Liability Group‘ (JLG) 
under which several farmers could invest collectively in a pump. 
 ―We created Joint Liability Groups. Five to six farmers come together and  pay for the entire 
system and that is how the shared expenses are bringing the cost down.” (Co-Founder, 
ONergy) 
ONergy is also impaneled under different government schemes to get subsidies for solar 
pumps and micro-irrigation systems that reduce the payback period on the system from 3 
years to 1 year. These subsidies are back-ended, reducing the loan payable by the farmer. 
==PAGE:52==
52 
 
Orora installs solar microgrids, each of which costs around 10K USD, to solar-power the 
community centers or other facilities in the villages.  When clients that are interested in the 
Orora Power Hubs faced challenges paying for the 10K USD, Orora tried to create innovative 
financing models to enable the customers to purchase the products. One of the models that it 
has created is where the payment or the purchasing plan is divided among three parties. If 
10K USD is the cost of the solar micro-grid, one-third of it is paid by the customer (which is 
the local manufacturer or the local NGO that Orora has partnered with), one-thirs of it is paid 
by an impact investor or through a CSR program of a company, and the remaining one-third 
is financed by the sales of the products that get manufactured in the solar-powered facility 
after the sale has happened. By getting multiple players to pay for their product, Orora is not 
only divesting the financial risks but also enabling financial mobilization in the community. 
GHE has created an innovative financing solution for the communities to pay for the 
maintenance of the installed solar grids. For every village that is electrified, there's a 
maintenance agreement that is signed with the community. As a part of this contract, the 
village opens a bank account in the name of the solar committee, and every house deposits 
INR 100 per month in this account. GHE‘s local engineers visit the village every six months 
to do routine maintenance where they check all the grids, batteries, and panels to ensure that 
the conditions of this equipment are fine. To pay the engineer, a cheque is issued from this 
account for the maintenance of the solar grid as a part of the maintenance contract. Thus 
every electrified village takes ownership of the continuing operations and the sustenance of 
the electrification.  
Thus these three enterprises paid careful attention to the need of the poor to provide them 
with financing solutions such that spending on the solutions matched the socio-economic 
circumstances of the communities. 
Many village projects that DESI has run in the past have not been profitable projects but over 
the years, the enterprise has been able to develop profitable business units. The enterprise has 
worked with many cooperative banks and social financiers to raise capital for the pilot 
projects in the villages. DESI acknowledges that raising funds is one of the difficult parts of 
their business model because no financial institution is ready to give loans to the villagers or 
to the local entrepreneurs due to the absence of security. DESI Power believes that further 
innovation in the financial mobilization (on the lines of ONergy, Orora, and GHE) along with 
supporting government policies can help DESI overcome these challenges. 
==PAGE:53==
53 
 
4.3 
Discussion 
My research answers the question: How do business models, for social entrepreneurs 
addressing the renewable energy needs of the BoP in India, work, and how do they create 
sustainable value? For this, I first mapped the business activities of my four case companies 
explaining their linkages and governance. This revealed the value creation logic which was 
used to describe the value outcomes (social, environmental, and economic) of the business 
models. Next, I investigated if the sustainability characteristics are reflected in the business 
models. It was found that the studied BMs abided by the four characteristics of sustainable 
business models – social and environmental value prioritization over profit, long-term 
business outlook, multiple-stakeholder approach, and systemic approach to problem-solving. 
Additionally, recurring patterns were revealed in the business models - Community 
Relationship Management, Community Capability Building, Non-traditional Partnerships, 
Micro-entrepreneurship Modelling, and Innovative Financial Mobilization - that ran across 
all the business models and helped in value creation, delivery, and capture.  
In order to answer, how the value is sustained over the long term to create a permanent 
change, I combine all of the above results and findings to postulate that a collaborative 
bottom-up approach incorporated in the business model design is significant for sustainable 
development. The enterprises must design business models by collaborating with all the 
players in the system, thus transcending organizational boundaries. The triple-bottom-line 
outcome of these models is a result of the collaborative work of all the stakeholders that these 
social enterprises integrate and mobilize. Therefore, I build the proposition that a 
collaborative bottom-up approach is followed by social entrepreneurs addressing renewable 
energy needs at the BoP for the sustenance of social, economic, and environmental value. 
This approach emphasizes collaboration from all aspects - with the BoP participants on clean 
technology training, solution creation, use, and acceptance; with the local non-profit groups 
for resource pooling and business execution; with international partners for financial risk 
mitigation and income diversification; with financial institutions and governments for 
financial mobilizations and with local micro-enterprises for entrepreneurship insemination. 
The bottom-up approach, as opposed to the top-down approach of MNCs, explains how 
social enterprises build trust and attend to native needs by designing holistic offerings to be 
acceptable and fitting to the local people. It also explains how the changing needs at the base 
compel entrepreneurs to keep an open and flexible mindset during the business model design 
– either pivoting from time to time or adding layers in the foundational business model. The 
==PAGE:54==
54 
 
massive socio-technical change that renewable energy provisioning at the BoP entails is 
achieved by cultivating a network with all kinds of organizations across the value chain in a 
bottom-up fashion over the long term.  
This study also propositions that a relocation of the enterprise to another community on 
achievement of self-reliance in the existing community leads to sustained value and 
community empowerment. It is seen that the entrepreneurs focussed to achieve self-reliability 
of the communities and factored in a relocation strategy to move out of the village or 
community on the achievement of the set objective of community self-reliance. Once the 
community became their own decision-makers and self-managed the operations of the new 
technology, the social enterprise that had brought all the participants together, was no longer 
indispensable. Thus they could move their solution to another community upholding self-
sustainability and empowerment of the communities. Financial security, ownership, control 
over resources, increase in self-esteem and self-confidence, and future security are the 
underlying foundation of this empowerment.  
In all of my cases, the entrepreneurs had an explicit mission of serving the underserved with 
renewable energy and fostering community self-sustainability. The collaborative bottom-up 
approach coupled with a relocation strategy on achievement of the community‘s self-reliance 
led to sustainable value in the communities. This theoretical idea is represented in Figure 13. 
 
Figure 13. Collaborative Bottom-up Approach and Relocation post Self-reliance  
(Source: Author) 
 
4.3.1 Contributions 
The research has both theoretical and practical implications because of the significance of 
business models as a tool to empower poor communities and generate sustainable 
development. It contributes to the theory of business models in two ways – first by theorizing 
==PAGE:55==
55 
 
a collaborative bottom-up approach for sustainable renewable energy transition at the BoP 
through empirical evidence. This collaborative bottom-up approach can be a valuable 
addition to the sustainability dimensions of SBM literature distinguishing them further from 
conventional business models. More empirical evidence from the other developing countries 
of the world can be used to corroborate the proposition. Thus this research calls for similar 
research in the renewable energy transition phenomenon in other developing countries. 
Secondly, the proposition that relocation of the business on achievement of self-reliance in 
the existing community leads to sustained value creates a new input for business model 
literature in the area of reorganizing or transforming a set model. When enterprises relocate 
to a new community they need to reinvent the established model based on the new local 
circumstances. This calls for customizations or further innovations in the business models 
keeping the basic framework of collaborative bottom-up execution the same. Thus a new 
determinant of business model transformation at the BoP is incited through this research. 
This research also brings to the forefront the significance of addressing the social dynamics to 
bring about a permanent technological change among the underserved communities. Thus it 
provides new evidence in the complementary fields of social entrepreneurship and social 
innovation at the Base of the Pyramid thus inducing further research in these areas.  
On the practical front, this research acts as a guide for MNCs operating in the developing 
economies of the world and budding entrepreneurs with aspirations to impact triple-bottom-
line sustainability.  MNCs with their traditional business models have failed to serve the 
requirements of the underserved communities. The social enterprises of the developing 
countries using a holistic approach for addressing the problems and needs of the BoP segment 
can serve as a shining example for MNCs on business model innovation. The SBM patterns 
discovered through this study can be used to inspire entrepreneurs and managers in other 
developing economies to take cues and emulate similar solutions, i.e., to conceptualize new 
or improved business models from the discovered patterns.   
The obtained insight will help in formulating strategies and public policies that can aid social 
entrepreneurs in running new ventures in the renewable energy sector. This in turn can spur 
societal and environmental welfare in India. Since entrepreneurship is related to economic 
performance, policymakers can adopt the policies recommended in the next section to 
promote social entrepreneurship in the renewable energy sector and foster economic 
development.  
==PAGE:56==
56 
 
4.3.2 Policy Recommendations 
Social entrepreneurs ‗repurposing the business for society/environment‘ (Bocken et al., 2014) 
face challenges at the institutional level when there are no conducive policy frameworks to 
support their growth. Among my studied cases, this applies most to DESI Power which 
emphasized the pressing need for strong government policies for enabling the construction of 
large-scale decentralized renewable energy power plants. Although ONergy, GHE, and Orora 
are able to navigate the institutional challenges in the country to a considerable extent using 
their business models, DESI Power faces one of the biggest hindrances in this area. The 
enterprise has not been able to scale up because raising capital for the execution of the pilot 
projects has been one of its biggest lacunas. The financial institutions in India are reluctant to 
lend to the poor or the local entrepreneurs who cannot show collaterals. DESI believes that an 
optimized combination of technologies when designed with suitable financing packages for 
both power plants and village micro-enterprises, can enable a faster proliferation of these 
energy systems, create local jobs, and reduce CO2 emissions. 
As per Bocken et al. (2014), policy framework changes that can support social enterprises to 
scale will help them deliver their fundamental mission of environmental and societal benefits. 
When these enterprises can function without worrying about maximizing shareholder return 
they can not only deepen their value outcomes but also drive an economy-wide change. The 
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic also provides a chance to policymakers to rethink the 
existing policies and modify them to support the social entrepreneurs working to bring 
renewable energy to the BoP. 
As an emerging economy, India is a highly important player in the global energy market. The 
country has made considerable progress in the power sector, bringing electricity to more than 
700 million people since 2000 (IEA, 2020a). Since then, the Government of India (GoI) has 
been able to increase access to electricity by implementing various energy market reforms 
(IEA, 2020a). However, there are still gaps in the institutional policies, as evidenced through 
this research.  
Assimilating the learning from my case studies, my experience from the developed 
economies, and aligning with India‘s existing energy policy development, the following 
policy recommendations are made to guide India in its ambitious energy transition endeavor. 
The policy recommendations are formulated to enhance the reliability, affordability, and 
==PAGE:57==
57 
 
sustainability of renewable energy for electrification in the BoP segment and to support social 
entrepreneurs working in this area. 
One of the greatest barriers to the implementation of renewables is the upfront costs which 
makes it difficult for them to compete with fossil fuel alternatives.  Since the cost of 
financing renewables is a major impediment, risk guarantees from the government can reduce 
the developmental risks of these solutions. The GoI can work with international financial 
institutions to create policies and debt financing programs for entrepreneurs working with 
renewable energy technologies. The GoI must also try to create a level playing field for these 
two alternative forms of energy in the Indian market. India has already implemented a tax on 
coal and some of the tax revenues go to fund renewable energy projects (IEA, 2020a). This 
can be supplemented by the carbon tax and phasing out fossil-fuel subsidies to redirect them 
to the poor communities. 
The Indian investors avoid investing in projects for the underserved communities because of 
lack of infrastructure, unavailability of skilled people, lack of training, and so on. A 
government framework that gives incentives to private investors and minimizes their 
investment risks is highly needed. The GoI can create more incentives for private investors 
investing in renewable energy innovation - from inception to commercialization - on the lines 
of the ‗Make in India‘ campaign. With government-backed guarantees, private investors will 
feel more secured against venture failures and invest in these rural electrification projects. 
Private investment alone is not a panacea for these rural communities. A public-private 
partnership in which the government allows the villagers to become partners in local projects 
through financial backups should also be considered. GoI schemes enabling partnership with 
the local banks, coupled with private sector investment can drive the financing needs of 
large-scale decentralized renewables in the rural parts of India. For example, for a large-scale 
power plant project, DESI Power can have local villagers as investing partners and a private 
investor backing them up to finance, build and operate the plants till break-even is achieved. 
India has already commenced community projects for renewables, for example, India‘s 
support for community cooking applications under the off-grid and decentralized energy 
program. Following the footsteps of Germany and Denmark, India can go further to bestow 
local community ownership of hydropower and solar power projects. This can be in the form 
of profit-sharing with the local communities for large renewables installations. Such a policy 
==PAGE:58==
58 
 
will not only advance renewable energy implementation but also bring in the economic 
development of the rural communities. 
A regulatory framework for the easing of renewables payment in the villages is needed 
because cost-consciousness in the BoP segment can hinder renewable energy adoption. In 
these situations, the government can develop payment packages that are in alignment with the 
system parameters of the specific renewables (like location, time-specific production, etc.). 
For example, creating variable tariffs according to the time of day can help a social enterprise 
like DESI Power to tap more customers among the BoP segment for small-scale, 
decentralized renewables. 
Barriers such as difficulty in obtaining consent from the local authority or shortage of skills at 
the local level can hinder the private sector‘s initiatives. For example, Orora could not start 
the solar homes project on time because the local authorities did not allow it. Thus, policy 
measures are needed to create an enabling environment such as accelerating the approvals 
and the planning process for the local BoP entrepreneurs. The government can put schemes in 
place that would push local authorities to step up on authorizations and build local supply 
chains to support the entrepreneurs. 
India‘s renewable power target for 227 GW of capacity by 2022 is commendable. The GoI 
has also declared an increase in the renewable energy target to achieve 450 GW at the United 
Nations‘ Climate Summit in September 2019 (IEA, 2020a). More concrete timelines for the 
new targets with a medium-term (say by 2027) and a long-term goal setting (say by 2032) are 
needed as proof of India‘s commitment towards renewables adoption. Fixing renewable 
energy targets for the medium and long term beyond 2022 along with robust renewable 
policies can give impact investors a sense of certainty and make them feel secure about their 
investment in the renewable energy sector. With access to investments and a long-term 
perspective, more social entrepreneurs can tap the BoP markets. 
5. Limitations and Future Research 
The key limitation of this research lies in its design and the fact that is based on only four 
case studies. It provides deep insights into the characteristics of SBMs that manifest in the 
business models of four social enterprises and also shows how these business models work to 
create sustainable long-term value by theorizing a collaborative bottom-up approach coupled 
with a relocation strategy. However, the findings cannot be generalized. With respect to the 
proposed collaborative bottom-up approach theory, it is worthwhile to research which types 
==PAGE:59==
59 
 
of collaborations have the potential to generate maximum value for both the communities and 
the BoP enterprises. It is also important to explore how entrepreneurs can ascertain the best 
time to move out of the community without generating negative repercussions. 
In this study, since the entrepreneurs pursued both a social and an environmental goal, it 
would be worthwhile to analyze the process they adopted to integrate both of these goals in 
the business models and what trade-offs they made. Although the findings indicate the need 
to incorporate sustainability dimensions in business models for value creation and sustenance, 
future studies need to address questions such as how the entrepreneurs balance the 
sustainability dimensions to generate value, which sustainability dimension has a bigger 
impact on community self-sustainability, and so on.  
Though this research focuses on sustainable value creation, a concrete approach for 
measuring that value is missing. In particular, this study does not adopt any approach to 
measure and compare the social, and environmental dimensions of value outcomes. SBM 
conceptualization and representation remain incomplete without measurement on the ground. 
Also, there is no indication of the level of success achieved by the adopted business models. 
It can only be presumed based on the theoretical account of the entrepreneurs. 
In this study, the business model lens has been used in the context of renewable energy and 
underserved communities. Integrating other areas, such as the circular economy and 
sustainable supply chains could uncover additional knowledge and information on business 
models for sustainability at the BoP. Finally, the exploratory nature of this study calls for 
further research in this area to accept or reject the propositions put forward here. 
6. Conclusion 
This study has been devoted to analyzing business models, understanding their behavior, and 
formulating theories that can help in implementing sustainable renewable energy solutions in 
the BoP segment. It represents one of the early attempts to take stock of the business model 
innovations at BoP employed by Indian social entrepreneurs in the renewable energy space. 
While the analytical model was developed with the Indian context in mind, the findings are 
applicable beyond this context in the other developing economies of the Global South. 
A collaborative bottom-up approach coupled with a relocation strategy followed by the social 
entrepreneurs to drive the self-sustainability of the rural communities is the most pertinent 
==PAGE:60==
60 
 
outcome of this study. The SBM patterns discovered through this study can also inspire 
entrepreneurs and managers in other developing economies to emulate similar solutions.  
My study raises awareness about sustainable business models as practiced in a developing 
economy despite the institutional challenges that it faces. Furthermore, it acts as a lever to 
spread knowledge about the practical implementation of business models, energy equity for 
the underserved, and sustainable development.  The research on sustainable business models 
in developing countries in the renewable energy sector is still at a very nascent stage. 
Therefore, this research leads the way to capture the attention that it deserves while 
uncovering some novel insights in this area. 
 
==PAGE:61==
61 
 
7. References 
Acs, Z. J., Boardman, M. C., & McNeely, C. L. (2013). The social value of productive 
entrepreneurship. Small Business Economics, 40(3), 785–796. 
Arora. S., & Romijn, H. (2012). The empty rhetoric of poverty reduction at the base of the 
pyramid. Organization, 19(4), 481-505. 
Austin, J., Stevenson, H., & Wei-Skillern, J. (2006). Social and commercial 
entrepreneurship: same, different or both? Entrepreneurship Theory Practice, 30, 1–
22. 
Baden-Fuller, C., & Morgan, M. S. (2010). Business models as models. Long Range 
Planning, 43(2–3), 156–171. 
Bhagavatula, S., Mudambi, R., Murmann, & J.P. (2019). Innovation and entrepreneurship 
in India: An overview. Management and Organization Review, 15(3), 467–493. 
Bocken, N., Short, S., Rana, P., & Evans, S. (2013). A value mapping tool for sustainable 
business modelling. Corporate Governance, 13, 482–497. 
Bocken, N., Short, S., Rana, P., & Evans, S. (2014). A literature and practice review to 
develop sustainable business model archetypes. Journal of Cleaner Production, 65, 42-
56. 
Bornstein, D. (2004). How to change the world: Social entrepreneurs and the power of 
new ideas (First ed.): Oxford University Press. 
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2013). Successful Qualitative Research: A Practical Guide for 
Beginners (First ed.). SAGE Publications Ltd. 
Chesbrough, H. (2007). Business model innovation: It‘s not just about technology 
anymore. Strategy & Leadership, 35 (6), 12–17. 
Chesbrough, H. & Rosenbloom, R.S. (2002). The role of the business model in capturing 
value from innovation : evidence from Xerox Corporation‘s technology spin-off 
companies. Industrial and Corporate Change, 11(3), 529–555. 
Dembek, K., York, J., & Singh J.P. (2018). Creating value for multiple stakeholders: 
Sustainable business models at the Base of the Pyramid. Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 196, 1600-1612. 
Dembek, K., Nagaraj, S., & Chmielewski, D.A. (2019). A systematic review 
of the Bottom/Base of the Pyramid literature: Cumulative evidence and future 
directions. Journal of Business Ethics, 165, 365–382. 
Dembek, K., & York, J. (2020). Applying a sustainable business model lens to mutual 
value creation with base of the pyramid suppliers. Business & Society, 1–36. 
Dentchev, N., Baumgartner, R., Dieleman, H., Jóhannsdóttir, L., Jonker, J., Nyberg, T., 
Rauter, R.,  Rosano, M., Snihur, Y., Tang, X.,  & van Hoof, B. (2016). Embracing the 
==PAGE:62==
62 
 
variety of sustainable business models: Social entrepreneurship, corporate 
intrapreneurship, creativity, innovation, and other approaches to sustainability 
challenges. Journal of Cleaner Production, 113, 1-4. 
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. Academy of 
Management Review, 14(4), 532–550. 
Foss, N. J.,  & Saebi, T. (2015). Business model innovation – The organizational 
dimension, 1–23 . Oxford University Press Inc. 
Franca, C.L., Broman, G., Robert, K.H., Basile, G., & Trygg, L. (2017). An approach to 
business model innovation and design for strategic sustainable development. Journal 
of Cleaner Production, 140, 155-166.  
Geissdoerfer, M., Vladimirova, D., & Evans, S. (2018). Sustainable business model 
innovation: A review. Journal of Cleaner Production, 198, 401-416. 
Gregg, J. S., Nyborg, S., Hansen, M., Schwanitz, V.J., Wierling, A., Zeiss, J.P., Delvaux, 
S., Saenz, V., Polo-Alvarez, L., Candelise, C., Gilcrease, W., Arrobbio, O., Sciullo, 
A., & Padovan, D. (2020). Collective action and social innovation in the energy 
sector: A mobilization model perspective. Energies 2020, 13, 651. 
Hall, J., Matos, S.V., & Martin, M.J.C. (2014). Innovation pathways at the Base of the 
Pyramid: 
Establishing 
technological 
legitimacy 
through 
social 
attributes. 
Technovation, 34, 284-294. 
International Energy Agency (IEA). (2020a). India 2020 Energy Policy Review. Retrieved 
from https://www.iea.org/reports/india-2020. Accessed on June 8, 2021. 
International Energy Agency (IEA). (2020b).  SDG7: Data and Projections. Retrieved 
from https://www.iea.org/reports/sdg7-data-and-projections. Accessed on June 8, 
2021. 
Intended 
Nationally 
Determined 
Contributions, 
India 
(2015). 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/India%20First/INDIA
%20INDC%20TO%20UNFCCC.pdf  Accessed on June 8, 2021. 
Jun, S., Lee, D., & Park, J. (2013). Determining business models in Bottom-of-the 
Pyramid markets. Industrial Management and Data Systems, 113(7), 1064-1082. 
Lüdeke-Freund, F.(2010). Towards a conceptual framework of business models for 
sustainability. Environment Management., 49, 1-28. 
Magretta, J. (2002). Why business models matter. Harvard Business Review, 80, 86–93. 
Markides, C., & Sosa, L. (2013). Pioneering and first Berlin advantages: The importance 
of business models. Long Range Planning, 46 (4–5), 325–334. 
Markman, G. D., Russo, M., Lumpkin, G. T., Jennings, P. & Mair, J. (2016). 
Entrepreneurship as a platform for pursuing multiple goals: A special issue on 
==PAGE:63==
63 
 
sustainability, ethics, and entrepreneurship. Journal of Management Studies, 53(5), 
673–694. 
Martins, L.L., Rindova, V.P., & Greenbaum, B. E. (2015). Unlocking the hidden value of 
concepts: A cognitive approach to business model innovation. Strategic 
Entrepreneurship Journal, 9, 99-117. 
Mongelli, L. & Rullani, F (2017). Inequality and marginalisation: social innovation, social 
entrepreneurship and business model innovation. Industry and Innovation, 24(5), 446-
467. 
Moratis, L., Melissen, F., & Idowu, S. O. (2018). Sustainable Business Models: Principles, 
Promise, and Practice (CSR, Sustainability, Ethics & Governance) (Softcover reprint 
of the original 1st ed. 2018 ed.). Springer. 
Osterwalder, A., Pigneur, Y., & Tucci, C. L. (2010). Clarifying business models: Origins, 
present, and future of the concepts. Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems, 16, 1-40. 
Phills, J.A., Deigmeier, K., & Miller, D. T. (2008). Rediscovering social innovation. 
Stanford Social Innovation Review, 34–43. 
Plutshack, V., Sengupta S., Sahay A., & Viñuales, J.E.(2019). New and renewable energy 
social enterprises accessing government support: findings from India. Energy Policy, 
132, 367-378. 
Prahalad, C. (2006). The fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid: Eradicating poverty 
through profits. Wharton School Publishing. 
Rao-Nicholson, R., Vorley, T., & Khan, Z. (2017). Social innovation in emerging 
economies: A national systems of innovation based approach. Technological 
Forecasting & Social Change, 121, 228-237.  
Robinson, J. (2006). Navigating social and institutional barriers to markets: how social 
entrepreneurs identify and evaluate opportunities. Social Entrepreneurship, 95-120. 
Jain, S. & Koch, J. (2020) Crafting markets and fostering entrepreneurship within 
underserved communities: social ventures and clean energy provision in Asia. 
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 32(1-2), 176-196. 
Schaltegger, S., Hansen, E. G., & Lüdeke-Freund, F. (2016). Business models for 
sustainability: Origins, present research, and future avenues. Organization & 
Environment, 29, 3-10. 
Seelos, C., & Mair, J. (2007). Profitable business models and market creation in the 
context of deep poverty: A strategic view. Academy of Management Perspectives, 21, 
49-63. 
Silvia, C. & Truzzi, S. (2020). Sustainable business models: Literature review of main 
contributions and themes. International Journal of Business and Managemen, 15(5). 
==PAGE:64==
64 
 
Simanis, E., & Hart, S. L. (2009). Innovation from the inside out. MIT Sloan Management 
Review, 50(4), 77–86. 
Sinkovics, N., Sinkovics, R.R., Yamin, M. (2014). The role of social value creation in 
business model formulation at the bottom of the pyramid–implications for MNEs. 
International Business Review, 23 (4), 692–707. 
Stubbs, W., & Cocklin, C. (2008). Conceptualizing a ‗sustainable business model‘. 
Organization & Environment, 21, 103. 
Swanson, L.A., & Zhang, D.D. (2011). Complexity theory and the social entrepreneurship 
zone. E:CO, 13(3), 39–56. 
United Nations (2015). Transforming our world: The 2030 agenda for sustainable 
development. New York, NY: United Nations. 
Weingand, D.E. (1993). Grounded theory and qualitative methodology. IFLA Journal, 
19(1), 17-26. 
World Commission on Environment and Development. (1987). Our common future. 
Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. Retrieved from http://www.un-
documents.net/our-common-future.pdf.  Accessed on 8th June 2020. 
Yang, M., Evans, S., Vladimirova, D., & Rana, P. (2017). Value uncaptured perspective 
for sustainable business model innovation. Journal of Cleaner Production, 140, 1794-
1804. 
Zahra, S.A., Gedajlovic, E., Neubaum, D.O., Shulman, J.M. (2009). A typology of social 
entrepreneurs: motives, search processes and ethical challenges. Journal of Business 
Venture. 24 (5), 519–532. 
Zott, C. & Amit, R. (2007). Business model design and the performance of entrepreneurial 
firms. Organization Science, 18(2), 181–199. 
Zott, C., & Amit, R. (2010). Business model design: An activity system perspective. Long 
Range Planning, 43, 216-226. 
Zott, C., & Amit, R. (2012). Creating value through business model innovation. MIT 
Sloan Management Review, 53(3). 
Zott, C., & Amit, R. (2017). Business Model Innovation: How to Create Value in a Digital 
World Business Model Innovation. GfK MIR, 9(1).  
Zott, C., Amit , R., & Massa, L. (2011).The business model: Recent developments and 
future research. Journal of Management, 37(4), 1019-1042. 
==PAGE:65==
65 
 
8. Appendix 
Interview Protocol related to Value Creation and Capture using Sustainable Business 
Model Lens (Source: Dembek & York, 2020) 
1. Introduction— what is the history of the organization, how they got involved, what they 
do? 
2. Problem addressed—what does the problem addressed look like? 
3. Motivation—why did they decide to address the problem? 
4. How problem is addressed—how is the problem addressed (details of activities, who 
performs them, etc.), collaborations if any? 
5. Purpose of the organization: what kinds of purposes is it catering to? 
6. Form of organisation and ownership: how are ownership and participation defined in their 
enterprise? 
7. Finances and profits—how organization earns money, its costs and income streams, 
profitability? How addressing the problem influences finances? 
8. Trade-offs and tensions—what are the potential tensions for organization? Any difficult 
decisions made? 
9. Value capture (stakeholder + value capture mechanism) — how the communities and 
different stakeholders benefit over time (pay attention to the mechanisms that ensure the 
communities and other stakeholders benefit from being involved in the organization).  
10. Embeddedness (either in a local community or within wider social movements): What 
kind of relation do they have with local communities and social movements? 
11. Definition of success—Definition of success in the organization?  Time frame of success? 
12. Measurement and outcomes—whether and how the organization measures its success, 
examples of indicators, outcomes so far? 
13. Examples of what worked and did not work—Examples of what worked really well and 
what did not work and why? 
14. What is needed to achieve success—Success factors and obstacles to success? 
15. Core Capabilities: what are the core capabilities they have and what they need? 
16. Additional details—are any details omitted and do they want to add or change anything? 
 
 
==PAGE:66==
66 
 
Interview Protocol related to Business Model Innovation (Source: Dembek & York, 
2020) 
1. What perceived needs were satisfied through the new model design? 
2. Business model content innovation - What novel activities were created to satisfy these 
perceived needs?  
3. Business model structure innovation - How were the required activities linked to each 
other in novel ways? Who performed each of the activities that are part of the business 
model? The Beneficiaries? A partner? The customer?  
4. Business model governance innovation - What novel governance arrangements enabled 
this structure? How was value created through the novel business model for each of the 
participants? 
5. What revenue model fits with the company‘s business model to appropriate part of the 
total value it helps create? 
 
==PAGE:67==
67 
 
Declaration of Authorship  
 
I hereby declare that the thesis submitted is my own unaided work. All direct or indirect 
sources used are acknowledged as references.  
I am aware that the thesis in digital form can be examined for the use of unauthorized aid and 
in order to determine whether the thesis as a whole or parts incorporated in it may be deemed 
as plagiarism. For the comparison of my work with existing sources I agree that it shall be 
entered in a database where it shall also remain after examination, to enable comparison with 
future theses submitted. Further rights of reproduction and usage, however, are not granted 
here.  
This thesis was not previously presented to another examination board and has not been 
published.  
 
Copenhagen, 25th July 2021  
Place, Date 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature 
(Debasmita Dey) 
 
 
 
