==PAGE:1==
A Method for Comparative Performance
Analysis of Communication Applications
in Cloud and On-premise Environments
Mala Devi Selvarathinam
Master’s Thesis
Lyngby, August 1, 2021
Supervisors:
Professor Fabian Fagerholm, Aalto University
Professor Ekkart Kindler, Technical University of Denmark
Advisor:
Sasikanth Munagala M.Sc. (Tech.)
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Communication applications deployed in the cloud beneﬁt from the various
advanced features available in the environment. When deployed to an on-
premise environment, the limited resources may cause performance issues
that aﬀect their functioning. If not resolved, these issues will hamper the
performance of time-critical applications. The aim of this thesis is to ana-
lyze how performance issues arising from the migration of a communication
application from a cloud environment to an on-premise environment can be
identiﬁed and rectiﬁed. Analyzing the performance issues of the migrated ap-
plication to the on-premise environment is essential as without understanding
the root of the issue it might not be feasible to design a solution to resolve
the same.
The thesis reviews multiple standards for performance analysis and frame-
works for performance measurement. The currently available performance
analysis solutions are also studied. The application is further reviewed to
identify the priorities with regard to performance. Based on the gathered
knowledge, a Performance Analysis method is deﬁned. The deﬁned method
is then used over the application to identify performance issues.
From the acquired results, it can be concluded that the proposed method
enables to identify factors to focus on, to obtain expected performance. The
results were compared against established performance thresholds deﬁned by
the organization.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in collaboration
with Motorola Solutions in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a
Masters degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Lyngby, August 1, 2021
Mala Devi Selvarathinam
iv
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to my supervisors Fabian Fager-
holm and Ekkart Kindler for their valuable guidance and constructive sug-
gestions for the thesis. Thank you for having faith in me and for pushing me
to give my best. I would also like to thank Sasikanth and his team in Mo-
torola who have been really supportive throughout the project and providing
technical guidance. Thank you for introducing me to this interesting topic.
I wish to thank my parents, my ﬁance and all my friends who are my
biggest pillar of strength.
Finally, I would like to thank my SECCLO coordinators for being sup-
portive throughout the Master’s program.
Lyngby, August 1, 2021
Mala Devi Selvarathinam
v
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations and Acronyms
CPU
Central Processing Unit
DSR
Design Science Research
SPE
Software Performance Engineering
GQM
Goal Question Metric
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
SQuaRE
Systems and Software Quality Requirements and
Evaluation
PQEM
Product Quality Evaluation Method
QARs
Quality Attribute Requirements
CSP
Communication Service Provider
QoS
Quality of Service
QoE
Quality of Experience
CC
Cloud Computing
OS
Operation System
API
Application Programming Interface
HTTP
HyperText Transfer Protocol
YAML
Yet Another Markup Language
KPI
Key Performance Indicators
RAM
Random Access Memory
AMQP
Advanced Message Queuing Protocol
CEEM
Cloud Evaluation Experiment Methodology
vi
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abbreviations and Acronyms
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Research Methodology
4
2.1
Design Science Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Design Science Research Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Applying DSR Cycle for the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Background
9
3.1
Goal Question Metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Software Product Quality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Performance Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
Frameworks for Measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
System Architecture and Metrics
17
4.1
The Communication Application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Terms and Concepts and Technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Metrics relevant for Performance Measurement . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Application Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Performance Analysis Method
29
5.1
The Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Goal Question Metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Prepare for Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Perform Measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.5
Evaluate Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
vii
==PAGE:8==
6
Implementation
39
6.1
Goal Question Metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Prepare for Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.3
Perform Measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.4
Evaluate Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
Evaluation and Discussion
60
7.1
The Performance Analysis Method and its Relevance . . . . .
60
7.2
In Comparison with other Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.3
Research questions revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.4
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.5
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8
Conclusion
65
viii
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Cloud computing denotes the delivery of resources and services on-demand
for computing over the internet to the users. Its major features include on-
demand self-service for computing resources (such as CPU, network, mem-
ory), rapid elasticity where the resources can be scaled up or down as re-
quired, a pay-per-use model, streamlined pipelines for deployment, and au-
tomated testing [1]. Hence there has been a shift from the traditional way of
using computational resources leading to an increased adoption rate of cloud
technologies.
Proven to be more eﬃcient due to advanced features, deploying the com-
munication application in the cloud can make them more eﬃcient and ubiq-
uitous. Communication application here refers to an application that enables
Telecommunication, which is the process of establishing communication as
voice, data, and video transmissions through electronic devices.
When a communication application deployed in the cloud is migrated
to an on-premise environment, limited resources such as CPU and memory
aﬀect the performance. Migration is deﬁned as the process of redeploying
an application to a new environment. Following the change in the environ-
ment, the application that leveraged elasticity in the cloud cannot function
on the same level due to the ﬁxed resources available on-premise. This re-
duced availability of resources could create bottlenecks that will hamper the
performance of the time-critical applications when they are deployed in an
on-premise environment.
This reverse migration from cloud to on-premise can be inﬂuenced by
various factors such as changing stakeholder preferences (the end-user of
the application) on the environment used, better security, and also to have
1
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
2
greater control over the computing environment.
1.1
Motivation
The migration from cloud to on-premise comes with its own set of challenges
due to various factors such as the ﬂuctuating workload to the system, the
resource constraints of the on-premise environment, and the increased com-
plexity of the application itself. Hence it becomes diﬃcult in maintaining
the level of performance as achieved in the cloud.
Thus, it becomes essential to deﬁne a migration strategy that leverages
the on-premise environment while providing performance that can adhere
to the organization’s standards. This can be achieved by focusing on how
an application that is built for the cloud could perform in the on-premise
environment when the requirement arises for the same.
It can be made
possible by analyzing the performance issues of the migrated application to
the on-premise environment.
1.2
Contribution
This thesis aims to determine and develop a method to identify and thus
solve the performance issues arising due to the migration of a communica-
tion application from a cloud environment to an on-premise environment. As
a ﬁrst step, the goal is to come up with a performance analysis method for
the application in the on-premise environment. Thus, the scope of the thesis
is restricted to deﬁning the performance analysis method to better conﬁgure
the migrated communication application for on-premise to provide improved
performance.
The performance measurement that would be part of the performance
analysis helps in evaluating the application.
The ﬁndings of this process
would be used to identify the performance issues that arise due to the mi-
gration and also to better conﬁgure the application for an on-premise envi-
ronment. The same method can also be further used to evaluate the same
application in the cloud to establish a comparison between the two deploy-
ment methods.
Thus, the major contribution of the thesis is an environment agnostic
framework for non-functional requirements for communication applications.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
3
This will also attempt to answer the research questions that guide the thesis.
This thesis was carried out in collaboration with Motorola Solutions, a
major company in the telecommunication industry. The requirement to mi-
grate the communication application to on-premise is to make it feasible for
the application to run in both on-premise and cloud environments. The term
organization in the rest of the thesis denotes the “Communication Service
Provider”.
1.3
Structure of the Thesis
The rest of the thesis is organized as follows: Chapter 2 describes the re-
search methodology used for the thesis. Chapter 3 gives an overview of the
software product quality and performance analysis. Chapter 4 discusses the
architecture of the application in the study and the deployment environment
which further stresses the metrics that can be used for the application in the
study. Chapter 5 introduces the method for the performance analysis. In
chapter 6 the method introduced in chapter 5 is implemented for the current
application in the study. Chapter 7 evaluates the method for its eﬀectiveness
and future work. Finally, Chapter 8 summarizes the work and discusses open
problems.
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Research Methodology
In this chapter, the thesis introduces the methodology used for this study.
It begins by explaining Design Science Research (DSR) in general and the
reason why this methodology was chosen. Further, the three research cycles
as deﬁned by Henver et. al. in [2] and how these cycles were used for solving
the research questions are also discussed.
2.1
Design Science Research
At the beginning of the study, it was important to identify a research method-
ology that can help guide the overall process. “Design Science Research”
was chosen as the research methodology as it would better suit in solving
the problem. Design science is the scientiﬁc study and creation of artefacts
as they are developed and used by people with the goal of solving practical
problems of general interest [3, P 7].
The deﬁnition has an emphasis on solving a practical problem which is
deﬁned as “a gap between the current state and a desirable state, as perceived
by the participants in a practice. A practice is a set of human activities per-
formed regularly and seen as meaningfully related to each other by the people
participating in them” [3, P 2]. Creating an artefact is another outcome of
the methodology. An artefact is deﬁned as an object made by humans with
the intention to be used for addressing a practical problem [3, P 3].
As discussed in the Introduction chapter, the thesis aims at solving the
problem of deﬁning migration strategy for the application migrating from
cloud to on-premise environment. To address and solve this practical prob-
lem, DSR becomes a natural choice as the research methodology. The arte-
4
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
5
fact that is created at the end of this study will consist of a method that
addresses the problem and aims at identifying a solution for the same.
2.2
Design Science Research Cycle
The Design Science Research Cycle proposed by Henver et. al. in [2] aids
in carrying out a design science project in an eﬃcient manner. The method
consists of three cycles: Relevance, Rigor, and Design. As seen from Figure
2.1, DSR is an iterative process with diﬀerent sub-processes for each cycle.
Figure 2.1: Design Science Research Cycle by Henver [2]
Relevance Cycle
The environment module consists of deﬁning the application domain and
the problems & opportunities that come with the domain in the study. The
application domain comprises the stakeholders and the technical system. Un-
derstanding the application domain is crucial as it helps identify the problems
or the opportunities that the current environment has for the stakeholders
involved. The relevance cycle then further initiates the Design Science Re-
search by providing it with the problem or opportunities to be addressed for
the environment. The artefact that is produced by the Design cycle is also
evaluated by the relevance cycle against the application domain. This is an
iterative cycle and the artefact evolves during each iteration to address the
requirements better.
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
6
Rigor Cycle
The activities of the “Rigor Cycle” are an iterative process between the
knowledge base and the Design Science Research. It is to ensure that the
created artefact is based on the scientiﬁc practices and methods that are
already available. It also helps identify existing solutions if they are already
available or to ﬁnd methods that can act as a base for creating the solu-
tion. Multiple iterations over the knowledge base are required to identify the
relevant information that can be used for the new artefact in creation.
Design Cycle
The Design cycle is the step where the actual artefact that addresses the
problem is deﬁned. The cycle is strongly grounded between the activities of
the Relevance cycle and the Rigor cycle. The inputs from these two cycles
act as the base on which the artefact from the design cycle is built upon.
The problem with its requirements is ﬁrst investigated which also includes
studying the existing solutions. The basis for studying the existing solutions
is given by the Rigor cycle.
The created artefact is constantly evaluated
in iterations over both the relevance cycle and the rigor cycle to identify
alternate solutions and to evaluate their relevance.
2.3
Applying DSR Cycle for the Thesis
Relevance Cycle
During the relevance cycle, the problem and the corresponding requirements
are identiﬁed. The problem here denotes the statement given by the orga-
nization i.e., performance analysis of an application that is being migrated
from cloud to on-premise to better deﬁne their migration strategy. This is
treated as the starting point from where the requirement and further oppor-
tunities are identiﬁed.
The environment here refers to the application in the study that is being
migrated from cloud to on-premise. The problems or opportunities are fur-
ther found in the deployment environments. The ﬁrst area of concern is that
the performance of the migrated application in the on-premise environment
might be aﬀected. Hence the requirement here is to deﬁne a performance
analysis method for the application in on-premise. During the performance
analysis, it should also be studied if the performance levels are similar to
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
7
that of the level when the application ran in the cloud.
The actual artefact that consists of the method would be the outcome of
the “Design Cycle”. Evaluating it against the requirements of the application
is also part of the “Relevance Cycle”. Evaluation of the method can be done
in two ways. The ﬁrst one would be to determine if the method was able to
identify and solve the issue that was initially determined. If not, the cycle
is repeated to further improve the method. Another method of evaluation
is by repeating the deﬁned method for another case study. This can better
assess the eﬀectiveness of the method deﬁned. But this is beyond the scope
of the thesis.
Hence with the above ﬁndings, the research questions for the thesis that
can help ﬁne-tune the focus of the study are deﬁned.
Research Questions
The thesis is guided by the following research questions:
• Research question 1: How to deﬁne a migration strategy for an appli-
cation from cloud to on-premise environment while maintaining perfor-
mance standards?
• Research question 2: How to conﬁgure the application to better suit
the on-premise environment?
• Research question 3: What technical infrastructure is required for car-
rying out the Performance Analysis of the application?
By answering these research questions, we aim to understand if the perfor-
mance of the migrated application gets aﬀected and if better ways to deploy
the application can be identiﬁed with the help of the method.
Rigor Cycle
Studying the knowledge base is important for the problem at hand to iden-
tify existing solutions.
A Systematic Literature Review is conducted for
the same. To ﬁnd the literature Google scholar was used. After the ini-
tial discovery of papers made through Google scholar, the required papers
were accessed through the University e-Library option as it is a quite com-
prehensive database that includes papers from all of the main journals and
publications. The papers chosen mostly include only conference and journal
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
8
papers.
The research questions help deﬁne the relevant search queries. The search
terms/queries help to identify the literature that is relevant to answer the
research questions. The search queries used were quite exhaustive but the
initial terms used for the search are presented in 2.1.
Query
Q1
“Performance measurement”
Q2
“Performance measurement” & “on-premise”
Q3
“Performance measurement” & “Telecommunication”
Q4
“Performance metrics”
Q5
“Performance monitoring”
Q6
“Performance evaluation”
Table 2.1: Search Terms
From the ﬁltered papers, the relevant papers were chosen for further read-
ing.
Design Cycle
In the design cycle, the objective is to identify a migration strategy from cloud
to on-premise with a focus on the performance of the application. With the
gained knowledge from the “Rigor Cycle” and the requirements deﬁned from
the “Relevance Cycle”, the method is deﬁned. The artefact thus would act
as a guideline to follow during the analysis. It would also be seen that if
the deﬁned method further improves on the existing solutions available thus
acting as an addition to the knowledge base.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Background
In this chapter, the thesis introduces the concepts and terms from the var-
ious domains it is based on. First, the interpretation method that aids in
identifying the objective of the analysis is introduced. It is followed by an
overview of Software Product quality and Performance Analysis. After this,
the chapter continues by introducing the frameworks currently available for
performance analysis.
To deﬁne a migration strategy the ﬁrst step would be to understand the
application in the study. With performance being the key factor to focus on
while deﬁning this strategy it becomes essential to understand the functioning
of the application and analyze its performance. Hence in the Background
chapter, the methods related to performance analysis are studied from the
literature.
3.1
Goal Question Metric
For analysis of any application, it is necessary to understand what is to be
achieved out of the analysis. When a large application is being considered,
the number of things that can be analyzed can become exhaustive, and thus
the objective of the analysis might be lost. One approach that could help
deﬁne the same for the system is The Goal Question Metric (GQM) [4].
The GQM approach is based on the idea that to measure and analyze
purposefully, the goals associated with the project are to be identiﬁed which
would help trace these goals to the data that is being measured. This ap-
proach aids in conﬁguring the measurement system that targets a speciﬁc
set of issues and also helps interpret the measurement data. The model is
9
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 3. BACKGROUND
10
deﬁned has three levels and are deﬁned as follows:
Figure 3.1: GQM Hierarchical Structure [4]
The GQM model is a hierarchical structure as deﬁned in Figure 3.1 where
the goal is deﬁned based on the model in Table 3.1 which is further broken
down into various questions. Each question is then reﬁned into metrics that
aid in the measurement.
Statement
Goal
Purpose
Issue
Object (process)
Viewpoint
Question
Metrics
Question
Metrics
Table 3.1: Goal Question Metric Model
The next step after deﬁning the questions is to associate them with the
appropriate metrics. Once the complete model is deﬁned, the appropriate
data collection techniques, tools, and procedures are selected which will be
done with the help of a performance measurement framework deﬁned in the
coming sections.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3. BACKGROUND
11
3.2
Software Product Quality
A quality attribute is a “measurable feature of a system, which is utilized to
stipulate how well the system satisﬁes stakeholders” [5, P 551]. Hence mea-
suring quality for a software product is essential to understand the degree to
which it has satisﬁed the speciﬁed requirements of the software itself and the
stakeholders. Speciﬁcation and evaluation of the quality of the software are
key to ensure value to stakeholders and their concerns.
For a performance study, Jain [6] explains that for executing a mea-
surement process, the performance criteria or characteristics must be ﬁrst
established. As Quality stands as the evaluation factor for the application in
the study, the standards deﬁned by The International Organization for Stan-
dardization (ISO) are used for establishing the performance criteria. ISO
has developed a family of standards called, Systems and Software Quality
Requirements and Evaluation (SQuaRE) that aids with specifying and eval-
uating software quality. ISO 25010 [7] is one such standard that is part of the
SQuaRE which is being used in this thesis. The ISO 25010 standard deﬁnes
the quality of a software product from two diﬀerent perspectives. They are
described are given below:
• Quality in use model: This model consists of ﬁve characteristics that
are assessed based on the outcome of the interaction with the system in
a particular context. It is deﬁned to analyze the system from the user’s
perspective. The characteristics proposed are eﬀectiveness, eﬃciency,
satisfaction, freedom from risk, and context coverage
• A product model: This model consists of eight characteristics that are
based on the static and dynamic properties of the system in study.
Those proposed characteristics are functional suitability, performance
eﬃciency, compatibility, usability, reliability, security, maintainability,
and portability.
The focus of the characteristics of the product model is on the technical
aspects of the software while the quality in use model focuses on the user ex-
perience. For the given problem statement where deﬁning migration strategy
of the application is of priority, the product model is used as the perspective
to the performance analysis.
Each characteristic has its own set of sub characteristics and based on the
requirements for the application the appropriate characteristic is chosen for
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 3. BACKGROUND
12
the analysis. Performance being the key factor for the migrated application,
the characteristic “Performance Eﬃciency” is chosen for the current analysis.
The sub characteristics are as described in Table 3.2. These characteristics
helps in prioritizing the requirements of the system in measure and thus aids
in the quality analysis of the system.
Characteristics
Sub-
Characteristics
Deﬁnition
Performance Eﬃciency
Time-behavior
the degree to which the re-
sponse and processing times
and throughput rates of a
product or system,
when
performing
its
functions,
meet requirements.
Resource
Uti-
lization
the degree to which the
amounts and types of re-
sources used by a product
or system, when performing
its functions, meet require-
ments.
Capacity
the degree to which the
maximum
limits
of
the
product or system, param-
eter meet requirements.
Table 3.2: ISO 25010 Deﬁnitions as in [7]
3.3
Performance Analysis
To further ﬁne-tune the narrative of analysis in Software Product Quality,
Performance Eﬃciency, one of the quality attributes of a software system as
explained in the previous section is chosen for further assessment. As deﬁned
in [8], performance is the degree to which a software system or component
meets its objectives. It becomes important to measure the performance of
the software system which also helps to determine if the system meets the
requirements [9]. Software Performance Engineering (SPE) helps in evaluat-
ing and improving a system’s performance. The deﬁnition for the term as
described in [10, P 2] is given below:
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3. BACKGROUND
13
Deﬁnition 3.3.1 (Software Performance Engineering) Software Perfor-
mance Engineering (SPE) represents the entire collection of software engi-
neering activities and related analyses used throughout the software develop-
ment cycle, which are directed to meeting performance requirements.
Performance modeling is one of the parts of the SPE that focuses on build-
ing performance models for the software system in the study that help un-
derstand the performance characteristics. These performance modeling tech-
niques are generally classiﬁed into measurement, analytical and simulation-
based techniques.
Measurement based technique involve application that
is already fully developed and available, whereas analytical and simulation-
based techniques are designed to predict on the performance of an application
that is still in development. In the current context of analyzing an already
existing application for two diﬀerent environments, the measurement tech-
nique for performance modeling would be the approach to proceed further
[11].
The metrics associated with measurement are the properties of the sys-
tem that can be expressed quantitatively for their interpretation [12]. The
standard ISO 15939:2017 [13] is used to deﬁne the measurement technique
in the thesis. ISO 15939:2017 helps deﬁne a common process and framework
for the measurement of the software system. It guides in identifying a pro-
cess that supports deﬁning a suitable set of measures that addresses speciﬁc
information needs.
The following terms aid in identifying the process of measurement and
the activities related to the process for the standard.
Deﬁnition 3.3.2 (Measurement) Measurement as deﬁned in [14, P 18]
is the process of experimentally obtaining one or more quantity values that
can reasonably be attributed to a quantity.
Such measurement should provide information on the various aspects of
the performance of the system. It also depends on the system that is being
measured and also on details like how the information is obtained and the
purpose of the information [9]. If the measurement chosen lacks this clarity,
then it would become irrelevant data in the data collected for performance
analysis.
Deﬁnition 3.3.3 (Measurement Process) Measurement process [13, P
4], is the process for establishing, planning, performing and evaluating mea-
surement within an overall project or organizational measurement structure.
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3. BACKGROUND
14
The purpose of a measurement process is to collect, analyze, and report data
relating to the products developed and processes implemented within the or-
ganizational unit, to support eﬀective management of the process, and to
objectively demonstrate the quality of the products, services, and processes.
Deﬁnition 3.3.4 (Measurement Method) Measurement method [13, P
3] is the logical sequence of operations, described generically, used in quanti-
fying an attribute with respect to a speciﬁed scale.
ISO 15939:2017 deﬁnes four sequential activities to design a measurement
method for performance analysis.
1. Establish and sustain measurement commitment
2. Plan the measurement process
3. Perform the measurement process, and
4. Evaluate the measurement
These activities are carried out iteratively to obtain continuous feedback
and thus improve the measurement process. The “Core Measurement Pro-
cess” and “Evaluate Measurement” as highlighted in Figure 3.2 are the ac-
tivities focused on establishing the measurement process in this thesis. Each
of these activities has its own set of tasks that help in further guiding the
activity.
The tasks deﬁned in the activity Plan the measurement process consists
of describing the measurement strategy, the characteristics of the organiza-
tion that is relevant to the measurement. Then the tasks focus on identifying
and prioritizing the information needs, selecting and specifying the measures
that satisfy these needs. Once the measures are deﬁned, the data collection
process, the reporting procedures, the evaluation criteria for the measures
chosen are deﬁned. Once these processes are deﬁned further tasks guide in
obtaining the resources to carry out the measurement process and then ac-
quiring and deploying the supporting technologies for the same.
Continuing from the above tasks, the ones for the activity Perform mea-
surement helps carry out the processed outlined for measurement. The tasks
integrate the procedures for data collection, does the actual data collection,
verify and store the data. Once the data is collected, it is analyzed and the
results are recorded by the activity Evaluate Measurement.
Thus, the standard ISO 15939:2017 helps in streamlining the process of
measurement with the help of a concrete set of activities that will be used in
this thesis.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3. BACKGROUND
15
Figure 3.2: ISO 15939:2017 Measurement Process [13]
3.4
Frameworks for Measurement
In this section, the frameworks that deﬁne the measurement process is dis-
cussed.
This framework with respect to the current scope can guide the
“Prepare for Measurement” activity of ISO 15939 that will be deﬁned in this
thesis.
3.4.1
Product Quality Evaluation Method
The Product Quality Evaluation Method (PQEM) deﬁned in [15] is the clos-
est in comparison to the evaluation methods chosen in this thesis for the
software system. The evaluation method described includes ﬁve steps:
1. Elicitation of Quality Attribute Requirements (QARs)
2. Deﬁnition of the acceptance criteria for the expected quality level of
the product
3. Measurement of each quality attribute requirements
4. Collect and synthesize the results
5. The assessment of the product quality level obtained
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3. BACKGROUND
16
The quality requirements as deﬁned in the ﬁrst step are determined with
the help of Goal Question Metric (as deﬁned in Section 3.1) and the standard
ISO 25010 (as deﬁned in Section 3.2). With the scope of the current thesis,
these steps aid in creating a method for measuring performance.
3.4.2
Monitoring Framework
The Microservices Monitoring framework has been designed speciﬁcally for
Microservices architecture. But in the context of this thesis, it helps in iden-
tifying the components of the measurement process that are needed. The
major components that are of focus here with relation to the application in
study are the testing tool, the data collector, and the big data storage com-
ponent [16].
Figure 3.3: Microservice Monitoring Framework [16]
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4
System Architecture and Met-
rics
In this chapter, the application in study, the design of the application, the
technologies used, the environmental setup, and the tools used are intro-
duced. First, an overview of the applications is given which is followed by
describing the technologies that are used in the application. The technologies
in focus here are Docker, Kubernetes, OpenShift, Prometheus, and Grafana.
The performance monitoring activities related to the communication applica-
tion and the diﬀerent environments where the system would be deployed are
discussed. Finally, the architecture of the application and the deployment
methods are discussed.
4.1
The Communication Application
The application in study is a Communication application. Communication
application here refers to the application that enables Telecommunication
which is the process of establishing communication as voice, data, and video
transmissions through electronic devices. With respect to a telecommunica-
tion system, there are multiple stakeholders involved and each has diﬀerent
interests in the system. As described in [17], the stakeholder whose interests
are evaluated here is content and service providers who can also be termed
as Communications Service Provider (CSP).
As deﬁned in [18], “A Communications Service Providers (CSP) oﬀers
telecommunications services or some combination of information and media
services, content, entertainment and application services over networks, lever-
aging the network infrastructure as a rich, functional platform. CSPs include
17
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND METRICS
18
the following categories: telecommunications carrier, content and application
service provider, cable service provider, satellite broadcasting operator, and
cloud communications service provider”. Their interests include Quality of
Service (QoS), Quality of Experience (QoE), and infrastructure rent cost.
These terms are further elaborated in Section 4.3.1.
The core functionality of the application is generic call processing that
enables mission-critical group communication. The application is based on
microservices architecture. A set of smaller services that implement various
features interact with each other to achieve the core functionality of the ap-
plication. This containerized application is deployed in a public cloud and
relies on Kubernetes.
For the application in study, the requirement to migrate the application
to on-premise is to make it feasible for the application to run in both on-
premise infrastructure and cloud. It is also essential that the performance
levels are maintained irrespective of the deployment environment.
4.2
Terms and Concepts and Technologies
In this section, metrics involved in the analysis of communication applications
are discussed. Also, performance monitoring of various types of applications
in diﬀerent deployment environments is discussed. Before that the general
terms that are part of the discussion are ﬁrst introduced. Also, the rele-
vant technologies that deploy, manage, and orchestrate the application are
introduced.
4.2.1
Cloud Computing
As deﬁned in ISO 17788:2014 [19], Cloud Computing (CC) is a paradigm
for enabling network access to a scalable and elastic pool of shareable physi-
cal or virtual resources with self-service provisioning and administration on-
demand.
The cloud model depends on the virtualization techniques that aid it to
achieve the elasticity of shared resources. One such technique is container-
ization.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND METRICS
19
4.2.2
Containerization
Containerization [20] is a lightweight virtualization solution. It provides a
portable run-time, the capacity to develop, test and deploy the application
in a large number of servers, and also provides inter-operability between the
containers.
A container is a self-contained package with ready to deploy parts of the
application and with all the necessary dependencies to run the application.
The containers have been further deﬁned in [21] as, “Containers are an ab-
straction at the app layer that packages code and dependencies together.
Multiple containers can run on the same machine and share the OS kernel
with other containers, each running as isolated processes in user space.”
Container orchestration automates the deployment, management, scaling,
and networking of containers. Container orchestration can be used in any
environment where the containers are used. It can help deploy the same
application across diﬀerent environments without needing to redesign it [22].
4.2.3
Microservices
The architectural design of the application in study is “Microservices”. The
microservices architectural style is described in [23] as “an approach to de-
velop a single application as a suite of small services, each running in its
process and communicating with lightweight mechanisms, often an HTTP
resource API. These services are built around business capabilities and inde-
pendently deployable by fully automated deployment machinery”. It divides
a traditional software system into several modules. The advent of container
technologies further increased the popularity of microservices.
Containers give an execution environment that is self-contained which
makes it ideal for deployment of the applications that follow Microservice
architecture. Multiple parts of the application can be run independently in
the same hardware and this oﬀers greater control over the life cycle of the
deployed services [22]. They are major enablers for this architecture where
the services of the application are distributed.
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND METRICS
20
Figure 4.1: General Overview of Microservices [24]
4.2.4
Docker
Docker [25] is an open platform for developing, shipping, and running appli-
cations. The packaged application is run in an isolated environment called a
container.
Docker container image: Docker container image [21] is a lightweight, stan-
dalone, executable package of software that includes everything needed to
run an application: code, runtime, system tools, system libraries, and set-
tings. It is an encapsulation of an operating system with its private resources
that are required for the software hosted in it to execute.
Docker registries: The docker images are stored in the docker registries. It is
from here that the images to be deployed inside containers are pulled when
deﬁned.
4.2.5
Kubernetes
Kubernetes [21] is an “open-source orchestration system for automating the
management, placement, scaling and routing of containers that have become
popular with developers and IT operations teams in recent years”. In the
current context, Kubernetes works as an orchestration system for Docker
containers.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND METRICS
21
Kubernetes Components
Node: A node in Kubernetes provides the run-time environments for con-
tainers.
Cluster: A cluster is a set of nodes.
Pod: The nodes host the pods that are the components of the application
workload. Pods represent the set of running containers in the cluster. A Pod
is the smallest deployable unit for computing that runs the containers.
Figure 4.2: Simple Overview on Kubernetes Cluster
Workload: Workload denotes the running application on Kubernetes. Vari-
ous types of workloads can be run in a set of pods.
• Deployment: The desired state of the pod can be described in the
Deployment. The deployments can be created with the help of YAML
ﬁles where the container images, ports to be exposed, the resources to
be allocated are all described.
• Replica set: The purpose of a replica set is to maintain a stable replica
of the pods that are running. It guarantees the availability of the pods.
The replica set for the pod is deﬁned in the deployment.
Namespaces: Namespaces aid in binding the group of resources to a name.
This facilitates aggregating resources used for the application.
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND METRICS
22
4.3
Metrics relevant for Performance Mea-
surement
The performance metrics of the application for communication applications
and its deployment in the cloud, the usage of GQM for deﬁning metrics, and
performance measurement for the microservice architecture are discussed in
this section.
4.3.1
Metrics for Communication system
Metrics play an important role in evaluating a communication system. The
help deﬁne Key Performance Indicators (KPI) for the system that aids for
their monitoring and evaluation. For the stakeholder in the study here, the
key concern is Quality of Service (QoS). The ITU (International Telecommu-
nication Union) and ETSI (European Telecommunications Standards Insti-
tute) deﬁnes QoS as “the ability of a network or network portion to provide
the functions related to communication between users” [26].
A network-
based QOS (NQoS) metrics are used to measure the services provided by
the network that can help improve the end-to-end QoS. Measuring end to
end thus provides an overall characterization of the system. The quantiﬁable
metrics as deﬁned in [17] for the QoS performance are:
• Delay - The delay is the ﬁnite amount of time it takes a packet to
reach the receiving end point after being transmitted from the sending
endpoint [27].
• Jitter - Variations in delay for packets within a given data stream
• Packet Loss - “the failure of one or more transmitted packets to arrive
at their destination”
• Availability - it is the “ability of a functional unit to be in a state to
perform a required function under given conditions at a given instant of
time or over a given time interval, assuming that the required external
resources are provided” [28].
Each of the terms can be further expanded to its set of metrics that help
assess the characteristics of the system. The QoS parameters also include
jitter and security [29]. The QoS can be deﬁned with the help of one of these
terms or a set of these parameters in varied proportions.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND METRICS
23
4.3.2
Measuring Microservices
In this section, we discuss the performance monitoring of applications that
follow Microservices architecture irrespective of their deployment environ-
ment. This helps identify the common metrics used across various literature
that can be utilized for the current work.
Monitoring microservices can based on two approaches. Firstly, indirect
monitoring aims to collect OS and network-level metrics such as CPU utiliza-
tion, system load, memory usage, and free memory. Based on the tools used,
the information obtained can be ﬁne-grained which can relate to details on
containers, resource usage, and network statistics. Second, direct monitoring
of the microservices using service instrumentation. It denotes updating the
code base that can send metrics for monitoring the application. It can help
trace the requests between the microservices and thus helps measure the per-
formance as a whole [30].
In the study [31], it focuses on combining monitoring data on resource
usage and application performance. The contributions of the study as high-
lighted below that can be used in the current scope of the project are:
• The design of a monitoring agent that collects data about application
performance (e.g., CPU usage, execution time), and network activity
(e.g., number of requests, bytes sent and received, average latency,
and from 50th to 99th percentile latency) for each Docker container,
Kubernetes pod, and physical host
• The design of a metrics collection system that retrieves metrics from a
set of monitoring agents, groups them depending on the container, pod,
service, and host, and provides a graph view and analysis of the moni-
tored Kubernetes cluster that encompasses performance, and network
activity of each microservice.
Performance monitoring of objects where the CPU utilization and re-
sponse time are used as the key factors for monitoring is also recommended
by the study [32].
The metrics for performance evaluation of the containerized application
in the cloud were also designed in the study [33]. The analysis done is, CPU
analysis, Network analysis (bandwidth, latency, and throughput), Read /
write analysis. Density analysis is also made which investigates the behavior
of CPU and memory usage by increasing the number of computing instances
of every host.
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND METRICS
24
4.4
Application Architecture
As discussed earlier the application follows Microservices Architecture. It is
made up of several smaller services that are loosely coupled and interact work
with each other. The code base is written in Elixir (functional programming
language). Being deﬁned as a Microservice gives it the ﬂexibility to deploy
the application in diﬀerent environments.
Service
Functionality
Gateway
The component that receives call requests from the
external devices
Connector service
Responsible for maintaining the link between the
devices and the audio connectivity for the calls
Adapter service
Converts the incoming requests into the format
understandable for the services processing the re-
quest
Provisioning service
Retrieve conﬁguration information for devices, reg-
istered sites, and the system itself
AMQP
Service implementing AMQP messaging protocol
that enables communication among the services.
The message passing among the services happens
through AMQP.
Audio
distribution
service
Responsible for duplicating the audio and dis-
tribute it to the destination devices
Group call service
Holds the call control logic of the architecture
Mobility service
Responsible for keeping track of locations of de-
vices and groups in the system.
Uses REDIS
database to store information
Table 4.1: Services and their functionalities
A simpliﬁed snapshot of the services is described in Figure 4.3 with its
functionalities described in Table 4.1.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND METRICS
25
Call Processing Application
AMQP
provisioning
service
adapter service
connector service
audio distribution
service
mobility service
group call service
Gateway
Figure 4.3: Services of the Application
Compute Resource Units
Compute Resource Units denotes the quantiﬁable resources that can be re-
quested and consumed by the containers. The containers consume resources
when they run on a node. When the pod is deﬁned for running the con-
tainers, the CPU and memory (RAM) required for the container are to be
deﬁned for eﬃcient performance. These conﬁgurations are to be deﬁned in
the same YAML ﬁle that also deﬁnes the container images that are to be
deployed in the pod. The conﬁguration terms are given as in Table 4.2.
Resource
Deﬁnition
requests.cpu
The sum of CPU requests across all pods in a non-
terminal state cannot exceed this value.
requests.memory
The sum of memory requests across all pods in a non-
terminal state cannot exceed this value.
limits.cpu
The sum of CPU limits across all pods in a non-terminal
state cannot exceed this value.
limits.memory
The sum of memory limits across all pods in a non-
terminal state cannot exceed this value.
Table 4.2: Deﬁning resources [34]
The limits and requests for CPU resources are given in terms of CPU
units. CPU is requested in absolute quantity where 1 CPU in Kubernetes is
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND METRICS
26
equivalent to 1 vCPU/Core. The limits and requests for memory resources
are measured in terms of bytes [35].
All this information aids in ﬁnding the right node in which the pod can
be scheduled for deployment. A sample ﬁle given below gives an overview of
the conﬁgurations that are used for deploying the services.
1 kind: " DeploymentConfig "
2 apiVersion: "v1"
3 metadata:
4
name: "frontend"
5 spec:
6
template:
7
metadata:
8
labels:
9
name: "frontend"
10
spec:
11
containers:
12
- name: "helloworld"
13
image: "openshift/origin -ruby -sample"
14
resources:
15
requests:
16
cpu: 100m
17
memory: 200Mi
18
limits:
19
cpu: 200m
20
memory: 400Mi
21
ports:
22
- containerPort: 8080
23
protocol: "TCP"
24
replicas: 5
Listing 4.1: Sample Deployment YAML File [34]
4.4.1
Deployment Environment
4.4.1.1
The current setup - Cloud
The application is currently deployed in the public cloud of Microsoft Azure.
It leverages the pipeline setup of the Azure DevOps for the same.
The
Azure cloud itself has health monitoring tools that monitor the services of
the application deployed. The resource allocation leverages dynamic scaling
where the services can be scaled up and down as required based on the load
to the system.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND METRICS
27
Code Base
Azure Cloud
Health monitoring
Containers
Docker images
Azure Devops
Figure 4.4: Deployment Steps - Cloud
4.4.1.2
On-premise infrastructure - OpenShift
Red Hat OpenShift [22] is a hybrid cloud, enterprise Kubernetes application
platform. It helps to build, deploy, run, manage, and secure intelligent appli-
cations at scale across the hybrid cloud. It also provides monitoring, logging,
and service registry of containers.
Code Base
Docker images
Repository
On premise cluster
Figure 4.5: Deployment Steps - On-premise
The application in study here is deployed as in the Red Hat OpenShift.
As it is Kubernetes based, the services of the application are deployed as
pods that run the containers in the cluster. Initially, the docker images of
the services are stored in a repository after each update. For deploying the
services, a deployment conﬁguration is deﬁned. It is a YAML ﬁle that con-
tains key information such as replication controller template that describes
the application to be deployed, the default replica count for the deployment.
The template contains information on the image, in this case, the docker
image that is to be deployed.
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND METRICS
28
4.4.2
Tools Used for Measurement
The following are the tools that are available in the on-premise infrastructure
for performance monitoring.
Prometheus
Prometheus [36] is an open-source system monitoring and alerting toolkit. It
is suitable for collecting monitoring data that is purely numeric time series.
For microservices, it supports in collection of multi-dimensional data and for
advanced querying. Prometheus is known for its reliability, to be the go-to
system during an outage to allow quick diagnosis of problems.
Grafana
Grafana [37] is an open-source analytics and monitoring solution for every
database. Grafana allows to query, visualize, alert on and understand the
metrics irrespective of their storage location.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 5
Performance Analysis Method
In this chapter, the method for doing the performance analysis for the com-
munication application that is to be migrated from cloud to on-premise is
deﬁned. First, the outline of the method is presented with references to the
standards that it is derived from. It is then continued by explaining each of
the activities in the method and the result of each of the activities is also
discussed.
5.1
The Method
The methodology is deﬁned in two stages. They can be carried out iteratively
until the appropriate measurement methods and metrics for performance
analysis are established.
1. Goal setting with the help of Goal Question Metric that was explored
in Section 3.1. To identify the appropriate metrics that are in line with
the goal of the overall analysis, this method is used. The GQM Model
is built as a result of the process.
2. Deﬁning the Core Measurement process for the application. The core
measurement process which is part of the standard ISO 15939:2017 has
been discussed in Section 3.3. The sub-activities of the process include
preparing, performing, and evaluating the measurement.
Though deﬁned as two stages, the “GQM” and the “Prepare for Mea-
surement” activity of the “Core Measurement Process” stage is an iterative
process that helps to reﬁne the questions and metrics further until the right
set of attributes are identiﬁed that are in line with the objective of the anal-
ysis.
29
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 5. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS METHOD
30
Figure 5.1: Stages of the Performance Analysis Method
The activities of Stage 2 are further divided into various tasks that aid
with the performance measurement process and the analysis. The various
stages as deﬁned in the PQEM framework (Section 3.4) too is spread across
as tasks of each of the step of the core measurement process. These activities
help deﬁne the complete GQM model for the study.
The whole method can be made iterative until the right set of metrics is
identiﬁed that can analyze the problem deﬁned. Table 5.1 gives an overview
of the tasks and the outcome of each activity.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS METHOD
31
Sub activities
Task to be done
Outcome
Study the current system
and architecture
Reﬁned
goals
and questions
Interview to identify the
current process
Reﬁned
goals
and questions
Elicitation
of
Quality
Attribute
Requirements
(QARs)
Quality
at-
tributes
Deﬁning measurement pro-
cess
Measurement
process
Prepare for measurement
Identifying the metrics
Complete GQM
Model
Set up the system
Perform the various tests to
obtain data
Perform Measurement
Measurement of data
Raw data from
the tests
Organize the data
Processed data
Evaluate Measurement
Collect and synthesize the
results
Findings / Inter-
pretation
Table 5.1: Core Measurement Process
5.2
Goal Question Metric
As deﬁned in Section 3.1, setting the goal is the most important step in
this model which would determine the success of the approach. Thus, the
development of the goal is based on three sources of information [4].
• Policy and the strategy of the organization - to derive the purpose and
issue coordinate of the Goal
• Description of the process and products of the organization - to derive
the object coordinate of the Goal
• Model of the organization - to determine the viewpoint coordinate of
the Goal
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 5. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS METHOD
32
From this speciﬁcation of the goal, meaningful questions are deﬁned that
helps quantify the goal. This can be formed based on the three groups of
questions as recommended by the approach. All these questions are formu-
lated by focusing on their relevance to the issue of the speciﬁc goal in the
GQM model.
• How the object can be characterized
• How the attributes of the object can be characterized
• How the characteristics of the object are evaluated
The questions identiﬁed during the initial stages itself can be further
reﬁned during the “Prepare for Measurement” process that will be explained
in the following section.
5.3
Prepare for Measurement
5.3.1
Study the current system and architecture
Studying the current system and architecture helps to understand the envi-
ronment that the application is successfully running. The core functionality,
the application environment, and the quality requirements of the application
are to be determined. The dependencies among the modules of the system
and the functionalities of the modules are also to be understood. This can
be done by analyzing the existing documents and also by interviewing the
team that maintains the application.
5.3.2
Interview
As the application is already available in one of the deployment environments
and is being migrated to another environment it becomes essential to study
the characteristics of the existing application and the practices on its perfor-
mance analysis. Hence to understand the current status of the application
and measurement proﬁling (if any) done for the application an interview is
to be conducted with the team that handles the application.
The goal of any interview is to collect experiences and collect information.
It is also important to know the background of the interviewee to prepare the
right set of questions that they can answer. The themes to explore during
the interview can include questions on:
• The architecture of the application
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS METHOD
33
• Impact of architecture on the performance
• How the current deployment methods were arrived
• Understanding the current performance analysis method if available
• The level at which the performance analysis is done
• How the Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) were deﬁned
• The priorities of the application and how well they match with the
KPIs used
• How the priorities aﬀect the design choices
• Currently used tools for monitoring performance
• Team’s review of the tools used
• Problems faced in the current deployment environment
• Potential problems that might arise during the migration
• The possible improvements that can be made to the existing proﬁling
process
If the application does not already have proﬁling deﬁned, the interview
can focus on the questions that help identify the priorities of the service and
the priorities of the team. This can help in ﬁnding the right quality attributes
to focus on and the corresponding metrics required to do the performance
analysis.
5.3.3
Elicitation of Quality Attribute Requirements (QARs)
The paper [38] uses the combined approaches deﬁned by GQM and the ISO
25010 characteristics for measuring their information system. Goals for the
system that suit the measurement of the system in study are initially deﬁned.
After the goals, the questions of the functional stability characteristic based
on the ISO 25010 for the system are deﬁned. The metrics used for measure-
ment are then deﬁned for each of the questions. At each stage, the validity
of the goals and the questions are done separately so that they are in line
with the needed measurement for the system. Then these measurements are
implemented and evaluated to verify if the results match the requirements
expected of the system.
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 5. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS METHOD
34
As deﬁned by the standard ISO 25010, the quality attributes that are of
focus here would be deﬁned from the Goals and Questions identiﬁed during
the previous steps.
The outcome of the interview process establishes the
priorities of the application which can further help in narrowing down the
metrics that might be of importance for the application.
5.3.4
Deﬁning the measurement process
The process deﬁned in the thesis is inspired by the framework deﬁned in
[16], which helps in identifying the components essential to carry out the
measurement process. The outline of the framework is as deﬁned in Figure
5.2.
Monitoring Stack
Platform
Communication
application
Metrics Scraping Tool
Collects platform level metrics
Collects application level metrics
Collect the performance data
Data Collector
Load Generator
Data Visualization
Data Storage
Save Performance  
data for future analysis
Live streaming of data
Figure 5.2: Measurement Framework
The major components of the framework include:
1. The Instrumented Application: Instrumentation is the process of adding
code to a software application to monitor its behavior [39]. The ap-
plication is conﬁgured in such a way that it exposes metrics that can
be extracted for analysis. The kind of metrics that it can expose will
depend on the platform that is deployed, the architecture of the appli-
cation and the modules that the application is made of.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS METHOD
35
2. Metrics Scraping Tool: A tool to extract the metrics that are exposed
by the application. The tool should also collect platform-level metrics
which will aid in analyzing how the platform impacts the performance
of the application.
3. Data Collector: Collects the data that is being obtained by the scraping
tool.
4. Data Visualization: A tool to present the live raw data that is being
collected by the data collector. This enables real-time monitoring of
the system.
5. Data Storage: To store the raw data collected for further analysis. Data
collected over time can aid in analyzing the performance pattern of the
application and in turn creating much more detailed proﬁling of the
application.
6. Load Generator: To perform load testing that is deﬁned in the coming
sections
For each of the components, the tools that are compatible with the on-
premise infrastructure are required to be chosen. It is also important to make
sure that the metrics identiﬁed for the analysis can be obtained with the help
of the chosen tools. Once the tools are chosen, they are conﬁgured according
to the deﬁned framework.
With the framework in place, the type of tests that are to be done on the
application is to be determined. An application will have various workﬂows.
Hence each workﬂow based on their priority is chosen to undergo the following
tests. After and during each test, the metrics deﬁned are collected. The
framework provides a means to identify the “normal behavior” of the cluster
for the various tests which can act as a baseline. Since the measurement-
based technique is followed it requires that the following tests are run multiple
times to normalize the data and thus arrive at a normal behavior for the
application.
Idle Testing
The data is collected when the services are in idle mode, which indicates that
the application doesn’t receive any external traﬃc but is alive to communi-
cate among each other and ready to process requests. These metrics help
predict the hardware utilization and, in the process, reveal areas that are
not working as expected or slowing down the whole application.
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 5. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS METHOD
36
Load Testing
Load testing helps in identifying bottlenecks even before the system is used
by the end-users.
Load testing refers to generating traﬃc to the system
that will stress the resources to ﬁnd how well they respond to the test. The
workload to which the application has to respond should be deﬁned. This
can help us determine the intensity to which the system can withhold and
also give a good performance before it breaks.
5.3.5
Identifying the metrics
For the qualities identiﬁed and the tools available at disposal and the plat-
form to which the application is deployed, the corresponding metrics that
match with the goals and questions are required to be identiﬁed. To do so,
ﬁrst, the complete list of metrics available is listed. Then the metrics that
match with the goals and priorities of the services are determined.
At the end of this activity, the complete GQM model as explained in Table
3.1 is deﬁned with the questions and metrics in focus for the application in
study.
5.4
Perform Measurement
5.4.1
Set up the system
Setting up the system here denotes having the migrated application in the
environment where its performance is to be analyzed. It is highly essential
to make sure that the system is in a stable state. The framework deﬁned for
the measurement process should be completely functional to measure and
further analyze the data.
5.4.2
Perform the tests to obtain data
The tests deﬁned as part of the measurement process are executed at this
stage. For each scenario, the tests are run several times to ensure the validity
and credibility of the data collected. The following criteria as deﬁned in [11]
are used for establishing the validity of the data.
• If the data is not recorded or if the data is missing, then the run is
marked unusable for analysis
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS METHOD
37
• For recording values for idle testing, the application is expected to reach
and maintain a steady-state (constant resource utilization with minimal
ﬂuctuations) for the measurements to be recorded for idle mode
• If the performance test is executed for the same workload previously
and the metrics that are measured diﬀer considerably with major ﬂuc-
tuations, then the measurements taken during the speciﬁc load test is
marked as unstable
5.4.3
Measurement of each quality attribute
The raw data for the tests conducted is then collected and tabulated to
be processed in the next task “Evaluate Measurement”. Few factors that
might corrupt the data collected are the format in which it is collected,
converting ﬁle formats that might result in loss of data, log data that might
be overwritten. Hence it is important to make sure the quality of the data
is preserved while it is collected.
5.5
Evaluate Measurement
5.5.1
Collect and synthesize the results
For the data collected it is essential to have an analysis strategy to obtain
any conclusion from them. There are two mining approaches of data that
help detect issues in performance [40].
• Baseline-based - using historical data to establish a baseline. These
baselines are then used in the future to notify when the services of the
application deviate from the established baselines.
• threshold-based - the threshold is a value deﬁned beyond which the
performance for the monitored application is considered unacceptable
These analysis approaches help in studying the data obtained from the
metrics that are being deﬁned to be measured from the services of the appli-
cation. For the short-term analysis that is conducted as part of this thesis,
the resultant data from the tests can help establish a threshold where the
performance can be considered normal. This end data will help in coming
up with some conclusions regarding the application in study
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 5. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS METHOD
38
Also, visual examination of the behavior of the metrics in the form of
graphs helps in the live monitoring of the application. This is achieved with
the help of the data visualization component in the measurement framework.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 6
Implementation
In this chapter, the method discussed in Chapter 5 is implemented for the
application in study.
6.1
Goal Question Metric
As the ﬁrst step, the objective of the analysis that is being done is deter-
mined. It is done with the help of the GQM methodology. Initially, the goal
of the analysis is determined which will be further developed for the GQM
model during the “Prepare for Measurement” stage of the “Core Measure-
ment Process”
For the current application, it has already been established that it is be-
ing migrated from cloud to on-premise. The goal here is to deﬁne a migration
strategy for the application migrating from the cloud to the on-premise en-
vironment. Hence this forms the core of the analysis and guides the process
of deﬁning the GQM model for the analysis.
Statement
Goal
Purpose
To deﬁne migration strategy for
on-premise deployment
Table 6.1: Goal Question Metric - Purpose
39
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
40
6.2
Prepare for Measurement
6.2.1
Study the current system and architecture
The details of the current system and architecture are well explained in Chap-
ter 4. To summarize the details, the application uses the microservice ar-
chitecture and each service has its own set of functionalities with varying
priorities. The deployment of the services can be done individually and the
conﬁgurations are deﬁned through a YAML ﬁle.
6.2.2
Interview
The interview process became essential to understand the current practices.
The application that is being adapted is already deployed in the cloud. The
idea is to get the current practices and details that help in maintaining the
application in the currently deployed environment.
Key takeaways of the interview
The KPIs related to monitoring are response time and call set up time. This
denotes that the quality of the service is of top priority and it’s a system-level
indicator. The performance is monitored continuously. Each service exposes
certain metrics which is obtained by a scrapper tool in Azure that analyses
the metric (the application itself doesn’t do anything, the tools monitor).
System testing is done by a process called call proﬁling, which is performed
using Catapult tool (a tool generates a stimulated load to the system). The
whole application was re-written for its adaptation to the cloud.
For deploying the services in the cloud, the required resources were ini-
tially deﬁned randomly but were later ﬁne-tuned with the help of load testing
performed by Catapult. But the dynamic scaling that was used in the case
of Cloud will not be of much use in case of an on-premise environment where
the resources are ﬁxed.
Major issues that are anticipated to happen while migrating to on-premise
are:
• Sizing the hardware
• Oversizing
• Deteriorating performance
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
41
Findings
The interview in turn helped in identifying the key issue that might have
to be analyzed for deﬁning the migration strategy. Hence deﬁning resource
allocation for the on-premise deployment of the application is chosen as the
Issue to be focused on for the GQM Model.
Statement
Goal
Purpose
To deﬁne migration strategy for on-
premise deployment
Issue
How does resource allocation in on-
premise have an impact on the perfor-
mance?
Object (process)
Communication application deployed
on-premise
Viewpoint
Performance Analysis
Table 6.2: Goal Question Metric - Issue
6.2.3
Elicitation of Quality Attribute Requirements (QARs)
From the previous section, it is evident that the performance variables that
are to be focused on as part of the analysis are “Resources”. For the com-
munication application that is being migrated from cloud to on-premise, it
has hence become essential to study the performance related the resources
that is available on-premise.
For the given problem statement where analyzing the system is of priority,
the product model is used as a method of evaluation and the characteristic
in focus is performance eﬃciency. The sub characteristics of “Performance
Eﬃciency” that are studied are Resource utilization and Capacity.
As the ﬂexibility oﬀered by the elastic nature of the cloud is absent in
the on-premise environment, we study the implications of performance cor-
responding to resources on-premise. This way it helps with better capacity
planning that is part of the migration planning for the application.
As described in Chapter 4.4, the compute resource units that are ﬂexible
and can be modiﬁed during the deployment of the services are CPU and
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
42
memory. Evaluating these resources allows us to determine how the appli-
cation performs in the on-premise environment. Hence, they would be the
objects identiﬁed for the GQM model to study.
Hardware Utilization metrics
In the case of performance monitoring for microservices of an application,
it is a key factor to evaluate the performance of each service. This will help
determine the load the service can endure and deliver individually. It will
further help in identifying bottlenecks at the granular level. The utilization
levels are to be determined during the idle mode (when there is no traﬃc to
the system) and during the load testing [41].
Metric
Description
CPU Utilization
Percentage of the requested CPU against the usage
Memory Utilization
Percentage of the requested memory against the
usage
Table 6.3: Metrics
Capacity planning
Deployment conﬁguration denotes the number of resources that are re-
quired to be allocated for the microservice. Resource requests, limits, and
replica counts are speciﬁed as part of the conﬁguration to allocate the needed
resources. The resource quota object of the service creation YAML ﬁle pro-
vides the constraints on the CPU and memory that can be allocated to the
service by the cluster. Resources managed by quota.
While doing these analysis with respect to the resources it is also nec-
essary to monitor the performance levels of the application.
The QoS is
required to be adhered to. Hence the performance metrics as deﬁned in Sec-
tion 4.3.1 are chosen as the additional factors to monitor.
At the end of this task, we arrive at the questions that are to be raised for
the issue identiﬁed by the GQM model. In the next task the corresponding
metrics would be determined appropriately.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
43
Statement
Goal
Purpose
To deﬁne migration strategy for
on-premise deployment
Issue
How does resource allocation in
on-premise have an impact on the
performance?
Object (process)
Communication application de-
ployed on-premise
Viewpoint
Performance Analysis
Question
What is the utilization of the
CPU for the deployed applica-
tion?
Metrics
Question
What is the utilization of memory
for the deployed application?
Metrics
Question
How to monitor the performance
of the application deployed on-
premise?
Metrics
Table 6.4: Goal Question Metric - Questions
6.2.4
Deﬁning the measurement process
OpenShift Dedicated clusters come with an integrated Prometheus/Grafana
stack for cluster monitoring. OpenShift monitoring stack is based on Prometheus.
It oﬀers default platform level monitoring and also the monitoring for the ap-
plications can be enabled separately. The tools chosen corresponding to the
framework deﬁned in Section 5.3.4 are described in Table 6.5
Component
Tool used
Load Generator
Catapult
Metrics Scraping Tool and Data Collector
Prometheus
Data Visualization
Grafana
Table 6.5: Measurement Framework - Tools Used
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
44
Each of the services exposes metrics in Prometheus format in port 9568.
The metrics are scraped from the exposed port by the Prometheus scrapper
which is also part of the on-premise cluster. Grafana creates visualizations
of system metrics such as CPU or memory utilization. It helps to visualize
the measured metrics and track for anomalies. The data storage part of the
deﬁned measurement framework was not set up as only live data is being
analyzed for the study. The ﬁnal set up is deﬁned in Figure 6.1
Openshift Cluster
Grafana -
Visualization
and
Dashboards
Pulls data sources
Prometheus
Pulls metrics from the application
Containers
with the
application
deployed
Catapult Tool
(Load Generator)
Figure 6.1: Measurement Framework - Set up
Once the monitoring environment is set up, the next step is to deter-
mine which functionality of the application is to be tested. For load testing,
the workload for the load generator, and the resource allocation scenarios
for which the load is to be tested is determined. To ﬁnd the optimal level
of performance, the results of monitoring the deployed services in terms of
performance and resource utilization are analyzed for diﬀerent resource allo-
cation scenarios.
The core functionality of the application is call processing and it is the
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
45
feature chosen to evaluate the performance of the application. The load gen-
erator used here is the tool Catapult that generates the deﬁned call proﬁle
that aids in testing the group call feature. The Catapult tool also records the
QoS in terms of the calls connected. For every load the QoS helps determine
the performance level.
They are then to determine a stable performance
level for each load and thus identify stable run for each of the scenarios. As
deﬁned in Section 5.5.1, this can be established with the help of the internal
thresholds that the organization has for the performance of the application.
These are the standards that the application is expected to meet when it is
deployed on-premise. Identifying the stable state of the system is crucial as
only data obtained during such state can help in the process of analysis.
The scenarios chosen for testing the load are given below:
• Scenario 1: Resources for the services similar to resources allocated in
cloud
• Scenario 2: Resources for the services with less replica count
• Scenario 3: Resources allocated for the services at the highest level
6.2.5
Identifying the metrics
The Catapult tool that is used to run the load test maintains a log with
various metrics after each run. The QoS metrics established in the Section
4.3.1 helps in identifying the relevant performance metrics. In the current
setup, they are used to determine a stable level of performance for the load
test done while adhering to the standards of the organization. The metrics
from Catapult that are used to determine if the run is stable for the data to
be valid are deﬁned in Table 6.6:
Metric
Explanation
Call Rejects
Total calls that the system refuses to accept
Call Denies
Total calls that the system does not allow
Voice Average Delay
The average delay in the transmission of voice over
the connection
Voice Jitter Violations
Variations in delay for packets within the voice
stream
Voice Packets Lost
Total voice packets lost during transmission
Voice Packets Received
Total voice packets received during the entire test
run
Table 6.6: Catapult Metrics
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
46
When the tests are being run metrics related to CPU utilization, memory
utilization at the service level and the application level as a whole are col-
lected. The same data is collected for all the scenarios and the two diﬀerent
types of tests idle and load testing.
In line with the metrics identiﬁed in Section 4.3.2 related to measur-
ing microservices, the metrics chosen for the analysis of the application in
the Redhat OpenShift are CPU Usage, CPU Requests, Memory Usage, and
Memory Requests. With the help of this information, the utilization details
are obtained.
Hence the measurements made during each run of load testing and idle
testing are:
• CPU and Memory Hardware allocation levels of each node in the on-
premise cluster
• CPU and Memory Requests made by each service
• CPU and Memory utilized with respect to the requests made by each
service
• Application-level utilization of CPU and Memory
Thus, the GQM model for the analysis is completed as given in Table 6.7.
6.3
Perform Measurement
6.3.1
Setting up the application
The cluster can be accessed through either a virtual machine or web console.
To access through virtual machine OpenShift client is required. Artifactory
acts as the repository to hold the docker images of the services. These images
are pulled from the repository and deployed in the cluster. The ports to be
opened for the metrics to be scraped, the allocated resources, the credentials
to access the image, and the cluster are all deﬁned as part of the YAML ﬁle
that is used for deployment. Initially, the default usage metrics are conﬁgured
to be exposed.
6.3.2
Performing the tests
Once the framework is set up, the application is ready for the tests to be
run. It should also be noted that the on-premise infrastructure is not used
by any other services other than the default services and the services of the
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
47
Statement
Goal
Purpose
To deﬁne migration strategy for on-premise
deployment
Issue
How does resource allocation in on-premise
have an impact on the performance?
Object (process)
Communication application deployed on-
premise
Viewpoint
Performance Analysis
Question - 1
What is the utilization of CPU for the de-
ployed application?
Metrics - 1a
CPU Requests - hardware level
Metrics - 1b
CPU Utilization - application level
Metrics - 1c
CPU Utilization, CPU Requests, % of usage
- service level
Question - 2
What is the utilization of memory for the
deployed application?
Metrics - 2a
Memory Requests - hardware level
Metrics - 2b
Memory Utilization - application level
Metrics - 2c
Memory Utilization, Memory Requests, % of
usage - service level
Question
How to monitor the performance of the ap-
plication deployed on-premise?
Metrics - 3
Call rejects, Call Denies, Delay, Jitter, Pack-
ets Lost, Packets Received
Table 6.7: Goal Question Metric - Metrics
application in study. Each time the resources are updated in the YAML
ﬁle as deﬁned for the scenario and the service is redeployed. Total CPU and
memory requests for each run are conﬁgured as given in Table 6.8. It denotes
the total requests for all the services of the application.
The scenarios chosen for testing the load are given below and their cor-
responding resource allocation is as deﬁned in Table 6.8.
• Run 1: Resources for the services similar to resources allocated in cloud
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
48
• Run 2: Resources for the services with less replica count
• Run 3: Resources allocated for the services at the highest level
Run 1
Run 2
Run 3
CPU (from requests)
51.1
43.1
58.1
Memory (from requests) in GiB
58.25
51.25
63.25
Table 6.8: CPU and Memory Requests made - Total
For these varying resources, we analyze the performance of the system
with the help of idle testing and load testing.
The test execution matrix helps keep track of the tests run and to mark
the validity of each try. They are determined by the criteria deﬁned in Sec-
tion 5.4.2. The number of load testing tries is not limited and can be done
as required. Mark the validity of each run as yes or no based on the load
testing metrics from the catapult.
Load Testing
Scenario
Idle mode
Try 1
Try 2
Try 3
Run 1
Yes
Yes
Run 2
Yes
Yes
Run 3
Yes
Yes
Table 6.9: Test Execution Matrix - Determine Validity
The following statistics about the platform are obtained for analysis dur-
ing both idle testing and load testing.
• Overall status of each node of the cluster
• CPU Usage at the application level
• CPU Usage at the service level
• Memory Usage at the application level
• Memory Usage at the service level
Idle Testing
Each time the resources are redeﬁned for deployment, the performance lev-
els of the application in idle mode is determined. This test helps determine
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
49
the minimum capacity that the services of the application require to keep
running. After each deployment of the service with changed resource conﬁg-
uration, idle mode measurements are made when the system becomes stable.
Load Testing
Load testing is done with the help of a tool called Catapult that loads the
system with a call proﬁle and analyses the performance of the system. Here
the application is loaded with the below workload. The console site and ra-
dio site denotes the sample devices that are conﬁgured to generate the load.
Voice call generation and voice length denote the call proﬁle that is simulated
to trigger the calls across radio sites and console sites.
Parameter
Value
Radio sites
10
Console sites
5
Voice call generation rate (calls/sec)
3.42
Voice length
4.4
Table 6.10: Catapult Load - Call Proﬁle
The same workload is used for all the deﬁned scenarios for the varying
resources. Each time the metrics are measured both during the idle mode
and also, when the call proﬁle is loaded. Each scenario is run several times
to ensure a stable run of the tests and to ensure that the data obtained is
valid.
6.3.3
Measurement of the quality attribute
The Performance metrics from Catapult aid for 2 purposes: To determine
the performance level of the current load and to identify the normalized data
for the current load. When the normalized load is determined it is considered
to be the stable state for the system. Determining these numbers helps in
running the load test for the application for diﬀerent capacity conﬁgurations.
The following performance metrics from Catapult help determine if the
test run is valid or not. The metrics measured and tabulated in Table 6.11 are
around the expected levels of internal thresholds of the organization. Hence
runs with these values are considered to be a stable run. Once the validity
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
50
of the data is established the further metrics recorded during the test are
considered for analysis.
Run 1
Run 1
Run 3
Call Rejects:
19
21
25
Call Denies:
15
18
21
Voice Average Delay:
73.623
55.913
57.201
Voice Jitter Violations:
497319
480004
473289
Voice Packets Lost:
9045
8267
9164
Voice Packets Received:
2347071
2275052
2297889
Table 6.11: Catapult Performance Data
Overall status of each node of the cluster
From the virtual machine that has access to the on-premise cluster, the over-
all status of each node of the cluster - CPU usage, resource consumption
from running pods can be determined.
1 \\ Command to run to obtain
cluster
details
2 oc describe
node
When the above command is run, multiple data points are obtained. But
the metrics that are of focus are the utilization levels of the cluster as a whole
in terms of allocation of the requested resources for various applications and
the allocation level for each service of the application in study in the node
that they are deployed to.
Table 6.12 denotes the total allocation level of one of the nodes of the
cluster. These metrics help understand the resources that are still available
in the node and thus giving inputs on how high the resources can be deﬁned
for the services. Request % denotes the percentage of resources allocated in
relation to the available resources.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
51
Resource
Available
Requests
Requests %
cpu
47500m
16129m
(33%)
memory
187.4 GiB
27.4 GiB
(14%)
Table 6.12: Sample Hardware Utilization data for a node - Total Allocated
Resources
Table 6.13 denotes the allocation level of the services of the application in
study in one of the nodes of the cluster. Request % denotes the percentage
of resources allocated in relation to the available resources in the whole node.
Namespace
Name
CPU
Re-
quests
CPU
Re-
quests
%
Memory
Re-
quests
Memory
Re-
quests
%
sample project
service-1
4
(6%)
6Gi
(2%)
sample project
service-2
4
(6%)
6Gi
(2%)
sample project
service-3
2
(4%)
1Gi
(0.5%)
Table 6.13: Sample Hardware Utilization data for a node
CPU and Memory Usage at the application level and service level
Once the allocation levels are determined, then the utilization of these allo-
cated resources for each of the services is to be measured. Service level usage
of CPU and memory can be obtained from the web console of the cluster.
The snapshot Figure 6.2 denotes the overall utilization level in terms of
% against the total requested resources by the services of the application.
Figure 6.2: CPU and Memory Utilization
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
52
Table 6.14 denotes the utilization level of CPU for the services of the ap-
plication corresponding to the requested resources by the services. Request
% denotes the percentage of resources used in relation to the resources re-
quested by the service.
Pod
CPU Usage
CPU Requests
CPU Requests %
service-1
0.091
4
2.28%
service-2
0.053
4
1.33%
service-3
0.003
2
0.15%
Table 6.14: Sample CPU Utilization data
Table 6.15 denotes the utilization level of memory for the services of the
application corresponding to the requested resources by the services. Re-
quest % denotes the percentage of resources used in relation to the resources
requested by the service.
Pod
Memory Usage
Memory Requests
Memory Requests %
service-1
1.1 GiB
6 GiB
18.39 %
service-2
1,018.5 MiB
6 GiB
16.58 %
service-3
164.9 MiB
1 GiB
16.11 %
Table 6.15: Sample Memory Utilization data
In summary, all the metrics deﬁned in this section are measured for each
of the scenarios deﬁned during the load testing and also during the idle mode.
For each scenario too, the load testing is done multiple times to obtain data
that would be valid for further analysis.
6.4
Evaluate Measurement
6.4.1
Collect and synthesize the results
The results are analyzed in 3 diﬀerent scenarios both at the cluster level and
node level for both idle mode and load testing. The following analysis is done
on the data obtained
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
53
• Analysis 1: The usage of resources - overall
• Analysis 2: The usage of resources - idle mode
• Analysis 3: The usage of resources under load
As discussed earlier the tests are run several times for each scenario to get
valid data that can be used for the evaluation of the application. The results
of the tests at the end of each run are used to validate the same. The tool
used for load testing catapult itself records metrics related to the group call
functionality that is tested as part of load testing. Consistent values across
the runs for the metrics given below help validate the authenticity of the run.
The metrics themselves reveal the actual performance of the system too.
For the visual representation below, CPU and Memory Utilization de-
notes the total of CPU units and Memory utilized by all the services of the
application respectively. CPU and Memory requests also denote the total of
the requests for resources made by the services. The Run conﬁgurations are
as given in Table 6.8. Master 1, Master 2, and Master 3 are the names of
the nodes of the OpenShift cluster.
The allocation levels are repeated below to relate with the ﬁndings arrived
from the analysis.
Run 1
Run 2
Run 3
CPU (from requests)
51.1
43.1
58.1
Memory (from requests) in GiB
58.25
51.25
63.25
Table 6.16: CPU and Memory Requests made - Total
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
54
Analysis 1
Figures 6.3 and 6.4 denotes the total allocation of resources (CPU) and Mem-
ory in the hardware for the application respectively. Request % denotes the
percentage of resources allocated in relation to the available resources in the
node.
Figure 6.3: CPU Allocation
Figure 6.4: Memory Allocation
Finding 1: As expected with increasing resource requests, the allocation
levels also increase in the hardware. When combined with total resources al-
located by the hardware, this gives us information on the maximum resources
that can be requested by the services of the application.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
55
Analysis 2
Figures 6.5 and 6.6 denotes CPU Utilization and Memory Utilization levels
of the services for varying resources in idle mode respectively.
Figure 6.5: CPU Utilization - idle mode
Figure 6.6: Memory Utilization - idle mode
Finding 2: During the idle mode the utilization of resources is found to
remain similar with small ﬂuctuations. It was already established that these
runs were stable and without any load. Hence the allocation of resources did
not make a diﬀerence as the load to the system remains constant i.e., idle.
Thus, increasing or decreasing the resources for the services did not make an
impact on the application performance in idle mode.
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
56
Analysis 3
Figures 6.7 and 6.8 denotes CPU Utilization and Memory Utilization levels
of the services for varying resources during load testing respectively.
Figure 6.7: CPU Utilization - with load
Figure 6.8: Memory Utilization - with load
Finding 3: A similar pattern as established by Finding 3 is found for the load
testing. Irrespective of the resources allocated, the application managed to
perform under similar levels (as revealed by metrics collected by catapult in
Table 6.11) and the utilization levels remained consistent. The increase in
resources only meant that there are more computing resources available at
disposal for the service and the application.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
57
Additional Findings
Combining all the above analyses, Figures 6.9 and 6.10 establish a comparison
across the requests, utilization during idle and load testing for the resources
CPU and memory respectively
Figure 6.9: CPU Requests Utilization Comparison
Figure 6.10: Memory Requests Utilization Comparison
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
58
It should also be noted from the charts that even with load only 4% of
the requested resources are being utilized. But when looking at the service
level utilization of the requested resources, the utilization goes up to 30%
for certain services. Hence even with utilization, application level and ser-
vice level analysis are to be done to arrive at the suitable conﬁguration of
resources for each service.
To conﬁrm the ﬁndings obtained one last run was planned where the re-
sources were requested by the services based on the utilization levels observed
during the earlier runs. The run was to conﬁrm that even with minimum
resources if they are more than the utilization levels of the service then the
performance would not be aﬀected.
Final Run
The ﬁnal run is done to conﬁrm the ﬁndings obtained from running the pre-
vious scenarios. The resources for CPU and Memory for each service were
rounded oﬀto the nearest whole number based on their utilization observed
throughout the test runs.
Requests
Utilization
-
idle
mode
Utilization - with
load
CPU
45.1
0.304
3.314
Memory in GiB
49.25
7.53
10.11
Table 6.17: Requests - Utilization Comparison
It was observed that even when minimum resources were allocated, the
performance metrics from Catapult showed consistent values with the data
in Table 6.11 indicating the same level of performance. Hence it can be seen
that the capacity planning made as per the load expected for the system
does not hinder the performance. This in turn aids in better utilization of
the resources.
Recommendations for further testing
Including more tests for the metrics deﬁned and varied types of testing can
help in further ﬁne-tuning the analysis. The performance analysis at service-
level would have also helped create a pattern for the services and thus provide
additional insights. Some other tests that are recommended:
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6. IMPLEMENTATION
59
• Varying load over a period of time
• Increased load to the system
• Negative testing where the services are broken to see their recovery and
thus the performance
Varying the load would have also enabled comparison across the perfor-
mance of the QoS metrics emitted by the Catapult tool.
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 7
Evaluation and Discussion
In the previous chapter, the Performance analysis method that was deﬁned
in Chapter 5 was implemented for the application in study. In this chapter,
the method is evaluated for its eﬀectiveness.
7.1
The Performance Analysis Method and
its Relevance
Though multiple pieces of literature discuss the migration of an application
from on-premise to cloud, there has been little to no discussion on reverse
migration. This reverse migration from cloud to on-premise can be inﬂuenced
by various factors such as changing stakeholder preferences (the end-user of
the application) on the environment used, better security, and also having
greater control over the computing environment.
This makes the deﬁned
method relevant with respect to ﬁnding a migration strategy for the appli-
cation migrating from cloud to on-premise.
The method was deﬁned with the help of ISO standards that has been
a guiding factor. It helped create a streamlined method for Performance
Analysis. Irrespective of the type of the application and the deployment en-
vironment this method can be used to analyze its performance.
For the application studied as part of the thesis the requirement was to
migrate the application on-premise and thus making it feasible for the ap-
plication to run in both on-premise infrastructure and cloud. The deﬁned
method helps with creating performance-aware deployment strategies for the
migration of the application. Suitable capacity conﬁguration of resources was
determined. One of the key ﬁndings of the method is ﬁnding eﬃcient ways of
60
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION
61
utilization of resources for deploying the application while maintaining the
same level of performance
The eﬀectiveness of the method deﬁned could have been evaluated further
with another case study which could help further improve the method.
7.2
In Comparison with other Methods
To evaluate the method further it was compared with some of the already
existing solutions that are published recently in the literature.
Paper Title
Published Year
Design of a performance measurement framework
for cloud computing
2012
Framework for observing the maintenance needs,
runtime metrics and the overall quality-in-use
2018
A performance evaluation of containers running on
managed kubernetes services
2019
Table 7.1: Papers used for Evaluating the method
The framework deﬁned in [42] focuses speciﬁcally on the cloud applica-
tion and also it only helps in identifying the characteristics required for the
evaluation and for planning the measurement process. Building on the idea
of using ISO 25010 for determining the performance concepts and ISO 15939
for deﬁning the initial stages of measurement, the method deﬁned in this
thesis also gives elaborate steps on measurement methods and for analysis of
the collected data to arrive at a meaningful conclusion.
The framework deﬁned in [43] also focused on establishing a quality mea-
surement and monitoring using the standards ISO 25010 and ISO 15939. But
the focus of the paper was to establish a method to bring maintenance as
part of the software itself by deﬁning quality metrics for monitoring. With
inspiration from the framework, the method deﬁned in this thesis is further
developed to focus on the issue of migration related to performance issues
for the application in study.
The Cloud Evaluation Experiment Methodology (CEEM) used in [44]
evaluates the performance of a containerized application deployed in the
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION
62
cloud. The method deﬁned in this thesis is similar to the ideology of the
CEEM framework but diﬀers in the metrics identiﬁcation phase.
CEEM
directly lists the factors to focus on but in this method, there are set a of
steps involved that guides in ﬁnding the appropriate metrics. This makes
the method more general and not case-speciﬁc.
The method deﬁned in the thesis is a culmination of frameworks and
standards. The core part of each framework has been used to deﬁne the
“Performance Analysis Method” that covers every aspect of the application
in study for analysis.
Introducing GQM and the interview process into the framework further
improved in narrowing down the objectives of the analysis. These were ad-
ditional activities that were not part of earlier frameworks deﬁned.
7.3
Research questions revisited
The Performance Analysis method that was deﬁned in the thesis speciﬁcally
focuses on the application that is being migrated from one deployment envi-
ronment to another, which helps in answering the research questions of the
thesis.
Research question 1: How to deﬁne a migration strategy for an application
from the cloud to the on-premise environment while maintaining performance
standards?
The method guides in identifying the issues that might arise due to the
migration which aﬀects the performance. Further with the GQM model, the
appropriate metrics to further analyze the issue is deﬁned. When the tests
deﬁned by the method are conducted, the metrics are measured and thus the
performance is determined. This aids in the process of ﬁnding the source of
the issues and helps deﬁne the migration strategy by ﬁnding a solution for
the same.
Research question 2: How to conﬁgure the application to better suit the on-
premise environment?
The method helps in leveraging the on-premise environment as well as the
architecture of the application. This helps in determining a better capacity
conﬁguration for deployment of the application based on quality attributes
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION
63
chosen as the focus.
Research question 3: What technical infrastructure is required for carrying
out the Performance Analysis of the application?
The measurement framework deﬁned as part of the method establishes
the components required for the analysis.
7.4
Limitations
For the Performance Analysis method deﬁned, the Measurement framework
deﬁned explores only a few methods of testing the application such as idle
testing and load testing. Though in the current scenario we were able to ar-
rive at ﬁndings and make conﬁguration choices based on the tests conducted,
it might not be the same for other applications. Hence the testing process
can be made elaborate to further improve the proﬁling of the services of the
application.
Some suggestions for tests that can be part of the Measurement frame-
work include:
• Testing the application with increased load
• Stress testing the application in an on-premise environment with a
constantly varying load during the test
• Breaking parts of the services of the application to determine the re-
sponse of the application in the on-premise environment and thus an-
alyze the performance in such a scenario
The analysis done is impacted by the context of the application and hence
the ﬁndings and the evaluation of metrics can vary from case to case.
7.5
Future work
• Automating the process of conducting the tests and recording the data
• Using the method to measure the performance levels of the application
in the cloud environment to establish a comparison between the two
deployment methods
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION
64
• Going beyond the metrics available by instrumenting the application.
Instrumentation is the process of adding code to a software application
to monitor its behavior [39]. The services of the application can be fur-
ther instrumented according to their priorities to build a better proﬁle
of the application. The focus here is to understand the importance of
each of the services and thus to build the interpretation model with the
help of the GQM technique for the services separately.
• With historical data, for each metric analyzed acceptance criteria for
the expected quality level can be deﬁned.
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
In this thesis, a Performance Analysis Method is deﬁned to help identify and
rectify performance issues that arise from migrating a communication appli-
cation from cloud to on-premise. The idea behind the method is to establish
a standard process that can help with performance analysis irrespective of
the type of application chosen and the deployment environment.
The method oﬀers the following beneﬁts:
• Emphasis on the need to deﬁne the ﬁrst phase of the Performance
Analysis process - Identifying the relevant objective of the analysis
with the help of GQM
• Systematic identiﬁcation of metrics to focus on for the performance
analysis
• A measurement framework that also establishes the technical infras-
tructure required
• Validation and analysis methods for the measured data
• Deﬁned ﬂow of activities that brings consistency to the whole process
With the help of the deﬁned steps in the method, resource conﬁguration
for services of the application, which is a part of migration strategy from
cloud to on-premise, was chosen for further analysis. By doing load testing
and idle testing, the utilization and performance levels for various resource
conﬁgurations were monitored. The performance levels remained consistent
and inline with the threshold of the standard deﬁned by the organization.
It was found that across diﬀerent resource conﬁgurations, both performance
and utilization level were on similar level with less ﬂuctuations. To conﬁrm
65
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSION
66
the ﬁnding, one ﬁnal run with resources deﬁned just equal to the utilization
was done. It was observed that the performance and utilization levels were
similar to the earlier runs.
Hence a conﬁguration that used less resources while still maintaining the
performance was found as a result of the analysis. Also the method deﬁned
aided in answering the research questions as explained in Section 7.3
The main challenges faced during the study were setting up the measure-
ment framework for the migrated application and obtaining valid test data
from the various runs. Identifying relevant metrics for the quality factors
chosen based on the deployment environment and the tools conﬁgured was
also challenging.
The next steps in the study would be to increase the load for the load test-
ing and simultaneously analyze the QoS metrics for the performance. Doing
similar tests in the cloud environment for the application can help establish
a comparison of the performance results in the two deployment environments.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1] T. Dillon, C. Wu, and E. Chang, “Cloud computing: issues and chal-
lenges,” in 2010 24th IEEE international conference on advanced infor-
mation networking and applications, pp. 27–33, Ieee, 2010.
[2] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design science in
information systems research,” MIS quarterly, pp. 75–105, 2004.
[3] P. Johannesson and E. Perjons, An introduction to design science.
Springer, 2014.
[4] V. R. B. G. Caldiera and H. D. Rombach, “The goal question metric
approach,” Encyclopedia of software engineering, pp. 528–532, 1994.
[5] M. Alenezi, “Software architecture quality measurement stability and
understandability,” International Journal of Advanced Computer Sci-
ence and Applications (IJACSA), vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 550–559, 2016.
[6] R. Jain, The Art of Computer Systems Performance Analysis: Tech-
niques for Experimental Design, Measurement, Simulation, and Model-
ing. john wiley & sons, 1990.
[7] ISO/IEC 25010:2010(E), “Systems and software engineering-systems
and software product quality requirements and evaluation (square)-
system and software quality models,” International Organization for
Standardization, 2010.
[8] C. U. Smith and L. G. Williams, Performance Solutions: A Practi-
cal Guide to Creating Responsive, Scalable Software, vol. 23. Addison-
Wesley Reading, 2002.
[9] L. E. B. Villalpando, A. Abran, A. Ravanello, A. E. Ram´ırez, et al., “A
three-dimensional performance measurement model for cloud comput-
ing,” Journal of Software Engineering and Applications, vol. 11, no. 05,
p. 235, 2018.
67
==PAGE:76==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
68
[10] M. Woodside, G. Franks, and D. C. Petriu, “The future of software per-
formance engineering,” in Future of Software Engineering (FOSE’07),
pp. 171–187, IEEE, 2007.
[11] D. Thakkar, A. E. Hassan, G. Hamann, and P. Flora, “A framework for
measurement based performance modeling,” in Proceedings of the 7th
International Workshop on Software and Performance, pp. 55–66, 2008.
[12] L. Schrettner, L. J. F¨ul¨op, ´A. Besz´edes, ´A. Kiss, and T. Gyim´othy,
“Software quality model and framework with applications in industrial
context,” in 2012 16th European Conference on Software Maintenance
and Reengineering, pp. 453–456, IEEE, 2012.
[13] ISO/IEC 15939, “IEE/IEEE international standard-systems and soft-
ware engineering–vocabulary,” ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765: 2017 (E), 2017.
[14] BiPM, IEC and IFCC, ILAC and IUPAC, IUPAP and ISO, OIML, “In-
ternational vocabulary of basic and general terms in metrology (VIM),”
JCGM, 2012.
[15] M. Falco and G. Robiolo, “Building a catalogue of iso/iec 25010 qual-
ity measures applied in an industrial context,” in Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, vol. 1828, p. 012077, IOP Publishing, 2021.
[16] Z. Wang, Y. Xia, C. Sun, and L. Cheng, “Research on microservice ap-
plication performance monitoring framework and elastic scaling mode,”
in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1617, p. 012048, IOP
Publishing, 2020.
[17] S. M. Al-Shehri, P. Loskot, T. Numanoglu, and M. Mert, “Common
metrics for analyzing, developing and managing telecommunication net-
works,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.03290, 2017.
[18] “Gartner
glossary.”
https://www.gartner.
com/en/information-technology/glossary/
csp-communications-service-provider. Accessed 24 May 2021.
[19] ISO/IEC 17738, “Information technology-cloud computing-overview
and vocabulary,” 2014.
[20] C. Pahl, “Containerization and the paas cloud,” IEEE Cloud Comput-
ing, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 24–31, 2015.
[21] “Docker oﬃcial website.” https://www.docker.com/. Accessed 06 May
2021.
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
[22] “Openshift
oﬃcial
website.”
https://www.openshift.com/learn/
what-is-openshift. Accessed 06 May 2021.
[23] J. Lewis and M. Fowler, “Microservices a deﬁnition of this new archi-
tectural term.”
https://martinfowler.com/articles/microservices.
html. Accessed 06 May 2021.
[24] O. Al-Debagy and P. Martinek, “A comparative review of microser-
vices and monolithic architectures,” in 2018 IEEE 18th International
Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Informatics (CINTI),
pp. 000149–000154, IEEE, 2018.
[25] “Docker documentation.”
https://docs.docker.com/get-started/
overview/. Accessed 06 May 2021.
[26] R. Stankiewicz, P. Cholda, and A. Jajszczyk, “Qox: What is it really?,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 148–158, 2011.
[27] V. Joseph and B. Chapman, Deploying QoS for Cisco IP and next gen-
eration networks: the deﬁnitive guide. Morgan Kaufmann, 2009.
[28] M. Van Der Meulen, Deﬁnitions for hardware and software safety engi-
neers. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
[29] B. M. Nyambo, G. K. Janssens, and W. Lamotte, “Quality of service
in mobile ad hoc networks, carrying multimedia traﬃc,” International
Journal on Information Technologies & Security, vol. 7, pp. 41–68, 2014.
[30] M. Cinque, R. Della Corte, and A. Pecchia, “Microservices monitoring
with event logs and black box execution tracing,” IEEE Transactions
on Services Computing, 2019.
[31] R. Brondolin and M. D. Santambrogio, “A black-box monitoring ap-
proach to measure microservices runtime performance,” ACM Transac-
tions on Architecture and Code Optimization (TACO), vol. 17, no. 4,
pp. 1–26, 2020.
[32] Z. Wang, Y. Xia, C. Sun, and L. Cheng, “Research on microservice ap-
plication performance monitoring framework and elastic scaling mode,”
in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1617, p. 012048, IOP
Publishing, 2020.
[33] I. M. A. Jawarneh, P. Bellavista, L. Foschini, G. Martuscelli, R. Mon-
tanari, A. Palopoli, and F. Bosi, “Qos and performance metrics for
==PAGE:78==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
70
container-based virtualization in cloud environments,” in Proceedings of
the 20th International Conference on Distributed Computing and Net-
working, pp. 178–182, 2019.
[34] “Redhat
openshift
documentation.”
https://docs.openshift.
com/enterprise/3.1/dev_guide/compute_resources.html#
compute-resource-units. Accessed 29 July 2021.
[35] “Kubernetes oﬃcial website.” https://www.kubernetes.io/. Accessed
06 May 2021.
[36] “Prometheus
oﬃcial
website.”
https://prometheus.io/docs/
introduction/overview/. Accessed 24 May 2021.
[37] “Grafana documentation.” https://grafana.com/grafana/. Accessed 29
July 2021.
[38] A. S. Puspaningrum, S. Rochimah, and R. J. Akbar, “Functional suit-
ability measurement using goal-oriented approach based on iso/iec 25010
for academics information system,” Journal of Information Systems En-
gineering and Business Intelligence, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 68–74, 2017.
[39] T. Kempf, K. Karuri, and L. Gao, “Software instrumentation,” Wiley
encyclopedia of computer science and engineering, pp. 1–11, 2007.
[40] T. M. Ahmed, C.-P. Bezemer, T.-H. Chen, A. E. Hassan, and W. Shang,
“Studying the eﬀectiveness of application performance management
(apm) tools for detecting performance regressions for web applications:
an experience report,” in 2016 IEEE/ACM 13th Working Conference
on Mining Software Repositories (MSR), pp. 1–12, IEEE, 2016.
[41] A. De Camargo, I. Salvadori, R. d. S. Mello, and F. Siqueira, “An archi-
tecture to automate performance tests on microservices,” in Proceedings
of the 18th international conference on information integration and web-
based applications and services, pp. 422–429, 2016.
[42] L. Bautista, A. Abran, and A. April, “Design of a performance measure-
ment framework for cloud computing,” Journal of Software Engineering
and Applications, 2012.
[43] T. Hynninen, J. Kasurinen, and O. Taipale, “Framework for observ-
ing the maintenance needs, runtime metrics and the overall quality-in-
use,” Journal of Software Engineering and Applications, vol. 11, no. 4,
pp. 139–152, 2018.
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
71
[44] A. P. Ferreira and R. Sinnott, “A performance evaluation of containers
running on managed kubernetes services,” in 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom),
pp. 199–208, IEEE, 2019.
