==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Development and validation of a general test method
for concentrating solar collector ﬁelds
Ingrid Overgaard s154669
Master of Science in Engineering of Sustainable Energy
Technical University of Denmark
July 25, 2021
Supervisor:
Weiqiang Kong
Senior Researcher at DTU Civil
Engineering
Co-supervisor:
Adam R. Jensen
PhD Student at DTU Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Development and validation of a general test method for concentrating solar collector ﬁelds
Report written by:
Ingrid Overgaard
Advisor:
Weiqiang Kong
Co-advisor:
Adam. R. Jensen
DTU Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
s154669@student.dtu.dk
Project period:
4. January - 25. July 2021
ECTS:
35
Education:
M.Sc.
University:
Technical University of Denmark
Field:
Sustainable Energy Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Copyrights:
© Ingrid Overgaard, 2021
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The need for energy in the world is increasing, and at the same time, the request for green energy
is higher than ever.
The world needs sustainable energy production, with minimal emission of
greenhouse gasses, and solar energy can be a part of the provider. In this thesis a mathematical
model predicting the short term and long term thermal performance of two concentrating solar
collector ﬁelds is being developed. One ﬁeld is consisting of parabolic trough collectors, and the
other of Fresnel lens collectors. The mathematical model is developed using quasi-dynamic testing.
It is both developed and validated using data from the collector ﬁelds. The model is validated and
can be used for predictions of the thermal performance for both collector ﬁelds. Though, is it also
concluded that the model can be improved. A modiﬁed quasi-dynamic testing model is also tested
for the parabolic trough collector ﬁeld. This model shows promising results.
ii
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First I would like to thank DTU for providing amazing opportunities and giving me knowledge I
will never take for granted.
I would like to give a special thanks to my supervisor, Weiqiang Kong, who has throughout this
entire project been very helpful and quick to help me whenever I had a question. His engagement
in this project has been amazing, leading to good meetings where many ideas were developed.
Thanks to my co-supervisor, Adam R. Jensen, for providing data and giving advice for the Fresnel
lens collector ﬁeld.
Thanks to my mother, Dorte Andersen, and my sisters, Hanne Overgaard and Benedikte Over-
gaard, for their amazing support through the writing of this thesis. A huge thanks to my boyfriend,
Loke Rantzau Olsen, for his encouragement and patience.
Finally, a special thanks to my father, who helped me through my ﬁrst years a DTU, but un-
fortunately will not see me graduate. He always supported me in my academic steps, giving me
courage and advice to fulﬁl my goals.
Without all of these people the completion of the this thesis would not have been possible.
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Concentrating solar collectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
CSP ﬁelds investigated for this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Thesis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature review
5
2.1
Reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Elaboration from earlier papers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Theory
7
3.1
Quasi-dynamic testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Multiple linear regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Boundary conditions for the test data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
CSP ﬁelds setup
16
4.1
Brønderslev - Parabolic trough collector ﬁeld
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Lendemarke - Heliac Fresnel solar collector ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Program development and assumptions
19
5.1
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Optimization of code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
Validation of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Results from multiple linear regression
24
6.1
Brønderslev - Parabolic trough collector ﬁeld
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.2
Lendemarke - Fresnel lens solar collector ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
iv
==PAGE:8==
7
Model validation
29
7.1
Brønderslev - Parabolic trough collector ﬁeld
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.2
Lendemarke - Fresnel lens solar collector ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
8
Discussion and future work
37
9
Conclusion
40
References
42
Appendix A
45
Appendix B
46
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Goal number 7 from UN’s 17 global goals [27] is “Aﬀordable and clean energy”, and target 7.2 sounds:
“By 2030, increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix.”
This describes the vision for this thesis, which is to ensure all energy productions is sustainable,
leaving a minimal carbon footprint for the future.
The world is in constant movement and so is the need for energy. An increasing energy demand,
but also awareness of the potential damage when acquiring it, leads to new ideas and potential. The
harm related to emission of greenhouse gasses during energy production, has created a new goal
for the energy market: extract energy from renewable energy sources. The nature of earth gives
amazing opportunities – wind blowing, oceans in constant movement, and the sun emitting power
directly to the earth. All are sources with power ready to be harvested. With the sun delivering the
amount of energy needed for a year for the entire Earth in just 1 hour [13], solar energy is a part of
the future energy market, with its almost unlimited resources.
Solar energy does not only give opportunities in the electricity market, but also in the heating
market. Both markets are in need of sustainable solutions. Solar thermal collectors give a great
opportunity to utilize the solar radiation directly for heat production, and the simplicity of the
systems is beneﬁcial when constructing it. With an eﬃciency for photovoltaic collectors around
22% [34] and an eﬃciency for solar thermal collectors around 70% [33], solar thermal collectors can
contribute even more to a sustainable transition.
The demand for heating comes from both residences and industry. For residences the heat can
be used for heating of houses and water, and industry is using heat in production. For industry
higher temperatures are required than for residential. Solar heating systems can be of small scale,
only used for one or a few residences, or be of large scale created as solar heating ﬁelds. Solar
heating ﬁelds can even be used for producing electricity with the implementation of steam turbines
in the system.
1
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
The world has limited resources. Politics, ﬁnance and priorities can sometimes limit the imple-
mentation of renewable energy in the energy systems. Therefore, the price and requirements for
the new systems needs to be as accessible as possible. A solar heating collector is sold with certain
speciﬁcations describing the eﬃciency, but when implementing the collector in a ﬁeld the output
might not be as expected. In the ﬁeld losses can occur, leading to diﬀerence in the expected eﬃ-
ciency. This diﬀerence should be known to the investor, which leads to the mission of this thesis.
The mission of this thesis is to be able to give an accurate prediction of the thermal performance for
two types of concentrating solar collector ﬁelds. In this thesis the aim will be reached by developing
and validating a mathematical model describing solar energy ﬁelds.
1.1
Concentrating solar collectors
Solar thermal collectors exist in many diﬀerent designs with diﬀerent purposes, but the idea behind
all the collectors is to use the solar radiation to heat at ﬂuid, which will then be used in various
diﬀerent applications. Most common is the ﬂat plate collector, which is used for residences and the
evacuated tube collector, also mainly used for residences [33]. The ﬂat plate collector is used for low
temperatures at 30-75◦C and the evacuated tube is used for medium temperatures of 50-150◦C [23].
These temperatures make them suitable heating used for residences, and also for lower temperatures
used in industry. Both collector types can utilize beam and diﬀuse radiation.
Another type of solar thermal collectors is concentrating solar power, CSP, collectors. These collec-
tors can be constructed in diﬀerent ways, but common for all of them is that the solar radiation is
concentrated to a small surface or focus point, heating up a ﬂuid and then utilizing this for heating.
These collectors produces heat at a much higher temperature, which make them suitable for other
purposes. For this thesis two types of concentrating solar collectors will be used: Parabolic trough
collector, PTC, and Fresnel lens collector, FLC. Below in Figure 1.1 and Figure 1.2 the PTC and
FLC can be seen, respectively.
The PTC is constructed with large mirrors shaped in a parabolic shape reﬂecting the solar radiation
from a large surface to a receiver tube, which contain a heat transfer ﬂuid. For the PTC collector
investigated the receiver is made of a tube of stainless steel insulated by the use of vacuum within a
layer of glass. The collector is a horizontal 1-axis tracking collector, which means it will follow the
path of the sun during the day, with movement in 1 axis. This is very important for the eﬃciency of
the collector and will ensure the solar radiation hits the collector at the most optimal angle possible,
leading to as much solar radiation as possible hitting the receiver. The PTC mainly utilize beam
radiation, meaning radiation that is not scattered due to e.g. the surroundings or clouds. Scat-
tered radiation is diﬀuse radiation, which will have diﬀerent unpredictable directions, and therefore
the collector cannot adjust to the radiation. Usually, the main radiation will also be beam radiation.
2
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.1: A parabolic trough collector, evalu-
ated in this thesis. [1]
Figure 1.2: A Fresnel lens collector, evaluated in
this thesis. [5]
The temperature range for the PTC is higher than for e.g. the ﬂat plate collector or evacuated tube
collector. The maximum outlet temperature for the PTC investigated in this thesis, and shown
in Figure 1.1 is 400◦C. The high temperature makes it useable for electricity production, but the
collectors can also be used for district heating or industry at lower temperatures. The collector
is not suitable for single use, but will be used in larger ﬁelds with multiple collectors. The main
advantages of the PTC are the ability to remain at the same eﬃciency even at large temperature,
low heat losses, and multiple applications of the heat, while one of the disadvantages is high cost.
The Fresnel lens collector evaluated in this thesis is seen in Figure 1.2 above. The principle behind
the collector, is that solar radiation is hitting a Fresnel glass lens, which focuses the radiation to a
smaller focus point behind the lens, where is ﬂuid is heated. The ﬂuid will ﬂow in well insulated and
ﬂexible pipes between the multiple focus points of the collector. The collector is 2-axis tracking,
meaning the solar radiation in principle always will hit the collector directly and ensure an incidence
angle of 0◦. Like the PTC the FLC mainly work with beam radiation. The speciﬁc collector has
a maximum outlet temperature of 400◦C. The collector will be used in collector ﬁelds. The main
advantage for the Fresnel lens collectors compared to PTC is a lower price, due to less expensive
materials.
Diﬀerent types of heat transfer ﬂuids, HTF, can be used for the collectors, depending on the tem-
perature range the collectors are operating at, and the use of the heat. For this thesis, a thermal
oil, and a glycol-water mixture is used for HTF. The glycol-water mixture has a lower freezing point
compared to water, which will be useful for collectors placed in environments with temperatures be-
low 0◦C. Thermal oils has a higher boiling temperature, which can be desired in some concentrating
solar collector ﬁelds [31].
1.2
CSP ﬁelds investigated for this thesis
In this thesis two concentrating solar collector ﬁelds are investigated. One collector ﬁeld is located
in Brønderslev in Denmark and is consisting of the parabolic trough collectors. The other collector
3
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
ﬁeld is located in Lendemarke in Denmark and is consisting of the Fresnel lens collectors. Both
collector types are concentrating solar collectors, but are constructed using two diﬀerent principles,
and thereby it cannot be assumed that the results of the analysis will be similar.
1.3
Thesis outline
The purpose of this thesis is to develop a general mathematical model to evaluate the thermal
performance of the two diﬀerent types of concentrating solar collector ﬁelds in-situ. It should both
predict the short term and long term performance in transient weather conditions.
The model
is based on the quasi-dynamic test method, and existing data from the ﬁelds will be used for
the development. For the ﬁrst system a thermal collector ﬁeld with parabolic trough collectors is
evaluated, and for the second system a ﬁeld with Fresnel lens collectors is evaluated. The model
will be validated with data from the collector ﬁelds. A program will be developed for each system,
which will be used to ﬁnd the mathematical model and do the validation.
1.4
Thesis overview
In each chapter of this thesis both solar collector ﬁelds will be described. In Chapter 2 a literature
review will be presented, as well as the elaboration done in this thesis compared to earlier studies.
In Chapter 3 the required theory and tools used for developing the mathematical model will be
presented. In Chapter 4 the two solar collector ﬁelds will be described in detail. The data used for
the development will be presented as well. In Chapter 5 the program development and assumptions
are explained, including the idea behind the model validation. In chapter 6 the results from the
model development for both systems will be shown. In chapter 7 the validation of the mathematical
model is shown. In chapter 8 a discussion of the results is performed, and in Chapter 9 a conclusion
is presented.
4
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Literature review
In this chapter a literature review will be performed. In the literature review, papers investigating
the same problem as this thesis will be reviewed.
It will also be discussed how this thesis will
elaborate on earlier papers.
2.1
Reports
Three reports will be evaluated. Two reports will be concerning the parabolic trough collector ﬁeld,
and one article is about the Fresnel lens collector. First a report written in 2020 will be evaluated.
The report investigates the same PTC collector ﬁeld as in this thesis. Second a report also investi-
gating the PTC ﬁeld in Brønderslev will be evaluated, and lastly a report about the performance and
testing of a single Fresnel lens collector. All reports are from the Technical university of Denmark.
Development and validation of a test method for parabolic trough solar collector ﬁelds
in solar heating plants (Alexis Mihalitsis, 2020 [3]):
The report is investigating the same parabolic trough collector ﬁeld in Brønderslev, as investigated
in this thesis. In the report a test method for the PTC ﬁeld is developed and validated. The test
method is based on the quasi-dynamic test model. For the validation of the model the relative error
between the predicted useful energy output from the model and the measured output was found to
be 18-23%. The peak eﬃciency for the collector is found to be 58%.
Brønderslev Hybrid Solar Power Plant (Jensen, Furbo and Perers, 2020 [16]):
The report is evaluating the parabolic trough collector ﬁeld in Brønderslev. It is investigated using
quasi-dynamic testing and the standard IEC 62862-3-2:2018. A simulation of the collector ﬁeld was
done using the software TRNSYS.
Test of Heliac 3rd Gen. Solar Collector (Jensen, 2020 [14]):
The report investigates the thermal performance of a single Fresnel lens collector. The model is
tested with quasi-dynamic testing. In the report the peak eﬃciency of the collector is found to be
60.2%.
5
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
2.2
Elaboration from earlier papers
In this thesis a mathematical model based on quasi-dynamic testing will be developed and validated
for an entire collector ﬁeld, and not just for a single collector. This have been done for a parabolic
trough collector ﬁeld before in (Mihalitsis, 2020 [3]), but in this thesis the performance will be
improved, and also a new theory will be tested. For this theory a new term is added to the quasi-
dynamic testing model. In (Jensen, Furbo and Perers, 2020 [16]) a quasi dynamic testing method is
used to evaluate the PTC ﬁeld in Brønderslev as well, but the QDT model is diﬀerent from the one
tested in this thesis. Also, the mathematical model in this thesis will be developed with a purpose to
be used for two types of concentrating solar collector ﬁelds, which was not the case for (Mihalitsis,
2020 [3]) and (Jensen, Furbo and Perers, 2020 [16]). The two types of concentrating solar power
collector ﬁelds is the parabolic trough collector ﬁeld and also a Fresnel lens collector ﬁeld. For both
ﬁelds the model is validated. A QDT model for the Fresnel lens collector ﬁeld has not yet been
investigated in any published papers, only the model and performance of a single collector has been
done in (Jensen, 2020 [14]).
6
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 3
Theory
To develop the mathematical model for both of the concentrating solar power ﬁelds, some knowledge
regarding existing in-situ test methods needs to be obtained. The model is based on quasi-dynamic
testing, and knowing the idea and theory behind this is essential.
In this chapter the theory behind the development of the mathematical model will be described.
First the quasi-dynamic test method is presented, and then how all the necessary input parameters
are calculated. In the end the concept behind the multiple linear regression is explained, as well as
the boundary conditions for the data used in the model development.
3.1
Quasi-dynamic testing
Through time multiple test methods for ﬁnding the thermal performance of solar thermal collectors
have been used. These methods have been further developed as well. Two of these models for
in-situ test has been veriﬁed, and is described in the standard ISO 9806:2017 [6]. One model can be
used for steady-state testing, known as the steady-state testing model, and the other can be used
in dynamic conditions, known as the quasi-dynamic testing, QDT, model.
The test methods are developed for single collector testing, but in this thesis the QDT method
will be used for an entire collector ﬁeld. When the QDT model is used for an entire collector ﬁeld,
losses related to the ﬁeld will occur and extra factors needs to be implemented in the testing model.
These will be described in further details later on in this thesis.
The steady-state testing model can be used in-situ, but when using the testing model many re-
quirements for the data used are applied. Measured data can only be used if the incidence angle
is less than 20◦[22]. Besides this many other conditions must be fulﬁlled for the test to be valid
e.g. a requirement for global irradiance, which cannot be less than 700
W
m2 . The fraction of diﬀuse
radiation must be below 30% of the global irradiance. These requirement leads to multiple days of
testing, which does not even assure good enough data. The time perspective for the test is therefore
unknown.
7
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
Another test option is the quasi-dynamic testing method, hence QDT method. The data require-
ment used for the testing is not as comprehensive and strict, as for the steady-state method. There
is no requirement for the fraction of diﬀuse irradiance and incidence angle, and the required global
irradiance should be within a large interval. The quasi-dynamic test method makes it possible to
make in-situ test quicker, using more data. And the less requirements make it suitable for changing
weather conditions. Below in Eq. 3.1 the equation for the QDT can be seen [6], [30].
Q = AG·[η0,b·Kb(θL, θT )·Gb+η0,b·Kd·Gd−a1·(Tf−Ta)−a2·(Tf−Ta)−a3·u′·(Tf−Ta)+a4·(EL−σT 4
a )
−a5 · dTf
dt −a6 · u′ · G −a7 · u′ · (EL −σT 4
a ) −a8 · (Tf −Ta)4]
(3.1)
Where:
• Q is the useful power output, [W]
• AG is the gross area of the collector ﬁeld, [m2]
• η0, b is the peak collector eﬃciency for zero loss, [−]
• Kb is the incident angle modiﬁer for beam irradiance, [−]
• θL is the longitudinal incidence angle, [◦]
• θT is the transversal incidence angle, [◦]
• Gb is the beam irradiance,
h
W
m2
i
• Kd is the incident angle modiﬁer for diﬀuse irradiance, [−]
• Gd is the diﬀuse irradiance,
h
W
m2
i
• G is the hemispherical irradiance,
h
W
m2
i
• a1 is the heat loss coeﬃcient dependent on the ambient temperature,
h
W
m2·K
i
• a2 is the heat loss coeﬃcient dependent on the temperature of the solar collector,
h
W
m2·K2
i
• a3 is the heat loss coeﬃcient dependent on the wind speed,
h
W
m2·K3
i
• a4 is the heat loss coeﬃcient dependent on the sky temperature, [−]
• a5 is the thermal capacity of the collector,
h
J
m2·K
i
• a6 is the wind speed dependence for zero loss eﬃciency,
h
s
m
i
• a7 is the wind speed dependent heat loss coeﬃcient for sky temperature,
h
W
m2·K4
i
• a8,
h
W
m2·K4
i
• Tf is the mean ﬂuid temperature, [◦C]
• Ta is the ambient temperature, [◦C]
• EL is the longwave irradiance (λ > 3 µm),
h
W
m2
i
8
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
• u is the wind speed,
h
m
s
i
• u′ = u −3,
h
m
s
i
• σ is Stefan-Boltzmann constant,
h
W
m2·K4
i
The QDT model consists of variable data input collected from the solar collector ﬁeld, and constants
which describes the model.
The idea behind the testing method is to calculate the maximum possible power output, and then
subtract losses which will aﬀect the total output.
For the development of the mathematical model for the concentrating solar collector ﬁelds, the
QDT model used will be as seen below in Eq. 3.2.
Q = η0 · Kb(θi) · Gb −a1 · (Tf −Ta) −a2 · (Tf −Ta)2 −a5 · dTf
dt
(3.2)
Where: θi is the incidence angle, [◦].
Since the collectors are concentrating solar collectors, the term including the diﬀuse irradiance
will not have any signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the power output, and therefore the term including Gd is
removed. The receivers in the collectors both have small surface areas, the concentration ratio [18]
of the collectors are high, and both types of pipes containing the heat transfer ﬂuid are insulated,
so the heat loss dependent on wind speed, will be so limited, that the terms including a3, a6, and
a7 will be removed, as well as the a4 dependent on the sky temperature. The same reasons apply
when removing a8, since the losses due to radiation also will be negligible.
3.2
Parameters
To perform the QDT and developing the mathematical model a variety of necessary input parameters
needs to be calculated.
The equations and explanations of these will be reviewed below.
The
calculated variables are depending on each other, and will be presented in the order they needs to
be calculated.
Solar time, tsolar
Solar time, tsolar, is the time depending on the path of the sun. At 12:00pm solar time the sun will
be at solar noon, meaning it will be at the highest position in the sky of the day. The solar time and
the local standard time is often not equal, since local times is given for large areas for simplicity.
Therefore the local standard time need to be corrected to follow the path of the sun. Solar time is
used for calculation of angles related to the suns position. The solar time is used when calculating
the hour angle, which will be presented in Eq. 3.6. Below in Eq. 3.3 the equation of the solar time
can be seen [4],[8].
tsolar = 4 · (Lstandard −Llocal) + E
60
+ tstandard
(3.3)
9
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
Lstandard is the standard longitude, Llocal is the local longitude, tstandard is the local standard time,
and E is the equation of time shown below in Eq. 3.4.
E = 229.2·(0.000075+0.001868·cos(B)−0.032077·sin(B)−0.014615·cos(2·B)−0.04089·sin(2·B))
(3.4)
Where,
B = (n −1) · 360
365
(3.5)
n is the number of the day in the year.
Hour angle, ω
The hour angle, ω, describes the movement of the sun in relation to the time of the day. For every
hour the sun will move 15◦. It is necessary to know the hour angle, to ﬁnd the zenith angle, which
will be presented in Eq. 3.8. The equation for the hour angle is given below in Eq. 3.6 [8].
ω = 15 · (tsolar −12)
(3.6)
ω is given in [degrees]. tsolar is solar time.
Declination, δ
When the Earth circles around the sun, a tilt of the Earth causes the changing seasons. This is due
to a changing position of the sun in the sky, where the tilt is causing the position of the sun in the
sky to vary through the year. The position of the sun, declination, is given in degrees and is seen
in relation to the equator. The declination is used when ﬁnding the zenith angle in Eq. 3.8. The
equation for declination, δ is given below in Eq. 3.7 [8].
δ = 23.45 · sin

360 · 284 + n
365

(3.7)
δ is given in [degrees]. n is the number of the day in the year.
Zenith angle, θz
The zenith angle, θz, is the angle between the actual position of the sun and the zenith of the sun.
The zenith is where the sun is highest in the sky during a year. In Eq. 3.8 the equation to ﬁnd the
zenith angle is shown [8].
θz = arccos(cos(φ) · cos(ω) · cos(δ) + sin(φ) · sin(δ))
(3.8)
θz is given in [degrees].φ is the latitude, ω is the hour angle, and δ is the declination.
10
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
Solar azimuth, γs
The solar azimuth, γs, is the horizontal angle between south and the position of the sun. Below in
Eq. 3.9 the equation for calculating the solar azimuth [8] is shown.
γs = sign(ω) ·
arccos ·
cos(θz) · sin(φ) −sin(δ)
sin(θz) · cos(φ)

(3.9)
γs is given in [degrees]. φ is the latitude, ω is the hour angle, θz is the zenith angle, and δ is the
declination. sign(ω) means that γs will have the same sign as ω.
The solar azimuth is used to ﬁnd the incidence angle.
Incidence angle, θi
The incidence angle, θi describes at which angle the radiation from sun is hitting the collector sur-
face. When the radiation is perpendicular to the surface the incidence angle will be 0◦. Knowing θi
is of great importance to be able to calculate the incidence angle modiﬁer, the end eﬀect loss and
the shading coeﬃcient for the collectors. The meaning of these will be described later. Below in
Eq. 3.10, Eq. 3.11, and Eq. 3.12 the equations for ﬁnding the incidence angle for 1-axis horizontal
tracking is presented [25].
If the collector is orientated as N-S tracking the θi would be as in Eq. 3.10 below.
θi,NS = arccos
p
1 −cos2(90 −θz) · cos2(γs)

(3.10)
θi is given in [degrees].θz is the zenith angle, and γs is the solar azimuth.
If the collector is orientated as E-W tracking the θi would be as in Eq. 3.11 below.
θi,EW = arccos
q
1 −cos2(90 −θz) · sin2(γs)

(3.11)
If the collector is not tracking S-N or E-W, but the azimuth is deviating from this, θi is found
as in Eq. 3.12.
θi,1axis = arccos
p
1 −cos2(90 −θz) · cos2(γs −γ)

(3.12)
γ is the azimuth of the collector.
If the collector is a 2-axis tracking collector, the incidence angle will theoretically always be 0◦,
if the collector is tracking perfectly. In this case the incidence angle is as below in Eq. 3.13:
cos(θi,2axis) = 1
(3.13)
11
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
Incidence angle modiﬁer, Kb
The incidence angle modiﬁer, IAM, for beam radiation is represented by the variable Kb. Kb is a
value usually between 0 and 1, describing how much of the solar radiance hitting the collector is
actually used. IAM is dependent on the incidence angle - the lower the incidence angle, the higher
Kb, resulting in high power for the system. Kb can exceed 1 if e.g. reﬂection on to the collector
occur [24]. Below in Eq. 3.14 the equation for the IAM [10] is shown.
Kb(θi) = cos(θi) + b1 · θi + b2 · θ2
i
(3.14)
b1 and b2 are constants describing the IAM, and θi is the incidence angle.
For a 2-axis tracking collector, with assumed perfect tracking the incidence angle is assumed to
be 0◦at all time. Therefore the IAM will be as in Eq. 3.15 below.
Kb,2axis = 1
(3.15)
Shade coeﬃcient, ηshade
When the collectors are placed in front of each other in the collector ﬁeld, a loss from shading will
occur even though there is a certain distance between each row. The loss will be signiﬁcant in the
early morning and late afternoon when the sun is low in the sky. A shade coeﬃcient, S, can be
calculated as below in Eq. 3.16 [29].
S = |cos(ρ)| · drow
wcoll
(3.16)
Where drow is the distance between each row, wcoll is the width of the collectors, and ρ is the
tracking angle for the collector found as below in Eq. 3.17 [25].
ρ = arctan
 sin(γs −γ)
tan(90 −θz)

(3.17)
γs is the solar azimuth angle, γ is the azimuth angle of the collectors, and θz is the zenith angle.
The tracking angle is shown in Figure 3.1 below.
It is the angle between a line perpendicular
to the surface of the earth and a line perpendicular to the collector surface.
12
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
Figure 3.1: Tracking angle, ρ, for 1-axis tracking parabolic trough collector.
Not all collectors will be shaded during the day. Those collectors, unshaded collectors, are placed at
the ﬁrst row in the collector ﬁeld. Below in Eq. 3.18 the expression of the actual shading coeﬃcient
for the entire ﬁeld is shown.
ηshade = ncollector −nunshaded
ncollectors
· S + nunshaded
ncollectors
(3.18)
Where S is the shade coeﬃcient found in Eq. 3.16, ncollector is the total number of collectors, and
nunshaded is the number of unshaded collectors in the ﬁeld.
End-loss eﬀect, ηend
End-loss eﬀect will only be present for the PTC. It is a coeﬃcient describing how much of the energy
reﬂected in the mirrors of the PTC, that will be reaching the receiver [18]. If the solar radiation is
not hitting the collector perfectly perpendicular, the angular diﬀerence, will results in some beams
will not be reﬂected towards the receiver tube. In Eq. 3.19 the equation for end-loss eﬀect, ηend, is
shown [20].
ηend = 1 −
(1 + w2
coll
48·f 2 ) · tan(θi)
lcoll
(3.19)
wcoll is the width of the collector, f is the focal length of the collector, θi is the incidence angle,
and lcoll is the length of the collector.
Calculated power output, qu
When developing the mathematical model a power output value for the system, qu, needs to be
calculated. qu is the useful power output for each time step in the model. This is used as a value
13
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
for Q in the QDT model, so it is possible to estimate the remaining constants in the model. The
equation for the calculated power output can be seen below in Eq. 3.20 [8].
qu = ˙m · Cp · (To −Ti)
(3.20)
qu is in [W]. ˙m is the mass ﬂow rate, Cp is the speciﬁc heat capacity, To is the outlet temperature
of the ﬂuid, and Ti is the inlet temperature of the ﬂuid.
qu is calculated for the heat transfer ﬂuid, HTF, in the collector, but can also be applied for
the secondary side of the heat exchanger, HX. This can be used in cases, where qu for the primary
side of the heat exchanger cannot be calculated easily and accurate. If the eﬃciency of the HX is
low, it should be taken into account. In those cases qu should be divided with the eﬃciency of the
HX, in order to get the correct power output from only the collectors.
3.3
Multiple linear regression
The unknown constants from the QDT model are found with a multiple linear regression, MLR.
This regression is used to estimate constants for each term in a equation, to describe the slope of
the regression, using a known output and variable inputs. Below in Eq. 3.21 the general expression
for the MLR can be seen [28].
yi = β0 + β1 · xi1 + β2 · xi2 + ... + βp · xip + ϵ
(3.21)
For the QDT model, varying data from the collector ﬁeld describing the weather condition is used
as the input. These inputs will be as xip in Eq. 3.21. The expected output is calculated as in Eq.
3.20, and will be y in Eq. 3.21. The ﬁtted constants will be as βp in Eq. 3.21. The ﬁtted constants
from the regression will then describe the constants desired to know from the QDT model.
3.4
Boundary conditions for the test data
The mathematical model is developed using actual measured data at the collector ﬁelds, which can
be diﬃcult to use, if it is not treated correctly. To develop an mathematical model as accurate as
possible, a set of boundary conditions, is applied for the test data, when used in the model devel-
opment with QDT. These boundaries conditions deﬁne the requirements for the data used in the
model development.
For the PTC ﬁeld these conditions ensure, that only data from online collectors are used, and
that data from e.g. night will be removed, as well as data errors. The same conditions will apply
for the FLC ﬁeld, except for the second condition seen below in Table 3.1. This a due to a lack of
data, so the required knowledge cannot be obtained to fulﬁl the conditions. Below in Table 3.1 the
boundary conditions for the PTC ﬁeld can be seen.
14
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
Parameter condition
Unit
Gb ≥qu
W
m2
Percent online collectors > 0
%
qu ≥100
W
m2
Gb ≥100
W
m2
−0.01 < dTf
dt < 0.01
◦C
min
Table 3.1: The boundary conditions for the PTC ﬁeld test data used in the development of the
mathematical model.
Gb ≥qu:
The energy output should never be higher than the irradiance level. The collector ﬁeld cannot
produce more energy than is delivered to the collectors. If the condition is not fulﬁlled, it would
means there is an error in the data, and therefore the data from the timestamp has to be removed.
Percent online collectors > 0:
When no collectors are online, meaning they will not track the sun correctly, there will be no energy
output even though the irradiance is high. The data will therefore be removed, so it does not aﬀect
the constants found from the MLR. For the calculations this condition is only used for the PTC
ﬁeld, but it could also be used for the Fresnel collector ﬁeld, if the data is available.
Gb ≥100 and qu ≥100:
If the irrandiance or energy output is too low, it will cause errors when ﬁnding the MLR, so some
requirements has to be set. In this thesis they are chosen to be at least 100
W
m2 .
−0.01 < dTf
dt < 0.01:
Large changes in the mean ﬂuid temperature, Tf, in short time will aﬀect the MLR. Tf changes all
the time, but to limit deviations for the model development a limit for the ﬂuctuations is necessary.
15
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 4
CSP ﬁelds setup
In this chapter the two systems with the Parabolic trough collectors and Fresnel lens collector will be
presented. The knowledge about the ﬁelds is very important to successfully create the mathematical
model.
4.1
Brønderslev - Parabolic trough collector ﬁeld
The Parabolic trough collector ﬁeld, PTC ﬁeld, is placed in Brønderslev, Northern Jutland in Den-
mark. The ﬁeld is owned by Brønderslev Forsyning, and established by Aalborg CSP. It has a
capacity of 16.6 MW, and started operation at the end of 2016. It is placed at latitude 57.27◦N and
longitude 9.94◦E.
The collectors are all placed in the same direction facing 29.9◦E of North, and are 1-axis hori-
zontal tracking collectors. The collector ﬁeld is consisting of 40 rows of 10 collectors each, so 400
collectors in total. Each of the 400 collectors has a width of 5.77 m and length of 12 m. The total
aperture area of the entire collector ﬁeld is 26930 m2 and the maximum optical eﬃciency claimed
by the producer is 77%. 27 out of the 400 collectors are assumed not be shaded during the day,
since no collectors are placed in front of them. Below in Figure 4.1 the placement of the collectors
in the ﬁeld can be seen.
For the model development and validation data from the PTC ﬁeld is used.
The data is from
May 2017 to September 2017, and has a time resolution of 1 min between each data step, meaning
the data will be saved every 1 minute. The time-series are given in daylight-savings time, which
will be corrected in the program. The data ﬁles contain all information, including temperature
diﬀerences, beam irradiance, ﬂow rate, and tracking angles of each of the collector rows.
16
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4. CSP FIELDS SETUP
Figure 4.1: Parabolic trough collector solar ﬁeld in Brønderslev. [11]
The heat transfer ﬂuid, HTF, used in the collectors is a thermal oil ”Therminol 66”. The ﬂuid
properties - density and speciﬁc heat capacity - is provided in a data ﬁle, and is used for the model
development.
The collectors are not always tracking correct and will in those cases not deliver the maximum
energy output. This can e.g., be caused by fault in the tracking system or purposely defocusing
of the collectors, due to too high temperatures. To limit errors when developing the mathematical
model, this needs to be accounted for in the model. When a collector is tracking correct, it will be
stated as online. To ﬁnd the online collectors, a diﬀerence between the optimal angle of the collector
and the actual angle, cannot exceed 2◦. The 10 collectors combined in one row will all have the
same angle. In Eq. 5.5 in Chapter 5 this will be described further.
4.2
Lendemarke - Heliac Fresnel solar collector ﬁeld
The Heliac Fresnel solar collector ﬁeld is placed in Lendemarke, Møn, Denmark. The solar collectors
are from the Danish company Heliac, who in collaboration with the company E.ON has created the
collector ﬁeld. The speciﬁc location of the ﬁeld is at latitude 54.979◦N and longitude 12.267◦E.
Below in Figure 4.2 the collector ﬁeld can be seen.
The collector ﬁeld is constructed with 144 collectors.
Each collector is created with 8 Fresnel
lenses and has an aperture area of 16.55m2. The collector is a 2-axis tracking collector, making sure
the radiation from the sun will always hit directly perpendicular at the collector. The capacity of
17
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 4. CSP FIELDS SETUP
each panel is 12 kW [12]. The heat transfer ﬂuid used for the collectors is 30% glycol and 70% water
mixture.
Figure 4.2: Heliac Fresnel solar collector ﬁeld in Lendemarke. [9]
One day of data is available from the collector ﬁeld. The data is from 22nd of September 2020, and
the data has a time resolution of 1 minute. Approximate 2/3 of the collectors were online when
the data was measured. The local time is given in daylight-savings time. Only one day of data will
limit the accuracy when developing the mathematical model and performing the validation. This
will be described further in Chapter 5.
18
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 5
Program development and
assumptions
In order to write the program, a walk-through of the fundamental program knowledge and assump-
tions is necessary.
In this chapter the idea behind the program development for both model development and validation
will be presented. The programming platform used for program development will be presented, as
well as the equation used for the MLR and the assumptions for averaging values for each time step.
5.1
Data processing
To ﬁnd the parameters from the MLR a program for each collector ﬁeld is written in MATLAB. In
this chapter the main calculations done in the code and the assumptions will be presented.
MATLAB version R2020a is used as the solving tool for the MLR and for the validation. MATLAB
is chosen due to the programs many possibilities when working with large data sets, as well as the
graphical possibilities when plotting graphs.
Model development - For PTC ﬁeld
The developing of the mathematical model for the PTC ﬁeld will be based on the QDT model
presented in Eq.
3.2.
It will be derived as below in Eq.
5.1 and Eq.
5.2, when inserting the
equation for Kb presented in Eq. 3.14.
QP T C,modified = η0 · (cos(θi) + b1 · θi + b2 · θi) · Gb · ηshade · ηend −a1 · (Tf −Ta)
−a2 · (Tf −Ta)2 −a5 · dTf
dt
(5.1)
19
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 5. PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT AND ASSUMPTIONS
⇒QP T C,modified = η0·Gb·ηshade·ηend·cos(θi)−η0·Gb·ηshade·ηend·b1·θi−η0·Gb·ηshade·ηend·b2·θ2
i
−a1 · (Tf −Ta) −a2 · (Tf −Ta)2 −a5 · dTf
dt
(5.2)
Where:
• ηshade is the shading coeﬃcient, [−]
• ηend is the end-loss eﬀect, [−]
In Eq. 5.1 and Eq. 5.2 the shading coeﬃcient, ηshade, and the end-eﬀect loss, ηend, are included.
These were found in Eq. 3.16 and Eq. 3.19 above in Chapter 3 - Theory.
From Eq.
5.2 it can be seen, that the QDT model contains six terms, and the unknown con-
stants are: η0, b1, b2, a1, a2, and a5. These are the constants desired to ﬁnd with the MLR.
The known variables in Eq. 5.2 are Gb, θi, ηshade, ηend, Tf, and Ta. These will be calculated
as presented in Chapter 3 - Theory. Some of the calculations from Chapter 3, will be altered before
used in the calculations for the PTC ﬁeld. This is to adjust them to the actual operation of the
ﬁeld, which i.a. include fraction of online collectors. The adjusted equations will be presented in
this section.
The mean ﬂuid temperature, Tf is found as the mean values between the inlet temperature of
the collector, Tin,HT F , and outlet temperature of the collector, Tout,HT F , as shown below i Eq. 5.3.
Tf = Tin,HT F + Tout,HT F
2
(5.3)
Q from Eq. 5.2 is the calculated qu for the secondary side of the HX. qu is found for the secondary
side of the HX, since it could not be calculated accurately on the primary side of the HX. The
calculation of qu is shown below in Eq. 5.4. qu from 3.20 is divided with the area of the collectors
times the fraction of online collectors to get the output in
h
W
m2
i
.
qu =
˙
mwater · Cp,water · (To,water −Ti,water)
Atotal · ηonline
(5.4)
Atotal is the total aperture area of the collector ﬁeld. ηonline is the fraction of online collectors,
found as described below in Eq. 5.5 and Eq. 5.6.
ηonline,collector =
(
1,
if ∆adiff ≤2◦
0,
if ∆adiff > 2◦
∆adiff = ”Actual angle of collector” −”Best angle of collector”
(5.5)
20
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 5. PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT AND ASSUMPTIONS
The sum of the rows for each time step is found and divided with the number of rows, to ﬁnd the
faction of online collectors for each time step.
ηonline =
P ηonline,collector(t)
Nrows
(5.6)
When developing the model approximately one month of data from the collector ﬁeld is used as
input for the MLR. For the PTC ﬁeld the data from May 3rd 2017 to May 31st 2017 is used.
The mathematical model derived in Eq.
5.2, will be compared to the same model, but includ-
ing a new term a3. The model and procedure for the MLR will be the identical, except that the
term a3 · (Tf −Ta)3 will be included. The derived model with the a3 term can be seen below in Eq.
5.7. This model will be denoted as QP T C,modified.
QP T C,modified = η0·Kb(θi)·Gb·ηshade·ηend−a1·(Tf−Ta)−a2·(Tf−Ta)2−a3·(Tf−Ta)3−a5·dTf
dt
(5.7)
Derived the equation will be as in Eq. 5.8 below.
QP T C,modified = η0 ·Gb ·ηshade ·ηend ·cos(θi)−η0 ·Gb ·ηshade ·ηend ·b1 ·θ−η0 ·Gb ·ηshade ·ηend ·b2 ·θ2
−a1 · (Tf −Ta) −a2 · (Tf −Ta)2 −a3 · (Tf −Ta)3 −a5 · dTf
dt
(5.8)
For a3 included in Eq. 5.7, the wind speed, u, is not included, as for a3 in Eq. 3.1. The new term
a3 · (Tf −Ta)3 tested and evaluated speciﬁcally for this thesis. It is desired to know if the extra
heat loss term has an eﬀect on the performance of the QDT model. The reason for adding the
new term is that the heat loss from the collector, might be more complicated, than it is possible to
describe with a second-degree polynomial. Therefore a higher order polynomial - third-degree poly-
nomial - is tested. When testing this idea it is compared to the measured useful output for validation.
The reason for testing both the model in Eq.
5.2 and Eq.
5.7 is to compare the results, and
see if the added term for heat loss, improves the results. Also the model without a3 is evaluated to
see, if the QDT model can be used for the PTC ﬁeld.
Model development - For Fresnel lens collector ﬁeld
The collectors in the Fresnel lens collector ﬁeld are 2-axis tracking collectors, which are assumed to
be perfectly tracking. This will mean, that the collectors always receive the solar radiation perpen-
dicular to the surface of the collector. Therefore the incidence will be 0◦at all time, and the IAM,
Kb, will be 1.
The QDT model shown in Eq. 3.2 will be evaluated for the Fresnel lens collector ﬁeld, but with some
alterations. The QDT model including the new term a3 presented in Eq. 5.7 will not be evaluated,
21
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 5. PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT AND ASSUMPTIONS
the reason for this will be explained in Chapter 6 - Results from multiple linear regression. Below
in Eq. 5.9 the QDT model of the FLC ﬁeld can be seen.
QF LC = η0 · Gb −a1 · (Tf −Ta) −a2 · (Tf −Ta)2 −a5 · dTf
dt
(5.9)
The QDT model for the FLC ﬁeld will have small changes due to the construction of the collector.
Since Kb is 1 the term will not aﬀect the model, and will be removed. The end-eﬀect, which was
including the mathematical model for the PTC ﬁeld, is not present at the FLC. A shading coeﬃ-
cient is not calculated for the ﬁeld, as the geometric data was not available, and therefore this is
not included in the model.
For the FLC ﬁeld the measured useful energy output, qu, is found using a measured power out-
put, Qmeasured,F LC, in [kW] on the primary side of the heat exchanger. It is desired to have the
power in the unit
h
W
m2
i
, so recalculations need to be done, as seen below in Eq. 5.10.
qu = Qmeasured,F LC · 103
Atotal · 2
3
(5.10)
qu is measured useful power output for the FLC ﬁeld in
h
W
m2
i
, Atotal is the total aperture area of
the collector ﬁeld. The area is multiplied with 2
3, since that is the fraction of online collectors in the
time period of the measurement.
The mean ﬂuid temperature is again found as the mean of the inlet and outlet temperature of
the collectors, as shown in Eq. 5.3. The direct normal irradiance, DNI, is used as Gb from Eq. 5.9,
since the collector is tracking in 2-axes.
5.2
Optimization of code
In Appendix A a ﬂowchart for the coding of the mathematical model for the solar collector ﬁelds
can be seen. The ﬂowchart is showing in which order the calculations of the variables is done, as
well as the programming structure in general. In Appendix B a ﬂowchart of the code written to
calculate the predicted useful power output is shown. The ﬂow charts are showing the programming
structure for PTC ﬁeld, but the same programming ﬂow will apply for the FLC ﬁeld, though with
another procedure for implementation of the incidence angle and IAM in the QDT model.
When performing the calculations of the variables for the QDT model the time resolution of the
output is determined by the time resolution of the given data. The time resolution is how much
time, there is between each measured data point. The measured data for both the PTC ﬁeld and the
FLC ﬁeld has a time resolution of 1 minute. Though, when ﬁnding the MLR constants it is desired
to use data of larger time steps, to limit the large ﬂuctuations which can be present in the measured
data. The ﬂuctuation can be due to sudden weather changes e.g. bypassing clouds aﬀecting the
received irradiance. The measured data shows reality, which includes the quick deviations in beam
irradiance, when the weather is changing. Even though, the MLR can still be used for smaller time
steps, the deviations will result in a less precise model.
22
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 5. PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT AND ASSUMPTIONS
A resolution of both 5 and 10 minutes was tested, but the best results were achieved at 5 minute
time steps. This was also the conclusion from (Fahr, Tschopp, Nielsen, Kramer, and Ohnewein,
2020 [26]), where a 5 minute resolution for in-situ testing was found to give the most valid results.
If the time steps are too large, it will result in errors in the derived constants from the MLR, since
the variable data will not suﬃciently describe the weather conditions. The larger time resolution of
5 minutes will also make it quicker to run the model.
5.3
Validation of model
To ensure the mathematical model is acceptable for describing the collector ﬁeld, it has to be val-
idated. When the model is validated the useful output predicted with the mathematical model is
compared to the actual measured useful output, both for the same time period. If there is no large
diﬀerence between the values, the model can be assumed to be valid.
For the validation the collector data is used as an input to the mathematical model, and thereby
the energy output, Q, can be calculated. This output will be considered as the ”predicted energy
output”. The predicted output can then be compared to the actual energy output for the time
period, which is the ”measured energy output”.
When the mathematical model is validated, data from the collector ﬁelds is used. Multiple months
of data would be preferred, to ensure the most valid results of the validation. For the PTC ﬁeld data
from June, July, August and September 2017 is used. For the FLC ﬁeld only data from the 22nd of
September 2020 is available. This will aﬀect the validation, since both the model development and
validation are performed using the same data set. Also, with the limited data, the performance of
the mathematical model under changing weather conditions can be diﬃcult to validate.
For the validation, data with large unrealistic deviations, will be removed in a data ﬁlter. These devi-
ations will not be scientiﬁcally possible, and therefore they are designated as data errors. Removing
this data will ensure the power output will not be aﬀected by data errors.
23
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 6
Results from multiple linear
regression
In this chapter the results from the MLR will be presented. The results are the constants from the
QDT model. The constants will describe important factors about the collectors. The impact of
shading and end-loss eﬀect for the parabolic trough collector will also be presented.
6.1
Brønderslev - Parabolic trough collector ﬁeld
The input parameters to the MLR are calulated as shown in Chapter 3. Below in Figure 6.1 the
shading coeﬃcient can be seen and Figure 6.2 shows the end-loss eﬀect for over a day. Both ﬁgures
are displaying the variables from the 17th of May 2017.
Figure 6.1: Shading coeﬃcient for the PTC ﬁeld
seen for one day - 17th of May 2017.
Figure 6.2: End-loss eﬀect for the PTC ﬁeld seen
for a day - 17th of May 2017.
From Figure 6.1 it can be seen, that the shading coeﬃcient is 1 for most of the day, where there
24
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS FROM MULTIPLE LINEAR REGRESSION
will be no shading aﬀecting the panels. The coeﬃcient is lower in early morning and evening as
expected. The sun will be low in the sky at these times, and therefore some panels will be more
aﬀected by shading from the other collector rows.
Looking at Figure 6.2 it can be concluded that the end-loss eﬀect is very low.
The biggest ef-
fect is seen in early morning, as for the shading coeﬃcient. With the biggest impact from end-loss
eﬀect being approximate 0.0006% it will have almost no eﬀect on the collector performance.
As described in Chapter 3 - Section 3.3 - MLR is used to ﬁnd the constants from the QDT models
shown in Eq. 5.2 and Eq. 5.8. These have been found to be the values in Table 6.1. In Table 6.1
the values found in the earlier study (Mihalitsis, 2020 [3]) are also presented. These values will be
used for comparison.
η0
b1
b2
a1
a2
a3
a5
Unit
-
-
-
W
m2·K
W
m2·K2
W
m2·K3
J
m2·K
Constants from QDT model without a3 term
0.5998
−0.0018
2.235 · 10−6
−1.3829
0.0189
-
−3949
Constants from QDT model with a3 term
0.6132
−0.0035
2.379 · 10−5
−4.9236
0.0807
−2.63 · 10−4
−3916
QDT constants found from (Mihalitsis, 2020 [3])
0.58
0.0047
−1.4 · 10−4
−0.7
0.01
−
−3163
Table 6.1: Table showing the constants from the QDT models.
η0 describing the peak eﬃciency of the collector is 59.98% for the model without a3, and 61.32%
for the model including a3. A small increase can be seen in the modiﬁed model including a3. These
peak eﬃciencies are higher, than found in (Mihalitsis, 2020 [3]). The heat loss, a1, and thermal
capacity, a5, is in this thesis higher, than the values found in (Mihalitsis, 2020 [3]). The values
found in (Mihalitsis, 2020 [3]) were also found for the entire collector ﬁeld. For a collector ﬁeld a1
and a5 will be higher than for a single collector, since the constants now describe an entire collector
ﬁeld, which includes piping. b1 and b2 describing the IAM are varying for the two models, but even
though when ﬁnding Kb(θi) the curves are very similar. In Figure 6.3 the IAM for the two models
can be seen for one day - the 17th of June 2017.
25
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS FROM MULTIPLE LINEAR REGRESSION
Figure 6.3: Incidence angle modiﬁer on the 17th of June 2017: The QDT model without a3 (blue
curve) and QDT model with a3 (orange curve). The x-axis is showing the local time.
The heat loss a2 is found to be positive, which does not indicate a heat loss. Nevertheless, the
common loss from the a1 term and a2 term is still negative, resulting in a heat loss. The heat loss
coeﬃcients a1 and a2 is much higher for the modiﬁed model. The extra heat loss coeﬃcient a3 is
not high, but even though it could be the case, that a more detailed description of the heat loss will
be more applicable when comparing the measured and predicted useful output. This will be further
investigated in the model validation in Chapter 7.
The coeﬃcient of determination, R2, is for the model without a3 R2 = 0.929, and for the model with
a3 R2 = 0.932. This means that the model including a3 will ﬁt the data better. Higher R2-values
would be desired, but considering the data is measured in-situ under dynamic conditions, the values
are acceptable.
6.2
Lendemarke - Fresnel lens solar collector ﬁeld
The constants in Eq. 5.7 is found. The values for these can be seen below in Table 6.2. The table
also shows QDT constants found from a single FLC found from (Jensen, 2020 [14]). The QDT
model for the single collector from (Jensen, 2020 [14]) consist of other terms, diﬀuse IAM and a3,
but even though can the constants still be compared.
26
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS FROM MULTIPLE LINEAR REGRESSION
η0
Kd
a1
a2
a3*
a5
Unit
-
-
W
m2·K
W
m2·K2
J
m3·K
J
m2·K2
QDT constants from model
0.61
-
-13.1
0.24
-
-4618
QDT constants found from (Jensen, 2020 [14])**
0.602
0.02
-0.23
-
-0.178
-3357
*The a3 term used in (Jensen, 2020 [14]) is dependent on the wind speed as shown in Eq. 3.1:
a3 · (Tf −Ta). a3 in this table cannot be compared with a3 found in Table 6.1.
** The constants found are for a single Heliac Fresnel lens collector.
Table 6.2: Constants found for the QDT model. The constants from (Jensen, 2020 [14]) are also
presented. These are for at single Fresnel lens collector.
For the model in Eq. 5.7 is R2 = 0.92, so the ﬁt is acceptable, but an increase in R2 could be
desired. This value is close to the R2-values found from the PTC ﬁeld.
Looking at the constants from the QDT model seen in Table 6.2, the ﬁrst constant to notice is
the very high heat loss a1 of -13.1
W
m2·K. It is much higher than what would be expected, also
compared to the value for the single collector, where a1 was found to be -0.23
W
m2·K. Even though
the value for the found constant is too high, it still shows the tendency, that would be expected,
when ﬁnding the heat loss for the entire collector ﬁeld. The heat loss a1 for the entire ﬁeld, is not
just describing the heat loss from the collector, but also for the pipes transporting the HTF. These
pipes are not only transporting the heat between each of the collectors, but also from the collector
ﬁeld to a heat exchanger. Therefore the heat loss is larger for the entire ﬁeld, than for a single
collector.
Another reason for a high a1 heat loss, might be a missing integration of the heat loss dependent on
the wind speed. For the single collector analysis in (Jensen, 2020 [14]) a heat loss dependent on wind
speed was found to be -0.178
J
m3·K. The heat loss dependent on wind speed was not implemented
in the QDT model for the collector ﬁeld, due to missing data. This will mean that a potential wind
speed dependent heat loss will be represented in the a1 heat loss as well.
Another constant to notice is the heat loss a2.
The constant is positive, which would not be
expected for a heat loss. This might indicate that the term is not signiﬁcant for the model.
The peak eﬃciency, η0 for the collector, found to be 61%, seems very reasonable. The thermal
capacity of the collector ﬁeld, a5 is found to be 4618
J
m2·K2 , which is higher than the thermal capac-
ity found for a single collector. It is higher because the thermal capacity is found for the the entire
collector ﬁeld, which also includes the piping.
The QDT model including the a3 term, as was investigated for the PTC ﬁeld, is not investigated
for the FLC ﬁeld. The very limited data resulted in invalid and wrong values for the constants.
27
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS FROM MULTIPLE LINEAR REGRESSION
The limited data has properly aﬀected the constants found for the FLC ﬁeld, but still the results
can give an useful estimate of the constants in the QDT model.
28
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 7
Model validation
In this chapter the validation of the mathematical model for the PTC ﬁeld and the Fresnel lens
collector ﬁeld will be performed. The validation will make it possible to see, if the model is ﬁtting
the measured data as desired, and is thereby valid. A comparison of the daily measured and pre-
dicted power output will be done, as well as the monthly energy output. The daily power output
comparison will show the performance of the model for short term predictions, whereas the monthly
comparison will show the long term performance of the model.
The validation of the mathematical model for the PTC ﬁeld, will be compared with validation
of a model from another report.
7.1
Brønderslev - Parabolic trough collector ﬁeld
The parameters from Table 6.1 are inserted in Eq. 5.2 and Eq. 5.8, and the useful power output is
found for June, July, August and September 2017.
Below in Figure 7.1 and 7.2 a graphical representation of the measured power output, the pre-
dicted power output QP T C from the QDT model without a3, and the predicted power output,
QP T C,modified, from the QDT model with a3 is shown in
W
m2 . Notice the diﬀerent scaling on the
y-axes. Figure 7.1 shows the power output from the 13th of June 2017. It was a sunny day with
limited cloud cover, which can be seen in Figure 7.3, showing the beam irradiance, Gb, from the
same day. Figure 7.2 shows the power output from the 20th August 2017. It was a cloudy day,
with large ﬂuctuations in the cloud cover. This can be seen in Figure 7.4, where large ﬂuctuations
in the beam irradiance can be observed. In Figure 7.1 and Figure 7.2 the measured power output
is represented by the blue line, the predicted output without a3 is represented by the orange line,
and the predicted output including a3 is represented by the yellow line.
From Figure 7.1, representing the sunny day, it can be seen that the measured power output and
the predicted models are following the same pattern, even though the predicted power output is
higher than the measured. There is a small deviation between the two predicted curves, showing
the model including a3 has a slightly better ﬁt, but there seems to be no signiﬁcant diﬀerence.
29
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 7. MODEL VALIDATION
Figure 7.1: Useful power output in
h
W
m2
i
for the PTC ﬁeld on a sunny day - the 13th of June 2017:
Measured (blue curve), predicted with model without a3 (orange curve), and predicted model with
a3 (yellow curve). The x-axis is showing the local time.
Figure 7.2: Useful power output in
h
W
m2
i
for the PTC ﬁeld on a cloudy day - the 20th of August
2017: Measured (blue curve), predicted with model without a3 (orange curve), and predicted model
with a3 (yellow curve). The x-axis shows the local time.
30
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 7. MODEL VALIDATION
Figure 7.2, which shows the comparison on a cloudy day, does also show that the measured and
predicted values are following the same pattern, but there is large ﬂuctuations in the predicted power
output. This is caused by a large ﬂuctuation in the received radiation, due to changing weather
condition between sun and cloud cover. This results in predicted power output which is both under
and over estimated compared to the measured power output. Looking closely at the graph, it can
be seen that the model including a3 is slightly closer to the measured output.
Figure 7.3: Beam irradiance in
h
W
m2
i
on a sunny
day - the 13th of June 2017. The x-axis shows
the local time.
Figure 7.4: Beam irradiance in
h
W
m2
i
on a cloudy
day - the 20th of August 2017.
The x-axis is
shows the local time.
For the cloudy day the measured useful energy output only for this day is 1.6 kWh
m2 , the predicted
output for the model without a3 is 1.9 kWh
m2 , and the predicted output for the model with a3 is 1.7
kWh
m2 . These results show, that even though the ﬂuctuations seem large in the Figure 7.2 the total
predicted energy output for the day is very close to the measured.
To get at better understanding of the comparison between the measured and predicted values,
the useful energy output is found and compared as well. This will also verify if the model can be
used for long term predictions. The energy output, Eoutput, is calculated as a total energy value in
kWh
m2
for each month. In Eq. 7.1 the calculation is shown.
Eoutput =
Q · dt
3600

· 10−3
(7.1)
Q is the power output in
W
m2 , and dt is the number of seconds between each data point.
Below in Table 7.1 the energy output is listed. In Figure 7.5 the output is shown in a bar chart, as a
graphical representation as well. In the bar chart the measured useful energy output is represented
by the blue bars, the predicted output for the model without a3 is represented by the orange bars,
and the predicted output for the model with a3 is represented by the yellow bars.
31
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 7. MODEL VALIDATION
Figure 7.5: Bar chart showing the total useful energy output in
h
kWh
m2
i
for the PTC ﬁeld for June,
July, August, and September 2017: Measured (blue curve), predicted with model without a3 (orange
curve), and predicted model with a3 (yellow curve).
Energy output in
h
kWh
m2
i
Month
Meassured
QDT model without a3
QDT model with a3
June
64.87
77.35
75.35
July
62.97
72.95
70.22
August
43.06
52.29
49.21
September
12.17
21.85
19.49
Table 7.1: The measured monthly energy output and predicted energy output for the QDT models
without and with a3 in
h
kWh
m2
i
for June, July, August and September 2017.
Looking at the diﬀerence in the monthly energy output between the two QDT models in Table 7.1
and Figure 7.5 a small diﬀerence can be seen as in Figure 7.1 and Figure 7.2 above. The diﬀerence
is not signiﬁcant, but though does the modiﬁed QDT model including a3 give results closer to the
measured energy output.
Further knowledge for the comparison can be gained from Table 7.2, which shows the percent
relative error, relative error in [%], of the predicted energy output, in comparison to the measured
energy output. The percent relative error, RE, is found as in Eq. 7.2 [32].
32
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 7. MODEL VALIDATION
RE = |Qpredicted −Qmeasured|
Qmeasured
· 100
(7.2)
Relative error for predicted power output in [%]
Month
QDT model without a3
QDT model with a3
June
19
16
July
16
12
August
21
14
September
80
60
Table 7.2: The relative error in [%] for the predicted monthly energy output for the QDT models
without and with a3 compared to the measured monthly energy output for June, July, August and
September 2017.
Looking at Table 7.2 showing the relative errors, it can be seen that there is a diﬀerence of 16-21%
for the model without a3, and 12-16% for the model with a3 for June, July and August. The relative
error concludes that the modiﬁed QDT model including a3 is giving better results. For September
the relative error is very large, which was also seen in Table 7.1. This is due to an error in the code
for the validation for that month, and should not be considered as the correct output of the model
for September.
The values for the relative error can be compared to the values found in an earlier report (Mi-
halitsis, 2020 [3]), investigating the same collector ﬁeld. The relative error was in the report found
to be between 18-23% as seen below in Table 7.3.
Relative error in [%] found in earlier
study (Mihalitsis, 2020 [3])
Month
Relative error [%]
June
20
July
23
August
18
September
19
Table 7.3: Relative error in [%] for predicted power output found from earlier study (Mihalitsis,
2020 [3]).
Comparing this thesis to (Mihalitsis, 2020 [3]) an improvement has been done in this thesis, and
especially for the model including a3, when looking on the relative error.
33
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 7. MODEL VALIDATION
7.2
Lendemarke - Fresnel lens solar collector ﬁeld
The validation of the Lendemarke ﬁeld is done using the same data set as for the MLR. First a
graphical comparison of the predicted and measured useful power output is performed. Below in
Figure 7.6 the measured power output is shown by the blue curve, and the predicted power output
from the QDT model in Eq. 5.9 is shown by the orange curve. In Figure 7.7 the beam irradiance
for the same time period is shown.
Figure 7.6: Useful power output in
h
W
m2
i
for the Fresnel lens collector ﬁeld on the 22nd of September
2020: Measured (blue curve) and predicted (orange curve). The x-axis shows the local time.
From Figure 7.6 it is seen that the predicted power output is following the same pattern, as the
curve for the measured power output, though are there a few peaks for the predicted output. From
Figure 7.7 it can be seen, that the validation is done for a sunny day, and therefore there is no big
ﬂuctuations in the predicted power output.
34
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 7. MODEL VALIDATION
Figure 7.7: Beam irradiance in
h
W
m2
i
on the 22nd of September 2020. The x-axis shows the local
time.
Below in Table 7.4 the measured and predicted useful energy can be seen. The energy output is
given in kWh
m2 , and was found as shown in Eq. 7.1 above. In the table the relative error of the
predicted output compared to the measured output is also shown. The relative error was found as
shown in Eq. 7.2 above.
Output parameters for the Fresnel lens collector ﬁeld
Measured useful energy output
h
kWh
m2
i
Predicted useful energy output
h
kWh
m2
i
Relative error [%]
1.92
2.28
18.75
Table 7.4: Table showing the measured useful energy output in
h
kWh
m2
i
, the predicted useful energy
output in
h
kWh
m2
i
, and the relative error in [%] for the Fresnel lens collector ﬁeld on the 22th of
September 2020.
As shown in Table 7.4 the measured useful energy output for the 22nd of September 2020 is 1.92
h
kWh
m2
i
, and the predicted output was 2.28
h
kWh
m2
i
, leading to an relative error of 18.75%.
The
relative error is high, and could be desired lower, despite this the graphical representation seen in
Figure 7.6 shows that the curves are to some extend very similar.
Since only data for a sunny day is available, it can be diﬃcult to validate the model for transient
35
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 7. MODEL VALIDATION
weather conditions and longer term performance predictions. Even though, the model validation
shows similar results to the validation of the PTC ﬁeld, in terms of relative error. It could be
expected that the model will perform as well on cloudy days, as on sunny days, and for longer term
predictions.
36
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 8
Discussion and future work
In this chapter possible reasons for the diﬀerence in the calculated and predicted useful output will
be discussed. Future improvement of the model will also be discussed.
Discussion
The performance of the mathematical model for the PTC ﬁeld and FLC ﬁeld is in the same range.
The relative error of the predicted useful energy output for the PTC ﬁeld was found to be approxi-
mate 16-21% for the model without a3, and for the FLC ﬁeld it was found to be approximate 19%.
This error can indicate that the model can be used for both CSP ﬁelds, but that it should also be
modiﬁed, so a lower relative error is obtained.
The mathematical model can be improved, and a way to do it, is to implement more terms re-
lated to the construction of the CSP ﬁelds.
The collector ﬁelds are not always working under
perfect ideal conditions, which means that multiple and naturally occurring factors will aﬀect the
useful outputs and the relative error. These factors might be possible to account for in a further
mathematical model.
For both collector ﬁelds it could be seen in Figure 7.3 and Figure 7.6 that the predicted power
output starts earlier in the morning than the measured power output. In the afternoon the pre-
dicted power output stopped earlier than the measured. In Table 8.1 the start and stop time in
local time for the useful power output for the FLC ﬁeld can be seen. This shows the large variation.
37
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Time interval for power production for Fresnel lens collector ﬁeld - September 22nd 2020
Measured
Predicted
Power output start [local time]
8:25
7:00
Power output stop [local time]
17:00
16:05
Table 8.1: Table showing the start and stop time [local time] of the power production for the Frensel
lens collector ﬁeld in the 22nd of September 2020 for the measured output and predicted output.
When the solar radiation is received by the collectors in early morning, the ﬁrst received energy
will not be used for heating up the HTF. Instead the energy is used to heat up the receiver. This
will also be the case, at any other time, where the receiver has cooled down, and then is exposed to
radiation. At these times the radiation hitting the collector will not be used as useful output, even
though the QDT model would expect it to be. This might cause a deviation between the predicted
and measured useful output. To which extent is however unknown for now.
The predicted power production stops before the measured output. When the sun sets and the
radiation on the collector is limited, the model will not predict any power output, but the HTF
might still contain some residual heat, which can be measured.
The predicted power output is
dependent on the beam irradiance in the exact moment, which will results in a power output given
as a snapshot, when using the investigated QDT model. This will mean, that if no irradiance is
received by the collectors, the predicted useful power output will be zero.
The QDT model from ISO 9806:2017 [6] is described as a test method for a single collector. In
this thesis the test method has been applied for an entire collector ﬁeld. Tf in the QDT model is
the average temperature between the inlet and outlet temperature as seen in Eq. 5.3. The inlet and
outlet temperature of the collector are measured at the same time. With the short distance between
the inlet and outlet this will not aﬀect the output. When Tf is found for the collector ﬁeld, the inlet
and outlet temperature are also measured at the same time, but the distance between the inlet and
outlet is much larger than for a single collector, since the distance now is for an entire ﬁeld. The
test conditions are dynamic, which means that large changes in the solar radiation can happen, and
aﬀect the outlet temperature in short time. This might cause an inconsistent error in the measures
mean ﬂuid temperature, which is not accounted for in the evaluated QDT model. This could aﬀect
the calculated predicted useful output.
For the FLC ﬁeld, it might improve the model to include a shading coeﬃcient in the QDT model.
Even when the collectors are a 2-axis tracking collectors, the output can be aﬀected by internal
shading from other collectors in the ﬁeld.
The addition of the term a3 for the PTC ﬁeld improved the model, leading to a relative error
of 12-16%. This might reveal that the heat loss is more complex than expected. Further investiga-
tions needs to be done.
The validation of the mathematical model without the a3 term shows similarity for both CSP ﬁelds.
It leads to the assumption that a common QDT model can be used for both CPS ﬁelds. Though,
38
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
should some changes be done, and further work with the model, should decrease the relative error.
Future work
Above in the discussion many factors, that perhaps inﬂuence the predicted useful output was pre-
sented. For future work some of these could be implemented in the QDT model, which might will
improve the model.
When the constants were found for the QDT model, the heat loss coeﬃcient a2 was found to
be positive. A ﬁrst step for future work could be to investigate this further. Also the validation
for the PTC ﬁeld for September should be corrected. For the FLC ﬁeld an implementation to the
model could be to add a shading coeﬃcient for 2-axis tracking collectors.
Next the implementation of the new a3-term should be investigated further.
The results from
the validation showed a promising improvement, but it should also be tested for the FLC, to sub-
stantiate the theory.
The eﬀect of the start and stop time for the power production, as well as the time delay between
Tin and Tout could be very interesting to investigate, to see if those cause any deviation in the useful
output.
39
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
In this thesis a general mathematical model for a parabolic trough collector ﬁeld and Fresnel lens
collector ﬁeld based on quasi-dynamic testing has been developed. The model analysed the perfor-
mance of the solar collector ﬁelds in-situ, using existing data from the collector ﬁelds.
For both collector ﬁelds the mathematical model was validated with data from the ﬁelds.
The
validation both showed the short term and long term performance of the collector ﬁelds. For the
parabolic trough collector ﬁeld, the validation was performed with transient weather data for multi-
ple months, whereas data from a single day was used for the Fresnel lens collector ﬁeld. The largest
relative error of the predicted useful energy output compared to the measured useful energy output
was found to be 21%. This is an improvement from earlier studies. For the parabolic trough collec-
tor the peak eﬃciency was found to be 59.98%. For the Fresnel lens collector it was found to be 61%.
The thermal performance of both collector ﬁeld was found to be very similar. The peak eﬃciencies
and the relative error for the predicted energy output were close.
A modiﬁed model including a new term a3 was also developed and validated for the parabolic
trough collector ﬁeld. For the modiﬁed model the largest relative error was found to be 16%, and
the peak eﬃciency of the collector was found to be 61.32%. These results are very promising and
the addition of a3 should be investigated further.
For the model development and validation a program was developed as the solving tool. MAT-
LAB was used as the programming platform.
Improvement of the mathematical model could be done, to obtain a lower relative error for the
useful predicted energy output. This could e.g. be done by removing the heat loss a2 or integrate
the delayed power production in morning and resident heat in the afternoon. Further, to improve the
model for the Fresnel lens collector, a shading coeﬃcient for 2-axis tracking collectors could be added.
The mission for this thesis was to give an accurate prediction of the thermal performance for two
concentrating solar collector ﬁelds. This has been accomplished, but could still be improved.
40
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 9. CONCLUSION
The main vision for this project was to ”ensure all energy production is sustainable”. This is a
change, that consist of many solutions combined together. One solution could and should be to use
energy from the sun. From this thesis the potential for solar heating ﬁelds have been evaluated. In
a world with desperate need for more clean energy, solar heating collector ﬁelds has huge potential,
which should be investigated and developed even further.
41
==PAGE:50==
Bibliography
[1]
Aalborg CSP website - Brønderslev collector ﬁeld. url: https : / / www . aalborgcsp . dk /
projekter/166-mwt-csp-solvarmeanlaeg-i-broenderslev-danmark/. (Accessed: 19.07.2021).
[2]
Alejandro de la Vega Fernandez. “Analyses of Brønderslev solar energy plant by use of TRN-
SYS”. In: (2017).
[3]
Alexis Mihalitsis. “Development and validation of a test method for parabolic trough solar
collector ﬁelds in solar heating plants”. In: (2020).
[4]
C.B.Honsberg and S.G.Bowden. Photovoltaics Education Website. 2019. Chap. 2. url: https:
//www.pveducation.org/.
[5]
Climate-KIC. Heliac challenges everything we know about energy. url: https://nordic.
climate- kic.org/news/heliac- challenges- everything- we- know- about- energy/.
(Accessed: 19.07.2021).
[6]
Danish Standard Associations. “Solar energy - Solar thermal collectors - Test methods (ISO
9806:2017)”. In: (2017).
[7]
Description of ScenoCalc (Solar Collector Energy Output Calculator), a program for cal-
culation of annual solar collector energy output. 2019. url: http : / / www . estif . org /
solarkeymarknew/component/content/article/13-public-area/163-scenocalc.
[8]
John A. Duﬃe and William A. Beckman. Solar Enguneering of Thermal Processes. John Wiley
Sons, 2013. isbn: 978-0-470-87366-3.
[9]
EnergiWatch. url: https://energiwatch.dk/Energinyt/Renewables/article11879308.
ece. (Accessed: 28.06.2021).
[10]
Stephan Fischer, Carsten Lampe Peter Kovacs, and Enric Mateu Serrats. IEA-SHC TASK
43: SOLAR RATING AND CERTIFICATION PROCEDURES. Solar heating and cooling
program - International energy agency, 2013.
[11]
Google Maps. url: https://www.google.dk/maps. (Accessed: 20.06.2021).
[12]
Heliac website. url: https://www.heliac.dk/faq/. (Accessed: 28.06.2021).
[13]
Insider news publication. url: https : / / www . businessinsider . com / this - is - the -
potential-of-solar-power-2015-9?r=US&IR=T. (Accessed: 25.07.2021).
[14]
Adam R. Jensen. Test of Heliac 3rd Gen. Solar Collector - Solar Collector Thermal Perfor-
mance and Pressure Drop Test according to ISO 9806:2017. 2020. isbn: 87-7877-544-2.
42
==PAGE:51==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[15]
Adam R. Jensen. Abstract - Thermal performance assessment of the world’s ﬁrst Fresnel lens
solar collector ﬁeld.
[16]
Adam R. Jensen, Simon Furbo, and Bengt Perers. Brønderslev Hybrid Solar Power Plant -
Performance Analysis and Monitoring Report. 2020.
[17]
Kyriacos Chimoni. “Mathematical modeling and simulation for thermal performance calcula-
tion of parabolic trough solar collectors”. In: (2021).
[18]
Keith Lovegrove and John Pye. Concentrating Solar Power Technology - Principles, Devel-
opments, and Applications. Woodhead Publishing, 2012. Chap. 2 - Fundamental principles of
concentrating solar power systems. isbn: 9781845697693.
[19]
Keith Lovegrove and Wes Stein. Concentrating Solar Power Technology - Principles, Develop-
ments, and Applications. Woodhead Publishing, 2012. Chap. 1 - Introduction to concentrating
solar power technology. isbn: 9781845697693.
[20]
M. Eck, T. Hirsch, J. F. Feldhoﬀ, D. Kretschmann, J. Dersch, A. Gavilan Morales, L. Gonzalez-
Martinez, C. Bachelier, W. Platzer, K.-J. Riﬀelmann and M. Wagner. “Guidelines for CSP
Yield Analysis - Optical Losses of Line Focusing Systems; Deﬁnitions; Sensitivity analysis and
Modelling Approaches”. In: Energy Procedia (2013).
[21]
Bengt Perers et al. A CSP plant combined with biomass CHP using ORC-technology in
Brønderslev Denmark. 2016.
[22]
S. Fischer, W. Heidemann, H. M¨uller-Steinhagen, B. Perers, P. Bergquist, B. Hellstr¨om. “Col-
lector test method under quasi-dynamic conditions according to the European Standard EN
12975-2”. In: Solar Energy (2003).
[23]
D. Sakthivadivel et al. Renewable-Energy-Driven Future. 2021. Chap. 1 - Solar energy tech-
nologies: principles and applications. isbn: 9780128205396.
[24]
Solar Tracking. url: http://www.solarpanelsplus.com/solar- tracking/. (Accessed:
22.06.2021).
[25]
William B. Stine and Michael Geyer. Power from the sun. 2001. Chap. 4. url: https://www.
powerfromthesun.net/Book/chapter04/chapter04.html.
[26]
Sven Fahr, Daniel Tschopp, Jan Erik Nielsen, Korbinian Kramer, Philip Ohnewein. “Review
of In Situ Test Methods for Solar Collectors and Solar Collector Arrays”. In: (2020).
[27]
The Global Goals for Sustainable Development. url: https://www.globalgoals.org/7-
affordable-and-clean-energy. (Accessed: 19.07.2021).
[28]
towardsdatascience.com. url: https : / / towardsdatascience . com / multiple - linear -
regression-for-manufacturing-analysis-c057d4af718b. (Accessed: 25.07.2021).
[29]
Michael J. Wagner and Paul Gilman. Technical Manual for the SAM Physical Trough Model.
NREL - National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2011.
[30]
Weiqiang Kong, Simon Furbo and Bengt Perers. “Development and validation of an in situ
solar collector ﬁeld test method”. In: (2019).
[31]
www.e-education.psu.edu/. url: https://www.e-education.psu.edu/eme811/node/676.
(Accessed: 25.07.2021).
43
==PAGE:52==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[32]
www.onlinemathlearning.com. url: https://www.onlinemathlearning.com/relative-
error-formula.html. (Accessed: 20.07.2021).
[33]
www.renewableenergyhub.co.uk. url: https : / / www . renewableenergyhub . co . uk / main /
solar - thermal - information / the - different - types - of - solar - thermal - panel -
collectors/. (Accessed: 25.07.2021).
[34]
www.solarreviews.com. url: https://www.solarreviews.com/blog/what-are-the-most-
efficient-solar-panels. (Accessed: 25.07.2021).
44
==PAGE:53==
Appendix A
Flowchart of the code written to ﬁnd the constants in the QDT model for the parabolic trough
collector ﬁeld.
45
==PAGE:54==
Appendix B
Flowchart of the code written to calculate the predicted useful power output for the parabolic trough
collector ﬁeld.
46
