==PAGE:1==
Analysis of passenger travel across the new
Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link with a focus on the
railway network
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Transport Division
==PAGE:2==
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link with a
focus on the railway network
Master Thesis
August 2021
By
Viktor Levente Vadnai
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Femern A/S official render, from femern.com
Published by:
DTU, Transport Division, Akademivej, Bygningstorvet 116B, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.transport.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
About This Thesis
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Transport Division of the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), for 35 ECTS credits, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng, on the Transportation
and Logistics study line.
Acknowledgements
Supervisor:
Stefan Eriksen Mabit, Associate Professor, DTU Transport
Co­supervisor:
Henrik Sylvan, Head of Center, DTU Railtech
External supervisor:
Adnan Jelin, senior advisor, Trafik­, Bygge­ og Boligstyrelsen
External supervisor:
Nikolai A. Markussen, traffic planner, Trafik­, Bygge­ og Boligstyrelsen
Viktor Levente Vadnai ­ s192777
Signature
Date
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The construction of the Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link is one of the largest ongoing in­
frastructure projects in the EU, that will be a real game­changer in railway connec­
tions between Scandinavia and the continental Europe. During the last decades,
several studies and traffic models were created to analyse the future traffic flows
on this new link. The aim of this paper is not to reassess the feasibility of the
project itself, but to put more focus on the rail passengers using it, in light of the
most recent trends in transport policies. Since the latest models, environmental
concerns around aviation gained more attention and the EU is now prioritizing rail
traffic stronger than ever before.
This paper examines the effect of four different factors on the future rail passen­
ger traffic across the prospective Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link. These factors are the
connecting infrastructure, timetabling, pricing and the passengers’ perception of
modes. In line with the computational limitations of the LTM (the Danish National
Transport Model), 1 base case and 4 scenarios were created for running: two of
them are focusing on the connecting infrastructure and the network of rail ser­
vices, one contains changes in pricing favouring rail travel, and finally one as­
sumes changes in passengers’ attitudes.
Running the base case in LTM gave similar results to previous estimations on
Fehmarnbelt traffic: it projects 1.62 million trips a year. The two network and the
pricing scenarios confirmed that there are great possibilities for boosting rail pas­
senger numbers by improving the network and connectivity in the catchment area
and by having prices that favour rail transport better. Providing more direct con­
nections, adding the Kattegat Fixed Link, running night trains over the FBFL and
reducing ticket prices seem to be the most effective ways to attract new passen­
gers. The passenger attitude scenario did not give useful results due to an error
within LTM, and unfortunately it had to be discarded.
However, there are some uncertainties in these results as they rely a lot on pre­
vious models and assumptions. More research would be necessary to confirm
transit traffic volumes from different independent sources and to find a way to in­
clude night trains in transport modelling. LTM outputs themselves also contain
some discrepancies, for example underestimating air traffic demand in general,
and not accounting enough for newly generated traffic.
Nevertheless, running the base case in LTM confirms the estimations from other
models before. The scenarios show that there are possibilities for higher volumes
of rail traffic through the FBFL if the right policies and investments are in place.
Considering the possible underestimations as well, these measures can cause
the yearly passenger volume grow up to 2.5­3 million.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
About this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Long­distance passenger rail in the EU
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Previous estimations on FBFL rail passenger traffic . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Scenarios
12
2.1
Theoretical scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Model scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3
Results
40
3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.2
Base Case (Fehmarn­0) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3
Mid­term network (Fehmarn­1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.4
Long­term network (Fehmarn­2)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.5
Flight taxation & on­track competition (Fehmarn­3) . . . . . . . . .
48
3.6
Changing passenger attitude (Fehmarn­4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4
Discussion
50
4.1
Volume of transit traffic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2
Different demand elasticity assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.3
Local traffic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.4
Destinations in Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.5
Comparison to air traffic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.6
Experience from other fixed link projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5
Conclusions
63
Bibliography
66
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
iv
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
1.1
Worldwide high­speed rail traffic between 2010­2019. Source: [2]
2
1.2
The fixed links around Denmark, and the Fehmarn rail corridor high­
lighted (Drawn on OpenStreetMap) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Trend in the number of rail passengers on Rødby­Puttgarden, the
Great Belt and Øresund. Source: [7] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
The structure of the new tunnel currently under construction. Source:
[11] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Table with the results of the FTC 2002 study, case B. Source: [12]
7
1.6
Table with the results of the FTC 2014 study, case B. Source: [12]
9
2.1
Modal share of trains from total air+rail traffic between different city
pairs. Source: [17] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
The network on which infrastructure projects will be included
. . .
14
2.3
The planned upgrades on the German side of FBFL. Source: [18]
15
2.4
Map of the new possible route (in red) of direct trains between FBFL
and Berlin. (Drawn on OpenStreetMap) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
The proposed Kattegat Fixed Link. Source: [25]
. . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
Proposed timetable structure in the DSA report from 2014. Source:
[19]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.7
Proposed TEE2.0 network of day and night trains. Source: [5]
. .
20
2.8
CO2 emissions by travel mode. Source: [28]
. . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.9
Values of travel time in 2010 in the Netherlands (€/hour). Source:
[46]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.10 Mean VTTs in the 2007 Danish study, after income adjustment (DKK/hour).
Source: [47] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.11 VTTs calculated for Fehmarnbelt in 2013, with a comparison to pre­
vious estimations. Source: [48] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.12 Overview of LTM’s framework. Source: [49] . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.13 Timetable of the regional stopping train
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.14 Timetable of the non­stop EuroCity train . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.15 Timetable of the IC­X trains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.16 Timetable of the night trains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.17 Timetable of the new high­speed trains to Stockholm . . . . . . . .
36
2.18 Timetable of the new high­speed trains around Berlin and Aarhus .
37
3.1
Screenshot from LTM Manager with all Main Scenarios and runs .
40
3.2
The OD­matrix of Scandinavia ­ Mainland Europe traffic flows from
the FTC 2014 model (source: [12]) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3
The definition of demand ­ travel time elasticity (source: [8]) . . . .
44
4.1
Final results: traffic flow through FBFL for all valid scenarios . . . .
50
4.2
Comparison of the current base case results to previous estimations 50
4.3
Source of new passengers in Fehmarn­1 compared to the base case 51
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
v
==PAGE:7==
4.4
Source of new passengers in Fehmarn­2 compared to the base case 52
4.5
Relative changes in rail traffic in Fehmarn­3 compared to the base
case – LTM output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.6
Map with the 2025 FBFL rail passenger flows from the FTC model
(Source: [12]) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.7
Different travel time elasticities for Hamburg­Copenhagen (Source:
[16]) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.8
Destinations in Germany of non­local core area trips (from LTM out­
puts) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.9
Relative share of rail between four OD­pair under different LTM sce­
narios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.10 Changes in rail’s relative share to air according to [17] . . . . . . .
60
4.11 Comparison of the daily traffic volumes over the existing and pro­
posed fixed links of Denmark (Source: [53]) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
vi
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables
1.1
Passenger numbers in 2011, according to [12]
. . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2
Trips through the FBFL in the 2014 FTC model. Source: [12] . . .
10
1.3
Overview of FBFL rail passenger flows according to different studies. 11
2.1
Overview of the infrastructure sub­scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2
Overview of the timetabling sub­scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3
Overview of the pricing sub­scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4
Proportion of in­vehicle time spent for working on different modes,
according to [45] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.5
Overview of the passenger attitude sub­scenarios
. . . . . . . . .
31
2.6
Overview of the final model scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.7
Values of travel times in different reviewed papers and the values
chosen for the new scenario (all values converted to DKK/minute).
38
3.1
Core area traffic through FBFL, based on LTM outputs . . . . . . .
41
3.2
The relevant rail OD­matrix from the FTC results and the LTM base
case output that was extended proportionally . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3
The detailed OD­matrix for the base case (Fehmarn­0) . . . . . . .
43
3.4
Travel time reduction for all transit OD­pairs from the base case to
Fehmarn­1 scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.5
The detailed OD­matrix for the mid­term network scenario (Fehmarn­
1)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.6
OD­matrices with 3 demand elasticity assumptions for the Fehmarn­
1 scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.7
Final OD­matrix for the mid­term network scenario (Fehmarn­1) af­
ter adding the night trains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.8
Travel time changes for all transit OD­pairs from the Fehmarn­1 to
the Fehmarn­2 scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.9
The detailed OD­matrix for the long­term network scenario (Fehmarn­
2)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.10 OD­matrices with 3 demand elasticity assumptions for the Fehmarn­
2 scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.11 Final OD­matrix for the long­term network scenario (Fehmarn­2)
after adding the night trains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.12 The detailed OD­matrix for the pricing scenario (Fehmarn­3)
. . .
49
4.1
Travel time elasticities in case of a simple theoretical market
. . .
56
4.2
Local traffic volumes and trip frequencies of the FBFL . . . . . . .
57
4.3
Historical and LTM­predicted air traffic flows between Copenhagen
and Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The construction of the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed link is one of the largest ongo­
ing infrastructure projects in Europe, which will undoubtably cause significant
changes in traffic patterns. Before jumping to the estimation and analysis of future
passenger rail traffic through this prospective new link, it requires a bit of context,
so this section contains a brief introduction of three key aspects. First, the cur­
rent role and general state of European long­distance passenger rail traffic must
be discussed, followed by a short historical overview on the Fehmarnbelt project,
and finishing with a review of some previous estimations and models on future
traffic through the new link.
1.1
Long­distance passenger rail in the EU
From the beginning of the 20th century, railway was the primary mode for long­
distance and international travel in Europe. An extensive network of services con­
nected all main cities and regions of the continent.
However, the volume and importance of long­distance railway traffic in Europe
declined steadily from the 1960s. The main reason behind it was the increasing
motorization (caused by the availability of cars to more and more income groups
and the fast improvement of the motorway network) and the development of com­
mercial aviation. By 2000 the once extensive Europe­wide network of night trains
and premium international services (such as the Trans­Europe­Express) mostly
disappeared. The trains’ importance was further hit from the 1990s by the ap­
pearance of low­cost airlines on the European market, providing extremely cheap
and fast connections between any cities on the continent. Many believed that rail­
ways have no future, as they seemed uncompetitive against flights and cars, both
in terms of prices and travel times.
On the other hand, technological innovation has slowly arrived for the railway
sector as well. The introduction of high­speed trains started in Japan in the 1960s,
and through the 1980s the first European lines have opened in France and Italy.
This solution turned to be a huge success: with speeds up to 300 km/h, trains
became competitive again in terms of travel time, especially in the distance range
of 100­500 km. After the first lines proved to be popular, many others followed:
over the last few decades several European countries opened high­speed lines
(300­350 km/h), such as France, Italy, Germany, Spain, Belgium – while others
chose to build semi­highspeed corridors (200­250 km/h in Austria, Switzerland,
Poland, Finland, etc.). By the end of 2019, the European Union had 9169 km of
high­speed railway lines (250 km/h+). The performance of passenger transport
followed these constructions: the overall annual passenger­kms travelled on high­
speed lines within the EU grew from 15.23 billion in 1990 to 130.92 billion in 2018.
[1] Outside Europe, high­speed rail saw an even greater boom: the worldwide
annual traffic has exceeded 1000 billion passenger­kms first in 2019, from which
China alone is responsible for 77.5%. [2]
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Worldwide high­speed rail traffic between 2010­2019. Source: [2]
The European railway market therefore was characterized by this duality in recent
decades: while high­speed lines quickly gained high market share between spe­
cific city pairs, long­distance international railway traffic in general could not keep
up with the overall increase in mobility and lost most of its significance against
aviation. There are several reasons behind this:
• First of all, the upgraded, higher speed infrastructure did not focus much
on international connections so far, as their domestic traffic is the natural
priority for most countries.
• The international borders are also much ‘stronger’ for rail than other modes
– while aviation and even road traffic is quite standardized over the EU,
railways are still characterized by many historic national systems and regu­
lations, which can make international traffic expensive and complicated.
• Railway operators cannot compete with low­cost airlines in terms of prices
– mainly because of several EU­wide policies are still heavily subsidizing
aviation (e.g. tax­free kerosene).
• Railway companies also fell behind in costumer relations, ticketing, market­
ing, etc. – many times it is quite complicated to find timetables and book
tickets for international journeys, compared to airlines.
Since the 1980s, the Common Transport Policy of the European Union has been
giving increasing priority to improve the railway network of the continent. The main
reason behind it is environmental: shifting traffic to rail is the most obvious way
to cut transport emissions. So far there were two main legs of EU rail policy: on
one hand, massive funding has been provided for the member states for infras­
tructure development (for example through the Connecting Europe Facility, CEF),
while on the other hand, 4 legislative packages were passed between 2001 and
2016. These aim to open up the European network as an open­access market
for competing operators, while also standardizing the rules and technical specifi­
cations throughout the member states. The goal is to create the Single European
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
2
==PAGE:11==
Transport Area and make railways competitive with aviation and private transport
– the White Paper from 2011 summarized these goals as comprehensive roadmap
(for example, it calls for a 50% shift of medium distance intercity passenger and
freight journeys from road to rail and waterborne transport by 2050).
Today, supporting railway traffic has an unquestioned priority in the EU’s transport
policy. The most recent and most important document to support that is the Eu­
ropean Green Deal, presented in 2019 by the Commission and approved by the
Parliament in 2020. The Green Deal’s main target is to make Europe carbon neu­
tral until 2050. To achieve this, transport emissions must be cut by 90% according
to the document. [3]
The Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy presented by the European Com­
mission in late 2020 includes the specific policy goals for the field of transporta­
tion. Among other things, it aims for doubling high­speed rail traffic by 2030 and
making all intra­EU public transport trips under 500 km carbon neutral. By 2050,
high­speed rail traffic should triple, and the multimodal Trans­European Trans­
port Network (TEN­T) should be operational as a comprehensive network. It also
claims that later ‘in 2021, the Commission will propose an action plan to boost
long­distance and cross­border passenger rail services’. The strategy already
projects some policies that are considered:
• ending subsidies on fossil fuels,
• internalizing external costs of more polluting modes,
• harmonised EU­wide vehicle approval to reduce costs for cross­border trains,
• making international rail ticketing easier by regulatory measures enabling
more innovative and flexible solutions. [4]
Other recent proposals show the current momentum for supporting this ‘railway
renaissance’ in the EU. 2021 was officially declared as the European Year of
Rail, meaning that events, campaigns and initiatives are taking place throughout
the continent now (such as the Connecting Europe Express). For international
long­distance traffic, the most relevant proposal is the TransEuropExpress 2.0
(TEE2.0) made by the German presidency of the European Council in the first
half of the year. This initiative proposes to bring back the former TEE (a network
of premium international services between big European cities) in some form, as
they see a lot of opportunity for long­distance trains due to expanding domestic
HSR­networks, increasing climate awareness and better connectivity than flying.
The aim of TEE2.0 is to create long services reaching over at least 3­4 coun­
tries, but this time by interlinking their nationally optimized clock­face timetable
systems. A blueprint study is now underway to identify origin­destination pairs
along with the technical and timetable­based challenges and derive schemes for
infrastructure projects and vehicles to be used. [5]
Night trains also started to return in recent years. Despite the fact that previ­
ous extensive network had been nearly completely abolished until 2015, a come­
back was first seen in Austria, where the national operator ÖBB’s Nightjet network
launched from 2017 turned out to be a huge success. In the last 2­3 years several
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
3
==PAGE:12==
other countries and private operators have restarted (or are planning to restart)
previously existing lines, while environmental movements also started to promote
night trains, giving them an emerging political support. For example, Sweden
will be connected to mainland Europe with several new night trains from next
year: private operator Snälltåget has already started its Stockholm­Berlin route
this summer, while the government will subsidize two additional routes from April
2022 (Stockholm­Hamburg and Malmö­Brussels). [6]
1.2
The Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link
Until the 20th century, the connections between Scandinavia, the islands of Den­
mark and the continental part of Europe relied on ferries. However, the expanding
railway networks and motorization on the roads along with fast economic growth,
resulted in the need for establishing fixed links across the straits. The 3 most im­
portant ones were across the Lillebælt between Jutland and Fyn (first in 1935),
across the Storebælt between Fyn and Sjælland (1997) and across the Øresund
strait between Denmark and Sweden (2000). These together allowed for a con­
tinuous road & rail corridor from the Scandinavian peninsula to the continental
Europe, leading to significantly faster travel options and increased mobility.
Figure 1.2: The fixed links around Denmark, and the Fehmarn rail corridor high­
lighted (Drawn on OpenStreetMap)
While the route through the Storebælt and Jutland has the largest benefits for
domestic connections within Denmark, this means a significant detour for interna­
tional traffic between the Danish­Swedish Øresund region and Germany. From
Copenhagen to Hamburg, the ‘straight’ corridor leads through the islands of Fal­
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
4
==PAGE:13==
ster, Lolland and Fehmarn (Femern) – thus it is often referred to as the ‘Fugle­
flugtslinjen’ in Danish or ‘Vogelfluglinie’ in German (both meaning ‘bird’s flight
line’). The completion of the Storstrømbroen in 1937 and the Fehmarnsundbrücke
in 1963 has left the corridor with missing only one fixed link: the one over the
Fehmarn Belt between the islands of Lolland (Denmark) and Fehmarn (Germany).
Today a frequent ferry connection operates here between the ports of Rødby and
Puttgarden, which is also capable of transporting trains.
The volume of traffic on these passenger trains is rather low, especially when
compared to the fixed links of the region. The number of daily crossings ranged
between 800­1000 on average in the period 2000­2013, according to [7]. Other
passenger counts from these years include yearly numbers of 300­350 thousand
trips, which is in line with those daily numbers. DSB traffic counts also indicate
that most of these passengers travel between Hamburg and Copenhagen – the
local traffic around the link only takes 2­3%, while transit traffic towards Sweden
also has a share of 3%. [8]
Figure 1.3: Trend in the number of rail passengers on Rødby­Puttgarden, the
Great Belt and Øresund. Source: [7]
Replacing the ferry connection with the so­called Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link (FBFL)
has been on the agenda since the early 1990s. The first feasibility studies, fi­
nanced cooperatively by Denmark and Germany, were conducted between 1995
and 1999. In September 2008, the two countries signed a binding State Treaty
[9] on planning and building the fixed link together. In the treaty they also commit
to finish several upgrades on the connecting infrastructure on both sides of the
link. By 2011, the technical solutions were decided: before that, a bridge was
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
5
==PAGE:14==
the more likely option, but the final choice was an immersed tunnel. Even though
the construction contracts were signed in 2016, the legal complaints on the Ger­
man side caused the start to be delayed – finally, the highest administrative court
in Germany gave the go­ahead in November 2020. The construction started in
January 2021, and the tunnel is projected to open in 2029. [10]
The tunnel will include an electrified, double­track railway line with a top speed
of 200 km/h. On the Danish side, the connecting infrastructure is under signif­
icant improvement: the new Copenhagen­Ringsted line has been already com­
pleted, and it will allow for speeds of 250 km/h once the signalling is also fin­
ished. The Ringsted­Rødby section is already under reconstruction: the line will
be double­track, electrified and capable of 200 km/h all the way – this project is
scheduled to finish before the inauguration of the FBFL itself. On the German
side, a project called ‘Schienenanbindung der Festen Fehmarnbeltquerung’ (Rail
connection of the fixed link across the Fehmarnbelt) is at the final planning and
approval stage. This includes the complete reconstruction of the currently single­
track, non­electrified line between Puttgarden and Lübeck, with double­tracking,
speed increase to 160 km/h, bypassing some villages and building a new tunnel
to replace the old Fehmarnsund bridge. With all improvements assumed to finish
in time, the travel time of long­distance trains between Copenhagen and Hamburg
is expected to be approximately 2:30, instead of today’s 4:30.
Figure 1.4: The structure of the new tunnel currently under construction. Source:
[11]
Completing the new fixed link is seen as closing a gap on the European transport
network. It will open new opportunities for international freight transport, busi­
nesses, local commuters and holiday traffic, and enhance economic growth in the
region.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
6
==PAGE:15==
1.3
Previous estimations on FBFL rail passenger
traffic
1.3.1
The Fehmarn Traffic Consortium studies
Over the last decades a few major traffic forecasts were conducted to estimate
future passenger numbers through FBFL and use these for the economic assess­
ment of the project. After some preliminary studies, the first detailed modelling
was presented in 2002 by the Fehmarn Traffic Consortium (FTC). They devel­
oped a new transport model specifically designed for the Fehmarn­corridor – it
included OD­matrices with a detailed zonal system and purpose segmentation.
The handled all potentially relevant transport flows between Eastern Denmark,
Sweden, Norway and Finland on the one side and Germany and the Continent
on the other side. It considered both freight and passenger traffic, with flights
included. [12]
The modelling was done for different scenarios: the differences were mostly in
socio­economic variables (e.g. future price levels) – case A used the German as­
sumptions on these, while case B used the Danish ones. Other than the 2 main
scenarios for each case (reference scenario with no FBFL and the one with FBFL
ready), the only extra scenarios calculated were focusing on different ferry net­
works and prices in the area. Otherwise, both scenarios assumed the connecting
railway infrastructure upgrades between Hamburg and Copenhagen completed
(but no changes in the further hinterlands), and 12 daily train­pairs running be­
tween the two cities. On fig. 1.5 the results of the modelling are presented for the
traffic through Fehmarnbelt, along with passenger counts from 2001 (note that
2015 was the targeted completion date for FBFL that time). Regarding rail traffic,
the study projected 1.386 million passengers per year after opening the fixed link.
Figure 1.5: Table with the results of the FTC 2002 study, case B. Source: [12]
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
7
==PAGE:16==
In 2014, an update and extension of the FTC model was published by Intraplan
and BVU. The base year was set to 2011 with updated demand matrices and
pricing data, and it examined both medium­ and long­term forecasts (2022 without
FBFL and 2022, 2025, 2030 and 2035 with FBFL). It included 2 scenarios, just
like the original FTC­model: Case A with German and Case B with Danish input
data.
By examining historical traffic data for the period 2001­2011, they found that the
volume and the model split of the traffic did not change as expected in 2002. Traffic
on the broader corridor (between Scandinavia and Germany) grew significantly,
mainly due to air traffic which has doubled in a decade (from 3.004 million pax/year
in 2001 to 6.623 million pax/year in 2011). In 2011, air traffic took 56.5% of the
modal split in the passenger traffic between Northern Europe (Norway, Sweden,
Finland and Denmark only east of Great Belt) and the rest of Europe (without
CIS, Baltic States). Despite the overall traffic increase of 27.4%, rail traffic has
decreased significantly by 46.1% compared to 2001, and its share in total traffic
dropped to 1.5%.
Meanwhile, in the ‘core study area’, defined as Eastern Denmark plus Sweden
and Germany, air traffic increase was less significant – here, car traffic takes up
56%. Railway traffic is still rather insignificant, with 266 000 passengers per year
(2.4%). Looking only at the Fehmarnbelt traffic, the overall traffic flows are the
same in 2011 as in 2001: the economic crisis from 2008 caused the passenger
lows drop back exactly to the 2001 levels (6.028 million yearly passengers on
the ferries). The number of train passengers shows an increase of 12% over this
period (from 352 000 to 394 000 yearly passengers). These findings are line with
the general trends in European long­distance traffic of the early 2000s: the rise
of low­cost aviation took the market of trains on very long distances (mainly night
trains and trips over 3­4 hours), while it also attracted many new passengers and
cause overall traffic volumes to surge.
Mode
Broader market
Core study area
1000 pax/year
Modal split
1000 pax/year
Modal split
Rail
460
1.5%
266
2.4%
Car
8 970
29.4%
6 230
56.0%
Air
17 226
56.5%
1 657
14.9%
Bus
2 320
7.6%
1 518
13.7%
Ferry walk­on
1 512
5.0%
1 446
13.0%
Total
30 488
100%
11 117
100%
Table 1.1: Passenger numbers in 2011, according to [12]
The study also includes data on trip purposes of ferry passengers over the Fehmarn­
belt. Business travellers made up 12%, commuters 7% (both daily and weekly),
60.7% were holiday and other leisure trips, while a significant 20% was solely
shopping, mostly on the on­board shops of the ferry. Meanwhile in air traffic over
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
8
==PAGE:17==
the corridor, business trips made up 31%, commuters only 2% and the rest was
leisure trips.
For updating the forecasts of the FTC model, the drivers for autonomous traffic
growth (GDP, population, etc.) were updated for both scenario A and B. In terms
of infrastructure, both assumed the completion of the railway upgrades between
Hamburg­Copenhagen. In addition, for the long­term scenario (2030) they also
assumed the completion of the Hamburg­Hannover HS­line and upgrades be­
tween Lübeck–Bad Kleinen–Schwerin. Regarding pricing, case A assumed a 7%
increase in rail ticket costs from 2011 to 2025, while case B includes no change.
Air prices are fixed on the 2010 price level in case A, while case B uses 2013
prices.
Figure 1.6: Table with the results of the FTC 2014 study, case B. Source: [12]
The forecasting results were created in two steps: first, the traffic on the total rel­
evant market (between Scandinavia and the continental Europe) was estimated,
then then the share from this traffic that would use the FBFL. As the study also
states that case B is used in further planning processes, only those results will be
presented here. (Also, there is no significant difference between the two.)
The overall traffic on the whole market (seen on fig. 1.6) was projected to increase
from 30.5 million trips in 2011 to 43.3 million in 2022, if the FBFL is open. Most
of this increase is due to autonomous growth (even without FBFL, 43.2 million
passengers would travel in 2022) and driven mainly by air traffic which has annual
growth of 4%. The difference between the no­FBFL and the FBFL case is rather
in the mode share: air traffic would be slightly lower with the tunnel opened (­263
000 pax/year), while cars and trains would take more passengers. The number of
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
9
==PAGE:18==
rail passengers on the total market would be 1.149 million in a year after opening
the fixed link. Interestingly, the results project that rail traffic volume will gradually
decrease after the peak of 1.155 million passengers in 2025.
Regarding traffic through the Fehmarnbelt, the results suggest a significant surge
compared to the ferries in case of opening the fixed link. As seen in table 1.2,
1.141 million passengers would use the trains through FBFL after the opening,
and the 2025 peak would be 1.146 million.
[1000 pax/year]
2011
2022
(no FBFL)
2022
(with FBFL)
2025
2030
2035
Passengers in cars
3 973
5 002
7 329
8 656
9 573
10 324
Passengers in buses
1 142
1 014
1 272
1 332
1 352
1 369
Passengers in trains
394
557
1 141
1 146
1 083
1 031
Ferry walk­on
519
417
0
0
0
0
Total
6 028
6 990
9 742
11 134
12 008
12 724
Table 1.2: Trips through the FBFL in the 2014 FTC model. Source: [12]
1.3.2
TRANS­TOOLS
Another model that has been used to predict traffic over the FBFL is the TRANS­
TOOLS model of the European Union. This model covers the whole EU with
NUTS3 regions as OD­zones and focuses only on the European TEN­T network
(road, rail and air). The original model was recalibrated in 2010­11 and the results
of the run presented in the TENconnect2 report. [13]
The model considers 3 fundamental infrastructure scenarios:
• PP (only existing infrastructure, plus approved and U/C projects realized)
• COMP (ideal scenario with all TEN­T projects)
• CORE (an interim scenario with some projects realized).
The main report only presents key figures for European traffic volumes in general
– however, a Danish report later summarized the results relevant for the Fehmarn­
belt. Unfortunately, that report focused only on the CORE scenario (adding that
in the Nordic region there is no serious difference between CORE and COMP)
and did not present numbers for rail passengers, only for road traffic and freight.
[14] Some later studies though cited the key figures for FBFL traffic – according
to them, the projected volume of rail trips through the link is 2.19 million yearly in
the TRANS­TOOLS model. [8]
1.3.3
COWI market study
In 2014, COWI presented a traffic estimation on FBFL with a different approach:
instead of modelling, they used demand elasticities to predict future rail passenger
traffic on the corridor. They used the elasticity between journey time and passen­
ger demand, and obtained values from several completed projects, traffic model
results (including the previously presented ones) and relevant literature.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
10
==PAGE:19==
In the assessment, they did not apply the elasticities in the present data – they
argued that the with such non­marginal travel time change it would be unrealistic
to use elasticity­based methods taking the present situation. Instead, they took
an older Femern Belt A/S estimation with Copenhagen­Hamburg travel time of
3.25 hours as the before scenario, and applied 3 different elasticities based on
the obtained values (­0.5 as low, ­1.5 as central and ­2.5 as high assumption) for
the travel time reduction to 2.25 hours. They also calculated with 1.7% yearly
autonomous traffic growth.
The results for 2025 (after the then assumed completion of the link) are also pre­
sented in 3 levels: low, central and high assumption. The volume of ‘interre­
gional’ trips (shorter than Copenhagen­Hamburg) is assumed to be constant 330
000 yearly, while the long­distance segment is changing according to elasticity
assumptions. This way, the estimation for total yearly trips over the FBFL ranges
between 1.84 million and 2.64 million, with a central value of 2.25 million passen­
gers/year. [8]
1.3.4
Other sources
Some other reports also mention different estimates. Trafikplan 2027 of the Dan­
ish Trafik­, Bygge­ og Boligstyrelsen contain a projection of 1.5 million yearly trips
through FBFL after its completion. [15] A 2012 report on a future Nordic high­
speed rail network refers to a TransTools simulation with 5000 daily trips on long
distance trains only, which equals to 1.75 million passengers a year. [16]
1.3.5
Overview
In table 1.3, a summary for all listed reports is presented. The estimated yearly
traffic on passenger trains through FBFL ranges between 1.39 and 2.25 million,
with more or less similar assumptions used by these models on external factors
(pricing, infrastructure, etc.).
Study
Publishing year
Model year
Passenger volume
(per year, both dir.)
FTC original
2002
2015
1 385 000
FTC update
2014
2025
1 146 000
Trafikplan 2027
2012
2027
1 503 000
STRING Nordic HSR
2012
2020
1 750 000*
TENconnect TransTools
2011
2030
2 190 000
COWI market study
2014
2025
2 250 000
*multiplied from daily volume, only long­distance traffic
Table 1.3: Overview of FBFL rail passenger flows according to different studies.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
11
==PAGE:20==
2
Scenarios
The aim of this paper is to identify some important factors and external effects
that were not considered in the previous studies, and incorporate them in the
modelling by constructing scenarios. These factors were either out of the scope
of the previous models, or their significance increased only in the last 7 years since
the last comprehensive study in 2014. The method will include 3 main steps:
• First, these new factors will be introduced, and sub­scenarios will be defined
for each of them. The ’theoretical scenarios’ that could be estimated with an
ideal model are all possible combinations of these sub­scenarios.
• Then, these will be reduced to ’model scenarios’, in line with the compu­
tational limitations, so the focus will be on the most important and realistic
cases.
• Finally, in the next chapter the results of the modelling will be adjusted to bal­
ance for the compromises made when implementing them into a modelling
environment.
2.1
Theoretical scenarios
This paper focuses on the effect of the following four external factors that might
have influence on the projected number of rail passengers traveling through the
FBFL:
• Connecting infrastructure,
• Timetabling,
• Pricing,
• Perception of modes.
This section will introduce these factors and give some reasoning on why there
are assumed to be relevant and have a current importance.
2.1.1
Connecting infrastructure
The success of the FBFL (in terms of rail passenger numbers) depends a lot on
the surrounding railway network. As most previous studies concluded, there is
a potential for the new link to serve passengers on trips longer than the basic
Copenhagen­Hamburg route, e.g. to or from Malmö, Göteborg, Stockholm, Oslo,
Berlin, Hannover and Bremen. Increasing the ’catchment area’ of the FBFL can
attract new rail passengers on the route – i.e. the shorter the travel times are
towards these cities, the higher share of travellers the railway can take.
This straightforward connection between the trains’ travel time between two cities
and their modal split has been observed in several cases and is the subject of
many studies. According to [17], several European projects in the 300­600 km
range that resulted in halving the travel time, caused the number of passengers
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
12
==PAGE:21==
to double. Many factors have effect on the exact growth (such as timetabling,
the original volume of traffic, level of competition and pricing), however, accord­
ing to research, a clear pattern can be observed between travel time and share
compared to air traffic – as seen on fig. 2.1.
This means that above 4 hours, decreasing travel time has a lower marginal ef­
fect – under 4 it starts to increase, and the highest marginal improvements can
be reached between 2 and 3 hours. Below that, the slope shortly gets flat again
as it reaches 100% ­ with such travel times no more improvements are necessary
to compete with flights. (Note: cars as an alterative are not considered here.)
However, the function is monotonously decreasing, therefore theoretically any de­
crease in travel time should attract passengers from planes, and not just between
Hamburg and Copenhagen, but also between the further city pairs.
Figure 2.1: Modal share of trains from total air+rail traffic between different city
pairs. Source: [17]
For this reason, when predicting rail passenger numbers for the FBFL, one must
extend the scope of study behind Copenhagen and Hamburg – just as most pre­
vious models did. However, most models did not consider different infrastructure
scenarios for those hinterland areas – only exception was the TRANS­TOOLS, but
there the difference between the CORE and the COMP cases were not significant
in these regions, also the planned projects have changed a lot since those sce­
narios were constructed in the 2000s. In this paper the network shown on fig. 2.2
will be considered, and the projects currently planned on it are also introduced
below.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.2: The network on which infrastructure projects will be included
Copenhagen­Hamburg
On the core section the most important change is of course the Fehmarn Belt Fixed
Link itself, which will eliminate the need for transporting the trains by ferry through
the strait. In addition, both the Danish and the German government committed to
finish some upgrades on the connecting lines in the State Treaty signed in 2008.
On the Danish side, a new line between Copenhagen and Ringsted has already
been open since 2019. When the ERTMS is completed on the section, it will
have a top speed of 250 km/h. The section between Ringsted and Rødby was
a non­electrified, partly single­track line before. Banedanmark is developing the
line now in an ongoing project, after which the whole section will be double­track,
electrified and capable of 200 km/h – this will most likely be completed by the
opening of FBFL.
In Germany, infrastructure manager DB Netze has its Fehmarn project (Schiene­
nanbindung der Festen Fehmarnbeltquerung) in final planning phase. It includes
the complete reconstruction of the currently single­track, non­electrified line be­
tween Puttgarden and Lübeck, with double­tracking, speed increase to 160 km/h,
bypassing some villages and building a new tunnel to replace the old Fehmarn­
sund bridge. [18] The construction has not started yet, but according to the com­
mitment made by the German government, it can be expected to commence in the
next 8 years. There is a separate project going on for the Lübeck­Hamburg sec­
tion, where the 160 km/h, double­track line’s capacity is planned to be increased
on some sections to allow for more suburban trains – and this would also allow
for long­distance trains to be faster by a few minutes.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
14
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.3: The planned upgrades on the German side of FBFL. Source: [18]
Overall, the targeted travel time assuming that all projects are completed in line
with the State Treaty, is 2:30. This will be used for the base case and all other
scenarios, as further upgrades are not proposed.
Malmö­Göteborg­Oslo
Between Copenhagen and Göteborg, SJ’s InterCity trains offer a travel time of
approximately 3:10 along Sweden’s Västkustbanan. This line has seen many up­
grades in recent years, as the goal is to completely double­track it and increase
the speed to 200 km/h. Most parts are already done, while the Varberg Tunnel and
the Ängelholm­Maria section are under construction and the last remaining sec­
tion, Maria­Helsingborg is under planning. These last small sections are assumed
to be completed for the base case, reducing travel time to 3:00.
The DSA (Den Skandinaviska Arenan) project from 2014 examined the possibility
of establishing a strongly interconnected region on the Oslo­Göteborg­Malmö­
Copenhagen corridor by upgrading the railway connectivity. The closing report
proposed a speed increase of the 200 km/h sections to 250 km/h as the physical
alignment makes it possible in most cases. It would result in a travel time of 2:00
between Copenhagen and Göteborg – this is assumed to be done for the mid­
and long­term scenarios. [19]
The Göteborg­Oslo part is currently covered in 3:40­3:45 by train. The ongoing
construction of the Ski tunnel in the Oslo suburbs will cut this by at least 11 min­
utes, so for the base case 3:30 will be used. The central section between Ed and
Moss is winding, mostly single­track line with top speeds of 80­120 km/h – and
there are proposals to reconstruct the line with new alignment and much higher
speeds. This would decrease travel time significantly, to 2:00 (mid­term case),
while more upgrades to high­speed standards on other sections can further re­
duce it to 1:30 (long­term).
Malmö­Stockholm
The Swedish transport authority Trafikverket is also working on a final proposal on
the first real high­speed lines of the country, connecting Stockholm with Göteborg
and Malmö. [20] The new HSR would reduce the Stockholm­Copenhagen travel
time to 3:00 (long­term assumption). While on the central section the planning
is at the step of determining the final alignment, some parts are more advanced
(Hässleholm­Lund, Stockholm­Norrköping), therefore for the mid­term scenario
some improvements are assumed to be finished, cutting the currently 5:05 travel
time to 4:30.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
15
==PAGE:24==
Hamburg­Bremen
The line between Hamburg and Bremen (route 2200 of DB) is already a semi­
highspeed corridor allowing for speeds of 200 km/h. There are no official plans
currently for further upgrade. The travel time for long­distance trains is 55 minutes
between Hamburg Hbf and Bremen Hbf, and Deutschland­Takt 2030 assumes this
number, too. [21]
Hamburg­Hannover
A new high­speed connection between Hamburg and Hannover has been on the
agenda for a long time, but the plans for a dedicated, new line (Y­Trasse) were
put to a halt. The current plan is to upgrade the existing line with more tracks
and higher speed (230­250 km/h). According to the Deutschland­Takt 2030, this
would result in travel times of 1:10 between the two cities, compared to today’s
1:30. However, there is no final decision yet on the exact technical specifications
and the start date of the construction. [22]
Hamburg­Berlin
The Hamburg­Berlin direct line (6100 and 6107 of DB) is already upgraded to 230
km/h on most sections and 200 km/h on the rest. The only projects planned are
aiming to increase capacity on some sections around Berlin, but no significant
changes in travel times are expected. Deutschland­Takt 2030 also expects long­
distance ICE trains to cover the distance between Hamburg Hbf and Berlin Hbf in
1:45, just like today. [21]
Figure 2.4: Map of the new possible route (in red) of direct trains between FBFL
and Berlin. (Drawn on OpenStreetMap)
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
16
==PAGE:25==
However, upgrades on the Lübeck­Schwerin­Ludwigslust section are under plan­
ning, which could open up for a more direct route between Copenhagen and
Berlin (see fig. 2.4). The reconstruction and the electrification of the Lübeck­Bad
Kleinen line is under planning, along with a new pypass at Bad Kleinen station.
[23] After these improvements, it will be possible to run electric trains between
the FBFL and Berlin with higher speeds on this route, avoiding Hamburg. Even
though Deutschland­Takt 2030 counts on the completion of this project, it does
not plan with long­distance trains on this route, only with reducing the Lübeck­
Schwerin travel time of regional trains from 1:05 to 0:52. However, a travel time
of 2:20 can be estimated for Lübeck­Berlin trains for this case, which means that
Copenhagen­Berlin would take 4:15 on a direct service.
Kattegat Fixed Link
Within Denmark there is also an important infrastructure project that is currently
studied: the Kattegat Fixed link. If considered feasible and gets financing, it will
be the country’s longest fixed link, connecting Jutland and Fyn over the Kattegat
Belt, as seen on fig. 2.5. It would significantly shorten the travel time between
Zealand and the Central and North Jutland region: trains could travel between
Aarhus and Copenhagen in 1 hour. [24]
Figure 2.5: The proposed Kattegat Fixed Link. Source: [25]
The Kattegat Link has important effects on the FBFL as well. If both links are
completed along with the connecting higher­speed railway projects, travelling from
Central and North Jutland to Germany and the rest of Europe will be faster through
the two links than on the route through Padborg. For example, Aarhus­Hamburg
can be reduced to 2:45 from today’s 4:15 and Aarhus­Berlin could be 4:30 instead
of 6:30. This means that the two fixed links would probably complement each
other, and the Kattegat would add extra rail passengers to the FBFL.
Therefore, the long­term case should include the Kattegat Fixed Link to estimate
the volume of such effect. It will be assumed to cut travel times between Ringsted
and Aarhus to just 45 minutes, and allow for continuous services through both
new connections.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
17
==PAGE:26==
Overview of sub­scenarios
Table 2.1 summarizes the sub­scenarios for connecting infrastructure: where Inf­
0 is a base case, Inf­1 contains medium upgrades and Inf­2 is the most optimistic
possibility.
Table 2.1: Overview of the infrastructure sub­scenarios
2.1.2
Timetabling
The departure frequency of public transport services is an important feedback at­
tribute in transport modelling. On one hand, it can be determined by the planners
or the operator based on travel demand – but on the other hand, it also affects
the demand itself though the mode choice step (and sometimes the trip genera­
tion and destination choice, too). Therefore, to achieve the optimal utilization of
the provided seat capacity on the corridor, more frequency scenarios should be
modelled under different timetable structures.
However, empirical experience shows that it has a significant effect mostly for
shorter and more frequent journeys (commuting in urban environment). Long­
distance intercity trips are mostly planned ahead by passengers, and if there is
a regular service pattern from morning to evening, then the exact headway times
has less importance. Passengers are likely to arrive to the station in a way to
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
18
==PAGE:27==
catch a desired departure, therefore the expected waiting time is not a function
of the headway in this case. This is also supported by the current long­distance
ticketing scheme, where seat reservations are common and cheaper offers are
mostly linked to a specific train.
Therefore, the provided connections have a higher importance in this case, as di­
rect services are generally more attractive. The need of transfer is a discouraging
factor in long­distance train journeys, especially if there are not guarantees that
connections are provided in case of delays. The scenarios will be constructed
with focus on this network connectivity, but also considering different headways.
There is no obvious base case here, as there is no decision yet on the future
timetable structure. There are several studies and official strategies on this topic,
but they mostly contradict each other. In the latest report based on FTC model in
2014, they assumed one train per hour to run through FBFL: a fast Copenhagen­
Hamburg EuroCity (EC) every second hour and an interregional train with more
stops in the other. [12] Deutschland­Takt 2030, the official German strategy for
a future timetable, only assumes the 2­hourly EC­train between Hamburg and
Copenhagen. [21] Trafikplan 2032, the Danish strategy made by Trafik­, Bygge­
og Boligstyrelsen, contains the EC­train every hour with some more stops com­
pared to the previous ones. [26] Banedanmark’s Køreplan 2030 includes both a
non­stop EC­train and a regional stopping train every hour. [27]
Figure 2.6: Proposed timetable structure in the DSA report from 2014. Source:
[19]
Some other studies already sketched the possibility for more ambitious timetable
structures. The DSA (Den Skandinaviska Arenan) project from 2014 examined
the possibility of establishing a strongly interconnected region on the Oslo­Göteborg­
Malmö­Copenhagen corridor by upgrading the railway connectivity. The closing
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
19
==PAGE:28==
report proposes some infrastructure upgrades (included at the previous factor)
and a timetable concept that comprises a so­called IC­X service that runs hourly
on the Oslo­Göteborg­Malmö­Copenhagen­Hamburg route (see fig. 2.6). Addi­
tional long­distance services with more stops complement it on each section, such
as an IC­Femern between Copenhagen and Hamburg, resulting in a 30­minute
headway between the two cities. [19]
There are other initiatives to significantly improve international rail traffic in the
region: in 2020, the German ministry for transport proposed the so­called TEE2.0
concept. The premium TEE services were the flagships of Europe’s international
trains, their network peaking in 1974 but completely abolished by the ‘90s – the
TEE2.0 aims to revive some of their glory. They plan to create long­distance ser­
vices reaching over at least 3­4 countries by interlinking their nationally optimized
clock­face timetable systems – that is, mostly connecting existing domestic high­
speed trains. The proposal also includes a night train network in addition. [5]
Figure 2.7: Proposed TEE2.0 network of day and night trains. Source: [5]
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
20
==PAGE:29==
A blueprint study is now underway to finalize the origin­destination pairs, identify
the technical and timetable­based challenges and derive schemes for infrastruc­
ture projects and vehicles to be used. Therefore, the proposal is still not final,
and the original network plan was already modified a few times. From the cur­
rently proposed network (in July 2021), the following services are relevant for the
Fehmarn tunnel (TEE – high­speed day trains / EN – night trains):
• TEE 13/14: Stockholm – Copenhagen – Hamburg – Brussels – Paris
• TEE 15/16: Stockholm – Copenhagen – Berlin – Munich
• TEE 25B/26B: Malmö – Copenhagen – Berlin – Prague – Budapest
• EN 33A/34A: Copenhagen – Hamburg – Brussels – Paris/Amsterdam
• EN 33B/34B: Stockholm – Copenhagen – Hamburg – Brussels – Paris
• EN 35A/36A: Copenhagen – Berlin – Prague – Vienna/Budapest
• EN 35B/36B: Stockholm – Copenhagen – Berlin – Prague – Vienna/Bu­
dapest
An official presentation from December 2020 proposes a timeline to start these
services. On the short term (within 2­5 years) two night trains, the EN 35B/36B
(Copenhagen – Vienna/Budapest) and the EN 33A/34A (Copenhagen­Paris/Am­
sterdam) could be launched. Starting the daily high­speed services and expand­
ing the night trains towards Stockholm requires the completion of the FBFL, so
these are planned for 2030.
Other night trains could benefit from the FBFL, too. The Swedish private operator
Snälltåget has been running a Malmö­Berlin night train for some time – this year
it was extended to Stockholm and rerouted via Denmark through the Storebælt­
Jutland route. If such a service stabilizes over the years, then probably it will
also run though the FBFL after its opening. In addition, the Swedish government
will subsidize new night trains from April 2022 (Stockholm­Hamburg and Malmö­
Brussels) – after the travel time reductions assumed, these can be assumed to
be combined into one Stockholm­Brussels service. [6] And this might only be the
beginning: night trains are coming back all over Europe: several national railways
are planning to restart their old services (for example in France and Switzerland),
while also new private operators are entering the market. A new French com­
pany, Midnight Trains already announced a plan to run Paris­Copenhagen ser­
vices among others, so with this tendency even more services could benefit from
the FBFL when completed.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
21
==PAGE:30==
Overview
Table 2.1 summarizes the sub­scenarios for timetabling: Tt­0 is the chosen base
case, Tt­1 contains additional trains according to the DSA study and the TEE2.0
concept, while Tt­2 has high­speed services running towards all important direc­
tions through FBFL.
Table 2.2: Overview of the timetabling sub­scenarios
2.1.3
Pricing
Previous models did not assume significant changes in any mode’s cost for the
future, mainly due to the high uncertainty for any assumption. For example, as
the 2014 FTC model update mentions, the original study in 2002 had seriously
underestimated air traffic, as it could not foresee the low­cost revolution that hap­
pened in the aviation sector during the following decade, leading to frequent flying
becoming accessible for many more people. However, there are current trends
in European transport policies in the field of pricing, that are worth examining in
some scenarios.
Flights
Even though other studies did not try to assume any significant turns in the gen­
eral trends of the aviation sector, some events since 2014 show that important
changes might be ahead, and it is worth to set up some scenarios based on these.
First of all, there has been an increasing pressure from environmental organi­
zations, NGOs and green politicians for giving more support to environmentally
friendly modes of travel and cutting back on the advantages enjoyed by aviation
– and these demands were gradually built into the policies of the European Com­
mission. Flying has the highest CO2 emissions among all travel modes, and there
is political pressure now to make its prices reflect this fact.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
22
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.8: CO2 emissions by travel mode. Source: [28]
Air travel currently enjoys many benefits: kerosene is tax­free in the European
Union; and flight tickets have a discounted tax rate or are VAT­free in most EU
countries. Despite intra­EU flights being involved in the EU’s Emission Trading
System (ETS) since 2012, airlines still receive approximately 32 million tons of
yearly CO2­emissions as free allowance (45­50% of their total emission), and
they only need to purchase the rest on the market. [29] On the other hand, railway
companies need to pay taxes when purchasing electricity and diesel fuel in most
cases, and discounted VAT rates on their tickets are less common. Many argue
that this way the taxation of transport is not line with the pollution caused by each
mode, and that the system should reflect better to the higher external costs of
aviation.
The European Commission is now planning to cut back on many of these benefits
– some measures are already decided, some are only planned. From 2021, the
free allowances for airlines in the ETS are being cut back by 2.2% each year. In
addition, the Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy [4] presented in 2020 aim
for further reduction, as it claims that a ‘proposal will be made to revise the EU
ETS Directive, notably to reduce the ETS allowances allocated for free to airlines’.
The European Green Deal also includes a paragraph on transport taxation: its key
point is that ‘the price of transport must reflect the impact it has on the environment
and on health’ and clearly expresses that fossil­fuel tax subsidies should end.
[3] The Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy claims that ‘the Commission is
looking closely at current tax exemptions, including for aviation and maritime fuels,
and will make proposal on how best to close any loopholes in 2021’. The final
proposal is likely to be based on a study from 2019 on the effects of an EU­wide
kerosene tax, completed by CE Delft on behalf of the Commission. [30] In this
report, 3 main taxation policies were introduced and simulated for all member
states of the EU:
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
23
==PAGE:32==
• The first approach is a direct flight ticket tax. In Europe domestic flights are
commonly taxed this way, but international tickets often have discounted
rates or are exempted. In Germany and Sweden there is already a ticket
tax (7.47€/passenger in Germany and 6.26 €/passenger in Sweden, both
applies for European routes), while in Denmark there is no tax on interna­
tional flight tickets. According to their simulation, introducing the German
tax rates in Denmark would result in a 4% increase in average ticket prices
from/to Denmark.
In light of the recent environmental concerns, there is a new trend starting
that aims to target short­haul flights with higher taxes – so this setup would
only ‘punish’ flights that are directly competing with trains. The most pro­
gressive system in this sense in the EU is probably the one introduced in
2020 by Austria (after the report was made). They charge a base tax of
12€/passenger, with a 30€/passenger extra fee for flights covering less than
350 km. A 40€ fare floor is also introduced, so no tickets can be sold under
this price – this tackles the extremely low dumping prices of ultra­low­cost
carriers. [31]
• Introduction of a regular VAT­rate on all flights was also examined. As for
now international tickets are VAT­free Europe­wide, a case was simulated
where each country applies its VAT rate for domestic land transportation to
all flight tickets, too. This policy in general would result in a price increase
in line with the VAT rate in the given country – according to the simulation,
the rise would be 25% in Denmark, 15% in Germany and 4% in Sweden.
• The third option was a kerosene tax with a rate of €330 per 1000 litres (which
would not be too high in a worldwide comparison). According to the study,
this would lead to a 10% increase in ticket prices on average – more specifi­
cally, 9% in Denmark, 12% in Germany and 8% in Sweden. The report also
found that it would lead to approximately 11% drop in the intra­EU passen­
ger numbers but would have no significant effect on employment or GDP
growth.
Even though there is no final decision on most of these policies yet, it is not un­
likely that they will become mainstream by the opening of the FBFL and drive the
prices of short­haul flights up. The most probable ones are the more intense ETS
allowance reductions and kerosene tax from the EU (based on the commitments
in the European Green Deal), while Denmark might also follow its neighbours and
introduce a flight ticket tax in the future.
Trains
The price of train tickets was also assumed to stay on their current levels in previ­
ous reports. However, considering the extensive political support for growing rail
travel, we might see some reduction in prices in the future.
On one hand, governments can directly reduce prices by discounting the VAT rates
for train tickets. This happened in Germany on the 1st of January 2020, when the
VAT on domestic long­distance tickets dropped from 19% to 7%, causing prices
to decrease by 10% on average. Yet this is less relevant for the case of the FBFL,
as international tickets are already VAT­free in all relevant countries.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
24
==PAGE:33==
On the other hand, the liberalization of the EU’s railway sector is already mak­
ing on­track competition between passenger operators a reality, which can also
contribute to decreasing prices. During the last decade several private operators
started up (e.g. Flixtrain in Germany, Snälltåget and MTR in Sweden, Regiojet in
the Czech Republic or NTV in Italy), often with much lower prices than the incum­
bent companies. This competition forced them in several cases to decrease their
prices, too. This could also happen on the Øresund­Hamburg corridor after the
opening of FBFL. A market study made by COWI in 2014 found that the estimated
passenger numbers and operating costs are creating a ‘rather certain’ commercial
market base for operating trains in a profitable way. [8]
Average fares have decreased noticeably in all cases where on­track competi­
tion started in Europe. Second class tickets have become cheaper by 42­46% on
the Prague­Ostrava route and by 30­40% on the Italian high­speed network after
open­access operators challenged the incumbent railway companies. In Sweden,
MTR’s appearance on the Stockholm­Göteborg route forced SJ to reduce fares
by 12.8% from 2015 to 2016, while they were still higher by 100 SEK on average
compared to that of the private operator. Case study papers also found that in
most cases competition resulted in more dynamic yield management systems to
optimize load factors, and in ‘predatory pricing’ when operators successfully at­
tract extra passengers with extremely low promotional offers – just like low­cost
airlines. [32] [33] [34]
Overview
Based on these assumptions, 3 scenarios can be created in addition to the base
case – they are listed in table 2.3. In the first one, an EU­wide kerosene tax
is introduced, and therefore the ticket prices increase as it is calculated in [30].
As the flights on the corridor operate between Germany­Denmark and Germany­
Sweden, the increase should be between 9% and 12%. However, this does not
include the effect of the decreasing free ETS allowances for airlines – the effect
of that is not calculated in the referenced policy documents, but based on the
volume it cannot be higher than a few percent until 2030. Therefore, a realistic
approach could be to use the upper boundary from the kerosene tax case: 12%.
As seen from the examples on open­access train operators, fierce competition
can nearly halve railway fares on routes where demand is sufficient – but even
a less ‘aggressive’ new operator can bring lower prices. In case of the FBFL
corridor, a bit less intense competition is assumed in a scenario, that leads to a
20% decrease in average fares.
Table 2.3: Overview of the pricing sub­scenarios
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
25
==PAGE:34==
2.1.4
Perception of modes
Mode choice modelling is a very complex task, just like simulating any human
decision making. Advanced models mostly have a large set of attributes defining
each mode (such as travel time, price, departure frequency, etc.) and variables
describing the decision maker (age, income, trip purpose, etc.). But there are
some more abstract factors in the human mind that traditional models do not con­
sider, though they are getting more and more relevant these days.
Environmental concerns
Nowadays, environmental attitudes are gaining more and more importance. Many
people who are concerned about ‘green’ issues already tend to make decisions
that cannot be described through ‘traditional’ factors of behaviour modelling. In
transportation, the most relevant example is the ‘flygskam’ (flight shame) move­
ment in Sweden, made widely known by famous climate activist Greta Thunberg.
Without any professional campaign carried out, only the online ‘hype’ created
around no­flying lifestyle resulted in a completely unexpected 4% drop in Swe­
den’s air traffic from 2018 to 2019. [35] The number of passengers using Danish
airports have also stagnated in 2019 after 10 years of uninterrupted growth –
though it is not certain that this happened because of flygskam. [36] The current
lockdowns due to the COVID­pandemic caused enormous losses for the aviation
sector – and it is still not clear whether passenger numbers will rise again to pre­
pandemic levels or not. Some studies suggest that many people unable to fly for
more than a year could realize that they do not need to return to old travel prac­
tices afterwards. For example, in a recent survey carried out by Userneeds on
behalf of IDA (Danish Society of Engineers), 32% of Danes claimed that they are
planning to fly less after the pandemic than before. [37]
However, it is not easy and straightforward to include these attitude changes in
mode choice model, even if its growing importance is making it necessary. Ac­
cording to [38], mode choice models including subjective preferences have shown
better explanatory power in several cases, compared to ones that comprised only
socio­demographic and infrastructural variables. Modelling these subjective pref­
erences is a widely researched topic in psychology, and the Theory of Planned
Behaviour (TPB) is a developing tool to identify them. According to an extended
TBP, the key personal factors in mode choice are moral norms, environmental atti­
tudes, efficacy, identity, and habits [39]. These can usually be included in models
after some segmentation of travellers – mostly through clustering them into groups
of similar personal preferences.
Comfort
Other personal attitudes that could affect the mode choice are service quality and
comfort. Several railway operators have now realized that this is a field where
they can have an advantage when competing with flights and cars. While a flying
trip includes higher access­egress times on airport transfers, queues, security
checks and long waiting times on airports, trains in general have less of these
and therefore a higher proportion of the trip’s time can be used in a valuable way,
for example for working, relaxing or entertainment. Many long­distance trains also
offer more personal space and more onboard services than airplanes – such as
more convenient catering, free Wi­Fi and power sockets, dedicated silent sections
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
26
==PAGE:35==
and family cabins and more permissive luggage policies.
Several examples from literature found that comfort can indeed be a significant
factor when choosing a mode – and they include so­called ‘latent variables’ to
improve modelling mode choice decisions. A way to incorporate these into the
discrete choice models (logit or probit) is by adding a latent attitude sub­model to
create these latent variables, which can be used in the utility functions afterwards.
For example, [40] lists several previous cases of estimating such models and
presents a model that comprises the security on trains in addition to traditional
variables.
In a Swedish study from 2006, a discrete mode choice model extended with latent
attitude variables was estimated based on survey data from commuters between
Uppsala and Stockholm. [41] They used the MIMIC model to create five latent vari­
ables based on revealed preferences: environmental preferences, safety, com­
fort, convenience and flexibility. They compared the estimation results to the tradi­
tional model (only including the observable mode­specific and individual­specific
attributes) and found that the extended model outperforms that. Two latent vari­
ables were found significant: comfort and flexibility. While flexibility has a nega­
tive parameter for trains, the comfort’s sign is positive, meaning that it contributes
positively to the utility of that alternative.
There is an alternative approach to quantify comfort level: to incorporate it in
the value of travel time (VTT). In the traditional paradigm of transport modelling,
travel time is seen only as a cost to the transport user and is generally considered
unproductive. However, in the last 20 years an emerging research area has been
examining the travellers’ activities done during travel and their effect on perceived
travel times and mode choice. In this sense, the VTT can be seen as the difference
between:
• the opportunity value of time (the value of activities that could have been
done instead of travelling);
• and the value of the utility that is created during the travel time (e.g. working,
relaxing or leisure time). [42]
With this definition, the VTT can change based on comfort: for example, crowding
on public transit can increase it, while a proper environment that enables ‘produc­
tively’ spent time during the trip (e.g. WiFi, tables on a train) can decrease it.
A study from 2018 [43] summarizes the research conducted on the topic of travel­
based multitasking and its effect on the perception of travel time, by reviewing
58 papers written between 2004 and 2016. First of all, most reviewed research
confirms that there has been an increase in ‘productive’ use of travel time over
the last 4 decades, mainly due to the innovations in information and communi­
cations technologies (ICT) – i.e. with smartphones and mobile internet access
widely available now, people have improving chance to use their travel time ef­
fectively.
The studies also confirm that passive travellers (car passenger, air,
public transport) have a significantly higher productivity than active travellers (car
driver, cycling, walking). Some of them also found that among public transport
modes, trains have the highest share of multitasking passengers who use their
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
27
==PAGE:36==
time in a valuable way. Other findings from different studies establish connection
between provided on­board comfort and productivity:
• Connectivity (availability of a Wi­Fi connection, and signal strength for mo­
bile phones) may be conducive to multitasking (Connolly et al., 2009),
• Seated passengers tend to carry out more activities (Zhang & Timmermans,
2010),
• The provision of a power socket and table on longer journeys stimulates
more use of ICT­devices (Fickling, Gunn, Kirby, Bradley & Heywood, 2009),
• A silent compartment can increase the proportion of passengers who work
among business travellers (Gripsrud & Hjorthol, 2012),
• Crowdedness negatively affects the frequency of using a phone (Timmer­
mans and Van der Waerden, 2008).
These mean that if a passive travel mode in general can offer more spacious seat­
ing, better digital connectivity and more comfortable working environment than
some other modes, this advantage might appear in a mode­segmented VTT.
A recent paper from the Netherlands [42] by authors working on the Dutch na­
tional VTT estimation study presents their results of a transit data analysis, where
they included a new dummy variable for the ‘usefulness’ of spending travel time.
Based on their literature review they expected the VTT to be lower for passengers
spending their time valuably – some quoted papers found that transit riders that
can work during travel have a considerably lower VTT than others, while a British
report to the Department of Transport has found a 50% reduction in the value of
travel time savings for business passengers, if they can spend the travel time in
a useful way. Based on their analysis carried out on the Dutch stated preference
data and the following model estimation, they found that respondents who can
spend their travel time usefully in a train or in local public transport have about a
20%±6% lower VTT than others.
Some other studies see it as a generational issue. A paper analysing commuter
behaviour in Northern California found that millennials (people born between 1980­
2000) has on average 15% lower in­vehicle VTT than older generations. They
conducted several sensitivity analyses to find what drives this difference and found
that the most important factor is not different income distribution or other socio­
economic variables, but the wider usage of info­communication devices and travel
multitasking among them. [44] This could also explain the trends seen in VTT
changes over the last decades (it does not increase as much as expected from
income changes) and indicates that even the general decrease of VTT might be
possible in the future.
A few studies tried to translate such finding into a possible segmentation of the
VTT by mode. [45] reviews several other papers to find the proportion of time
spent working while travelling for different modes (p*) among business travellers.
The exact numbers have a high variability among studies (see table 2.4), but rank­
ing is mostly consistent: train > air > bus > car (from highest to lowest). They also
found that several independent surveys showed an increase in p* over the years
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
28
==PAGE:37==
between 2004 and 2011 – they cite examples from the UK and Norway. They also
reviewed several national VTT studies until 2011 (including the Danish from 2004)
and found that only the Dutch considers the effect of opportunities for worthwhile
use of travel time – and that one sets the VTT for trains lower than other modes.
MODE
Car
Bus
Train
Air
p* range
0.02…0.22
0.03…0.17
0.11…0.46
0.07…0.36
Table 2.4: Proportion of in­vehicle time spent for working on different modes, ac­
cording to [45]
The aforementioned Dutch VTT study’s specific focus on travel multitasking and
mode segmentation was introduced in detail by the original authors in a confer­
ence paper from 2019. [46] They present survey results on the fraction of travel
time spent working by business travellers – these support the previous findings
that trains has the highest value, and that it has notably increased between 1988
and 2011, from 11% to nearly 16%. Meanwhile, this productive business time
was only 13.5% in flights and 4% in cars in 2011. The mode­segmented VTTs
from the 2010 study are also presented here (see fig. 2.9), and the numbers are
­ among other factors ­ believed to reflect the comfort level and the possibilities
for multitasking. Therefore, flying has the highest general VTT (51.75 €/hour) and
trains only have 9.25 €/hour. Another notable factor is that in case of train, com­
muters are pulling up this general average (VTT is 11 €/hour for them), so in case
of long­distance traffic the purpose­weighted average should be even lower.
Figure 2.9: Values of travel time in 2010 in the Netherlands (€/hour). Source: [46]
The Danish Value of Time Study [47] also includes an estimation of mode differ­
entiated VTTs. The initial results, which show a self­selection effect, were even
corrected for income differences and truncated at 1000 DKK/hour income to pro­
vide more realistic results (see fig. 2.10). However, in the final recommendations
the authors ‘decided to use that grand average of 67 DKK per hour as the central
value to be applied to all transport modes’. They argue that ‘differences in VTT
between modes for a given person should depend on the comfort of mode’, but
they empirically expected the VTT of cars to be higher than of public transport as
they assumed a ‘bus to be less comfortable than driving a car’. Their explanation
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
29
==PAGE:38==
claims that self­selection is still present despite the corrections, that is why the
final recommendation is to disregard these results and ‘treat everyone equally’
in any further analysis – which makes sense when data is used as an input for
cost­benefit analyses.
Figure 2.10: Mean VTTs in the 2007 Danish study, after income adjustment
(DKK/hour). Source: [47]
Another Danish VTT study from 2013 focuses specifically on travellers through the
prospective Fehmarn­corridor. [48] After the model estimations, values of travel
time savings (VTTS) are also calculated here for each mode (but not for travel
purpose). The relative results are in line with the original Danish VTT values and
the numbers of the Dutch study, and two other references are also presented
which show similar ratios between modes (see fig. 2.11).
Figure 2.11: VTTs calculated for Fehmarnbelt in 2013, with a comparison to pre­
vious estimations. Source: [48]
All these literature references show that there is potential in differentiating VTT
between modes – and even though more research is needed before it can be­
come a common practice, it makes sense to see the effects of it in a scenario
where the values reflect these previous studies and the empirical observations
and expectations of each mode’s comfort.
Overview
As shown above, the most accurate way to consider these two effects (increasing
environmental awareness in mode choice, and detectable onboard service im­
provements on the trains) would be to modify the mode choice model by including
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
30
==PAGE:39==
traveller segmentation and adding latent attitude variables to the mode choice
model or estimate different values of travel time (VTT) for each mode.
Table 2.5: Overview of the passenger attitude sub­scenarios
2.2
Model scenarios
Based on the variants of each factor introduced in the previous section, overall
3x3x4x2 = 48 scenarios could be created. In case of having access to a ‘perfect
model’ that handles all the aforementioned changes and can calculate all these
with reasonable computational demand, it would give the most detailed and in­
structive results. However, computational power and modelling tools available
are not endless, and therefore these theoretical scenarios must be adjusted to
real life.
2.2.1
The Danish National Transport Model (LTM)
The model used to simulate these scenarios is the Danish National Transport
Model (Landstrafikmodellen, or LTM). It was developed between 2009 and 2020
by DTU and other consultancy firms, and it is a comprehensive traffic model cov­
ering trips within Denmark by all modes, along with international travel to and from
the country. The main purpose of LTM was to improve the decision basis for plan­
ning and investments in the traffic system and provide input for the cost­benefit
analyses of planned infrastructure developments. It can calculate the future traffic
based on user­selected calculation assumptions, for example on demography, in­
frastructure or prices. It is based on a reformulated four­stage traffic model (where
instead of trip generation (1), trip distribution (2), mode choice (3) and assignment
(4) in separate models, there is tour generation (1), destination and mode choice
(2) and assignment (3)), but by combining some sub­models in a more complex
way. These are grouped into 2 main modules: the demand model does the mode
and destination choice for more than 15 model segments (using mostly nested
logit models), while the route choice model covers the assignment on the supply
side. It also includes models for population and household synthesis and car own­
ership, and the freight traffic is also simulated in a separate module. The overall
structure of LTM is on fig. 2.12.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 2.12: Overview of LTM’s framework. Source: [49]
In this case, the most important limitation is the fact that an established modelling
framework is used, therefore any of the theoretical scenarios that would require
changing the model (e.g. by adding new variables to the mode choice) are not
feasible to implement. Another main issue is calculation time: it takes 5­7 days for
LTM to run one scenario, so considering the limited time available to complete this
paper and the limited availability of calculation machines, maximum 4­5 scenarios
can be realistically finished.
While reducing the scenarios, the most important ones to keep are the ones which
could show the effect of each 4 factors independently from each other. There­
fore, the chose final scenarios focus on changing one specific factor, while keep­
ing the others at the base case. The exception is Connecting infrastructure and
Timetabling – there is no point in separating the changes between these. Financ­
ing and building new infrastructure only make sense politically and economically
if new, more frequent services follow the upgrades – while some planned connec­
tions also require specific infrastructure developments in order to offer competitive
travel times and headways.
Considering all these aspects, 5 scenarios will be set up for modelling. The first
one will be a base case to serve as a reference point, with the base concepts from
each 4 factor (with ID of 0). Scenarios 1 and 2 will include the infrastructure and
timetable changes (in line with each other), with number 1 being a more conser­
vative and number 2 being a very optimistic case. Scenario 3 will implement the
changes in pricing, while number 4 contains the effect of changing passenger atti­
tudes. The summary of these combined scenarios is in TABLE, and their detailed
introduction is the topic of the following section.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
32
==PAGE:41==
Table 2.6: Overview of the final model scenarios
In practice, the LTM implementation took place on an editor machine, that Trafik­,
Bygge­ og Boligstyrelsen and Vejdirektoratet provided for student access between
May and July 2021 (MAN­pLTM­E­STU1). The computer’s key software is the
LTM Manager, where so­called Main Scenarios can be created for running. A Main
Scenario consists of 32 sub­scenarios which can be modified individually. These
determine the different inputs to the model regarding travel costs, infrastructure,
route network, socio­economic variables, etc. The most important ones in this
case will be
• the Public Route Scenarios (containing a public transport network with exact
timetables),
• the Air Network Scenarios (containing all inputs for the air traffic sub­model),
• the Public Fare Scenarios (containing prices for public transport) and
• the Pas Dem Scenarios (containing the settings for the demand model).
Most sub­scenarios contain numerical data in matrices ­ these can be modified
in the SQL Server Management software on the editor computer. The output
matrices can also be viewed here after a run. The Public Route Scenarios are
more complex: creating these can happen in a map­based environment, with
ArcMap software.
The LTM machine used for the calculations contains the input settings and data for
several different base scenarios by default. For example in case of the demand
model, one can choose the year from [2010, 2015, 2020, …, 2040] and auto­
matically set all socio­economic variables, cost inputs, VTTs, etc. for the values
defined for the respective year by the developers of the model. Base scenarios
can be chosen similarly for the road network (only until 2030), the freight network
and the air model (both pricing and routes). Regarding public transport, the default
options contain two historical networks (Base 2010; Base 2015) and three official
network plans by Trafik­, Bygge­ og Boligstyrelsen (Trafikplan 2022; Trafikplan
2027; Trafikplan 2032).
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
33
==PAGE:42==
2.2.2
Base case (Fehmarn­0)
The base case of this modelling task is a Main Scenario named ‘Fehmarn­0’ in the
calculation machines. Most of those 32 sub­scenarios are the default LTM settings
for 2030 (road, air and freight network; demand inputs; etc.) – the only difference
is the public transport network (Public Route Scenarios). A new sub­scenario
was created for this case (under the name ‘Fehmarn Base Case’, with ID=100),
by copying the ‘Trafikplan 2032’ one and implementing some changes in it. This
means that the scenario contains every run in the public transport network that is
part of the official Trafikplan 2032 [26], including the hourly stopping train between
Hamburg and Copenhagen through FBFL, with a timetable seen on fig. 2.13.
Figure 2.13: Timetable of the regional stopping train
As an addition to Trafikplan 2032, the two­hourly EC trains with less stops were
added to the scenario – the timetable (which follows Deutschlandtakt 2030) is pre­
sented on fig. 2.14. As a last modification, some extra domestic German ICE trains
were added (Berlin­Hamburg, Cologne­Hamburg, Munich­Hamburg) to feed extra
passengers to the international lines to Denmark.
Figure 2.14: Timetable of the non­stop EuroCity train
2.2.3
Mid­term network (Fehmarn­1)
The conservative network upgrade case is constructed from the travel times of the
mid­term infrastructure scenario and the IC­X timetable concept, with additional
TEE2.0 trains. All other factors (such as pricing, VTT, socio­economic variables)
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
34
==PAGE:43==
remain the same as in the base case. Therefore, only the public transport net­
work’s sub­scenario (Public Route Scenarios) is changed in the LTM implemen­
tation to create the new Main Scenario (Fehmarn­1, ID=102).
The new sub­scenario for the railway network should contain all services from
the base case. However, the 2­hourly Copenhagen­Hamburg EC­trains are ex­
tended to run between Hamburg and Oslo every hour, under the name IC­X. The
hourly Copenhagen­Hamburg stopping trains also remain under the name IC­Ø.
In, addition 3 IC­X trains are extended to Munich, Prague and Paris, according to
the TEE2.0 concept. 4 pairs of night trains should be also added, as projected
by the TEE2.0 and the Swedish government. The timetables are on the following
fig. 2.15 and fig. 2.16.
Figure 2.15: Timetable of the IC­X trains
Figure 2.16: Timetable of the night trains
The new public network sub­scenario (ID=101) in LTM contains all lines, sched­
ules and runs – just like the base case. However, the model’s limitations do not
allow for implementing this structure on a full scale. First, as the line to Oslo is not
part of the network, the northern terminus of IC­X services is therefore Göteborg.
The southern TEE2.0 extensions of these trains are also limited to Germany – in
the model, they only run to Cologne, Munich and Berlin.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
35
==PAGE:44==
The night trains are not implemented in LTM at all, because their key destinations
are mostly outside the model’s area, and their whole concept is not something that
the LTM is prepared for. These trains are mostly meant for passengers travelling
between the two ends of the line (even if there are some stops during the night),
and the decision of choosing these as a travel mode is completely different than
choosing public transport in general (different perception of time while sleeping
in a bed, saved hotel bill due to overnight travel, etc.), therefore their passenger
numbers would not be realistic when compared to day trains. Even though there
is very little literature on this specific filed of mode choice, some studies found that
night trains cannot be fitted in traditional mode choice models aiming to minimize
travel time, as the passenger’s only goal is to conveniently depart in the evening
and arrive in the morning. [50] However, as they provide a predictable amount
of capacity and occupancy can be estimated from empirical data, their passenger
numbers can be manually added to the model output. Similar considerations stand
for the passengers travelling outside the model’s area on day trains, due to their
low numbers (to/from Oslo, Prague, etc.).
2.2.4
Long­term network (Fehmarn­2)
The optimistic network upgrade case is constructed from the travel times of the
long­term infrastructure sub­scenario (Inf­2) and an extensive high­speed timetable
concept (Tt­2). All other factors (such as pricing, VTT, socio­economic variables)
remain the same as in the base case. Similarly to scenario Fehmarn­1, only the
public transport network’s sub­scenario (Public Route Scenarios) is changed in
the LTM implementation to create a new Main Scenario (Fehmarn­2, ID=103).
The public route network contains all services introduced in scenario Fehmarn­1
(IC­X, IC­Ø, TEE2.0 trains, night trains) – though the travel times are reduced on
some sections in line with the infrastructure changes. In addition, direct Stockholm­
Hamburg trains are added every hour – together with the Oslo­Hamburg service
they now provide a 30­minute headway between Copenhagen and Hamburg.
There is also a new, direct Copenhagen­Berlin service avoiding Hamburg, using
the upgraded line through Schwerin and running every second hour.
Figure 2.17: Timetable of the new high­speed trains to Stockholm
As the infrastructure scenario includes the Kattegat Fixed Link in Denmark, there
are new international services using that connection as well. There is an Århus­
Berlin service every 2 hours, and an Århus­Hamburg line through Kattegat and
FBFL.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
36
==PAGE:45==
Figure 2.18: Timetable of the new high­speed trains around Berlin and Aarhus
The new public network sub­scenario (ID=102) is copied from the one of scenario
Fehmarn­1 (ID=101). Therefore, the limitations of LTM remain for the services that
already had appeared there (no trains to Oslo and further south from Germany).
However, the four new services listed here can all be fully implemented.
2.2.5
Flight taxation & on­track competition (Fehmarn­3)
The final model scenario on pricing examines the sole effect of cost changes,
therefore it does not alter from the base case in other factors. Although it would
be interesting to see the separate effects of changes in the price of trains and
flights (Pri­1 and Pri­2 sub­scenarios), due to computational limitations only one
input must be chosen, which is the combination of these two (Pri­3). This means
that in this case the prices of all international flights around Denmark will increase
by 12%, while cross­border trains’ prices are simultaneously dropping by 20%.
Changing prices in LTM is relatively straightforward, therefore no compromises
were made when implementing this scenario. For the new air prices, a new Air
Network Scenario was created (ID=100), and the input table ltm.in_AirRC_Links
was given a new column with the 12% increased prices for all flights. (As the as­
sumptions behind the increase apply on a European level, there was no need to fil­
ter for any specific flights, the price was changed for all that are in LTM.) Regarding
train prices, a new Public Fare Scenario was made as a copy of Base 2030, where
domestic prices remained the same, while prices of all international trips in and out
of Denmark were reduced by 20% in the input table ltm.in_PasDem_PublicTicket
Cost_Int. (Again, as the assumptions behind the cost decrease are quite gen­
eral, there was no filtering for FBFL trips, it was applied to all international ones.)
The new Main Scenario was created as ‘Fehmarn­3’ (ID=101), with most sub­
scenarios copied from the base case, and only two altered (Air Network Scenario,
Public Fare Scenario).
2.2.6
Changing passenger attitude (Fehmarn­4)
As shown in the literature references in section 2.1.4, the most accurate way
to consider increasing environmental awareness would be to modify the mode
choice model by including traveller segmentation. However, the modelling is done
in a given framework (the LTM), so changing the model is not feasible. Therefore,
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
37
==PAGE:46==
this factor will not be included in the modelling part.
Regarding the comfort levels, the latent variables are also not possible to imple­
ment as they would require changing the model itself. On the other hand, the
segmentation of VTTs can be included, as these values are part of the input data
for the LTM. By default, its international model currently uses a simple segmenta­
tion by purpose: the VTT for business travellers is 6.2 DKK/minute on all modes,
while for others it is 1.3 DKK/minute. The 2030 base case also considers some
inflation, and therefore these values are 8.56 DKK/min and 1.79 DKK/min respec­
tively.
At the theoretical construction of scenarios, a few studies were reviewed where
mode­segmented VTTs were estimated – the values are summarized in table 2.7,
along with those used in LTM’s international model by default. Based on these, a
new set of VTTs were created intuitively, which is in line with the reviewed papers
and also reflects the empirical experiences on the comfort level of long­distance
modes and the changes expected for the future. The key assumptions are the
following:
• The VTT for car drivers is slightly lowered (cca. 10%) – most reviewed stud­
ies found that the increase of previous decades has stopped (it does not
follow economic growth and income as before), and the ICT developments
(voice control of personal devices, higher level of car automation) indicate
that some decrease is likely in the future.
• The VTT for public transport is adjusted, so that the relative values compared
to car are similar as in the 3 key literature examples. This means a significant
reduction compared to LTM base values for business trips, and a slighter one
for other purposes.
• The VTT for air is much higher than ground level modes in all literature ex­
amples – both due to self­selection and long idle times. Therefore, the value
for business travellers remains the same as it is in LTM, while other purposes
take the value from the Fehmarn VTTS­study.
The final numbers to be implemented in the model are also added to table 2.7.
Note that as the focus of this paper is cross­border travel over the Fehmarnbelt,
these modifications are only to be implemented in the international sub­model in
LTM.
MODE
Car
Public Transport (Train)
Air
Purpose
Business
Commute
Other
Business
Commute
Other
Business
Other
LTM 2010
6.2
1.3
1.3
6.2
1.3
1.3
6.2
1.3
LTM 2030
8.56
1.79
1.79
8.56
1.79
1.79
8.56
1.79
Fehmarn VTTS (2013 [48])
1.3
1.3
1.3
0.9
0.9
0.9
3.5
3.5
Dutch VTT study (2010 [46])
3.3
1.1
0.9
2.5
1.4
0.9
10.6
5.8
Danish VTT study (2007 [47])
­
1.3
1.2
­
0.9
1.0
­
­
New scenario 2010
5.6
1.2
1.2
3.1
0.9
0.9
6.2
3.5
New scenario 2030
7.73
1.66
1.66
4.28
1.24
1.24
8.56
4.83
Table 2.7: Values of travel times in different reviewed papers and the values cho­
sen for the new scenario (all values converted to DKK/minute).
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
38
==PAGE:47==
To simulate the effect of the altered VTTs, the new Main Scenario ‘Fehmarn­4’
(ID=104) was created in LTM manager. Among the 32 sub­scenarios only one had
to be changed from to the base case ‘Fehmarn­0’: the Pas Dem Scenarios in the
demand models section. Here a new sub­scenario was created (Fehmarn­VoT,
ID=100) where default data is copied from Base 2030 (ID=2). The VTTs for the in­
ternational model can be modified in an input table called ltm.in_PasDem_INT_VoT
– the new values were manually added here for the new sub­scenario.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
39
==PAGE:48==
3
Results
The constructed scenarios were run on an LTM calculation machine, that Trafik­,
Bygge­ og Boligstyrelsen and Vejdirektoratet provided for student access between
May and July 2021 (MAN­pLTM­B­STU1). The 5 Main Scenarios (from ID 100 to
104) are shown on fig. 3.1, along with their runs. Completing each run took 5­
7 days, and one run failed due to a system error (ID=10001) and it had to be
re­done (ID=10002). The following sections include the presentation of the LTM
results and the calculation of the extra non­Danish trips. The latter is necessary
due to LTM’s limitations mentioned before: it only considers trips starting or ending
Denmark. This was also checked after running the model, and the detailed OD­
matrices did not include any transit trips. Therefore, some extra estimations are
necessary for each scenario to find the volume of transit traffic (e.g. Sweden­
Germany).
Figure 3.1: Screenshot from LTM Manager with all Main Scenarios and runs
3.1
Overview
After the run, LTM provides very detailed outputs in different matrices – for ex­
ample, it is possible to get passenger numbers for each train on each section
between two stops, or to check OD­matrices between all stations. The most im­
portant results constructed from these outputs are presented in table 3.1: these
are the daily and yearly passenger volumes through the new tunnel section (Lol­
land Syd – Puttgarden). Note that these only include trips between Germany and
Denmark.
The yearly volume is calculated by multiplying daily traffic by 350 – this is the com­
mon practice with international traffic outputs from LTM. This gives a yearly traffic
of 903 493 in the base case between Denmark and Germany (core area). The
two network scenarios (Fehmarn­1 and Fehmarn­2) generated 2.7% and 22.8%
increase respectively, the pricing scenario has a 18.6% higher traffic flow, while
changing the VTTs caused an unexpected drop by 5.8%. In the next sections
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
40
==PAGE:49==
these 5 scenario results will be analysed and discussed further, and they will be
extended by adding an estimated transit traffic to them.
SCENARIO
To south
[pax/day]
To north
[pax/day]
SUM
[pax/day]
Yearly traffic
Increase to base
0
Base case
1 348.54
1 232.87
2 581.41
903 493.00
­
1
Mid­term network
1 381.57
1 268.86
2 650.43
927 650.86
2.67%
2
Long­term network
1 618.41
1 550.37
3 168.78
1 109 074.54
22.75%
3
Pricing
1 592.10
1 468.13
3 060.23
1 071 079.58
18.55%
4
VTT
1 298.47
1 133.47
2 431.94
851 177.71
­5.79%
Table 3.1: Core area traffic through FBFL, based on LTM outputs
3.2
Base Case (Fehmarn­0)
As seen in table 3.1, the core Denmark­Germany traffic flow is 903 493 passenger­
s/year in this case. To estimate the number of passengers between other country
pairs and provide a more detailed OD­matrix, the results of the 2014 FTC model
will be used in addition to the LTM outputs. The flows between different zones in
the FTC’s 2025 scenario is presented on fig. 3.2. The relative share of different
transit OD­s from these results can be used as a reference when extending the
LTM values.
Figure 3.2: The OD­matrix of Scandinavia ­ Mainland Europe traffic flows from the
FTC 2014 model (source: [12])
These flows on fig. 3.2 however include all trips in the region, not only the ones
through FBFL. That is why the sum of all rail passengers is 1 155 000, despite the
results for the same scenario projected 1 146 000 passengers on the new link. The
difference is only 9000 trips – even though there is no explanation in the report on
which OD­pair these could belong to, according to rational route choice consider­
ations these are most likely trips to/from Northern Schleswig­Holstein (Flensburg,
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
41
==PAGE:50==
Sylt, Husum, etc.), which is still easier to reach via the Storebælt. Therefore these
9000 trips are extracted from the Germany–East­Denmark OD­pair, as the num­
ber of passengers travelling here from Sweden or further is probably much lower
than from Denmark. Afterwards, the same OD­matrix for the base case was cre­
ated by keeping the ratios of the FTC 2025 matrix and multiplying each value with
the relative difference between the Denmark­Germany value from the old results
(639 000) and the LTM output (903 493). This means that the total number of rail
passengers through the fixed link in 2030 would be 1.62 million (see table 3.2).
FTC results for 2025
LTM output for Fehmarn­0
Germany
Other EU
Germany
Other EU
Eastern DK
639 000
178 000
Eastern DK
903 493
251 677
Sweden
186 000
105 000
Sweden
262 989
148 461
Norway
15 000
6 000
Norway
21 209
8 484
Finland
9 000
8 000
Finland
12 725
11 311
1 146 000
1 620 349
Table 3.2: The relevant rail OD­matrix from the FTC results and the LTM base
case output that was extended proportionally
As the next step, the OD­matrix must be detailed into smaller zones – this will
be necessary later as some scenarios will contain changes in specific parts of
Sweden or Germany. Doing this for the Denmark­Germany route is relatively
straightforward, as the LTM outputs contain the exact values. However, there are
some uncertainties within route choice between West Denmark and Germany, as
some of those passengers also use the FBFL according to LTM (mostly from/to
Fyn). As the exact choices are not possible to trace back for all trips, some as­
sumptions were made for the number these trips, while keeping the sums correct.
(High shares over 95% of FBFL choice was assumed for Ostholstein – West Den­
mark trips, while around 50% had to be assigned to other OD­pairs.) The trips
between Denmark and the rest of Europe were divided into 3 directions: 40% is
assumed to/from Western Europe (Benelux, France, etc.), 30% to/from the south
(Switzerland, Italy, Austria) and another 30% to the east (Czechia, Poland, etc.).
On the northern side, less certain assumptions must be made due to the lack of
LTM data. According to a figure in the 2014 FTC report, the transit traffic over
both FBFL and Øresund is distributed in Sweden the following way: 53.2% starts
or ends in Skåne (Malmö area), while 29.8% continues towards Stockholm and
17.0% towards Göteborg. These ratios are used to split the Swedish trips (262
989 to/from Germany and 148 461 other in total), while Norway and Finland were
not split any further. Splitting these transit trips between the southern destina­
tions were based on the Denmark­Germany trips. Passengers from Skåne are
distributed the same way as the Danish ones, because of the region’s proximity
and similarity to Denmark. Going towards north, lower ratios are set for further
destinations and Ostholstein (which has its popularity mostly for shopping trips,
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
42
==PAGE:51==
that gets less and less attractive as travel time increases), while the share of Ham­
burg increases. The final OD­matrix is presented as table 3.3, where the grey
background indicates the data taken from LTM, while the others are calculated
from the discussed assumptions.
Table 3.3: The detailed OD­matrix for the base case (Fehmarn­0)
3.3
Mid­term network (Fehmarn­1)
As seen in table 3.1, the core Denmark­Germany traffic flow is 927 651 passen­
gers/year, meaning a 2.67% increase compared to the base case. However, as
the transiting passenger numbers are still not included, these must be estimated
manually by using the flows from the base case OD­matrix and making assump­
tions on demand increase for each OD­pair.
As a first step, travel time reductions are calculated for each transit OD­pair.
Transfers are also taken into account, each of them as 30 minutes extra. This
includes the actual time for changing trains (a general 15 minutes) and a penalty
(in LTM it is 20 minutes for business trips and 10 minutes for others, so it was cho­
sen to be 15 here). The time reductions are seen in table 3.4. The trips to/from
Finland are not examined from this point, and they are assumed to stay constant
– they have very low relative values, and it is also difficult to make assumptions on
the routes those travellers take. For destinations covering a larger area, the most
central/important/populous city is chosen to calculate travel times. (For Eastern
Denmark it is Copenhagen, for Skåne it is Malmö, for Norway it is Oslo, for Os­
tholstein it is Lübeck, for the Ruhr Area it is Cologne, for Bayern it is Munich, for
Southwest Germany it is Frankfurt am Main, for Benelux area it is Brussels, for
the South it is Zurich and for the East it is Prague.)
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
43
==PAGE:52==
Table 3.4: Travel time reduction for all transit OD­pairs from the base case to
Fehmarn­1 scenario
In the next step, the new passenger numbers are determined based on demand
­ travel time elasticities. Demand elasticity (e) is defined as the ratio of relative
change in passenger volume and the relative change in travel time (see fig. 3.3).
So for example, e = ­2 means that 1% decrease in travel time leads to a 2%
increase in passenger numbers.
Figure 3.3: The definition of demand ­ travel time elasticity (source: [8])
In the market analysis made by COWI for the Fehmarn corridor [8], the experi­
ences from several previous projects and scientific papers were reviewed. They
found that e = ­1.5 is the best fitting central assumption for the case of this corri­
dor, when travel times reduce from 3:25 to 2:25. (They used an old Fehmarn A/S
model output as a baseline, instead of historic passenger numbers with actual
travel times.) They also calculated results with a low assumption of e = ­0.5 and
a high assumption of e = ­2.5.
To calculate the increase in demand in this scenario, the same elasticity assump­
tions from the COWI report will be used as a first step, as there is no better method
nor more recent data that could be used to find a number for this region based
on other projects in Europe. However, simply applying these values to the longer
transit trips (e.g. to a Stockholm­Hamburg) could lead to some biases, so be­
low in the Discussion section the effect of using some other approaches will be
considered as well.
For the central assumption, the travel time changes shown in table 3.4 are multi­
plied by ­1.5 for each entry to get the increase in demand. The increases are then
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
44
==PAGE:53==
applied to the traffic volumes of the base case on each OD­pair – the results are
presented in table 3.5. As it was expected, the largest increase happens in Skåne
and Göteborg, where the travel time decreases the most. The overall number of
travellers through FBFL is 1 727 776 a year, meaning an increase of 6.63% to
the base case. This is quite reasonable, considering the fact that most travel time
changes affected the transiting passengers (28.7% of all) – so even if they see a
larger increase, the total FBFL traffic is still dominated by trips between Germany
and Denmark.
Table 3.5: The detailed OD­matrix for the mid­term network scenario (Fehmarn­1)
The results for the low and high assumptions on elasticities were calculated sim­
ilarly. For comparison, the results are shown together with the central one in
table 3.6, in some more aggregated matrices. There is no significant difference in
total FBFL traffic, again due to the dominance of the rather stable Danish­German
traffic.
Table 3.6: OD­matrices with 3 demand elasticity assumptions for the Fehmarn­1
scenario
The last component that needs to be added manually is the night train passengers.
As mentioned before, incorporating them in a traditional model like LTM would not
give sufficient results, therefore some assumptions must be made on their traffic
volumes.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
45
==PAGE:54==
Night trains are quite much like flights: they offer trips between two distinguish­
able points (even if these are more stations in a region, not just one airport), have
a rather fixed capacity and therefore relatively stable and predictable passenger
flows if ran on a commercial basis. If it is assumed that the night trains of the
FBFL will be run successfully with high utilization, then it is a safe choice to base
the estimation on the Austrian ÖBB’s Nightjet network. They carried 1.5 million
passengers in 2019 on their 15 routes. [51] One route (or city­pair) generally
means ’half a train’ offering 200­250 places, as they run coupled on the key sec­
tion. (For example, their Vienna­Hamburg and Innsbruck­Hamburg trains that run
jointly from Nürnberg are counted as 2 routes.) With this method, Fehmarn­1 sce­
nario contains 6 night routes altogether, and each of them can carry approximately
100 000 passengers a year.
The important question to determine here is what share of these passengers are
coming from the regular day train flow, and what share of them is new, who would
not sit for this long time on day trains and is attracted only by the night service. Un­
fortunately, there was no previous research found to answer these: the few stud­
ies on night trains also mention that this a very under­researched area. Therefore,
a 50­50 assumption will be used here. This means that each night route adds 50
000 yearly trips to the respective OD­entry. The updated, aggregated results are
shown in table 3.7 – adding the night trains caused an increase in FBFL traffic to
more than 2 million trips a year.
Germany
Other EU
Eastern DK
927651
454823
Sweden
371110
212096
Norway
27938
10120
Finland
12725
11311
2 027 776
Table 3.7: Final OD­matrix for the mid­term network scenario (Fehmarn­1) after
adding the night trains
3.4
Long­term network (Fehmarn­2)
The second network scenario is again using the LTM values for Danish­German
trips, but the transit volumes must be estimated manually. They are calculated
with the use of elasticities, similarly as the previous scenario, Fehmarn­1. As this
case includes all connections and infrastructure upgrades that were the part of
Fehmarn­1, that one will be used as a ‘base case’ only for the travel time and travel
demand calculations. (The version before adding the night trains is considered,
as the time elasticity calculations would make no sense for the overnight trips.)
Also, the same elasticity assumptions are used (low ­0.5, central ­1.5, high ­2.5).
First, the changes in travel times are calculated, compared to Fehmarn­1 scenario.
The method is the same as before, with one less transfer considered as 30­minute
time reduction. The changes are shown in table 3.8 – they mostly affect the trips
to/from Stockholm, Oslo and Berlin.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
46
==PAGE:55==
Table 3.8: Travel time changes for all transit OD­pairs from the Fehmarn­1 to the
Fehmarn­2 scenario
Similarly to the Fehmarn­1 scenario, the elasticities of the COWI report are used
here to determine the change in demand and calculate the new OD­flows. At
the central assumption, the travel time changes are multiplied by ­1.5, then the
changes are applied to the transit trip numbers from the OD­matrix of the Fehmarn­
1 case (table 3.5). The core area trips (grey background in table 3.9) are again
extracted from the LTM output.
Table 3.9: The detailed OD­matrix for the long­term network scenario (Fehmarn­2)
The other assumptions of low and high demand elasticity were also calculated.
For comparison, the results are shown together with the central one in table 3.10,
in more aggregated matrices. Again, the difference is not as significant as ex­
pected, as transit trips has less effect on overall traffic.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
47
==PAGE:56==
Table 3.10: OD­matrices with 3 demand elasticity assumptions for the Fehmarn­2
scenario
The night train trips are added to this scenario as well. As there is no difference in
services between this scenario and Fehmarn­1, the same additions will be made
in this case. (50­50 thousand trips to Sweden­OtherEU and Sweden­Germany,
and 4x50 thousand to Denmark­OtherEU.) The final, semi­aggregated OD­matrix
presented in table 3.11, with a total FBFL flow of 2.26 million.
Germany
Other EU
Eastern DK
1109075
460945
Sweden
400746
221594
Norway
34238
11197
Finland
12725
11311
2 261 831
Table 3.11: Final OD­matrix for the long­term network scenario (Fehmarn­2) after
adding the night trains
3.5
Flight taxation & on­track competition
(Fehmarn­3)
The results for this scenario are quite straightforward to interpret: the combined
effect of reducing the international train tickets by 20% and the 12% increase in
flight ticket costs lead to a 18.55% increase in demand between Denmark and
Germany. As these changes are applicable to all intra EU­flights and all key in­
ternational rail corridors, it is a safe choice to apply the same increase to transit
traffic, too.
This means that the Danish­German entries are filled from the LTM outputs, while
all others are the base case OD­matrix results multiplied by 1.1855. The results
are presented in table 3.12, where the total passenger volume is 1.921 million per
year.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
48
==PAGE:57==
Table 3.12: The detailed OD­matrix for the pricing scenario (Fehmarn­3)
3.6
Changing passenger attitude (Fehmarn­4)
The results of running this scenario in LTM do not seem to make much sense:
through Fehmarn, there is a 5.8% decrease in passenger volume, which has a
sign opposite to the expectations. In addition, there are some strange changes in
traffic volumes everywhere on the domestic Danish network (e.g. 10% increase to
Sønderborg, or changes on regional lines in Nordjylland) that cannot be explained
by the introduction of new international VTTs. After verifying several times that the
settings for scenario was implemented correctly, the only explanation is that there
is an error in the respective module of LTM’s software. Even though an attempt
was made to resolve it with the original developer of the coding, unfortunately their
investigation exceeds the time limits of writing this paper, and therefore a re­run
was not possible. These results and this scenario are therefore discarded and not
discussed any further.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
49
==PAGE:58==
4
Discussion
After all adjustments and extra estimations, the final yearly volumes of traffic
crossing the new FBFL are as shown on fig. 4.1. The base case has 1.62 mil­
lion passengers a year, while the conservative improvements on the network
(Fehmarn­1) would add 25.1% and the optimistic case would add 39.6% more
passengers. The projected price changes of flights and trains cause an increase
of 18.5%.
Figure 4.1: Final results: traffic flow through FBFL for all valid scenarios
The base case is quite comparable to previous modelling results that used similar
assumptions. As introduced before in table 1.3, those range between 1.15 and
2.25 million passengers a year – these LTM results are in line with those values
(see fig. 4.2).
Figure 4.2: Comparison of the current base case results to previous estimations
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
50
==PAGE:59==
The first infrastructure and network scenario (Fehmarn­1) assumed travel time
reductions on the connecting network towards Hannover, Göteborg, Stockholm
and Oslo, and it included more frequent non­stop trains on the core Copenhagen­
Hamburg section, direct services between Germany and Western Sweden, and
several night train connections. These led to an increase to 2.03 million passen­
gers a year through the fixed link. The source of these new passengers is quite
interesting:
• Only 24 158 of the new trips occur between Germany and Denmark (2.7%
increase), most likely due to the reduction of travel time to some further
German destinations and the increased frequency of non­stop trains. (from
LTM output)
• An insignificant amount of 3 146 trips are journeys between Denmark and
other European countries than Germany. (from elasticity estimation)
• 80 123 are new transit trips on regular trains (17.2% increase to base), gen­
erated by the travel time reductions and more direct connections in Sweden
and Germany. (from elasticity estimation)
• The largest amount, 300 000 passengers are attracted by the night trains.
Note that as night trains also take the same number of passengers from
day trains according to the assumptions, the overall volumes for day transit
traffic and Denmark – other EU trips would actually decrease overall. (from
empirical estimation)
Figure 4.3: Source of new passengers in Fehmarn­1 compared to the base case
The effect of adding the night trains is overwhelming: without that, traffic would
have grown only by 6.6% instead of 25.1%. On one hand, this could indicate that
night train passenger numbers are way overestimated – they are quite uncertain
anyway, as both their passenger volume and the source of passengers are basi­
cally guesses, as there was not enough data to support any calculations on this.
On the other hand, those guesses still seem reasonable: 100 000 trips/year on
each connection means around 60­70% utilization of their capacity and it is similar
to existing successful night trains in Europe. The 50­50 share between newly at­
tracted passengers and people switching from day trains also cannot alter much:
the day traffic on the relations where these services would operate is very low:
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
51
==PAGE:60==
there are simply not enough passengers on day trains to supply much more than
this 50% of the night trips.
All in all, it is not possible to tell without further data or more advanced modelling if
such dominance of night traffic would be realistic or not. However, the geograph­
ical attributes of the region also suggest that there might be such potential. As
seen on fig. 2.1, day trains must have a travel time under 5­6 hours to start gaining
noticeable market share in traffic between a given city pair – however, distances
in Scandinavia are simply so huge, that even despite the FBFL and other infras­
tructure improvements, the large Swedish cities and Norway will not be reachable
from any key German or other European region within this time. Therefore, if
night train connections are established with the necessary policy support and with
attractive pricing and services, they can be the way forward to improve the rail
transit trip volume over the FBFL.
The second infrastructure and network scenario (Fehmarn­2) assumed travel time
reductions on the connecting network towards Berlin, Stockholm and Oslo, and
it included direct services between Germany and Stockholm, and it also added
the Kattegat Fixed Link in Denmark. These led to an increase to 2.26 million
passengers a year through the FBFL. The source of these new passengers is as
follows:
• There are 181 424 new trips in the core area between Germany and Den­
mark (22.8% increase to base case) – some of them are the result of the
direct connection to Berlin, but mostly they are trips to/from Western Den­
mark through Kattegat. (from LTM output)
• A smaller amount of 9 268 trips are journeys between Denmark and other
European countries than Germany. (from elasticity estimation)
• 126 633 are new transit trips on regular trains (27.2% increase to base), gen­
erated by the travel time reductions and more direct connections in Sweden
and Germany. (from elasticity estimation)
• Night trips amount for 300 000, the same as in Fehmarn­1. The same con­
siderations apply for passengers ‘taken’ from day trains and the decrease
in those volumes. (from empirical estimation)
Figure 4.4: Source of new passengers in Fehmarn­2 compared to the base case
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
52
==PAGE:61==
Though the dominance of night train effect in the growth is still prevalent, the core
area trips also play a significant role here. This is mainly the effect of Kattegat
Fixed Link: as expected before, it shifted most trips between Western Denmark
and the continental Europe to the route with the fixed links from the old Padborg
border crossing. It is an important finding from the LTM outputs that the Kattegat
Fixed Link alone can add an extra 18­20% trips to the Germany­Denmark traffic
through FBFL. The effect of the frequent direct trains to Berlin is also seen in the
LTM results: they caused a 21.3% growth in traffic volume between the German
capital and Denmark.
The pricing scenario assumed a 12% increase in air ticket costs and a simulta­
neous 20% drop in train fares. This resulted in 300 554 extra trips compared to
the base case. At the same time, air traffic between Copenhagen and Germany
dropped by 144 935 trips (8.77% decrease) and passenger car traffic on the FBFL
road part also decreased by 1.47%. This means that more than half of the new
trips are newly generated ones, as the result of the price reduction on trains. The
demand for trains is therefore very cost sensitive – this whole scenario supports
the hypothesis that demand for long­distance trips depends a lot on the price. The
map of the LTM outputs showing relative traffic changes is on fig. 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Relative changes in rail traffic in Fehmarn­3 compared to the base
case – LTM output
Due to the universality of the price changes, passenger numbers changed on
other border crossings in LTM. Traffic through the Padborg crossing increased by
11%, while the Øresund bridge had a quite significant increase of 29%. The latter
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
53
==PAGE:62==
one seems very high, and it is mainly driven by the increase in local traffic, as a
result of the 20% price decrease. This was rather unintended, as the assumptions
on competition are valid for long­distance traffic, but it was not possible to apply
changes only for that. However, it shows that local traffic is very sensitive to price
changes, and there is a lot of potential in gaining more cross­border passengers
by decreasing fares.
Even though scenarios with combined effects could not run due to limits in time
and availability of the LTM machine, it would have been interesting see results for
such a case. Based on the outputs of the scenarios with independent changes in
parameters, a combined effect of new pricing regime (Fehmarn­3) and extensive
network improvements (Fehmarn­2) could boost FBFL rail passenger flows up to
even 2.5­2.6 million/year.
By further observing the detailed results, there are some irregularities, obvious
uncertainties and questionable patterns that are worth discussing. In the next
sections these points are covered.
4.1
Volume of transit traffic
The presented results solely rely on the OD­matrix of the 2014 FTC model, as
that is the only source where it is comprehensively calculated and available at
the time of writing this report. However, it would be much better to have access to
more independent calculations and base the extension of LTM on a combination of
these. Especially because there are some discrepancies in the FTC paper: while
the OD­matrix of 2025 indicates that 28.7% percent of all FBFL traffic is crossing
Øresund as well, there is a map in the same report where the label indicates
41% for the same value (see fig. 4.6). While it could be just a simple error in the
labelling on the map as it is not mentioned anywhere in the text, it is an interesting
coincidence that the Danish Trafikplan 2027 also estimates 40.2% of all FBFL
traffic to cross Øresund as well. [15]
This ratio of transit traffic has huge influence on the final results here, therefore it
is vital to support this number as firmly as possible. It is quite unfortunate that the
TRANS­TOOLS model has no published detailed results, as it could be an inde­
pendent verification for the FTC model. Without that it can only be noted here that
further modelling and analysis is required to achieve less uncertain estimations.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
54
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.6: Map with the 2025 FBFL rail passenger flows from the FTC model
(Source: [12])
4.2
Different demand elasticity assumptions
The results of Fehmarn­1 and Fehmarn­2, the two infrastructure and network sce­
narios, strongly depend on the assumed demand elasticities. For simplicity and
for sticking to safe assumptions, the values from the COWI report were used by
default. However, making different assumptions can have a large impact on esti­
mated traffic.
The values from the COWI report are actually calculated specifically for a travel
time reduction from 3:25 to 2:25 between Hamburg and Copenhagen – and here
their main application is on longer trips between other cities of the region (e.g.
Göteborg­Hamburg, Stockholm­Berlin, etc.). Among others, the analysis in the
COWI report also pointed out that these demand­time elasticities can be very
different due to many factors, e.g. unique characteristics in the connected cities,
the volume of already existing traffic or the range of travel time reduction.
Among these, probably the latter one is the most important here, as the range of
travel times are very broad, and using one general elasticity for all OD­pairs might
cause biases. From experience, if original travel times are high and demand is
very low, then the elasticity can be much higher than the basic assumptions here.
For example, the STRING high­speed rail report also found that former travel
is a very important factor: in case of the core FBFL connection (Copenhagen­
Hamburg), reducing travel time from the original 4:45 has elasticities in the range
of [­9.12; ­10.23], while reducing it further from 3:30 – 1:50 will only have [0.79;
2.25]. (See fig. 4.7.)
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.7: Different travel time elasticities for Hamburg­Copenhagen (Source:
[16])
The relation between travel time and rail’s relative market share to aviation be­
tween a given OD­pair (presented on fig. 2.1 before) also supports this hypothe­
sis. Along the ’slope’, different relative marginal gains occur from different starting
points. If we assume a market with fixed total demand where only flights and trains
are competing for the passengers and trains’ share depend only on the travel time
according to the trendline on fig. 2.1, the travel time elasticities for some randomly
chosen cases would be as shown on table 4.1. The results support the idea that
applying only one general elasticity for all OD­pairs is not the most accurate ap­
proach. In general, the larger the travel time reduction is and the lower the basis
traffic were, the higher the elasticity can be.
Table 4.1: Travel time elasticities in case of a simple theoretical market
The problem with the current case is that most OD­pairs for the transit traffic are
in a very high travel time range. Even after the improvements, travel times do not
drop under 5­6 hours. On this area the traffic volumes are low and the ’slope’ of
market share gains is quite flat – therefore, it is not straightforward at all to find
precise values for those elasticities. It is beyond the scope of this paper to conduct
more research on this field and determine more accurate values.
4.3
Local traffic
Local flows (defined here as traffic between Lolland and Guldborgsund municipal­
ities in Denmark and Ostholstein district in Germany) are a less significant part of
FBFL’s total traffic as there are no large cities in the area – but is still important
for regional mobility. Also, this segment is very difficult to prognose precisely, as
giving a new, fast connection between two regions that were rather ‘dead ends’ be­
fore, can catalyse fundamental changes in local trip patterns and socio­economic
trends.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
56
==PAGE:65==
In 2010, around 8800 local trips were taken by train through Fehmarnbelt [8] –
which is very low but realistic, as neither the service pattern, nor the travel times
and costs were suitable for this kind of local traffic. According to the LTM outputs,
41 327 yearly local trips would be made in the base case. Scenarios 1 and 2 have
slightly lower values (even though none of the changes implemented there had
any effect on this connection), while scenario 3 with the price reduction predicts
49 231 trips/year here.
Scenario
Daily traffic south
Daily traffic north
Yearly traffic
Trip frequency (trip/resident/year)
Fehmarn­0
58.65
59.17
41 237
0.138447
Fehmarn­1
58.32
58.53
40 897.5
0.137307
Fehmarn­2
58.54
57.18
40 502
0.135979
Fehmarn­3
70.37
70.29
49 231
0.165286
Table 4.2: Local traffic volumes and trip frequencies of the FBFL
Though these numbers seem high compared to historical data, the effect of such
a new connection could be even greater. With this volume, the trip rate of lo­
cal population would be rather low, around 0.138 trips/resident/year in the base
case – in comparison, for the Øresund region (trips between region Hovedstaden
in Denmark and Skåne in Sweden) it is approximately 3.55. Though similar val­
ues would be unrealistic in these rather rural regions, this 25­fold difference seem
too high. LTM cannot account for changing habits due to better connectivity (e.g.
people changing workplaces or moving after FBFL is completed) and therefore
probably underestimates local traffic. Socio­demographic effects are also not in­
cluded: for example, the official population estimates that are fed into LTM are
predicting decrease in population for both regions – but one of the official goals of
the project is to reverse this, which can again generate more trips.
Another important finding is that demand is quite sensitive to travel costs. The
pricing scenario (Fehmarn­3) brought 19% increase – as flights are not relevant
here, this is solely caused by the 20% decrease in rail ticket prices, meaning a
cost elasticity of nearly ­1. This shows that further reduction (for example by offer­
ing cheap regional tariffs both for commuters and occasional travellers) can also
support more trips there. In such local traffic, headways can also affect demand –
this was not modelled now as all scenarios contained only the same hourly local
trains here, but in theory in could improve the results.
It is very difficult to make any safe prognosis, but considering these effects, prob­
ably more than this 40­50 thousand of local trips can be achieved with suiting
timetables and tariffs. For example, a trip rate of just 0.5 would mean nearly 150
000 passengers/year – still a realistic intensity compared to Øresund, but a sig­
nificant improvement from the LTM results.
4.4
Destinations in Germany
When looking at the detailed OD­data of the long­distance core area trips in LTM,
there is a noticeable distortion in the traffic volume towards different German cities.
As seen on fig. 4.8, there are 368.5 thousand yearly trips to/from Oldenburg – this
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
57
==PAGE:66==
is 36.6% of all trips between Germany and Denmark through the new link. This
seems very odd, as Oldenburg is a small town with less than 10 000 inhabitants
and has low touristic or business potential. In comparison, the nearby Lübeck (215
000 residents) is the starting or ending point of only 139 801 trips, while Hamburg
urban area with 2.5 million people generates 226 604 trips.
Figure 4.8: Destinations in Germany of non­local core area trips (from LTM out­
puts)
The reason behind this probably lies in the historical data that the model was
calibrated on. The current traffic includes a significant amount of shopping road
traffic when people from Denmark cross the border to Germany to buy cheaper
products. The destinations of these trips are mostly the closest town that has
larger supermarkets and other stores – and probably this pattern is replicated
in the LTM outputs. However, this shopping traffic is not likely to be dominant
within railway trips, as for trips with this purpose trains are a less optimal mode
to choose. This could mean that there is a considerable overestimation in the
rail traffic between Oldenburg and Copenhagen and therefore in the overall FBFL
traffic. It is difficult to estimate without the adjustment of the model, but it is most
likely that at least 150 000 trips less between these regions would be a much more
realistic result.
4.5
Comparison to air traffic
As presented at the introduction of the scenarios, there is a proven relation be­
tween rail’s travel time and its relative market share to aviation between a given
OD­pair (see fig. 2.1). The LTM outputs on the core area trips can be compared to
those empirical values. Four OD­pairs are examined: the Danish side is always
the whole Øresund area, meaning trips to/from CPH airport for flying, and Copen­
hagen area and Skåne trips for rail (as passengers in both would also use CPH if
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
58
==PAGE:67==
decided to fly). On the German side the 5 destinations are Hamburg (for air, Bre­
men and Hanover trips are included here, as these airports normally do not have
direct links to CPH in reality), Berlin (Dresden is added to air for similar reasons),
Ruhr area, Bayern and Southwest Germany. The travel times and relative shares
of rail are presented on fig. 4.9 for all scenarios, along with the trend line fitted on
the empirical data in [17].
Figure 4.9: Relative share of rail between four OD­pair under different LTM sce­
narios
According to the graph on fig. 4.9, the LTM outputs follow the expectations quite
well on relative mode shares. The rail share stays slightly under the trendline, but
as it was emphasized before, many other factors have influence on these values.
For example, the pricing scenario (Fehmarn­3, green dots on the graph) shows
that cost itself can cause noticeable alterations. However, previous studies ex­
pected higher shares for trains, as the present values are also above the trendline
on this corridor. Compared to these predictions of 95% percent of Copenhagen­
Hamburg and 46% for Copenhagen­Berlin as shown on fig. 4.10, the LTM values
are significantly lower.
The absolute values of air traffic are also worth a look, with a comparison the
actual historical traffic volume. table 4.3 contains the flows between the Øresund
region (CPH airport) and the five German destinations used before, for 2019 and
the four LTM­scenarios. The observed flows of 2019 seem much higher in most
cases – the decrease in the LTM outputs is much higher than the increase in rail
traffic between the OD­pairs. This indicates that LTM is generally underestimating
demand for international travel on longer distances, and there might more trips
also by rail to further parts of Germany than in the LTM outputs.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 4.10: Changes in rail’s relative share to air according to [17]
Between CPH and:
2019
Fehmarn­0
Fehmarn­1
Fehmarn­2
Fehmarn­3
Hamburg
185 417
141 631
141 706
141 881
128 900
Berlin
628 470
398 967
399 145
399 446
368 969
Ruhr area
417 272
417 714
417 899
418 655
381 280
Bayern
513 678
389 659
389 828
390 550
353 321
Southwest DE
838 121
303 878
304 005
304 616
274 443
Table 4.3: Historical and LTM­predicted air traffic flows between Copenhagen and
Germany
There is another aspect of air traffic that affects the rail passenger flows through
FBFL, and that is the feeding services for long­range flights. The opening the
FBFL will give Copenhagen airport (CPH) a chance to become an even more
important hub for intercontinental flights, as its ground catchment area will in­
crease significantly. Schleswig­Holstein does not have a well­connected airport
with many long­range flights – to reach these, one must travel to Berlin or Frank­
furt. With the completion of the FBFL however, CPH airport will also be easily
reachable from this area.
The airport’s official strategy, Expanding CPH aims to increase yearly passenger
traffic to 40 million – a huge increase compared to approximately 30 million before
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
60
==PAGE:69==
the COVID­pandemic in 2019. [52] One of the important drives for this growth is to
attract new passengers from Northern Germany through the new FBFL, by offering
at least hourly direct services (which is easy if trains continue to Sweden anyway).
The importance of air­rail collaborations is also mentioned: offering transfer tickets
between trains and flight can boost the passenger numbers further. This kind of
collaboration already exists in several countries in Europe, for example between
Lufthansa and Deutsche Bahn or between ÖBB and Austrian Airlines. If CPH
airport can reach its goal of becoming an intercontinental hub and such joint offers
are provided by key airlines, it can attract more passengers through FBFL from
Germany.
4.6
Experience from other fixed link projects
It is also worth to compare the results to the traffic of the other fixed links of
the region. Before the COVID­pandemic, 7.8 million passengers a year crossed
the Storebælt by train, while for the Øresund bridge this number was 12 million.
Compared to these volumes, the FBFL’s 1.6­2.5 million trips (depending on the
assumptions) seem very low. Naturally, the expectations should be lower: the
Storebælt serves a much larger domestic Danish market that already existed be­
fore the fixed link opened, while international travel towards Germany is less in­
tense today. The Øresund link has a very different role: it connects two large
urban regions, so most of its traffic is short­range commuting (around 90% of all
trips), which will not be the case for FBFL.
Figure 4.11: Comparison of the daily traffic volumes over the existing and pro­
posed fixed links of Denmark (Source: [53])
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
61
==PAGE:70==
Nevertheless, as fig. 4.11 indicates, the rail traffic volume ended up to be higher
than the modelling estimations suggested before their opening. Adding these links
are such game­changers in a region’s life, that it is nearly impossible to account
for all the changes they cause in travel patterns, economy, social structures and
so on. As seen from the previous points of this chapter, the current modelling
also includes several biases, of which more might result in underestimation. By
keeping these uncertainties in mind and looking at the experiences from other
links, a guess of 2.5­3 million train passengers over the FBFL does not seem too
wild.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
62
==PAGE:71==
5
Conclusions
This paper examined the effect of four different factors on the future rail passen­
ger traffic across the Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link. These factors are the connecting
infrastructure, timetabling, pricing and the passengers’ perception of modes. In
line with the computational limitations of the LTM (the Danish National Transport
Model), 1+4 scenarios were created for running:
• Fehmarn­0: Base case, with similar assumptions and inputs as previous
studies.
• Fehmarn­1: Mid­term network case, with rather conservative travel time im­
provements on connecting lines in Sweden and Germany, and additional
direct services between Scandinavia and the rest of Europe.
• Fehmarn­2: Long­term network case, with rather optimistic travel time im­
provements on connecting lines in Denmark, Sweden and Germany, and
even more direct services between Scandinavia and the rest of Europe.
• Fehmarn­3: Pricing scenario, including the more extensive taxation of intra­
EU flights (leading to a price increase) and on­track competition between
rail operators on international routes (causing a drop in fares).
• Fehmarn­4: Passenger attitude scenario, that considers recent behavioural
changes, such as reduced values of travel times on mode with sufficient
comfort and on­board entertainment possibilities.
Running the base case gave similar results to previous estimations on FBFL traffic:
it projects 1.62 million trips. However, there are some uncertainties in this result as
it relies a lot on previous models and assumptions, while LTM outputs themselves
also contain some discrepancies that are hard to explain. Nevertheless, it is an
acceptable and reasonable result for a base case, and can be used to analyse
the effects of the other scenarios’ inputs.
The two network scenarios have their results in line with previous expectations:
the moderate improvements lead to a traffic growth of 25.1%, while the optimistic
case had and increase of 39.6%. While increasing departure frequency had nearly
no effect by itself and providing more direct connections also lead to a rather
moderate gain, the completion of the Kattegat Fixed Link and running night trains
over the FBFL both attracted a significant amount of new passengers.
The pricing scenario supported the empirical expectation that long­distance traffic
is quite sensitive to travel costs. Despite flights became more expensive, the
overall market could still grow, due to the simultaneous drop in rail fares.
Running the passenger attitude scenario has unfortunately failed in LTM due to a
system error, and had to be discarded. It would be the most important continua­
tion of this paper to fix this problem and check the effect of the assumptions that
created this scenario.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
63
==PAGE:72==
As the summary shows, the goal of this paper was to find possibilities that could
lead to a higher share of rail passenger traffic through the new fixed link, in line with
the policy goals of the European Union. During this work, several weaknesses
and uncertainties of the modelling and traffic estimation were also identified. In
this closing part, most important things learned about these two aspects will be
summarized as an addition to the numerical results.
UNCERTAINTIES:
• Long­distance international traffic is very difficult to estimate in general. It
is much less ’stable’ compared to local traffic, as the share of commuters
is much lower. The most dominant purposes here (such as holiday traffic,
leisure, business, shopping) are more unpredictable, as they are more likely
to follow the supply and are sensitive to prices (e.g. many people choosing
holiday destinations based on cheap flights). Therefore, any model results
on this area has to be considered very carefully.
• LTM seems to include some distortions in international traffic, probably due
to differences in travel purpose distribution between modes. It also seems
to underestimate international travel demand in general – or at least the air
model outputs are lower than expected from current traffic. These has to be
kept in mind when looking at international outputs from LTM.
• LTM also does not include much of newly generated traffic. As one of the
goals of FBFL is to boost connectivity between Germany and Denmark, and
stabilize the population of the border regions, the self­generated new traffic
could be higher than expected. Especially local cross­border traffic could be
much more intense than the projections of LTM.
• The core area estimations seem to confirm each other from different models,
but there is much less data on transit traffic. There everything is based solely
on the FTC results, but it would be important to see results for it from other
models as well.
• Night trains are just simply huge uncertainties. No thorough researched has
been conducted yet on how they could be involved properly in mode choice
models, and where the passengers could switch from to such new services.
But the results in this paper show that they will probably have a significant
effect on passenger numbers as the basis without them is not that high – so
it is an important task for the future to look into this matter more carefully.
• The paper eventually could not include the simulation of changing passenger
attitude. However, as many literature sources confirm this is getting very
important nowadays to consider, and models without this aspect can be less
accurate.
POSSIBILITIES:
• With the estimated share of transit traffic, network changes in Sweden and
Germany seem to have a noticeable but not too overwhelming effect on
overall FBFL traffic, as still Germany­Denmark trips dominate. But new di­
rect connections are still important and eliminating transfers can add extra
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
64
==PAGE:73==
traffic between any OD­pair (e.g. 21% gain between Denmark and Berlin).
• Pricing has a probably even larger effect: cheaper rail ticket offers can lure
many new passengers. This was shown by empirical observations before,
but the model results also confirmed it. Therefore, one of the most crucial
influencing factor on passenger numbers will be fare structure and the pres­
ence of competition, when opening the new fixed link.
• Due to the geographical distances, many OD­pairs between Scandinavia
and the continent will never be really attractive by day trains. For these
destinations, night train connections can be crucial in the future. As the
success of some European operators show, a quite significant amount of
new passengers can travel through the FBFL with these services, if they
are attractive enough to travellers.
• The changing passenger attitude is not just an uncertainty, but it has possi­
bilities as well. From aviation examples it is clear that good marketing and
well­designed on­board services can also attract passengers without chang­
ing travel times or costs. Therefore, if policy makers and train operators want
to boost the passengers numbers on trains, they have pay attention to this
aspect of the service as well.
• The structure change of air traffic in the broader region also contains a pos­
sibility. If CPH airport manages to grow in terms of intercontinental traffic
according to its plans, that extends their ground catchment area and it can
boost rail trips over the FBFL. It also requires to have well­designed rail­
feeding offers to those long­distance flights.
Overall, the modellings confirmed that even with assuming no significant improve­
ments to boost rail traffic, at least 1.5 million passengers a year can be expected
to travel through FBFL as a bottom line. But as most uncertainties in the base
case tend to show that the model has more under­ than overestimation biases, it
is not unlikely that even 1.8­2 million trips can be realized as baseline. However,
the most important finding is that network improvements and proper pricing has
a large influence on traffic lows, and with good policies rail traffic flows can be
boosted up to 2.5­3 million a year.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
65
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
[1]
European Commission. Statistical Pocketbook 2020 ­ EU Transport in fig­
ures. 2020. URL: https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/
da0cd68e-1fdd-11eb-b57e-01aa75ed71a1.
[2]
UIC ­ International Union of Railways. High­speed Database and Maps.
2021. URL: https://uic.org/passenger/highspeed/article/high-speed-database-
maps.
[3]
European Commission. The European Green Deal (COM(2019) 640). 2019.
[4]
European Commission. Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy (COM(2020)
789 / SWD(2020) 331). 2020.
[5]
Secretariat of the German Federal Government ­ Commissioner for Rail
Transport. TEE2.0 ­ International high­speed and overnight rail services to
promote climate change mitigation. 2021.
[6]
Ministry of Infrastructure Government of Sweden. Night trains to Europe
will now be procured. 2020. URL: https://www.government.se/press-releases/
2020/07/night-trains-to-europe-will-now-be-procured/.
[7]
Femern A/S. Traffic Forecast for the Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link. 2014.
[8]
COWI A/S. Market Study: Improved train service Öresund­Hamburg. 2014.
[9]
Traktat mellem Kongeriget Danmark og Forbundsrepublikken Tyskland om
en fast forbindelse over Femern Bælt. 2008.
[10]
Femern A/S. Project Status ­ Historic Milestones. 2021. URL: https://femern.
com/en/Tunnel/Project-status/Milestones-for-the-project.
[11]
BMVI (Federal Ministry of Transport and Germany) Digital Infrastructure.
Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link. 2021. URL: https://www.bmvi.de/SharedDocs/EN/
Articles/G/fehmarnbelt-fixed-link.html.
[12]
Intraplan ­ BVU. Fehmarnbelt Forecast 2014 ­ Update of the FTC­Study of
2002. 2014.
[13]
Tetraplan A/S. TENconnect 2 (MOVE/B1/2010­313: Supplementary model
calculations supporting TEN­T network planning and impact assessment).
2011.
[14]
Tetraplan A/S. Forventet trafikudvikling i Femern­korridoren ­ Resultater fra
TENConnect2 projekterne. 2014.
[15]
Trafikstyrelsen. Trafikplan for den statslige jernbane 2012­2027. 2013.
[16]
Hanseatic Transport Consultancy ­ Transport Data Lab. Status for High­
Speed Networks in Northern Europe. 2012.
[17]
Transport Data Lab. Effekter af hurtige togforbindelser. 2015.
[18]
DB Netze. Schienenanbindung der Festen Fehmarnbeltquerung (project
website). 2021. URL: https://www.anbindung-fbq.de/de/.
[19]
Den skandinaviske 8 millioners by ­ slutrapport. 2014.
[20]
Trafikverket. Rapport: Nya stambanor för höghastighetståg. 2021.
[21]
Ein Fahrplan für alle: der Deutschlandtakt. 2021. URL: https://www.deutschlandtakt.
de.
[22]
DB Netze. Bahnprojekt Hamburg/Bremen–Hannover (project website). 2021.
URL: https://www.hamburg-bremen-hannover.de/home.html.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
66
==PAGE:75==
[23]
DB Netze. BauInfoPortal: Lübeck – Schwerin (project website). 2021. URL:
https://bauprojekte.deutschebahn.com/p/luebeck-schwerin.
[24]
Kattegatforbindelsen. Undersøgelse af en fast forbindelse over Kattegat.
2021. URL: https://kattegat.dk/om-forbindelsen/.
[25]
TV­Kalundborg.dk. Bro fra Kalundborg til Jylland genoplives. 2018. URL:
https://tv-kalundborg.dk/Bro-fra-Kalundborg-til-Jylland-genoplives.
[26]
Bygge­ og Boligstyrelsen Trafik­. Trafikplan for den statslige jernbane 2017­
2032. 2017.
[27]
Banedanmark. Beslutningsgrundlag: Kapacitetsudvidelse og hastighedsop­
gradering ved Ringsted. 2021.
[28]
EU Environment Agency. CO2 emissions per passenger kilometre from dif­
ferent modes of transport. 2014. URL: https://twitter.com/euenvironment/
status/542314833203695616.
[29]
European Environment Agency (EEA) ­ EU Aviation Safety Agency (EASA)
­ Eurocontrol. European Aviaton Environmental Report. 2019.
[30]
European Commission ­ CE Delft. Taxes in the Field of Aviation and their
impact. 2019.
[31]
CAPA ­ Centre for Aviation. Austrian Airlines bailout protected by taxes and
fare floor. 2020. URL: https://centreforaviation.com/analysis/reports/austrian-
airlines-bailout-protected-by-taxes-and-fare-floor-527571.
[32]
Lorenzo Casullo. “The efficiency impact of open access competition in rail
markets ­ The case of domestic passenger services in Europe”. In: Interna­
tional Transport Forum (2016).
[33]
Matthias Finger; David Kupfer; Juan J. Montero­Pascual. “Competition in
The Railway Passenger Market”. In: European University Institute Report
(2016).
[34]
Matthias Finger; Nadia Bert; Kathryn Bouchard; David Kupfer. “European
Transport Regulation Observer: Competition in Passenger Railways in Eu­
rope”. In: RSCAS ­ Policy Brief (2017/24 2017).
[35]
BBC News. Sweden sees rare fall in air passengers, as flight­shaming takes
off. 2020. URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-51067440.
[36]
FINANS.dk. For første gang i 10 år: Væksten i flytrafikken er gået i stå.
2020. URL: https://finans.dk/erhverv/ECE11861792/for-foerste-gang-i-10-aar-
vaeksten-i-flytrafikken-er-gaaet-i-staa/?ctxref=ext.
[37]
IDA (Danish Society of Engineers). 1 in 3 Danes will fly less in the future.
2021. URL: https://english.ida.dk/1-in-3-danes-will-fly-less-in-the-future.
[38]
Marcel Hunecke; Sonja Haustein; Susanne Böhler; Sylvie Grischkat. “Attitude­
Based Target Groups to Reduce the Ecological Impact of Daily Mobility Be­
havior”. In: Environment and Behavior 42.1 (2010).
[39]
Jillian Anable. “‘Complacent Car Addicts’ or ‘Aspiring Environmentalists’?
Identifying travel behaviour segments using attitude theory”. In: Transport
Policy 12 (2005), pp. 65–78.
[40]
Andrew Daly; Stephane Hess; Bhanu Patruni; Dimitris Potoglou; Charlene
Rohr. “Using ordered attitudinal indicators in a latent variable choice model:
a study of the impact of security on rail travel behaviour”. In: Transportation
39 (2011), pp. 267–297.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
67
==PAGE:76==
[41]
Maria Vredin Johansson; Tobias Heldt; Per Johansson. “The effects of atti­
tudes and personality traits on mode choice”. In: Transportation Research
Part A 40 (2006), pp. 507–525.
[42]
Marco Kouwenhoven; Gerard de Jong. “Value of travel time as a function of
comfort”. In: Journal of Choice Modelling 28 (2018), pp. 97–107.
[43]
Imre Keseru; Cathy Macharis. “Travel­based multitasking: review of the em­
pirical evidence”. In: Transport Reviews 38.2 (2018), pp. 162–183.
[44]
Aliaksandr Malokin; Giovanni Circella; Patricia L. Mokhtarian. “Do millenni­
als value travel time differently because of productive multitasking? A re­
vealed preference study of Northern California commuters”. In: Transporta­
tion (2021), pp. 1–37.
[45]
Mark Wardman; Glenn Lyons. “The digital revolution and worthwhile use of
travel time: implications for appraisal and forecasting”. In: Transportation 43
(2016), pp. 507–530.
[46]
Marco Kouwenhoven; Gerard de Jong. Discussion Paper: Time Use and
Values of Time and Reliability in the Netherlands. 2019.
[47]
Mogens Fosgerau; Katrine Hjorth; Stéphanie Vincent Lyk­Jensen. The Dan­
ish Value of Time Study. 2007.
[48]
Stefan L. Mabit; Jeppe Rich; Peter Burg; Dimitris Potoglou. “Valuation of
travel time for international long­distance travel – results from the Fehmarn
Belt stated choice experiment”. In: Journal of Transport Geography 33 (2013),
pp. 153–161.
[49]
Jeppe Rich; Christian Overgaard Hansen. “The Danish National Passenger
Model – model specification and results”. In: EJTIR 16(4) (2016), pp. 573–
599.
[50]
Thorsten Gunkel; Mathias Schnee; Matthias Müller–Hannemann. “How to
find good night train connections”. In: Networks 57(1) (2011), pp. 19–27.
[51]
Dieter Fockenbrock (Handelsblatt). Österreich startet Nachtzug­Offensive
in Europa. 2020. URL: https://www.handelsblatt.com/unternehmen/handel-
konsumgueter/schienenverkehr-oesterreich-startet-nachtzug-offensive-in-europa/
26075242.html.
[52]
Transport Data Lab. International tilgængelighed på skinner. 2014.
[53]
Otto Anker Nielsen; Alex Landex. Debatoplæg til banestrategi for en konkur­
rencedygtig Øresundsregion. 2009.
Analysis of passenger travel across the new Fehmarnbelt Fixed Link
68
==PAGE:77==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Bygningstorvet 116B
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.transport.man.dtu.dk
