==PAGE:1==
Aerosols in respiratory air
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Aerosols in respiratory air
Federico Medea
Submitted to the Department of
Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Biomedical Engineering, MSc
Eng. 30 July, 2021
Federico Medea ­ s193612
30 July, 2021
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In 2019 the COVID­19 pandemic started to spread all over the world causing almost 3 mil­
lion of deaths and a total of more than 130 million of cases. The effectiveness and proper
use of face masks are still under observation since the high number of cases of infection
reported every day. The main aim of the study is to conduct an experiment that measures
and quantifies aerosols under laboratory experimental conditions. A test chamber with a
steady flow setup is installed and aerosols flux measurements are taken. Aerosols reten­
tion in respiratory air is also investigated. Specifically, different types of mask such as
surgical mask, respirators and a new prototype mask are tested to quantify their filtration
efficiency in the experimental setup.
Then, it was possible to analyse and differentiate between spreader (head A) and receiver
(head B) in terms of pressure drop of mask and filtration. As regards the results on pres­
sure drop, it was concluded that mask tightness is a key factor into the increase of it for
both cases (head A and B). FFP2 Leikang (tight) was the mask that achieved the highest
pressure drop in both experiments with a mean value of 39.5 Pa and 37 Pa at the highest
flow for head A and B, respectively. Regarding the results on aerosols retention, it was
possible to conclude that masks are more useful to prevent from spreading particles more
than protecting from them because the mean reduction of mask worn by receiver (head
B) was higher than the ”no mask” case only when the masks were tighter. Overall, FFP2
Leikang (tight) was the mask that achieved the highest mean reduction in both experiments
with values of 97.1 % and 96.2 % for head A and B, respectively. Therefore, these results
confirmed the great importance of mask tightness in filtration efficiency.
ii
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my thesis supervisors John Heebøll, Knud Erik Meyer and Poul
Scheel Larsen that helped me every day for the development and good outcome of this
project. In particular, I would like to thank John that was the main supervisor behind
this project idea and he was always available to help me in the laboratory when it was
necessary. I would also like to thank Knud Erik that was the supervisor in charge of the
main organization of the project and helped me with his brilliant suggestions during the
project period. Lastly, I would like to thank Poul Scheel for his wisdom and help for the
mathematical and physical part related to the project.
I would also like to extend my gratitude to my family that always supported me during
my student career and gave me this opportunity to study at DTU and live this abroad
experience.
Aerosols in respiratory air
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2.1
Aerosols behaviour and transmission
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2.2
Aerosols filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory
7
2.1
Aerosols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Fibrous media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Initial pressure drop
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Initial pressure efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Filtration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Solid aerosols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.2
Liquid aerosols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Materials and Method
21
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.1
Flow meter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.2
Manometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.3
Particle generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.4
Particle detector
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.2
Leakage test chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.3
Aerosol flux measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.4
Mask filtration measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Results and Discussion
35
4.1
Test chamber validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Pressure drop analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Aerosols retention analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Conclusions
61
Bibliography
65
A Appendix
67
Aerosols in respiratory air
v
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
APS Aerodynamic Particle Sizer
BPM Breaths Per Minute
CFD Computational Fluid Dynamics
DRH Deliquescence Relative Humidity
EPA Efficient Particulate Air Filter
FFP Filtering Face Piece
FE
Filtration Efficiency
HEPA High­Efficiency Particulate Air
MFEC MicroFibrous Entrapped Catalysts
MMD Mass Median Diameter
MPPS Most Penetrating Particle Size
PM
Particulate Matter
PP
PolyPropylene
RH
Relative Humidity
SEM Scanning Electron Microscope
ULPA Ultra Low Penetration Air Filter
VOC Volatile Organic Compounds
WHO World Health Organization
vi
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In this first chapter a brief introduction to the topic of the thesis will be given. Firstly,
the reasons why this research was carried out will be explained. In the next subsection,
the organization of the thesis will be described on details. After that, a more accurate
description of the state of the art will be conducted. Finally, the aim and the objectives of
the study will be stated.
1.1
Motivation
In 2019 the COVID­19 pandemic started to spread all over the world causing almost 3
million of deaths and a total of more than 130 million of cases [1]. After 1 year and a
half this virus is still affecting our lives changing habits and way of socializing between
people. Indeed, nowadays wearing a face mask has become part of our daily routine and
it is considered one of the main medical devices to contrast the pandemic. However,
the effectiveness and proper use of face masks are still under observation since the high
number of cases of infection reported every day. Because of that, face masks need to be
studied in order to have a full understanding of how they work and exploit their protective
potential against virus completely. Nonetheless, before examining the power of filtration
of a single face mask it is necessary to take a step back and analyse the behaviour of
aerosols in air. In fact, one of the main mean of infection is airborne transmission of the
virus. Therefore it is also essential to study how particles go through air and then how a
viral spreader can infect another person by generating virus carrier droplets and aerosols.
So in conclusion, this study will try to give clearer answers on the following problems:
how pathogenic aerosols behave in respiratory air and how face mask can neutralize them
properly. As a result of this, the research will be able to contribute to the understanding
of COVID­19 airborne transmission and so the possible defeat of the virus.
1.2
Literature review
1.2.1
Aerosols behaviour and transmission
Several researches on aerosols have been published in the last few years. The interest on
this topic increased particularly after COVID­19 pandemic. The number of citations for
each article was taken from Web of Science Core Collection.
In a study by Asadi et al. [2] that was cited 163 times, it was shown that particles emitted
during breathing and speech have 1 μm diameter on average and they take around 100 ms
to evaporate. These small particles are potentially more infectious than larger that are gen­
erated with sneeze or cough. Indeed, they persist in the air for longer time before setting
by gravity, thus increasing the probability of inhalation. Moreover, smaller particles can
penetrate further into the respiratory tract more frequently and speech can release dramat­
ically larger numbers of particles compared to coughing (around 2–10 times more than a
single cough). As regards voice loudness, the particle emission rate increased from 6 to
53 particles per second at the quietest and loudest vocalizations respectively. However,
the geometric mean particle diameter remaining near 1 μm regardless of voice amplitude.
Lastly, it was demonstrated that some individual participants, called superemitters, emit­
ted many more particles than others.
Aerosols in respiratory air
1
==PAGE:10==
In a study by Tellier et al. [3] that was cited 424 times, it was stated that particles of >6
µm diameter are trapped increasingly in the upper respiratory tract whereas no substantial
deposition in the lower respiratory tract occurs at >10–20 µm (large droplets). Coughing
or sneezing generates a substantial quantity of particles, a large number of which are <
5­10 µm in diameter. Particles with a diameter at emission of <20 µm shrunken by evap­
oration are referred to as droplet nuclei and complete desiccation would occur in <1 s by
decreasing the diameter to a little less than half the initial diameter.
In a revised version of the previous article released in 2009 [4] and cited 296 times, it
was shown that particles of 5 µm or less have a significant penetration into the respiratory
tract all the way to the alveolar region. Particles with an aerodynamic diameter of 5 µm
or less are defined aerosols, whereas particles >20 µm are large droplets. The size of the
majority of the particles exhaled by mouth is 1 µm or less during normal breathing. It
was also calculated using Stokes’ law that for a 3 m fall it takes 4, 17 and 67 minutes for
particles with diameter of 20, 10 and 5 μm respectively.
In another study by Yan et al. [5] cited 144 times, it was concluded that influenza cases
rarely sneezed, so sneezing is not important for influenza virus aerosolization. On the
other hand, cough was prevalent and a strong predictor of virus shedding into both coarse
and fine aerosols. However, it is more a response to irritation than a direct source of infec­
tious aerosols. Indeed, a significant fraction of influenza cases routinely shed infectious
virus, as infectious virus was found in 39% of fine­aerosol samples during normal tidal
breathing.
In a study by Fennelly [6], it was concluded that pathogens predominate in small particles
(< 5 μm) generated by exhaled breath aerosols and they are most likely to remain airborne
and to be deposited in the lower respiratory tract.
In a research conducted by Milton et al. [7] that was cited 217 times, it was shown that
fine particles (< 5 µm) contained 8.8 fold more viral copies than did coarse particles (>5
µm). In particular, they detected virus RNA in coarse particles exhaled by 43% and in
fine particles exhaled by 92% of influenza patients.
In a recent research by Moriyama et al. [8], they revealed the effect of environmental fac­
tors (temperature and humidity) on respiratory virus stability and transmission rates. In
particular, dry and unventilated air can increase opportunity to spread influenza virus in­
fection in wintertime. Therefore, possible solutions suggested to prevent respiratory virus
transmission in winter could be to maintain an indoor Relative Humidity (RH) equals to
40 −60% and ventilated indoor air.
In a recent article by Tang et al. [9] they concluded that respiratory aerosol droplets with
aerodynamic diameter < 5 μm (droplet nuclei) remain suspend in air currents or turbulence
and may drift away considerable distances (> 1 m). Furthermore, during normal breathing
and talking, 80–90% droplet sizes are < 1 μm, so they are subjected to aerosols transport. It
was also highlighted the importance of ventilation, since in an optimally ventilated room,
the number of droplets could halved after 30 s, whereas with poorly ventilated and no
ventilation rooms this could take 1–4 min and 5 min, respectively.
In conclusion, for this study fine aerosols will be taken into account since they can pene­
trate into the respiratory tract during breathing [3][5]. It was also reported how pathogens
predominate in small particles (< 5 μm) [6]. In particular, a Mass Median Diameter
(MMD) of the particle size of 1 μm or less needs to be taken into account during speaking
and breathing [2][4][9]. Lastly it is important to mention the influence of temperature,
humidity and ventilation on respiratory virus stability and transmission [8][9].
2
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:11==
1.2.2
Aerosols filtering
In literature there are also articles related to aerosols filtering to prevent possible virus
spreading. As before, Web of Science Core Collection was taken into account for the
number of citations.
In a recent article by Asadi et al. [10], it was revealed that both surgical masks and un­
vented KN95 respirators, even without fit­testing, reduce the outward particle emission
rates by 90% and 74% on average during speaking and coughing, respectively, compared
to wearing no mask. In the experiment an Aerodynamic Particle Sizer (APS) was placed
inside a High­Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) filtered laminar flow hood that mini­
mized background particle concentration. The subject was in front of a funnel attached to
the APS inlet via a conductive silicone tube.
In another study by Leung et al. [11] that was cited 199 times, they collected exhaled
breath coarse particles >5μm (respiratory droplets) by impaction with a 5­μm slit inertial
Teflon impactor. The remaining fine particles ≤5μm (aerosols) were collected by conden­
sation in buffer.
In a research by Kasper et al. [12] they conducted an experiment where a single stainless
steel fiber (or an array of several parallel fibers) was exposed to an aerosol flow. The
aerosol flux was measured before and after the fibers via an optical technique which per­
formed single particle counting to determine the collection efficiency of single fibers.
In a study published by Gu et al. in 2015 [13], they elaborated a 3D Computational Fluid
Dynamics (CFD) model based on Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images of the
fibrous media. Volume loading of fibers, entrapped particles and media compressibility
were found to be major contributors to pressure drop for MicroFibrous Entrapped Cata­
lysts (MFEC).
In an article by Kravchik et al. [14], it was showed how the Filtration Efficiency (FE) of
a fibrous filter increases by reducing the filter diameter and especially its porosity. More­
over it can improve by increasing the filter thickness.
In another article by Quan et al. [15] showed the role of NaCl salt as an active virus nega­
tion unit. The salt coating on the PolyPropylene (PP) microfiber filter surface dissolves
upon exposure to virus aerosols and recrystallizes during drying, destroying the pathogens
and enhancing FE.
In a study by Podgorski et al. [16] cited 295 times, it was shown how the use of nanofiber
filters increased the filtration efficiency in fibrous filters. The research was to have an
experimental verification of how to increase the filtration efficiency using filters contain­
ing fibers of 0.2 μm diameter that were produced by a melt­blown technique. A trade­off
between filtration efficiency for the Most Penetrating Particle Size (MPPS) (aerosol par­
ticle size­range between 100 and 500 nm) and pressure drop ∆P (breathability through
the material) was achieved.
In another study by Sundarrajan et al. [17], it was demonstrated the efficiency of nanofibers
for air filtration. They showed how the use of conventional filters such as glass fibers and
charcoal based filters can be replaced with nanofibers filters thanks to their ability of re­
moving Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) and nanoparticles.
In the guidance on the use of masks published by World Health Organization (WHO) in
2020 [18], it was stated that filtering facepiece respirators offer more respiratory protec­
tion than surgical masks. In fact, medical masks filter 3 µm droplets, whereas respirators
filter up to 0.075 µm solid particles.
In a study by Cowling et al. [19] cited 105 times on the use of face masks to prevent
Aerosols in respiratory air
3
==PAGE:12==
transmission of influenza virus, it was stated how N95 or equivalent respirators are rec­
ommended for aerosol­generating procedures, whereas surgical masks for droplet precau­
tions.
In a study by Smith et al. [20] cited 105 times, it was showed that N95 respirators are
associated with less filter penetration, less face­seal leakage and less total inward leakage
under laboratory experimental conditions, compared with surgical masks.
An interesting article by Konda et al. [21] that was cited 124 times, revealed how gaps
(caused by an improper fit of the mask) can result in over a 60% decrease in the FE. Fab­
ric with tight weaves and low porosity were preferable. Moreover, it was highlighted the
importance of the combined effect of mechanical and electrostatic filtration mechanisms
since FE of the hybrids (such as cotton−silk, cotton−chiffon, cotton−flannel) was > 80%
(for particles <300 nm) and > 90% (for particles >300 nm).
In a similar study by Drewnick et al. on homemade face masks [22], they showed how
electrostatic attraction contributes strongly to overall FE for particles up to 100 nm diam­
eter. Furthermore, a small fractional leak area of 1–2% can strongly deteriorate total FE,
as FE dropped by 50% or even two thirds for particles smaller than 5 µm diameter.
In another study by Zangmeister et al. [23] FE, pressure drop and quality factor were
measured for 32 cloth materials including cotton, wool, synthetic, synthetic blends, and
synthetic/cotton blends used in cloth masks intended for protection from the SARS­CoV­2
virus (diameter 100 ± 10 nm). The results showed that no measured cloth masks performed
as well as a N95.
Therefore, it is possible to conclude that respirators offer more respiratory protection than
surgical masks [18][6]. Moreover, they are recommended for aerosols, whereas surgi­
cal masks only for protection against droplets [19]. A key factor that needs to be taken
into consideration are gaps that decrease the filtration efficiency greatly[21][10]. Lastly,
electrostatic attraction together with mechanical filtration mechanisms was reported to
increase filtration efficiency of masks [21][22].
1.3
Thesis objectives
The main aim of the study is to conduct an experiment that will measure and quantify
aerosols under laboratory experimental conditions based on the previous work by Ueki et
al. in 2020 [24]. So firstly, one of the objectives will be to replicate the results obtained
previously by the Japanese crew in order to verify and validate the experimental method.
In particular, a test chamber with a steady flow setup will be installed and aerosols flux
measurements will be taken. Aerosols retention in respiratory air will also be investigated.
Specifically, different types of mask such as surgical mask, respirators and a new prototype
mask will be tested to quantify their filtration efficiency in the experimental setup.
1.4
Thesis outline
The thesis is divided into five chapters. In Chapter 1 an introduction to the background of
aerosols in respiratory air and their retention is given. The state of the art on aerosols is
also shown. After that, the final objectives of the thesis are reported.
In Chapter 2 the theoretical part of the topic will be covered giving the necessary infor­
mation on how aerosols behave and diffuse in air. Then, the characterization of fibrous
filter is presented by taking into account its initial pressure drop and efficiency. Finally,
the actual filtration process of solid and liquid aerosols through filter media is explained.
4
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 3 deals with an initial description of the equipment used in the experiment and
then how it was validated. After that, it will be shown how the experiment was conducted
to measure aerosol flux and mask filtration.
In Chapter 4 the results of the experiment will be provided and followed by a discussion
on mask pressure drop and aerosols retention of the different masks.
Lastly, Chapter 5 will show the final conclusions on the research and the experiment results
including also some possible future developments of it.
Aerosols in respiratory air
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:15==
2
Theory
This chapter will focus on aerosol filtration by taking into account the characteristics of
the aerosol, the characteristics of the fibrous filter and the operating conditions such as fil­
tration velocity, temperature and humidity, and how they interact between them. Overall,
the section is divided in three parts: aerosols, fibrous media and filtration of aerosols.
2.1
Aerosols
Aerosol, by definition, is the suspension of solid or liquid particles in a gaseous medium
and it refers to both the particles as well as the gas in which these particles are suspended
[25]. In air it corresponds to particles smaller than 100 μm. Figure 2.1 shows some of
the typical particle dimensions found in air. Particles can be detected and classified into
different Particulate Matter (PM)x classes based on their aerodynamic diameter x.
Figure 2.1: Orders of magnitude of size for some particles [25].
A gas is a discontinuous medium made up of molecules in constant motion [25]. The
characteristics of a gaseous medium need to be taken into account since it restricts random
movement of particles or slows down their deviations under a force field. The mean free
path λg is defined as the mean distance that a molecule travels between two collisions.
For air molecules it is calculated by the following equation:
λg = λ0
T
T0
P0
P
1 + 110,4
T0
1 + 110,4
T
(2.1)
where λ0 = 66.5×10−9 m, P0 = 101325 Pa and T0 = 293.15 K. It increases as the
temperature increases or as the pressure decreases.
Another important parameter is the Knudsen number Kn that is dimensionless and is the
ratio of the mean free path of the molecules of the gaseous environment to the radius of
Aerosols in respiratory air
7
==PAGE:16==
the particles (dp/2):
Kn = 2λg
dp
(2.2)
It is used to determine whether a medium is continuous or not. The medium can no longer
be considered continuous when the dimensions of the particles are of the same order of
magnitude as the mean free path of the molecules of the surrounding gas. Therefore, a
total of 3 regimes are given: Kn << 1 for a continuum gas flow, 0.4 < Kn < 20 for
transition flow and Kn >> 1 for free molecular flow.
A particle with small dimensions, suspended in an environmental gas, is subject to Brow­
nian motion (i.e. the random motion of particles suspended in a medium). The only forces
that can act on particle are the resistance offered by the medium to the movement of the
particle and external forces. Drag force (Fv) is the force that is opposed to the relative
movement of a particle in air or, generally, in a gas [25]. It is computed by:
Fv = CtAp
ρgU 2
2
(2.3)
where Ap is the projected area of the particle (m2), U is the displacement velocity of the
particle (m/s) and ρg is the density of the gas (kg∙m−3). Ct is the drag coefficient and
it is a function of the flow regime surrounding the particle that depends on the particle
Reynolds number (Rep):
Rep = Udpρg
µ
(2.4)
where µ is the dynamic viscosity of the gas (Pa∙s).
Particles suspended in a gas at constant temperature and pressure, move around under the
action of Brownian motion and tend toward a uniform concentration in the whole of the
gaseous volume [25]. The diffusion coefficient D for a spherical particle is:
D = kbTCu
3πµdp
(2.5)
where kb is Boltzmann’s constant, that is equals to 1.381×10−23J∙K−1 and Cu is the Cun­
ningham’s coefficient. Thus, the average distance ¯z travelled by a particle in a time t is
obtained by:
¯z =
√
2Dt
(2.6)
2.2
Fibrous media
In air filtration, the majority of fibrous filters are made up of non­woven fibrous media.
By definition, non­woven is a manufactured sheet or web of directionally or randomly
oriented fibers, bonded by friction, or cohesion or adhesion [25]. The biggest difference
between non­woven and woven is the fact that in the non­wovens, fibers are used directly
rather than threads (collection of fibers). A non­woven media is manufactured by the for­
mation and then the consolidation of the non­woven webs.
Nowadays, there are different technologies to generate fibers that improve the quality of
the filtration. One of them is using fibers that carry electric charges (electret fibers). An
electret is a dielectric material that has a quasi­permanent state of electric polarization
[25]. The polarization can be obtained by either the real electric charges on the surface
8
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:17==
and/or the volume, or by the oriented dipoles, fixed in the volume. Another technique
called electrospinning involves the use of nanofibers. It is based on the drawing out of
a polymer jet using electric charges to produce the synthetic fibers. A better mechanical
resistance is obtained due to the low mechanical resistance of the nanofiber sheet formed
that is deposited on the fibrous support.
Fibrous media can be characterized by the following parameters: thickness, packing den­
sity and diameter of the fibers. Thickness (Z) is an important characteristic of fibrous
media that affects the performance of filtration and is defined by the equation:
Z = G
ρFi
(mlρFi
mFiρl
+ 1
)
(2.7)
where G is grammage (expressed in g∙m−2), mFi is the mass of fibers, ρFi is the density
of the fibers, ml is the mass of the liquid at saturation and ρl is the density of the liquid.
Packing density (α) is the ratio of the volume of the fibers to the volume of the fibrous
media [25]. In aerosol filtration, it has values lower than 20–30% and is computed by:
α = 10−3G
ZρFi
(2.8)
The diameter of the fibers is calculated with the equation:
df =
√
4 dtex
107π ρFi
(2.9)
where dtex stands for decitex and is the submultiple of the tex that corresponds to the
mass, in grams, of 1,000 m of the wire or fiber.
Fibrous media must meet specific criteria and performances based on the target appli­
cation. In the case of protective breathing masks, it is essential to have a product that
presents low resistance to fluid flow for respirability, and which has quite a high level
of efficiency for effective protection. Filtering Face Piece (FFP) are used to define three
classes of respiratory masks: from FFP1 to FFP3. In Table 2.1 it is shown the standards
that each mask needs to comply with. The pressure drop characterizes the user’s respira­
tory comfort, whereas leaks represent how mask is well­sealed and can reduce the mask’s
effectiveness.
Class
Filtration efficiency
Inward leakage
Pressure drop
FFP1
≥80%
<22%
<210 Pa
FFP2
≥94%
<8%
<240 Pa
FFP3
≥99%
<2%
<300 Pa
Table 2.1: Classification of respiratory masks according to the EN 149 norm.
As regards general ventilation air filters, filtering elements are classified into three groups
according to EN 1822 norm based on their filtration efficiency: Efficient Particulate Air
Filter (EPA), High Efficiency Particulate Air Filter (HEPA) and Ultra Low Penetration Air
Filter (ULPA).
Aerosols in respiratory air
9
==PAGE:18==
2.2.1
Initial pressure drop
A fibrous medium is a porous medium that offers resistance when a fluid travels across
it. This results in a difference in total pressure between the entry and exit faces of the
filter; this is called a pressure drop [25]. The goal of any new design for a filter media is,
in general, to minimize the pressure drop and, consequently, minimize the expenditure of
energy for a given efficiency.
Darcy’s law is the most commonly used law to estimate the pressure drop for a filter based
on its characteristics and the nature of the flow. In stationary flow, the pressure gradient
is related in a linear manner to the rate of flow through a porous medium with thickness
Z, assumed to be homogeneous and isotropic, by the following relationship:
∆P
Z
= 1
κµ Uf
(2.10)
where κ is the permeability of the filtering media, µ is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid
and Uf is the mean flow velocity. This law, established for liquids, remains valid for the
flow of gas through porous media as long as the fluid can be considered to be incom­
pressible. The application of the law depends on the flow regime that is characterized,
based on the packing density of the fibrous media: it is used the pore Reynolds num­
ber Repore =
ρ Uf
µ α af for α > 0.2, whereas the fiber Reynolds number Ref =
ρ Uf df
µ (1−α) for
α < 0.2 where af represents the specific surface area of fibers with a diameter of df. In
Table 2.2 it is shown the different flow regimes that are identified depending on the type
of Reynolds number.
Laminar
Transitional
Turbulent
Repore <180
180<Repore<900
Repore>900
Ref<1
1<Ref<1000
Ref>1000
Table 2.2: Flow regimes.
The impact of heterogeneity of fibrous media on pressure drop needs to be taken into
account since a fibrous media hasn’t a homogeneous structure in reality. In Figure 2.2 it
can be seen how the fibers are not uniformly distributed throughout the media and that
one fraction of the total volume of fibers (fV f is found in one fraction of the total area of
the media (fS) causing a local variation in the packing density. Therefore, one part of the
fibrous media presents a lower flow resistance than the other part. This results in a higher
flow rate in this zone.
Figure 2.2: Modeling of heterogeneous media [25].
10
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:19==
After having carried out several calculations, it is possible to conclude that in the laminar
regime the ratio of the pressure drop for a heterogeneous media to that of the pressure drop
for a homogeneous (ideal) media is:
∆Pheterogeneous
∆Phomogeneous
=
[( fS
fV f
)1,5 [
1 +
(
fV f
1 −fV f
1 −fS
fS
)1.5 1 −fS
fS
]
fS
]−1
(2.11)
Another option could be to use pleated media. Specifically, in order to increase collection
efficiency or the particle retention capacity leads to implement filters with very large fil­
tration areas. On the other hand, filters with very low filtration velocities can be used to
minimize energy loss. In Figure 2.3 it is shown the two types of pleats commonly used,
each characterized by height (h), pleat gap (p) and length (L): the triangular pleat, also
called a “V” pleat and the rectangular pleat, also called a “U” pleat.
Figure 2.3: Different kinds of pleats [25].
Pleating fibrous media results in additional pressure drops as compared to flat media.
Thus, in pleated media, in a laminar flow regime, the linear evolution of pressure drop
based on permeation velocity, which is classically seen for flat media, becomes nonlin­
ear after a certain value. The difference observed between the “flat” pressure drop and the
“pleated” pressure drop depends on the number of pleats. Indeed, a small number of pleats
results in a low filtering surface, i.e. high filtration velocity and, consequently, a greater
pressure drop across the media. On the other hand, a large number of pleats results in low
filtration velocity, inherent to a larger filtration area but also an increase in the energy lost
through friction related to the flow of fluid in channels.
Lastly, it is important to differentiate between rigid and non­rigid pleats. Rigid pleats are
able to not losing their shape whatever the constraints on the pleated filter. Thus, the non­
linear evolution of the pressure drop is related to narrowing (contraction of air at the entry
to the pleat), air flow in the channel that forms the pleat, the filter media’s flow resistance
and widening (expansion of air at the exit to the pleat).
However, air­flow within pleated media may bring about, in some cases, a deformation of
the pleat (non­rigid pleats) that generates a modification in the flow. In fact, this region,
which is characterized by a high resistance to the passage of the fluid, implies a prefer­
ential flow within the pleat. A majority of the flow passing across this restricted surface
brings about an increase in velocity, which leads to a higher pressure drop. Several studies
demonstrated that at low filtration velocities (< 3 cm∙s−1), that deformation is negligible
and the pressure drops are equivalent to that those across flat media. Beyond these veloc­
ities, the pressure drop across pleated media increases with the filtration velocity. For a
speed of 8 cm∙s−1, the pressure drop doubles with respect to that of a flat media with the
same area [25].
Aerosols in respiratory air
11
==PAGE:20==
2.2.2
Initial pressure efficiency
Efficiency is the key criterion when evaluating a filter performance. The efficiency of the
filter governs the concentration of particles downstream of the filter media. Therefore, for
instance, it determines if a respiratory protective filter conforms to the protection level for
the operator. Assuming that the volumetric flow is identical upstream and downstream of
the filter, the overall filtration efficiency may be defined as a function of the upstream and
downstream concentrations:
E = 1 −Cdownstream
Cupstream
(2.12)
As the filtered particles are generally polydisperse, it could be useful to define efficiency
for a given particle size. Thus, it is preferable to express efficiency as fractional efficiency
(Edi) for a particular size (di). For high­efficiency filters, fractional efficiency is lowest
for the MPPS that is the most difficult size to collect and it’s between 0.1 and 0.5 μm. As
a result of this, the qualification of most filters is carried out with a test aerosol whose
particle size distribution is centered on the MPPS. It is important to notice that the ex­
perimental determination of efficiency requires that the inlet velocity, into the sampling
tube, must be equal to the flow velocity in the pipe where the sampling is carried out with
a probe that is parallel to the streamlines.
It is possible to determine the efficiency of a fibrous filter based only on the knowledge of
the characteristics of the filter media, aerosol and filtration velocity. Taking into account
a fibrous media of thickness Z made up of an array of fibers, more or less entangled, with
a mean diameter df, then the overall efficiency of the filter is:
E = 1 −P = 1 −exp
(
−4 η
α
1 −α
Z
πdf
)
(2.13)
where P is penetration and η is the collection efficiency of a single fiber, which is the
ratio of the flux of particles of diameter dp collected by the fiber to the flux of particles of
diameter dp approaching the fiber.
The single fiber efficiency, η, is a function of the different physical particle capture mech­
anisms. The main mechanisms are: Brownian diffusion, interception, inertial impaction
and electrostatic effects (see Figure 2.4).
Figure 2.4: Filtration mechanisms.
12
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:21==
Diffusion is significant for particles with a small diameter (dp < 0.1µm) that come into
contact with fibers by Brownian agitation and adhere to them. Interception involves par­
ticles that are larger than 0.1 μm. It is assumed that a particle with a diameter, dp, is
intercepted by a fiber when it approaches this fiber at a distance smaller than its radius.
It could also happen that a particle does not follow the streamlines going around the fiber
due to its inertia and may impact on the fiber’s surface. Inertial impaction is especially
dominant for particles (dp > 1µm), which have a high inertia. Lastly, if the fibers or
particles, or both, carry charges then electrostatic forces such as image force, polarization
force and Coulombic force can influence the filtration efficiency (electrostatic collection
efficiency).
Assuming that each mechanism is independent of the others, the single fiber efficiency is
considered as the sum of the efficiencies related to each capture mechanism:
η =
n
∑
i=1
ηi
(2.14)
The collection efficiency of a single fiber, which is assimilated to a cylinder (ηi), is defined
as the ratio of the number of particles collected by the fiber (∆N) to the number of particles
having travelled a virtual section situated much further upstream of the fiber (N) [25]:
ηi = ∆N
N
(2.15)
In Table 2.3 it is shown the relative influence of the characteristics of the filter media,
aerosol and operating conditions on the efficiencies linked to the main collection mecha­
nisms.
Aerosol
Operating condition
Filter characteristics
Efficiency
ρp ↗
dp ↗
Uf ↗
df ↗
α ↗
Z ↗
Diffusion
↘
↘
↘
↘
↗
↗
Interception
­
↗
­
↘
↗
↗
Inertia
↗
↗
↗
↘
↗
↗
Table 2.3: Influence of various parameters intrinsic to the aerosol, the filter and to filtration
on the collection efficiency for collection through diffusion, interception and inertia [25].
For high­efficiency filters the minimum efficiency value for particles is between 100 and
300 nm taking into account inertia, interception and diffusion mechanisms. This particle
size is said to be the MPPS. In the presence of electrostatic effects, the MPPS is offset
toward the smallest particles and the minimum efficiency value increases [25].
The impact of heterogeneity of fibrous media on efficiency needs to be taken into account
in presence of apparent flaws such as microperforations that can greatly reduce a filter
performance. A model was proposed to estimate the penetration of a filter that presents
resistance to flow in the media in the presence and absence of leaks (Rm and R′
m). For the
Aerosols in respiratory air
13
==PAGE:22==
single fiber diffusion efficiency, the penetration, P, of a flat filter with holes is:
P = 1 −fh
R′
m
Rm
[
1 −exp
(
−3.36 α Z
π(1 −α)df
(R′
m
Rm
Pe
)−0.43)]
(2.16)
where fh is the ratio of the perforated surface area to the surface area of the filter media
and Pe is Péclet’s number calculated for the mean flow velocity. For a given perforation,
the penetration tends toward a constant value beyond a maximum particle size. Thus,
efficiency is no longer governed by the collection of particles within the fibrous structure
but by the leak itself (leak regime) [25]. Moreover, the penetration of the finest particles,
for the same perforation, becomes all the greater, with respect to the penetration of the
non­pierced filter, as the flow resistance increases. Thus, a filter with least resistance, but
presenting a sufficient efficiency would be preferable since the consequences would be
less harmful in case of a leak.
2.3
Filtration
2.3.1
Solid aerosols
During filtration, the collection of particles by the filter results in an increase in the pres­
sure drop across the filter [25]. For solid aerosols, this evolution can be divided into three
phases based on filtration time. In Figure 2.5 it is shown the duration of each phase based
on the filter media, the aerosol and operating conditions.
Figure 2.5: Evolution of the pressure drop across a filter clogged by a solid aerosol [25].
Therefore, in case of a flat filter media there are three different phases:
1. depth filtration: a slow change in the pressure drop results primarily from the col­
lection of particles within the media and a low mass of collected particles
2. a transition zone: the appearance of a deposit on the surface of the filter leads to an
exponential change in the pressure drop. A portion of the particles is still collected
within the media;
3. surface filtration: a linear evolution of the pressure drop is related to an increase in
the thickness of the deposit on the surface of the filter. In this phase, the particles
are collected by this deposit.This phase is seen only in exceptional cases for filters
used in respiratory protection.
14
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:23==
Two additional phases are needed to be taken into account for a pleated filter:
• a transition zone: a change in the pressure drop, moving away from a linear change;
• a reduction in filtration area: a rapid increase in the pressure drop related to the
partial or total clogging of the filter pleats.
As regards depth filtration, the filtration efficiency of a fiber filter depends on on the struc­
tural properties of the filter: the mean diameter of the fibers and the packing density of
the filter. An increase of these two parameters determines an an increase in the number of
particles collected within the filter media.
The transition zone between depth filtration and surface filtration is also called the tran­
sition or clogging point that corresponds to the value of the area density of the particles
collected by filter, beyond which there is the appearance of a deposit on the surface of the
filter [25].
Lastly in surface filtration, the structure of the deposit differs based on the particle size
distribution of the collected particles. For submicronic particles (dp < 1 µm) the deposit
is dendritic that leads to a deposit with low packing density (i.e. high porosity) and large
specific surface area. On the other hand, for microscopic particles, the deposit is formed
of compact agglomerates, generating a lower specific surface area and greater packing
density. The structure of the deposit is highly dependent on the collection mechanism.
Thus, particles that are essentially captured by diffusional, interception or electrostatic
mechanisms will tend to form dendrites. On the contrary, particles mainly captured by
inertial mechanism form deposits in the form of aggregates. In Figure 2.6 it is shown the
structure of the deposit on the fiber based on the filtration conditions:
Figure 2.6: Schematic relationship between the structure of the deposit and the filtration
conditions, expressed as functions of the Péclet number (Pe), the Stokes number (Stk) and
the interception parameter (R) [25].
Thus, in the absence of interception, Brownian diffusion (low Pe number) leads to a homo­
geneous and open deposit of particles around the fiber. When only the inertial mechanism
is dominant (high Stokes number), the deposit is more compact and is oriented to face the
flow. The presence of an additional interception mechanism generates a more dendritic
and open structure.
During surface filtration, the rise in pressure drop is caused by the accumulation of par­
ticles on the surface of the filter media. In the absence of any compression of the cake,
Aerosols in respiratory air
15
==PAGE:24==
which is the part of the collected particles that deposit themselves on the surface of the
filter, the evolution of the pressure drop remains linear and linked to the increase in thick­
ness of the deposit.
A reduction in the filtration area can be caused by a steep increase in pressure drop and
reached if the filtration system is not well maintained. Observations carried out on a
pleated high­efficiency filter demonstrate the presence of solid bridges between the pleats
or even a partial blocking of the pleats at high clogging levels­ This reduction in filtration
area can be linked to the deformation of pleats during clogging for filter media with low
rigidity [25].
The influence of humidity in the air needs to be taken into account as the particles sus­
pended in the flow or forming a filtration cake can interact with their environment, espe­
cially with water vapor present in the air. Therefore, the affinity of the particles with re­
spect to water will have an impact on the pressure drop or collection efficiency. A particle
is hygroscopic if it tends to absorb moisture from air. It can only happen beyond a certain
relative humidity level that is called the Deliquescence Relative Humidity (DRH). At this
point, the particle dissolves itself in the volume of sorbed water, generating a droplet. For
RH values greater than the deliquescence point, the size of the droplet continues to grow.
In contrast, as RH decreases, water evaporation results in a smaller droplet.
In case of non­hygroscopic nanostructured particles, it was demonstrated that there is a
decrease in the thickness of the deposit formed by filtration under dry air, then subjected
to a flux of humid air. This structural modification can be explained by a modification of
the internal forces in a nanostructured deposit due to the adsorption of water vapor (for
RH < 70 %) and the presence of liquid bridges between particles, linked to capillary
condensation (for RH > 70 %).
2.3.2
Liquid aerosols
Filtration is the most commonly used separation technique to treat liquid aerosols. Liq­
uid aerosols are part of atmospheric pollution in mechanical industries and agricultural
industries. In industrial, the compression of atmospheric air results in the vaporization of
the lubricant oil. As a result of the rapid cooling of air as it is distributed, the vapor is
condensed into an extremely fine mist. It was shown that 80–90% of mists are composed
of particles with a diameter smaller than 1 µm. Liquid aerosols are produced by three
different processes:
1. Mechanical atomization: at very high rotational velocities the liquid that comes
into contact with the rotatory equipment acquires sufficient mechanical energy to
disaggregate into small droplets. It generated particles of between 5 and 110 μm
depending on the oil type, the centrifugal velocity and the liquid flux.
2. Evaporation–condensation: one part of the liquid evaporates and subsequently con­
denses to form droplets due to extreme temperatures
3. Entrainment by gas flow in gas–liquid contactors: gas moving through cooling tow­
ers, from plate columns, etc., can carry along liquid droplets on the order of 105−107
droplets per cubic centimeter with the diameter of the droplets ranges from 0.5 to
3 µm.
Liquid aerosols are treated by using fiber filters. Indeed, within a fiber filter a liquid
aerosol undergoes several changes. In Figure 2.7 it is shown the possible outcomes of
16
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:25==
mist droplets that permeate a filtration system.
Figure 2.7: Diagrammatic representation of the filtration of a liquid aerosol; (V) vapor;
(NC) uncollected droplets; (R) re­entrainment; (E) evaporation; (C) collected droplets
[25].
Upstream, the droplets coexist with the vapor of the volatile and semivolatile compounds
present in the filtration sample. As they are transported across the filter media, the droplets
may or may not be collected depending on their characteristics (size and density), the
characteristics of the filter (packing density and fiber diameter) and operating conditions
(velocity) [25]. The majority of the liquid particles that accumulate in the filter flow to­
ward the downstream zone of the media, but a part may evaporate and escape the filter in
the form of vapor. Therefore, an efficient filter must maximize the collection of droplets
from the air flow while also minimizing not only the evaporation of the droplets or their
re­entrainment into the system but also the pressure drop.
The clogging of a fibrous filter at a steady rate by liquid aerosols is characterized by spe­
cific evolutions in the pressure drop and penetration, compared to a solid aerosol. In Fig­
ure 2.8 it is shown the stages in the filtration of a liquid aerosol. A total of four stages are
present: deposit on the surface in the form of drops (stage 1), coalescence and decreased
collection area (stage 2), formation of liquid bridges and films (stage 3) and stationary
regime (stage 4).
Figure 2.8: Evolution of the performance and the deposit of droplets during the clogging
of a filter by a submicronic liquid aerosol [25].
Aerosols in respiratory air
17
==PAGE:26==
The filtration velocity is a parameter that is very influential on a filter’s pressure drop that
increases as the filtration velocity increases. It was also observed that if the rate of the
temporal evolution remains constant, high filtration velocities are the cause of an expo­
nential increase in more premature pressure drops. It was suggested that high filtration
velocities promote the reorganization of the droplets collected in the filter and, therefore,
promote their coalescence. Thus, for the same collected mass, the liquid is distributed
differently depending on the filtration velocity. On the contrary, there is increased flow
resistance, during the stationary regime, at low velocities. This could be explained by
the fact that displacement of the liquid at high velocities facilitates the distribution of the
liquid through the whole of the porous media and thus minimizes the resistance. Liquid
aerosols are the only ones that have this feature that take advantage of high velocities.
As regards pressure drop, it essentially depends on the mass of the collected liquid for a
given filtration velocity. Moreover, during the stationary phase it increases as the surface
tension of the liquid increases. Indeed, the spherical drops have low resistance to flow
while the pools, formed at the intersections of the fibers, are more resistant to flow and,
thus, the cause of greater pressure drops.
Regarding efficiency, clogging and subsequent accumulation of liquid within the filter
leads to an increase in the interstitial velocity during filtration that causes a reduction
in diffusion collection efficiency and an increase in collection by impaction. Therefore,
clogging is the cause for an increase in efficiency for micronic particles and a decrease in
efficiency for submicronic or nanometric particles. Moreover, if filtration velocity plays
a dominant role during media clogging, the concentration of liquid particles does not have
a significant influence on the filter efficiency [25].
However, most mists are impure in reality. That is, they are not solely made up of liquid
droplets but also contain solid particles. In Figure 2.9 it is shown the temporal evolution
of the pressure drop across a fibrous filter when it is clogged with a mixture, in variable
proportions, of the two aerosols.
Figure 2.9: Evolution of the pressure drop across a fibrous filter depending on the mass
fraction of solid particles in the generated aerosol [25].
18
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:27==
It is possible to notice that it has a specific behavior that differed from the near­linear evo­
lution observed in the three phases encountered in the filtration of a liquid aerosol. There
are a total of five stages in the clogging of a filter by a binary mixture: a relatively slow
increase in the pressure drop due to the deposit of solid and liquid particles (stage 1), a
very rapid increase in the pressure drop (stage 2), then the pressure drop tends to stabilize
or increase very slowly (stage 3), After that, a second exponential increase in the pressure
drop (less abrupt) due to an increase in the thickness of the cake accompanied by a pro­
gressive closing of the pores of the cake (by the liquid) brings about a large increase in
flow resistance and the interstitial velocity of the gas (stage 4). Lastly, a pseudo­stationary
regime is set up due to the downstream drainage of the liquid collected previously. This
state translates to a stabilization of the pressure drop across the filter (stage 5). This ten­
dency for the pressure drop to increase as the ratio of solid aerosols increases is not only
for mixtures but also for solid aerosols with particles covered in liquid.
In conclusion, the clogging of a media takes place in several phases and results in a
drainage regime during which the pressure drop becomes stable. An increase in the pack­
ing density and the interstitial velocity of the gas accompanies the clogging and, therefore,
the accumulation of liquid within the filter. Thus, clogging has the same effect as an in­
crease in filtration velocity, namely heightened efficiency for micronic particles and a drop
in performance for submicronic particles [25]. Only the final pressure drop and efficiency
are, therefore, determined by the modification of certain parameters of the filter (packing
density, fiber diameter, etc.) to take into account changes caused by the accumulation of
liquid.
Aerosols in respiratory air
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:29==
3
Materials and Method
In this section the instruments used in the experiment will be presented. Then, it will be
shown how the experiment was conducted. In particular, leakage test chamber, aerosols
flux and mask filtration measurements will be described.
3.1
Materials
3.1.1
Flow meter
A flow meter or a rotameter is a device that measures the volumetric flow rate of fluid in
a closed tube. A rotameter consists of a ’float’ (a shaped weight like a sphere) within a
glass tube. The indicator is pushed up by the drag force of the flow and pulled down by
the weight of the float and it floats at a steady value when the forces on it are equal. In
Figure 3.1 it is shown the instrument used in the experiment. In the represented case it can
be easily seen that the float indicates a value equals to 7 in a range scale that goes from 0
to 10.
Figure 3.1: Volumetric flow measurement device used for the experiment.
Before using it in the actual experiment, the device needs to be calibrated in order to
get the most precise measurements during the trial. To do this, a flow meter volumetric
calibration was carried out on two different days. The experiment was conducting by
flowing a certain air volume through the flow meter that was compared to the reference
volume of a glass container which was put inside a storage tank. The reference volume was
determined geometrically. The flow meter inlet was connected to a pump whose power
was controlled by a voltage regulator in order to adjust the flow. The outlet was connected
to the container. For each observation, it was estimated the time that the water flow took
to go from 35 to 15 cm height through the container (that corresponds to 2 l volume). Two
different pumps were used in the two­day experiment. The pump of the second day will
be used in the actual experiment since it was easier to reach the desired flow values with
it. In Figure 3.2 it can be seen a graphic scheme of the experiment where the water volume
in the container starts to decrease.
Aerosols in respiratory air
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.2: Illustration of flow meter calibration experiment.
In Appendix (see Table A.1 and Table A.2) are shown the results obtained for the flow
meter calibration in the first and the second day of experiment, respectively. A total of
17 observation were collected in the first day, whereas the other 10 observations were
obtained in the second day. Multiple measurements were taken for some flow meter range
. The flow was calculated from time estimation for each observation. In particular, it can
be seen how the standard deviation of it was higher for flow meter range that goes from
7,1 to 7,2 and from to 8,3 to 8,4 in day 1 of experiment. Instead in day 2 of experiment,
the highest standard deviation was obtained for a flow meter value equals to 4,1. This
flow variability could be related to experimental error such as readout uncertainty and
time measurement errors.
Multiple R
R Square
Adjusted R Square
Standard Error
No. obs
0.96
0.92
0.92
0.62
27
Table 3.1: Regression statistics.
A linear regression analysis was computed with Microsoft Excel to estimate the relation­
ship between the flow meter readout and the actual flow. In Table 3.1 it is shown the most
important values. For the total of 27 observation it can be seen that the multiple R value is
really close to 1 (that is 0.96), therefore there is a strong positive relationship between the
two variables, whereas the R square with a value equals to 0.92, it means the goodness of
fit. The Standard Error that measures the average distance that the data points fall from the
regression line is equals to 0.62. In Appendix (Table A.3) it was calculated the residuals
between the predicted flow and the actual flow for each observation.
Lastly, in Figure 3.3 a linear regression graph is shown where it can be easily seen that
for the highest flow meter values there is less linearity due to the oscillations of the float
(flow meter range that goes from 9 to 9.5 and from to 9.4 to 9.5 for observation number
26 and 27, respectively).
Using the least square method, the linear regression is defined by the following equation:
y = bx + a
(3.1)
where b is the flow meter coefficient and a is the intercept coefficient. Therefore, it is
possible to conclude that to obtain a flow equals to 10 l/min, it is necessary to have a flow
22
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:31==
meter readout equals to 9.7 with b = 1.3398 and a = −2.9912. Once the flow meter
calibration was carried out, it was ready to be used in the experiment.
Figure 3.3: Linear regression
However, for the last experiments it was decided to use a digital flow meter (MEMS mass
flow meter MF 5712) that allowed to obtain higher flow rates and more accuracy in the
measurements. In Figure 3.4 it is shown the digital flow meter that has a flow range that
goes from 0 to 200 l/min with a response time lower than 2 s.
Figure 3.4: MEMS mass flow meter MF 5712.
3.1.2
Manometer
Two different manometers were used during this study in order to measure the pressure
inside the chambers in the experiments. The ”Testo 510” is a differential pressure mea­
suring instrument that is normally used to measure small differences in pressure (e.g. to
check filter permeability), gas flow pressure measurement, fine draught measurement as
well as flow velocity measurement with a Pitot tube. The unit of measurement used was
Pascal with a measuring rate of 0.5 s. In Figure 3.5 it is shown the device.
Aerosols in respiratory air
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.5: Testo 510 differential pressure sensor.
An additional manometer was also used: the KIMO MP120 that is a portable, handheld
meter suitable for measuring pressure and air velocity whose overall measurement range
is from ­1000 to +1000 Pa, with accuracy of ±0.5% of reading ±2 Pa and resolution down
to 1 Pa. The device was calibrated in 2015 and it is shown in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: KIMO MP120 manometer.
3.1.3
Particle generator
Mesh nebulizers are the newest innovation of nebulizer product to the market. They use
a mesh cap with tiny holes to help dispense medication into consistent particle sizes that
can be easily and comfortably inhaled for treating the upper and lower respiratory tract.
For this study a nebulizer was used to generate particles during mask filtration. The model
chosen was Mesh nebulizer YM­252 and it is shown in Figure 3.7. The ultrasonic nebu­
lizer atomizes the liquid using the principle of ultrasound producing finely atomized par­
ticles between 1 and 5 µm with a condensation rate greater than 0.2 ml/min and a relative
humidity < 93 %.
24
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.7: Mesh nebulizer YM­252.
However, it was decided to replace the nebulizer with an electronic cigarette in the latest
experiments. Indeed, the e­cigarette was able to generate smaller particles with dimen­
sions between 0.1 and 0.9 µm in order to analyse very fine aerosols. A model example is
represented in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: An example of commercial e­cigarette.
3.1.4
Particle detector
A PM 2.5 detector was decided to use in order to measure particle concentration in the
chamber for mask filtration measurements. The device model chosen was RAZE SND­
WAY SW­825 PM2.5 that is able to detect particles with dimensions less or equal to 2.5 µm
and measure temperature and relative humidity. The PM 2.5 measuring range goes from
0 to 500 µg/m3 with a single response time of less than 1 s and a counting efficiency of
Particulate Matter equals to 50% at 0.3 µm and 98 % for particles greater than 0.5 µm. It
is shown in Figure 3.9.
Aerosols in respiratory air
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.9: PM 2.5 detector.
In Table 3.2 it can also be seen the level of air quality taking into account the average value
of PM 2.5 over 24 hours.
Grade of air quality
Average value of PM 2.5 in 24 hours
Great
0 −35 µg/m3
Good
35 −75 µg/m3
Mildly polluted
75 −115 µg/m3
Moderately polluted
115 −150 µg/m3
Seriously polluted
150 −350 µg/m3
Severely polluted
> 250 µg/m3
Table 3.2: Level of air quality.
3.2
Method
3.2.1
Experimental setup
In the original experiment by the Japanese crew it was decided to use a test chamber for
airborne transmission simulator of infectious SARS­CoV­2­ with an aluminium frame and
acrylic panels [24]. The dimensions of the chamber were 120­cm long x 40­cm wide x
50­cm high that corresponds to a volume of 240 l. Two mannequin heads were placed
in front of each other into the test chamber. One mannequin head was connected to a
nebulizer to simulate a viral spreader by generating droplets and aerosols. The other one
was connected to an artificial ventilator through a particle collection unit to simulate tidal
breathing of a person exposed to the pathogens. Particle size exhaled was 5.5 ± 0.2 μm in
MMD. A gelatin membrane filter was used to trap virus particles contained in the inhala­
tion flow. RH and temperature were maintained at 60–65% and 23–25 °C, respectively.
In comparison to the Japanese experiment, for this study it was decided to have a chamber
with the following dimensions: 125­cm long x 39,5­cm wide x 49,5­cm high that corre­
sponds to a volume of 244.4 l by inserting acrylic plates with a thickness of 3 mm. In
addition to this main chamber, two side chambers were installed by using acrylic plates
with dimensions 14 cm x 79.5 cm (length x height). In Figure 3.10 it is shown the exper­
imental setup.
In order to simulate tidal breathing in humans, a tube with inner diameter equals to 10,3
mm was placed inside each mannequin head by taking into account a flow rate Q of 10
l/min with a flow speed v of 2 m/s. As regards the flow rate value, it was obtained by
26
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:35==
multiplying the tidal volume with respiratory rate. In literature the tidal volume value is
consistent and it is equals to 0.5 l/breath, whereas the respiratory rate is more variable with
a range that goes from 12 to 20 Breaths Per Minute (BPM) for adults at rest. For the calcu­
lations, it was taken into account the maximal value of 20 BPM giving the flow rate of 10
l/min. Regarding the flow speed in literature there is less agreement on it. Nonetheless, in
one article published by Tang et al. [26] it was calculated that the maximum velocity dur­
ing coughing and sneezing was 5 and 4.5 m/s, respectively. Instead a maximum velocity
of 1.4 m/s and 1.3 m/s was obtained for nasal breathing and mouth breathing, respectively.
Therefore it was decided to take into account a flow speed value of 2 m/s in order to simu­
late a more contagious behaviour. In the following equations the computation of the tube
inner diameter is given:
Q = A ∗v = 10 l/min = 0.167 ∗10−3 m3/s
(3.2)
A = Q
v = 0.167 ∗10−3 m3/s
2 m/s
= 8.35 ∗10−5 m2
(3.3)
A = π ∗R2 = π ∗D2
4
(3.4)
D = 2 ∗
√
A
π = 10.3 mm
(3.5)
Figure 3.10: Test chamber setup.
In Figure 3.11 it is shown an illustration of how the experiment works on details in a steady
flow setup. Firstly, a pump connects the two side chambers by generating the requested
flow. The flow meter (previously calibrated) is used to measure the flow rate. A USB
ventilator is placed inside each side chamber and main chamber to help distribute par­
ticles within chambers. Moreover, a total of 3 particle detectors are used, one for each
chamber. The side chambers are connected to the main chamber by using a pipe that is in­
serted directly into the mannequin heads. Lastly, two manometers are used to measure the
Aerosols in respiratory air
27
==PAGE:36==
differential pressure between chambers: p1 pressure within left side chamber, p2 pressure
within main chamber and p3 pressure within right side chamber.
Figure 3.11: Graphic scheme of the test chamber.
In Figure 3.12 it is shown the latest setup after the installment of four poly carbonate
plates and added to the other two existing acrylic plates of the main chamber. Moreover,
two digital flow meters were mounted behind the heads. One flow meter measures the
flow that goes from chamber 1 to head A (spreader), the other one is for the flow that
enters into head B (receiver) and arrives to chamber 3. The distance between heads is 40
cm approximately.
Figure 3.12: Main chamber setup with the two digital flow meters.
3.2.2
Leakage test chamber
The objective of this experiment was to validate the equipment that will be used to measure
masks performance. Therefore, it was necessary to evaluate the flow leakage as a function
of pressure for each chamber. The chambers were tested in several days by measuring the
flow leakage on different experimental conditions. In particular, firstly, the following
scenarios were taken into account: before and after painting the chamber. Moreover, a
28
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:37==
second painting was carried out afterwards. It was assumed that the painting would prevent
higher leakages through chambers.
Figure 3.13: The three experiments conducted to measure the flow leakage as a function
of pressure. a) Flow leakage ql1 from left side chamber given p1. b) Flow leakage ql2
from main chamber given p2. c) Flow leakage ql3 from right side chamber given p3.
Since the chamber didn’t give reliable results in terms of leakage and pressure after having
painted it with 2­layer components, it was clear that the actual leakage flow seemed related
to the structure of the main chamber and its panels. Therefore, it was installed 4 polycar­
Aerosols in respiratory air
29
==PAGE:38==
bonate plates and added to the other two existing acrylic plates in order to cover the entire
structure with more solid and thick material. Then, new experiments were conducted to
test the main chamber and its new plates in order to see if there was an improvement in
terms of flow leakage and pressure by using the new material.
To do that, a new pipe was set that allowed to measure p2 related to the given flow by con­
necting it directly with the analogic flow meter. As a result of this, a new different exper­
iment was started where the flow meter was connected to the main chamber, whereas the
left and right­side chamber outlets were left open to ambient (p1−pa = 0 and p3−pa = 0)
where pa is the ambient pressure. Then the same sort of experiment was conducted also
for the side chambers: flow meter directly connected to one side chamber, whereas the
other one and the main chamber outlets are left open. Lastly, the three experiments were
repeated again after having sealed the linings completely and painted the guides in the
front. In Figure 3.13 it is represented the three different experimental situations.
3.2.3
Aerosol flux measurements
The objective of these experiments was to determine the pressure drop at head A (spreader)
outlet ∆pA and head B (receiver) outlet ∆pB as a function of flow. It was decided to use
only the left side chamber (chamber 1) to evaluate the pressure drop for spreader in order
to simplify the replication of the experiment.
However, before starting to take measurements, a new leakage test chamber was conducted
in order to verify that the flow leakage from the chamber could be neglected. In Figure 3.14
it is shown the leakage test for chamber 1 where the inlet pump was open to ambient, the
outlet pump was connected to the flow meter. The outlet flow meter was connected to
chamber 1, whereas the outlet of chamber 1 was sealed by blocking the outlet of pipe A.
Figure 3.14: Leakage test for the left side chamber to find flow leakage ql1 as a function
of pressure p1.
After that, the equipment was ready to measure the aerosol flux. In both experimental
situations (spreader and receiver) the analogic flow meter was replaced with the digital one
installed with the latest setup. In Figure 3.15 it is shown the graphic schemes of the two
experiments. As regards the pressure drop for spreader, it is easy to notice that chamber
2 and 3 are disconnected, thus, only chamber 1 is taken into account. The digital flow
30
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:39==
meter was mounted behind head A in order to estimate the actual flow for the head. The
inlet pump was open to ambient, whereas the outlet pump was connected to chamber 1.
Thus, the outlet of chamber 1 was connected to head A by pipe A. Therefore, the pressure
drop (∆pA) was obtained by measuring directly the pressure into chamber 1 (p1) given a
certain flow.
On the other hand, for the receiver, the pressure drop was obtained by measuring directly
the pressure into chamber 3 (p3). The spreader (head A) doesn’t wear any mask, while
receiver’s pressure drop is measured in different experimental conditions. It is possible
to see that the main chamber (chamber 2) was open to ambient, while p1 and p3 were
measured by using the two manometers simultaneously. The digital flow meters were
mounted behind head A and B. Lastly, the tube from chamber 3 was connected to inlet
pump, whereas the tube from chamber 1 was in connection with the outlet pump to have
air recirculation.
Figure 3.15: Aerosol flux experiments. a) Pressure drop evaluation for spreader (head A).
b) Pressure drop evaluation for receiver (head B).
In both experiments it is important to mention that it was decided to take into account a
maximal flow rate equals to 10 l/min as the tidal volume is equals to 0.5 l/breath and the
Aerosols in respiratory air
31
==PAGE:40==
respiratory rate goes from 12 to 20 Breaths Per Minute (BPM) for adults at rest.
Finally, in Figure 3.16 it is shown all the different experimental conditions that were taken
into account to measure pressure drop for spreader and receiver. A total of eight cases
are presented: head without mask, head with a prototype mask, head with surgical mask
(normal and tight), head with FFP2 NRD OX­ON(normal and tight and head with FFP2
NR LEIKANG (normal and tight). An adapter was used in order to fit the mask to the
head completely.
Figure 3.16: Experimental cases considered for the aerosol flux measurements. a) No
mask. b) Prototype mask. c) Surgical mask (normal and tight). d) FFP2 NRD OX­ON
(normal and tight). e) FFP2 NR LEIKANG (normal and tight).
3.2.4
Mask filtration measurements
In these experiments, the ability of masks to filter aerosols is tested. To do this, in one
experiment, it was decided to measure particle concentration into chamber 1 and 2 with PM
2.5 detector during exhalation for head A (spreader). In the other one, it was measured
the particle concentration into chamber 2 and 3 with PM 2.5 detector during inhalation
for head B (receiver). It was assumed that the difference in concentration between one
side chamber and the main one gave reliable results related to mask filtration. The two
experiments are represented graphically in Figure 3.17.
Firstly, a mesh nebulizer was used to generate particles within the chambers, but it wasn’t
able to give a good analysis of the particles. So, instead of it, an electronic cigarette was
used to inject particles with size between 0.1 and 0.9 µm into the chambers. Therefore,
very small particles with diameter of 1 μm or less were taken into account.
A special liquid for particle generation was inserted into the e­cigarette in order to make
particles more resistant to evaporation. Nonetheless, after several experiments, it was
clear that it was not possible to establish steady state conditions into chambers due to
the instant particle evaporation. As a result of this, a different approach was taken: a 1­
second injection was carried out every 30 seconds, thus, first injection came at 0 s, second
injection at 30 s and so on. It was established an experiment time of 10 min (or 600 s)
and by sampling every 10 s, a total number of measurements equal to 61 was achieved
for every experiment. Two PM 2.5 detectors were used to measure particle concentration
into the main chamber and one of the side chambers depending on the experiment. The
particle detector was able to measure particle concentration with a range that goes from 0
to 500 µg/m3.
In Figure 3.17 (a) it is shown the experiment with head A where it is possible to notice that
the volume of chamber 2 was halved by inserting a divider into it in order to have a higher
concentration of particles in chamber 2 (open to ambient). The particles were directly
injected into chamber 1 with a flow rate equals to 20 l/min through head A. In Figure 3.17
32
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:41==
(b) it is shown the experiment with head B. In this case, the particles were directly injected
into chamber 2 (open to ambient) with a flow rate through head B equals to 20 l/min that
allowed to move the particles from chamber 2 to 3. The flow rate of 20 l/min was chosen
because it represents the tidal breathing in more stressed conditions [27]. Moreover, this
higher flow helped to make faster the process whereby particles moved from one chamber
to the other one.
Figure 3.17: Mask filtration measurements. a) PM 2.5 detection for head A (spreader). b)
PM 2.5 detection for head B (receiver).
In Figure 3.18 it is shown all the different experimental conditions that were taken into
account to measure aerosols retention for spreader and receiver. A total of five cases are
presented: head without mask, head with surgical mask (normal and tight) and head with
FFP2 NR LEIKANG (normal and tight). As previously seen, the adapter was used in order
to fit the mask to the head completely.
Aerosols in respiratory air
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.18: Experimental cases considered for the aerosols retention measurements. a)
No mask. b) Surgical mask (normal and tight). c) FFP2 NR LEIKANG (normal and tight).
34
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:43==
4
Results and Discussion
In this chapter the results will be showed and then discussed. Firstly, the results on cham­
ber validation are presented, secondly, a pressure drop analysis on face masks is carried
out based on aerosol flux measurements. Lastly, mask filtration is also highlighted thanks
to the aerosol retention analysis.
4.1
Test chamber validation
In this section the latest and most relevant results on leakage test chamber are shown. In
particular, a comparison between experiment results after having installed four polycar­
bonate plates and added to the other two existing acrylic plates (day 4) and after having
sealed the linings completely and painted the guides in the front (day 5) is carried out.
These results are represented graphically in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Leakage tests for the left side chamber given p1 (on the left), the main chamber
given p2 (in the middle) and the right side chamber given p3 (on the right).
As regards day 4, in both three cases multiple measurements were taken by sampling mea­
sures firstly upward and then downward. So, a mean of the same pressure measurements
was taken into account. It was easy to notice that after the installation of the four plates
in the main chamber, an important improvement was obtained. Indeed, a flow leakage
that was approximately 7 l/min was obtained given a p2 equals to 110 Pa. Moreover, the
graphs for pressure­flow leakage in the two side chambers look very similar. However,
the left side chamber was able to obtain slightly better results reaching lower flow leak­
ages at the highest pressure value. It can be noticed that the highest flow leakages were
above 8 l/min and below 8 l/min for left (given p1 equals to 80 Pa) and right side chamber
(given p3 equals to 70 Pa), respectively.
The results are also shown in details with Table 4.1, Table 4.2 and Table 4.3 that refer to
flow leakages ql1, ql2 and ql3, respectively.
Aerosols in respiratory air
35
==PAGE:44==
Day
p1 [Pa]
Flow readout
Flow [l/min]
4
40
5.65
4.58
50
6.3
5.44
60
6.95
6.32
70
7.6
7.19
80
8.3
8.12
5
120
4.8
3.44
125
5
3.71
200
6.4
5.58
Table 4.1: Experiment results from day 4 and 5 for the left side chamber.
Day
p2 [Pa]
Flow readout
Flow [l/min]
4
50
4.6
3.17
60
5.4
4.24
80
5.83
4.82
90
6.3
5.44
100
7.15
6.58
110
7.5
7.06
5
40
4.1
2.5
50
5
3.71
60
5.5
4.4
80
6.5
5.72
90
7.3
6.79
100
8
7.73
Table 4.2: Experiment results from day 4 and 5 for the main chamber.
Day
p3 [Pa]
Flow readout
Flow [l/min]
4
40
5.6
4.51
50
6.5
5.72
60
7.4
6.92
70
8.05
7.79
5
100
4.6
3.17
120
5.5
4.38
150
6.3
5.45
190
7.5
7.06
Table 4.3: Experiment results from day 4 and 5 for the right side chamber.
In a comparison between day 4 and day 5, it can be noticed that the results for the main
chamber are similar. A small worsening was obtained but it might be related to experi­
mental error. As regards the side chambers, a great improvement for both chambers was
achieved. In particular, the left side chamber was able to reach a flow of 5.58 l/min with
a corresponding pressure value of 200 Pa. Lastly, for instance, it is interesting to notice
36
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:45==
that the flow leakage in the left side chamber was 3.44 l/min for a pressure value equals
to 120 Pa, it was 7.73 l/min when the pressure in the main chamber was 100 Pa, whereas
it was 4.38 l/min for a pressure value of 120 Pa in the right side chamber.
Then, taking into account the latest data from day 5, it was created a linear regression
model in order to have the leakage flow of each chamber as a function of pressure. The
regression statistics for the three chambers are shown in Table 4.4. It can be seen that
the multiple R value and the R square are really close to 1 for each chamber. The lowest
standard error was obtained for the left side chamber with a value equals to 0.099.
Chamber
Multiple R
R Square
Adjusted R Square
Standard Error
No. obs
1
0.998
0.996
0.993
0.099
3
2
0,996
0.992
0.989
0.197
6
3
0.995
0.991
0.987
0.190
4
Table 4.4: Regression chamber 1­2­3
The three regression models were defined by the following equations:
y1 = 0.0285 x1
(4.1)
y2 = 0.0743 x2
(4.2)
y3 = 0.0362 x3
(4.3)
where x1, x2and x3 are the given pressure in each chamber. It is important to mention
that each model was obtained by setting the intercept in the origin since it is supposed that
there is no flow leakage for a pressure equals to 0 Pa. Therefore, the linear regression
graphs of each chamber after adjustment are shown in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Linear regression model (adjusted) for chamber 1 (on the left), 2 (in the middle)
and 3 (on the right).
Overall, the results of the experiments were satisfactory in terms of pressure and corre­
sponding flow leakages in each chamber. In particular, the results revealed that the main
chamber was the main source of flow leakage taking into account similar pressure values
in the three chambers. As regards the two side chambers, their performances were quite
similar. However, after day 5, the left side chamber confirmed that was able to achieve
better results than the right side chamber.
Thus, it was possible to conclude that the chamber equipment was validated thanks to
these solid results and ready to be used for measurements in the actual experiments with
Aerosols in respiratory air
37
==PAGE:46==
masks. Indeed, the flow leakage could reasonably be estimated given a certain pressure in
a chamber and since it is legitimate to expect lower pressure values dealing with face mask,
then very small flow leakages can be easily foreseen during aerosol flux measurements.
4.2
Pressure drop analysis
The results for the leakage test of the left side chamber are now discussed. Five mea­
surements were taken from 120 to 200 Pa and are shown in Table 4.5. The values are
consistent with the results obtained in the previous test for chamber validation.
p1 [Pa]
Flow readout
Flow [l/min]
120
3.75
2.0
140
4.2
2.6
160
4.6
3.2
180
5
3.7
200
5.3
4.1
Table 4.5: Leakage tests for the left side chamber given p1.
Based on it, a linear regression model was computed in order to have the flow leakage
ql1 as a function of pressure p1. The equation y = 0.0198 x was determined and used
to define the flow leakage given a certain pressure within chamber 1 for the aerosol flux
measurements. The model is represented in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Linear regression model for the flow leakage in chamber 1 given p1.
Therefore, the leakage flow of the left side chamber was obtained by using the linear
regression model based on the results of the leakage test. In Table 4.6 it is possible to
notice that the leakage flow is really low and almost irrelevant for the given pressures in
the aerosol flux measurements (the values shown in the table are related to the case where
head A is without mask). As a result of this, it was decided to disregard the leakage flow
from chamber 1 in the measurements. The same conclusion was achieved for the leakage
flow from chamber 3 because it was already demonstrated that the two side chambers
perform similarly in terms of pressure and corresponding flow leakages.
After that, pressure drop calculations were carried out in order to estimate the pressure
38
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:47==
within pipe A and so the final pressure at head A outlet. Obviously, the same calculations
and results were achieved for pipe B behind head B. In Table 4.7 it is shown an example
for head A without mask. q12 is the flow that goes through the pipe A and was obtained by
subtracting ql1 from the starting flow. The corresponding velocity v was calculated with
the following equation:
v = q12
A
(4.4)
The velocity values are relevant and consistent with the ones used in literature [26] where
it was calculated that the maximum velocity during nasal breathing and mouth breathing
was 1.4 and 1.3 m/s, respectively.
Then the Reynolds number was computed with Equation (2.4) where U is velocity, dp
is the inner diameter of the pipe equals to 10.3 mm, ρ is the density of the air equals to
1.225kg/m3 and µ is the dynamic viscosity of the air at 20°C equals to 1.825 ∗10−5 kg/m s.
It is possible to notice that the Reynolds numbers obtained mean that a laminar flow is
within the pipe. Therefore, the final equation used to calculate the pressure drop at pipe
A for the given flow values is:
∆ppipeA = f(Re) L
dp
ρ
2v2
(4.5)
where f(Re) is equals to 64
Re and L is the pipe length equals to 53 cm.
Eventually, the pressure drop at head A outlet ∆pA was computed by subtracting ∆ppipeA
from the pressure p1 in chamber 1. After having carried out these calculations, it was clear
that the pressure drop at pipe A could be neglected. Therefore, it was concluded that to
simplify the pressure drop measurements for head A and B, it was sufficient to measure
directly the pressure in chamber 1 and 3, respectively.
p1 [Pa]
Flow readout
Flow [l/min]
ql1 [l/min]
q12 [l/min]
11.5
6
5.05
0.23
4.82
14
7
6.39
0.28
6.11
16.5
8
7.73
0.33
7.40
19
8.7
8.67
0.38
8.29
Table 4.6: Example of flow leakage ql1 computed for head A without mask.
q12 [l/min]
q12 [m^3/s]
v [m/s]
Re
f (Re)
∆p pipeA [Pa]
p1 [Pa]
∆pA [Pa]
4.82
8.03E­05
0.96
665.14
0.10
2.81
11.5
8.69
6.11
1.02E­04
1.22
843.20
0.08
3.56
14
10.44
7.40
1.23E­04
1.48
1021.25
0.06
4.31
16.5
12.19
8.29
1.38E­04
1.65
1143.85
0.06
4.83
19
14.17
Table 4.7: Example of pressure drop calculations for head A without mask.
Once the flow leakages from chambers and the pressure drop at pipes were disregarded, it
was more straightforward to measure the aerosol flux. Indeed, by taking into account the
Aerosols in respiratory air
39
==PAGE:48==
pressures into the side chambers and the flows measured by the digital flow meters behind
the heads, it was possible to conduct the experiments efficiently.
So firstly, the pressure drop for spreader (head A) was investigated. In particular, the
pressure drop at head A outlet (∆pA was determined as a function of flow. A total of eight
experimental cases were considered where head A is without mask and it wears different
masks in a casual way or tight.
The first experiment was conducted to evaluate the pressure drop of head A without mask
(see Table A.4). This case can be considered as a reference to make comparisons when
head A wears any mask.
The first mask that was analysed was a new prototype to test its actual efficiency. In
Figure 4.4 it is shown the head wearing the mask from different perspectives. In Table A.5
it is possible to see the pressure values obtained by the mask given a certain flow. In a
comparison with the case where head A has no mask, it can be noticed that their pressure
drops are really similar. So, it can be concluded that the mask needs to be improved.
Figure 4.4: Head that wears a prototype mask.
Next, the surgical mask was investigated by conducting two different experiment: one
where the head wears the mask in a casual way (see Figure 4.5 (top)) and another one where
the head wears a surgical mask that is well fitted (tight) thanks to an adapter (see Figure 4.5
(bottom)). In Table A.6 and Table A.7 it is shown the results of the two experiments with
the surgical mask. Making a comparison with the case where head A doesn’t wear any
mask, it is possible to notice that the surgical mask performs similarly in terms of pressure.
However, when it was tighter, the pressure drop of mask increased significantly thanks to
the adapter.
In the next experiments, respirators were taken into account. In particular, model FFP2
NRD OX­ON was studied. As before, two different experiments were carried out with
it: in the former the mask was worn casually (see Figure 4.6 (top)), in the latter it was
worn tightly with the adapter (see Figure 4.6 (bottom)). In Table A.8 and Table A.9 it is
shown the results of the two experiments with FFP2 NRD OX­ON. In this case, the mask
starts to perform slightly better when it is worn casually than the ”no mask” situation. As
previously seen with the surgical mask, the pressure drop increased significantly when the
mask was well fitted.
40
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.5: Head that wears a surgical mask normally (top) and tightly (bottom).
Figure 4.6: Head that wears FFP2 NRD OX­ON normally (top) and tightly (bottom)
Aerosols in respiratory air
41
==PAGE:50==
Lastly, another respirator was investigated: the model FFP2 NR LEIKANG. Again, the
mask was tested in normal conditions (see Figure 4.7 (top)) and when it was well fitted
(see Figure 4.7 (bottom)). In Table A.10 and Table A.11 it is shown the results of the two
experiments with FFP2 NR Leikang. No significant differences were observed in com­
parison to the ”no mask” case. However, a great improvement of the mask was detected
when it was tighter.
Figure 4.7: Head that wears FFP2 NR Leikang normally (top) and tightly (bottom)
Figure 4.8: Aerosol flux measurements of head A (spreader) for the eight experiments.
42
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:51==
In Figure 4.8 it is shown a comparison of the measurements taken on two days for the eight
cases. Day 1 is represented in blue, while day 2 is represented in red. For the surgical mask
(tight) case a third round of measurement was taken (green curve). It can be noticed the
consistency of the measurements on both days for each case. Moreover, it can be seen that
when the surgical mask and both FFP2 masks are tighter, they gave higher pressure drops
for a given flow.
Then, it was decided to display in one single plot, the measurements taken on the two
days for the eight cases to make a graphic comparison more easily. As previously noticed,
steepest curves that can reach highest pressure drops are the ones that represent the masks
when they are tighter. Therefore, it is possible to conclude that mask tightness seems to
play an essential role for pressure drop of masks. Overall, FFP2 Leikang (tight), which is
represented in orange, is the mask that gives the highest pressure drop for a given flow.
Figure 4.9: Pressure drop of head A (spreader) for the eight experiments.
Lastly, a mean of the first, second and third most high measurements taken on each day was
carried out to make a comparison between the eight experimental cases (see Table 4.8).
Taking into account the most common values from previous works, it was decided to split
between low flow with a velocity range that goes from 1 to 1.4 m/s, medium flow with
a velocity that goes from 1.5 to 1.7 m/s and high flow that corresponds to the maximal
velocity of 2 m/s. It is possible to notice that the masks are able to distinguish themselves
in terms of pressure drop only when they are well fitted for low, medium and high flow.
A mean value of 17.3, 20.5 and 23 Pa was obtained for low flow with surgical, FFP2 OX­
ON and FFP2 Leikang, respectively. For medium flow, the values were 23.8, 25.3 and
32 Pa with with surgical, FFP2 OX­ON and FFP2 Leikang, respectively. For high flow,
the values were 33.2, 33,3 and 39.5 Pa with surgical, FFP2 OX­ON and FFP2 Leikang,
respectively. The only case where the mask is able to perform slightly better without being
tight is the FFP2 OX­ON for high flow with 27 Pa, given a flow of 10 l/min.
Aerosols in respiratory air
43
==PAGE:52==
Case
Low flow (v=1­1.4 m/s)
Medium flow (v=1.5­1.7 m/s)
High flow (v=2 m/s)
q12 [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
q12 [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
q12 [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
No mask
6.6
15
8.5
19.3
10
24.5
Prototype
6.4
14.5
8.2
19.8
10
25.8
Surgical
6.3
14
8.2
19
10
24.5
Surgical (t)
5.6
17.3
7.3
23.8
9.8
33.2
FFP2 (O)
5.2
12.8
7.6
19
10
27
FFP2 (O) (t)
6.7
20.5
8.2
25.3
10
33.3
FFP2 (L)
7
15
8.2
19.3
9.9
23.8
FFP2 (L) (t)
6.2
23
8.3
32
9.8
39.5
Table 4.8: Pressure drop of head A (spreader) for the eight experiments given a low,
medium and high flow.
After that, the pressure drop for receiver (head B) was also investigated. In particular, the
pressure drop at head B outlet (∆pB was determined as a function of flow. The same eight
experimental cases were considered where head B is without mask and it wears different
masks in a casual way or tight, while head A is always without mask.
Firstly, it was considered the case where both heads are without masks. The importance
of this experiment is related to the fact that head B without mask is used as a benchmark to
make comparisons with masks. Furthermore, in this experiment and the next ones, the air
flow and pressure of spreader is also measured taking into account a maximal flow rate of
10 l/min for adults at rest. In Table A.12 it is shown the results of this experiment where
it is interesting to notice that flow and pressure values for head A are actually consistent
with the ones taken previously (see Table A.4).
Then, the prototype mask was investigated when it was worn by the receiver (head B). In
Table A.13 it is shown the results related to the experiment. Making a comparison with
the benchmark (head B without mask), it is possible to notice that there is no significant
difference between the two experimental cases. So, it was confirmed that a design im­
provement is necessary for the prototype mask.
Next, the two experiments with surgical mask were conducted where the mask is worn
casually and tight with the adapter by head B. In Table A.14 and Table A.15 it is shown
the results of the experiments. It can be seen how the flow decreased more from head A
to head B due to the surgical mask, especially, when it was tighter. In terms of pressure
drop, a great increase can be seen for surgical mask (tight).
As before for spreader, respirators are also investigated with model FFP2 NRD OX­ON.
Again, the situations where the mask was worn normally and tightly are considered. The
results are shown in Table A.16 and Table A.17. In a comparison with the ”no mask” case,
no significant difference was observed when the mask was worn normally. However, an
important rise of pressure was detected when the mask was tighter.
Lastly, the model FFP2 NR LEIKANG was also studied for pressure drop of head B. As
usual, the two cases where it was worn casually and more tightly are considered. In Ta­
ble A.18 and Table A.19 it is shown the results related to the two experiments. A slight
improvement in terms of flow and pressure drop can already be noticed when the mask
was worn normally. However, a great increase of pressure drop and decrease of flow was
observed when the mask was well fitted.
In Figure 4.10 it is shown a comparison of the measurements taken on two days for the
44
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:53==
eight cases. Day 1 is represented in blue, whereas day 2 is represented in red. It can be no­
ticed the consistency of the measurements on both days for each case. As previously seen
in head A cases, mask tightness plays an essential role on it. Indeed, when the receiver is
wearing a tighter mask, then the pressure drop is higher for a given flow.
Figure 4.10: Aerosol flux measurements of head B (receiver) for the eight experiments.
Figure 4.11: Pressure drop of head B (receiver) for the eight experiments.
In Figure 4.11 it is shown the measurements taken on the two days for the eight cases in a
single plot. As previously seen, the steepest curves are the ones that represent the masks
when they are tighter. Moreover, it can be noticed that the masks that assure highest
pressure drops are also the ones that let pass less air flow through them.
Aerosols in respiratory air
45
==PAGE:54==
Therefore, after pressure drop analysis of head B, it can be concluded that importance
of mask tightness was confirmed. In particular, FFP2 Leikang (tight) is the mask that
gives the highest pressure drop in both experiments. The difference between this mask
performance and the others is greater for head B than head A.
Lastly, as before, a mean of the first, second and third most high measurements taken on
each day was carried out to make a comparison between the eight experimental cases (see
Table 4.9). In this case the low flow has a velocity range that goes from 0.8 to 1.2 m/s,
the medium flow has a range that goes from 1.1 to 1.4 m/s and the high flow starts from
1.3 and arrives to a maximum of 1.7 m/s. Obviously, the three flow ranges are lower than
before because of masks and their efficiency that decreased the starting flow from head A
to head B. The masks perform completely different from the ”no mask” case only when
they are tighter for low, medium and high flow. mean value of 16.5, 17 and 23.3 Pa was
obtained for low flow with surgical, FFP2 OX­ON and FFP2 Leikang, respectively. For
medium flow, the values were 21,5 22 and 31.3 Pa with with surgical, FFP2 OX­ON and
FFP2 Leikang, respectively. For high flow, the values were 26, 27 and 37 Pa with surgical,
FFP2 OX­ON and FFP2 Leikang, respectively. However, FFP2 Leikang was also able to
perform slightly better without being tight for medium and high flow with values equal to
20.5 and 23 Pa, respectively.
Case
Low flow (v=0.8­1.2 m/s)
Medium flow (v=1.1­1.4 m/s)
High flow (v=1.3­1.7 m/s)
q12 [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
q12 [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
q12 [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
No mask
6.0
15.0
7.0
16.5
8.3
21.5
Prototype
5.5
14.0
6.7
17.0
8.3
22.3
Surgical
4.8
12.5
6.5
17.5
7.7
20.5
Surgical (t)
4.7
16.5
6.0
21.5
7.2
26.0
FFP2 (O)
5.2
13.0
6.1
15.5
8.0
21.0
FFP2 (O) (t)
5.4
17.0
6.7
22.0
8.1
27.0
FFP2 (L)
5.6
14.5
7.3
20.5
8.0
23.0
FFP2 (L) (t)
4.1
23.3
5.6
31.3
6.6
37.0
Table 4.9:
Pressure drop of head B (receiver) for the eight experiments given a
low,medium and high flow.
In conclusion, making a comparison between head A and head B pressure drop measure­
ments, it is possible to infer that the pressure drop for a given flow rate is generally higher
for inhalation (head B) than for expiration (head A). For instance, FFP2 Leikang gave a
pressure drop equals to 23.8 Pa for a flow rate of 9.9 l/min during expiration, whereas it
gave a pressure equals to 23 Pa for a flow rate of 8 l/min during inhalation.
4.3
Aerosols retention analysis
In this section the results of aerosols retention and masks filtration are shown and dis­
cussed. Firstly, the results related to experiments with head A (spreader) are presented.
For head A, particle concentrations in chamber 1 and 2 were taking into account. In each
chamber there was a different pressure, temperature, relative humidity (RH) and initial
concentration. These parameters are shown in Table 4.10 for the five cases analysed with
head A.
46
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:55==
Case
Chamber 1
Chamber 2
p [Pa]
T [°C]
RH
c0 [µg/m3]
p [Pa]
T [°C]
RH
c0 [µg/m3]
No mask
62
28.2
57
30
0
27
60
28
FFP2 Leikang
71
28.3
57
29
0
27.1
57
25
FFP2 Leikang (t)
122
28.3
58
32
0
27
61
11
Surgical mask
68
28.3
58
36
0
27.1
52
16
Surgical mask (t)
91
28.3
58
33
0
27.1
60
21
Table 4.10: Experiment conditions with head A (spreader).
Figure 4.12: Experiment setup to measure particles during exhalation for head A without
mask.
Figure 4.13: Moving average for particle concentration c1 (on the left) and c2 (on the
right).
The first experiment conducted with head A was the one where the head is without mask
(see Figure 4.12). A mean concentration was calculated for every 60­second period (see
Aerosols in respiratory air
47
==PAGE:56==
Table A.20). It can be noticed how concentration in chamber 1 (c1) is more unstable than
concentration in chamber 2 (c2) due to the direct injection into it.
Then, it was decided to compute the centered moving average of the original sampling data
in order to smooth out the peaks and valleys of it. In Figure 4.13 it is shown the particle
concentration (blue curve) measured in each chamber for the 10­minute experiment. The
red curves are the centered moving average of the original data taking into account an
interval of 7 values.
In Figure 4.14 it is shown the particle concentration c1 and c2 for the experiment taking
into account their moving average. It is easy to notice that curve c1 has more ups and
downs due to 30­second injection directly into chamber 1. The maximal peak is obtained
after the 16th injection (at 510 s) with a value equal to 476 µg/m3, which could suggest
that this rise on time is due to the fact that RH might have been increased during the
experiment. Because of that, this final slow evaporation might be explained. On the other
hand, curve c2 remains constant into a range that goes from 30 to 50 µg/m3.
Figure 4.14: Particle concentration c1 and c2 for no mask experiment.
It could be interesting to analyse more on details the behaviour of curve c1. Indeed, it
is easy to notice its exponential increase and decrease on time. Taking into account the
conservation of mass concentration for chamber 1, it might be possible to explain these
exponential curves mathematically. In the following equation it is shown the differential
equation related to the conservation of mass for chamber 1:
V1
dc1
dt = Q (c0 −c1)
(4.6)
where V1 is the volume of chamber 1 and Q is the flow rate. Given the conditions:
c0 =
{
c0
if 0 ≤t ≤∆t
0
if ∆t < t
(4.7)
c1(0) = c10
(4.8)
48
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:57==
it is possible to find a specific solution of the differential equation, which has the generic
solution
c1(t) = c10 + (c0 −c10)[1 −e−t/τ1]
(4.9)
where τ1 = V1
Q =
44 l
20 l/min = 132 s. Taking into account the first period of c1, it can be
noticed that the first peak arrives at t = 50 s with a value equals to 383 µg/m3. Thus,
by inserting c10 = 203 µg/m3 that corresponds to the initial concentration and c0 with a
value within 700 and 800 µg/m3, which corresponds to the predicted final concentration
by looking to the slope of the exponential curve, then the equation can be solved with the
following solutions:
c1(t = 50 s) ≃
{
375
if c0 = 750
391
if c0 = 800
(4.10)
Therefore, both values are really close to the exact solution for t = 50 s. Obviously, this
was only a rough estimate because c0 is not a known parameter. However, it may actually
suggest that the change in c1(t) has an exponential increase every time particles are added.
Now, the results of the two experiments conducted with head A that was wearing the FFP2
Leikang normally and tightly (see Figure 4.15) are shown. The mean concentration of c1
and c2 was calculated for every 60­second period (see Table A.21 and Table A.22). It is
possible to notice that when the mask is tight, then c2 keeps decreasing, even though c1
keeps fluctuating.
Figure 4.15: Experiment setup to measure particles during exhalation for head A with
FFP2 Leikang.
Then again, the centered moving average was calculated from the original data. In Fig­
ure 4.16 it is shown the particle concentration (blue curve) measured in each chamber for
the 10­minute experiment. The red curves are the centered moving average of the original
data taking into account an interval of 7 values.
Aerosols in respiratory air
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.16: Moving average for particle concentration c1 (on the left) and c2 (on the
right). (Top) Head A with FFP2 Leikang. (Bottom) Head A with FFP2 Leikang (tight).
In Figure 4.17 it is shown the particle concentration c1 and c2 for the two experiments
taking into account their moving average. As regards head A with FFP2 (normal) (see
Figure 4.17 on the left), it can be seen that curve c1 has more ups and downs due to 30­
second injection directly into chamber 1. The maximal peak is obtained after the 15th
injection (at 470 s) with a value equal to 420 µg/m3, while curve c2 is within a range
that goes from 25 to 35 µg/m3. Regarding head A with FFP2 (tight) (see fig. 4.17 on the
right), it can be noticed again that curve c1 has more ups and downs due to 30­second
injection directly into chamber 1. The maximal peak is obtained after the 15th injection
(at 470 s) with a value equal to 423 µg/m3. On the other hand, curve c2 keeps decreasing
and arrives to values close to zero.
Figure 4.17: Particle concentration c1 and c2 for head A with FFP2 Leikang (normal and
tight).
Lastly, the results when head A was wearing a surgical mask casually and tightly are
50
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:59==
shown (see Figure 4.18). The mean concentration of c1 and c2 was calculated for every
60­second period (see Table A.23 and Table A.24). As previously seen with the FFP2,
when the mask is tight, then c2 keeps decreasing, even though c1 keeps fluctuating.
Figure 4.18: Experiment setup to measure particles during exhalation for head A with
surgical mask.
As before, the centered moving average was calculated. In Figure 4.19 it is shown the par­
ticle concentration (blue curve) measured in each chamber for the 10­minute experiment.
The red curves are the centered moving average of the original data taking into account
an interval of 7 values.
Figure 4.19: Moving average for particle concentration c1 (on the left) and c2 (on the
right). (Top) Head A with surgical mask. (Bottom) Head A with surgical mask (tight).
In Figure 4.20 it is shown the particle concentration c1 and c2 for the two experiments
taking into account their moving average. Regarding head A with surgical mask (normal)
Aerosols in respiratory air
51
==PAGE:60==
(see Figure 4.20 on the left): curve c1 has more ups and downs due to 30­second injection
directly into chamber 1. The maximal peak is obtained after the 10th injection (at 330
s) with a value equal to 493 µg/m3, whereas curve c2 is within a range that goes from
20 to 40 µg/m3. As regards head A with surgical mask (tight) (see Figure 4.20 on the
right): curve c1 has more ups and downs due to 30­second injection directly into chamber
1. The maximal peak is obtained after the 10th injection (at 330 s) with a value equal to
500 µg/m3. On the other hand, curve c2 keeps decreasing and arrives to values lower than
3 µg/m3.
Figure 4.20: Particle concentration c1 and c2 for head A with surgical mask (normal and
tight).
Figure 4.21: Particle reduction from chamber 1 to chamber 2 for the five experiments with
head A.
Finally, the particle reduction from chamber 1 to 2 was calculated for each case using the
formula:
52
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:61==
reduction in % = c1 −c2
c1
∗100
(4.11)
Figure 4.21 shows these reduction in percentage through curves in a single plot in order to
make a comparison between them. It can be noticed how the particle reduction is always
higher when head A was wearing a mask, especially when they were tighter. Indeed, the
“no mask” curve (in blue) has more ups and downs and it gives the lowest reduction in
general.
Lastly, in Table 4.11 it is shown the mean reduction for the five cases studied. The lowest
reduction was 79.1 % with ”no mask” case, whereas the highest was 97.1 % with FFP2
Leikang (tight). It is interesting to notice that this value is really close to 94 % that is the
standards for filtration efficiency that FFP2 needs to comply with in accordance with the
EN 149 norm (see Table 2.1). Furthermore, in a comparison between FFP2 and surgical
mask, it can be seen how in normal conditions the surgical mask performs slightly better
than the FFP2. However, when both of them are tight, then the FFP2 improves greatly by
reaching the highest power of filtration.
No mask
FFP2 Leikang
FFP2 Leikang (t)
Surgical
Surgical (t)
79.1 %
86.6 %
97.1 %
88.9 %
94.9 %
Table 4.11: Mean reductions for the five experiments with head A (spreader).
After having analysed the cases with head A, now the experiments with head B (receiver)
will be presented and their results discussed. For head B, particle concentrations in cham­
ber 2 and 3 were taking into account. In each chamber there was a different pressure, tem­
perature, relative humidity (RH) and initial concentration. These parameters are shown in
Table 4.12 for the five cases analysed with head B.
Case
Chamber 2
Chamber 3
p [Pa]
T [°C]
RH
c0 [µg/m3]
p [Pa]
T [°C]
RH
c0 [µg/m3]
No mask
0
26.8
47
12
­64
26.8
54
16
FFP2 Leikang
0
27
58
29
­73
27.7
62
26
FFP2 Leikang (t)
0
26.9
60
25
­124
27.6
61
5
Surgical mask
0
27.1
59
38
­76
27.8
60
32
Surgical mask (t)
0
27
57
21
­110
27.8
58
7
Table 4.12: Experiment conditions with head B (receiver)
The first experiment conducted with head B was the one where the head is without mask
(see Figure 4.22). A mean concentration was calculated for every 60­second period (see
Table A.25). It can be noticed how concentration in chamber 2 (c2) is more unstable than
concentration in chamber 3 (c3) due to the direct injection into it.
Aerosols in respiratory air
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.22: Experiment setup to measure particles during inhalation for head B without
mask.
Then, as previously done with head A cases, it was decided to compute the centered mov­
ing average of the original sampling data in order to smooth out the peaks and valleys
of it. In Figure 4.23 it is shown the particle concentration (blue curve) measured in each
chamber for the 10­minute experiment. The red curves are the centered moving average
of the original data taking into account an interval of 7 values.
Figure 4.23: Moving average for particle concentration c2 (on the left) and c3 (on the
right).
In Figure 4.24 it is shown the particle concentration c2 and c3 for the experiment taking
into account their moving average. It can be noticed that curve c2 keeps increasing due to
30­second injection directly into chamber 2. The maximal peak is obtained after the 17th
injection (at 540 s) with a value equal to 488 µg/m3. Curve c3 keeps increasing as well
but within a short range that goes from 15 to 50 µg/m3.
Studying more on details the shape of c2 curve, it is interesting to notice that the curve has
a trend that is completely different from the c1 curve in the equivalent experiment of head
54
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:63==
A without mask. Indeed, in this case the c2 curve keeps increasing exponentially from 70
to 300 s and only after that it starts having ups and downs. This behaviour could suggest a
larger time constant (τ2) with an exponential increase that tends towards an upper value of
700 −800 µg/m3 in comparison to c1 curve from head A without mask. Obviously, this
assumption needs to be verified with future experiments. However, it could be reasonable
qualitatively since chamber 2 is bigger than chamber 1 having a volume equals to 244.4 l
and so a τ2 above 12 minutes by taking into account a flow rate of 20 l/min.
Figure 4.24: Particle concentration c2 and c3 for no mask experiment.
Now, the results of the two experiments conducted with head B that was wearing the
FFP2 Leikang normally and tightly (see Figure 4.25) are shown. The mean concentration
of c2 and c3 was calculated for every 60­second period (see Table A.26 and Table A.27).
Making a comparison between the two cases, it can be noticed how c3 doesn’t change but
remains constant in response to c2 fluctuations when the FFP2 was tighter.
Figure 4.25: Experiment setup to measure particles during inhalation for head B with
FFP2.
Aerosols in respiratory air
55
==PAGE:64==
After that, the centered moving average was calculated from the original data. In Fig­
ure 4.26 it is shown the particle concentration (blue curve) measured in each chamber for
the 10­minute experiment. The red curves are the centered moving average of the original
data taking into account an interval of 7 values.
Figure 4.26: Moving average for particle concentration c2 (on the left) and c3 (on the
right). (Top) Head B with FFP2 Leikang. (Bottom) Head B with FFP2 Leikang (tight).
Figure 4.27: Particle concentration c2 and c3 for head B with FFP2 Leikang (normal and
tight).
In Figure 4.27 it is shown the particle concentration c2 and c3 for the two experiments
taking into account their moving average. As regards head B with FFP2 (normal) (see
Figure 4.27 on the left) it can be noticed that curve c2 has more ups and downs due to
30­second injection directly into chamber 2. The maximal peak is obtained after the 10th
56
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:65==
injection (at 330 s) with a value equal to 330 µg/m3, whereas curve c3 is within a range
that goes from 27 to 40 µg/m3. Regarding head B with FFP2 (tight) (see Figure 4.27
on the right) curve c2 has more ups and downs due to 30­second injection directly into
chamber 2. The maximal peak is obtained after the last injection (at 600 s) with a value
equal to 427 µg/m3, while curve c3 remains constant within a range that goes from 4 to
6 µg/m3.
Finally, the results when head B was wearing a surgical mask casually and tightly are
shown (see Figure 4.28). The mean concentration of c2 and c3 was calculated for every
60­second period (see Table A.28 and Table A.29). Making a comparison between the
two cases, it can be noticed how c3 doesn’t fluctuate so much in response to injection into
chamber 2 in both experiments, especially when the face mask was tighter.
Figure 4.28: Experiment setup to measure particles during inhalation for head B with
surgical mask.
Figure 4.29: Moving average for particle concentration c2 (on the left) and c3 (on the
right). (Top) Head B with surgical mask. (Bottom) Head B with surgical mask (tight).
Aerosols in respiratory air
57
==PAGE:66==
As before, the centered moving average was calculated. In Figure 4.29 it is shown the par­
ticle concentration (blue curve) measured in each chamber for the 10­minute experiment.
The red curves are the centered moving average of the original data taking into account
an interval of 7 values.
In Figure 4.30 it is shown the particle concentration c2 and c3 for the two experiments
taking into account their moving average. Regarding head B with surgical mask (normal)
(see Figure 4.30 on the left) it is possible to notice that curve c2 has more ups and downs
due to 30­second injection directly into chamber 2. The maximal peak is obtained after
the last injection (at 600 s) with a value equal to 370 µg/m3, whereas curve c3 is within a
range that goes from 30 to 45 µg/m3. As regards head B with surgical mask (tight) (see
Figure 4.30 on the right) curve c2 has more ups and downs due to 30­second injection
directly into chamber 2. The maximal peak is obtained after the 11th injection (at 340 s)
with a value equal to 291 µg/m3, while curve c3 remains constant within a range that goes
from 6 to 12 µg/m3.
Figure 4.30: Particle concentration c2 and c3 for head B with surgical mask (normal and
tight).
Finally, the particle reduction from chamber 2 to 3 was calculated for each case using the
formula:
reduction in % = c2 −c3
c2
∗100
(4.12)
Figure 4.31 shows these reduction in percentage through curves in a single plot in order
to make a comparison between them. It can be noticed how in this case (inhalation) the
particle reduction is higher only when head B was wearing a tight mask. Otherwise, if the
mask is worn casually, then the particle reduction decreases and becomes lower than the
“no mask” curve (in blue). Indeed, in this case, the ”no mask” curve has a trend that is
quite similar to the other ones.
58
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.31: Particle reduction from chamber 2 to chamber 3 for the five experiments with
head B.
Lastly, in Table 4.13 it is shown the mean reduction for the five cases studied. The lowest
reduction was 77.7 % with the surgical mask, whereas the highest was 96.2 % with FFP2
Leikang (tight). Again, a value that is really close to the one from standards for filtration
efficiency. Moreover, in a comparison between FFP2 and surgical mask, it can be seen
how in this case the FFP2 Leikang performs better than surgical mask when it was worn
both casually and tight.
No mask
FFP2 Leikang
FFP2 Leikang (t)
Surgical
Surgical (t)
83.5 %
79.8 %
96.2 %
77.7 %
92.7 %
Table 4.13: Mean reductions for the five experiments with head B (receiver).
In conclusion, taking into account head A and head B aerosols retention measurements,
both experiments confirmed the importance of mask tightness related to filtration. Indeed,
in both experiments (head A and B) the highest filtration power was obtained by FFP2
Leikang (tight) with values equal to 97.1 % and 96.2 %, respectively. This confirms how
respirators offer more respiratory protection against aerosols than surgical masks and the
fact that gaps are a key factor into the reduction of filtration efficiency, as previously seen
in the literature review on aerosols filtering. Lastly, the results suggest that masks perform
better in terms of filtration power when they are worn by spreader (head A) in order to
prevent the spread of the particles, whereas when the masks are worn by receiver (head
B), they retain particles properly only when they are tight. Therefore, it can be concluded
that masks are more useful to prevent from spreading particles more than protecting from
them.
Aerosols in respiratory air
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:69==
5
Conclusions
A pressure drop and aerosols retention analysis of different face masks were achieved
with this study. In particular, aerosol flux and mask filtration measurements were carried
out. Before that, a validation of the equipment used for the experiments was necessary in
order to verify that the results obtained with it were reliable. To do this, leakage test of
the chambers were carried out that confirmed how flow leakages were very low, given a
certain pressure during aerosol flux measurements.
Focusing more on the results related to face masks obtained with this research, in con­
clusion, it was possible to analyse and differentiate between spreader and receiver case in
terms of pressure drop of mask and filtration. Therefore, four different objectives were
achieved:
1. pressure drop analysis of spreader without and with mask given a certain flow
2. pressure drop analysis of receiver without and with mask given a certain flow from
a spreader without mask
3. aerosols retention analysis of spreader without and with mask given a certain flow
using PM 2.5 detector
4. aerosols retention analysis of receiver without and with mask given a certain flow
using PM 2.5 detector
Taking into account the results on pressure drop for head A (spreader), it was easy to ob­
serve the great influence of mask tightness. Indeed, only when the masks were tighter,
they were able to differentiate significantly from the ”no mask” case. Related to this ex­
periment, it is also interesting to notice that the experimental conditions achieved by Ueki
et al. were replicated perfectly [24]. Thus, a flow rate Q of 10 l/min with a flow speed
v of 2 m/s was used as well. Regarding the flow speed, in one article published by Tang
et al. [26] it was calculated that the maximum velocity during nasal breathing and mouth
breathing was 1.4 and 1.3 m/s, respectively. Therefore, by taking into account a flow
speed range for head A (spreader) that goes from 1 to 2 m/s. it was possible to simulate a
more contagious behaviour.
On the other hand, the experiments with head B (receiver) were conducted with lower
flows during evaluation of pressure for head B. This aspect of experiment confirmed how
mask on head B stopped partly the original flow from head A (spreader). This ability
of face masks was more highlighted when the mask was tighter. Overall, as previously
seen with head A, mask tightness is a key factor into the increase of pressure drop. FFP2
Leikang (tight) was the mask that achieved the highest pressure drop in both experiments
with a mean value equals to 39.5 Pa and 37 Pa at the highest flow for head A and B, re­
spectively.
Lastly, making a comparison between aerosol flux measurements with head A and B, it is
possible to conclude that the pressure drop for a given flow rate during inhalation (head
B) was generally higher than during exhalation (head A). For instance, taking into account
again the results of FFP2 Leikang (tight) at the highest flow, it can be seen that the pres­
sure drop was slightly lower for head B. However, the highest flow for head B was 6.6
Aerosols in respiratory air
61
==PAGE:70==
l/min, whereas the one for head A was 9.8 l/min. Therefore, it can be assumed that the
pressure drop for head B will be greater if the flow increases.
In literature there were few articles on pressure drop of face mask and most of them tested
face masks with really high flows. So it is not possible to make a reliable comparison be­
tween this study and the previous ones. However, in the Dansk standard on medical face
masks (requirements and test methods) (DS/EN 14683:2019+AC:2019) the performance
requirements for medical face masks that need to comply with are shown [28] . It can be
seen how the differential pressure for surgical masks has to be below 40 [Pa/cm2] with a
flow of 8 l/min. Therefore, taking into account the area of pipe A in our experiment that is
equals to 0.835 cm2, then the pressure drop needs to be under 33.4 Pa. The pressure drop
of head A with surgical mask (tight) at the highest flow (9.8 l/min) was 33.2 Pa, so the two
values are consistent. Nonetheless, these results suggest that it might be a problem with
breathability when the mask is tighter because the value is really close to the threshold (a
higher pressure drop gives more protection, but also less breathability). Lastly, taking into
account the classification of respiratory masks according to the EN 149 norm, it can be
seen that the pressure drop of FFP2 has to be below 240 Pa. A value that is significantly
different from the ones obtained in this research. However, a possible explanation for that
could be that in this experiment relative low flows were used that greatly affected the final
pressure drop.
As regards the results on aerosols retention for head A (spreader), it was observed how
the particle reduction was always higher when head A worn a mask. The difference with
the ”no mask” case was even higher when the masks were tighter. On the other hand, the
experiments with head B (receiver) showed that the particle reduction was higher than the
”no mask” case only when head B was wearing a tight mask. These results confirmed
again the great importance of mask tightness in filtration efficiency, as previously demon­
strated by Konda et al. [21] and Asadi et al. [10]. It was also interesting to notice that
once the head was wearing a tight mask, then the initial concentration started immediately
to decrease. It kept with this trend for head A, whereas it remained constant for head B.
Making a comparison between mask filtration measurements with head A and B, it is pos­
sible to conclude that masks are more useful to prevent from spreading particles more than
protecting from them because the mean reduction of mask worn by receiver (head B) was
higher than the ”no mask” case only when the masks were tighter. Overall, FFP2 Leikang
(tight) was the mask that achieved the highest mean reduction in both experiments with
values of 97.1 % and 96.2 % for head A and B, respectively. Therefore, it was also demon­
strated that respirators offer more respiratory protection than surgical masks, as previously
seen in the articles published by WHO [18] and Fennelly [6].
Another important factor that needs to be analysed more on details is the phenomenon
of particle evaporation that could explain why c2 is always much smaller than c1 in ex­
periments with A, not only because of the different time­constants τ1 and τ2. Particles
evaporation is strictly connected to the RH parameter, whereby RH equals to 100 means
no evaporation at all. In contrast, as RH decreases, water evaporation results in a smaller
droplet. Examining RH values in the experiments with head A, it is interesting to notice
that RH was equals to 58 and 52 in chamber 1 and 2, respectively, when the head was
wearing the surgical mask normally. These great difference between them could explain
why for head A, the surgical mask (88.9 % performed slightly better than FFP2 Leikang
with normal fitting (86.6 %). On the other hand, taking into account the experiments with
head B, it is possible to observe that RH was equals to 47 in chamber 2 when the head was
62
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:71==
without mask. This value could give another explanation for curve c2 behaviour. Indeed,
this lower value in comparison to the related case of head A without mask (RH = 57)
could justify why the c2 curve was slower and kept increasing until 300 s.
In literature there were several articles on particles evaporation: in the work published by
Asadi et al. [2] it was shown that particles with 1 µm diameter can evaporate in 100 ms.
In another one by Tellier et al. [3] it was observed how complete desiccation of particles
with a diameter less than 20 µm would occur in less than 1 s by decreasing the diameter
to a little less than half the initial diameter. In one article by Moriyama et al. [8] it was
remarked the importance of maintaining an indoor RH equals to 40 −60 % to prevent
respiratory virus transmission in winter. Therefore, in order to have more reliable results
and so overcome evaporation problem with particles, it is essential to control RH and tem­
perature of chambers during the experiment. For instance, one possible option could be to
have RH between 60 and 65 and temperature between 23 and 25°C, as in the experiment
conducted by Ueki et al. [24]. As a result of this, RH shall be higher and T lower in order
to have more optimal experimental conditions. Lastly, another possible way to improve
the measurements could be to turn off the USB ventilators inside the chambers. Indeed.
in one article by Tang et al. [9] it was showed the importance of ventilation, since in an
optimally ventilated room, the number of droplets could halved after 30 s, whereas with
poorly ventilated and no ventilation rooms this could take 1–4 min and 5 min, respectively.
Another future possible goal could be to establish and then analyse no stationary condi­
tions within the chamber.in order to see any differences with the steady state. One way
to do this, it could be to install a solenoid valve that allow to have a pulsating flow and
thud, differentiate between high and low flow. Lastly, the most important objective, after
the conclusion of this research, will be to test new masks by developing an experimen­
tal method for mask filtration. Moreover, the masks could also be tested by using virus
particles in order to have more realistic conditions in the experiment.
Aerosols in respiratory air
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
who. WHO Covid­19. URL: https://covid19.who.int/.
[2]
Sima Asadi et al. “Aerosol emission and superemission during human speech in­
crease with voice loudness”. In: Scientific reports 9.1 (2019), pp. 1–10.
[3]
Raymond Tellier. “Review of aerosol transmission of influenza A virus”. In: Emerg­
ing infectious diseases 12.11 (2006), p. 1657.
[4]
Raymond Tellier. “Aerosol transmission of influenza A virus: a review of new stud­
ies”. In: Journal of the Royal Society Interface 6.suppl_6 (2009), S783–S790.
[5]
Jing Yan et al. “Infectious virus in exhaled breath of symptomatic seasonal influenza
cases from a college community”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci­
ences 115.5 (2018), pp. 1081–1086.
[6]
Kevin P Fennelly. “Particle sizes of infectious aerosols: implications for infection
control”. In: The Lancet Respiratory Medicine (2020).
[7]
Donald K Milton et al. “Influenza virus aerosols in human exhaled breath: particle
size, culturability, and effect of surgical masks”. In: PLoS pathogens 9.3 (2013),
e1003205.
[8]
Miyu Moriyama, Walter J Hugentobler, and Akiko Iwasaki. “Seasonality of respi­
ratory viral infections”. In: Annual review of virology 7 (2020), pp. 83–101.
[9]
Song Tang et al. “Aerosol transmission of SARS­CoV­2? Evidence, prevention and
control”. In: Environment international 144 (2020), p. 106039.
[10]
Sima Asadi et al. “Efficacy of masks and face coverings in controlling outward
aerosol particle emission from expiratory activities”. In: Scientific reports 10.1
(2020), pp. 1–13.
[11]
Nancy HL Leung et al. “Respiratory virus shedding in exhaled breath and efficacy
of face masks”. In: Nature medicine 26.5 (2020), pp. 676–680.
[12]
Gerhard Kasper et al. “The collection efficiency of a particle­loaded single filter
fiber”. In: Journal of Aerosol Science 40.12 (2009), pp. 993–1009.
[13]
Qiang Gu, Robert T Henderson, and Bruce J Tatarchuk. “A CFD pressure drop
model for microfibrous entrapped catalyst filters using micro­scale imaging”. In:
Engineering Applications of Computational Fluid Mechanics 9.1 (2015), pp. 567–
576.
[14]
T Kravchik, U German, and Y Laichter. “Aerosol filtration by fibrous membrane
filters”. In: (1996).
[15]
Fu­Shi Quan et al. “Universal and reusable virus deactivation system for respiratory
protection”. In: Scientific reports 7.1 (2017), pp. 1–10.
[16]
Albert Podgorski, Anna Bałazy, and Leon Gradoń. “Application of nanofibers to
improve the filtration efficiency of the most penetrating aerosol particles in fibrous
filters”. In: Chemical Engineering Science 61.20 (2006), pp. 6804–6815.
[17]
Subramanian Sundarrajan et al. “Electrospun nanofibers for air filtration applica­
tions”. In: Procedia Engineering 75 (2014), pp. 159–163.
[18]
World Health Organization et al. Advice on the use of masks in the context of
COVID­19: interim guidance, 6 April 2020. Tech. rep. World Health Organization,
2020.
Aerosols in respiratory air
65
==PAGE:74==
[19]
Benjamin John COWLING et al. “Face masks to prevent transmission of influenza
virus: a systematic review”. In: Epidemiology & infection 138.4 (2010), pp. 449–
456.
[20]
Jeffrey D Smith et al. “Effectiveness of N95 respirators versus surgical masks in
protecting health care workers from acute respiratory infection: a systematic review
and meta­analysis”. In: Cmaj 188.8 (2016), pp. 567–574.
[21]
Abhiteja Konda et al. “Aerosol filtration efficiency of common fabrics used in res­
piratory cloth masks”. In: ACS nano 14.5 (2020), pp. 6339–6347.
[22]
Frank Drewnick et al. “Aerosol filtration efficiency of household materials for
homemade face masks: Influence of material properties, particle size, particle elec­
trical charge, face velocity, and leaks”. In: Aerosol Science and Technology 55.1
(2021), pp. 63–79.
[23]
Christopher D Zangmeister et al. “Filtration efficiencies of nanoscale aerosol by
cloth mask materials used to slow the spread of SARS­CoV­2”. In: ACS nano 14.7
(2020), pp. 9188–9200.
[24]
Hiroshi Ueki et al. “Effectiveness of face masks in preventing airborne transmission
of SARS­CoV­2”. In: MSphere 5.5 (2020).
[25]
Dominique Thomas et al. Aerosol filtration. Elsevier, 2016.
[26]
Julian W Tang et al. “Airflow dynamics of human jets: sneezing and breathing­
potential sources of infectious aerosols”. In: PloS one 8.4 (2013), e59970.
[27]
Richard Pasteka et al. “Electro­mechanical Lung Simulator Using Polymer and Or­
ganic Human Lung Equivalents for Realistic Breathing Simulation”. In: Scientific
reports 9.1 (2019), pp. 1–12.
[28]
dansk. dansk stanadard. URL: https://webshop.ds.dk/da-dk/s%C3%B8gning?
q=DS/EN%20ISO%2014683:2017.
[29]
S Steve Zhou et al. “Assessment of a respiratory face mask for capturing air pol­
lutants and pathogens including human influenza and rhinoviruses”. In: Journal of
thoracic disease 10.3 (2018), p. 2059.
[30]
Hsu­Chi Yeh and Benjamin YH Liu. “Aerosol filtration by fibrous filters—I. The­
oretical”. In: Journal of aerosol science 5.2 (1974), pp. 191–204.
[31]
RC Brown and D Wake. “Loading filters with monodisperse aerosols: Macroscopic
treatment”. In: Journal of aerosol science 30.2 (1999), pp. 227–234.
[32]
Paolo Tronville, Bin Zhou, and Richard Rivers. “Realistic air filter media perfor­
mance simulation. Part I: Navier–Stokes/finite­volume computational fluid dynam­
ics procedures”. In: HVAC&R Research 19.5 (2013), pp. 493–502.
66
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:75==
A
Appendix
No. obs
flow meter range
flow meter mean
time[s]
flow[l/min]
µ±σ
1
4.5
­
37
3.24
­
3
7.1 ­ 7.2
7.15
18
6.67
6.36 ± 0.27
19.14
6.27
19.54
6.14
4
7.7 ­ 7.8
7.75
16.46
7.29
7.36 ± 0.13
16.46
7.29
16.43
7.30
15.9
7.55
9
8.3 ­ 8.4
8.35
15
8.00
7.60 ± 0.28
15.02
7.99
15.32
7.83
15.78
7.60
15.86
7.57
16.19
7.41
16.34
7.34
16.37
7.33
16.37
7.33
Table A.1: Measurements obtained in the first day of experiment for flow meter calibra­
tion.
No. obs
flow meter range
flow meter mean
time[s]
flow[l/min]
µ±σ
1
3.6 ­ 4
3.8
56
2.14
­
2
4.1
­
42,8
2.80
2.60 ± 0.29
50.13
2.39
1
7.3
­
15.8
7.59
­
1
7.5
­
16.08
7.46
­
3
8.1 ­ 8.2
8.15
13.88
8.65
8.63 ± 0.02
13.9
8.63
13.94
8.61
1
9 ­ 9.5
9.25
11.4
10.53
­
1
9.4 ­ 9.6
9.5
10.87
11.04
­
Table A.2: Measurements obtained in the second day of experiment for flow meter cali­
bration.
Aerosols in respiratory air
67
==PAGE:76==
Obs
Predicted Y
Residuals
1
3.04
0.21
2
6.59
0.08
3
6.59
­0.32
4
6.59
­0.45
5
7.39
­0.10
6
7.39
­0.10
7
7.39
­0.09
8
7.39
0.15
9
8.20
­0.20
10
8.20
­0.21
11
8.20
­0.36
12
8.20
­0.59
13
8.20
­0.63
14
8.20
­0.78
15
8.20
­0.85
16
8.20
­0.87
17
8.20
­0.87
Obs
Predicted Y
Residuals
18
2.10
0.04
19
2.50
0.30
20
2.50
­0.11
21
6.79
0.81
22
7.06
0.41
23
7.93
0.72
24
7.93
0.70
25
7.93
0.68
26
9.40
1.12
27
9.74
1.30
Table A.3: Residual output for observations from 1 to 17 (day 1) and from 18 to 27 (day
2).
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
Day 1
2.60
5
4.60
10
6.50
15.5
8.40
19
10.00
24.5
Day 2
2.70
5
4.20
9.5
6.60
14.5
8.50
19.5
10.00
24.5
Table A.4: Pressure drop for head A (spreader) without mask.
68
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:77==
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
Day 1
2.80
4.5
4.50
10
7.00
16
8.50
20.5
10.00
25.5
Day 2
3.10
5.5
4.30
9
5.70
13
7.90
19
10.00
26
Table A.5: Pressure drop for head A (spreader) with a prototype mask.
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
Day 1
2.80
6
4.40
10
6.20
14
9.00
21
10.00
24.5
Day 2
3.40
6
4.50
9
6.35
14
7.40
17
10.00
24.5
Table A.6: Pressure drop for head A (spreader) with a surgical mask.
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
Day 1
2.15
5.5
3.65
9.5
5.65
15.5
8.00
23.5
9.65
29.5
Day 2
2.30
6.5
3.40
11
5.40
19
7.00
25
10.00
37
Day 3
2.60
7
3.30
10
5.65
17.5
7.00
23
9.65
33
Table A.7: Pressure drop for head A (spreader) with a surgical mask (tight).
Aerosols in respiratory air
69
==PAGE:78==
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
Day 1
2.30
5
3.60
8
5.10
13
7.50
19
10.00
27.5
Day 2
2.20
5
3.55
8
5.35
12.5
7.60
19
10.00
26.5
Table A.8: Pressure drop for head A (spreader) with FFP2 NRD OX­ON.
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
Day 1
3.15
9
5.30
16
6.75
21
8.30
26.5
10.00
33.5
Day 2
3.30
9.5
5.45
17
6.60
20
8.15
24
10.00
33
Table A.9: Pressure drop for head A (spreader) with FFP2 NRD OX­ON (tight).
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
Day 1
2.4
5
4.6
10.5
7.2
16
8.7
21
10
24.5
Day 2
2
3
4.8
10
6.7
14
7.65
17.5
9.7
23
Table A.10: Pressure drop for head A (spreader) with FFP2 NR Leikang.
70
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:79==
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
Day 1
3.25
11
4.4
16
6.15
23
7.8
29.5
9.9
40
Day 2
2.8
9.5
4.5
17.5
6.3
23
8.8
34.5
9.75
39
Table A.11: Pressure drop for head A (spreader) with FFP2 NR Leikang (tight).
Spreader
Receiver
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
q [l/min]
p3 [Pa]
day 1
3.7
8
3.25
9
5.45
12
4.2
10.5
7.15
15
5.65
14
8.1
18
7.25
16.5
10
26
9
24
day 2
2.3
4
1.9
4.5
4.3
9.5
3.45
8.5
7.1
16
6.3
16
8.5
18.5
6.75
16.5
9.3
21.5
7.5
19
Table A.12: Pressure drop for head B (receiver) without mask and head A (spreader)
without mask.
Spreader
Receiver
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
q [l/min]
p3 [Pa]
day 1
3.35
7
2.95
6
5.2
12
4.4
11
6.7
15
5.3
14
8.05
17
6.3
16
10
24
8.3
23
day 2
3.5
6
2.9
5
6
12
4.6
11
7.25
15
5.7
14
8.75
20
7.1
18
10
23
8.2
21.5
Table A.13: Pressure drop for head B (receiver) with a prototype mask and head A
(spreader) without mask.
Aerosols in respiratory air
71
==PAGE:80==
Spreader
Receiver
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
q [l/min]
p3 [Pa]
day 1
3.9
8
3.5
8
5.65
12
4.3
11
6.3
14
4.8
13
8.35
20
6.5
19
10
23
8
21
day 2
2.35
4
1.65
4
4.9
11
3.85
10
6.15
12
4.7
12
8
17
6.4
16
9.25
21
7.3
20
Table A.14: Pressure drop for head B (receiver) with a surgical mask and head A (spreader)
without mask.
Spreader
Receiver
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
q [l/min]
p3 [Pa]
day 1
3.6
6
2.55
6.5
4.9
10.5
3.6
12
6.1
13
4.25
15
7
15
4.9
17
8.8
20
6.35
23
10
23
7.4
27
day 2
3.55
5
2.7
8.5
5.05
10.5
3.7
12
6.25
13.5
4.55
16
7.7
17
5.7
20
9.25
20
7.05
25
Table A.15: Pressure drop for head B (receiver) with a surgical mask (tight) and head A
(spreader) without mask.
72
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:81==
Spreader
Receiver
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
q [l/min]
p3 [Pa]
day 1
3.2
5
2.5
6
4.95
10
4
10
6.4
13
5.2
13
7.75
16
6.25
16
9.65
21
8
21
day 2
2.85
4
2.2
5
4.65
9
3.75
9
6.35
13
5.15
13
7.3
14.5
5.85
15
9.65
21
8.05
21
Table A.16: Pressure drop for head B (receiver) with FFP2 NRD OX­ON and head A
(spreader) without mask.
Spreader
Receiver
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
q [l/min]
p3 [Pa]
day 1
2.85
5
2.1
6
4.6
8
3.6
10
6.6
13.5
5.05
16
8.4
17
6.45
21
10.15
22.5
8
27
day 2
3.35
5
2.55
7
5.5
10
4.1
12
7.5
15
5.75
18
8.9
18
6.9
23
10.25
22.5
8.1
27
Table A.17: Pressure drop for head B (receiver) with FFP2 NRD OX­ON (tight) and head
A (spreader) without mask.
Aerosols in respiratory air
73
==PAGE:82==
Spreader
Receiver
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
q [l/min]
p3 [Pa]
day 1
2.85
5
2.2
5
5.15
11
4.05
11
6.85
14
5.45
14
9
20
7.25
21
9.7
23
7.9
23
day 2
3.95
7
3.2
7.5
6.1
13
4.8
13
7.15
15
5.65
15
9
20
7.25
20
9.85
23
8.05
23
Table A.18: Pressure drop for head B (receiver) with FFP2 NR Leikang and head A
(spreader) without mask.
Spreader
Receiver
q [l/min]
p1 [Pa]
q [l/min]
p3 [Pa]
day 1
2.6
4
1.4
7
4.5
8.5
2.9
15.5
6.7
14
4.15
23.5
9
20
5.9
33.5
10.15
23.5
6.85
39
day 2
2.45
4
1.35
7
4.4
9
2.8
14
6.65
14
4.1
23
8.15
17
5.2
29
9.55
22
6.3
35
Table A.19: Pressure drop for head B (receiver) with FFP2 NR Leikang (tight) and head
A (spreader) without mask.
Time [s]
PM 2.5 [µg/m3]
Chamber 1
Chamber 2
0 ­ 60
330
38
60 ­ 120
166
34
120 ­ 180
245
38
180 ­ 240
322
44
240 ­ 300
244
38
300 ­ 360
446
45
360 ­ 420
341
44
420 ­ 480
229
36
480 ­ 540
476
48
540 ­ 600
272
42
Table A.20: PM 2.5 detection for head A (spreader) without mask.
74
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:83==
Time [s]
PM 2.5 [µg/m3]
Chamber 1
Chamber 2
0 ­ 60
182
29
60 ­ 120
219
29
120 ­ 180
366
32
180 ­ 240
329
33
240 ­ 300
227
29
300 ­ 360
263
29
360 ­ 420
261
29
420 ­ 480
402
31
480 ­ 540
335
31
540 ­ 600
351
31
Table A.21: PM 2.5 detection for head A (spreader) with FFP2 NR Leikang.
Time [s]
PM 2.5 [µg/m3]
Chamber 1
Chamber 2
0 ­ 60
278
9
60 ­ 120
159
7
120 ­ 180
135
6
180 ­ 240
270
6
240 ­ 300
177
3
300 ­ 360
308
3
360 ­ 420
200
2
420 ­ 480
388
1
480 ­ 540
255
1
540 ­ 600
233
1
Table A.22: PM 2.5 detection for head A (spreader) with FFP2 NR Leikang (tight).
Time [s]
PM 2.5 [µg/m3]
Chamber 1
Chamber 2
0 ­ 60
283
25
60 ­ 120
296
30
120 ­ 180
455
35
180 ­ 240
392
34
240 ­ 300
481
36
300 ­ 360
493
39
360 ­ 420
297
32
420 ­ 480
378
32
480 ­ 540
278
31
540 ­ 600
338
31
Table A.23: PM 2.5 detection for head A (spreader) with a surgical mask.
Aerosols in respiratory air
75
==PAGE:84==
Time [s]
PM 2.5 [µg/m3]
Chamber 1
Chamber 2
0 ­ 60
139
16
60 ­ 120
194
12
120 ­ 180
333
9
180 ­ 240
393
8
240 ­ 300
205
6
300 ­ 360
500
7
360 ­ 420
250
4
420 ­ 480
189
3
480 ­ 540
327
2
540 ­ 600
453
3
Table A.24: PM 2.5 detection for head A (spreader) with a surgical mask (tight).
Time [s]
PM 2.5 [µg/m3]
Chamber 2
Chamber 3
0 ­ 60
88
16
60 ­ 120
132
21
120 ­ 180
242
30
180 ­ 240
326
35
240 ­ 300
409
42
300 ­ 360
479
49
360 ­ 420
420
46
420 ­ 480
451
48
480 ­ 540
433
49
540 ­ 600
467
51
Table A.25: PM 2.5 detection for head B (receiver) without a mask.
Time [s]
PM 2.5 [µg/m3]
Chamber 2
Chamber 3
0 ­ 60
104
29
60 ­ 120
102
28
120 ­ 180
150
32
180 ­ 240
212
35
240 ­ 300
233
35
300 ­ 360
330
40
360 ­ 420
289
38
420 ­ 480
218
36
480 ­ 540
211
34
540 ­ 600
321
39
Table A.26: PM 2.5 detection for head B (receiver) with FFP2 Leikang.
76
Aerosols in respiratory air
==PAGE:85==
Time [s]
PM 2.5 [µg/m3]
Chamber 2
Chamber 3
0 ­ 60
116
5
60 ­ 120
78
5
120 ­ 180
70
6
180 ­ 240
220
5
240 ­ 300
325
5
300 ­ 360
281
6
360 ­ 420
265
5
420 ­ 480
264
5
480 ­ 540
354
5
540 ­ 600
409
5
Table A.27: PM 2.5 detection for head B (receiver) with FFP2 Leikang (tight).
Time [s]
PM 2.5 [µg/m3]
Chamber 2
Chamber 3
0 ­ 60
87
32
60 ­ 120
201
37
120 ­ 180
160
39
180 ­ 240
166
37
240 ­ 300
205
37
300 ­ 360
267
41
360 ­ 420
182
38
420 ­ 480
255
41
480 ­ 540
294
42
540 ­ 600
344
45
Table A.28: PM 2.5 detection for head B (receiver) with a surgical mask.
Time [s]
PM 2.5 [µg/m3]
Chamber 2
Chamber 3
0 ­ 60
73
6
60 ­ 120
59
6
120 ­ 180
79
6
180 ­ 240
76
7
240 ­ 300
168
9
300 ­ 360
288
10
360 ­ 420
230
12
420 ­ 480
246
9
480 ­ 540
222
10
540 ­ 600
263
11
Table A.29: PM 2.5 detection for head B (receiver) with a surgical mask (tight).
Aerosols in respiratory air
77
==PAGE:86==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 1 Bygning 101A,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 2525
https://www.dtu.dk/english
