==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
PROTOLYTIC CLEAVAGE OF ALLERGEN EPITOPES
SUPERVISORS:
LISE FRIIS CHRISTENSEN, CLAUS HEINER BANG-BERTHELSEN & EGON BECH HANSEN
MASTER THESIS
Authors:
Rasmus Christiansen
Student No.:
s143213
This report was completed with the aid of DTU Food
August 2021
==PAGE:2==
1
Abstract
Background: The prevalence of celiac disease are increasing worldwide, currently 1% of the worlds popu-
lation suffers from it. Wheat are one of the most important grains available due to the plants resilient nature.
Wheat are the main ingredient in processed food and is highly valued in the urban areas of the world. This
all shadowing presence of wheat everywhere is a nuisance to people with celiac disease as they always have
to be wary of what they eat. In this study lactic acid bacteria strains harbouring Cell Envelope Proteinases
(CEPs) were isolated from environments where a proteolytic afﬁnity towards gluten would be an advantage.
They were then investigate for their usage in the production of non-gluten-allergenic food.
Methods: The Cell envelope proteinases from the lactic acid bacteria Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides
have been characterised for their activity on gliadin. This has been investigated by cloning the CEPs into
background strain without proteases Lactoccous lactis MG1363 and comparing the growth and acidiﬁcation
curves from these with the wildtype strains.
A bioinformatic study was performed to investigate proteolytic speciﬁcity of CEPs and this lead to a deeper
investigation of the differences between CEPs from other lactic acid bacteria to the ones found in L. pseu-
domesenteroides.
Results: A successful cloning of the CEPs was not achieved. So a comparison of growth and acidiﬁcation of
12 strains of L. pseudomesenteroides were performed. In the acidiﬁcation experiment acidiﬁcation occurred
almost immediately for all strains including the controls both when grown on gliadin and a deﬁned media.
By producing contact maps for the CEPs and comparing these to their respective protein sequences a pro-
posal have been made for how and where to determine the position and length of domains.
Conclusion: The negative control, the protease free MG1363, showed growth on gliadin, small peptides
and free amino acids were probably present in the gliadin and be taken up by the active peptide uptake
systems Opp and DtpT.
The results from the growth and acidiﬁcation experiments prevents the validation of whether or not the
strains can grow and acidify on the gliadin media. Growth and acidiﬁcation experiments needs to be inves-
tigated with lower gliadin concentration.
Not much experimental data have been produced in this study, but the methods and protocols used are
optimised in such a way that a successful investigation of the proteolytic activity on gliadin from lactic acid
bacteria are possible. Further more the bioinformatic study yielded exciting results showing a suggestion
of the structure and domain composition of CEPs using bioinformatic tools.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Abstract
0
2
Introduction
1
2.1
Celiac disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.2
Lactic acid bacteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Safety of lactic acid bacteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides and their role in food biotechnology
. . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
Removal of allergens from foods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.6
Cell envelope protease and proteolytic system of Lactococcus lactis
. . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.7
Cell envelope proteases in lactic acid bacteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.8
Domains of cell envelope proteases from lactic acid bacteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.9
Aim of this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methods
2
3.1
Strains used in this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3.2
Sample gathering and the DTU Food strain collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.3
Species identiﬁcation by MALDI-TOF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.4
Bioinformatic methods used for selection of CEPS and strains
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.5
Over night cultures, growth medias and antibiotic stock preparations . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.6
Primer-, Plasmid design and Gibson assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.7
Phenol chloroform plasmid extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.8
DNeasy kit DNA puriﬁcation PowerFood Microbial Kit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.9
DNA ampliﬁcation of prtP’s and plasmid ampliﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.10 DNA gel electrophoresis and puriﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.11 Electrocompetent L. lactis and transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.12 Growth and acidiﬁcation curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.13 SDS-PAGE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.14 Protein structure modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Results
12
4.1
Strain gathering and species identiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Bioinformatic results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
PCR ampliﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1
==PAGE:4==
4.4
Gibson Assembly and transformation to obtain isogenetic strains . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.5
Growth curves of wildtype L. pseudomesenteroides strains
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.6
Acidiﬁcation curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.7
Degradation of gliadin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.8
CEPs structure prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.9
Protease structure prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Discussion and future perspectives
29
5.1
Strain gathering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Cloning efﬁciency and optimisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Growth curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Acidiﬁcation assay optimisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.5
Proteolytic activity on gliadin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.6
PrtPS CEP mutation and possible effect
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Conclusion
33
7
Appendix
41
==PAGE:5==
2
Introduction
2.1
Celiac disease
Gluten allergy also called celiac disease is an autoimmune disease in the small intestines stemming from a
sensitivity towards gluten after ingestion. The prevalence of celiac disease has been increasing in all areas
of the world [1] and approximately 1% of the worlds suffer from celiac disease [2].
A large variety of food items containing wheat and other close related cereals like rye and barley contains
gluten. Gluten are a storage protein and is a broad term describing prolamins an aggregate of gliadin and
glutenins in wheat, the corresponding prolamin in rye are secalins and in barley hordeins all three shows
similiar immunogenic properties. Prolamins from maize named zeins seems to have evolved differently
so their prolamins have more leucine and alanine and less proline and glutamine resulting in them being
non-immunogenic. The same is the cause for oats which as been shown to not cause allergenic reactions in
patients with celiac disease [3].
Examples of food products containing gluten are beer, bread, cakes, porridge, meat alternatives, soups
gravy salad dressings (where ﬂour is used as a thickening agent) and some hard wheat based liquors like
vodka. When gluten are consumed it is digested by proteases f.x. pepsin in the stomach and trypsin,
chymotrypsin and carboxypeptidases etc. in the small intestine, this releases the gliadin from the glutenin
and then degrades it further into gliadin peptides. The gliadin peptides vary in length and composition but
a 33-mer peptide of the digestion products are of signiﬁcance.
This peptide (LQLQPFPQPQLPYPQPQLPYPQPQLPYPQPQPF) remains intact even if the reaction time
with enzymes are doubled compared to the other digested products from gliadin when tested in a laboratory
setting [4]. This peptide consist of three patient speciﬁc T-cell epitopes identiﬁed as being allergens these are
PFPQPQLPY, PQPQLPYPQ (found thrice in the peptide), and PYPQPQLPY (found twice in the peptide)
[5]. The gliadin peptides can cross the intestinal wall into the lamina propia. In the lamina propia the tissue
transglutaminase modify them by deamidation converting a glutamin (Q) into glutamic acid (E) which is
essential for T-cell recognition [6].
Immune cells either dendritic or macrophages will engulf the now Deamidated gliadin peptides and present
them to helper T cells. The genetics of the host is of high importance when it comes to gluten allergy as
the main genetic factor is the human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DQ gene. The HLA-DQ2 gene are most
prevalent in gluten allergic people for 90% or more where the HLA-DQ8 are present in the remaining
10%[7]. These genes results in the presentation of deamidated gliadin peptide by antigen presenting cells
to T helper cells in such a way the it is detected as a pathogen by the T helper cell. The deamidation and
the HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 gene are essential for the T-cell to recognise gliadin peptide as a pathogen [6].
1
==PAGE:6==
The T helper cells will then release TH2 cytokines activate B cells that will proliferate into plasma cells
that will produce and secrete anti-gliadin and anti-transglutaminase antibodies. Anti-gliadin antibodies
will mark gliadin for phagocytosis. The same will occur for anti-transglutaminase antibodies, but because
the are produced by the host they are auto-antibodies and these have been shown to cause atrophy in the
intestinal villi [8]. Further more proinﬂammatory cytokines like IFN-γ are released, these have been shown
to increase the passage of gliadin into the lamnia propia from the gut lumen[9]. A visual representation of
the immunogenic reaction towards gluten has been shown in ﬁg. 1
Normally the small intestines are lined with ﬁnger-like structures named villi they increase the surface area
the intestines and are hereby providing a larger absorption of nutrients. Celiac disease will decrease surface
area and the result will be malnutrition common symptoms of celiac disease are iron deﬁciency, weight
loss, abdominal pain, diarrhea, chronic fatigue and constipation [10].
Figure 1: The degradation of gliadin in the small intestine and the immunological response. Gliadin
and glutenin are separated enzymatically. Gliadin are further degraded and gliadin peptide can now cross the
intestinal wall. After being modiﬁed by tissue transglutaminase the peptides are taken up by macrophages
or dendritic cells. They present the antigen to Helper T cells that releases cytokines that can activate B
cells to produce anti-gliadin antibodies or cause inﬂammation leading to tissue damage. Created with
BioRender.com.
2
==PAGE:7==
2.2
Lactic acid bacteria
Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are a group of gram-positive catalase negative bacteria consisting of six families.
These are further divided into approximately 40 genera. LAB are mainly found in environments rich in
nutrients, with ample possibility for growth. The natural habitat for LAB are soil, plants, milk, water and in
cavities on animals like the mouth, intestines and the genitalia. Humans have taken advantage of LAB for
thousands of years in multiple cultures all over the world by using LAB to ferment food to increase the shelf
life. Sauerkraut, kimchi, pickled vegetables, fermented dairy, wine and sourdough are some of the ways
LAB has been utilised by humans. This have mainly been due to the fact that the acidiﬁcation produced
by LAB prevent food spoilage as pathogens have difﬁculties growing in acid environments. Species of
LAB also contributes positively to the gut microbiome in humans with their ability to degrade proteins and
carbohydrates for easier nutritional absorption for humans [11]. LAB strains can be divided into generalists
and specialists strains. Generalist LAB have a wide genome span containing multi genes that gives them the
ability thrive in many environments and be able to survive on drastic media changes and the generalists are
the ones most often found in plants. The specialist LAB strain have a smaller genome and fewer metabolic
pathways and can therefore only thrive in very speciﬁc environments. Less is known about the specialist
LABs which is quite sensible as they are harder to isolate and cultivate in a laboratory setting [12].
When LAB are isolated in laboratories De Man, Rogosa and Sharpe (MRS) media are often used as it is designed for
LAB because it contains sodium acetate which inhibits the growth of other bacteria strains and some LAB strains.
LAB were for many years characterised by their attributes and characteristics, but with the progress of technology
methods like 16s rRNA data and core genome phylogeny made it clear that the taxonomic classiﬁcation LAB ﬁrst
were clustered with was not accurate. This lead to a reclassiﬁcation of LAB strains and the strains are now evaluated
continuously. [13].
2.3
Safety of lactic acid bacteria
Even though LAB have been used to fermented for many years, when ﬁnding new strains and exploring their abilities
to create new products be it protease containing pills, pro-biotics or just fermenting kale it is of extreme importance
to certify the safety of the product. LAB strains like L. pseudomesenteroides have been reported to be the cause of
infections like urinary tract infections and bacteremia and these types of infections are rare and only occur because the
strain is an opportunistic pathogen when a host with an weakened immune system presents itself [14] [15]. The LAB
causing the most infection are the strains from the genus Enterococcus, these are known to carry virulence factors and
do therefore not have a Qualiﬁed Presumption of Safety (QPS).
When LAB strains are used to ferment foods and thereby be ingested with the food they can function as probiotics
which by enriching the microbiota of the host promote good healt and a strengthen the microbiome in the gut.
LAB strains live as commensal cells on the human body some LAB strains thrive in the genital tract where they
protect the host from infections from other bacteria or fungus strains by their production of lactid acid. It reduces the
3
==PAGE:8==
risk signiﬁcantly for women to get various STIs and infections to have a healthy microbiota in the vagina consisting
of LAB strains [16]
LAB strains are Generally Regarded as Safe (GRAS) due to the ancient uses of LAB in food production and the
beneﬁts that follows. The the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) have also granted several LAB strains the
Qualiﬁed Presumption Status (QPS) approval.
2.4
Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides and their role in food biotechnology
Leuconostoc spp. are a genus of gram positve bacteria under the family of Lactobacillaceae and is categorised as
a LAB strain. Leuconostoc spp. are among the most frequently detected LAB on plant tissues [17] and L. pseu-
domesenteroides is a coccus shaped non-motile bacteria widely found in fermented foods like soybean paste, pickled
chinese cabbage, Tibetan keﬁand mango juice. It has a QPS and it has been suggested for use in the dairy or fruit and
vegetable fermentation industry based on its ability to produce exopolysaccharide (EPS) yielding a smooth texture.
2.5
Removal of allergens from foods
The removal of allergens from foods are a challenge especially from food products containing gluten. It has been
shown that by heating the food protein aggregation and polypeptide formation occurs via cross-linking, thermal pro-
tein aggregation and Maillard type reactions with the sugars to a degree that digestion of the proteins are decreased
signiﬁcantly [18]. Foods containing gluten are all heated before consumption, and there is a correlation between
higher temperatures and larger modiﬁcations for example are the protein aggregates in the crumb of a bread easier to
digest than the crumb. The maximum temperature of the crumb during baking are less than 100◦C whereas the crust
are 180-200◦C [19].
Sourdough bread harbour a potential for removing gluten from bread as it is symbiotic low temperature fermentation
with various LAB and yeast strains. Researchers have simulated the process of making a sourdough bread and
the following digestion to very the effect of sourdough LAB on gluten allergen. This was done by fermenting the
sourdough with Lactobacillus alimentarius 15M, Levilactobacillus brevis 14G, Lactobacillus sanfranciscensis 7A and
Lactobacillus hilgardii 51B as they had shown proteolytic activity on gliadin from wheat sourdoughs. Baked bread
were digested in vitro using pepsin, trypsin and pancreatin to simulate in vivi digestion in the intestines. The protein
extracted from both the digested sourdough bread and digested bread made with bakers yeast was tested for reactivity
against antibodies donated by patients with celiac disease in an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). ELISA
showed a good but not total hydrolysis of gliadin in the sourdough compared to bakers yeast dough [20].
By co-cultivating yeast and LAB strains a higher degree of hydrolysis could be achieved as shown by other researchers
[21], but the effects of yeast on LAB can vary immensely depending on fermentation temperature, genes expressed
due to stress causing different interactions amongst the microbes, media composition, starting density of yeast and
LAB and duration of fermentation. The outcome of a fermentation will unlikely be identical each time it is performed.
Lactobacilli or another LAB could potentially aid as a probiotic bacteria hydrolysing gluten allergens in the intestines.
4
==PAGE:9==
In the literature no single strain of LAB have been shown to perform total hydrolysis of gluten allergens [22]. Another
possible solution for ensuring removal of gluten allergens could be by ingesting a pill before consumption of gluten
rich food product similar to lactase pills for lactose intolerant people. Lactose intolerant people either lack or have
a low quantity of lactases in their gut lactose are hydrolysed after entering the large intestine yielding galactose and
glucose. The bacteria in the large gut will ferment the sugars resulting in symptoms like diarrhoea, bloating and
stomach pain etc. By taking a lactase pill before consuming dairy products symptoms can be avoided [23]. In the
case of the gluten degrading pill it would contain a highly speciﬁc enzyme with an activity towards the prolines in the
33-mer peptide described in section 2.1. These enzymes could also be added to dough as baking enzymes combining
the fast rising ability of bakers yeast and the degradation of gluten allergens as seen in the sourdough which requires
a long fermentation period.
2.6
Cell envelope protease and proteolytic system of Lactococcus lactis
Figure 2: The cell envelope bound protease PrtP from L. lactis hydrolysing caseins from micelle ca-
sein with the maturation protein PrtM next to it. The peptide transporters Opp and Dpp each have their
oligopeptide-binding protein bound next to them. Together with the secondary transporter DtpT peptides
are transported into the cytoplasm. Intracellular peptidases in the cytoplasm further hydrolyses the pep-
tides to free amino acids. The transcriptional regulator CodY represses genes involved with the proteolytic
system when isoleucin, leucine and valine are present. Created with BioRender.com.
As described in section 2.2 many of the LAB strains described in the literature are generalist with a wide genome span
giving them the ability to grow in many different environments, but they are auxotrophic for many amino acids and
5
==PAGE:10==
are therefore highly reliant on their own hydrolytic products[24]. Due to their auxotropic capability transcriptional
regulator mechanisms are present in LAB to save precious energy. LAB have an intricate proteolytic system consisting
of a plasmid encoded Cell envelope proteinase (CEP) named PrtP in L. lactis with a speciﬁcity towards casein micelles
[25].
The maturation protein encoded by the gene prtM are needed to express an active CEP for some strains. The gene
are found upstream from the prtP gene in L. lactis, are transcribed in the reverse direction of prtP and codes for a 299
amino acid large protein. It is a homolog to the chaperone protein PrsA in B. subtilis for extracellular proteins[26].
CEPs with the need and presence og PrtM have been found in all L. lactis and other strains like L. paracasei subsp.
paracasei.. An active CEP without a gene homologous to prtM have been found in L. Delbrueckii subsp. lactis [27].
The exact domain on which PrtM are active on is not known. The casein are hydrolysed into oligo peptides which are
transported across the gram positive membrane using the main oligo peptide transport system in L. lactis Opp [28].
Opp system is an ABC transporter super-family consisting of ﬁve proteins ﬁrst OppA this is an oligo peptide binding
protein that is next to the two integral membrane proteins OppB and OppC and two nucleotide binding proteins OppD
and OppF. These 4 proteins are seen as one complex in ﬁg. 2 named Opp and are coloured a green hue. Dpp coloured
a yellow hue in ﬁg. 2 are also an ABC transporter similar to Opp but six Dpp genes are present as theres is coded for an
extra oligo binding peptide DppA and DppP but in L. lactis due to a frameshift and a non sense mutation the DppP are
not expressed and therefore not shown in ﬁg. 2. The remaining structure of Dpp are similar to Opp as the two integral
membrane proteins DppB and DppC and two nucleotide binding proteins DppD and DppF are located and presented
in the same way Opp are. The secondary transporter DtpT belongs to the PTR family of peptide transporters Dpp
and DtpT facilitate the transportation of di- and tripeptides into the cytoplasm. Opp on the other hand can transport
oligo peptides with varying lenghts from 4-35 amino acid residues. To investigate the importance of Opp another
study knocked the out the gene of Opp resulting in a blocking of uptake of casein oligo peptides demonstrating the
crucial role of Opp for L. lactis to grow in milk[29]. Opp and Dpp are ABC transporters and their uptake of peptides
are driven by ATP and the transportation of one mole of substance will generally cost two moles of ATP [30]. The
DtpT transporter uses protons to drive the transportation of peptides via symport and therefore not using any ATP.
The oligo peptides transported to the cytoplasm are hydrolysed by peptidases resulting in free amino acids ready for
the cell to use for protein synthesis. When a build of free amino acids of isoleucin, leucine and valine occures a
negative feedback reaction are started. The enzyme CodY senses the pool of these three amino acids and represses the
transcription of the genes for the CEP prtP, the oligo peptide transporters and multiple peptidases by a factor of 5-150
[31]. Leucin, isoleucine and valine are the three amino acids in lowest concentrations in milk therefore when they are
in high concentration it is no longer necessary to expend energy and resources on expressing the proteolytic system.
2.7
Cell envelope proteases in lactic acid bacteria
The CEPs from industrially important LAB strains have had their catalytic functions characterised. To this date 6 main
types of CEPs have been characterised but many more are expected to be found. These are PrtB found in Lactobacillus
6
==PAGE:11==
delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus, PrtH found in Lactobacillus helveticus, PrtL found Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp.
lactis, PrtP from L. lactis, PrtS found in Streptococcus thermophilus and PrtR from Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus.
CEPs have also been reported in other LAB strains, a study found through comparative genomics of 213 LAB strains
60 CEPs with varying lengths of 1,97 to 2,270 amino acids [32]. The same study showed that Lb. brevis Pediococcus
acidilactici, and Pediococcus pentosaceus among others lack CEP coding gene even though biochemical have demon-
strated the presence in those strains[33]. The expression of CEPs are not always guaranteed despite the presence of
the gene, and even the presence of CEPs vary immensely in LAB. In Streptococcus thermophilus strain KLDS SM
contains and expresses the prtS gene, while strain KLDS3.1012 does neither [34]. LAB strains are regarded as having
only one CEP and this seems to be the case for LAB strains with eiter PrtP, PrtR, PrtL, PrtS and PrtB. However Lb.
helveticus have four different CEPs PrtH, PrtH2, PrtH3 and PrtH4 and gene have been found for a ﬁfth [35]
2.8
Domains of cell envelope proteases from lactic acid bacteria
Figure 3: The domains of the cell envelope bound protease PrtP from L. lactis. prodomain (PP), catalytic
proteinase domain (PR), the insertion I domain (I), A-domain (A), B-domain (B), helical domain (H), cell-
wall domain (W), anchored domain (AN). Created with BioRender.com.
As described in section 2.7 CEPs vary in which domains are present and their size from strain to strain. For these
reasons PrtP from L. lactis have been used as a model CEP in ﬁg. 3 as it has all domains and can give a good
representation of the domains of CEPs. CEP are generally synthesized in the cytoplasm of LAB as an inactive pre-
pro-proteinase that generally are encoded by 6 to 8 discernible domains. The ﬁrst domain which is not shown in ﬁg. 3
are the N-terminal signal sequence approx. 30 amino acids long and are required for secretion across the cytoplasmic
7
==PAGE:12==
membrane. It is not found in PrtH2 [36]. The signal sequence are removed after secretion autocatalytic with membrane
peptidases. The prodomain (PP) the approximately 150 amino acid long sequence are also removed by autocatalysis.
The catalytic proteinase domain (PR) is approximately 500 amino acid residue long and contains the active site of
the protease and the catalytic triad of consisting of aspartic acid (D), histidine (H), and serine (S) the superfamily
of subtilisin-like serine proteinases are known for. The PR domain contains and insert domain with an approximate
length of 150 amino acid residues. The insert domain are absent in PrtR and PrtH2. The role of the approximate 400
amino acid long A-domain (A) have not been discovered, but it could have an inﬂuence on speciﬁty of the proteolytic
activity similar to the insert domain. The B-domain (B) with an approximate length of 500 amino acid residues are
likely responsible for the structure of CEPs as it is a repeat sequence with a ﬁbronectin like structure [25]. The helical
domain (H) are approximately 200 amino acids long and could be responsible for a ﬂexible connection to the cell
membrane and like a spring giving the entire CEP more degrees of freedom when attaching to a protein but it is only
seen in PrtH, PrtP and PrtS. [25]. The cell-wall domain is approximately 100 amino acid residues long and the amino
acid content are reported to containing Pro-Gly and ser-Thr in high concentrations similar to the bacterial cell wall of
gram positive bacteria. The anchored domain (AN) are reported to only be present in PrtP, PrtS, and PrtR, this domain
also have a sorting signal in many surface proteins. The anchoring domain have not been found in PrtL, PrtB, PrtH
and PrtH2 and it is believed that the W domain acts as the nonexisting cell wall anchor domain [37]. In most CEPs
either the AN or W domain displays a sorting signal often with a LPXTG composition. PrtR harbours an abnormal
sorting signal MPQAG. The two mechanism of which CEPs often anchors themselves are either by sorting signal
covalently bind to cell wall peptidoglycans peptide bonds. The positive charges of the C-terminal end of the CEP can
electrostatically conjoin with the negative charges of the teichoic acids in the cell wall
2.9
Aim of this study
The aim of this study was to isolate LAB strains harbouring a CEP with proteolytic afﬁnity towards gluten and more
speciﬁcally the prolamins with a high proline content. Strains were gathered from environments where LAB strains
with gluten speciﬁc CEPs could be found such as different sourdoughs and fermented kimchi. The samples were
blended and streaked on agar with either yeast extract peptone dextrose (YPD) or MRS media an incubated at various
temperatures. After restreaking colonies atleast three times, the species were identiﬁed using MALDI-TOF and they
will be eventually be sequenced.
As it was out of the scope for this project to wait for the sequencing data due to time limits. Already sequenced strains
from the DTU Food strain collection were investigated in a bioinformatic study to discover if some of the strains had
genes coding for CEPs.
There were several L. pseudomesenteroides strains with a sequence similar to the CEP PrtP from Lactococcus lactis
3 of these strain were chosen for cloning.
The DNA was from each strain was puriﬁed and PCR ampliﬁcation were performed. PCR ampliﬁcation was unsuc-
cessful for a long period of time and the focus of the project was moved to investigates CEPs from various industrial
8
==PAGE:13==
LAB strains and the CEPs found in L. pseudomesenteroides.This was done by creating contact maps showing the
structure of the domains of the CEPs. These results were compared to what was described in the literature and the
genomic sequences for a deeper understanding of the function and activity of CEPs.
Simultaneously PCR ampliﬁcation was optimised and further work on the cloning process was continued.
To investigate the proteolytic activity of L. pseudomesenteroides strains on gliadin growth and acidiﬁcation curves
were produced on speciﬁc media.
1
==PAGE:14==
3
Methods
3.1
Strains used in this study
The strains used in this study are described in table 1. From this point forward strains will be references to the
nomenclature given in the ﬁrst coloumn (Strain) in table 1. Freeze stocks of all strains were made by mixing 750 µl
of 50 % glycerol with 750 µl of culture after overnight (O/N) growth on MRS media. Top10 were the exception as it
was delivered in freeze stock.
Strain
Description, ID and relevant genotype
Use in this study
Reference
96
DKK96 L. pseudomesenteroides from DTU strain collection
Wild type characterisation, DNA extraction
This study
99
DKK99 L. pseudomesenteroides from DTU strain collection
Wild type characterisation, DNA extraction
This study
102
DKK102 L. pseudomesenteroides from DTU strain collection
Wild type characterisation, DNA extraction
This study
180
DKK180 L. pseudomesenteroides from DTU strain collection
Wild type characterisation, DNA extraction
This study
181
DKK181 L. pseudomesenteroides from DTU strain collection
Wild type characterisation, DNA extraction
This study
227
DKK227 L. pseudomesenteroides from DTU strain collection
Wild type characterisation, DNA extraction
This study
228
DKK228 L. pseudomesenteroides from DTU strain collection
Wild type characterisation, DNA extraction
This study
313
DKK313 L. pseudomesenteroides from DTU strain collection
Wild type characterisation, DNA extraction
This study
314
DKK314 L. pseudomesenteroides from DTU strain collection
Wild type characterisation, DNA extraction
This study
322
DKK322 L. pseudomesenteroides from DTU strain collection
Wild type characterisation, DNA extraction
This study
323
DKK323 L. pseudomesenteroides from DTU strain collection
Wild type characterisation, DNA extraction
This study
339
DKK339 L. pseudomesenteroides from DTU strain collection
Wild type characterisation, DNA extraction
This study
MG1363
Plasmid free Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris (strain MG1363)
Transformation and negative control
[38]
SK11
MG1363 with plasmid pAK80 with PrtM and PrtP from L. lactis SK11
Plasmid puriﬁcation and control
[39]
TOP10
Escherichia coli One Shot® TOP10
Transformation
[40]
Table 1: Strains and CEPs used and investigated in this study
The CEPs used in this study are shown in table 2 showing the CEP name which organism it has been found in and the
Genbank accession no. for ﬁnding it. As described in section 2.2 a reclassiﬁcation of LAB strains have been made
and therefore are the basonym Lactobacillus rhamnosus not used in this study but Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus are
used in stead even though it is the basonym are used in most of the literature describing the strain and its CEP [41].
CEP name
Found in strain
Accession No. or reference
PrtB
Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. Bulgaricus NCDO 1489
AAC41529
PrtH
Lactobacillus helveticus CNRZ32
AAD50643
PrtH2
Lactobacillus helveticus CNRZ32
AGQ23554
PrtL
Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. Lactis CRL 581
EPB98635
PrtP
Lactoccus lactis SK11
ABA47411.1
PrtR
Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus BGT10
CAD43138
PrtS
Streptococcus thermophilus CNRZ 385
ADB77872
PrtPS1
L. pseudomesenteroides found in strain: 96
This study
PrtPS2
L. pseudomesenteroides found in strains: 99, 102, 180, 181 and 313
This study
PrtPS3
L. pseudomesenteroides found in strains: 227 and 228
This study
PrtPS4
L. pseudomesenteroides found in strains: 314, 322, 323 and 339
This study
Table 2: CEPs used in this study for comparison with the CEP found in L. pseudomesenteroides and the
CEPs found in this study.
2
==PAGE:15==
3.2
Sample gathering and the DTU Food strain collection
To ﬁnd wildtype strains of LAB with a prtP capable of cleaving gliadin, samples was taken from various high potential
environments. These were 2 different types of sourdough, kimchi (home fermented kale) and non-plant material.
These samples were streaked on MRS and YPD agar plates and incubated at 30◦C for 48h, 40◦C for 48h. Furthermore
samples were also incubated at 60◦C for 24h where after they were transferred to 40◦C for 24h to see if the if heat
tolerant strains were present. Afterwards, single colonies from each were re-streaked and incubated at either 30◦C or
40◦C depending on their earlier incubation temperature either this process was repeated a minimum of 3 times before
O/N cultures were made into freeze stock by adding 40% glycerol til a ﬁnal volume of 20% glycerol was achieved
and frozen in cryo-tubes. DTU Food has over the last couple of years gathered strains from various environments
mainly from plants. At the moment 399 strains are sequenced by pair-end sequencing using Illumina NextSeq 500. It
was out of the scope for this project to sequence the strains found in the beginning of this project because of this the
strains from the DTU Food strain collection were used.
The process from strain gathering and all the way through identiﬁcation of strains and characterisation of wildtype
strains and CEPs can be seen in the ﬂowchart in ﬁg. 4
Figure 4: Flowchart illustrating the methods used in this study. From the ﬁrst steps of taken samples to
streaking them on plates to isolate colonies. Identifying the species using MALDI-TOF, selecting the QPS
approved strains for DNA puriﬁcation and sequencing. Using the genomic data to select for strains with
CEPs which DNA got ampliﬁed for Gibson assembly and cloning. To in the in characterise the species by
their acidiﬁcation and growth on media with gliadin as only nitrogen source.
3.3
Species identiﬁcation by MALDI-TOF
The strains that were gathered as described in section 3.2 was identiﬁed by Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization
Time of Flight (MALDI-TOF) on a Bruker microﬂex ™LT/SH smart benchtop system.
The MALDI-TOF method is used for identifying species on the protein composition in the cell. By shooting a laser
on the sample the proteins are ionized where after they are accelerated along an electromagnetic corridor where they
are separated by their mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) and based on their time of ﬂight a Peptide Mass Fingerprint (PMF)
3
==PAGE:16==
is created. By comparing the PMF to an ever evolving database the species can be identiﬁed quick and costeffective.
The main limitation is the size and quality of database or if the resolution is low then only genus can be determined.
[42]
Strains were streaked on agar plates with their respective isolation media and incubated for 48h. A protein extraction
was performed on all samples to gain better identiﬁcation. For each strain 300 µL of MilliQ water was added to an
eppendorf tube and a single coloni was added and the tube was vortexed until full suspension was achieved. 900 µL
HPLC grade ethanol was to each tube and they were vortxed for 1 min. The tubes were centrifuged for 3 min at
14,000 x g and supernatant was discarded. Centrifugation was repeated and the ﬁnal supernatant was removed with a
pipette. Pellet was set to dry for 2 min and then 50 µL 70 % formic acid was added. This was mixed with a pipette
and then vortexed and inubated at room temperature for 3 min. 50 µL Acetonitrile were added mixed using a pipette.
The tubes were then centrifuged for 3 min at 14,000 x g. 1 µL supernatant were then added to the target plate which
was set to dry before 1 µL of matrix were added on the target plate and also set to dry. The target plate was the put
into the MALDI-TOF machine and identiﬁcation was performed using standard settings.
Matrix should be prepared fresh and were made by mixing 475µL MilliQ water, 500µL 100% Acetonitril, 25µL
Triﬂoureddikesyre and 50µL α-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (HCCA)-powder this was mixed vigorously.
3.4
Bioinformatic methods used for selection of CEPS and strains
To ﬁnd CEPs eligible for cloning for their potential ability to cleave gliadin, the active site of the prtP were by using
the algorithm Translated Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (TBLASTx) against the 399 strains in the DTU Food
strain collection in CLC Main Workbench using standard settings and the BLOSUM62 matrix. To qualify as an
eligible gene the organism was needed to have a Qualiﬁed Presumption of Safety (QPS) approval, it should have the
entire CEP in the same contig while simultaneously having a interesting and different sequence compared to prtP.
To further investigate the proteolytic activity of L. pseudomesenteroides on gliadin the 12 strains of L. pseudomesen-
teroides which had available genomic data in the DTU Food strain collection was examined. The active site of prtP
were used again with the TBLASTx algorithm and the BLOSUM 62 matrix in CLC Main Workbench Speciﬁcly on
L. pseudomesenteroides strains.
3.5
Over night cultures, growth medias and antibiotic stock preparations
The medias used in this project were mainly MRS, SA-media, and a modiﬁed SA-media where its only nitrogen
source was gliadin from now referenced as gliadin media.
4
==PAGE:17==
O/N cultures were made by incoculating a single colony from a MRS agar plate in 10 mL MRS media for approxi-
mately 16h. The antibiotic stock of 1000x erythromycin was made by mixing 50mg of erythromycin with 10 mL of
95% ethanol which was kept at -20◦C. The desired ﬁnal concentration of erythromycin in growth media are 5µg/mL.
5
==PAGE:18==
3.6
Primer-, Plasmid design and Gibson assembly
The plasmid used in this study was pAK80 without a beta-galactosidase gene, and with the maturation protein prtM
inserted from earlier work by another student.[39] This was achieved by designing primers on each side of the gene
coding for beta-galactosidase one binding close to the polylinker in succession of the prtM and the other binding
approx 5kb downstream of the polylinker see Fig. 5.
Figure 5: The original pAK80 plasmid (A) and the modiﬁed pAK80 plasmid (B) The pAK80 plasmid
was used for cloning the prtP’s from L. pseudomesenteroides into L. lactis MG1363. The primers used was
plasmid FW ST and plasmid RV EN (see Fig. 3) the promotorless beta-galactosidase was knocked out and
the maturation protein prtM were inserted instead.
Primers were designed using the tool analyse primer properties in CLC Main WorkBench primers are presented in
table 3.
Table 3: Primer design Primers designed for ampliﬁcation of the selected prtP’s from L. pseudomesen-
teroides strains 96, 102 and 228 and for Gibson assembly of the individual prtP with the pAK80 plasmid
containing the two replicons, the erythromycin resistance gene and prtM from cloning work performed by
former student Ida Laforce. Sequences written in lower cas are plasmid primers while uppercase letter are
primers for the CEPs. Tm are an abbreviation for annealing temperatures and these were calculated using
Thermo Fischer Tm calculator [43]
Gibson assembly was performed by mixing 2µL 5X In-Fusion Enzyme Premix from TakaraBio with 2µL plas-
6
==PAGE:19==
mid. These were the same for all three Gibson assemblies but due to varying concentrations of PCR ampliﬁed prtP.
NEBioCalculator[44] was used to calculate exact amount of prtP DNA needed. This is seen in table 4.
Table 4: Gibson assembly was performed using the PCR product from each of the prtP’s as inserts and
plasmid ampliﬁed by PCR were used. Plasmid and insert were applied 1:1 pmol/µL relationship due to
their relative same size of 5-6kb.
3.7
Phenol chloroform plasmid extraction
Plasmids from the O/N cultures of the I SK11 strain were harvested, extracted and puriﬁed using a phenol chloroform
extraction for low/medium Molecular Weight (MW) plasmids. The culture was harvested by spinning down at 16,200
x g for 10 minutes and discarding the supernatant. The pellet was re-suspended in 100 µL Tris-EDTA-glucose (TEG)
and transferred to a 1.5 mL eppendorf tube. TEG solution: 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.6, 10 mM EDTA, 2% glucose.
Then it was spun down for 16,200 x g for 5 minutes. The pellet was resuspended in 200µL TEG containing 50 mg/mL
of lysozyme and incubated for 30 minutes at 37 ◦C. 400µL of newly prepared lysis solution was added and mixed by
inverting the tube four to six times. 10 mL Lysis solution was prepared by mixing 0.2 mL of 10 N NaOH, 0.5 mL
of 20% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and 9.3 mL of sterile water for a ﬁnal concentration of 0.2 N NaOH and 1%
SDS. 300µL of 3M potassium acetate pH 5 was added and the tube was inverted three times and stored at -20◦for a
minimum of 30 minutes. After incubation at -20◦the sample was defrosted at room temperature and then centrifuged
for 15 min at 16,200 x g. Supernatant was then extracted with the same volume of phenol-chloroform-isoamylic acid
mixture with a ratio of 25:24:1. This was pelleted for 5 min at 16,200 x g and the supernatant was extracted once
more with the same volume of chloroform into a new tube. The sample was centrifuged again for 5 min and 16,200
x g the supernatant was removed and 2 volumes of ethanol with 10% 3M potassium acetate for a minimum of 30
min. The pellet was centrifuge for 15 min at 16,200 x g, it was then washed with 70% ethanol and centrifuged for
5 min at 16,200 x g this was repeated three times. The ethanol were discarded and the pellet was set to air-dry for
30 min. Then it was resuspended in 30 µL of DNase-free water. To verify the quality of the plasmid extraction a
gel electrophoresis was performed as described in section 3.10 and the concentration of DNA was measured using a
NanoDrop™spectrophotometer from Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc [45].
7
==PAGE:20==
3.8
DNeasy kit DNA puriﬁcation PowerFood Microbial Kit
The DNeasy PowerFood Microbial Kit from Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc (hereafter referred to as DNeasy kit) was used
for puriﬁying the DNA of the three L. pseudomesenteroides strains 96, 102 and 228. 10 mL O/N culture was spun
down at 10.000 x g for 5 minutes and supernatant was decantet. This was repeated and the last of the supernatant was
removed using a pipette. The pellet was resuspended in 450 µL of solution MBL (from the DNeasy kit). The MBL
solution was incubated for 10 min at 55 ◦C and used while still warm. The resuspended pellet was then transferred to
a PowerBead Tube and run on a Fastprep from Nordic Biolabs with at 4m/s for 30s. Then the tubes were put on ice
for 5 min. This was repeated 3 times. The tubes were then centrifuged for 1 min at 10,000 x g and the supernatant
was transferred to a clean 2 mL collection tube. 100 µL of solution IRS (from the DNeasy kit) was added to each
tube and vortexed brieﬂy, and then incubated for 5 min at 4◦C. After incubation the tubes were centrifuged at 10,000
x g for 1 min. The entire volume of the supernatant was carefully removed without stirring up the pellet to a clean
2mL collection tube. 900 µL of solution MR (from the DNeasy kit) was added to the supernatant and the tubes were
vortexed. 650µL of the supernatant was loaded to a MB spin column and centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 1 min. Flow-
through was discarded and this step was repeated until all supernatant had been loaded onto the spin column. The spin
columns were placed into clean collection tubes and 650µL of solution PW (from the DNeasy kit) were added. The
tubes were then centrifuged for 1 min at 10,000 x g. The ﬂow-through was discarded and 650µL of ethanol provided
in the kit was added and the tubes were centrifuged for 1 min at 10,000 x g. Flowthrough was discarded and tubes
were centrifuged again for 2 min at 10,000 x g to dry the silica membrane. The spin columns were placed in clean
collection tubes and 100µL of solution EB (from the DNeasy kit) were added to the center of silica membrane this
was incubated for 5 min at RT and then centrifuged for 1 min 10,000 x g. The spin column was discarded and the
concentration of the DNA was measured by NanoDrop™spectrophotometer from Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc and then
stored at -20 ◦C.
3.9
DNA ampliﬁcation of prtP’s and plasmid ampliﬁcation
DNA ampliﬁcation was performed using Phusion High-Fidelity PCR Master Mix with HF Buffer from Thermo Fisher
and all PCR runs were performed with the same settings for the individual steps as both the modiﬁed pAK80 plasmid
used in this project and the three prtP’s had the approximate same length of 6kb. The settings for the individual steps
of the PCR runs can be seen in table 5 When the run had ﬁnished samples were either stored at -20◦C or run on an
agarose gel for puriﬁcation of product as described in section 3.10.
8
==PAGE:21==
Table 5: PCR ampliﬁcation was performed using 60s/kb for extension exceeding the 30s/kb recommended
by Thermo Fischer for their Phusion High-Fidelity PCR Master Mix with HF Buffer. Denaturation, anneal-
ing and extension was run cyclical for 35 cycles.
3.10
DNA gel electrophoresis and puriﬁcation
Plasmid extration, PCR- and Gibson assembly products were all run on 1% agarose gels with SYBR Safe DNA gel
stain and Tris-borate-EDTA (TBE) buffer to ensure size of the product was as expected. 10X TBE buffer solution was
made with 108 grams of tris base, 55 grams of boric acid were dissolved in 900mL of distilled deionized water. 40mL
of 0.5 M EDTA solution pH of 8.0. All gels were run at 100v for 45 min. A generuler dna ladder mix from Thermo
Fisher Scientiﬁc was used for estimation of protein band size in kDa. Macherey-Nagel PCR clean-up Gel extraction
kit was used for purifying products of the gel extraction, PCR ampliﬁcations and Gibson assemblies. As 200µL NTI
buffer is needed per 100mg agarose gel. 350mg was cut out from the gel weighed and added to an eppendorf tube
with 700µL NTI buffer and was incubated at 50◦C for 10min to dissolve the gel. After gel was dissolved 700µL of
sample was loaded to a NucleoSpin Gel and PCR Clean-up column and spun down at 11,000 x g for 30s ﬂow-through
was discarded. 700µL was the maximum volume of the spin column but sample could be loaded several times to gain
a higher ﬁnal concentration of product. The silica membrane was washed with 700µL NT3 buffer containing ethanol
and centrifuged at 11,000 x g for 30s. This was repeated twice and the ﬂow-through was discarded both times. All
NT3 buffer was removed and the silica membrane dried by centrifuging the spin columns for 1 min at 11,000 x g.
Spin columns were transferred to fresh collection tubes and incubated for 5min at 70◦C after 15 µL elution buffer was
added and spun down for 1 min at 11,000 x g. This step was repeated twice and the DNA concentration was measured
by NanoDrop™spectrophotometer from Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc.
3.11
Electrocompetent L. lactis and transformation
An adapted protocol from Ida Laforce [39] was used to produce competent cells of MG1363 for the transformation
of the Gibson assembly products. 0.75mL of O/N culture of MG1363 with an OD600 of 2 were inoculated in 50 mL
of solution 1 (see table 6) to achieve an OD600 of 0.03. The cells were grown for approx 6h until OD600 was 0.5. It
is of high importance this OD is not exceeded. Cells were centrifuged at 5000 x g for 10 min at 4 ◦C and supernatant
was discarded. Pellet was washed by dissolving it in 30mL ice cold solution 2 (see table 6). Cells were centrifuged at
5000 x g for 10 min at 4 ◦C and supernatant was discarded. Pellet was dissolved in 0.5mL solution 2 and 40 µL was
added to cryo-tubes and immediately frozen at -80◦C.
9
==PAGE:22==
Table 6: Recipe for solution 1 and solution 2 used for making competent cells
Transformation was performed by thawing 40 µL competent cells for each reaction on ice. While still on ice 5 µL of
Gibson Assembly reaction was added and mixed by tapping the cuvette against the tabletop 3-5 times. A precooled
cuvette was put in the Bio-Rad MicroPulser Electroporator and the Sh5 (Fungi 5) program was used (25µF, 2.0 kV
and 200 ω). The time constant was above 4.5 for each sample. 950 µL of M17 solution (table 7) was swiftly added
after electroporation. Then all samples were incubated at 30◦C for 2-3 hours. The whole sample was plated (200 µL)
on 5 selective plates (MRS+Ery 5µg/mL). These were incubated for 4 days at 30 ◦C. If transformation was successful
4-5 colonies was chosen and restreaked on selective plates and restreaking was repeated once more.
Table 7: Recipe for M17-solution used for electrocompetent cells
3.12
Growth and acidiﬁcation curves
Growth curves of the 12 L. pseudomesenteroides strains was measured in both gliadin media and SA-media both
medias with 2% glucose. In the the ﬁrst media gliadin acts as the only nitrogen source. MG1363 and SK11 were used
as controls for growth experiments. Firstly, cells were washed by centrifuging 10 mL O/N cultures at 5,000 x g for 5
min and then washed with 0.9% NaCl H2O this was repeated 3 times. After the third centrifugation the pellets were
dissolved in 1 mL 0.9% NaCl H2O. In a 96-well plate 117 µL media was mixed with 13µL culture to a total volume
of 130 µL so a 10% ﬁnal concentration culture was achieved. During the next 24h the Tecan inﬁnite 200 pro would
measure OD600 in kinetic cycles consisting of 20s orbital shaking and then measurements were taken.
The rate of acidiﬁcation for the 12 L. pseudomesenteroides(96, 99, 102, 180, 181, 227, 228, 313, 314, 322, 323 and
339) in a gliadin media were measured by using the iCinac system MG1363 and SK11 were used as controls. This was
done by pelleting 10 mL O/N cultures of all strains and washing them 3 times in 0.9% NaCl H2O and then dissolving
10
==PAGE:23==
the pellet in 1 mL 0.9% NaCl H2O. In 50 mL falcon tubes 15 mL media were mixed with 0.5 mL culture. The iCinac
system was programmed to take measurements every 30s for 24h. This was done in triplicates for both gliadin media
and SA-media. Because this project is about testing the degradation of gliadin, the gliadin was not autoclaved as some
of the gliadin would denature. Instead a 100g/L gliadin H2O solution was heated to 72 ◦C in a waterbath, then taken
out for several hours to cool down and let possible endospore germinate and then heat it up to 72 ◦C again. To avoid
contamination of the growth- and acidiﬁcation curves a high starting cell density was added. A high ﬁnal volume of
20% Gliadin was added because gliadin has a very poor solubility, so to ensure gliadin was in the media in sufﬁcient
amounts this was necessary. After the acidiﬁcation a SDS-PAGE protein gel was run (as described in section 3.13 to
examine the if the cleavage of gliadin had occurred as expected.
3.13
SDS-PAGE
Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was performed to evaluate if the cleavage
of gliadin had occurred during the 24h fermentation of the acidiﬁcation trial. 5 µL of sample from each of 12 L.
pseudomesenteroides were mixed with 2.37 µL 4x Laemmli sample buffer and 0.25 µL of β-mercaptoethanol for a
total volume of 7.62µL. Samples were then heated at 95◦C for 5 min. Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Gels (BioRad)
were used and 7.5µL of each sample was loaded into the wells. The protein ladder used for measuring the size of
proteins fragments in the gel was PageRuler Prestained Protein Ladder (Thermo Fischers Scientiﬁcs). The precast
gels were run at 200v for 30 min in the Mini-PROTEAN® Tetra Vertical Electrophoresis Cell (Bio-Rad) with 1X
Tris/glycine/SDS (TGS) running buffer (25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine, 0.1 % SDS).
3.14
Protein structure modelling
Contact maps of the CEPs from textitL. pseudomesenteroides were predicted with RaptorX. RaptorX uses sequence
conservation and evolutionary coupling powered by two deep residual neural networks that form an ultra-deep neural
network. [46] By combining this method with evolutionary data when processing the result from the ﬁrst neural
network with the second a prediction of the protein structure is achieved [47]. These networks have been trained by
large data sets and on the basis of those it can predict the structure of proteins, the larger the data set the better the
prediction .
The RaptorX servers have restrictions on the length of the uploaded sequences of 799aa. The sequences are therefore
needed to be divided this could be into either set lengths of sequences with a set overlap or by dividing them up by
domains. In this study it all sequences were divided into lengths of 799 aa with atleast 300aa overlaps to ensure a good
prediction of the overall protein structure. The sequences were submitted to the RaptorX using standard settings. Full
contactmaps were then created by superimposing these and getting a full picture of the protein structure. [48]
11
==PAGE:24==
4
Results
4.1
Strain gathering and species identiﬁcation
Samples were taken from 4 environments where the degradation of gluten could be an advantage in the hopes of
ﬁnding LAB strains with gliadin speciﬁc CEPs as described in section 3.2. 2 samples were taken from 2 different
sourdoughs, 1 sample was from kimchi (home fermented kale) and 1 from non-plant origin. By streaking the 4 samples
onto 2 types of media (YPD and MRS) and then incubating them at 3 different temperatures (30◦C, 40◦C and 60◦C)
a total of 24 agar plates were used. Of the 24 plates only 15 plates showed bacterial growth. The individual bacteria
15 plates were restreaked three times and then run in the MALDI-TOF in triplicates. For 12 of the plates a clear
species was given. These are listed in table 8 where the type of media and temperature of incubation are described
together with the origin of isolation, QPS approval status and main attributes of the given strain. [49]. Interestingly
Acetobacter cerevisiae were present in both sourdough samples even though these have never been interconnected as
one originates from the southern part of Jutland and the other from the northern part of Zealand. Acetobacter malorum
were also present in sourdough 1 but it is uncertain if that is the case as A. malorum and A. cerevisiae could have
a similar protein composition and as both the best and second best match according to the MALDI-TOF had a very
high score value for the sourdough 1 sample incubated on MRS at 30 ◦C. A. malorum and A. cerevisiae are acetic
acid bacteria best known from the production of wine and vinegar as it can be found on the outside of grapes [50].
Levilactobacillus brevis were found twice from the same kimchi sample even though it was plated on different medias
and incubated at different temperatures (MRS 30◦C. and YPD 40◦C.). L. brevis, is a LAB which are commonly found
in fermented food like cabbage but are also associated with the spoilage of beer [51]. L. brevis are the only species
found in this study with no limitation regarding its uses in food production. Enterobacter cloacae was found thrice,
all from the same non-plant sample but in different media and incubation temperatures (30◦C YPD, 40◦C YPD and
40◦C MRS). E. cloacae is commonly found in the gastrointestinal tract of humans [52] and E. cloacae is one of
the most common Enterobacter sp. causing nosocomial infections [53]. Nosocomial infections with E. cloacae can
cause severe altercations for patients as it is an opportunistic pathogen with the abillity to be multi-resistant towards
antibiotics. Additionally Staphylococcus hominis were found in the sourdough 2 samples when incubated on MRS
at 40◦C. It is commonly found as a commensal bacteria on human skin [54], but is an opportunistic pathogen that
can cause sepsis [55] S. hominis has the ability to produce the bacteriocin hominicin which has an activity against
strains of Staphylococcus aureus such as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and vancomycin-intermidiate
Staphylococcus aureus[56]. Staphylococcus lugdunesis were found in non-plant samples after incubation at 60◦C on
YPD media for 24h and then transferring the plate to a 40◦C incubator for another 24h. It is also a commensal on
the human skin but has been documented to cause infections associated with operations [57]. Bacillus subtilis were
found in the kimchi samples incubated on YPD media at 60◦C on YPD media for 24h and then relocating the plate to
a 40◦C incubator for an additional 24h. It is QPS approved as long as there is no toxigenic activity. B. subtilis is an
model organism used for producing many commercial products due to the ease of performing gene editing on it and
its ability to secrete proteins to the surrounding media. A score value from 0-3 of the identiﬁcation are given when
12
==PAGE:25==
performing a MALDI-TOF identiﬁcation. A low score from 0.00-1.69 means that the measurement was to uncertain
to specify genus. A middle score from 1.70-1.99 means the identiﬁcation was good enough to predict the genus. A
high score 2.00-3.00 means the identiﬁcation was successful and identiﬁed species are accurate. The high average
score values in table 8 is a good indicator that restreaking was performed well and the strains are ready to be send to
sequencing.
Table 8: MALDI-TOF species identiﬁcation In this table the species identiﬁed by the MALDI-TOF
are here listed based on growth media and incubation temperature. The MALDI-TOF identiﬁcation were
performed in triplicates and the score value were averaged to the value seen in column 2 (Average score
value)
4.2
Bioinformatic results
From the bioinformatic study described in section 3.4 a tBLAST was performed on the DTU Food strain collection
and 76 strains of the 399 strains had a similar sequence to the active site of the SK11 prtP. As only 3 of the 76 strains
had their entire CEP in one contig, were QPS approved and had a genetic sequence different than each other and the
PrtP use for the BLAST these were selected. In total 5 CEPs all from 3 L. pseudomesenteroides were selected. One
of the strains, 96 had 3 interesting CEPs. The three strains from the strain collection from DTU Food were 96, 102
and 228. It was later discovered that strain 96 was contaminated and only harboured 1 usable CEP
To investigate the proteolytic activity of L. pseudomesenteroides all 12 strains from the DTU Food strain collection
were tblasted as described in section 3.4 using prtP to investigate if they all harboured CEPs. As all 12 had CEPs a
phylogenetic tree was assembled in CLC Main WorkBench with standard settings such as Neighbor Joining as tree
construction method and Jukes-Cantor for protein distance measure. The phylogenetic tree can be seen in ﬁg. 6.
13
==PAGE:26==
The CEPs grouped into 4 branches. This is because in the 12 strains only 4 CEPs were different and these were
divided into 4 CEPs as describe in table 2. The whole alignment of the CEPs can be seen in appendix 12. The length
measurements of a phylogenetic tree are based on percentage of dissimilarity, in ﬁg. 6 the distance between CEPs
from L. pseudomesenteroides and in table 9 the branch length between CEPs are calculated.
Figure 6: Phylogenetic tree made in CLC WorkBench by ﬁrst aligning 12 L. pseudomesenteroides CEPs
and then using standard settings to produce this tree. The origin of isolation of isolation can be seen next
to the strain No. and for each cluster the CEP name dealt to the cluster are written next to it. The length of
each branch are also portrayed.
CEPa-CEPb
Distance
CEPa-CEPb
Distance
CEPa-CEPb
Distance
CEPa-CEPb
Distance
PrtPS1-PrtPS2
0.062
PrtPS1-PrtB
0.974
PrtPS2-PrtB
0.948
PrtPS3-PrtB
0.951
PrtPS1-PrtPS3
0.061
PrtPS1-PrtH
0.996
PrtPS2-PrtH
0.97
PrtPS3-PrtH
0.973
PrtPS1-PrtPS4
0.06
PrtPS1-PrtH2
0.926
PrtPS2-PrtH2
0.9
PrtPS3-PrtH2
0.903
PrtPS2-PrtPS3
0.019
PrtPS1-PrtL
0.953
PrtPS2-PrtL
0.927
PrtPS3-PrtL
0.93
PrtPS2-PrtPS4
0.018
PrtPS1-PrtP
0.987
PrtPS2-PrtP
0.961
PrtPS3-PrtP
0.964
PrtPS3-PrtPS4
0.015
PrtPS1-PrtR
0.885
PrtPS2-PrtR
0.859
PrtPS3-PrtR
0.862
PrtPS1-PrtS
0.901
PrtPS2-PrtS
0.875
PrtPS3-PrtS
0.878
CEPa-CEPb
Distance
CEPa-CEPb
Distance
CEPa-CEPb
Distance
CEPa-CEPb
Distance
PrtPS4-PrtB
0.95
PrtB-PrtH
0.985
PrtH-PrtH2
1.454
PrtH2-PrtL
1.411
PrtPS4-PrtH
0.972
PrtB-PrtH2
1.432
PrtH-PrtL
0.973
PrtH2-PrtP
1.445
PrtPS4-PrtH2
0.902
PrtB-PrtL
0.315
PrtH-PrtP
0.677
PrtH2-PrtR
1.363
PrtPS4-PrtL
0.929
PrtB-PrtP
0.499
PrtH-PrtR
1.277
PrtH2-PrtS
1.379
PrtPS4-PrtP
0.963
PrtB-PrtR
1.255
PrtH-PrtS
1.373
PrtL-PrtP
0.964
PrtPS4-PrtR
0.861
PrtB-PrtS
1.351
PrtP-PrtR
1.324
PrtL-PrtR
1.234
PrtPS4-PrtS
0.877
PrtR-PrtS
1.363
PrtP-PrtS
1.364
PrtL-PrtS
1.33
Table 9: Table showing the distance between CEPs. The CEPa-CEPb coloumn describes which CEPs the
distance are measured between. The distance resembles percentage of dissimilarity, This is not always a
valid measurements as it can be seen some have length over 1 meaning they are more than 100% different.
To investigate the broader function and structure of CEPs. 7 CEPs from industrially important LAB were chosen
based on a review paper from 2020 [41]. Their sequences were aligned in CLC Main Workbench using standard
settings and a phylogenetic tree were created from this alignment with standard setting and shown in radial layout.
The distances between each CEP from the DTU Food strain collection and the industrial CEPs are shown in table. 9
14
==PAGE:27==
Figure 7: Phylogenetic tree of the 12 L. pseudomesenteroides and the 7 CEPs from a review paper on
CEPs from 2020 [41]. Branch lengths have been added. In the upper left corner the area of the 12 L.
pseudomesenteroides have been enlarged enhance the perspective of difference amongst the CEPs.
The prtM gene from SK11 were blasted against the whole genome of the 12 L. pseudomesenteroides strains to in-
vestigate if the PrtM chaperone are necessary for PrtPS. No hit were found for the 12 strains see ﬁg. 24 in appendix
shows the BLAST performed.
15
==PAGE:28==
4.3
PCR ampliﬁcation
PCR ampliﬁcation was a challenge in this project therefore many PCR runs were performed with a trial, error and
analyse approach. Only three of the runs are showed in this section to give the reader an overview of the process.
In lane 3 and 4 of the presented gels are 2 of the three CEPs genes from strain 96. During a bioinformatic study
performed later in the project it was revealed that during the sequencing of strain 96 a contamination must have
occurred. For this reason the CEP gene in lane 3 were not present in the pure strain of 96 used in this project and the
CEP gene ampliﬁed in lane 4 had an overseen stop codon early in the sequence. For these reason no later work was
performed with these genes and they are not mentioned as possible CEPs in this project.
In ﬁg. 8 a smear is seen at the bottom of lane 2-7 some more dense than others, this could be the result of primer-dimer
formation. The extension used were the one described by Thermo Fischer for their Phusion High-Fidelity PCR Master
Mix of 15-30s/kb, which turned out to be too short of a timespan.
Figure 8: PCR run of CEP gene ampliﬁcation from L. pseudomesenteroides Lane 1 GeneRuler, Lane 2
Strain 96 CEP gene, Lane 3-4 non-usable CEP genes, Lane 5 strain 102 CEP gene, Lane 6 strain 228 CEP
gene, Lane 7 plasmid puriﬁed from strain SK11
In ﬁg. 9 a PCR product and primers for ampliﬁcation was borrowed from a colleague to verify the efﬁciency of the
PCR reactions using their methods. The test is seen in lane 7 and are the only succesful ampliﬁcation on the basis of
these setting the next PCR ampliﬁcations were performed with a lower addition of DNA templates and primers.
16
==PAGE:29==
Figure 9: PCR run of CEP gene ampliﬁcation from L. pseudomesenteroides Lane 1 GeneRuler, Lane 2
Strain 96 CEP gene, Lane 3-4 non-usable CEP genes, Lane 5 strain 102 CEP gene, Lane 6 strain 228 CEP
gene, Lane 7 PCR efﬁciency test using a diluted PCR product and primers borrowed from a colleague.
In ﬁg. 10 the most successful of the PCR runs are shown achieved by extending the initial denaturation and cyclical
denaturation time , using a lower annealing temperature and extending the extension period to 60s/kb.
Figure 10: PCR run of CEPs gene ampliﬁcation from L. pseudomesenteroides Lane 1 GeneRuler, Lane
2 Strain 96 CEP gene, Lane 3-4 non-usable CEPs genes due to strain contamination, Lane 5 strain 102 CEP
gene, Lane 6 strain 228 CEP gene, Lane 7 plasmid puriﬁed from SK11 with non-effective kit and therefor
not mentioned further, Lane 8 plasmid puriﬁed from SK11 with the Phenol chloroform plasmid extraction
as describe in section 3.7.
The ﬁnal results shown in ﬁg. 10 were good enough to go ahead with Gibson Assembly and Transformation.
17
==PAGE:30==
4.4
Gibson Assembly and transformation to obtain isogenetic strains
Gibson assembly was attempted as described in section 3.6 the best results came from running Gibson Assembly
product on a gel and then perform a gel puriﬁcation.
Transformation with electrocompetent MG1363 cells was attempted for the CEPs genes of strains 96, 102 and 228.
As a negative control linear plasmid from PCR ampliﬁcation was used and the positive control was a paK80 plasmid
containing a PrtP and PrtM from L. Lactis. As seen in ﬁg. 11 no colonies grew from the transformations of the CEPs
genes from strain 96, 102, 228 and the negative control. Several colonies were seen on the positive control.
Figure 11: Transformation results Transformation was performed by using Gibson Assembled paK80
plasmids and transforming these into MG1364. (A) was the transformation of the CEP gene from strain
96, (B) was from strain 102, (C) was from strain 228 (D) was the negative control by using linear plasmid
ampliﬁed by PCR. The only successful transformation showing colonies was the positive control (E) using
the plasmid SK11 from an earlier students work Ida Laforce [39] .
4.5
Growth curves of wildtype L. pseudomesenteroides strains
Growth curves of the 12 L. pseudomesenteroides strains from the DTU strain collection these were run in a 96 well
plate in the Tecan inﬁnite 200 pro platereader as described in section 3.12. As controls MG1363 and MG1363 with a
casein degrading PrtP from L. lactis SK11 were used. In ﬁg. 12 (A) and (B) shows the entire 24h cultivation. These
indicate that strain 322, 323 and 339 grow extensively on gliadin media while the same three strains show a low and
slow growth on pure SA-media. As the total volume of the cultivations were rather small 130µL a low rise in OD600
would be expected. In (C) and (D) in ﬁg. 12 a smaller time and OD600 interval are shown for the same cultivation. In
these it can be seen that most of the strains grow and plateau at similar rate in SA-media with and without gliadin as
only nitrogen source. From these results it is not quite possible to conclude if the wildtype strains a viable on gluten
more research is needed.
18
==PAGE:31==
Figure 12: Growth curves of the 12 L. pseudomesenteroides strains from the DTU strain collection. As controls MG1363 and SK11 were used. (A) 24h
cultivation on gliadin media. (B) 24h cultivation on SA-media. (C) A close-up of the ﬁrst 10h of the 24h cultivation on gliadin media. (D) A close-up of
the ﬁrst 10h of the 24h cultivation on SA-media.
19
==PAGE:32==
Aggregation and precipitation occurred for some strains when cultivated for longer periods as seen in the 96 well plate
used for measuring growth rates seen in ﬁg. 13. Precipitation occurred mainly in the wells where SA-media was used,
but in wells C 10-12 containing strains 339 a clear precipitation had happened.
Figure 13: (A)96 well plate used for measuring growth curves of the 12 L. pseudomesenteroides strains
from the DTU strain collection for 24h. (B) All strains were measured in triplicates. Strains in row A-D
were grown on gliadin media. Strains in row E-H were grown on SA-media. An aggregation occurred in
the bottom of the wells for some of the strains, this could have had an inﬂuence on the OD measurements
seen in 12.
4.6
Acidiﬁcation curves
For 24h cultivations the pH of the 12 strains of L. pseudomesenteroides from the DTU Food strain collection to-
gether with MG1363 and SK11 as controls were measured using the iCinac analyser from KMP analytics. This was
performed in triplicates except for 322 which was performed in duplicates due to one erroneous measurement. Acid-
iﬁcations were made on gliadin media and SA-media as seen in ﬁg. 14. A high acidiﬁcation rate was seen for all
strains even the pure media used as blank eventually showed some acidiﬁcation of the media. From these results it is
difﬁcult conclude the cause of acidiﬁcation, these studies need to be optimised and repeated.
20
==PAGE:33==
Figure 14: Acidiﬁcation curves of the 12 strains of L. pseudomesenteroides from the DTU Food strain collection. A shows acidiﬁcation curves in gliadin
media and B shows acidiﬁcation curves from SA-Media. Each strain number are the DKK identiﬁcation number from the strain collection. Three controls
were used in this experiment MG1363, the SK11 strains which contains a casein degrading prtP from L. lactis and a blank named media only containing
the media and no O/N culture addition.
21
==PAGE:34==
4.7
Degradation of gliadin
To investigate if the L. pseudomesenteroides strains had a proteolytic effect on gliadin a sample was taken after a
24h incubation. These samples were run on SDS-Page gel with undigested SA-media with gliadin to compare if a
change of band size and intensity had occurred. Gliadin has a size of 25-100 kDa [58] and in this interval a clear band
can be seen in ﬁg. 15 in lane 2 on both gel (A) and gel (B). That speciﬁc band seems to diminish in intensity after
fermentation, but that occurs for all strains including the controls. MG1363 is a plasmid free strain with a CEP and
the SK11 strain only has a casein degrading CEP. From these gels it is not possible to conclude if the 12 strains of L.
pseudomesenteroides can degrade gliadin.
Figure 15: SDS-page showing the degradation of gliadin after 24h fermentation with the 12 L. pseudome-
senteroides strains from the DTU Food strain collection in gliadin media. The protein ladder used for both
gels were pageruler prestained protein ladder (thermo ﬁsher scientiﬁcs) and for all strains 5µL of sample
were added to each well after the 24h fermentation. A) Lane 1: protein ladder, lane 2: Non-degraded gliadin
media, Lane 3: strain 96, Lane 4: strain 99, Lane 5: strain 102, Lane 6: strain 180, Lane 7: strain 181, Lane
8: strain 227, Lane 9: strain 228, Lane 10: 313. (B) Lane 1: protein ladder, lane 2: Non-degraded gliadin
media, Lane 3: strain 314, Lane 4: strain 322, Lane 5: strain 323, Lane 6: strain 339, Lane 7: MG1363,
Lane 8: SK11. Arrows are added between the 23kDa and the 35kDa lane showing the gliadin band.
4.8
CEPs structure prediction
All of the 12 strains of L. pseudomesenteroides from the DTU strain collection had a CEPs gene similar to PrtP from
L. lactis. Of the 12 strains only 4 unique CEPs genes were found. The structure of these 4 CEPs genes were predicted
using RaptorX [48] and the results can be seen in ﬁg. 16 and ﬁg. 17. To investigate the CEPs further the genomic
sequence from 7 industrially important LAB from a review on CEPs from 2020 described in table 2 [41] were also
predicted using RaptorX. These results can be seen in ﬁgures 18-21. Contact maps yields visual information on the
structure of protein regions and the distinction between structural features can found if they are not too complimentary.
22
==PAGE:35==
Figure 16: Left: Contact map of PrtPS1 from L. pseudomesenteroides found in strain: 96. Right: Contact
map of PrtPS2 found in L. pseudomesenteroides found in strains: 99, 102, 180, 181 and 313. Both created
using the RaptorX server.
Figure 17: Left: Contact map of PrtPS3 found in L. pseudomesenteroides found in strains: 227 and 228.
Right: Contactmap of PrtPS4 found in L. pseudomesenteroides found in strains: 314, 322, 323 and 339.
Both created using the RaptorX server.
In ﬁg. 16 and ﬁg. 17 the 4 PrtPS CEPs from L. pseudomesenteroides are seen. They are all similar enough to be
described by the same approximate domain distribution. The ﬁrst 700 amino acids encompasses the signal sequence
amino acid 0-30, the prodomain amino acid 31-188 and the CEPs domain 189-693. In the contact maps many short
and long range contacts are predicted, which could describe a globular tertiary structure. The following 300 amino
acids (694-1001) are predicted as the A domain and has an unknown function. Anti-parallel β-sheet with short
Helix intertwined are seen. The B domain stretches from amino acid 1002-1693 and seven anti-parallel β-sheets are
dominant in this region and resembles a ﬁbronectin structure. From amino acid 1694-1802 the wall binding domain
are to be found with a sorting signal, no clear structure are seen in this but contact are seen as blur near the end of the
matrix.
Figure 18: Left: Contactmap of PrtB from L. bulgaricus. Right: Contactmap of PrtH from L. helveticus
both created in RaptorX
23
==PAGE:36==
The contact map of PrtB seen in to left in ﬁg. 18 Similar for all CEPs that does not originates from L. pseudomesen-
teroides excluding PrtH2 and PrtR the ﬁrst 700 amino acids roughly encompasses the signal sequence amino acid, the
prodomain and the protease domain with an insert domain. There is no signal sequence and insert domain in PrtH2
so its protease domain stops at amino acid 545, PrtR also lacks an insert sequence and its protease domaine ends
at amino acid 549. In the contact maps many short and long range contacts are predicted this region, which could
describe a globular tertiary structure. For all CEPs amino acids the next domain is the A-domain and even though
it has has an unknown function the approximate length for all A-domains are circa 300 amino acids an alignment of
A-domains can be seen in the appendix 13. Anti-parallel β-sheets with short Helix intertwined are seen in all CEPs
though the sequences of the a domains are different the predicted structure are somewhat similar. The B domains of
the CEP vary immensely in length. it consists of anti-parallel β-sheets and resembles a ﬁbronectin structure. PrtH2
and PrtS only has 3 β-sheets repeats whereas PrtB and PrtL have 8 repeats. PrtH, PrtP and PrtS are the only CEPs
with helix domains after the B domain, these are most obvious in PrtS where a clear repeat of 3 cluster of helixes are
present. The wall binding domains are the second to last domain and for PrtP and PrtS a known sorting signal LPXTG
is found , while in PrtR an atypical sorting signal MPQAG are present in PrtB and PrtL a degenerated sorting signal
LPKKT have been found [59] No clear structure are seen in the wall binding domain, but there are clear contacts in
PrtB, PrtH, PrtH2, PrtL and PrtP meaning some folding must occur.
Figure 19: Left: Contactmap of PrtH2 from L. helveticus. Right: Contactmap of PrtL from L. delbrueckii
both created in RaptorX
Figure 20: Left: Contactmap of PrtS from St. thermophilus. Right: Contactmap of PrtR from L. rhamnosus
both created in RaptorX
24
==PAGE:37==
Figure 21: Contactmap of L. lactis created in RaptorX
4.9
Protease structure prediction
In a review paper from 2020 [41] CEPs from LAB were investigated and a schematic presentation of the predicted
domains and the structure of CEPs were published. By examining this representation a few changes should be made.
This is based on the amino acid numeration given by the paper and comparing those with the actual amino acid
sequence and the contact maps predicted in RaptorX (shown in ﬁg. 18-21).
Domains were annotated to the CEP from strain 102 to present a schematic representation in a similar way to the
review paper on CEPs [41]. The CEP presented here will from this point be referred to as PrtPS and will represent the
domain distribution of CEPs from L. pseudomesenteroides.
PrtL are the only CEP with its insert sequence reported in Li et al. As the catalytic protease domain are somewhat
similar for all the CEPS the part of the protease domain from PrtL before and after the insert was blasted against the
strains with a suspected insert to identify the probable position of the insert in these. An insert were found in PrtB,
PrtL, PrtH, PrtP, PrtS and PrtPS and these were aligned. From this alignment it was seen that only a hand full of
amino acids were conserved through all inserts, but most of the amino acids varied signiﬁcantly from each other. The
alignment of inserts are shown in ﬁg. 23
The function of the A-domain are currently unknown [37]. Domain B are believed to be responsible for the stability
of CEPs due to its ﬁbronectin like structure consisting of multiple repeats of beta-sheet clusters [25]. This structure is
easily noticed in the contact maps of all CEPs, in the review paper PrtS are said to lack the B domain this is hereby
refuted for even though the region is short it has 3 beta-sheet cluster similar to PrtH2. For many of the contact maps
the helix domain of the CEP is only visible when zooming in on the non-superimposed and comparing it with the
suggested 3D structure. In PrtH2 no helix domain can be seen in the contact map even though it has been reported in
review paper [41]. All the things discussed above regarding the CEPs domain placement are shown in ﬁg. 22
25
==PAGE:38==
Sequences of A and B domains from the strains containing such a domain were aligned and are presented in the
appendix ﬁg. 13-16 the domain annotations were added to the sequence in all CEPs and are presented in appendix
25-32. For all domains no distinct pattern were to be found, except for a handful of conserved amino acids at spread
intervals with unknown function.
26
==PAGE:39==
Figure 22: A schematic representation and comparison of domains of different LAB CEPs. (A) The suggested changes for the domain distribution
in CEPs from the review paper. (B) The original representation of CEPs from the review paper[41]. Signal sequence (S), prodomain (PP), catalytic
proteinase domain (PR), the insertion I domain (I), A-domain (A), B-domain (B), helical domain (H), (cell-wall domain), anchored domain (AN),
aspartic acid (D), histidine (H), Asparagine (N), and serine (S)
27
==PAGE:40==
Figure 23: Alignment of the insert domains from CEPs from various LAB ranging from AA 1-152.
The insert sequences vary in length from the shortest being 139 amino acids to the longest being 152 amino acids
long. In the alignment shown in ﬁg. 23 there was a 100% amino acid consensus 22 times in these relative short
sequences furthermore when comparing the contact maps created a difference are hardly seen in the CEPs containing
a insert sequence.
Table 10: Alignment of Helix domains from CEPs from various LAB ranging from AA 1-233.
In the helix domains conservation are seen a few places the size of the three helix domains vary from 86 amino acids
to 220 amino acids where only a few amino acids were conserved in the alignment ﬁg. 10. When Comparing the
helix domains from the contact maps a similarity is difﬁcult to notice. In prtS the helix domain consists of three clear
clusters of helixes and in the two others they are hardly seen.
28
==PAGE:41==
Table 11: Alignment of Wall binding domains from CEPs from various LAB ranging from AA 1-368.
The wall binding domains are reported to contain high levels of P-G ans S-T, based on the alignment shown in ﬁg.
11 some parts of the sequences have similarities, but not often are the conformations of P-G and S-T similar to gram
positive cell walls seen. High levels of the amino acids S and T are seen in the alignment.
5
Discussion and future perspectives
5.1
Strain gathering
The strains found by taking samples from environments where gluten degrading strains could be, were identiﬁed
by MALDI-TOF. The MALDI-TOF identiﬁcation showed that both samples taken from sourdough contained A.
cerevisiae and A. malorum. From this, one could imply cross contamination being the reason, but that is not the
case. The samples were taken from sourdoughs far away from each other without any them ever being in contact,
the samples only shared the same fridge after being stored at 4◦C in individual eppendorf tubes. From the sample
sourdough 2 the strain S. hominis were found. When baking with sourdough all sourdough are used to make a bread,
but some of the dough a removed before baking and stored to continue the sourdough fermentation until a new bread
needs to be made. Because the dough have been handled by hand during kneading and then some of the dough have
been taken out for continued fermentation, this could be the reason for the presence of S. hominis. A. cerevisiae
and A. malorum are Acetic Acid Bacteria (AAB) both found in wine, vinegar and balsamico production where the
concentration are monitored minutely to gain the perfect amount of acidity to the product [50]. In sourdough as
in wine an acidity can be noticed though more prevalent in the sourdough hence the name and the AAB strains A.
29
==PAGE:42==
cerevisiae and A. malorum are most likely the cause of this. The sample taken from kimchi harboured among others
strains of L. brevis as this strain were found twice after incubation on two different medias (MRS and YPD) and at
two different temperature (30◦C and 40◦C). L. brevis is a QPS approved organism which after sequencing could be
an useful addition to the DTU Food strain collection, but as the two strains found in this project were taken from
the same sample a full alignment should be performed to not have doublets of the same strain in the strain collection
. L. brevis are found in several places in natural fermentations of food such as in Thai fermented sausage Nham
and in the traditional fermented kale Korean kimchi [60] [61]. B. subtilis were in this study found in the kimchi
sample. B. subtilis are found in the production of fermented soybean products in Southeast Asia [62], but it has also
been connected to food poisoning [63]. The B. subtilis found in the kimchi sample should be screened for toxigenic
activity before being used in food production. In the non-plant sample S. lugdunesis and E. cloacae were isolated and
as neither are QPS approved further work in food production should not be pursued.
5.2
Cloning efﬁciency and optimisation
During this project many obstacles were encountered during the cloning of CEPs found in L. pseudomesenteroides via
the paK80 plasmid into a plasmid free L. lactis strain MG1363. The plasmid extraction from MG1363 from another
students work [39] was the ﬁrst issue as it is a low-copy plasmid. Several kits were tried to extract the plasmid but as
ﬁnal concentration of plasmid was too low the phenol chloroform extraction described in section 3.7 was performed
successfully. The puriﬁcation of DNA from the L. pseudomesenteroides was succesfull in the ﬁrst try using the
DNeasy Kit from Qiagen. The ampliﬁcation using PCR was the issue causing the most problems in this project. By
improving PCR settings in small steps on the base of scientiﬁc reasoning as described in section 4.3 the protocol
described in section 3.9 are recommended for ampliﬁcation in future works. Gibson Assembly was performed by gel
puriﬁcation’s of the PCR products to gain a very high concentration of both the plasmid and CEP gene. Attempts
to transform the Gibson Assembled plasmid straight into MG1363 was unsuccessful. An agarose gel were run with
Gibson Assembly products and a puriﬁcation was performed, nevertheless transformation was unsuccessful. To gain
a high plasmid concentration a transformation of the puriﬁed Gibson Assembly product was One Shot™TOP10
Chemically Competent E. coli was attempted with no success. This could be due to the lethal effect an expressed
CEP would have on E. coli as it the CEP will likely be expressed in the periplasm as it is a gram-negative bacteria in
contrast to the gram-positive MG1363L. lactis. This has been described in the literature before [64] [65] a possible
solution could be to use a IPTG inhibited plasmid with the CEP gene which could repressed while the gene was
ampliﬁed in E. coli and then extract the plasmid and transform it into MG1363. The clones made by this method
should be investigated for their viability in a gliadin media by making growth and acidiﬁcation curves which should
be compared with the L. pseudomesenteroides strain the gene was isolated from to verify the proteolytic activity of
the CEP on gliadin. If the clones show an proteolytic activity towards gliadin the media after cultivation should be
analysed using mass spectrometry to gain a knowledge of the cleavage site of the CEP. An ELISA performed on the
media after incubation would tell whether or not the allergenicity of gliadin had been removed after fermentation.
30
==PAGE:43==
Both mass spectrometry and ELISA should also be performed on the L. pseudomesenteroides strains so a comparison
of the results could show if the proteolytic activity of comes from the CEP or has another causation.
5.3
Growth curve
Growth experiments of the 12 L. pseudomesenteroides strains were performed as described in section 3.12 with the
results presented in section 4.5 to investigate whether or not the strains could grow on a media with gliadin as only
nitrogen source. The growth curves seen in ﬁg.12 shows an unexpected high growth on gliadin for strain 322, 323 and
339 with fast decline of OD600 after 6-10h depending on the strain. This decline can be explained by the aggregation
and precipitation occurring as shown in ﬁg. 13, it is difﬁcult to notice aggregation and precipitation of strain 322 and
323 in the gliadin wells, but it can be seen quite clear in the SA-media wells. In the appendix ﬁg. 17-19 shows a clear
precipitation of the strains on an O/N culture with MRS media.
Aggregation genes aggL from L. lactis (uniprot entry name G3ADN7 LACLL) and CluA (uniprot entry name Q48588 9LACT)
were blasted against the 12 L. pseudomesenteroides strains and no similar genes were found. Very few papers have
been published regarding the aggregation of Leuconostoc spp. and none about which gene causes it but aggregation
are mentioned [66].
In ﬁg. 12 the growth of the remaining strains are difﬁcult to see on the 24h graph as the peak is much smaller. By
narrowing the time frame to 0-10h as seen in (C) and (D) in ﬁg. 12 a small growth can be seen on gliadin similar to the
growth on SA-media except for strain 322 which shows an almost immediate decline in (C). The small growth peak
can be due to the aerobic conditions under which the fermentation took place. It has been shown that LAB strains
growth signiﬁcantly better under anaerobic conditions [67]
As all strains including the negative control strains SK11 (casein degrading CEP) and MG1363 showed viability on
the gliadin media future work should investigate the optimum concentration of gliadin added to the media. Studies
have shown that some CEP have an afﬁnity for animal proteins like caseins and plant proteins like soybean and
wheat. It was in the same study discovered that L. helveticus CRL 1177 in a high extent could degrade gliadins[68].
Even though it seems unlikely that SK11 could degrade gliadin to a small extend one should not underestimate the
proteolytic activity of LAB strains. The gliadin used in this study was likely not pure gliadin but must also have
contain some free amino acids from which the growth have occurred. MG1363 is plasmid free strain without a CEP
and SK11 only have one CEP with speciﬁcity towards casein which is highly unlikely to have an proteolytic activity
towards gliadin. In future studies the concentration of gliadin should be investigated to ﬁnd an optimum concentration
of gliadin. It is of major importance that the concentration of free amino acids are so small they will be consumed fast
as CEPs are only expressed when amino acids leucine, isoleucine and valine concentrations are low, but the remaining
gliadin concentration are high enough to see a continued growth of the strains. In this experiment the concentration
of gliadin were most likely too high.
31
==PAGE:44==
5.4
Acidiﬁcation assay optimisation
The acidiﬁcation curves as seen in ﬁg. 14 ma de from incubating the 12 L. pseudomesenteroides strains, MG1363,
SK11 and pure media for 24h in gliadin media and SA-media and measuring pH with the iCinac analyser from KMP
analytics shows a similar pattern to the growth curves in ﬁg. 12. As all strains no matter the media lowers the pH
signiﬁcantly, an overall lower pH are measured after the incubation SA-media than on gliadin media. On average
the ﬁnal pH for the SA-media incubation was 3.8 and while being 4.2 for the gliadin media. The signiﬁcantly lower
pH could be explained by the buffer capacity of proteins. Amino acids can both be basic and acidic but proteins
even when protein concentration are raised a little (0.1%) it can change the buffer capacity up to 15 times[69]. For
most of the strains the acidiﬁcation occurs rapidly after inoculation this is probably due to the high density of starting
culture. This makes it difﬁcult to differentiate between the reason for acidiﬁcation, as growth of the bacteria might
not be the necessary for acidiﬁcation as the high starting number of cells could produce the lower pH value. When the
optimal concentration of gliadin in the media has been found as described in section 5.3 a similar approach should be
performed to identify a more realistic acidiﬁcation rate.
5.5
Proteolytic activity on gliadin
Gliadin from wheat contains approximately 14% proline which are considered a high proline content [58]. Proline
contributes with an extraordinary conformational rigidity in secondary protein folding as it is the only proteogenic
amino acid with a secondary amine. The consequence of this is that the amino can’t act as an hydrogen bond donor
as in other amino acids, but only as an acceptor. This causes the angle of the prolines cyclic sidechain to interlock
with other amino acids at approximately -65◦[70]. An enzyme with speciﬁcity for cleaving after an proline would
be able to cleave the proline rich 33-mer peptide (LQLQPFPQPQLPYPQPQLPYPQPQLPYPQPQPF) removing the
epitopes causing the allergenic effect of gliadin[71]. Prolyl endopeptidases with this speciﬁcity have been found and
described [72], but has of yet not been in found in CEPs.
5.6
PrtPS CEP mutation and possible effect
In the protease domaine (amino acid 188-693) of PrtPS missense mutations have cause the substitution of 17 amino
acid. Of these 17 10 caused an amino acid substitution with a different property
256 tyrosine to cysteine, alanine to serine, alanine to aspartic acid, glutamine to lysine, serine to alanine, aspartic acid
to glycine, proline to threonine, alanine to threonine, threonine to methionine, alanine to serine a
32
==PAGE:45==
6
Conclusion
The aim of this study was to isolate and study LAB strains harbouring CEPs with proteolytic afﬁnity towards gluten
and investigate the properties of these LAB strains for their usage in the production of non-gluten-allergenic food.
It was out of the scope for this project to get the isolated strains sequenced due to the narrow time frame of the
study. Therefore CEPs used in this study were found in LAB strains from the DTU Food strain collection containing
sequenced genome for 399 microbes.
Three strains of L. pseudomesenteroides were chosen for cloning based on tblast performed on the strain collection
with the active site of the CEP from L. lactis The intend of this study was to clone CEPs into a plasmid free L. lactis
strain MG1363 using the paK80 vector. The ampliﬁcation of the CEP genes were a greater challenge than expected
and the PCR protocol yielding the best results were unlike standard protocols. Denaturation time lengths were for
example extended signiﬁcantly to ensure full denaturation of the DNA making the it more available for primers to
attach.
The transformation of the paK80 plasmid into electrocompetent MG1363 were troublesome and the protocol that
made successful transformation with a control plasmid required for example setting the electroporater on a fungi
transformation program.
Growth and acidiﬁcation experiments were intended to be made and by comparing the activity of the cloned strains
with the wildtype strains the activity of the CEPs could be determined. Since cloning was not successful all 12 L.
pseudomesenteroides strains from the strain collection were chosen for characterisation of their growth on media with
gliadin as only nitrogen source. Only one strain did not show growth on the gliadin media (314) as the negative
controls (the plasmid free MG1363) showed growth on gliadin it is likely because small peptides and free amino acids
were present in the gliadin which it could absorb through its active uptake system Opp and DtpT. When investigated
further in other studies a lower concentration of gliadin are needed to access the viability of the strains on gliadin
media.
The acidiﬁcation curves showed a similar result, the acidiﬁcation occurred rapidly for all strains including the controls
both when grown on gliadin and deﬁned media. This prevents the ability to decipher if the strains can grow and acidify
the gliadin media or if the starting density are so high that the starting culture are performing the acidiﬁcation without
proliferating.
A comparison of the CEPs from established industrial LAB strains and the CEPs used in this was study was made to
investigate the proteolytic activity of the CEPs from a bioinformatic angle [41]. In the literature certain structures and
domains in CEPs are presumed to have a set length, structure or placement carried on from older publications [26].
By producing contact maps for the CEPs and comparing these to their respective protein sequences a proposal have
been made for how and where to determine the position and length of domains like the B domain.
This study have provided detailed protocols on how to work with and amplify DNA from the LAB strain L. pseu-
domesenteroides and guidelines have been given for making characterisation of the proteolytic activity of CEPs on
gliadin. A new view on how to determine the domain distribution and protein structure in CEPs have been giving
33
==PAGE:46==
using prediction models for visual interpretation combined with aligning genomic sequences of similar structures to
yield more accurate structures of domains.
References
[1] J. Y. Kang, A. H.Y. Kang, A. Green, K. A. Gwee, and K. Y. Ho. Systematic review: Worldwide variation in the
frequency of coeliac disease and changes over time. Alimentary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 38(3):226–
245, 2013.
[2] Elena Lionetti, Simona Gatti, Alfredo Pulvirenti, and Carlo Catassi. Celiac disease from a global perspective.
Best Practice and Research: Clinical Gastroenterology, 29(3):365–379, 2015.
[3] Outi Koskinen, Mikko Villanen, Ilma Korponay-Szabo, Katri Lindfors, Markku M¨aki, and Katri Kaukinen. Oats
do not induce systemic or mucosal autoantibody response in children with coeliac disease. Journal of Pediatric
Gastroenterology and Nutrition, 48(5):559–565, 2009.
[4] Lu Shan, Øyvind Molberg, Isabelle Parrot, Felix Hausch, Ferda Filiz, Gary M. Gray, Ludvig M. Sollid, and
Chaitan Khosla. Structural basis for gluten intolerance in celiac sprue. Science, 297(5590):2275–2279, 2002.
[5] Helene ArentzHansen, Stephen N. McAdam, Øyvind Molberg, Burkhard Fleckenstein, Knut E.A. Lundin,
Thomas J.D. Jørgensen, G¨unther Jung, Peter Roepstorff, and Ludvig M. Sollid. Celiac lesion t cells recog-
nize epitopes that cluster in regions of gliadins rich in proline residues. Gastroenterology, 123(3):803–809,
2002.
[6] Helene Arentz-Hansen, Roman K¨orner, Øyvind Molberg, Hanne Quarsten, Willemijn Vader, Yvonne M.C.
Kooy, Knut E.A. Lundin, Frits Koning, Peter Roepstorff, Ludvig M. Sollid, and Stephen N. McAdam. The
intestinal t cell response to α-gliadin in adult celiac disease is focused on a single deamidated glutamine tar-
geted by tissue transglutaminase. Journal of Experimental Medicine, 191(4):603–612, 2000.
[7] K E Lundin, H A Gjertsen, H Scott, L M Sollid, and E Thorsby. Function of dq2 and dq8 as hla susceptibility
molecules in celiac disease. Human Immunology, 41(1):24–27, 1994.
[8] Kalle Kurppa, Tiia R¨as¨anen, Pekka Collin, Sari Iltanen, Heini Huhtala, Merja Ashorn, P¨aivi Saavalainen, Katri
Haimila, Jukka Partanen, Markku M¨aki, and Katri Kaukinen. Endomysial antibodies predict celiac disease
irrespective of the titers or clinical presentation. World Journal of Gastroenterology, 18(20):2511–2516, 2012.
[9] M. Schumann, J. F. Richter, I. Wedell, V. Moos, M. Zimmermann-Kordmann, T. Schneider, S. Daum, M. Zeitz,
M. Fromm, and Joerg D. Schulzke. Mechanisms of epithelial translocation of the α2-gliadin- 33mer in coeliac
sprue. Gut, 57(6):747–754, 2008.
34
==PAGE:47==
[10] Michael N. Marsh, Vincenzo Villanacci, and Amitabh Srivastava. Histology of gluten related disorders. Gas-
troenterology and Hepatology From Bed To Bench, 8(2):171–177, 2015.
[11] Helmut K¨onig and J¨urgen Fr¨ohlich. Lactic acid bacteria. Biology of Microorganisms on Grapes, in Must and in
Wine, pages 3–41, 2017.
[12] Rebbeca M. Duar, Xiaoxi B. Lin, Jinshui Zheng, Maria Elena Martino, Th´eodore Grenier, Mar´ıa Elisa P´erez-
Mu˜noz, Franc¸ois Leulier, Michael G¨anzle, and Jens Walter. Lifestyles in transition: evolution and natural history
of the genus lactobacillus. Fems Microbiology Reviews, 41(1):S27–S48, 2017.
[13] Jinshui Zheng, Stijn Wittouck, Elisa Salvetti, Charles M.A.P. Franz, Hugh M.B. Harris, Paola Mattarelli,
Paul W. O’toole, Bruno Pot, Peter Vandamme, Jens Walter, Koichi Watanabe, Sander Wuyts, Giovanna E.
Felis, Michael G. G¨anzle, and Sarah Lebeer. A taxonomic note on the genus lactobacillus: Description of 23
novel genera, emended description of the genus lactobacillus beijerinck 1901, and union of lactobacillaceae and
leuconostocaceae. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology, 70(4):004107, 2020.
[14] Sunil S. Tholpady, Costi D. Sifri, Robert G. Sawyer, Kevin C. Hazen, Timothy L. Pruett, and Hugo Bonatti.
Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides blood stream infection following liver transplantation. Annals of Transplan-
tation, 15(1):61–66, 2010.
[15] E. A. Cappelli, R. R. Barros, L. M. Teixeira, and V. L. C. Merquior. Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides as-
sociated nosocomial urinary tract infection.
Abstracts of the General Meeting of the American Society for
Microbiology, 98:354, 1998.
[16] Paria Mirmonsef, Douglas Gilbert, Mohammad R. Zariffard, Bruce R. Hamaker, Amandeep Kaur, Alan L.
Landay, and Greg T. Spear. The effects of commensal bacteria on innate immune responses in the female genital
tract. American Journal of Reproductive Immunology, 65(3):190–195, 2011.
[17] Annabelle O. Yu, Johan H.J. Leveau, and Maria L. Marco. Abundance, diversity and plant-speciﬁc adaptations
of plant-associated lactic acid bacteria. Environmental Microbiology Reports, 12(1):16–29, 2020.
[18] Gabriella Pasini, Barbara Simonato, Matteo Giannattasio, Angelo D.B. Peruffo, and Andrea Curioni. Modiﬁca-
tions of wheat ﬂour proteins during in vitro digestion of bread dough, crumb, and crust: An electrophoretic and
immunological study. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 49(5):2254–2261, 2001.
[19] B. Simonato, G. Pasini, M. Giannattasio, A. D.B. Peruffo, F. De Lazzari, and A. Curioni. Food allergy to wheat
products: The effect of bread baking and in vitro digestion on wheat allergenic proteins. a study with bread
dough, crumb, and crust. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 49(11):5668–5673, 2001.
[20] Carlo Giuseppe Rizzello, Maria De Angelis, Rossana Coda, and Marco Gobbetti. Use of selected sourdough
lactic acid bacteria to hydrolyze wheat and rye proteins responsible for cereal allergy. European Food Research
and Technology, 223(3):405–411, 2006.
35
==PAGE:48==
[21] Wenhui Fu, Chenglong Liu, Xiao Meng, Sha Tao, and Wentong Xue. Co-culture fermentation of pediococ-
cus acidilactici xz31 and yeast for enhanced degradation of wheat allergens. International Journal of Food
Microbiology, 347:109190, 2021.
[22] Wenhui Fu, Wentong Xue, Chenglong Liu, Yang Tian, Ke Zhang, and Zibo Zhu. Screening of lactic acid bacteria
and yeasts from sourdough as starter cultures for reduced allergenicity wheat products. Foods, 9(6):751, 2020.
[23] Salam A. Ibrahim and Rabin Gyawali. Lactose intolerance. Milk and Dairy Products in Human Nutrition:
Production, Composition and Health, pages 246–260, 2013.
[24] Alain Chopin. Organization and regulation of genes for amino acid biosynthesis in lactic acid bacteria. Fems
Microbiology Reviews, 12(1-3):21–37, 1993.
[25] Egon Bech Hansen and Paolo Marcatili. Modeled structure of the cell envelope proteinase of lactococcus lactis.
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology, 8:613986, 2020.
[26] Roland J. Siezen. Multi-domain, cell-envelope proteinases of lactic acid bacteria. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek,
International Journal of General and Molecular Microbiology, 76(1-4):139–155, 1999.
[27] Joseﬁna M. Villegas, Luc´ıa Brown, Graciela Savoy de Giori, and Elvira M. Hebert. Characterization of the
mature cell surface proteinase of lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. lactis crl 581.
Applied Microbiology and
Biotechnology, 99(10):4277–4286, 2015.
[28] Mark K. Doeven, Jan Kok, and Bert Poolman. Speciﬁcity and selectivity determinants of peptide transport in
lactococcus lactis and other microorganisms. Molecular Microbiology, 57(3):640–649, 2005.
[29] Soile Tynkkynen, Gibre Buist, Edmund Kunji, Jan Kok, Bert Poolman, Gerard Venema, and Alfred Haan-
drikman. Genetic and biochemical characterization of the oligopeptide transport system of lactococcus lactis.
Journal of Bacteriology, 175(23):7523–7532, 1993.
[30] Kaspar P. Locher. Mechanistic diversity in atp-binding cassette (abc) transporters. Nature Structural and Molec-
ular Biology, 23(6):487–493, 2016.
[31] E. Gu´edon, P. Renault, S. D. Ehrlich, and C. Delorme. Transcriptional pattern of genes coding for the proteolytic
system of lactococcus lactis and evidence for coordinated regulation of key enzymes by peptide supply. Journal
of Bacteriology, 183(12):3614–3622, 2001.
[32] Zhihong Sun, Hugh M.B. Harris, Angela McCann, Chenyi Guo, Silvia Argim´on, Wenyi Zhang, Xianwei Yang,
Ian B. Jeffery, Jakki C. Cooney, Todd F. Kagawa, Wenjun Liu, Yuqin Song, Elisa Salvetti, Agnieszka Wrobel,
Pia Rasinkangas, Julian Parkhill, Mary C. Rea, Orla OSullivan, Jarmo Ritari, Franc¸ois P. Douillard, R. Paul Ross,
Ruifu Yang, Alexandra E. Briner, Giovanna E. Felis, Willem M. De Vos, Rodolphe Barrangou, Todd R. Klaen-
hammer, Page W. Cauﬁeld, Yujun Cui, Heping Zhang, and Paul W. OToole. Expanding the biotechnology
36
==PAGE:49==
potential of lactobacilli through comparative genomics of 213 strains and associated genera. Nature Communi-
cations, 6(1):8322, 2015.
[33] J. K. Mugula, T. Sørhaug, and L. Stepaniak. Proteolytic activities in togwa, a tanzanian fermented food. Inter-
national Journal of Food Microbiology, 84(1):1–12, 2003.
[34] Hui Tian, Bailiang Li, Smith Etareri Evivie, Shuvan Kumar Sarker, Sathi Chowdhury, Jingjing Lu, Xiuyun Ding,
and Guicheng Huo. Technological and genomic analysis of roles of the cell-envelope protease prts in yoghurt
starter development. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 19(4):1068, 2018.
[35] M. W. Grifﬁths and A. M. Tellez. Lactobacillus helveticus: The proteolytic system. Frontiers in Microbiology,
4:30, 2013.
[36] Leila Sadat-Mekmene, Magali Genay, Dani`ele Atlan, Sylvie Lortal, and Val´erie Gagnaire. Original features
of cell-envelope proteinases of lactobacillus helveticus. a review. International Journal of Food Microbiology,
146(1):1–13, 2011.
[37] Kirsi Savijoki, Hanne Ingmer, and Pekka Varmanen. Proteolytic systems of lactic acid bacteria. Applied Micro-
biology and Biotechnology, 71(4):394–406, 2006.
[38] MJ GASSON.
Plasmid complements of streptococcus-lactis ncdo-712 and other lactic streptococci after
protoplast-induced curing. Journal of Bacteriology, 154(1):1–9, 1983.
[39] Ida Nynne Laforce. Lactocepin of lactoccocus lactis and the importance of the h-, w- and an-domain for acidi-
ﬁcation of bovine and camel milk. Local, 2019.
[40] Thermo Fischer. Escherichia coli one shot® top10 from thermo ﬁscher.
[41] Dawei Ji, Jingying Ma, Min Xu, and Dominic Agyei.
Cell-envelope proteinases from lactic acid bacteria:
Biochemical features and biotechnological applications. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food
Safety, 20(1):369–400, 2021.
[42] Neelja Singhal, Manish Kumar, Pawan K. Kanaujia, and Jugsharan S. Virdi. Maldi-tof mass spectrometry: an
emerging technology for microbial identiﬁcation and diagnosis. Frontiers in Microbiology, 6, 2015.
[43] Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc. Calculator for primer annealing temperature.
[44] NEBio. Calculator for gibson assembly.
[45] Ana R. Freitas, Carla Novais, Lu´ısa Peixe, and Teresa M. Coque. Isolation and visualization of plasmids from
gram-positive bacteria of interest in public health. Methods in Molecular Biology, 2075:21–38, 2020.
[46] Sheng Wang, Siqi Sun, Zhen Li, Renyu Zhang, and Jinbo Xu. Accurate de novo prediction of protein contact
map by ultra-deep learning model. Plos Computational Biology, 13(1):e1005324, 2017.
37
==PAGE:50==
[47] Debora S. Marks, Thomas A. Hopf, and Chris Sander. Protein structure prediction from sequence variation.
Nature Biotechnology, 30(11):1072–1080, 2012.
[48] Jinbo Xu. Distance-based protein folding powered by deep learning. Arxiv, 2018.
[49] EFSA BIOHAZ Panel, Konstantinos Koutsoumanis, Ana Allende, Avelino Alvarez-Ordonez, Declan Bolton,
Sara Bover-Cid, Marianne Chemaly, Robert Davies, Alessandra De Cesare, Friederike Hilbert, Roland
Lindqvist, Maarten Nauta, Luisa Peixe, Giuseppe Ru, Marion Simmons, Panagiotis Skandamis, Elisabetta Suf-
fredini, Pier Sandro Cocconcelli, Pablo Salvador Fern´andez Esc´amez, Miguel Prieto Maradona, Amparo Querol,
Lolke Sijtsma, Juan Evaristo Suarez, Ingvar Sundh, Just Vlak, Fulvio Barizzone, Michaela Hempen, and Lieve
Herman. Updated list of QPS-recommended biological agents for safety risk assessments carried out by EFSA.
Frontiers in Microbiology, July 2021. EU; PDF; biohaz@efsa.europa.eu.
[50] Maria Jos´e Valera, Maria Jes´us Torija, Albert Mas, and Estibaliz Mateo. Acetobacter malorum and acetobac-
ter cerevisiae identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation by real-time pcr with taqman-mgb probes. Food Microbiology,
36(1):30–39, 2013.
[51] Marine Feyereisen, Jennifer Mahony, Philip Kelleher, Richard John Roberts, Tadhg OSullivan, Jan Maarten A.
Geertman, and Douwe Van Sinderen. Comparative genome analysis of the lactobacillus brevis species. Bmc
Genomics, 20(1):416, 2019.
[52] Rog´eria Keller, Margareth Z. Pedroso, Rosana Ritchmann, and Rosa M. Silva.
Occurrence of virulence-
associated properties in enterobacter cloacae. Infection and Immunity, 66(2):645–649, 1998.
[53] Anne Davin-Regli and Jean Marie Pag`es. Enterobacter aerogenes and enterobacter cloacae; versatile bacterial
pathogens confronting antibiotic treatment. Frontiers in Microbiology, 6(MAY):392, 2015.
[54] H¨useyin Agah TERZ˙I. Susceptibility proﬁle in staphylococcus hominis isolates. Akademik Geriatri Dergisi,
2011.
[55] Victor Nizet and Jerome O. Klein. Bacterial sepsis and meningitis. Infectious Diseases of the Fetus and Newborn
Infant, pages 222–275, 2011.
[56] Heidi Pauer, Tha´ıs Glatthardt, Nicole V. Ferreira, Rosana B.R. Ferreira, and L. Caetano M. Antunes. Bioac-
tive molecules of the human microbiome: Skin, respiratory tract, intestine. Microbiome and Metabolome in
Diagnosis, Therapy, and Other Strategic Applications, pages 115–125, 2019.
[57] Shridhar Parthasarathy, Shrey Shah, Avinaash Raja Sager, Anvitha Rangan, and Satya Durugu. Staphylococcus
lugdunensis: Review of epidemiology, complications, and treatment. Cureus, 12(6):e8801, 2020.
[58] Rossen Donev. Protein and Peptide Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery, volume 98. ELSEVIER ACADEMIC
PRESS INC, 2015.
38
==PAGE:51==
[59] Jacques Edouard Germond, Mich`ele Delley, Christophe Gilbert, and Dani`ele Atlan. Determination of the do-
main of the lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus cell surface proteinase prtb involved in attachment to
the cell wall after heterologous expression of the prtb gene in lactococcus lactis. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, 69(6):3377–3384, 2003.
[60] Wanilada Rungrassamee, Amonlaya Tosukhowong, Amornpan Klanchui, Sawarot Maibunkaew, Vethachai
Plengvidhya, and Nitsara Karoonuthaisiri. Development of bacteria identiﬁcation array to detect lactobacilli
in thai fermented sausage. Journal of Microbiological Methods, 91(3):341–353, 2012.
[61] J. Kim, H. Nam, Y. Jung, and Y. Lee. Antibacterial activity of kimchi (korean traditional fermented food) on
various food poisoning bacteria. Abstracts of the General Meeting of the American Society for Microbiology,
101:537–538, 2001.
[62] Yasuhiro Inatsu, Keitarou Kimura, and Yoshifumi Itoh. Characterization of bacillus subtilis strains isolated from
fermented soybean foods in southeast asia: Comparison with b. subtilis (natto) starter strains. Japan Agricultural
Research Quarterly, 36(3):169–175, 2002.
[63] C. Apetroaie-Constantin, R. Mikkola, M. A. Andersson, V. Teplova, I. Suominen, T. Johansson, and
M. Salkinoja-Salonen. Bacillus subtilis and b. mojavensis strains connected to food poisoning produce the
heat stable toxin amylosin. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 106(6):1976–1985, 2009.
[64] J KOK, DIJL J M VAN, DER VOSSEN J M B M VAN, and G VENEMA.
Cloning and expression of a
streptococcus-cremoris proteinase in bacillus-subtilis and streptococcus-lactis. Applied and Environmental Mi-
crobiology, 50(1):94–101, 1985.
[65] WM DEVOS, P VOS, H DEHAARD, and I BOERRIGTER. Cloning and expression of the lactococcus-lactis
subsp cremoris sk11 gene encoding an extracellular serine proteinase. Gene, 85(1):169–176, 1989.
[66] Milica Nikolic, Branko Jovcic, Milan Kojic, and Ljubisa Topisirovic. Surface properties of lactobacillus and
leuconostoc isolates from homemade cheeses showing auto-aggregation ability. European Food Research and
Technology, 231(6):925–931, 2010.
[67] Dominic Agyei and Michael K. Danquah. in−depthcharacterizationoflactobacillusdelbrueckiisubsp.lactis313 forgrowt
envelope−associatedproteinaseproduction. Biochemical Engineering Journal, 64:61–68, 2012.
[68] Micaela Pescuma, Graciela Savoy De Giori, Elvira Maria Hebert, Maria Beatriz Espeche Turbay, Fernanda
Mozzi, and Graciela Font De Valdez. Diversity in proteinase speciﬁcity of thermophilic lactobacilli as revealed
by hydrolysis of dairy and vegetable proteins. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 97(17):7831–7844,
2013.
[69] Andreas Lamanda, Zeinab Cheaib, Melek Dilek Turgut, and Adrian Lussi. Protein buffering in model systems
and in whole human saliva. Plos One, 2(2):e263, 2007.
39
==PAGE:52==
[70] AL MORRIS, MW MACARTHUR, EG HUTCHINSON, and JM THORNTON. Stereochemical quality of
protein-structure coordinates. Proteins-structure Function and Genetics, 12(4):345–364, 1992.
[71] Radhakrishna Shetty, Mike Vestergaard, Flemming Jessen, Per H¨agglund, Verena Knorr, Peter Koehler, H.S.
Prakash, and Timothy John Hobley. Discovery, cloning and characterisation of proline speciﬁc prolyl endopep-
tidase, a gluten degrading thermo-stable enzyme from sphaerobacter thermophiles. Enzyme and Microbial Tech-
nology, 107:57–63, 2017.
[72] Heather M. Riggle and Matthew A. Fisher. Puriﬁcation of a prolyl endopeptidase from aspergillus oryzae and
evaluation of its ability to digest gluten. Abstracts of Papers of the American Chemical Society, 237:399–CHED,
2009.
40
==PAGE:53==
7
Appendix
Table 12: Alignment of the genetic sequence of the 12 L. pseudomesenteroides strains from the DTU
Food strain collection
Figure 24: The prtM gene were BLASTed against the 12 Lc. pseudomesenteriodes strain to ﬁnd if PrtM
are needed as a chaperone for the PrtPS CEP.
Table 13: Alignment of A domains from CEPs from various LAB.
41
==PAGE:54==
Table 14: Alignment of B domains from CEPs from various LAB ranging from AA 1-400.
Table 15: Alignment of B domains from CEPs from various LAB ranging from AA 401-800.
42
==PAGE:55==
Table 16: Alignment of B domains from CEPs from various LAB ranging from AA 801-910.
Figure 25: Annotated sequence of the prtB gene
Figure 26: Annotated sequence of the prtH gene
43
==PAGE:56==
Figure 27: Annotated sequence of the prtH2 gene
Figure 28: Annotated sequence of the prtL gene
Figure 29: Annotated sequence of the prtP gene
44
==PAGE:57==
Figure 30: Annotated sequence of the prtR gene
Figure 31: Annotated sequence of the prtS gene
Figure 32: Annotated sequence of the prtPS gene
45
==PAGE:58==
Table 17: Aggregation and precipitation of O/N culture of strain 96-227 (left to right).
Table 18: Aggregation and precipitation of O/N culture of strain 227-322 (left to right).
46
==PAGE:59==
Table 19: Aggregation and precipitation of O/N culture of strain 323-399, SK11 and MG1363 (left to
right).
47
