==PAGE:1==
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
Master Thesis
Section of Sustainability
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
Master Thesis
July 25, 2021
By
Jesus Blazquez Mulas
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report
title, etc.
Cover photo:
Portland Towers, Nordhavn, Copenhagen 2021
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
Collaboration with:
Architecture and Human Rights
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section of Sustainability, Depart­
ment of Technology, Management and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Civil Engineering, MSc Eng.
This research has been carried out in collaboration with the company Architecture and
Human Rights, which has provided the relevant information to develop this topic.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of sustainability, con­
struction management and urban planning.
Jesus Blazquez Mulas ­ s192781
Signature
Date
ii
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The problem of population growth in cities is one of the biggest challenges humanity will
face in the next 25 years. This problem is since the world’s population has a longer life
expectancy than ever before and migratory movements to large cities are increasing. In
addition, this situation is compounded by the lack of housing in large cities. In order to
tackle this problem, effective solutions are needed, but their main objective is to promote
sustainability. Large cities have to be sustainable centres if we want to provide a promising
future for future generations.
Councils are now tending to build new urban areas to accommodate the demand for hous­
ing, but there are also other options such as reusing and renovating old buildings. In this
project, an index of indicators will be developed to serve as a tool to define what kind of
solutions should be implemented in abandoned buildings. This index aims to evaluate
and assess the conditions of the area where the building is located and determine the
population’s needs living in that area.
In order to do this, a study of the indicators’ concept will first be carried out to know how to
sustainable indicators work. Subsequently, the most critical factors in abandoned build­
ings and relevant to the needs of the population will be studied. After studying the factors,
an analysis of sustainable urban development indicators will be performed to establish the
currently used indicators in the world. These steps will allow the definition of a framework
of building indicators that will be implemented in a series of cases to conclude whether
they are efficient.
In conclusion, the goal of this project is to create a tool, formed by indicators, that allows
defining solutions to be implemented in buildings based on the needs and conditions of
the city.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to thank to my two supervisors which have been guiding and supporting
me during the entire research to get the best outcome of it.
Per Sieverts Nielsen, for all the guiding in the area of sustainability and sustainable
indicators, sharing articles and texts that have been the base to develop the research. As
well, thank you for helping me to improve my knowledge in the topic of sustainability.
Jorge Lobos, firstly for proposing the topic that has been investigated. Secondly, for
sharing the data about abandoned and renovated buildings and for getting in contact with
the right people to get the information needed in each step of the process. And lately, for
providing a fair feedback at any moment.
Lukas Shinzel & Emil Andersson, for being a great support while developing this project,
providing their insights and a lot of energy.
My family, for being always in the other side of the phone sending energy and encour­
agement even though they did not know much about the topic.
iv
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Project Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theoretical Background
9
2.1
Sustainable development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Sustainable Urban Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3
Factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Factors
15
3.1
Building research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Indicators
23
4.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
Study cases
37
5.1
Case 1: San Francisco I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.2
Case 2: San Francisco II
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.3
Case 3: San Francisco III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6
Discussion
70
7
Conclusions
74
Bibliography
75
A List of Abandoned Buildings
79
B List of New/Rebuild Buildings
85
C Indicators
93
D Study cases
109
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The United Nations (UN) starts its yearly report on World Urbanization Prospects: The
2018 Revision with the sentence ”The future of the world’s population is urban”. The UN
emphasises that the future growth of the human population can be assumed to occur in the
urban context by growing the number of city inhabitants. This report revises and updates
estimations and projections of all countries’ urban and rural populations from 1950 to
2050. Currently, around half of the global population lives in urban areas, and according
to studies conducted by the UN, it is estimated that 68% of the world’s population will live
in urban areas by 2050, [1]. The global rural population has been increasing since 1960
when 2 billion of the world’s population was living in rural areas, [2]. On the other hand, the
global urban population is expected to reach 5 billion by 2028 and 6 billion by 2041, with
most of these concentrated in Africa and Asia. The growth of the global population and its
concentration in large cities are seen as challenges for the world economy, environmental
quality and social conditions.
The number and size of urban areas are expected to increase in the coming years, al­
though their growth will stagnate between 2018­2030 (0.7% growth) and decline between
2030­2050 (0.6% growth). [3]. Population growth in urban areas is influenced by the
following factors: higher number of births than deaths, migration from rural or less devel­
oped areas and annexation of nearby cities. Urban areas provide technological innova­
tion, infrastructure, better opportunities, and high­quality services, such as education and
healthcare. High standards and better quality of life promote migration from rural to urban
areas. Population growth increases the pressure on the housing market, as more people
need to be accommodated in less time. The housing market has to provide sufficient
resources to meet the demand of the population, [3].
The concepts of urbanisation and city are set out below, as they are necessary to under­
stand the problem under investigation:
• The process of urbanisation is a set of socio­economic trends that transform rural en­
vironments into urban areas through the construction of infrastructure and services.
Socio­economic trends produce changes in lifestyle, culture, economic activity and
transform social structure. Urban planning is the primary tool for promoting the ur­
banisation process. It plans, designs and builds a range of services and infras­
tructure through public and private funding. Adequate infrastructure and services
can foster innovation and the economy, making urban areas hubs for information
exchange, trade or transport, [3].
The UN defines urbanisation as the proportion of the national population living in
areas that are considered urban. The higher the degree of urbanisation, the higher
the percentage of the population living in urban areas. The degree of urbanisation
depends on the criteria set by each country, [3]. The process of urbanisation is
closely related to the concept of sustainability, as well­managed and planned ur­
banisation minimises ecological degradation, enhances sustainable production and
enables human development.
• The concept of a city has different factors such as population, administrative juris­
dictions, function and territory that can be used to define it, [4]. These factors are
not global, as the legislation of each country defines them, [3]. Population data
for urban areas can be collected differently by geographic zones or administrative
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
1
==PAGE:10==
zones. The legislation of the countries determines which form is used to define a city.
The generalised concept of the city defines the city within administrative boundaries,
which does not include suburban areas. Suburban areas concentrate a substantial
part of the population, which depends on the activities and services of the city. This
area, which includes the city and suburban areas, is called an urban agglomeration.
An urban agglomeration is defined as the territory adjacent to the city where a high
population density is concentrated and which maintains strong economic and social
links with the central city, [3].
Urban agglomerations can be classified according to the number of inhabitants re­
siding in them. The classification starts with the largest ones, called megacities,
a concept that has a universal definition. Megacities are urban areas where the
concentration of population exceeds 10 million inhabitants, [3]. The next group in
the classification are the so­called large cities, home to between 5 and 10 million
inhabitants. The third group is the large­medium cities, with 1 to 5 million inhabi­
tants. The fourth group are medium­sized cities with a concentration of inhabitants
between 500,000 and 1 million. The fifth group is called small cities with 300,000
to 500,000 inhabitants. The last group is called urban settlements, which have less
than 300,000 inhabitants, [3]. The local authorities of each country determine the
boundary between the definition of urban and rural areas. These authorities use
their criteria which depend on national conditions, [5].
After presenting the global population’s situation, we specify the problem to be solved by
this research.
1.1
Background
Over the last fifty years, the movement of people has increased rapidly, leading to high
demand for housing. The availability of housing has not kept pace with demand, resulting
in difficulty finding housing and higher prices or rents. One of the solutions to this problem
is the development of new urban areas by local authorities. Local authorities can use the
help of private companies to build new housing on greenfield or brownfield, [2].
Greenfield: ”Refers to land that has not been used, or buildings built on land that had
never been used before for building”, [6].
Brownfield: ”Refer to an area of land in a town or city that was previously used for another
purposes, polluted, and then abandoned, and where new buildings can be built”, [7].
Greenfield developments tend to be located in the suburban area of the city. The sub­
urban area is predominantly rural with little human activity and with bad accessibility to
the city centre. On the other hand, Brownfield developments tend to be located in areas
between the city and suburban areas. These areas may be former industrial areas where
industrial activities no longer take place. Figure 1.1 presents an example of the location
of a Greenfield area (green cross) and a Brownfield area (brown cross). Policies in large
cities have focused on relocating industrial zones to the city’s periphery, further away
from the centre. This approach focuses on reducing pollution and heavy vehicle traffic.
De­industrialised areas have been left free to encourage new building, [8].
2
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.1: Example of Greenfield and Brownfield locations
Urban developments in both Greenfield and Brownfield areas could provide a large amount
of housing for the population. However, developments should include other essential
services for the population, such as shopping areas, offices, hospitals, schools, sports
centres. Developers divide and distribute the area between services that need to be im­
plemented in the area to meet the needs of the population, [9]. As well, not all urban
development areas can be dedicated exclusively to housing construction; some have to
accommodate other functions.
The trend for building housing and developing new urban areas continues to grow due
to the high demand for housing. On the other hand, in 2006, there were 38 million un­
occupied convectional dwellings in Europe (16% of the total dwellings), [10]. 20% of the
unoccupied dwellings are second or holiday homes, which do not meet the requirements
to satisfy the needs of the population, [10]. This high number of unoccupied dwellings
is complemented by the number of buildings with other functions (industrial, commercial,
office) in a state of disuse or abandonment. During this research, only the number of
abandoned buildings in the historic centre of Sao Paolo was found, being 554 buildings,
[11]. No data was found for other parts of the world. Informal information on individual
abandoned buildings could be found, but no official data on abandoned or disused build­
ings in other parts of the world could be found. It is assumed that there are buildings with
non­residential uses that are abandoned. These buildings can be offices, sports centres,
hotels, former prisons, institutional buildings, warehouses.
A large proportion of the world’s population finds it difficult to access adequate housing,
even though governments promote housing construction and there is a large stock of
unoccupied housing. Some 1.6 billion people live in inadequate housing and 900 million
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
3
==PAGE:12==
in informal settlements, ranging from low­income to high­income countries, [12]. This
situation encourages the formation of movements that aim to provide housing for the poor
by squatting abandoned houses, premises or land.
The squatting movement is the action of occupying uninhabited dwellings or premises to
provide housing, social, cultural centres or meeting places, [13]. The main objective is
to present and report the problem of the lack of decent housing and to protest against
speculation and economic and social hardship, [14], [15].
Squatting movements are a problem found in most or almost all countries, regardless of
their quality of life, although each country has different legislation. Most countries have
laws that protect the property owner, who can denounce squatting as a crime against his
or her property. This complaint allows the authorities to initiate eviction from the building,
which starts with the negotiation phase and can go as far as eviction by force. For example,
countries such as Spain, Germany, the Netherlands, Denmark or the United States have
this type of legislation. On the other hand, there are countries where the law tolerates
squatting and allows for temporary concessions from the property on the condition that
the building is maintained. Countries with this type of legislation are Brazil or Canada,
[16].
This introduction sets out the global situation faced by the population and local authorities
in each country. The following section presents the problem investigated in this research.
1.2
Problem Statement
The problem of population growth is widespread, but this report was based on studying
the particular case of Brazil, particularly Sao Paolo, as a case study. Unfortunately, data
from Sao Paolo have not been found so San Francisco has been choosen for the study
cases. Although, the situation of Sao Paolo is going to be explained. Sao Paolo is a city
with problems of homelessness, high population and large informal settlements. During
the 60s and 70s, the government of Sao Paolo tried to reduce or eliminate the settlements,
as they were unsafe and unhealthy areas. However, the government could not eliminate
them and began to tolerate and accept such settlements in the cities. This new policy has
led to an increase in people living in these areas, which has turned them into cities without
the right services and infrastructure. This new policy also encouraged the squatting of
abandoned buildings in the cities.
The University of Sao Paulo, together with the City Council, has conducted a study on the
current situation of the housing market in the city of Sao Paulo. This study reveals that
10% of the population (1.2 million people) live in illegal settlements (favelas or squatted
buildings). Moreover, the city requires 474,000 affordable housing units to cover the needs
of the population in the next century, [11].
In 2016, an affordable housing programme, ”My House, My Life”, was launched to ensure
that people with limited resources could afford to house. This programme is not efficient,
as more than 10,000 people live in squatted buildings, with 3,500 families squatting in 51
buildings in the historic centre of São Paulo, [11]. The Sao Paulo city council has identified
554 buildings in the city centre in a state of abandonment, of which 100 are privately
owned, and public entities own the rest. The municipality intends, through public­private
partnerships, to mobilise resources to restructure these properties and address the lack
of affordable housing in the city, [11].
After analysing the problems of population growth, housing shortages, squatting problems
and the availability of abandoned or unused buildings, the objectives of this research can
4
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:13==
be defined. This research focuses on how sustainable development can be promoted
by reconstructing and rehabilitating abandoned or unused buildings. Several questions
have been formulated to address this research more precisely and will be presented in
this report.
• What factors should consider promoting sustainable development in unused build­
ings?
• Can I define a set of indicators that allow measuring these factors?
• Can these indicators be scaled from Sao Paulo to other parts of the world?
• Can I define new functions that can be implemented in unused buildings to promote
sustainable development?
This research aims to define indicators needed to evaluate abandoned or unused build­
ings to promote sustainable development. Abandoned buildings are a factor that can help
to solve the problem of housing shortages in cities. Indicators are a tool to evaluate a cur­
rent situation and promote the most recommendable solutions to improve the situation.
During this research, I will define the indicators needed to promote sustainable devel­
opment in cities by reconstructing dilapidated buildings. These indicators will focus on
analysing aspects and factors present in the building and the city. In order to develop this
research, data needs to be public and accessible, which local governments are responible
of that. If this data is not available, the objective of this research may not be achieved.
These indicators aim to promote sustainability in cities and building sector, using existing
infrastructures and adapting them to current needs. The beneficiaries of this research
will be individuals (as building owners) or institutions (as governments or companies) with
abandoned buildings. The beneficiaries will be advised by a consultant who knows to ap­
ply the indicators and propose appropriate solutions. The building owners will implement
the solutions giving a second life to the buildings and promoting sustainable development.
The Table 1.1 presents a detailed summary of the research.
1.3
Project Plan
The plan to develop this research has been divided into different stages. First, I have
analysed a list of buildings and classified them according to their status and function.
These buildings have the conditions of being abandoned, disused, occupied, renovated,
restructured or newly constructed. The company Architecture and Human Rights have
provided the list of buildings, [17]. During the buildings’ analysis, we searched for aspects
that the buildings had in common and obtained a list of factors that can be used to develop
the indicators.
On the other hand, different indices of urban sustainability indicators have been compiled
from different countries, providing an insight into the type of indicators that currently exist.
These indicators have been grouped into a single index to compare them and establish
which indicators are necessary for this research. The concepts of sustainable develop­
ment and sustainable building have also been studied to define them for this research.
Figure 1.2 presents the project plan followed to develop the index of indicators.
The objectives, scale and scope that have been defined in the research should be con­
sidered when selecting the indicator framework to ensure that they are appropriate.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
5
==PAGE:14==
PROJECT SHEET
TARGET
Define indicators needed to evaluate abandoned or unused
buildings to promote sustainable development.
PURPOSE
Abandoned or unused buildings can be reconstructed or
adapted to new functions to help to reduce the housing
shortage problem that cities are facing.
GOALS
1. Promote sustainable development in cities. 2. Giving
a second use or function to buildings that are unused or
abandoned. 3. Fulfil and provide services to the community.
ADDRESSEES
Consultants. Beneficiaries: Building owners.
METHODS
Researching several buildings which are abandoned, have
been rebuilt or have been proposed a rebuild. Researching
current indicators to promote sustainability.
PROCEDURE
Analysing factors of abandoned or rebuild buildings. Defin­
ing indicators that define and evaluate the factors. Applying
the factors and indicators in real cases.
PARTNERS
DTU Management and Architecture & Human Rights
Table 1.1: Project sheet summarizing all the information
6
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.2: Outline of the project process
The index of indicators for sustainable development of abandoned or disused buildings
has been developed with the necessary information researched. Subsequently, this index
was applied in several case studies where the current conditions of the building were
analysed, and the results of the indicators were presented. Sao Paolo was the city chosen
to carry out these case studies, but due to the lack of data from the local administrations,
it was decided to choose San Francisco as the city of analysis. This research does not
address the solutions that can be implemented in these buildings. However, an evaluation
of which solutions can be implemented will be made.
SUM UP OF THE PROJECT PLAN
1. Establish the principles of sustainable development and sustainable building.
2. Analysis of several buildings that have been renovated, restructured, newly con­
structed or are abandoned,
3. Definition of factors that the buildings analysed have in common.
4. Search for global indicators that are currently used to measure urban sustainability.
5. Definition of the framework of indicators for sustainable development in abandoned
or not used buildings.
6. Application of the index in study cases to assess the applicability and effectiveness.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:17==
2
Theoretical Background
In this section, the definitions established for the development of this research will be
described. These include definitions of sustainable development, sustainable urban de­
velopment, factors and indicators.
2.1
Sustainable development
Sustainability is a ”loose” term with a very controversial and challenging definition because
its interpretation and application vary quickly depending on the area used for the research,
[18]. A large number of articles express disappointment that there is little consensus on
the concept of sustainability, also remark the problem that is created when the words
sustainable and development are lumped together, [18] [19]. The most familiar defini­
tion of sustainability is presented by the Brundtland World Commission in the report ”Our
Common Future” (1987). This report defines sustainable development as ”development
that meets the needs of present generations without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their needs”, [20].
Sustainability means achieving sustainable development over time by meeting human
needs, improving the quality of life and at the same time using natural resources at a fre­
quency and to the degree that allows ecosystems to regenerate their capacity, [18]. This
definition may be more precise but still allows for multiple interpretations. The emphasis
used in answering the questions of ”What to sustain? What to develop? and who should
take responsibility? may vary depending who is interpreting them. Different models, such
as the Triple Bottom Line (TBL), have been developed as a guide to answering these ques­
tions. The TBL should not be considered as a parallel tool to the definition of Sustainability,
[18]. The Triple Bottom Line determines a structure divided into three parts, economic,
social and environmental, which depend on each other to develop sustainability.
Figure 2.1: Sustainable Triple Bottom Line
Therefore, a good definition of sustainable development would be the combination of
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
9
==PAGE:18==
these three aspects. First, development is to satisfy ”certain basic human needs” with­
out complementing higher needs. Secondly, the harmony between development and na­
ture is considered during all the development. Lastly, development is a human­centred
concept that maintains intergenerational equality in all necessary aspects, [18].
The concept of sustainability to be used in this research is: the development of particular
basic human needs without fostering high needs or threatening environmental harmony,
allowing the improvement of people’s quality of life while respecting social responsibility.
2.2
Sustainable Urban Development
Sustainable Urban Development (SUD) or Urban Sustainability (US) is defined by the
intersection of urbanisation and global sustainability, [4]. Sustainable Urban Development
includes several criteria, [18]:
1. Minimising resource and energy consumption via green buildings design technolo­
gies.
2. Renewable energy and waste management.
3. Sustainable and efficient transport.
4. Environmental protection and restoration.
5. Preservation of public space, cultural and natural heritage and water resources.
6. Green economy promoting clean technologies, green taxes, green infrastructure.
7. Environmental justice and equity through public health, welfare, safety.
8. Social responsibility including affordable housing, participation in policy decisions.
9. Improving the quality of life by social interaction and access to a wide range of ser­
vices.
Thus, the ability of a city to survive and thrive indefinitely depends on achieving a balance
between the criteria presented above that foster sustainable development. All of these
criteria pose a series of challenges that cities must face before they can achieve sustain­
ability, [4]. These challenges are technical (obtaining water, processing waste, destroying
the natural environment), economic­social (providing jobs, housing, essential services),
environmental (preservation of the natural environment, natural disasters) and biological
(impact of urban life on inhabitants, reduction of physical exercise, working hours, eating
habits, noise levels), [21].
One of the tools to promote sustainable urban development is the concept of New Urban­
ism. The concept of New Urbanism defines a strategy of planning and developing cities
focusing on a human scale and using the traditional, centuries­old method of building
cities, [22]. This traditional method designs and develops the city as a set of streets and
blocks where public spaces are walkable and accessible, and housing, commercial and
financial areas are within walking distance.
This concept promotes more dynamic cities, where activities occur in different neighbour­
hoods with a diversity of population and services. Communities should be designed for
pedestrians while preserving the city’s historical legacy and natural environments. There
are several criticisms of this model, as it ignores today’s modern world’s social and eco­
nomic side. The population prefers the private to the communal, distant social relations
to traditional neighbourhoods or the freedom of the car to the dependence of transit, [23].
10
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:19==
2.2.1
15­minutes city
The concept of New Urbanism is related to the concept of 15­minute city. The 15­minute
city (C15) concept aims to develop urban areas where residents can meet a range of basic
human needs. These basic human needs are determined by six factors: living, work,
commerce, education, leisure and health. These urban areas are designed with criteria
that allow residents to access these essential functions by a 15­minute walk or bike ride,
[24]. This design reduces the time and space needed as the services that people need are
closer and improves the diversity of activities by implementing mixed­use developments.
Technology is needed to implement this system because it offers services and products
that help change the population’s behaviour, [24].
Several urban design experts have proposed different models, including Carlos Moreno,
[24] or Capasso Da Silva, [25], who define the five critical components to developing this
concept of the city as accessibility, density, digitalisation, diversity, and proximity, [26].
This concept derives from the ideas of neighbourhood design, mixed­use, density and
people zones that Jane Jacobs developed in ”The Death and Life of Great American
Cities”, [8].
The C15 concept is defined as ”back to local life”, which transforms the city and infrastruc­
tures into multi­use spaces, focusing on the rhythm of people, creating more pedestrian
and bicycle zones, reducing the importance of the car and developing neighbourhoods
with various services and businesses. C15 aims to create greener and more socially in­
clusive cities by including the population in the decision making process and creating a
healthier, more flexible, qualitative and agile urban life, [24] and [27].
2.2.2
Sustainable building
Sustainable building design is also known as green design or high­performance buildings
in which the building aims to change the skills, paradigms, processes and systems used
to deliver the project. It not just solve specific problems by identifying solutions, [28].
This concept of sustainable building is changing the world of construction. Although it is
happening at a much slower pace than others, being an sector with 30% of greenhouse
gas emissions and 40% of global energy use, [29].
Green buildings aim to minimise harmful effects on human health and the environment by
choosing eco­friendly materials and practices during construction, renovation, operations,
maintenance and demolition. Like sustainable development, sustainable buildings also
focus on the three fundamental criteria, environmental, social and economic, [30]. Several
criteria are taken into account when assessing the level of sustainability of buildings. This
criteria are used by specific certifications such as LEED (USA), CASBEE (Japan), GeSBC
(Germany), HEQ (France) or BREEAM (UK) and vary between them. These criteria can
be summarised in five main areas or elements, [30]:
1. Sustainable site design.
2. Water conservation and quality.
3. Energy and environment.
4. Indoor environmental quality.
5. Conservation of material and resources.
2.3
Factors
The definition of a factor is ”a fact or situation that influences the result of something”,
[31]. Some examples of factors used in this research are the structural conditions of the
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
11
==PAGE:20==
building, the services available in the neighbourhood, and the city’s economic conditions.
2.4
Indicators
”An indicator is a variable, or a combination of variables, selected to represent a certain
wider issue or characteristic of interest, which can vary over time or space”, [32].
An indicator provides quantitative and qualitative information on the state and functioning
of a specific phenomenon or system to support decision­making and management. Indi­
cators provide data that can be measured and monitored to help understand change, [33].
An essential characteristic of indicators is the unit with which it is measured, as it allows
to classify of the type of indicator depending on a scale. A scale can be a scientific scale
or a more customised scale for specific contents.
The indicators are simple and easy to use tool which has several criteria that are important
to consider:
1. Indicators need a good database for their development.
2. The objectives of the indicators need to be determined to determine
the performance measures.
3. The perception of indicators varies depending on the global location
where they are used, so consideration must be given to locations, peo­
ple, culture and institutions.
4. The set of indicators evolves.
5. The set of indicators is rarely completed.
6. The measurement of indicators tends to reduce uncertainty but does
not eliminate it.
7. Indicators play an important role as they can change the system.
Table 2.1: Considerations of indicators, [33].
Indicators can take different forms and can provide different types of information depend­
ing on the problem, process or issue. There are different types of indicators depending on
how they express information. The clearest example is the difference between qualitative
indicators and quantitative indicators, [32]. In this case, indicators will be divided into four
groups, depending on their Dimension, Complexity, Position or Stage.
Dimension­based: involves the dimensions of time and space. There are point indicators
(a variable measured at a particular time and place), time series indicators (a variable
measured over time) and cross­sectional indicators (a variable defined across different
entities), [32].
Message­ and purpose­based: similar to the previous typology but more specific, used
by the European Environment Agency, EEA, [32].
1. Descriptive indicators: define a condition using a particular variable.
2. Efficiency indicators: at least two variables are divided against each other, which
defines a ratio. They are useful for comparing entities of different sizes.
12
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:21==
3. Normative indicators: They allow determining or evaluating a problem using a crite­
rion, objective or standard as a reference point. They require the determination of
objectives or targets.
4. Index indicators: They are composed of several qualitative sub­indicators that are
measured in different units.
Period and position based: consider the indicator concerning what it indicates and the
time position, [32].
• Leading indicators: predict future changes in the phenomenon or process of interest.
• Lagging indicators: allow confirmation that a certain pattern occurred and whether
the result was obtained by the process and not by coincidence.
Process­based: Classifies indicators depending on the factors discussed above, includ­
ing level, scale and Period, [32].
• Input: Directly related to the activity carried out.
• Output: Immediate and tangible results and impacts obtained from the activity.
• Outcome: Long­term, intangible results and impacts obtained from the activity.
2.4.1
Indicators Framework
Indicators are grouped into domains, which allow indicators to be connected to different
information and other management tools. These interconnections make it possible to de­
fine the purpose or practice of the indicator framework, to organise the information and
thus to assess data and results correctly, [32]. The frameworks define the external struc­
ture, the boundaries of the information or focus, the internal structure, how the information
is used, derived or organised. Frameworks provide essential information and context for
planning and decision making, [32].
Different types of frameworks can be used for the development of sustainable indicators,
which are divided depending on how they aggregate, represent, connect and evaluate
information, [21].
These framework types are:
• Domain­based frameworks: These are frameworks based on the three key dimen­
sions of sustainability, social, environmental and economic. Additional dimensions
can be added depending on the purpose. This framework is the most effective when
covering all elements of sustainability. More specific objectives may be a bit difficult
to achieve with such a general vision. The different subcategories can be intercon­
nected to promote sustainability linkages, [21].
• Goal­Based frameworks: Link indicators to sustainability objectives directly. First,
the sustainability goals to be achieved must be identified, and then the necessary
indicators are created for each goal. This framework allows defining indicators de­
pending on the level at which the problem is located, local or global. Its advantage is
that it reduces the number of indicators to only those related to the objectives. The
framework is relatively simple and therefore does not capture the more complex
interconnections, [21].
• Sectoral­based frameworks: Indicators are developed depending on the sector to
be assessed, housing, transportation, energy use, land use, unemployment. This
framework is developed to help policymakers and municipal government staff to
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
13
==PAGE:22==
report on sustainability. This indicator allows to obtain precise information on the
different areas studied but makes it difficult to interconnect different areas of work,
as it is not specified which areas are being assessed, [21].
• Issue­based frameworks: List the sustainability­related problems in the commu­
nity, such as water treatment, air pollution, education, employment. This type of
framework is easier to understand and easier to construct. Like the previous frame­
work, its disadvantage is that it does not attempt to match indicators with sustain­
ability objectives or to cover all three dimensions of sustainability, [21].
• Casual­based frameworks: Introduces the concept of cause­effect relationships.
It is a framework used in the environmental field by applying the condition­stress­
response method, which defines human activities that concern environmental con­
ditions. An advantage is that it allows marking which indicators are changing and
showing which policies have an impact. Its disadvantage is that the interconnec­
tions with other domains such as social and economical are not as apparent and
more complex, [21].
• Combination­based framework: This framework brings together several individ­
ual frameworks in order to complement each other’s advantages and reduce the
impact of the disadvantages, [21].
14
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:23==
3
Factors
In this section, the data and the analysis needed to obtain the factors will be presented.
The input data comprises several buildings with particular conditions, such as being aban­
doned, occupied or rebuilt. This section will examine the most relevant factors to be
considered during this research after analysing the buildings. The factors will be divided
depending on which areas are needed for the research.
3.1
Building research
The input data used to develop this research are 144 buildings which have been provided
by the University of Sassari, Italy, in collaboration with Architecture and Human Rights,
[34]; the Danish Association of Architects [35], [36]; and personal research. The buildings
analysed have different conditions but can be divided into abandoned, squatted, new or
reconstructed.
From the beginning of the research, the buildings were divided into two groups, aban­
doned/not used buildings and new/rebuild buildings. This division was created to deter­
mine what characteristics the abandoned buildings have, what criteria have been used,
and what solutions have been implemented in new or rebuild buildings to promote sus­
tainable development.
The group of abandoned buildings includes abandoned buildings, buildings that are not
being used for the designed purpose, squatted buildings that have been legalised, demol­
ished buildings and buildings with projects for future use. The new/rebuild buildings group
includes projects developed in abandoned buildings, highly sustainable building projects
under development and facilities with sustainable solutions.
The buildings are located worldwide, which provides an overview of the conditions of each
country. It can be concluded that the situation of abandoned buildings is widespread in
all parts of the world. The list of buildings can be found in Appendixes A and B.
The buildings have been classified with the same criteria in both lists, although there are
minor variations in each list’s data. The criteria used to divide the buildings is presented
in Table 3.1.
In the list of Abandoned/Not used buildings, in particular criteria of Building Conditions
and Current Status, the following concepts have been established, which can be applied
to all buildings and thus determine future conclusions more quickly. The concepts are
presented in the table 3.2.
In Building Conditions, the concepts of Abandoned, Demolished, Legalised, Project and
Squatted have been established. ”Abandoned” means that no activity occurs in the build­
ing, and no maintenance is being carried out. There may be plans to develop a new
project. ”Demolished” means a building that has been analysed was destroyed due to
poor maintenance or damages; an accident, a fire, can be the origin of the demolition.
There are also other reasons for demolition, such as squatting situations or proposals for
a new service.
The concept of ”Legalised” means that the building or premises were squatted by an or­
ganised group of people who became established by creating a community in the building.
The government authorities have not evicted the building. In this case, the competent
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
15
==PAGE:24==
Abandoned/Not used
New/Rebuild
Number
Number
Address
­
City
City
Country
Country
Year of construction
­
Original Function
Function
Building Conditions
­
Current Status
Current Status
Year of Status
­
Table 3.1: Classification criteria
government decided to accept this squatting and allow the building residents to live there
under legal conditions. ”Project” means that the building is abandoned, but the structural
and maintenance conditions are such that some institution or individual has decided to
reuse it for another function. ”Squatted” means a building was abandoned, and an organ­
ised group of squatters have settled as a denunciation of the problem of homelessness.
The structural conditions of these buildings are relatively high, allowing for settlement and
activities inside the building. In some cases, these squats have been legalised.
On the other hand, Current Status establishes Brownfield, Housing, New Building, Un­
used and Social Centre. ”Brownfield” definition can be found in the section 2. ”Housing”
means that the principal function of the building is to provide shelter for the inhabitants of
a city. Even though housing is the primary function, there are cases where there are also
other functions as a business, offices, health care facilities, among others. ”New building”
determines that the land has been used to build new infrastructure; it is not defined what
kind of infrastructure has been built on the land. Buildings listed as ”Unused” in the cur­
rent status determine that the building owner keeps the building empty and locked, and no
squatter organisation has gained access to it. ”Social Centre” defines cases in which an
organised group of squatters has established itself in a building and created a community.
This community uses the centre to live and organises cultural activities in which the whole
neighbourhood can participate, such as concerts, art galleries, and workshops. In some
cases, these centres can be more radicalised and are only used by squatters or radical
organisations and not by the community.
This section allows knowing the current status of the building by knowing its conditions.
For example, if the building is squatted, it may be occupied to provide housing, or it may
be occupied as a social centre or if the building was demolished and converted into a new
building or a brownfield.
3.2
Factors
The factors were derived from the research of the buildings, which analysed their charac­
teristics to determine which factors are necessary to enhance sustainable development.
16
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:25==
Building Conditions
Current Status
Abandoned
Brownfield
Demolish
Housing
Project
New Building
Squatted
Unused
­
Social Centre
Table 3.2: Classification concepts of Abandoned/Not Used
For the analysis, several buildings were selected, five abandoned and five sustainable,
located in different parts of the world. The factors have been divided into two groups de­
pending on the state they affect. There are internal building factors and external building
factors. The concept of Human Needs must first be defined to explain the reason for these
factors.
INTERNAL FACTORS
The first criterion is the building itself, considering the year of construction. The year of
construction allows knowing essential building’s characteristics, such as the construction
process or the age of the materials and the structure. It also provides information on
whether the building has exceeded its useful life and whether it is in compliance with
current building regulations. This information includes not only the structural aspects but
also the age of the materials and installations.
The second factor is derived from the first one by considering the condition of the building.
The condition of the building allows to define whether the building is fit for use, needs to
be renovated or is in a state of ruin and should be demolished. Therefore, two important
factors to consider are the quality of the materials and the structural quality of the build­
ing. It is necessary to inspect the structure of the building to find structural faults that may
compromise the stability of the building when new functions are implemented. It is neces­
sary to make a structural inspection to analyse the structure looking for cracks, fractures,
analysing the quality of the concrete, the quality of the reinforcing steel, changes to the
original structure, among others. It is also essential to inspect the installations, such as
the sewage system, the electrical installation, and the gas installation.
The third factor is related to the function for which the building was designed, residential
building, industrial building, office building, hotel, and leisure. The original function and
the functions that have been implemented subsequently can determine which activities or
functions can be implemented in the future. For example, a building formerly a hotel has
the structure and facilities necessary to adapt the building to a residential function. Ware­
houses that had an industrial function in the past can be adapted to provide office space.
This information makes it possible to define how the building should be reconstructed and
adapted to accommodate the solutions to be implemented in the future.
Table 3.3 summarises the factors related to the building, the internal factors.
These three factors are related to the characteristics of the building itself, but there are
also external characteristics that affect factors related to economic, social and environ­
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
17
==PAGE:26==
INTERNAL FACTORS
Building Factors
Construction year
Basic information of the building
Condition of the building
Conditions of the structure
Conditions of the materials
Conditions of installations
Function of the building
Original function of the building
Major changes and adaptions
Table 3.3: Resume of the Internal Factors
mental aspects. These factors will be related to the location of the building, in which
neighbourhood it is located, what economic activity exists, what the social situation is like,
the space dedicated to green areas and what needs exist in the current population of the
area.
EXTERNAL FACTORS
The external characteristics have been divided into three groups using the essential sus­
tainability, economic, social, and environmental concepts. The concept of Human Needs
must first be defined to explain the reason for these factors.
Human needs were defined by the psychologist Abraham Maslow who determined the
hierarchy of human needs in contemporary society, [37]. Maslow defined human needs
and motivations at different levels, depending on three levels, basic needs (physiologi­
cal needs and safety), psychological needs (needs for belonging, love and esteem) and
self­fulfilment needs (needs for self­development and growth), [38]. Figure 3.1 presents
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs.
Each of the needs focuses on different aspects, which need to be defined to determine
which human needs are essential in this research.
Basic needs
1. Physiological Needs are the human needs necessary for living, i.e. food, water, rest,
breathing, sex, shelter, among others which are critical for survival in society but also to
promote sustainability. When these basic needs are not adequately met, it is defined that
there is underdevelopment in that society, [37].
2. Security and Safety Needs focus on the protection of the individual against danger­
ous situations such as conflicts, wars, social disturbances, natural hazards, kidnappings,
violence, diseases, among others. The presence of these situations compromises peace
and stability in individuals and communities in contemporary society due to the uncertainty
that these situations create, [37].
Psychological needs
3. Belonging and Love Needs or Social Needs are defined by the needs of belonging
to a community or social organisation such as family, social group, club, relationships,
18
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.1: Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, [38]
among others. Society looks for a social group where they feel loved and integrated as
this contributes to increase confidence in their abilities, helping in the process of making
decisions, [37].
4. Esteem, Ego and Prestige Needs develop in humans when they feel safe in the
social environment in which they find themselves, friends, relationships, club, family, work.
When people feel safe in their environment because they feel a sense of belonging, they
tend to seek a higher status that implies respect, recognition and reputation within that
community, [38].
Self­fulfilment needs
5. Self­Actualisation and Self­Realization Needs are defined as the need to develop
the skills and talents they have become the best of themselves. Self­actualisation is devel­
oped through activities that allow them to know and develop their human potential through
stimulation, efficiency and performance. Self­fulfilment Needs are accompanied by Un­
derstanding Needs as humans require a range of knowledge, skills and information in
order to develop and grow by participating in the promotion of the community, [38]. There
are also Aesthetic Needs which are defined by the enjoyment of human beauty. These
needs promote the need to love, understand and reinforce human beauty within oneself
but also the community, [37].
Maslow presented these needs as the basis for living in society, but at the same time
determined that specific needs are mandatory to survive in society. For this, Maslow
divided the five groups into two categories: Deficient Needs (Basic and Psychological
Needs) and Growth Needs (Self­Fulfilment Needs, [37] & [38]. The Deficient Needs de­
pend on systems or situations outside the individual, and the Growth Needs depend on
the performance of the individual.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
19
==PAGE:28==
EXTERNAL FACTORS
Economic Factors
Economic activity of the area
Economic power
Job availability
Social Factors
Social situation of the area
Facilities of the area
Living conditions of the area
Environmental Factors
Environmental conditions
Climate conditions
Green urban areas
Table 3.4: Resume of External Factors
Primary Needs are significant conditions for an individual to develop in society and prosper
and grow. Suppose any of these conditions are missing, such as access to food, housing,
drinking water, education, health care, safety, economic stability, peace, among others.
In that case, there will be a feeling of dissatisfaction in the individual, which will prevent
him/her from connecting and contributing to society, [37].
Other psychologists have updated Maslow’s research by studying how the virtual society
affects human needs, especially Psychological Needs, [38]. The virtual world allows us
to establish connections with individuals who are similar to us and provide quickly and
straightforwardly the same sensations that occur when we feel accepted in a group or are
recognised in our work or loved by other people. Although this may seem reasonable,
it has been shown that virtually established individuals do not get to feel satisfied with
Psychological Needs and are thus prevented from developing them. This fact leads to
the conclusion that spaces where social relationships can be established, are necessary
to maintain a person’s psychological health, [37].
When individuals or the community manages to reach these Needs, the path to reach the
Growth Needs begins, which provide a feeling of satisfaction in society.
The concept of human needs is a clear argument for determining that economic, social
and environmental factors need to be investigated to promote sustainable development.
Table 3.4 summarises the external, economic, social and environmental factors.
Economic Factors
Economic factor provides information about the economic situation of the city and the
neighbourhood by analysing data as the unemployment level, the economic power of
the population, the division of businesses depending on their type of activity. This factor
determines the population’s standard of living, whether there are possibilities to find a job
or which type of activity is more predominant. The economic analysis allows knowing if
there are possibilities for the population to grow and develop the Needs for Esteem and
Belonging.
20
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:29==
Environmental Factors
The environmental analysis focuses on obtaining information about the environmental
conditions in an area, neighbourhood or city. This information collects data on how the cli­
matological evolution of the city has been in the last years and the number of open spaces
in the city, or how the city’s environmental management is. Green spaces are areas that
allow the population of a city to be in contact with nature, provide clean air and lower
the temperature of the city, among other things. This is closely related to Physiological
Needs.
Social Factors
The social factor aims to define the area, neighbourhood, or city’s situation and state by
assessing the living conditions and facilities. Infrastructures, educational, health, safety
or housing services are basic needs of the population, allowing individuals to develop
in society and grow personally. The activities implemented in the building are a key to
providing some of the needs that individuals must have to grow and reach a state of life
satisfaction.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:31==
4
Indicators
This section of the report explains the process used to define the indicators, divided into
two parts: Methodology and Indicators Presentation. The methodology presents what
steps have been followed to analyse the indicators and the criteria used to select them.
The indicators are presented in this section, including their definition, units, criteria and
modes of representation. It will also include an analysing of the relationship between the
factors presented and the indicators defined.
4.1
Methodology
The development of indicators to promote sustainable development in buildings frame­
work has been done, including different sources of information creating a balance that
allows reaching objectives and ambition. The process has analysed sets of indicators
established in different countries (global indicators), studying their definition, units, and
baseline to find commonalities related to the factors studied in this research and connect
with the objectives and ambition.
The analysis process has been divided into four parts:
• Collection of indicators
• Division of data into groups and analysis of indicators, considering category, defini­
tion and units
• Selection of indicators relevant to the research topic
• Developing indicators
This methodology is based on some steps of the methodology used for the development
of the global indicator framework, the Development Goals Indicators [39].
1. Collection of indicators
In this part of the process, indicators from different countries with different locations, cul­
tures, economic and environmental objectives were studied. The chosen countries are
China, [40], the United States (US) [41] and the European Union (EU) [42]. The EU indica­
tors are defined to evaluate each country that is part of the EU and understand the level at
which they perform. The global indicators obtained from these three sources are general
indicators as they are to be used by different administrations. Baselines and units can
be challenging to select when there is a wide variety of evaluators. This analysis shows
that sustainable development indicators in different countries are based on the same con­
cepts, they may even be the same, but it is not possible to scale them or used them in
other locations.
Indicators have also been collected from the city of A Coruña in Spain [43], which allowed
to find more specific indicators with different units. One hundred forty indicators have
been collected, allowing a comprehensive analysis with diverse data to compare different
objectives.
It should be noted that no indicators related to the structural category have been found so
that the structural indicator will be developed through the analysed factors only.
Table C presents all the information collected for the indicators.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
23
==PAGE:32==
2. Analysis and division of indicators
In order to further analyse the definition of each indicator, their units and baselines have
been divided into four categories, Economic, Environmental, Social and Energy. Some in­
dexes divide the indicators into categories and subcategories to better define the objective
of the indicator, a tool that will be used to define the indicators of this research.
Once the indicators have been divided into categories, indicators from the same category
but different sources have been compared. This comparison provided an overview of how
many indicators are similar and what units are used in them. Some units and baselines
have not been provided in some indicators because the definition of the indicator allows
flexibility in defining them, which allows them to be adapted to different cases.
Table C shows the categories and subgroups that have been defined.
3. Selection of relevant indicators
The indicator selection process has been divided into two stages, first selecting indicators
relevant to the investigated topic ”Sustainable Development in Buildings” and secondly
creating subgroups within the subcategories depending on the concept they are assess­
ing.
The first stage determines the topic of ”Sustainable Development in Buildings”, which
defines the criteria necessary to select the indicators.
1. The indicators have to measure factors that can be influenced by the existence of the
building and that can be relevant for the implementation of solutions. For example,
the cost of public transport is not a factor that a building can influence, but the travel
time to work depends on the building. For example, the density of trees in the area
is not as important as the distance to green spaces in the area. A neighbourhood
may have many trees on the sidewalks but no park available.
2. The indicator has an objective that is relevant for decision making and implementa­
tion of solutions after the building assessment. For example, the population distri­
bution in the area in percentage may be more relevant than the population density
in the area in number. Another case would be the distribution of living space per
inhabitant which is more relevant than the density of dwellings in the area.
This process and criteria have been re­evaluated during several phases, and based on the
process used in the Sustainable Development Goals Indicators. It has been concluded
that they are strict criteria and allow for flexibility in selection.
The second stage has focused on specifying the theme that the selected indicators de­
fine; this allows for a subdivision within the Economic, Environment, Social and Energy
categories. This method reduces the number of indicators and groups similar indicators
as it allows defining the most exciting concepts to investigate. This grouping also allows
comparing the different indicators with the same objective, specifying their definition, units
and baseline.
It is recommended that the number of indicators defined should not be significant, as a
large number of indicators can make them more challenging to use and implement.
The subgroups used are:
• Economic: Business conditions; Economic growth; Income rates; Unemployment
rates.
24
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:33==
• Environmental: Air quality / Emissions; Climatology; Green Spaces; Land Use; Wa­
ter/Waste Management.
• Energy: Energy consumption; Water consumption
• Social: Compact city; Education; Health; Housing; Public space; Social conditions.
This division is closely related to the factors specified in section 3.
4. Indicator development
The analysed indicators are then connected to the previously defined factors by defin­
ing a relationship between the two. For this purpose, a table presents the factors and
subgroups in order to be able to see the relationships more easily. In this case, each
subgroup has been accompanied by its definition to make it easier to understand them.
The factors and subgroups of the categories Economy, Environment and Social could be
easily defined, as they coincide in nature. The categories Structural and Resources/En­
ergy do not have indicators and factors, respectively. The Structural category because no
indicators have been found in any global indicator framework and the Resources/Energy
category because it has not been considered in the factor analysis. Table C shows the
relation between factors and subgroups that have been defined.
After the analysis to relate the indicators, the indicators used are determined, defining the
indicator’s name and the subcategory.
The next step in defining the indicators was establishing criteria that all indicators should
have in common. The criteria established are Data Representativeness, Data Accessibil­
ity and Baseline Definition.
Criterion 1, Data Representativeness, aims to ensure that the indicator has validity for the
research and that the data evaluated are relevant.
Criterion 2, Data Accessibility, aims to assess that the indicator uses data that is easily
accessible. Usually, governments publish their data.
Criterion 3, Baseline Definition, aims of establishing the objective of the baselines. Base­
lines are usually not applicable in cases where the location varies, which is one of the
significant problems of sustainability indicators. The baseline target has been defined,
studying whether data is available and allowing the baseline to be adapted later.
With these criteria defined, it is possible to determine the indicator target by specifying
its definition, the units used to define it and in some cases, also the baseline. Table C
presents the indicators selected following this process. This table also includes informa­
tion on the sources used to determine each indicator and examples of how the indicator
can be applied.
4.2
Indicators
In this section, a description of each indicator is given, including definition, units, baseline
and criteria. An example of the presentation of results will also be added if the indicator
requires it.
Before determining the indicators, the objective, scale and scope must be specified to
define the indicator framework.
Objective: The indicator framework aims to assess the current situation of the area where
a building is located to propose solutions that promote the city’s sustainable development.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
25
==PAGE:34==
Scale: The indicator framework only analyses a specific area of the city. It may be neces­
sary to analyse the conditions of the whole city in some instances, but it is not adaptable
for regions or countries.
Scope:
The indicator framework is developed to be used in a global environment, i.e.
every city that publishes the necessary data can use it, regardless of location.
4.2.1
Indicators Table
Table 4.1: Indicator Number 1
Structural Evaluation
Definition
Structural evaluation of the building, using guides
and codes establish in the country.
Composition of the Indicator
­
Unit
Description: Good structure, Renovation needed
or Demolition.
Baseline
Defined by the country/region regulations and
rules.
Representativeness
Provides information about the building covering
factors as age, functions and structural conditions.
Accessibility
Information about the building can be found in
plans and project report but a in­situ study can be
carried out to get more data.
Baseline Definition
The country/region laws set the criteria to evaluate
a building.
Source
∙Building Safety Code (Spain) ∙Eurocodes (Eu­
rope) ∙Guide for Structural Rehabilitation of Her­
itage Buildings
Representation
There is not representation fixed
26
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:35==
Table 4.2: Indicator Number 2
Business Diversity
Definition
The main economic activity of the area is defined
by the economic activities, which depends on the
economic sector and size of the business.
Composition of the Indicator
Percentage of business in economic and size sec­
tors.
Unit
Percentage of business sector.
Baseline
The economic activity of the neighborhood is de­
fined by the sector which has a number of business
bigger than 40%. In case of not having more than
40% the two bigger sectors should be taken in ac­
count.
Representativeness
Provides a clear overview of the main economic
activity of the area covering all the types of eco­
nomical sectors.
Accessibility
The business registered in the area is available
data and accessible.
Baseline Definition
Economic activity of the neighbourhood is defined
by the main activity, which depends on the eco­
nomic sector and size of the business.
Source
∙Global indicators
Representation
Figure 4.1: Example of division of active businesses by sectors.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
27
==PAGE:36==
Table 4.3: Indicator Number 3
Unemployment
Definition
Defines the amount of people which does not have
a job in the area or in the city.
Composition of the Indicator
Percentage of unemployment in population in age
intervals.
Unit
Percentage of people unemployed by age range.
Baseline
The baseline defines the age interval by comparing
it with the unemployment of the city.
Representativeness
Provides information of which group has more dif­
ficulties to find a job.
Accessibility
Easy to access to the information of unemployment
by districts or city level.
Baseline Definition
The baseline allows to define the age interval
which is more affected by the unemployment.
Source
∙Global indicators ∙Trends of unemployment in the
last 5 years in the country
Representation
Figure 4.2: Example of unemployment divided by age intervals. Mean unemployment is
5.4 %
28
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:37==
Table 4.4: Indicator Number 4
Economic growth of the population
Definition
Defines the economic situation of the city/country
in terms of salary gap and income.
Composition of the Indicator
Median salary and Gini coefficient of the country.
Unit
Median salary in country currency and Gini coeffi­
cient.
Baseline
High coefficient big gap. Low coefficient small gap.
Median income is compared with country median
salary.
Representativeness
Provides an overview on the salary gap and the
income value.
Accessibility
Easy to access to information about population in­
come, in a city or country level. The Gini coefficient
is based on country and city data.
Baseline Definition
The baseline allows to define the distribution of in­
come in the city.
Source
∙Economy of the cities
Representation
There is not representation fixed
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
29
==PAGE:38==
Table 4.5: Indicator Number 5
Climate situation of the city
Definition
Defines the changes on climatology to ensure that
the solutions implemented in the building can ad­
just the climate change.
Composition of the Indicator
Temperature and precipitations report over the last
50 years.
Unit
Celsius Degrees ºC; Millimeters of rain mm.
Baseline
Extreme cases pose a risk to society, which makes
it necessary to take into account how many times
they have been repeated in recent decades.
Representativeness
Provides an understanding on what is the climatol­
ogy situation of the city.
Accessibility
Climatology data have been recorded over the last
decades at any area in the world.
Baseline Definition
The baseline allows to define the considerable
change on climatology which can develop future
vulnerability in the city.
Source
∙Global Indicators
Representation
Figure 4.3: Example of temperature in San
Francisco in the last 80 years %
Figure 4.4: Example of precipitations in San
Francisco in the last 80 years %
30
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:39==
Table 4.6: Indicator Number 6
Use of public places in relation with private
Definition
Defines the m2 of each category allowing to under­
stand the ratio between spaces.
Composition of the Indicator
Percentage of green areas,
buildings,
roads,
pedestrian’s streets.
Unit
Percentage of land use.
Baseline
The WHO consider 2 hectares in size at 300 m from
home as the minimum, for this evaluation 15% of
the area should be urban green area.
Representativeness
Provides a clear overview of the organization of the
city/neighbourhood.
Accessibility
The urban law of the city allows to find the m2 of
this areas.
Baseline Definition
The baseline defines the point in which the lack
of urban green areas can be harmful for society
health.
Source
∙Global Indicators ∙Urban green spaces and
health WHO [44]
Representation
Figure 4.5: Example of percentage of Land use in San Francisco
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
31
==PAGE:40==
Table 4.7: Indicator Number 7
Waste management
Definition
Defines the system and policies for recycling allow­
ing to implement other services.
Composition of the Indicator
Percentage of waste that is placed on landfills, re­
cycled, burnt.
Unit
Percentage of waste.
Baseline
The baseline defines if the municipalities have
enough resources to recycle the waste. It depends
on which sector is the higher
Representativeness
Provides an overview of the city or countries condi­
tions.
Accessibility
The city hall or country polices and programs im­
plemented allow to know the data of waste man­
agement.
Baseline Definition
The baseline allows to define the amount of waste
that is treated and has a benefit in the society and
environment.
Source
∙Global Indicators
Representation
Figure 4.6: Example of amount of waste managed
32
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:41==
Table 4.8: Indicator Number 8
Fundamental human needs
Definition
Defines the current situation of the neighbourhood
in different aspects like Safety / Crime, Education,
Health, Public Spaces & Accessibility.
Composition of the Indicator
Diagram representing the level of fundamental
needs that the neighbourhood has.
Unit
Number of facilities per inhabitants.
Baseline
The baseline is set by the calculation of facilities in
the city per 100.000 inhabitants.
Representativeness
Provides an overview of the current situation of the
neighbourhood.
Accessibility
The different factors are accessible by published
data by the governments.
Baseline Definition
The indicator provides an overview of the situation
that is currently in the neighbourhood compared
with the city.
Source
∙Global Indicators
Representation
Figure 4.7: Example of facilities per inhabitants of the neighborhood compared with the
facilities per 100.000 inhabitants of the city
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
33
==PAGE:42==
Table 4.9: Indicator Number 9
Social housing needs
Definition
Defines the needs for social housing depending on
the society needs.
Composition of the Indicator
Percentage of applications for social housing de­
pending on the house availability.
Unit
Number of applications.
Baseline
The baseline is not specifically set. The best situa­
tion is not having applications.
Representativeness
Represents the current problem of social housing.
Accessibility
The number of applications and the number of cur­
rent social housing is accessible.
Baseline Definition
The baseline is not specifically set. The indicator
provides an overview of the needs for a social hous­
ing and the capacity available by the government.
Source
∙Global Indicators
Representation
Figure 4.8: Example of applications to social housing and available housing in the city
and the neighborhood
34
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:43==
Table 4.10: Indicator Number 10
Distribution of population
Definition
Defines the diversity and the density of population
in the area.
Composition of the Indicator
Density of population per sq.km divided in age
ranges.
Unit
Inhabitants per square km.
Baseline
The baseline is not specifically set. There are not
needs to define baseline in this indicator.
Representativeness
The data are accessible by the statistics that each
country publishes. Special cases as people unreg­
istered can vary the results.
Accessibility
The baseline defines if the municipalities have
enough resources to recycle the waste. It depends
on which sector is the higher
Baseline Definition
The baseline is not specifically set. The indicator
provides an overview of the density and population
age which allow to improve the diversity.
Source
∙Global Indicators
Representation
Figure 4.9: Example of distribution of population by age range. Red area: older than 45
years. Blue area: younger than 45 years
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
35
==PAGE:44==
Table 4.11: Indicator Number 11
Production rates
Definition
Defines the level of green energy that is produced
in the country/city.
Composition of the Indicator
Renewable energy production from the total of en­
ergy production.
Unit
Percentage of different energies production.
Baseline
The baseline defines the level of renewable en­
ergy that the country produces. A minimum of 50%
should be recommended
Representativeness
Represents the production of energy from renew­
able sources over the full production of energy.
Accessibility
Easy data due to is realised by country level.
Baseline Definition
The baseline defines if the there is possibilities to
improve sustainability by adding self production.
Source
∙Global Indicators
Representation
Figure 4.10: Example distribution of energy production
36
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:45==
5
Study cases
This section of the report focuses on applying the indicators selected during the research,
presenting their usefulness and applicability in actual cases. Several buildings located in
different areas of San Francisco have been selected, which allows a better understanding
of the performance of the indicators by comparing different situations. Three buildings in
San Francisco have been analysed, which have been selected through personal research.
Due to this personal research, it has not been possible to access specific information about
the building, such as plans, age, state of the structure, among others, so the structural
indicator has been limited to a short assessment of the building.
All the information that is relevant for this section has been placed in the Appendix D.
5.1
Case 1: San Francisco I
The first case chosen is 1068 Mission St, San Francisco, located in the South Market
(SoMa) neighbourhood. Figure 5.1 shows the location of the building in the city of San
Francisco and the SoMa district.
Figure 5.1: Location of 1068 Mission St, San Francisco; source: Google Maps
The South Market neighbourhood consisted of a collection of buildings centred on indus­
trial practices, but due to the development of adjacent neighbourhoods, more housing,
offices, and cultural centres have been built. Today South Market is a rapidly developing
area where significant technology and financial companies have established themselves
due to its proximity to San Francisco’s Financial District. Although residential projects
have increased and high­rise residential and office buildings have been built. There are
areas with old industrial warehouses. These warehouses have ceased to be used for
industrial purposes and have become part of cultural events, creating space for artists,
exhibitions, events, among others.
South Market is also home to buildings that provide cultural or governmental services,
such as the Moscone Center and the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
37
==PAGE:46==
It is also a neighbourhood where the Transbay Terminal can be found, a transportation
hub for the Financial District, Downtown, SoMa, and other zones of San Francisco.
The building at 1068 Mission Street has a peculiar state. At the beginning of the research,
the activities carried out today, June 2021, were unknown, but they are a good argument
for the research. The building belongs to the Episcopal Service Community of San Fran­
cisco and consists of a building and a plot of land that has different uses. The small
building has three floors and is located on the south corner of the site, and the open lot
serves as a public car park during the day. The site has access from three different streets,
but currently, only Mission Street access is used. Figure 5.2 shows the situation of the
land to be investigated.
Figure 5.2: Site studied in Case I; source: Google Maps
Once the basic information on the building­ground is known, the analysis can proceed
using the indicators investigated. For this purpose, the structural indicator will be applied
first, then the economic, environmental, social and energy indicators. Table 5.1 presents
a resume of the basic information of the building.
INTERNAL INDICATORS
1. Structural Indicator
Due to the lack of data on the building itself, its condition, installations, age, among oth­
ers, it has been impossible to carry out structural analysis. In this case, a preliminary
assessment of the building has been carried out using a series of photographs obtained
from Google Maps, with which a similar result has been obtained, but it is not considered
acceptable. Actual data is required to be able to make a final decision.
The photographic used for the analysis can be found in the Appendix D. The pictures show
that the ground where the car park is located is paved, but it cannot be seen if there is a
38
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.3: Pictures of building in Case I; source: Google Maps
drainage system or electrical installations. The building on the south side of the lot is in a
state of neglect. It is a small building with damaged windows; the shop window has been
painted to give the impression that it has been blinded to avoid squatting, and the secure
access door is also painted in the same colour. It can be seen that this window and door
were built after the building was constructed, possibly when the building was closed and
abandoned. Figure 5.3 shows the façade of the building.
The photo shows a series of cracks in the upper and middle areas of the façade, just
above the second and first­floor windows. These cracks are likely the result of the natural
movement of the building as the foundations have settled. They may also have been
the result of a more powerful earthquake. The side facades do not show any significant
damage that needs to be investigated.
In this case, it is not possible to make a structural analysis of the interior of the building,
but it is necessary to make the final decision, which would be to reuse it or demolish it.
EXTERNAL INDICATORS
In order to evaluate the external indicators (economic, environmental, social and energy),
it is necessary first to evaluate the concept of ”15­Minutes City” (C15) and to conclude
which are the inhabitants of this neighbourhood can access by walking or cycling. The
public transport service will also be studied, but it is not the essential factor in the research.
To define the C15, the tool ”Travel Time Map”, [45], has been used, which allows knowing
the distance travelled in a city depending on the means of transport used, walking, cycling,
public transport or car. This tool makes it possible to define the boundaries of the area
where the data is to be obtained and to use the indicators.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.4:
15 minutes City walking;
source: Travel Time Map
Figure 5.5: 10 minutes City cycling; source:
Travel Time Map
The Figures 5.4 and 5.5 show the results obtained when the following criteria have been
established:
1. 15 minutes walking time from the address 1068, Mission St, San Francisco.
2. 10 minutes cycling from the address 1068, Mission St, San Francisco.
In this case, a maximum cycling time of 10 minutes was used due to the hilly terrain of San
Francisco. People do not usually cycle long distances in cases like San Francisco. The
Figures with the evaluation for Public Transport and Car distance are placed on Appendix
D with the Figures of Walking and Cycling distances.
Figure 5.6: Area and zip codes used during this case; source World Postcodes [46]
The delimitation of the area obtained after applying the C15 concept leads to the conclu­
sion that the South Market and Tenderloin districts are the main ones to consider for this
research. Figure D.17 shows the different neighbourhoods in the city of San Francisco.
Once the districts have been determined, the following variables, such as zip­code areas
and service areas (police and health), can be defined.
In this case, the zip­codes used are 94102 and 94103 and can be seen in Figure 5.6. For
some social indicators, the codes 94105 and 94107 will be used as they are located in
40
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:49==
Address
1068 Mission St
Neighbourhood
South Market Tenderloin
City
San Francisco
Zip Codes
94102 94103
Police District
South Market Tenderloin
Population
55.066
Other Data
Other Zip Codes: 94105 94107
Table 5.1: Information about Case I
the supervisory district number 6, as can be seen in Figure D.18. In the case of the police
district, the Southern and Tenderloin districts have been used; see Figure D.19.
The indicators can be applied after the location of the building, the area and the data have
been selected.
Economic Indicators
2. Business Diversity
The first indicator of the economic group is the percentage of businesses divided accord­
ing to the economic sector they are engaged in.
In this case, we have obtained the total number of businesses with the postcodes 94102
and 94103. After obtaining the total number, they have been divided according to their
activities in Natural resources, Agriculture, Industry, Commerce and Services. Services
have been divided into two groups depending on whether they are highly qualified services
such as finance, education, or science. (Service I) and regular services for citizens, such
as hairdressing, beauty salons, hotels, among others (Service II). The list with the number
of businesses in each sector can be found in Appendix D, Table D.20.
The unknown businesses that are registered in this zone could not be classified as the
function they perform could not be found. Therefore, they have been divided by six and
distributed equally among the five sectors. The results obtained are shown in Graph 5.7
where it can be seen that the Services sector is the most predominant, accounting for
48%.
The conclusions obtained from this analysis are that the area has an economy centred on
the service sector, which is evident due to its proximity to San Francisco’s Financial District,
where large companies are established. This proximity may encourage smaller firms to
locate in the South Market District as office prices may be lower than in the Financial
District.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.7: Division of active businesses by sectors; source Open Data San Francisco
[47]
Figure 5.8: Division of active businesses by sectors; source Open Data San Francisco
[47]
Economic Indicators
3. Unemployment
The second indicator in the economic section is the percentage of unemployment divided
into age intervals.
In this case, it was impossible to obtain unemployment data for the study areas, so it was
decided to continue the research with general data for the whole city.
The unemployment data have been divided into the following age ranges: 16­19; 20­24;
25­29; 30­34; 35­44; 45­54, 55­59; 60­64; 65­74 and +75. The average unemployment
rate in the city of San Francisco, in this case, 5.4 %, has also been established to evaluate
which of the intervals has the most significant difficulty in finding work.
The results are presented in Figure 5.10 and in the Table D.23
42
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.9: Unemployment divided by age intervals.
Mean unemployment is 5.4 %;
source County Office [48]
The conclusions obtained from this indicator is that young people have problems in ac­
cessing the labour market (16­24 years old), which may be due to their low qualification
or low level of education. However, it can be observed that young people from 25 years
old onwards have no difficulty finding a job, possibly due to completing their studies and
entry into the labour market.
In the 44­64 age group, unemployment levels almost reach the average, which may be
due to various factors such as a change of job or the need to update their education.
Economic Indicators
4. Economic growth of the population
The third indicator aims to show the possibility of economic growth and wage inequalities.
The Gini coefficient shows the wage inequality in the country; if the coefficient is close to
0, there is equality; if it is close to 1, there is inequality. In this case, the Gini coefficient
represents the state of California with 0.489, which compares with the US coefficient of
0.434, is slightly higher. Note that two countries or states may have the same Gini coef­
ficient but may have different wage levels It is important to compare wages to conclude
society’s economy. The San Francisco median and the US media have been used to
compare wages. San Francisco has a median wage of 74,841 USD, and the US median
wage is 35,977 USD, which shows that the population of San Francisco has access to a
higher wage compared to the rest of the country.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.10: Salary situation in San Francisco and the US; source
The conclusion we can draw from this indicator is that the population of San Francisco has
access to a relatively high salary, although there is a marked inequality between salaries.
From this, we can conclude that part of the society may be in a low­income situation and
have difficulties living.
Environmental Indicators
5. Climate situation of the city
The first environmental indicator focuses on understanding the climatic conditions of the
city of San Francisco by looking at the highest temperatures per year and the total rainfall
per year over the last 50 years.
In this case, temperature and precipitation data for the last 80 years have been found, pro­
viding further insight into climate change. The temperatures obtained are the maximum
temperatures recorded each year, and the precipitation is the total precipitation accumu­
lated during each year. The trend line has been drawn on the graph to understand the
evolution of temperature and precipitation better.
The temperature and precipitation data for San Francisco are presented in Figures 5.11
and 5.12 where it can be seen that there is an increase in temperature in the city.
44
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.11: Temperature in San Francisco in the last 80 years %; source Current Results
[49]
Figure 5.12: Precipitations in San Francisco in the last 80 years %; source Climate Sta­
tions [50]
This indicator allows the visualisation of extreme changes in the city’s climate, such as
high temperature or high rainfall seasons. Problems caused by natural disasters have a
significant impact on people’s economic and social life. With an early weather assessment,
it can be ensured that the necessary measures are implemented to avoid severe damage
to the building. Special attention must be paid to the temperature increase in this particular
case, which has risen by 4 degrees Celsius.
Environmental Indicators
6. Public spaces in relation with private places
This indicator focuses on assessing space distribution in the neighbourhood or area as­
sessed by analysing buildings and green areas. For this purpose, a classification has
been created by dividing the spaces into Non­Residential Building, Residential Buildings,
Vacant, Parks and Recreation and Missing Data. The groups of Non­Residential Build­
ings and Residential Buildings are divided into subgroups, as can be seen in Table D.30
with each of them:
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
45
==PAGE:54==
­ Non Residential Buildings
• Cultural, Institutional, Educational.
• Medical
• Offices (Management, Information, Professional)
• Mixed Used (non­residential)
• Industrial (Production, Distribution and Repair)
• Retail, Entertainment
• Hotels, Visitors Services
­ Residential Buildings
• Residential
• Mixed Use (With Residential)
The other groups do not have any subgroups.
These data have been represented in Figure 5.13 where it can be seen in more detail
which group is the most predominant. The table presenting the data that has been used
to evaluate this zone is presented in Appendix D, Table D.30.
Figure 5.13: Percentage of Land use in the area of South Market and Tenderloin; source
Open Data San Francisco [47]
The conclusions obtained from this graph are quite relevant as it can be seen that Res­
idential and Non Residential buildings are very prevalent in this area, with 81% of the
46
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:55==
occupancy. These neighbourhoods have very few green or recreational spaces, some­
thing considered a fundamental pillar of human needs, as green spaces are used for
socialising, being in contact with nature and resting. Green spaces also help to clean the
air and lower the temperature of the city.
Environmental Indicators
7. Waste Management
The last indicator of the environmental section focuses on the assessment of waste man­
agement in San Francisco.
Norcal Waste Systems is the company in charge of waste management in the city of
San Francisco. The City of San Francisco and Norcal have waste treatment and manage­
ment objectives they intend to achieve through various programs. One of these programs,
called Fantastic 3, collects waste from homes, businesses, offices and government insti­
tutions. Another program called Pier 96 has facilities for citizens to deposit the waste they
have generated, which is not accepted in the ”Fantastic 3 program”. This waste includes
large objects, household appliances, construction waste, among others.
Only the data obtained from the company Norcal and the Fantastic 3 program have been
used, as they are the most relevant in this case. Table D.32 presents the data obtained
from the management company and the Fantastic 3 program. The data have been divided
into three groups: Compostable, Recycled and Other. The Compostable group is divided
into two subgroups: Compostable Food and Other Compostable, such as paper, grass,
pruning, stumps, logs, soft cardboard, among others.
Figure 5.14: Amount of waste managed by the company Norcal; source SF Environment
[51]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.15: Amount of waste managed by the program Fantastic 3 ; source SF Environ­
ment [51]
It is important to note that the data obtained are relatively old, from 2006, so they may
not be relevant today. It can be seen that the city of San Francisco was recycling two­
thirds of its waste in 2006, which is a high percentage. It has not been possible to obtain
information on the destination of decomposed waste, whether it goes to landfill, is reused
or burned, as it may have a second use.
Social Indicators
8. Fundamental Human Needs
The first social indicator will analyse the possibilities that the area provides for the popu­
lation to satisfy their basic human needs. In this research, the basic needs are Access to
health services, Access to educational services, Level of safety of the area, Availability of
open areas for socialising and Accessibility of the territory by public transport. The con­
cept of ”15­Minutes City” has been considered to determine the area boundaries where
these factors are studied.
Table D.35 and Figure 5.16 present the data obtained in the studied area. The popula­
tion of these zones is 55,066 inhabitants, which is relatively low compared to the total
population of San Francisco, 883,300.
In this case, the population of this zone has good access to sanitation services since, as
can be seen in the graph, the blue line is above the orange line, meaning that it is above
the city average. Access to educational services is also relatively higher than the city
average.
The safety of the area changes the positive trend of this graph. The number of reports
that have been registered in the district police station is presented; the higher the number
of reports, the less safety. In this case, the number of reports in the area is twice as high
as in the city.
48
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:57==
The next point analysed is the availability of public spaces to socialise or enjoy green
space. In this case, it can be seen that the number of green spaces is below the city
average. From this, it can be concluded that this aspect is essential to study and value
the possibility of creating new open spaces.
The last point to evaluate is the accessibility of the area by public transport. Data on
how many means of transport exist in the city has been collected, including bus, metro
and train lines. Subsequently, an evaluation was made of how many of these means of
transport are accessible within a 15­minute walk. It can be concluded that this area is
highly accessible, which is due to the existence of an interchange centre and the San
Francisco Central Station.
Figure 5.16: Facilities per inhabitants of the neighborhood compared with the facilities per
100.000 inhabitants of the city; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
The conclusions drawn from this indicator is that basic human needs can be easily met in
the area, although solutions to improve the availability of open space need to be explored.
Social Indicators
9. Social Housing Needs
The social housing indicator shows how many people need help from the state to obtain
housing in the area.
Applications for assistance that have been registered in the city of San Francisco and the
neighbourhood have been collected. The data collected for this evaluation focuses on
applications for ”Access to Housing”, ”Homeless Services”, and ”Housing Place Based
Services” during the years 2017­2018 and 2018­2019.
These applications collect all applications, from enquiries to applications for housing to
emergency services to case studies. Therefore the activities included in these cases are
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
49
==PAGE:58==
”Applications for Affordable Units”, ”Case Management”, ”Counseling”, and ”Emergency
Shettler”.
This research has not considered applicants’ race, economic status, or age range, as all
applicants should be considered equal individuals.
On the other hand, the number of available housing units in San Francisco and the neigh­
bourhood has also been studied, which allows us to understand whether San Francisco
is ready to accommodate the number of applications for social housing. For this purpose,
data was collected on how much housing is currently available, how much housing is
under construction and how much is planned to be operational in 2023, i.e. in two years.
The results obtained are presented in Figure 5.17 and Table D.37.
Figure 5.17: Applications to social housing and available housing in the city and the neigh­
borhood; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
As shown in the figure, the number of neighbourhood applications in the last two years is
greater than the amount of housing that San Francisco will have in two years. In addition,
the percentage of applications in the neighbourhood is 42% of the total, implying a high
number of applications. It can also be observed that the neighbourhood is home to 53%
of the social housing in the whole city.
The conclusion drawn from this data is that the South Market neighbourhood is home to
most people with few resources and in need of help in finding housing.
Social Indicators
10. Distribution of Population
The population indicator provides information on the distribution of the population by age
range that lives in the area. Knowing the type of population makes it possible to under­
stand the needs they are looking for and adapt the solutions implemented in the building
50
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:59==
to these needs. The results obtained are presented in Figure 5.18 and Table D.39.
Figure 5.18: Distribution of population in the Zip­codes 94102 and 94103 divided by age
range. Red area: older than 45 years. Blue area: younger than 45 years; source United
States Zip­Codes [52]
In this case, it can be observed that the young population is slightly more predominant,
where 40% are inhabitants between 25­44 years old. It can be concluded that the popu­
lation in this area is quite mixed, with a high density of young people.
Energy Indicator
11. Production Rates
The energy indicator aims to understand how energy is generated and consumed in the
city. For this purpose, the percentage of energy produced from different sources is pre­
sented.
Mainly they have been divided into two groups: renewable and conventional. We can
find biomass, geothermal, hydro, solar, wind, and waste heat within renewable energies.
Conventional energies are composed of coal, petroleum coke, nuclear, natural gas and
oil. It should be noted that energy is also imported from other parts of California with
unknown origins. The results obtained are presented in Figure 5.19 and Table D.41.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.19: Distribution of energy production in the County of San Francisco; source
Energy California Government [53]
The conclusions drawn from this indicator are that much of the energy consumed in San
Francisco comes from conventional sources, which are not environmentally friendly. Var­
ious solutions can be studied to improve this factor and can be implemented to generate
energy and self­supply the building.
Conclusion
In this case, a residential complex can be developed where social housing and some
public area, such as a park or square, should be established. This neighbourhood has
many applications for social housing and is home to many people on low incomes. If high­
cost housing for more stable or wealthy families is established, it may cause housing
prices to change. In terms of business, it is not advisable to develop offices, as it is a very
office­influenced neighbourhood; this research is intended to strike a balance and create
mixed­use districts. It is also advisable to implement energy self­sufficiency systems as
this can promote green energy in the city.
It is important to note that the building constructed at this time, July 2021, is intended for
social housing. This fact serves as an argument for the research, which shows that social
housing is an excellent solution to implement, [54].
52
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:61==
5.2
Case 2: San Francisco II
The second case is located at 375 32nd Avenue in the Richmond District. The Richmond
District is located in the Northwest part of San Francisco, as shown in Figure 5.20.
Figure 5.20: Location of 375, 32nd Avenue, San Francisco; source: Google Maps
The Richmond District grew out of the need to build more housing after the 1906 earth­
quake. Since that time, the neighbourhood has been a mixture of different cultures, al­
though the most predominant are Chinese and American.
The neighbourhood is made up of residential housing and its characteristic parallel streets.
The boundaries of this neighbourhood are formed by three large parks, Golden Gate Park,
Pacific Ocean beach and the Presidio of San Francisco. The most recognisable building
in this neighbourhood is the Holy Virgin Cathedral, which was built by the Russian society
that settled in the neighbourhood during the Russian Revolution.
The building at 375 32nd Avenue is different from the previous building, as it was designed
to house a commercial area. The owner of the building is unknown. This site consists of a
building housing a commercial area and two parking areas. The building is designed with
a single storey and a very particular architecture reminiscent of Hispanic style buildings.
The building has three entrances, two on Clement Street and one on 32nd Ave. One of the
Clement Street entrances provides access to the parking garage on the roof of the building.
Figure 5.21 shows the situation of the land studied. During the exploration with Google
Maps, it has been observed that the building has changed services during the last years.
It is worth noting that, according to the San Francisco Department of Building Inspection
data, this building is classified as vacant or abandoned. This listing was updated during
the first quarter of 2021, but in the latest Google Maps update, it appears that the building
is still in use. The data obtained from the Building Inspection Department are considered
during this research and not the information obtained from Google Maps.
Table 5.2 presents the primary data necessary to be able to apply the indicators in this
case.
INTERNAL INDICATORS
1. Structural Indicator
Due to the lack of data on the building, as in the previous case, it has not been possible to
carry out structural analysis, so an evaluation using photos obtained from Google Maps
will be carried out. The current data on the structure of the building is necessary to make
a final decision.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.21: Site studied in Case II; source: Google Maps
The photos obtained from Google Maps, dated December 2020, show the current services
of the building. There is a pharmacy currently, but the logo of another company is missing.
Older photos show that there are two businesses.
The structural assessment by photos shows a building in good external condition, and no
details of structural failure are visible. Figure 5.22 shows the façade of the building.
Figure 5.22: Pictures of building in Case II; source: Google Maps
Unfortunately, it is not possible to assess the interior of the building as data has not been
found to do so.
The photos of the analysis are presented in the Appendix D.
EXTERNAL INDICATORS
As in Case I, the concept of C15 must be defined using the ”Travel Time Map” tool. Also,
the same conditions have been used as in Case I, 15 minutes walking and 10 minutes
cycling.
54
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.23:
15 minutes City walking;
source: Travel Time Map
Figure 5.24:
10 minutes City cycling;
source: Travel Time Map
The Figures 5.23 and 5.24 show the results obtained when the following criteria have
been established:
1. 15 minutes walking time from the address 375, 32nd Avenue, San Francisco.
2. 10 minutes cycling from the address 375, 32nd Avenue, San Francisco.
After defining the C15 concept, the district, the zip­codes, the population and the police
district can be selected.
In this case, the district investigated is the district of Richmond which is mainly composed
of the neighbourhoods of Inner Richmond and Outer Richmond. The zip code used in this
case is 94121, which occupies most of Outer Richmond. This area is part of Supervisory
District 1 and the Richmond Police District.
Address
375 32nd Avenue
Neighbourhood
Richmond
City
San Francisco
Zip Codes
94121
Police District
Richmond
Population
42.700
Other Data
Table 5.2: Information about Case II
Economic Indicators
2. Business Diversity
Following the same procedure as in Case I, the total number of businesses located in
zip­code 94121 has been obtained and classified in the same way.
Tables D.60 and D.61 presents the number of businesses in each sector and Figure 5.25
shows the percentage of each sector with 47% being the service sector.
In this case, it can be seen that the businesses in Services I and Services II have simi­
lar values compared to Case I because of the district where the building is located in a
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
55
==PAGE:64==
more residential area. Residential areas have to provide essential services, hairdressers,
pharmacies, gyms, among others.
Figure 5.25: Division of active businesses by sectors; source Open Data San Francisco
[47]
Economic Indicators
3. Unemployment
This indicator has been explained in Case I, as the data obtained are from San Francisco
and apply to all case studies. The explanation of this indicator can be found in Case I 5.1.
Economic Indicators
4. Economic growth of the population
This indicator has been explained in Case I, as the data obtained are from San Francisco
and apply to all case studies. The explanation of this indicator can be found in Case I 5.1.
Environmental Indicators
5. Climate situation of the city
This indicator has been explained in Case I, as the data obtained are from San Francisco
and apply to all case studies. The explanation of this indicator can be found in Case I 5.1.
Environmental Indicators
6. Public spaces in relation with private places
The distribution of spaces in the district has been assessed by analysing the percentage
of buildings and green areas with the same method and classification as Case I.
Figure D.63 presents the percentage of each of the groups, these data are also presented
in Table 5.26.
56
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:65==
Figure 5.26: Percentage of Land use in the area of South Market and Tenderloin; source
Open Data San Francisco [47]
As can be seen in this case, this district has many green spaces, being 68% of the area.
As explained in the introduction, this district is surrounded by three parks, allowing easy
access to them. It should be noted that these parks are shared with the adjoining districts
as they can also enjoy their benefits. It can also be observed that the percentage of
buildings is 31%.
Environmental Indicators
7. Waste Management
This indicator has been explained in Case I, as the data obtained are from San Francisco
and apply to all case studies. The explanation of this indicator can be found in Case I 5.1.
Social Indicators
8. Fundamental Human Needs
Following the same procedure as in Case I, the area’s possibilities to satisfy their basic
human needs have been evaluated. Figure 5.27 presents the percentage of each of the
groups, and these data are also presented in Table D.66.
Health services in Case II are slightly lower than those assessed in Case I. Even so,
access to sanitation facilities is higher than the city average.
Educational services are at the same level as in Case I. They are also above the city
average.
Safety in this neighbourhood is much better than that found in Case I. The number of
reports filed with the police administration is very close to the city average.
The most peculiar point is the green spaces. As shown in indicator 6, there is a high
percentage of green spaces and public areas. In this case, the location of the building
allows access to green spaces in 15 minutes.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.27: Facilities per inhabitants of the neighborhood compared with the facilities per
100.000 inhabitants of the city; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
On the contrary, the accessibility of this district is worse than that of Case I. Accessibility
is compromised because there are only bus lines, no metro or train. The bus is still an
efficient means of public transport, but it is slower than the metro or the train.
Meeting basic human needs in this area is possible.
Social Indicators
9. Social Housing Needs
Following the same procedure as in Case I, the Social Housing situation has been inves­
tigated in the Richmond Borough.
Figure 5.28 and table D.67 present the number of applications for social housing in the
city of San Francisco and Richmond neighbourhood. Also included is the amount of social
housing available in the San Francisco and Richmond District. In this case, the district
does not have a large social housing capacity. The conclusion drawn from this indicator
and the characteristics of the district is that it is a residential area where the population is
economically stable, being an upper­middle­class society. Often, urban planners tend to
develop social housing in neighbourhoods with a medium­low economy. These practices
can lead to a problem known as Ghetto, areas where minority groups live due to social,
legal and economic pressure.
Social Indicators
10. Distribution of Population
Following the same process as in Case I, the population distribution in age ranges has
been analysed.
Figure D.70 presents the percentage of each of the age range, these data are also pre­
sented in Table D.69.
58
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.28: Applications to social housing and available housing in the city and the neigh­
borhood; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
In this case, the population residing in this district is very similar to the population of Case
I, with the young population, aged 25­44 years, being the most predominant with 40% of
the total. It can be concluded that the population is mixed, with a high density of young
people.
Figure 5.29: Distribution of population in the Zip­codes 94121 divided by age range. Red
area: older than 45 years. Blue area: younger than 45 years; source United States Zip­
Codes [52]
Energy Indicator
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
59
==PAGE:68==
11. Production Rates
This indicator has been explained in Case I, as the data obtained are from San Francisco
and apply to all case studies. The explanation of this indicator can be found in Case I 5.1.
Conclusion
In the second case, it can be seen that the population of the area where the building
is located is relatively young, made up of families and young couples. This building is
designed for commercial activities, so social housing is not a good solution in this case,
either offices. This building can be used to provide a community space where markets
or events can be held. It can also be rented out to a company with a business, possibly
commercial such as a supermarket.
60
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:69==
5.3
Case 3: San Francisco III
The third case study is located at 160 Font Boulevard in the Lakeshore District. Figure
5.30 shows the location of the Lakeshore District, which is in Southwest San Francisco.
This building is not currently abandoned but has been selected to present buildings of
different characteristics in the research.
The Lakeshore District is a combination of different activities and spaces. On the west
side is Lake Merced Park; the north side consists of single­family homes and the Ston­
estown Galleria shopping centre. The Central­East area is home to San Francisco State
University, where various university facilities are found and residential buildings. The
South Zone is home to the San Francisco Golf Club, located next to Daly City Station.
This combination of uses makes for a very diverse neighbourhood where different types
of activities are offered.
Figure 5.30: Location of 160, Font Boulevard, San Francisco; source: Google Maps
The building at 160 Font Boulevard is a high­rise apartment building designed together
with four other buildings of the same style. The site consists of a 13­storey building for
residential use, green areas on the sides of the building and a car park at the rear. The
building has two entrances, one on Font Boulevard street and the other at the rear of the
building. The owner of this land is San Francisco State University, which is already buying
the area to integrate it into the campus. The building was designed and constructed by a
private company during the 19th century.
Figure 5.31 shows the situation of the land studied. With the basic information about the
building defined, the analysis of the building can begin using the indicators defined above.
Table 5.3 presents a resume of the basic information of the building.
INTERNAL INDICATORS
1. Structural Indicator
The structural analysis could not be carried out due to the lack of data on the building,
so we proceeded to make the same assessment as in the previous cases using Google
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 5.31: Site studied in Case II; source: Google Maps
Maps. Data about the current situation of the building is necessary to be able to decide
after the assessment.
The building consists of 13 floors and a roof terrace access, with a residential function.
The garage access is located in an attached building at the rear of the building.
The photos obtained from Google Maps are from February 2021, where the current situ­
ation of the building can be assessed. After observing the different photos obtained from
Google, it can be concluded that the building has no major structural problems. Although
this may be due to the type of façade installed, the external structure is in good condition.
Figure 5.32 shows the façade of the building.
62
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:71==
Figure 5.32: Pictures of building in Case III, Picture from February 2021; source: Google
Maps
Due to the lack of information on the building, it is impossible to carry out structural analy­
sis. The rest of the photos used in the analysis of the building can be found in the appendix
D.
EXTERNAL INDICATORS
The 15­Minutes City (C15) concept has been defined using the ”Travel Time Map” tool
and the same conditions as in the previous cases, 15 minutes walking and 15 minutes
cycling.
The Figures 5.33 and 5.34 show the results obtained when the following criteria have
been established:
1. 15 minutes walking time from the address 160, Font Boulevard, San Francisco.
2. 10 minutes cycling from the address 160, Font Boulevard, San Francisco.
Figure 5.33:
15 minutes City walking;
source: Travel Time Map
Figure 5.34:
10 minutes City cycling;
source: Travel Time Map
After defining the C15 concept, the district, the zip­codes, the population and the police
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
63
==PAGE:72==
district can be selected.
The Lakeshore District comprises different uses, such as residential, commercial, public­
educational, and green spaces, which is different from the other two previous cases with
less diverse uses. The Lakeshore District is made up of the neighbourhoods of Merced
Manor, Stonestown, Parkmerced and Lakeshore. The building under study is located in
the Parkmerced neighbourhood. The zip code for the Lakeshore district is 94312, which
occupies all of the neighbourhoods listed above. The Supervisory District is number 7,
and the Police District is called Taraval.
Address
160 Font Boulevard
Neighbourhood
Lakeshore
City
San Francisco
Zip Codes
94312
Police District
Taraval
Population
31.289
Other Data
­
Table 5.3: Information about Case III
Economic Indicators
2. Business Diversity
Following the same procedure as in Case I and Case II, the total number of businesses
located in zip­code 94312 has been obtained and classified in the same way.
Tables D.87 and D.88 presents the number of businesses in each sector and Figure 5.35
shows the percentage of each sector with the Service sector being the highest one with
40%.
64
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:73==
Figure 5.35: Division of active businesses by sectors; source Open Data San Francisco
[47]
The distribution of businesses, in this case, is relatively balanced and similar to Case II,
where the service sector I predominate, generally due to the predominance of the univer­
sity, which offers primarily professional services. The commercial sector is also centred
on the commercial areas in the university and the ”Stonestwon Gallery” shopping centre.
Economic Indicators
3. Unemployment
This indicator has been explained in Case I, as the data obtained are from San Francisco
and apply to all case studies. The explanation of this indicator can be found in Case I 5.1.
Economic Indicators
4. Economic growth of the population
This indicator has been explained in Case I, as the data obtained are from San Francisco
and apply to all case studies. The explanation of this indicator can be found in Case I 5.1.
Environmental Indicators
5. Climate situation of the city
This indicator has been explained in Case I, as the data obtained are from San Francisco
and apply to all case studies. The explanation of this indicator can be found in Case I 5.1.
Environmental Indicators
6. Public spaces in relation with private places
Following the same procedure as in Case I and Case II, the distribution of spaces in the
district has been assessed by analysing the percentage of buildings and green areas with
the same method and classification.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure D.90 presents the percentage of each of the groups; these data are also presented
in Table 5.36.
Figure 5.36: Percentage of Land use in the area of South Market and Tenderloin; source
Open Data San Francisco [47]
Despite the diversity of the district’s functions, residential buildings are the most predomi­
nant with 43%, followed by green areas with 31%. A large amount of residential buildings
determines that this district also has a predominantly residential use. Vacant areas also
have a high percentage of 12%, almost the same as other buildings, which shows that
the district has areas that are not being used.
Environmental Indicators
7. Waste Management
This indicator has been explained in Case I, as the data obtained are from San Francisco
and apply to all case studies. The explanation of this indicator can be found in Case I 5.1.
Social Indicators
8. Fundamental Human Needs
Following the same procedure as in Case I, the area’s possibilities to satisfy inhabitants
basic human needs have been evaluated. Figure 5.37 presents the percentage of each
of the groups, and these data are also presented in Table D.93.
Health services in Case III are similar to Case II and slightly better than the city average.
Educational services are more accessible in this district than in Case I and Case II, pri­
marily due to the presence of San Francisco State University.
Lakeshore’s safety is the best of the three cases studied, below the San Francisco city
average.
66
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:75==
Public spaces are reasonably accessible to the district’s population, with several parks
and sports facilities. It should be noted that access to these areas is not as high as in
Case II.
Figure 5.37: Facilities per inhabitants of the neighborhood compared with the facilities per
100.000 inhabitants of the city; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
Finally, accessibility from the building analysed has an optimal level, better than in Case
II, as there is a Metro line and five train lines that allow quick access to the centre of San
Francisco. Several bus lines allow mobility between adjacent districts that do not have a
metro.
Meeting basic human needs in this area is possible.
Social Indicators
9. Social Housing Needs
Social housing in the Lakeshore District has been investigated using the same criteria as
in Case I.
Figure 5.38 and table D.94 present the number of applications for social housing in the city
of San Francisco and Lakeshore District. Also included is the amount of social housing
available in the San Francisco and Lakeshore District.
Like the Richmond District, the Lakeshore District does not have a large availability of
social housing, mainly due to the strong influence of the university, which is the main
activity in this area. Another reason may be the economic level of the population residing
in this district, where the society may be upper­middle class.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 5.38: Applications to social housing and available housing in the city and the neigh­
borhood; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
Social Indicators
10. Distribution of Population
Figure 5.39: Distribution of population in the Zip­codes 94132 divided by age range. Red
area: older than 45 years. Blue area: younger than 45 years; source United States Zip­
Codes [52]
68
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:77==
Following the same process as in Case I, the population distribution in age ranges has
been analysed.
Figure 5.39 presents the percentage of each of the age range, these data are also pre­
sented in Table D.96.
The population distribution is also affected by the university’s presence, which means that
the young population, between 0­34 years of age, predominates with 52The young pop­
ulation is only likely to live in the district when they are students, but when they finish
their studies, they will move to another part of the city. This population distribution con­
cludes that there is not a wide variety of populations and that the district’s services may
be focused on students.
Energy Indicator
11. Production Rates
This indicator has been explained in Case I, as the data obtained are from San Francisco
and apply to all case studies. The explanation of this indicator can be found in Case I 5.1.
Conclusion
In the third case, the most distinctive aspect is a large number of young people, which
concludes that the use of the building must take this aspect into account. This area has
various uses, so there is a good balance between residential, green space and commer­
cial areas. Implementation of social housing could be encouraged because it can reduce
the pressure in other districts and thus not create ghettos in the city. This area is a good
location for social housing because it has better accessibility than the Richmond District,
allowing lower­income people to commute to other districts for work. This case is particu­
lar in that it is a building that is not currently abandoned. This building was chosen for the
structural analysis of a building different from the rest, but it has been impossible to find
information on the structure. However, it has been kept in the research.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
69
==PAGE:78==
6
Discussion
First, this project has researched the concept of sustainability and sustainable building.
As several authors describe in different articles, sustainability is a general concept, which
can be interpreted differently depending on the background of the reader. The tools used
to implement sustainability are diverse and focus on different aspects of the sustainability
concept. There are tools for social, economic and environmental aspects, which are not
interrelated. Tools that combine the various aspects are necessary to implement sustain­
ability more straightforward and more practical.
For example, the concept of sustainable building is not a well­known concept. This con­
cept, explained in section 2, determines that sustainability can be achieved by using envi­
ronmentally friendly materials and non­traditional practices during the construction of the
building.
Today’s world understands sustainable development as activities, products or services
that promote the care and protection of the environment. After analysing the factors for
sustainable development, it can be concluded that economic, social and environmental
conditions are as necessary as the techniques and materials used to construct a build­
ing. In other words, a building can be certified as a sustainable building if it fulfils the re­
quirements of a certification, such as the use of environmentally friendly materials, good
thermal insulation, efficient installations. However, this does not mean that the building
promotes the sustainable development of the area, as it may not meet the needs of society
or provide any benefits to the community.
Social and economic aspects are aspects that should be given more importance in urban
developments. The study of human needs should be used during the planning and design
of urban areas and buildings. It is essential to understand that urban space is the environ­
ment people use to live and develop, so it is crucial to consider fundamental human needs
when designing urban space. If an urban area does not have the services necessary to
develop our lives, people will be dependent on moving to other parts of the city to meet
their needs.
The economic aspect tools have not been explored much during this research, as one of
the problems considered is the lack of affordable housing for the population. However,
the economic aspect is closely related to the reuse of the building and its facilities. The
circular economy proposes an economic model where goods are produced, consumed,
recycled and re­produced. In this case, buildings reused for other activities fall within this
economic model where resources are reused.
The concept of sustainable development is a critical concept that should be considered
from the beginning of the planning and design of a building, as it can be implemented
quickly. Implementing sustainability when the design and construction process has al­
ready started is more complex and compromises sustainability.
An essential criterion of this project is the circumstances of the building, i.e. the charac­
teristics and condition of the building.
The functions for which the building was designed are a critical factor in determining which
functions can be implemented in the building. For example, a former cinema can be
restructured as a commercial area, where a market can be established, another solution
70
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:79==
could be a sports centre. For this reason, structural analysis is essential, although in
these three cases, the information necessary to analyse the building structurally was not
available. A detailed analysis is not necessary in the first case study, as it is a car park
with a small building. However, the other buildings should be analysed in more detail in
order to obtain the appropriate conclusions.
One aspect that has not been taken into account in this project is the urban planning
legislation that can impede the implementation of the solutions.
Planning laws are not the same in all countries; some countries have stricter criteria than
others, which are more flexible, but their objectives are the same. These laws establish
the functions that can be carried out in the different sectors into which the city is divided.
These functions cannot be interchanged between them without a prior urban planning
project for the interchange of uses having been approved. For example, an industrial
zone is designed with the criteria established for industrial use. If a building in this zone is
in a state of abandonment and proposed to implement a new use, it must first be verified
that this is permitted by law. If the law does not allow this use type, a change of land use
has to be applied to implement the solution in the building. This situation will be a problem
if the building is to be renovated and reused.
In this project, the focus was on assessing buildings that might be in residential use, so
buildings with other uses have not been considered.
During the research of urban sustainability indicators in different countries, it has been
shown that urban sustainability indicators vary even if they have a very similar definition.
The administration developing the urban sustainability indicators sets its targets accord­
ing to its economic activity, culture, population and location. The baselines and targets
are based on the criteria of each city, region or country where they are developed, which
makes the indicators inflexible tools and difficult to compare. China’s sustainability indi­
cators are similar to the European or US indicators, but their targets and baselines are
different.
This framework of building indicators has the flexibility of application, i.e. it can be used for
any building in the world. This flexibility is possible thanks to the methodology followed,
as different indicator frameworks have been studied, allowing different objectives and
visions to be analysed. Furthermore, this indicator framework is used to analyse different
aspects of a city or area to determine which solutions should be applied to promote urban
sustainability. This framework has not been used to compare sustainability levels between
different cases or assess which building is more sustainable.
The building indicators provide an understanding of the city’s current situation and promote
sustainable urban development, while the global indicators assess the level of sustainabil­
ity of a city, region or country.
During the implementation of the building indicators in the case studies, several chal­
lenges have been encountered. First, the city selected to implement the indicators was
Sao Paolo, Brazil, which had to be discarded due to the lack of data needed for the re­
search. Local authorities need to publish the data necessary to implement the indicators,
such as registered businesses in the city, schools, hospitals, and police reports. Due to
the lack of data from Sao Paolo, it was decided to select the city of San Francisco to study
and implement the building indicators.
The data obtained from San Francisco has been very relevant for evaluating the buildings
but has posed the following challenges. The data is sorted into tables depending on the
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
71
==PAGE:80==
topic selected. These tables are disorganised, and the data has no coexistence between
the different tables.
For example, data obtained from police reports are sorted depending on the police district
where they have been submitted. Hospitals are registered only with their address, without
including district, zip­code or neighbourhood. Building and green space registration data
establishes a specific number for each building in each neighbourhood with no interrela­
tion with zip­codes, neighbourhood name, or district number. Other data such as schools,
businesses and population are registered by zip code or district number.
This inconsistency in the presentation makes it challenging to interpret the data, which
requires a previous study to analyse and understand it. The process followed in this
project to interpret the data focused on first organising the data by zip code and ward
name. In cases where this information was not available, the supervisory district and
police district was used to organised the data. This inconsistency in the data led to the
conclusion that it is necessary to study selecting the area in which the building influences.
Several processes have been used to select the area of influence, and it has been con­
cluded that the concept of ”15 minutes City” (C15) is necessary to select the area of
influence. In Case I, the building is located on the border between two neighbourhoods,
SoMa and Tenderloin, so it has been decided to take these two neighbourhoods. When
studying the zip codes that exist in the area, it was found that the SoMa neighbourhood
is divided into three different zip codes. Based on the C15 concept, only one of these zip
codes was fully covered, and the other two were slightly covered. This analysis allowed
us to conclude that only one of the SoMa zip codes and the Tenderloin zip code were
necessary to evaluate the building.
The data that the zip­codes had recorded were easy to separate and represent, such as
schools or businesses recorded. It was later determined that only the zip­codes could not
be used, and other aspects needed to be included in the study to use other data, such as
the supervision district and the police district. The supervision and police districts occupy
a much larger area than the area defined by the C15 and the zip codes.
In order to be more precise in the selection of data, more detailed work can be done with
the data to determine and filter the necessary data. The vast majority of data records the
coordinates of the building or infrastructure for representation on maps. By collecting the
coordinates and representing these locations on a map, zip codes could be determined.
This type of work would require the help of machine learning to recognise the coordinates
of the recorded data and position them on a map. This type of activity was not covered
as part of this research, but for improved efficiency of the building indicator framework, it
could be helpful to investigate it.
The selection of the area of influence in Case III has varied from the process used in
Case I. In Case III, the building also has an area of influence. In Case III, the building is
located near the boundary between two districts, Lakeshore, Stonetown and Oceanview.
Each of the districts is relatively different. Stonetown is a sub­district of Lakeshore, where
the Stonetown shopping centre and some residential buildings are located. Lakeshore
consists of the university, residential neighbourhoods and green spaces. Oceanview is a
much more dense neighbourhood centred on residential buildings and some commercial
areas, which are located around the train station. The C15 study found that the building
had a zone of influence in both districts. When defining the area’s zip code, it was found
that code 94312 was accurate, as it occupied the Lakeshore district and the critical area of
Oceanview. The C15 concept allows the area of influence of the building to be known, and
72
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:81==
further investigation should be carried out as to whether it is necessary to use the district
or the zip code. This concept works in San Francisco; it is recommended to implement it
in other cities to obtain new conclusions and develop a generalised process for selecting
the area of influence. + The methodology used in this project is explorative. During
this project, building indicators have been explored from different aspects. The selected
aspects have been factors, currently established urban development indicators and case
studies. This methodology has proved to be very effective in defining the indicators and
in refining them. The most efficient part was the case studies, as it allowed to determine
which indicators of the definition, the units and the baseline had been selected correctly. It
is important to note that if these indicators are applied in other cities, they can be improved,
increasing the value of this framework and making it more precise.
Finally, several examples of abandoned buildings that have been renovated and have
changed their function can be easily found; for example, among others, in Copenhagen,
there are three buildings, two in Nordhavn, [55] and [56] and one on Island Brygge, [57].
These buildings were former raw material silos that have been adapted as residential build­
ings and offices, following sustainability criteria in design. The indicator guide for buildings
could have been used in these buildings to determine which functions are recommended
to be implemented to foster the city’s sustainable development.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
73
==PAGE:82==
7
Conclusions
Through this project, I have concluded that the concept of sustainability is much more
complex than the definition of sustainability. It requires knowledge, research and tools to
make sure that sustainability is implemented. I have also concluded that sustainability is
a relative aspect, and the level of sustainability can vary depending on who is doing the
assessment.
On the other hand, I have observed and concluded that simple tools with clear objectives,
such as the framework of building indicators or the circular economy, can help to promote
the concept of sustainability. This tool developed in this project can be of great help in the
building sector when planning and designing a future building.
I conclude that this tool serves to promote sustainable urban development. As shown in
Case I, the results showed that the best solution would be to design social housing, and
social housing is currently being built in this area.
Structural analysis is necessary in every Case investigated. As seen in Case II and III,
it is not easy to propose solutions to the buildings as I do not know the interior structure.
For this reason, no very relevant conclusions have been obtained in these two cases.
In order to continue promoting the path towards a more sustainable world, more tools,
such as the one studied in this project, are required to cover aspects of our way of life. This
tool can help urban planners, architects and engineers to use buildings and infrastructure
more sustainably.
74
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
United Nations. “68% of the world population projected to live in urban areas by
2050”. In: UN News (2018). URL: https://www.un.org/development/desa/en/news/
population/2018-revision-of-world-urbanization-prospects.html.
[2]
Hannah Ritchie. “Urbanization”. In: Our World in Data (2018). URL: https://ourworldindata.
org/urbanization.
[3]
United Nations. “World Urbanization Prospects: The 2018 Revision”. In: Deparment
of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2019). URL: https://population.
un.org/wup/Publications/Files/WUP2018-Report.pdf.
[4]
George Bugliarello. “Urban sustainability: Dilemmas, challenges and paradigms”.
In: Technology in Society (2006). URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/abs/pii/S0160791X05000576.
[5]
José I. Barredo and Luca Demichelo. “Urban sustainability in developing countries’
megacities: modelling and predicting future urban growth in Lagos”. In: Cities (2003).
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0264275103000477.
[6]
Cambridge English Dictionary. URL: https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/
english/greenfield. (accessed: 19.02.2021).
[7]
Cambridge English Dictionary. URL: https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/
english/brownfield. (accessed: 19.02.2021).
[8]
Jane Jacobs. The Death and Life of Great American Cities. Random House, 1961.
ISBN: 9780679741954.
[9]
Jane Jacobs. The Economy of Cities. Random House, 1969. ISBN: 0394422961.
[10]
Foundation Abbé Pierre and Feantsa. “Vacant real estate: seizing the opportunity
to find affordable housing solutions in Europe”. In: Filling vacancies (2016). URL:
https://ec.europa.eu/futurium/sites/futurium/files/long%5C_version%5C_en.pdf.pdf.
[11]
J. Paul Ware E. Grigoriadou J. Reis and B. Papic. “PPPop Partnership”. In: June
2020 (2018).
[12]
Noticia ONU. Millones de personas viven sin techo o en casas inadecuadas, un
asalto a la dignidad y la vida. URL: https://news.un.org/es/story/2018/07/1437721.
(accessed: 25.05.2021).
[13]
The World Bank Group. What is Urban Upgrading? URL: http://web.mit.edu/
urbanupgrading/upgrading/whatis/what-is.html. (accessed: 25.05.2021).
[14]
Eduardo M. Peñalver. “Homesteaders in the Hood”. In: Slate Magazine (2009). URL:
https://slate.com/news-and-politics/2009/03/how-cities-should-deal-with-squatters.
html.
[15]
Hans Pruijt. “Logic of Urban Squatting”. In: International Journal of Urban and Re­
gional Research (2016). URL: https://repub.eur.nl/pub/25656.
[16]
Cornell Law School. “Adverse Possession”. In: Legal Information Institute (2020).
URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/adverse_possession.
[17]
Architecture Human Rights. List of abandoned or nonused buildings in different
parts of the world. (accessed: 25.02.2021).
[18]
A.S. Raghubanshi Pramit Verma. “Urban sustainability indicators: Challenges and
opportunities”. In: Ecological Indicators (2018). URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/abs/pii/S1470160X18303418.
[19]
Fadi Kotob. “What is Sustainability?” In: University of Wollongong (2011). URL:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282184670_What_Is_Sustainability.
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
75
==PAGE:84==
[20]
Rachael Garret and Agnieszka Elatawiec. “What are Sustainability Indicators For?”
In: Sustainability Indicators (2015). URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
280977342_What_are_sustainability_indicators_for.
[21]
Virginia W Maclaren. “Urban sustainability reporting”. In: Journal of the American
Planning Association (2007). URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/
01944369608975684.
[22]
Congress for the New Urbanism. The Chapter of the New Urbanism. URL: https:
//www.cnu.org/resources/what-new-urbanism. (accessed: 30.05.2021).
[23]
Cliff Ellis. “The New Urbanism: Critiques and Rebuttals”. In: Journal of the Urban De­
sign (2002). URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1357480022000039330.
[24]
Carlos Moreno. “Introducing the ”15­Minute City”: Sustainability, Resilience and
Place Identity in Future Post­Pandemic Cities”. In: (2020). URL: https://www.mdpi.
com/2624-6511/4/1/6/htm.
[25]
Denise Capasso Da Silva. “Accesibility in Practice: 20­Minute City as a Sustainabil­
ity Planning Goal”. In: (2019). URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/12/1/129/
htm.
[26]
Nikos A. Salingaros. “Compact City Replaces Sprawl”. In: University of Texas at
San Antonio (2006). URL: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.
1.157.1747&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
[27]
Transformative Urban Mobility Initiative Management. “The 15­minute City”. In: (2021).
URL: https://www.transformative-mobility.org/assets/publications/TUMI_The-15-
Minute-City_2021-07.pdf.
[28]
Hojjat Adeli Negmou Wang. “Sustainable building design”. In: Journal of civil engi­
neering and management (2014). URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
261581479_Sustainable_building_design.
[29]
UN Environment programme. Sustainable buildings. URL: https://www.unep.org/
explore-topics/resource-efficiency/what-we-do/cities/sustainable-buildings. (accessed:
24.03.2021).
[30]
Ghada Ragheb Amany Ragheb Hisham El­Shimy. “Green architecture: a concept
of sustainability”. In: Procedia ­ Social and Behavioral Sciences (2015). URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877042815062552.
[31]
Cambridge English Dictionary. URL: https : / / dictionary . cambridge . org / es - LA /
dictionary/english/factor. (accessed: 19.02.2021).
[32]
Greg Marsden Henrik Gudmundsson Ralph Hall. “Sustainable Transport: Indicators,
Frameworks, and Performance Management”. In: Springer (2015). URL: https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/280254905_Sustainable_Transportation_Indicators_
Frameworks_and_Performance_Management.
[33]
European Comission. “Indicator for sustainable cities”. In: Science for Environmen­
tal Policy (2018). URL: https://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/research/
newsalert/pdf/indicators_for_sustainable_cities_IR12_en.pdf.
[34]
Design Department of Architecture and Italy Urban planing University of Sassari.
Progettazione Architettonica 3. (accessed: 03.03.2021).
[35]
Natalie M. Sofie S. Thomas C. Vibeke G. Maja L. Annette B. An Architecture Guide
to the UN 17 Sustainable Development Goals, Volumen I. KADK, Copenhagen,
2018. ISBN: 9788778309921.
[36]
Natalie M. Sofie S. Thomas C. Ingeborg Christiane H. Christoffer S. Annette B. An
Architecture Guide to the UN 17 Sustainable Development Goals, Volumen II. Royal
Danish Academy, Copenhagen, 2020. ISBN: 9788778308337.
[37]
Melvins Enwuvesi Hanachor E. O. Aruma. “Abraham Maslow’s Hierarchy of needs
and assessment of needs on community development”. In: International Journal of
76
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:85==
Development and Economic Sustainability (2017). URL: https://www.eajournals.
org/wp-content/uploads/Abraham-Maslow’s-Hierarchy-of-Needs-and-Assessment-of-
Needs-in-Community-Development.pdf.
[38]
Dr. Saul McLeod. URL: https://www.simplypsychology.org/maslow.html. (accessed:
19.02.2021).
[39]
Economic and United Nations Social Council. “Report of the Inter­Agency and Ex­
pert Group on Sustainable Development Goal Indicators”. In: (2016).
[40]
J. Woetzel Xiaopeng Li Xiujun Li. “The China Urban Sustainability Index”. In: (2014).
[41]
J. Robinson S. Andreason T. Eisenman. “Sustainable Urban Development Indica­
tors”. In: (2011).
[42]
European Commission. “In­Depth Report: Indicators for Sustainable Cities”. In: (2018).
[43]
Agenda Urbana ­ Ayuntamiento de A Coruña. “Sistema de Indicadores de Desar­
rollo Urbano Sostenible”. In: (2020).
[44]
M. Depledge C. Ward B. Wheeler. “Urban green spaces and health, World Health
Organization”. In: (2016).
[45]
Travel Time Map. URL: https://traveltime.com/. (accessed: 03.07.2021).
[46]
World Postal Code. URL: https://worldpostalcode.com/united-states/california/san-
francisco. (accessed: 25.06.2021).
[47]
Open Data San Francisco. URL: https://datasf.org/opendata/. (accessed: 27.06.2021).
[48]
County Office. URL: https://www.countyoffice.org/chinatown-one-stop-career-link-
center-san-francisco-ca-e15/. (accessed: 28.06.2021).
[49]
Current Results: Weather. URL: https://www.currentresults.com/Yearly-Weather/
USA / CA / San - Francisco / extreme - annual - san - francisco - high - temperature . phpN.
(accessed: 29.06.2021).
[50]
Climate stations. URL: https://www.climatestations.com/san- francisco- ca/. (ac­
cessed: 29.06.2021).
[51]
City and County of San Francisco. “Waste Characterization Study”. In: (2006).
[52]
United State Zip­Codes. URL: https://www.unitedstateszipcodes.org/. (accessed:
08.07.2021).
[53]
Energy of California Goverment. URL: https://www.energy.ca.gov/data-reports/
energy - almanac / california - electricity - data / california - electrical - energy - generation.
(accessed: 08.07.2021).
[54]
Episcopal Community Services San Francisco. URL: https://ecs-sf.org/1064-1068-
mission-street/. (accessed: 16.07.2021).
[55]
Cobe. URL: https://www.cobe.dk/place/the-silo. (accessed: 25.04.2021).
[56]
NCC. URL: https://www.ncc.dk/projekter/portland-towers2/. (accessed: 25.04.2021).
[57]
Danish Architecture Center DAC. URL: https://dac.dk/en/knowledgebase/architecture/
gemini-residence-2/. (accessed: 25.04.2021).
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
77
==PAGE:86==
78
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:87==
A
List of Abandoned Buildings
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
79
==PAGE:88==
Table A.1: List of Abandoned or Not used buildings
Address
City
Country
Year
Original Function
Condition
Current Status
Year
1
Via Santa Cruz 140
Buenos Aires
Argentina
­
Fabric Factory
Squatted
Housing
2
Villa Lugano
Buenos Aires
Argentina
1930
Hospital
Demolished
Brownfield
2017
3
Kasa Invisivel
Belo Horizonte
Brazil
­
Leisure, Restaurant
Squatted
Social center
4
Ospedali
Porto Alegre
Brazil
­
Gubernamental building
Squatted
Housing
5
Ave. Venezuela 53
Rio de Janeiro
Brazil
1970
Gubernamental building
Abandoned
Non used
6
Ave. Américas 1245
Rio de Janeiro
Brazil
1980
Apartments
Squatted
Housing
7
Mangueira
Rio de Janeiro
Brazil
1970
Gubernamental building
Demolish
Brownfield
8
Rua Mauá, 340
Sao Paolo
Brazil
1957
Hotel
Squatted
Housing
9
Ave. Sao Joao 247
Sao Paolo
Brazil
­
Apartments
Squatted
Housing
10
Ave. Sao Joao 601
Sao Paolo
Brazil
1960
Hotel, cinema
Abandoned
Non used
11
Ave. Sao Joao 588
Sao Paolo
Brazil
1960
Hotel
Squatted
Housing
12
Ave. Rio Branco, 47
Sao Paolo
Brazil
­
Hotel
Squatted
Housing
13
Ave. Rio Branco, 53
Sao Paolo
Brazil
­
Hotel
Squatted
Housing
14
Ave. Rio Branco, 49
Sao Paolo
Brazil
­
Leisure, Cinema
Abandoned
Non used
15
Ave. 9 de Julho
Sao Paolo
Brazil
1940
Offices, clinic, apartments
Squatted
Housing
80
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:89==
Table A.2: List of Abandoned or Not used buildings
Address
City
Country
Year
Original Function
Condition
Current Status
Year
16
Rua Marconi, 138
Sao Paolo
Brazil
­
Offices
Squatted
Housing
17
Ave. Preste Maia 911
Sao Paolo
Brazil
1993
Fabric Factory
Squatted
Housing
18
Rue de Ouvidor 63
Sao Paolo
Brazil
­
Gubernamental building
Squatted
Social center
2014
19
Ave. do Estado 3170
Sao Paolo
Brazil
1959
Apartments
Demolish
New building
20
Ave. do Estado 3170
Sao Paolo
Brazil
1954
Apartments
Demolish
New building
21
The white building
Phnom penh
Cambodia
1960
Residential area
Demolish
Brownfield
2017
22
Dortheavej 61
Copenhaguen
Denmark
­
Social center
Squatted
Social center
23
Fredens Ark 40
Copenhaguen
Denmark
1935
Gubernamental, Military
Legalized
Social center
1971
24
Stengade 50
Copenhagen
Denmark
1971
Factory
Legalized
Social center
25
Jagtvej 69
Copenhaguen
Denmark
1897
Social center
Demolish
Brownfield
2007
26
Ave. Roger Shwob
Bordeaux
France
1973
Apartments
Squatted
Housing
27
Hotel Iveria
Tbilisi
Georgia
­
Hotel
Squatted
Housing
28
Liebigstrasse 34
Berlin
Germany
1990
Apartments
Abandoned
Non used
29
Teufelsbergchaussee
Berlin
Germany
1937
Gubernamental, Spy office
Abandoned
Non used
30
Hindenburgdamm 27
Berlin
Germany
1974
Gubernamental, Microbiology
Abandoned
Non used
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
81
==PAGE:90==
Table A.3: List of Abandoned or Not used buildings
Address
City
Country
Year
Original Function
Condition
Current Status
Year
31
Saatwinkler Damm
Berlin
Germany
1974
Airport
Abandoned
Non used
32
Rigaer Strasse 94
Berlin
Germany
1990
Apartments
Squatted
Social Center
33
Köpenicker Str 137
Berlin
Germany
1905
Social center
Squatted
Social center
34
Liebigstrasse 14
Berlin
Germany
1990
Apartments
Project
Non used
35
Templehof
Berlin
Germany
1923
Airport
Project
Touristic atraction
36
Schulterblatt 71
Hamburg
Germany
1888
Leisure, Theatre, Stores
Squatted
Social center
37
Elliniko
Athens
Greece
1938
Airport
Abandoned
Non used
2002
38
Elliniko
Athens
Greece
2004
Stadiums
Abandoned
Non used
2004
39
City Plaza Atene
Athens
Greece
­
Hotel
Squatted
Housing
2016
40
Torre della Cigna
Livorno
Italia
­
Apartments
Squatted
Housing
41
Prenestina 944
Rome
Italia
1990
Hotel
Squatted
Housing
53
Via Regina Margherita 47
Torino
Italiy
­
Gubernamental, Kindergarden
Squatted
Social center
42
Via Prenestina 913
Rome
Italy
1980
Factory
Squatted
Social center
43
Via dell’Arcadia 60
Rome
Italy
­
Factory, Warehouses
Abandoned
Non used
44
Via Tiburtina 1099
Rome
Italy
­
Offices, Newspapper
Squatted
Housing
82
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:91==
Table A.4: List of Abandoned or Not used buildings
Address
City
Country
Year
Original Function
Condition
Current Status
Year
45
Via ll’Impruneta 51
Rome
Italy
­
Gubernamental, School
Squatted
Housing
46
Via Collatina 385
Rome
Italy
­
Gubernamental building
Squatted
Housing
47
Via Arrigo Cavaglieri 8
Rome
Italy
­
Gubernamental, Universtiy
Squatted
Housing
48
Via delle Telegrafisti 44
Rome
Italy
­
Apartments
Squatted
Housing
49
Via delle Province 196­198
Rome
Italy
­
Gubernamental, Industry
Squatted
Housing
50
Via de Caravaggio 107/113
Rome
Italy
1960
Offices
Squatted
Housing
51
Via di S. Croce, 55
Rome
Italy
­
Offices
Squatted
Housing
52
Via Federico Delpino, 187
Rome
Italy
­
Gubernamental, Fortres
Legalized
Social center
54
Spuistraat 216
Amsterdam
Netherlands
1875
Factory and woodwork
Legalized
Social center
1982
55
Radio Kootwijk
Apeldoorn
Netherlands
1918
Gubernamental, Radio
Project
Non used
56
Pilestredet 30c
Oslo
Norway
1981
Social center
Legalized
Social center
57
Masarykova cesta 24
Ljubljana
Slovenia
1870
Gubernamental, Military
Squatted
Social center
58
Berea
Johannesburg
South Africa
1975
Apartments
Squatted
Housing
59
Pyeongchang
Pyeongchang
South Korea
2017
Stadium
Demolish
Brownfield
2018
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
83
==PAGE:92==
Table A.5: List of Abandoned or Not used buildings
Address
City
Country
Year
Original Function
Condition
Current Status
Year
60
Collserola Park
Barcelona
Spain
1948
Hospital
Squatted
Social center
61
Kareaga Estrata
Bilbao
Spain
­
Residential Area
Squatted
Social center
62
Ciudad Real
Ciudad Real
Spain
2009
Airport
Abandoned
Non used
2016
63
Alberto Bosch 4
Madrid
Spain
­
Gubernamental building
Abandoned
Project
64
Embajadores 51
Madrid
Spain
1809
Factory Tobacco
Squatted
Social center
65
Paseo del Prado, 30A
Madrid
Spain
1936
Gubernamental, University
Project
Social center
66
Corrala Utopia
Sevilla
Spain
­
Apartments
Squatted
Housing
67
La Tabacalera
Tarragona
Spain
1923
Factory Tobacco
Abandoned
Non used
68
Errekaleor
Vitoria
Spain
1959
Apartments
Squatted
Housing
69
La Molinera
Valladolid
Spain
1857
Hotel
Squatted
Social center
70
Rasimpasa
Istambul
Turquey
1998
Apartments
Squatted
Housing
71
Coulsdon
Croydon
UK
1882
Hospital
Abandoned
Non used
72
Alexandra park
London
UK
1865
Theatre, Cinema, Radio
Abandoned
Non used
73
Piccadily 144
London
UK
­
Apartments, Mansion
Demolish
New building
84
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:93==
B
List of New/Rebuild Buildings
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
85
==PAGE:94==
Table B.1: List of New or Renovated buildings
Building
Location
Country
Function
Current Status
1
Padellai ­ San telmo
Buenos Aires
Argentina
Governmental building
Rebuilt
2
Valley house
Montville
Australia
Appartments
Appartments
3
DESI training Centre
Rudrapur
Bangladesh
Leisure Cultural Centre
Local constructed building
4
INSS
Rio de Janeiro
Brazil
Leisure Cultural Centre
Rebuild
5
Ouvidor 63
Sao Paolo
Brazil
Cultural Centre
Rebuild
6
Wilton Paes de Almeida
Sao Paolo
Brazil
Federal Police
Collapsed
7
Water Hall
/
Camboia
Water plant
Project of Eco building
8
Skyfarm
Toronto
Canada
Office building
Project of Eco building
9
Small­scale neighbourhoods
Chongqing
China
Sustainable design
Urban public spaces for locals
10
Qunli Stormwater park
Harbin
China
Eco urban design
Wetland to avoid floodings
11
Red ribbon park
Qinhuangdao
China
Eco urban design
Park, climate adaption of public area
12
Bogota ­ policies of change
Bogota
Colombia
Sustainable design
Sustainable Urban
Development policies
13
Ostergro
Copenhagen
Denmark
Restaurant + Office building
Urban farm
14
Affordable housing
on Dortheavej
Copenhagen
Denmark
Affordable housing
Affordable housing complex
15
Impact Farm
Copenhagen
Denmark
Urban farm
Production of food in small scale
86
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:95==
Table B.2: List of New or Renovated buildings
Building
Location
Country
Function
Current Status
16
Konditaget Lüders
Copenhagen
Denmark
Leisure Cultural Centre
Rooftop park
17
Frederiksbjerg School
Aarhus
Denmark
School
School with multiactivities
18
Wonder wood
Skorping
Denmark
Leisure Cultural Centre
Gender friendly design park
20
The house of the disabled
people’s organization
Taastrup
Denmark
Accesible building
Accesible for disable people
21
Taasinge square
Copenhagen
Denmark
Eco urban design
Public square, climate
adaption of public area
22
Upcycle studios
Copenhagen
Denmark
Housing
Recyclied materials
23
Lindevands Park
Frederiskberg
Denmark
Eco urban design
Public square, climate
adaption of public area
24
The wadden sea Centre
Esbjerg
Denmark
Leisure Cultural Centre
Teaching environment
25
Novo nordisk nature park
Bagsværd
Denmark
Eco urban design
Park, climate adaption
of public area
26
Tingbjerg library
and culture house
Copenhagen
Denmark
Sustainable design
Support community­
based activities
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
87
==PAGE:96==
Table B.3: List of New or Renovated buildings
Building
Location
Country
Function
Current Status
27
The climate tile
Copenhagen
Denmark
Sustainable design
Climate adaptation of public area
28
The Silo, Cobe
Copenhagen
Denmark
Sustainable design
Former grain silo transformed into
residential area and public facilities
29
Gemini Residence
Copenhagen
Denmark
Sustainable design
Former grain silos rebuilt
into residential area
30
Portland Towers
Copenhagen
Denmark
Sustainable design
Former Aalborg Portland silos rebuilt
into office area. BREEAM­certified
31
Warka tower
Dorze
Ethiopia
Water plant
Fog catcher
32
Kamppi chapel of silence
Helsinki
Finland
Eco building
Chapel made of wood
33
Antony House
Paris
France
Housing
Project of Eco building
34
Nature urbaine
Paris
France
Eco building
Urban farm/Vegetable garden
35
Le bloc
Paris
France
Affordable housing
Rebuilt into a student housing
36
Tommy Weisbecker Haus
Berlin
Germany
Cultural Centre
­
37
Volontariat Home
Pondicherry
India
Affordable housing
Housing for homeless children
38
Avasara Academy
Pune
India
School
School for girls.
39
Moving schools
Tiracol River
India
School
Moving school
88
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:97==
Table B.4: List of New or Renovated buildings
Building
Location
Country
Function
Current Status
40
Skyland
Milano
Italy
Office building
Project of Eco building
41
Ex Telecom
Bologna
Italy
Affordable housing
Rebuilt into a student housing
42
Pasona HQ­Tokio
Tokyo
Japan
Office building
Urban farm
43
The community Dome
Zaatari Village
Jordan
School
School for refuge children
44
Nakuru Children’s home
Nakuru
Kenya
School
School
for children of the area.
45
TECHO
Latin America
Latin America
Social Organization
Promotion of community
development in slums
46
Paramit Factory
Penang
Malaysia
Eco building
Medical factory and urban garden
47
Powerhouse Kjobro
Oslo
Norway
Office building
Renovation + energy efficiency
48
Ovre Forsland
Helgeland
Norway
Water plant
Energy production + recreational area
49
Mjøstårnet
Brumunddal
Norway
Eco building
Wooden building with local material
50
The Norwegian wild
reindeer centre
Hjerkinn
Norway
Eco building
Observation centre for wild animal
51
Vertical farm
Singapore
Singapore
Eco building
Urban farm/Vertical farm
52
Kai Tak Cruise
Terminal park
Singapore
Singapore
Cruise terminal
Rooftop garden
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
89
==PAGE:98==
Table B.5: List of New or Renovated buildings
Building
Location
Country
Function
Current Status
53
La Carbonerìa
Barcelona
Spain
Housing
Rebuilt
54
Mercado de Frutas
de Legazpi
Madrid
Spain
Old Vegetable market
Project for city hall offices
55
El matadero de Madrid
Madrid
Spain
Old Factory house
Cultural Centre
56
Mendez Alvaro
Madrid
Spain
Warehouse
Project for office building
57
Patio Maravillas
Madrid
Spain
Social Centre
Project for housing
58
Plantagon
Linköping
Sweden
Eco building
Urban farm
59
The Magoda Project
Magoda
Tanzania
Affordable housing
Adapted to the conditions
of the place.
60
Puey park
Bangkok
Thailand
University
Green Rooftop
61
The international criminal
court in hague
The Hague
The Netherlands
Eco urban design
Park, climate adaption
of public area
62
Kachumbala Maternity Unit
Kachumbala
Uganda
Hospital
Hospital to give birth
63
Maggie’s at Robert
Partfell buildign
Manchester
UK
Hospital
Area for people in most
difficult sickness circumstances
64
Low living impact
affordable community
Leeds
UK
Housing cooperative
Community built by local
90
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:99==
Table B.6: List of New or Renovated buildings
Building
Location
Country
Function
Current Status
65
Umbrella house
New York
USA
Housing cooperative
Urban farm
66
Little diversified
architectural consulting
San Francisco
USA
Water plant
Fog catcher
67
Tucson Mountain Retreat
Arizona
USA
Eco building
New housing building
68
Brooklyn grange
New York
USA
Eco building
Rooftop garden
69
The plant
Chicago
USA
Warehouse
Urban farm
70
Bullitt Centre
Seattle
USA
Eco building
Comercial building
71
Phipps conservatory
and botanical gardens
Pittsburgh
USA
Investigation Centre
Most sustainable building
72
Michigan Urban Farming
Michigan
USA
Urban farm
Full system for Urban farming.
73
The living machine
San Francisco
USA
Water plant
On site greywater plant
74
Portland green
streets programme
Portland
USA
Eco urban design
Streets, climate adaption
of public area
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
91
==PAGE:100==
92
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:101==
C
Indicators
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
93
==PAGE:102==
Category Subcategory
Indicator
Unit
Source
1
Social
Urban emploment number
Thousand
China Index
2
Social
Number of doctors per 
capita
Per thousand 
peron
China Index
3
Social
High and middel school 
students share in 
population (0-24 years)
%
China Index
4
Social
Urban population with 
pension
Person
China Index
5
Social
Urban population with 
health care insurance
Person
China Index
6
Economy
Disposable income per 
capita
Thousand RMB
China Index
7
Economy
Service share in GDP
%
China Index
8
Economy
Goverment spending on 
R&D per capita
RMB
China Index
9
Resource
Energy consumption per 
unit GDP
SCE/thousand 
RMB
China Index
10
Resource
Residential power 
consumption per urban 
capita
Thousand 
KWH/capita
China Index
11
Resource
Total water supply per 
urban capita
Cubic meter per 
RMB
China Index
12
Resource
Water 
consumption
Coverage of public water 
supply
%
China Index
13
Enviroment Air quality
Air pollution composite - 
NO2
mg per cubic 
meter
China Index
14
Enviroment Air quality
Air pollution composite - 
SO2
mg per cubic 
meter
China Index
15
Enviroment Air quality
Air pollution composite - 
PM10
mg per cubic 
meter
China Index
16
Enviroment
Industrial SO2 discharged 
per unit GDP
Ton per billion
China Index
17
Enviroment
Days of Air Quallity 
reached national standard 
in one year
%
China Index
18
Enviroment
Waste water treatment rate
%
China Index
19
Enviroment
Household waste harmless 
treatment rate
%
China Index
INDICATORS COLLECTED FROM DIFFERENT SOURCES
==PAGE:103==
20
Enviroment
Urban population density 
in city district
Persons per sq.km
China Index
21
Enviroment
Coverage of public green 
space in city built area
%
China Index
22
Enviroment
No public transit used per 
urban capita
Number of transit 
per capita
China Index
23
Social
Share of household using 
broad band in total 
household
%
China Index
24
Social
Individual Health 
?
USA Index
25
Social
Social Justice / Equity
?
USA Index
26
Social
Public health service
?
USA Index
27
Social
Violent crime
?
USA Index
28
Social
Crime protection service
?
USA Index
29
Social
Resident Accidents
?
USA Index
30
Social
Social Capital
?
USA Index
31
Social
Civic engagement
?
USA Index
32
Social
Community programs
?
USA Index
33
Social
Place culture
?
USA Index
34
Social
Rent gap / Housing 
overhang
?
USA Index
35
Social
Subsidies for Affordable 
Housing
?
USA Index
36
Social
Access to Affordable 
Housing
?
USA Index
37
Social
Location choice / Work 
proximity
?
USA Index
38
Social
Unit size / Overcrowding
?
USA Index
39
Social
Proximity to Public green 
areas
?
USA Index
40
Social
Condition/servicies of 
green areas
?
USA Index
41
Social
Transportation option 
choice
?
USA Index
42
Social
Proximity to different 
modes
?
USA Index
43
Social
Cost of transport to 
disposable income
?
USA Index
44
Social
Travel time to work
?
USA Index
45
Enviroment
Efficient land use
?
USA Index
46
Enviroment
Efficient resources use
?
USA Index
==PAGE:104==
47
Enviroment
Waste / pollution 
management
?
USA Index
48
Enviroment
Climate change and 
natural disaster mitigation, 
adapatation and resilience
?
USA Index
49
Enviroment Air quality
Carbon efficient, ratio of 
public to private
?
USA Index
50
Enviroment Air quality
Carbon emissions in 
transportation
?
USA Index
51
Enviroment Air quality
Carbon non motorized 
vehicles
? 
USA Index
52
Enviroment
Quality and diverstiy of the 
natural environment
?
USA Index
53
Enviroment
Extent/Coverage of natural 
area
?
USA Index
54
Enviroment
Quality of functional 
ecological systems
?
USA Index
55
Economy
Healthy business and 
industry mix
?
USA Index
56
Economy
Growing community and 
individual wealth
?
USA Index
57
Economy
Equal opportunity and 
mobility in local and 
regional economy
?
USA Index
58
Economy
Reasonable tax and 
regulation costs
?
USA Index
59
Economy
Density and agglomeration 
of infrastructures
?
USA Index
60
Economy
Infrastructure assessment 
and investment
?
USA Index
61
Economy
Travel time and time to 
move goods
?
USA Index
62
Economy
Growth plans
?
USA Index
63
Economy
Access to capital and credit 
flows to industries
?
USA Index
64
Economy
Entrepreneurial support 
and new business starts
?
USA Index
65
Economy
Protection of assests, 
stable prices and stable 
economy
?
USA Index
==PAGE:105==
66
Economy
Access to quality education 
and training
?
USA Index
67
Economy
Jobs and unemployment
?
USA Index
68
Resource
Efficiency of 
urban water use
Percentage of total water 
consumed
%
Europe index
69
Resource
Energy 
efficiency of 
transport
Percentage of total energy 
consumed
 %
Europe index
70
Resource
Efficiency of 
residential 
energy use
Percentage of total energy 
consumed
 %
Europe index
71
Resource
Urban water 
availability
Total amount of water 
availability - Water quality 
index - % population with 
access to drinking water
No. - No. - %
Europe index
72
Enviroment Waste intensity
Volume of solid waste 
generated
?
Europe index
73
Enviroment Recycling
Recycling rate 
%
Europe index
74
Enviroment Urban land take ?
?
Europe index
75
Enviroment Green space 
access
Percentage of areas in 
relation to total land area - 
Percentage of trees in the 
city in relation to city area 
or population
% - %
Europe index
76
Enviroment Air quality NO2 
concentrations
Levels of NO2
mg/m3
Europe index
77
Enviroment Air quality PM10 
concentrations
Levels of Particulate Matter 
mg/m3
Europe index
78
Enviroment
Per capita CO2 
emissions from 
energy 
consumption
Total amount of GHG 
emissions per city and per 
capita
%
Europe index
79
Enviroment Land use 
efficiency
?
?
Europe index
80
Economy
Unemployment 
rate
Underemployment rate
%
Europe index
81
Economy
Registered cars
Number of cars per 1000 
habitants
No.
Europe index
82
Economy
GDP per capita
Annual GDP growth rate
?
Europe index
83
Economy
Economic 
growth
Net export growth rates
%
Europe index
==PAGE:106==
84
Social
Public transport 
network length
Transportation mode split - 
Average commute time
% - time
Europe index
85
Social
Compact city / 
complete 
neihgbourhood
Access to local services in 
short distance
No.
Europe index
86
Social
Violent crime
Crime rates
%
Europe index
87
Social
Housing use
Percentage of social 
housing
%
Europe index
88
Social
Housing type
Percentage of property 
types
%
Europe index
89
Social
Education
Number of schools
No.
Europe index
90
Social
Education
Adult literacy rate
%
Europe index
91
Social
Sanitation
Access to sanitary sewage 
infrastructure
?
Europe index
92
Social
Health
Percentage of population 
with access to health care 
services
%
Europe index
93
Social
Health
Mortality rate / life 
expectancy
% - No.
Europe index
94
Enviroment Ocupation and 
use of the land
Density of housing
houses/hectare
Spain Index
95
Enviroment Ocupation and 
use of the land
Living space per habitant
m2/hectare
Spain Index
96
Enviroment Urban space: Air 
quality
Air quality local
?
Spain Index
97
Enviroment Urban space: 
Noise confort
Percentage of habitants 
exposed to noise levels 
higher than dB
%
Spain Index
98
Enviroment
Urban space: 
Thermical 
confort
Temperature raised in last  
years
No.
Spain Index
99
Enviroment Green Urban 
space
Green areas structure per 
habitant
m2/habitant
Spain Index
100
Enviroment Green Urban 
space
Density of trees
No. trees/hectare
Spain Index
101
Enviroment Air quality
GHG emissions 
tons/person/day
Spain Index
102
Enviroment Waste 
management
Production of waste
tons/person/day
Spain Index
103
Enviroment Green Urban 
space
Distance to green areas
No.
Spain Index
104
Enviroment Waste 
management
Percentage of waste that is 
recycled
%
Spain Index
==PAGE:107==
105
Enviroment Water 
management
Percentage of waste water 
that is not treated
%
Spain Index
106
Resource
Energy use
Energy consumption 
?/hab/day
Spain Index
107
Resource
Water 
consumption
Water consumption per 
habitant per day
m3/hab/day
Spain Index
108
Resource
Energy use
Self energy production
?/hab/day
Spain Index
109
Economy
Private mobility
Number of cars per 1000 
habitants
No.
Spain Index
110
Economy
Private mobility
Number of bikes per 1000 
habitants
No.
Spain Index
111
Economy
Business and 
work
Number of business in the 
district
No.
Spain Index
112
Economy
Business and 
work
Percentage of business in 
sectors
%
Spain Index
113
Economy
Business and 
work
Rate of unemployment
%
Spain Index
114
Economy
Business and 
work
Rate of unemployment, 
gender and age
%
Spain Index
115
Economy
Business and 
work
Rate of unemployement, 
sector and education level
%
Spain Index
116
Social
Social cohesion: 
population
Population distribution by 
age per district
%
Spain Index
117
Social
Social cohesion: 
population
Density of population per 
district
No.
Spain Index
118
Social
Social cohesion: 
population
Rate of people in between 
0-30 years per district
%
Spain Index
119
Social
Social cohesion: 
population
Rate of people in between 
70-90 years per district
%
Spain Index
120
Social
Urban 
complexity
Distance to daily comercial 
activities
No.
Spain Index
121
Social
Urban 
complexity
Balance between housing 
and businesses
% 
business/housing
Spain Index
122
Social
Social cohesion: 
population
Population of inmigrants 
per district
No.
Spain Index
123
Social
Social cohesion: 
housing
Number of housing buildt 
per hectare and district
No./hectare
Spain Index
124
Social
Social cohesion: 
housing
Number of social housing 
per district
No.
Spain Index
125
Social
Social cohesion: 
housing
Number of applications for 
social housing
No./1.000 hab
Spain Index
126
Social
Social cohesion: 
housing
Average prize of m2 of 
housing in the last 5 years i 
the district
No.
Spain Index
==PAGE:108==
127
Social
Social cohesion: 
education
Distribution of studies level 
of population
%
Spain Index
128
Social
Social cohesion: 
education
Rate of undereducation
%
Spain Index
129
Social
Social cohesion: 
education
Number of public libraries 
in the district
No.
Spain Index
130
Social
Social cohesion: 
health
Number of hospital beds 
per 1000 hab.
No./hab.
Spain Index
131
Social
Social cohesion: 
health
Number of primary health 
doctors per 1000 hab.
No./hab.
Spain Index
132
Social
Social cohesion: 
wellbeing
Average monthly income 
per home
No.
Spain Index
133
Social
Social cohesion: 
wellbeing
Number of people in risk 
of poverty per 1000 hab
No./hab.
Spain Index
134
Social
Social cohesion: 
wellbeing
Number of gender 
violence per 1000 hab
No./hab.
Spain Index
135
Social
Social cohesion: 
wellbeing
Number of elder people 
per 1000 hab.
No./hab.
Spain Index
136
Social
Social cohesion: 
wellbeing
Number of people with 
public support per 1000 
hab
No./hab.
Spain Index
137
Social
Social cohesion: 
safety
Number of crimes per 
1000 hab
No./hab.
Spain Index
138
Social
Social cohesion: 
participation
Number of sugestions and 
claims
No.
Spain Index
139
Social
Social cohesion: 
participation
Number of consultations 
to information service
No.
Spain Index
140
Social
Social cohesion: 
culture
Historical, cultural and 
heritages areas
No.
Europe index
==PAGE:109==
Category
Subcategory
Indicator
Unit
Source
Subgrup
Economy
-
Healthy business and 
industry mix
?
USA Index
1. Business conditions
Economy
Business and work
Number of business in the 
district
No.
Spain Index
1. Business conditions
Economy
Business and work
Percentage of business in 
sectors
%
Spain Index
1. Business conditions
Economy
-
Service share in GDP
%
China Index
1. Economic growth
Economy
-
Growth plans
?
USA Index
1. Economic growth
Economy
GDP per capita
Annual GDP growth rate
?
Europe index
1. Economic growth
Economy
Economic growth
Net export growth rates
%
Europe index
1. Economic growth
Social
Social cohesion: 
wellbeing
Average monthly income per 
home
No.
Spain Index
1. Income rates
Economy
-
Disposable income per 
capita
Thousand RMB
China Index
1. Income rates
Social
-
Urban emploment number
Thousand
China Index
1. Unemployment rates
Economy
-
Jobs and unemployment
?
USA Index
1. Unemployment rates
Economy
Unemployment rate
Underemployment rate
%
Europe index
1. Unemployment rates
Economy
Business and work
Rate of unemployment, 
gender and age
%
Spain Index
1. Unemployment rates
Economy
Business and work
Rate of unemployment
%
Spain Index
1. Unemployment rates
Enviroment
Air quality
Air pollution composite - 
NO2
mg per cubic meter
China Index
2. Air quality/Emissions
Enviroment
Air quality
Air pollution composite - 
SO2
mg per cubic meter
China Index
2. Air quality/Emissions
Enviroment
Air quality
Air pollution composite - 
PM10
mg per cubic meter
China Index
2. Air quality/Emissions
Enviroment
Urban space: Air 
confort
Days of Air Quallity reached 
national standard in one year
%
China Index
2. Air quality/Emissions
Enviroment
Air quality NO2 
concentrations
Levels of NO2
mg/m3
Europe index
2. Air quality/Emissions
Enviroment
Air quality PM10 
concentrations
Levels of Particulate Matter 
mg/m3
Europe index
2. Air quality/Emissions
Enviroment
Urban space: Air 
quality
Air quality local
?
Spain Index
2. Air quality/Emissions
Enviroment
Air quality
GHG emissions 
tons/person/day
Spain Index
2. Air quality/Emissions
Enviroment
-
Climate change and natural 
disaster mitigation, 
adapatation and resilience
?
USA Index
2. Climatology
Enviroment
Urban space: Weather 
confort
Precipitation in the last 50 
years
No.
Spain Index
2. Climatology
Enviroment
Urban space: 
Thermical confort
Temperature raised in last 50 
years
No.
Spain Index
2. Climatology
Enviroment
-
Coverage of public green 
space in city built area
%
China Index
2. Green spaces
Enviroment
-
Quality and diverstiy of the 
natural environment
?
USA Index
2. Green spaces
Enviroment
Green space access
Percentage of areas in 
relation to total land area - 
Percentage of trees in the 
city in relation to city area or 
population
% - %
Europe index
2. Green spaces
Enviroment
Green Urban space
Green areas structure per 
habitant
m2/habitant
Spain Index
2. Green spaces
Enviroment
Efficient land use
?
USA Index
2. Land use
Enviroment
Ocupation and use of 
the land
Density of housing
houses/hectare
Spain Index
2. Land use
Enviroment
Ocupation and use of 
the land
Living space per habitant
m2/hectare
Spain Index
2. Land use
Enviroment
-
Waste water treatment rate
%
China Index
2. Water/Waste Management
Enviroment
-
Household waste harmless 
treatment rate
%
China Index
2. Water/Waste Management
SUBGROUP DEFINED BY THE INDICATORS
==PAGE:110==
Enviroment
-
Waste / pollution 
management
?
USA Index
2. Water/Waste Management
Enviroment
Waste intensity
Volume of solid waste 
generated
?
Europe index
2. Water/Waste Management
Enviroment
Recycling
Recycling rate 
%
Europe index
2. Water/Waste Management
Enviroment
Waste management
Production of waste
tons/person/day
Spain Index
2. Water/Waste Management
Enviroment
Waste management
Percentage of waste that is 
recycled
%
Spain Index
2. Water/Waste Management
Enviroment
Water management
Percentage of waste water 
that is not treated
%
Spain Index
2. Water/Waste Management
Resource
-
Energy consumption per unit 
GDP
SCE/thousand RMB
China Index
3. Energy Consumption
Resource
Water consumption
Coverage of public water 
supply
%
China Index
3. Energy Consumption
Resource
Efficiency of 
residential energy use
Percentage of total energy 
consumed
 %
Europe index
3. Energy Consumption
Resource
Energy use
Energy consumption per 
habitant per day 
?/hab/day
Spain Index
3. Energy Consumption
Resource
-
Total water supply per urban 
capita
Cubic meter per 
RMB
China Index
3. Water Consumption
Resource
Efficiency of urban 
water use
Percentage of total water 
consumed
%
Europe index
3. Water Consumption
Resource
Urban water 
availability
Total amount of water 
availability - Water quality 
index - % population with 
access to drinking water
No. - No. - %
Europe index
3. Water Consumption
Resource
Water consumption
Water consumption per 
habitant per day
m3/hab/day
Spain Index
3. Water Consumption
Social
Urban complexity
Balance between housing 
and businesses
% business/housing
Spain Index
4. Compact city
Social
-
Location choice / Work 
proximity
?
USA Index
4. Compact city
Social
-
Unit size / Overcrowding
?
USA Index
4. Compact city
Social
-
Travel time to work
?
USA Index
4. Compact city
Social
Compact city / 
complete 
neihgbourhood
Access to local services in 
short distance
No.
Europe index
4. Compact city
Social
Urban complexity
Distance to daily comercial 
activities
No.
Spain Index
4. Compact city
Social
-
High and middel school 
students share in population 
(0-24 years)
%
China Index
4. Education
Social
Education
Number of schools
No.
Europe index
4. Education
Social
Education
Adult literacy rate
%
Europe index
4. Education
Social
Social cohesion: 
education
Rate of undereducation
%
Spain Index
4. Education
Social
Social cohesion: 
education
Number of public libraries in 
the district
No.
Spain Index
4. Education
Social
-
Number of doctors per 
capita
Per thousand peron
China Index
4. Health
Social
-
Urban population with health 
care insurance
Person
China Index
4. Health
Social
Public health service
?
USA Index
4. Health
Social
Social cohesion: 
health
Number of hospital beds per 
1000 hab.
No./hab.
Spain Index
4. Health
Social
Social cohesion: 
health
Number of primary health 
doctors per 1000 hab.
No./hab.
Spain Index
4. Health
Social
-
Subsidies for Affordable 
Housing
?
USA Index
4. Housing
Social
-
Access to Affordable 
Housing
?
USA Index
4. Housing
Social
Housing use
Percentage of social housing
%
Europe index
4. Housing
==PAGE:111==
Social
Social cohesion: 
housing
Number of housing buildt 
per hectare and district
No./hectare
Spain Index
4. Housing
Social
Social cohesion: 
housing
Number of social housing 
per district
No.
Spain Index
4. Housing
Social
Social cohesion: 
housing
Number of applications for 
social housing
No./1.000 hab
Spain Index
4. Housing
Social
Social cohesion: 
housing
Average prize of m2 of 
housing in the last 5 years i 
the district
No.
Spain Index
4. Housing
Social
-
Place culture
?
USA Index
4. Public space
Social
-
Proximity to Public green 
areas
?
USA Index
4. Public space
Social
-
Condition/servicies of green 
areas
?
USA Index
4. Public space
Social
Social cohesion: 
culture
Historical, cultural and 
heritages areas
No.
Europe index
4. Public space
Social
Crime protection service
?
USA Index
4. Social condition
Social
Violent crime
Crime rates
%
Europe index
4. Social condition
Social
Social cohesion: 
wellbeing
Number of gender violence 
per 1000 hab
No./hab.
Spain Index
4. Social condition
Enviroment
-
Urban population density in 
city district
Persons per sq.km
China Index
4. Social condition
Social
-
Urban population with 
pension
Person
China Index
4. Social condition
Social
Social cohesion: 
population
Population of inmigrants per 
district
No.
Spain Index
4. Social condition
Social
Social cohesion: 
population
Rate of people in between 0-
30 years per district
%
Spain Index
4. Social condition
Social
Social cohesion: 
population
Rate of people in between 70-
90 years per district
%
Spain Index
4. Social condition
Social
Social cohesion: 
population
Density of population per 
district
No.
Spain Index
4. Social condition
Social
Social cohesion: 
wellbeing
Number of people in risk of 
poverty per 1000 hab
No./hab.
Spain Index
4. Social condition
Social
Social cohesion: 
wellbeing
Number of elder people per 
1000 hab.
No./hab.
Spain Index
4. Social condition
Social
Social cohesion: 
wellbeing
Number of people with 
public support per 1000 hab
No./hab.
Spain Index
4. Social condition
==PAGE:112==
Factor's category
Factors
Subgroup
Definition
Information on building age
Information on facilities of 
the building
Information in case of the 
building is occupied
Information on structural 
age, condition, damaged, 
service life
Information on materials 
age, condition, defects and 
service life
Changes in the structure
Services which are installed 
on the building, electricity, 
water…
-
Business conditions
Information on business 
diversity and stability
Job availability
Unemployment rates
Information on the 
availability of jobs and the 
working population.
Economic growth
Information on the 
economic growth of the city
Income rates
Information on the 
purchasing power of 
residents in the 
neighbourhood
Climate conditions
Information on weather 
conditions in the city
Air quality and emissions
Information on the air 
quality of the city
Building structure
Economic 
Major rebuildings
Service supply
Economic Power
Climate conditions
Construction year
Previous building functions
Current building functions
Conditions of the structure
Conditions of the materials
FACTORS
==PAGE:113==
Green spaces
Information on the amount 
of green space available in 
the area
Use land
Information on the 
distribution of land 
between buildings, green 
areas, streets, etc.
-
Waste/water management
Information on the city's 
waste and water treatment 
process
Compact city
Information on the ease of 
access to basic needs within 
a 30-40 minutes distance
Public spaces
Information on the 
availability of public, green 
or cultural-historical areas
Health
Information on access to 
health systems and 
infrastructure
Education
Information on illiteracy 
rates and access to 
education systems and 
infrastructures
Housing
Information on applications 
for and access to social 
housing
Living conditons
Social conditions
Information on the 
characteristics of the 
population, including age, 
race, density or quality of 
life.
Energy consumption
Consumption of energy in 
the neighbourhood
Water consumption
Consumption of water in 
the neighbourhood
-
Facilities of the area
Enviroment
Social
Resources
Green urban areas
==PAGE:114==
Category Subcategory
Nº
Indicator
C1. Data representativeness
C2. Data accesibility
C3. Baseline definition
Definition
Unit
Source
Baseline
Cases
Age
Business diversity
2
Percentage of business 
in economic and size 
sectors
The indicator provides clear view of 
the main activitiy of the area 
covering all the types of economical 
sectors
Data of number of business is 
accesible
The baseline alows to define the 
predominate economic activity 
and allow to balance it with 
other activities
Economic activitiy of the 
neighbourhood  is defined 
by the main activity, which 
depends on the economic 
sector and size of the 
business
%
· Global indicators
The economic activity of 
the area is defined by the 
sector which has a 
number of business 
bigger than 40% 
In case of not having any of the 5 sectors (Natural 
resources, Agriculture, Industry, Comercial and 
Services) over 40% means that the net of 
businesses is pretty diversed  
Unemployment
3
Percentage of 
unemployment in 
population in age 
intervals
The indicator provides information 
of which group has more difficulties 
to find a job
Easy to access to the informaiton of 
unemployment by districts
The baseline allows to define the 
age interval which is more 
affected by the unemployment
Defines the amount of 
people which does not 
have a job in the area
%
· Global indicators
· Trends of 
unemployment in the 
last 5 years in the 
country
The baseline defines the 
more affected age interval 
and if the unemployment 
is higher or smaller than 
the city rate 
The age intervals are divided by age ranges: 
18-25, 25-35, 35-45, 45-55, 55-65, 65-70
Waste 
management
7
Percentage of waste that 
is placed on landfields, 
reclycled, burnt
The indicator provides an overview 
of the city or countries conditions
The city hall or country polices 
implemented allow to know the data
The baseline allows to define the 
amount of waste that is treated 
and has a benifit in the society 
and environment 
Defines the system and 
policies for recyling 
allowing to implement 
other services
%
· Global indicators
· 
The baseline defines if the 
municipalities have 
enough resources to 
recycle the waste.  It 
depends on which sector is 
the higher
If the landfills sector is the highest percentage  
there is not an efficient system.
If the landfills is not the highest there are three 
cases:
1. Incineration without energy recovery is the 
highest, not efficient system
2. Incineration with energy recovery is the highest, 
efficient system
3. Recycling is the highest, efficient system
Determined by current 
country/regional 
regulations
Structural
Structural situation of the 
building
Structural evaluation
Description
· Building safety code 
(Spain)
· Eurocodes (Europe)
· Guide for Structural 
Rehabilitation of 
Heritage Buildings
Functions of the 
building
Structural 
conditions
Economy
Enviroment
Economic growth 
of the population
Climate situation 
of the city
Use of public 
places in relation 
with private
The data can be accesible by checking 
the plans and project infomration. In 
case of not having this information a 
study of the building can be carried on 
to get this data. This type of study is 
stablized by country laws.
The baseline is set by the 
country building law which 
states criteria for buildings.
The indicator provides an overview 
on the salary gap and the income 
value
Easy to access to information about 
population income, in a city or country 
level. The Gini coefficient is based on 
country data.
The baseline allows to define the 
distribution of income in the 
country
1
4
5
6
The indicator provides information 
about the building, covering all the 
factors stated
Median salary and gini 
coefficient of the country
Temperature and 
precipitations report over 
the last 50 years
Percentage of green 
areas, buildings, roads, 
pedestrian's streets
The indicator provides a clear 
overview of the organization of the 
city/neigbourhood
The urban law of the city allows to find 
the m2 of this areas
The baseline allows to define the 
availability of urban spaces for 
pedestrians in the city 
The indicator provides an 
understanding on what is the 
climatology situation of the city
Cimatology data have been recorded 
over the last decades at any areas
The baseline allows to define the 
considerable change on 
climatoglogy which can develop 
future vulnerability in the city
Defines the m2 of each 
category allowing to 
understand the ratio 
between spaces
· Global indicators
· 
Limit within which the city 
may experience severe 
weather events.
· Global indicators
· 
The baseline defines the 
point in which the lack of 
trees can be harmful for 
society health. The point 
is 15 m2 of urban green 
areas (WHO)
ºC; mm
%
INDICATORS
Severe weather events are: 
 floodings
heat waves
cold waves
rise up of the sea level
The recomendation is to improve the city 
situation and create urban green spaces which 
take the same ratio of land as the roads.
Defines the economic 
situation of the 
city/country in terms of 
salary gap and income
coef. Nº
· Personal research
High coefficient big gap.
Low coefficient small gap
Median income does not 
have any baseline
Defines the changes on 
climatology to ensure that 
the solution can adjust the 
climate change
==PAGE:115==
Social housing 
needs
9
Percentage of accepted 
applications of social 
housing depending on 
the house availability
Represents the current problem of 
social housing
The number of applications and the 
number of current social housing is 
accesible
The baseline is not specifically 
set. The indicator provides an 
overview of the needs for a 
social housing and the capacity 
that the goverment has working
Defines the needs for 
social housing depending 
on the society needs
% 
(Description)
· Global indicators
Description/
Informative
Distribution of 
population
10
Density of population 
per sq.km divided in age 
ranges
Represents the density of 
population in the district and also 
provides an overview of the density 
in age range
The data are accesible by the stadistics 
that each country publishes. Special 
cases as people unregisted can vary 
the results 
The baseline is not specifically 
set. The indicator provides an 
overview of the density and 
population age which allow to 
improve the diversity
Defines the diversity and 
the density of population 
in the area
habitants
/sq.km
(Description)
· Global indicators
Description/
Informative
8
Production rates
11
Social
Energy
Fundamental 
human needs
Defines the current 
situation of the 
neighbourhood in 
different aspects like 
Safety / Crime, Education, 
Health, Public Spaces & 
Accesibility
Renewable energy 
production from the 
total of energy 
production
Represents the production of 
energy from renewable sources 
over the full production of energy
Easy data due to is realised by country 
level
The baseline defines if the there 
is possibilites to improve 
sustainability by adding self 
production
Defines the level of green 
eneergy that is produced 
in the country/city
%
· Global indiactors
The baseline defines the 
level of renewable energy 
that the country produces. 
A minimun of 50% should 
be recommended
%
(Description)
· Global indicators
The baseline is set by the 
calculation of facilities per 
100.000 inhabitants in the 
city
The fundamental needs represented in the 
indicator are Safety / Crime, Education, Health 
and Accesibility in the area.
Diagram representing 
the level of fundamental 
needs that the 
neighbourhood has
The indicator provides an overview 
of the current situation of the 
neighbourhood 
The different levels are accessible by 
published data
The baseline is not specifically 
set. The indicator provides an 
overview of the situation that is 
currentlly in the neigbourhood
==PAGE:116==
108
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:117==
D
Study cases
Case I: 1068 Mission St, San Francisco
Location map
Figure D.1: Location of Case I; source: Google Maps
Figure D.2: Location of Case I; source: Google Maps
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
109
==PAGE:118==
Site map
Figure D.3: Site studied in Case I; source: Google Maps
Figure D.4: Site studied in Case I; source: Google Maps
Structural analysis pictures
110
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:119==
Figure D.5: Pictures of building in Case I; source: Google Maps
Figure D.6: Pictures of building in Case I; source: Google Maps
Figure D.7: Pictures of building in Case I; source: Google Maps
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
111
==PAGE:120==
Figure D.8: Pictures of building in Case I; source: Google Maps
Figure D.9: Pictures of building in Case I; source: Google Maps
Figure D.10: Pictures of building in Case I; source: Google Maps
112
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:121==
Figure D.11: Pictures of building in Case I; source: Google Maps
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
113
==PAGE:122==
15 minutes City analysis pictures
Figure D.12: 15 minutes City walking; source: Travel Time Map [45]
Figure D.13: 10 minutes City cycling; source: Travel Time Map [45]
114
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:123==
Figure D.14: 10 minutes City public transport; source: Travel Time Map [45]
Figure D.15: 10 minutes City car; source: Travel Time Map [45]
Districts and Areas
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
115
==PAGE:124==
Figure D.16: Area and zip codes used during this case; source [46]
Figure D.17: Neighborhoods; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
116
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:125==
Figure D.18: Supervisor districts in San Francisco; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
Figure D.19: Police districts; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
117
==PAGE:126==
2. Business diversity
Figure D.20: Division of active businesses by sectors; source Open Data San Francisco
[47]
Figure D.21: Division of active businesses by sectors; source Open Data San Francisco
[47]
118
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:127==
Figure D.22: Division of active businesses by sectors; source Open Data San Francisco
[47]
3. Unemployment
Figure D.23: Unemployment divided by age intervals. Mean unemployment is 5.4 %;
source County Office [48]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
119
==PAGE:128==
Figure D.24: Unemployment divided by age intervals. Mean unemployment is 5.4 %;
source County Office [48]
5. Climate situation of the city
120
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:129==
Figure D.25: Maximum temperature and total precipitation of each year from 1940 to 2020;
source County Office [48] and Climate Stations [50]
Figure D.26: Maximum temperature and total precipitation of each year from 1940 to 2020;
source County Office [48] and Climate Stations [50]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
121
==PAGE:130==
Figure D.27: Maximum temperature and total precipitation of each year from 1940 to 2020;
source County Office [48] and Climate Stations [50]
Figure D.28: Temperature in San Francisco in the last 80 years; source Current Results
[49]
122
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:131==
Figure D.29: Precipitations in San Francisco in the last 80 years; source Climate Stations
[50]
6. Public spaces in relation with private places
Figure D.30: Table with the percentage of land use in the area of South Market and Ten­
derloin; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
123
==PAGE:132==
Figure D.31: Percentage of Land use in the area of South Market and Tenderloin; source
Open Data San Francisco [47]
7. Waste Management
Figure D.32: Data of waste management; source SF Environment [51]
124
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:133==
Figure D.33: Amount of waste managed by the company Norcal; source SF Environment
[51]
Figure D.34: Amount of waste managed by the program Fantastic 3 ; source SF Environ­
ment [51]
8. Fundamental Human Needs
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
125
==PAGE:134==
Figure D.35: Facilities per inhabitants of the neighborhood compared with the facilities
per 100.000 inhabitants of the city; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
126
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:135==
Figure D.36: Facilities per inhabitants of the neighborhood compared with the facilities
per 100.000 inhabitants of the city; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
9. Social Housing Needs
Figure D.37: Applications to social housing and available housing in the city and the
neighborhood; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
127
==PAGE:136==
Figure D.38: Applications to social housing and available housing in the city and the
neighborhood; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
10. Distribution of Population
128
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:137==
Figure D.39: Distribution of population in the Zip­codes 94102 and 94103 divided by age
range; source United States Zip­Codes [52]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
129
==PAGE:138==
Figure D.40: Distribution of population in the Zip­codes 94102 and 94103 divided by age
range. Red area: older than 45 years. Blue area: younger than 45 years; source United
States Zip­Codes [52]
11. Production Rates
130
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:139==
Figure D.41: Distribution of energy production in the County of San Francisco; source
Energy California Government [53]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
131
==PAGE:140==
Figure D.42: Distribution of energy production in the County of San Francisco; source
Energy California Government [53]
132
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:141==
Case II: 375, 32nd Avenue, San Francisco
Location map
Figure D.43: Location of Case II; source: Google Maps
Figure D.44: Location of Case II; source: Google Maps
Site map
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
133
==PAGE:142==
Figure D.45: Site studied in Case II; source: Google Maps
Figure D.46: Site studied in Case II; source: Google Maps
Structural analysis pictures
134
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:143==
Figure D.47: Pictures of building in Case II, Picture from December 2020; source: Google
Maps
Figure D.48: Pictures of building in Case II, Picture from May 2008; source: Google Maps
Figure D.49: Pictures of building in Case II, Picture from May 2008; source: Google Maps
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
135
==PAGE:144==
Figure D.50: Pictures of building in Case II, Picture from May 2008; source: Google Maps
Figure D.51: Pictures of building in Case II, Picture from May 2008; source: Google Maps
136
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:145==
15 minutes City analysis pictures
Figure D.52: 15 minutes City walking; source: Travel Time Map [45]
Figure D.53: 10 minutes City cycling; source: Travel Time Map [45]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
137
==PAGE:146==
Figure D.54: 10 minutes City public transport; source: Travel Time Map [45]
Figure D.55: 10 minutes City car; source: Travel Time Map [45]
Districts and Areas
138
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:147==
Figure D.56: Area and zip codes used during this case; source [46]
Figure D.57: Neighborhoods; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
139
==PAGE:148==
Figure D.58: Supervisor districts in San Francisco; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
Figure D.59: Police districts; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
2. Business diversity
140
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:149==
Figure D.60: Division of active businesses by sectors; source Open Data San Francisco
[47]
Figure D.61: Division of active businesses by sectors; source Open Data San Francisco
[47]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
141
==PAGE:150==
Figure D.62: Division of active businesses by sectors; source Open Data San Francisco
[47]
6. Public spaces in relation with private places
Figure D.63: Table with the percentage of land use in the area of South Market and Ten­
derloin; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
142
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:151==
Figure D.64: Percentage of Land use in the area of South Market and Tenderloin; source
Open Data San Francisco [47]
8. Fundamental Human Needs
Figure D.65: Facilities per inhabitants of the neighborhood compared with the facilities
per 100.000 inhabitants of the city; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
143
==PAGE:152==
Figure D.66: Facilities per inhabitants of the neighborhood compared with the facilities
per 100.000 inhabitants of the city; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
9. Social Housing Needs
Figure D.67: Applications to social housing and available housing in the city and the
neighborhood; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
144
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:153==
Figure D.68: Applications to social housing and available housing in the city and the
neighborhood; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
10. Distribution of Population
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
145
==PAGE:154==
Figure D.69: Distribution of population in the Zip­codes 94121 divided by age range;
source United States Zip­Codes [52]
146
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:155==
Figure D.70: Distribution of population in the Zip­codes 94121 divided by age range. Red
area: older than 45 years. Blue area: younger than 45 years; source United States Zip­
Codes [52]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
147
==PAGE:156==
Case III: 160, Font Boulevard, San Francisco
Location map
Figure D.71: Location of Case III; source: Google Maps
Figure D.72: Location of Case III; source: Google Maps
148
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:157==
Site map
Figure D.73: Site studied in Case III; source: Google Maps
Figure D.74: Site studied in Case III; source: Google Maps
Structural analysis pictures
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
149
==PAGE:158==
Figure D.75: Pictures of building in Case III, Picture from February 2021; source: Google
Maps
Figure D.76: Pictures of building in Case III, Picture from February 2021; source: Google
Maps
150
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:159==
Figure D.77: Pictures of building in Case III, Picture from May 2008; source: Google Maps
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
151
==PAGE:160==
Figure D.78: Pictures of building in Case III, Picture from February 2021; source: Google
Maps
152
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:161==
15 minutes City analysis pictures
Figure D.79: 15 minutes City walking; source: Travel Time Map [45]
Figure D.80: 10 minutes City cycling; source: Travel Time Map [45]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
153
==PAGE:162==
Figure D.81: 10 minutes City public transport; source: Travel Time Map [45]
Figure D.82: 10 minutes City car; source: Travel Time Map [45]
Districts and Areas
154
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:163==
Figure D.83: Area and zip codes used during this case; source [46]
Figure D.84: Neighborhoods; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
155
==PAGE:164==
Figure D.85: Supervisor districts in San Francisco; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
Figure D.86: Police districts; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
2. Business diversity
156
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:165==
Figure D.87: Division of active businesses by sectors; source Open Data San Francisco
[47]
Figure D.88: Division of active businesses by sectors; source Open Data San Francisco
[47]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
157
==PAGE:166==
Figure D.89: Division of active businesses by sectors; source Open Data San Francisco
[47]
6. Public spaces in relation with private places
Figure D.90: Table with the percentage of land use in the area of South Market and Ten­
derloin; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
158
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:167==
Figure D.91: Percentage of Land use in the area of South Market and Tenderloin; source
Open Data San Francisco [47]
8. Fundamental Human Needs
Figure D.92: Facilities per inhabitants of the neighborhood compared with the facilities
per 100.000 inhabitants of the city; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
159
==PAGE:168==
Figure D.93: Facilities per inhabitants of the neighborhood compared with the facilities
per 100.000 inhabitants of the city; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
9. Social Housing Needs
Figure D.94: Applications to social housing and available housing in the city and the
neighborhood; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
160
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:169==
Figure D.95: Applications to social housing and available housing in the city and the
neighborhood; source Open Data San Francisco [47]
10. Distribution of Population
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
161
==PAGE:170==
Figure D.96: Distribution of population in the Zip­codes 94132 divided by age range;
source United States Zip­Codes [52]
162
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
==PAGE:171==
Figure D.97: Distribution of population in the Zip­codes 94132 divided by age range. Red
area: older than 45 years. Blue area: younger than 45 years; source United States Zip­
Codes [52]
Indicators for sustainable development
of abandoned or not used buildings
163
==PAGE:172==
The problem of population growth in cities is one of the biggest challenges humanity will face in
the next 25 years. This problem is since the world’s population has a longer life expectancy than
ever before and migratory movements to large cities are increasing. In addition, this situation is
compounded by the lack of housing in large cities. In order to tackle this problem, effective solutions
are needed, but their main objective is to promote sustainability. Large cities have to be sustainable
centres if we want to provide a promising future for future generations.
Councils are now tending to build new urban areas to accommodate the demand for housing, but
there are also other options such as reusing and renovating old buildings. In this project, an index of
indicators will be developed to serve as a tool to define what kind of solutions should be implemented
in abandoned buildings. This index aims to evaluate and assess the conditions of the area where
the building is located and determine the population’s needs living in that area.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
