==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Sizing hybrid power plants under
round-the-clock tender compliance
in India
Elisabeth Andreae
Supervisors:
Kai Heussen, Senior Researcher at DTU Electrical Engineering
Tue Vissing Jensen, Lead Professional in Hybrid Plant Modelling at Vestas
Daniel Esteban Morales Bondy, Specialist in Hybrid Plant Modelling at Vestas
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Center for Electric Power and Energy
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej
Building 325
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Electrical
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, M.Sc. Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the area of operations
research.
Kongens Lyngby
August 15, 2021
Elisabeth Andreae
s165157
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The need for electricity is growing in India as the country becomes wealthier and
people can afford new electrical appliances, and the electrification of transportation
and other industries progresses. India has an ambitious goal to provide affordable
and sustainable power for all, around-the-clock. At the same time, the country
remains heavily dependent on coal for electricity generation. Renewables play a
fundamental role in achieving IndiaРђЎs energy and climate objectives. The aim is
to quadruple renewable electricity capacity by 2030. To accelerate the transition,
India is using power auctions, where the government issues a call for tenders to
install a certain capacity of renewable energy. Such a tendering process provides
the context for this thesis.
The thesis proposes a tool to optimise a power producerРђЎs bid for a tariff-based
competitive bidding process within tender guidelines issued by the Indian govern-
ment. The bid involves the supply of round-the-clock power from a grid-connected
hybrid power plant where wind and solar power generation are complemented with
coal-fired balancing power.
The thesis uses operations research methods to design an investment optimisa-
tion model for a hybrid power system that complies with specific tender criteria.
The following tender criteria are incorporated: minimum 250 MW bid capacity,
minimum 85% annual availability of power, and at least 51% of annual power
generated from renewable energy sources. A shortfall penalty on not meeting the
tender requirements is set at 400% of the power tariff.
The results of the model show that the invitation to tender is successful in
incentivising investment in renewable power instead of conventional thermal coal
power. The inclusion of compliance increases the share of renewable power capacity
by a factor of 1,5 in the investment optimisation.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Resum├Е
Behovet for elektricitet i Indien stiger i takt med, at velstanden vokser og be-
folkningen f├Цr r├Цd til nye elektriske apparater og elektrificering af industrien skrider
fremad.
Et element i IndienРђЎs energi- og klimam├Цl er at levere overkommelig
og b├дredygtig str├Иm til alle - d├Иgnet rundt.
Vedvarende energi vil spille en
grundl├дggende rolle for at n├Ц dette m├Цl. M├Цlet er at firedoble vedvarende elek-
tricitetskapaciteten inden 2030. For at fremskynde overgangen fra kul, som landet
stadig er st├дrkt afh├дngig af, bruger Indien kraftauktioner, hvor regeringen tilskyn-
der bud for installering af en vis kapacitet af elektricitet baseret p├Ц vedvarende
energi. En s├Цdan udbudsproces danner rammen for dette speciale.
Specialet foresl├Цr et v├дrkt├Иj til at optimere en kraftproducents bud i en tarif-
baseret udbudsproces. Den indiske regering udsteder retningslinjer for udbuddet.
Det skal indeholde str├Иm fra et netforbundet hybridkraftv├дrk d├Иgnet rundt. Sol-
og vindenergi er de prim├дre kilder komplementeret med kul som balanceringskraft.
Specialet anvender metoder fra operationsanalyse til at formulere en invester-
ingsmodel for det specifikke udbud, som indeholder f├Иlgende kriterier: et minimum
250 MW bud p├Ц kapacitet, minimum 85% ├Цrlig tilg├дngelighed til str├Иm, og mindst
51% af den ├Цrlige str├Иm fra vedvarende kilder. S├Цfremt producenten ikke kan op-
fylde kriterierne, bliver der sat en straf p├Ц 400% af tariffen.
Resultaterne af investeringsmodellen viser, at udbuddet lykkes ved at tilskynde
investering i vedvarende energi i stedet for kulkraft. Inddragelsen af udbudskri-
terierne ├Иger andelen af vedvarende elkapacitet med en faktor af 1,5 i investering-
soptimeringen.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Senior Researcher Kai Heussen, Dr. Tue
Vissing Jensen and Dr. Daniel Esteban Morales Bondy for their support and guid-
ance in bringing this thesis to completion. It has been an exciting and rewarding
experience to work with such skilled professionals. For his valuable help in using
the supercomputer, I would like to thank PhD student Jochen Bernhard Stiasny.
I also want to express my gratitude to my friends Julian and Markus for their help
when I needed it. I thank my family for always supporting me during my studies
and giving me endless love and guiding me to my best achievements. To Heini,
thank you for proofreading. Last but foremost, thank you Jonas for making me
laugh every day.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Glossary
AC alternating current. 8
ATB Annual Technology Baseline. 40, 41
BCR benefit cost ratio. 52, 56, 73
CCS carbon capture and storage. 23
CO2 carbon dioxide. 25, 59РђЊ61, 65, 67, 69, 71, 74
CVaR conditional value at risk. 32, 33
DC direct current. 7, 8
DoD depth of discharge. 23
ESS energy storage system. 6
HOMER Hybrid Optimization of Multiple Energy Resources. 16
ICP internal carbon pricing. 61
IEA International Energy Agency. 9, 10, 24
IEX Indian Energy Exchange Limited. 11
IRR internal rate of return. 52, 56, 73
ISTS Inter State Transmission System. 23
LCOE levelised cost of energy/electricity. 10, 11, 16, 53, 57, 58, 63, 64, 67, 70РђЊ75
Li-ion Lithium-ion. 9, 23
LPSP loss of power supply probability. 16
==PAGE:12==
x
Glossary
MNRE Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. 5, 14
MoP Ministry of Power. 5
NEA Nuclear Energy Agency. 10
NEP National Electricity Policy. 11
NPV Net Present Value. 19, 21, 25, 33, 40, 44, 45, 52, 56, 57, 64РђЊ66, 69, 71, 73,
74, 81
NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory. 17, 24, 40, 57, 58
NTPC National Thermal Power Corporation. 14
PPA power purchase agreement. 6, 11, 23РђЊ25, 28, 29, 35, 44, 47, 51РђЊ53, 55, 56,
61, 67, 70, 71, 77, 79
PV photovoltaic. 6РђЊ8, 10, 11, 13РђЊ16, 19, 22, 25, 27, 37РђЊ41, 46, 51, 57, 67, 78
REopt Renewable Energy Integration and Optimization. 17
RfS request for selection. 5
RLDC Regional Load Dispatch Centre. 29
RTC round-the-clock. 5, 19
SECI Solar Energy Corporation of India. 2, 5, 6, 14, 19, 44, 57
SoC state of charge. 23
VALCOE value adjusted LCOE. 10
VRE variable renewable energy. 7
WACC weighted average cost of both debt and equity capital. 44, 66
WGS84 world geodetic system. 4
YTD year to date. 41
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
2.1
Main components of a hybrid power plant design optimisation problem
formulation. Adapted from [14]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1
Components of sizing optimisation of hybrid power plant under tender
conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1
Example of scenario combination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1
Hourly capacity factors shown as a monthly distribution for year 2000 .
38
5.2
Monthly variation in coal prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
2019 electricity prices and coal prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1
Sample production profiles of hybrid power plant units in operational
model simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2
Sample battery behaviour and total production profile in operational
model simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3
Effect of varying bid size on total power production and power availabil-
ity shortfalls
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.4
Effect of varying renewable capacity on total power production by source 49
6.5
Effect of varying coal capacity on total power production and power
availability shortfalls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.6
Effect of varying battery power and energy capacity on total power pro-
duction by source
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.7
Sample production profiles of hybrid power plant units in simulation of
investment model without tender compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.8
Total power production in relation to power requirement without tender
compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.9
Penalty costs and power availability shortfalls without tender compliance 53
6.10 Sample production profiles of hybrid power plant units in simulation of
investment model with tender compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.11 Total power production in relation to tender requirement with tender
compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:14==
xii
List of Figures
6.12 Renewable energy share and power availability shortfalls under tender
compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.13 Annual costs and revenues under tender compliance . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.14 Total power production in relation to required power over two sample
timespans for investment models with and without tender compliance
(compl. = model with tender compliance)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.15 Comparison of annual costs and revenues for investment models with
and without tender compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.16 CO2 emissions over 30 years for investment models with and without
tender compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.17 Effect of change in power requirement on results of model without tender
compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.18 Effect of change in battery cost on results of model without tender com-
pliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.19 Effect of adjusted battery cost at 0,25 of original for model without
tender compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.20 Effect of scaled-down battery cost on energy mix for model without
tender compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.21 Effect of introduction of CO2 price on results of model with tender com-
pliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.22 Effect of discount rate on results of model with tender compliance . . .
66
6.23 Effect of average annual utilisation e№гђiciency (power availability) on re-
sults of model with tender compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.24 Effect of average annual power availability shortfall penalty on results
of model with tender compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.25 Effect of PPA tariff on results of model with tender compliance
. . . .
72
7.1
Comparison of deterministic and stochastic models РђЊ two scenarios
. .
74
7.2
Comparison of deterministic and stochastic investment models РђЊ three
scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7.3
CO2 emissions for deterministic and stochastic models
. . . . . . . . .
75
==PAGE:15==
List of Tables
5.1
Technical specifications of production technologies . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Numerical economic values for applied production technologies . . . . .
42
6.1
Installed capacities of hybrid power plant units for operational model .
46
6.2
Values tested for sensitivity analysis of economic dispatch model
. . .
48
6.3
Comparison of key simulation results of investment models with and
without tender compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.4
Capex shares of hybrid power plant units for investment models with
and without tender compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.5
CO2 cost development for sensitivity analysis under tender compliance
65
6.6
Effect of power availability shortfall penalty level on NPV and penalty
value for model with tender compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.7
Effect of PPA tariff on NPV and penalty value for model with tender
compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.1
Sets of operating years for simulation with two scenarios . . . . . . . .
73
7.2
Sets of operating years for simulation with three scenarios
. . . . . . .
74
==PAGE:16==
xiv
==PAGE:17==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
Resum├Е
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Glossary
x
List of Figures
xi
List of Tables
xiii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
IndiaРђЎs energy transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Tender compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research question and thesis objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
5
2.1
Tender conditions for hybrid power project in India . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Power generation technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Power production and trade in India
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Hybrid power plants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Hybrid power plant modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Deterministic model of the hybrid power plant
19
3.1
Economic dispatch model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Investment model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Extension with tender compliance criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Stochastic model
31
4.1
Two-stage stochastic program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:18==
xvi
Contents
4.2
Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Data inputs
37
5.1
Wind and solar data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Technical parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Cost estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Revenue estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.5
Discount rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Results of deterministic model
45
6.1
Functionality of economic dispatch model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Plant sizing without tender compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3
Plant sizing with tender compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.4
Comparison of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.5
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7
Results of stochastic model
73
8
Discussion
77
9
Conclusion
81
References
83
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Renewable energy sources that reduce the use of fossil fuels in power generation
are of high priority in the transition to a climate-neutral society. The share of
renewables in the global electricity production reached 29% in 2020 [28]. By 2025,
renewables are projected to make up one third of the global electricity output,
surpassing coal-fired power generation. Growing concern over climate change, con-
tinued cost declines and sustained support policies are driving the growth in re-
newable power [30]. India, which is the worldРђЎs third-largest energy consuming
country and the third-largest carbon emitter, is a case in point. To meet the in-
crease in electricity demand over the next twenty years, India will need to add a
power system that corresponds in size to the EUРђЎs current power system. Tack-
ling the intertwined challenges of growing electricity demand, ambitious climate
targets and energy security, access and affordability, India aims to quadruple its
renewable energy capacity by 2030. Today, coal still accounts for close to 70% of
IndiaРђЎs electricity generation [24].
Several countries have shifted their renewable energy support schemes toward
tendering, where the level of incentive or the power tariff is set in a competitive
auction. Power auctions can accelerate renewable capacity additions, whilst min-
imising the cost of support through competition among bidders [32]. A competitive
auction process for renewable energy also provides the context for this thesis, which
focuses on the modelling of a utility-scale hybrid power plant under tender guide-
lines in India. The guidelines were released by IndiaРђЎs Ministry of Power in 2020,
and they involve tariff-based competitive bidding for procurement of round-the-
clock power from grid-connected renewable energy projects complemented with
power from coal-based thermal power projects РђЊ and in later amendments of the
guidelines, complemented with power from any other source or storage [12].
1.1
IndiaРђЎs energy transition
Three parallel transitions are currently shaping IndiaРђЎs energy landscape [50]. All
three transitions are also at play behind the round-the-clock hybrid power genera-
tion discussed in this thesis. The first transition aims at enabling poor households
==PAGE:20==
2
1 Introduction
to shift to modern energy sources like electricity. Nearly 97% of Indian households
are connected to the grid, but the governmentРђЎs vision of ensuring round-the-clock
affordable power for all has not been achieved in many urban and rural parts of the
country [1]. The second transition involves increase of renewable energy sources
in IndiaРђЎs energy mix. The target is to install 450 GW of renewable capacity by
2030. As of February 2021, India had an installed renewable power capacity of
about 93 GW, whilst the coal-fired power capacity stood at 201 GW [23]. The
third transition seeks to promote the role of market forces in the energy sector with
a market-based mechanism that enables least-cost, clean power generation. 88%
of power procurement in India is still tied to long-term bilateral power purchase
agreements or PPAs but trade through power exchanges is gradually growing [55].
A defining future characteristic of IndiaРђЎs electricity sector is a steep rise in
variability РђЊ both on the supply side because of the wider penetration of wind
and solar power and in daily consumption from growing use of air-conditioning
equipment [24]. Integrating increasing shares of variable renewable electricity in
the power system increases the need for system flexibility. One way to address
the demand for flexibility and grid stability is to bundle renewable energy with
coal-fired or an other balancing power in hybrid power projects.
1.2
Tender compliance
In 2020, Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) issued an invitation to tender
and a long-term PPA for a hybrid power project under the guidelines of IndiaРђЎs Min-
istry of Power. These two documents underpin this thesis, forming the framework
for the modelling of a hybrid power plant, which complies with the requirements
and specifications outlined in the documents.
The power project will be implemented on a build-own-operate basis.
The
minimum bid capacity is 250 MW and the maximum 2.500 MW. The power tar-
iff is determined through competitive bidding in a reverse auction where project
developers bid for the tariffs at which they are willing to sell their power to SECI.
The hybrid power plantРђЎs different generation units РђЊ including wind or solar pho-
tovoltaic or a combination of both, with or without an energy storage system, and
coal-fired or other complementary power РђЊ may be co-located or situated at dif-
ferent locations anywhere in India. The coal-fired balancing power can be sourced
from any coal-based thermal power plant in India. At least 51% of the annual
power generated by the hybrid power plant should be from renewable sources.
The power producer should also ensure at least 85% annual availability of power.
Both requirements are linked with a shortfall penalty calculated at 400% of the
power tariff.
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Research question and thesis objectives
3
1.3
Research question and thesis
objectives
The main research question this thesis seeks to answer is the following:
How should a power producer size a hybrid power plant to optimise
its bid for round-the-clock power supply in India in compliance with
specific tender conditions?
A secondary research question is how the tender conditions are able to incen-
tivise investment in renewable power generation in India. To address the questions,
my objective is to develop a tool for determining the optimal sizing and other as-
pects of the hybrid power plant investment under the specific tender conditions.
The perspective in the modelling is the power producerРђЎs perspective. The opti-
misation model should provide both production and investment profiles for the
plant, taking into account technical, economic and regulatory requirements and
constraints. The dynamic decision tool should be able to consider varying input
values for the tender conditions so that it can be reapplied for different locations
in India. With these aims in mind, I will
1. model the daily plant operation including wind, solar, coal and battery re-
sources,
2. identify how the tender conditions can be translated into metrics applicable
to the mathematical model,
3. formulate the sizing optimisation problem considering the tender conditions,
4. extend the optimisation problem formulation to include stochasticity, and
5. conduct a sensitivity analysis to evaluate how changes in the tender condi-
tions and other inputs affect the results of the model.
I will use operations research techniques to build the sizing model for the
hybrid power plant.
To assess how the tender conditions are able to promote
investment in renewable power generation, I will run two simulations: one for the
model without tender compliance and another with tender compliance. I will use
a two-stage stochastic model to investigate the uncertainty of time-series data,
such as historical weather data. Finally, I will carry out sensitivity analyses on
key parameters related to the tender conditions to understand how sensitive the
==PAGE:22==
4
1 Introduction
results are to changes in these parameters. Python 3.8. is used for modelling, with
Pyomo as a framework. Gurobi 9.1.1 is used as a solver for the problems.
The modelled plant is situated in the following location: longitude 77,134340┬░
and latitude 10,859542┬░ (world geodetic system (WGS84)) at a terrain height of
341,2 m above sea level. Location-specific wind and solar power data and other
additional information for modelling has been provided by Vestas Wind Systems
A/S (Vestas).
1.4
Thesis overview
Chapter 2 provides background for the thesis, including an overview of the Indian
tender conditions that form the framework for the optimisation model, outlines
of relevant power generation technologies and electricity generation and trade in
India, as well as descriptions of hybrid power plants and their modelling. Chapter 3
presents the deterministic model for sizing the different units of the power plant
for the investment decision.
The model is extended as a two-stage stochastic
investment model in Chapter 4. Chapter 5 summarises the data inputs for the
investment model. The results of the deterministic model with and without tender
compliance are presented in Chapter 6, which also elaborates on the outcomes of
the sensitivity analysis. Chapter 7 examines the results for the stochastic model.
The findings are further discussed in Chapter 8, with limitations of the study and
suggestions on possible extensions of the model and additional research. Chapter 9
concludes the thesis.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This chapter presents the background of the thesis. It begins with a summary of the
tender conditions that form the framework for the hybrid power plant modelling.
Brief descriptions of the power generation and storage technologies, relevant to the
modelled plant, follow in Section 2.2. Section 2.3 outlines the operating environ-
ment in the Indian electricity markets, with an overview of electricity generation
and trade. Section 2.4 focuses on hybrid power plants: the rationale behind them,
technology combinations used, and hybrid power projects in India. Research con-
ducted in hybrid power plant modelling and some of the main techniques used are
discussed in Section 2.5.
2.1
Tender conditions for hybrid power
project in India
In July 2020, IndiaРђЎs Ministry of Power (MoP) issued guidelines for a tariff-based
competitive bidding process for the procurement of round-the-clock (RTC) power
from grid-connected renewable energy power projects complemented with coal-
based thermal power. The guidelines were introduced to accelerate the installa-
tion of additional renewable energy capacity, whilst ensuring uninterrupted power
supply to distribution companies [12]. The MoP guidelines were amended to allow
bidders for the projects to complement the renewable power with power from any
other source or storage instead of only coal-fired power [53].
The tendering and selection of the hybrid power projects is managed by SECI
that operates under the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE). SECIРђЎs
activities cover the entire renewable energy domain. In March 2020, SECI pub-
lished a request for selection (RfS) document for РђюSelection of RE Power Developers
for Supply of 5.000 MW of RTC Power from Grid-Connected Renewable Energy
(RE) Power Projects, complemented with Power from Coal based Thermal Power
Projects in India under Tariff-based Competitive Bidding (RTC-II)РђЮ [57]. The RfS
document has been subsequently amended to reflect the changes made in the MoP
guidelines, including the change from coal-based complementing power to balanc-
==PAGE:24==
6
2 Background
ing power from any other source or storage. The aggregate capacity has also been
halved to 2.500 MW [61].
The hybrid power project can be located anywhere in India.
The different
power generating units and the possible energy storage system (ESS) may be co-
located or may be situated at different sites and will still be considered a single
project. The balancing power and the ESS may be tied up separately with a third
party. For the balancing power, there can only be one fuel source РђЊ such as coal,
gas or large hydro РђЊ and the source cannot change during the contract period.
The ESS can only be charged from renewable power capacity. Only commercially
established and operational technologies may be used in the project.
The tendered capacity is minimum 250 MW and maximum 2.500 MW. The
share of renewable power of the total energy supplied in any year must be at least
51%. Suppliers must also commit to maintaining at least 85% availability of the
contracted capacity annually and during peak hours. For any failure to comply
with the 51% and 85% limits, power suppliers will have to pay a 400% penalty for
the amount of power the supplier falls short of and based on the tariff applied for
the year.
Successful bidders will sign a power purchase agreement (PPA) with SECI.
The agreement is valid for 25 years. In case the bidder has tied up with coal-
fired power plant(s) using domestic coal only, the thermal energy generator(s) will
also be a party to the PPA. SECI acts as an intermediary procurer and will sign
power sale agreements with distribution utilities for onward back-to-back sale of
the purchased power [60].
The interpretation of the tender conditions into mathematical form is presented
in Section 3.3
2.2
Power generation technologies
Power generation can be divided into thermal and renewable generation. This
work focuses on a power plant that generates electricity using renewable energy
sources that are complemented with thermal generation.
One of the main characteristics of the different energy sources for electricity
generation is dispatchability. Conventional thermal power plants are dispatchable,
meaning they can be started up, shut down and controlled to adjust power out-
put flexibly. Among renewable energy sources, geothermal and bioenergy are also
usually regarded as dispatchable. Hydropower uses a seasonally variable resource,
but water reservoirs provide controllable output. The ability of concentrating solar
power to use thermal energy storage also makes it dispatchable, at least to some
degree. Solar photovoltaic (PV) and wind energy involve inherent variability and
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Power generation technologies
7
limited predictability and are site specific. The two energy sources are essentially
non-dispatchable and are often referred to as variable renewable energy (VRE).
Whilst curtailment is possible when there is overproduction, it is not possible to
increase generation on cloudy days or when there is no wind. Solar and especially
wind forecasting methods to estimate future energy output have improved signifi-
cantly and can help mitigate the impact of renewable energy intermittency on the
power system. But the forecasts still have their limitations.
The need to decarbonise the power sector, whilst continuing to meet grow-
ing energy demand, is increasing the share of variable renewable energy in power
systems. This brings along the challenge of managing increasing levels of variabil-
ity and uncertainty. One option to tackle the challenge is to combine different
generation assets that complement each other, increasing the controllability and
predictability of the joint energy resource. This is also the rationale behind the
hybrid power plant modelled in this thesis. The following sections provide brief
overviews of the power generation and storage technologies that are relevant to
the modelled plant.
2.2.1
Wind turbines
Wind turbines harness the kinetic energy of the wind and turn it into rotational
energy and further into electric power. Wind-induced aerodynamic forces blowing
on the turbineРђЎs rotor blades cause the rotor to spin. The rotor connects to a
generator, either directly or through a shaft and a gearbox. The generator trans-
forms the mechanical energy into electricity. Converters and transformers act as
an interface to the electricity grid, adjusting the voltage levels to match with the
grid. A control system monitors wind conditions, vibration, rotor and generator
speed, power generation and other parameters to ensure reliable, e№гђicient and safe
operation of the wind turbine.
The wind turbine used for the hybrid power plant modelling in this thesis is the
Vestas V155-3,3 MW with a 155-meter rotor diameter. The turbineРђЎs optimised
blade design is customised to suit the low and ultra-low wind conditions in India
[70].
2.2.2
Photovoltaics
Photovoltaic (PV) or solar cells convert sunlight into direct current (DC) electric-
ity through the photovoltaic effect. The most important parts of a PV cell are
dissimilar semiconducting materials: a negative or n-type material has an excess
of electrons and a p-type material has an excess of positive charges or holes. The
==PAGE:26==
8
2 Background
asymmetry in the electronic structure is the basic requirement for the photovoltaic
energy conversion. When light hits the solar cell, and part of the photons emitted
by the sun are absorbed by the semiconductor structure, the photovoltaic effect
leads to the generation of an electric field at the junction between the p- and
n-type materials.
Photogenerated electron-hole pairs (charge carriers) are first
created and subsequently separated, facilitated by the internal electric field. The
separated electrons are then used to drive an electric circuit. Besides semiconduc-
tors, PV cells have a top and bottom metallic grid or another electrical contact
for collecting the electrons [59]. Multiple solar cells can be integrated into a PV
panel, and multiple PV panels can be wired together to form a PV array. Inverters
convert the DC output from the panels into low voltage alternating current (AC),
and transformers step up the voltage for transfer of energy to the power grid.
The PV module used for the hybrid power plant modelling in this thesis is
the Hanwha HSL60P6-PA-4-250T [2013] solar panel with SMA 1.000 kVA Sunny
Central 1.000 CP XT power inverters.
2.2.3
Thermal coal power
In a conventional coal-based thermal power plant, a coal-fired boiler generates
steam at high pressure and temperature. A steam turbine converts the heat energy
into mechanical energy, which is then converted into electrical energy in a generator.
The steam spins the turbine blades, imparting rotation to the turbine shaft and
further to the generator shaft that turns a magnet surrounded by coils of copper
wire.
The fast-revolving magnet creates a powerful magnetic field that causes
electrons around the coils to move, generating electricity [15]. Many coal power
plants have been initially designed to supply baseload power, rather than optimised
for cycling (operating at varying load levels). With the growing share of variable
renewable energy in power systems, coal-fired power plants are contributing to
supply-demand balance by operating in a more flexible manner, with frequent
shut-downs and start-ups and rapid load swings [11].
The balancing thermal power for the hybrid plant discussed in this thesis is
based on spare capacity from a co-located or remotely located existing coal-fired
power plant or a plant that is under construction in India. For modelling pur-
poses, it is assumed that the balancing power will be procured from a hypothetical
greenfield coal power project that is co-located with the renewable generation and
storage assets.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Power production and trade in India
9
2.2.4
Battery storage
Batteries can capture energy generated at one time for use at a later time. Battery
storage systems are utilised at different stages of the electric energy value chain,
including generation, transmission, distribution and different industrial, commer-
cial and residential end uses of electricity. Utility-scale stationary batteries are
connected to renewable generation as well as transmission and distribution net-
works, where they improve power system flexibility and enable a greater share of
variable renewables in the energy mix. Utility-scale storage systems can also help
defer investment in peak generation and grid upgrades. For producers of variable
renewable energy, storing excess electricity helps reduce curtailment and provides
capacity firming, mitigating the volatility of power generation [33].
Lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries currently dominate utility-scale storage. A Li-ion
battery is also the storage system selected for the hybrid power project discussed
in this thesis. Li-ion battery cells consist of a metal-oxide cathode, a graphite
anode, a gel electrolyte and a separator. During charging, power is applied to the
battery to induce lithium ions to be displaced from the cathode and then move
through the electrolyte and the separator to be collected within the anode. During
discharging, the action is reversed. Battery cells are interconnected into battery
modules and further into battery packs. Apart from the battery pack, a stationary
battery storage facility includes a power conversion system as well as thermal and
energy management systems [41].
2.3
Power production and trade in India
In the International Energy Agency (IEA)РђЎs 2040 scenarios, India is set to account
for the largest increase in energy demand of all countries worldwide. Demand
for electricity is forecast to grow even more rapidly than the overall energy use.
Population growth, urbanisation, industrialisation and an expanding economy are
driving the growth [24]. The Electricity Act 2003 marked a watershed in IndiaРђЎs
electricity sector. The act and its subsequent amendments aim at promoting com-
petition, providing uninterrupted and reliable supply of electricity for the whole
country, and setting regulations for electricity generation, distribution and trade.
The act also recognised the role of renewable energy in IndiaРђЎs national electric-
ity policy. These policy goals underpin the investment in the hybrid power plant
discussed in this study. This section gives an overview of the hybrid power pro-
ducerРђЎs operating environment in the Indian electricity market, by first looking
into electricity generation and then providing a summary of electricity trade in
India.
==PAGE:28==
10
2 Background
2.3.1
Electricity generation
IndiaРђЎs total electricity production has grown at about 6% percent per year for the
last thirty years. The power generation mix remains biased toward fossil energy,
and the availability of e№гђicient peaking power capacity is limited [2]. Today, many
consumers still lack access to reliable electricity supply, even though India has in-
stalled electricity connections to hundreds of millions of its citizens in recent years.
Supply interruptions and voltage fluctuations are common, and the central govern-
ment has frequently stepped in to rescue financially ailing electricity distribution
companies [24].
IndiaРђЎs total installed electricity capacity stood at about 379 GW as of February
2021 [23]. Coal dominates power generation, with a 68% share in 2020. Solar PV,
wind, hydropower, nuclear, and fossil energy sources beyond coal make up the rest
[24]. Even though renewable energy is now less expensive than new coal power in
most of India, and accounts for the majority of new power capacity installations,
coal continues to dominate electricity generation because of the legacy of coal-fired
power plants constructed in previous decades [43].
To meet the double challenge of growing electricity demand and emissions
reduction, renewables are set to play a key role in IndiaРђЎs energy future.
The
country has raised its target of renewable energy production to 450 GW by 2030.
This marks a significant increase from the 2022 target of 175 GW, which includes
100 GW of solar and 60 GW of wind, with the rest coming from biomass and
small hydro [37]. The rise of solar and wind power will introduce more variability in
electricity supply. At the same time, the demand profile is also expected to become
peakier due to air conditioning that creates daily peaks in electricity use. The
variability calls for more flexibility in the power system [24]. The inherent flexibility
of IndiaРђЎs current coal-dominated power system can facilitate renewable energy
integration by accommodating the variability caused by the growing renewable
energy volumes [48].
The levelised cost of energy/electricity (LCOE) is a well-established metric
for comparing the plant-level unit costs of different power generation technologies
over their operating lifetimes1. The LCOE can be interpreted as the electricity
tariff at which an investor would break even after paying the required return on
capital, given the costs incurred over a power plantРђЎs lifetime. The 2020 edition
of РђюProjected Costs of Generating ElectricityРђЮ РђЊ a joint report by the IEA and the
OECD Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) that presents the LCOEs for both baseload
1As a plant-level metric, the LCOE does not consider the value that different generation
technologies bring to the power system. To enable a more system specific cost comparison, the
IEA has introduced a complementary metric known as the value adjusted LCOE (VALCOE).
The results of IEAРђЎs VALCOE analysis indicate that the system value of variable renewables like
wind and solar decreases as their share in the power supply increases [31].
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Hybrid power plants
11
and renewable electricity generation for almost 250 plants in 24 countries РђЊ shows
that in India, variable renewables have the lowest expected LCOE, with utility-
scale solar PV and onshore wind as the least-cost options [31].
The government of India is in the process of revising the 2005 National Electric-
ity Policy (NEP). Among other things, the draft NEP 2021 emphasises increased
private participation in power distribution, with the aim of strengthening the distri-
bution system to ensure 24/7 power supply. The draft also suggests that additional
coal-based generation capacity may still be required, despite growth in renewable
power [35].
2.3.2
Electricity trading
About 90% of power procurement in India takes place under long-term bilateral
PPAs. Whilst private generators bid for installing capacity in exchange for a long-
term purchase contract, government-owned companies that do not enter through
a bidding process get their tariff approved on a cost-plus basis by the relevant
electricity regulator. One reason for the importance of PPAs is the fact that most
generation capacity is built using bank finance, and long-term power purchase
contracts are used as loan collateral [2].
A formal power exchange market has been functioning since 2008.
Indian
Energy Exchange Limited (IEX) is IndiaРђЎs largest energy exchange, controlling
about 95% of the trading volume. IEX is also a marketplace for renewable energy
certificates and energy saving certificates. Electricity is traded in day-ahead, term-
ahead and real-time markets. In the day-ahead market, participants can buy and
sell electricity for the next delivery day in 15-minutes contracts in a closed double-
sided anonymous auction. The term-ahead market allows participants to buy and
sell electricity on a term basis for a duration of up to 11 days ahead. In 2020,
trading began in the real-time markets, where buyers and sellers can purchase
or sell electricity in 15-minutes block contracts from anywhere across the country
with just one hourРђЎs prior notice [25].
To promote renewable energy capacity addition in India and to facilitate effec-
tive integration of energy from various sources, IEX launched its green term-ahead
market in 2020. The market features similar products as the conventional term-
ahead market, and contracts are available for both solar and non-solar power [26].
2.4
Hybrid power plants
Hybrid power plants contain two or more power generation sources that can be
combined with energy storage. A hybrid power plant can include any power produc-
==PAGE:30==
12
2 Background
tion source, from combinations of conventional, non-renewable generation assets
to installations based entirely on renewables, as well as systems combining thermal
and renewable power sources, like the one discussed in this thesis. Hybrid power
plants can be used to produce electricity or other products, such as hydrogen, and
they can be grid-connected or operate off-grid. This thesis focuses on an on-grid
hybrid power plant for electricity generation.
2.4.1
Rationale behind hybrid power plants
When compared with standalone wind and solar systems, wind-solar hybrids en-
hance power output and make the power generation profile flatter over time, when
there is a negative correlation between the two renewable resources, which is the
case in large areas of the world [71]. Hybrid power plants make it easier to sched-
ule power dispatch and help control the ramp rate to eliminate rapid voltage and
power fluctuations in the grid. Hybrid systems also enable higher utilisation of
converter, transformer and connection capacity, with one single grid connection
point being su№гђicient in most cases. Installation of additional capacity at an ex-
isting connection point in the form of hybrid generation РђЊ with the maximum grid
evacuation capacity remaining the same РђЊ offers an opportunity to optimise the
use of the network and defer investment in grid reinforcement.
The growing share of variable renewable energy in power systems increases the
need for system flexibility to balance electricity supply and demand at all times.
To fully utilise variable renewable energy in a power system, either demand has
to adapt to benefit from the increasingly cheaper but more variable energy, or
the supply side must adapt to deliver more predictable and controllable energy.
Energy storage, stronger transmission and distribution systems as well as smart
grids are some of the other options available to support power system flexibility
[42].
Future profitability of individual power plants will also increasingly depend
on revenue streams from time-varying energy pricing and, where applicable, from
capacity markets, ensuring medium- to long-term supply adequacy, as well as an-
cillary service markets, ensuring short-term grid reliability and stability. Because
of their uncertainty and variability, wind and solar technologies cannot capitalise
on these revenue streams to the same extent as conventional power plants [13].
Combining wind, solar, storage or other technologies into a hybrid power plant
is proposed as one solution to increase supply-side flexibility in power systems
and to improve profitability at plant level. [14] suggest that in the future, hybrid
power plants will operate more like traditional power generation, consistently pro-
ducing less than full capacity and focusing on supplying energy at specific times
in a dispatchable manner. Hybrid plants can also provide services to support grid
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Hybrid power plants
13
reliability and stability for a broader set of revenue streams. By combining gen-
eration and storage assets, hybrid power plant owners can also achieve economies
of scope relating to the permitting process, land usage, electrical and physical
infrastructure, as well as operating and maintenance expenses.
2.4.2
Technology combinations in hybrid power
plants
The renewable hybrid power plants under development, under construction or
already operational in different parts of the world combine wind power and solar
photovoltaic units or integrate wind, and solar power with storage technology -
like the worldРђЎs first utility-scale, on-grid wind, solar and battery energy storage
hybrid plant powered by Vestas technology in Australia [74, 72].
WindEurope, an association promoting the use of wind power in Europe, identi-
fies two configurations for renewable hybrid power plants: in the first option, wind
and solar share the same substation and grid connection, whereas in the second
configuration, solar PV panels are integrated with the wind turbines and are not
directly interfaced with the grid. WindEurope further identifies three alternatives
for energy storage systems. The storage can be integrated to at least one of the
generating units and cannot be independently controlled. In the second alterna-
tive, the storage module is operated independent of the generation units. The third
option is a mixed system, where a share of the storage capacity is enabled only
when the generating unit, to which it is coupled, operates. The remaining storage
capacity acts as an independent module directly interacting with the power grid
[75].
Renewable energy technologies can also be combined with thermal generation
assets like coal power. A number of solar power add-ons to existing coal-fired
plants have been planned and piloted in different countries, with the objective
of combining the cost-effectiveness and reliability of large-scale coal-fired power
with emissions-free renewables. Many of these projects have not proceeded, and
operational experience gained from coal-solar hybrids is therefore fairly limited.
Increasing the solar share has been a challenge, often because the solar system has
been retrofitted to an ageing coal power plant as opposed to a new build. There is
some consensus that larger hybrid projects with newly built coal-fired power could
provide a larger solar share as well as improved e№гђiciency and better economics
[44].
The focus of this thesis is a hybrid power plant, where wind and solar PV are
complemented with energy storage and balanced with coal-based electric power.
==PAGE:32==
14
2 Background
2.4.3
Hybrid power generation in India
IndiaРђЎs National Wind-Solar Hybrid Policy was launched by the MNRE in 2018
to promote large-scale wind-solar hybrid power projects. According to MNRE,
solar and wind complement each other, and India has major areas where both
resources can be harnessed on a high to moderate level. Hybrid systems can also
help improve grid security and stability. To be classified as a wind-solar hybrid
power plant, the rated power capacity of one resource should be at least 25% of
the rated power capacity of the other resource in the plant. Any form of energy
storage РђЊ not just batteries РђЊ can be deployed in hybrid projects [63].
India already introduced a hybridisation or bundling scheme in its National
Solar Mission that was launched in 2010. The purpose initially was to bundle
relatively expensive solar power with cheaper coal-fired power generation. With the
declining cost of both solar and wind power, as well as issues related to renewable
energy intermittency and grid capacity utilisation, the focus has now turned on so-
called reverse bundling. Here, high-cost coal-based power can be coupled with less
expensive renewable energy to provide round-the-clock electricity for distribution.
Such a reverse bundling scheme also underpins the hybrid power plant that is
modelled in this thesis [57].
IndiaРђЎs first large-scale commercial, grid-connected wind and solar hybrid project
was commissioned in 2018, when a 28,8 MW solar PV plant went operational ad-
jacent to an existing 50 MW wind farm in Karnataka. Solar power generation
was added without increasing the grid evacuation capacity. This demonstrates
the opportunity to optimise the use of the network, which is considered one of
the motivations behind hybridisation [64, 75]. Two other hybrid plants have since
been commissioned, bringing the total wind-solar hybrid capacity in India to 148
MW. An analysis published in 2020 estimates that IndiaРђЎs wind-solar hybrid capac-
ity could reach 11,7 GW by end 2023. The estimate is based on tenders allotted
on central and state level for new hybrid projects and the strong support offered
by SECI and state governments to scale up market growth [20]. A solar-thermal
hybrid power plant has also already been commissioned at the Dadri plant of Na-
tional Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) in Uttar Pradesh during 2019-2020
[49].
2.5
Hybrid power plant modelling
Much of the research on the optimisation of hybrid power plant designs has focused
on selecting the appropriate mix of technologies and sizing the capacity of those
technologies within prevailing resource and market conditions. Different quantities
==PAGE:33==
2.5 Hybrid power plant modelling
15
of renewable resources are available at different locations and at different timescales.
Local market conditions depend on factors like the power systemРђЎs generation mix,
transmission infrastructure and time-varying demand profile, as well as the types
of revenue streams and incentives that are available for power plant operators [14].
Figure 2.1 gives an outline of the main components of problem formulation in
hybrid power plant design optimisation.
Figure 2.1: Main components of a hybrid power plant design optimisation problem
formulation. Adapted from [14].
Already in 1997, Chedid et al. [7] suggested a unit sizing and control model
of hybrid wind-solar power systems with a linear programming approach. The
tool is applicable to autonomous or grid-linked systems. The average production
cost of electricity is minimised while meeting demand, and the proposed analy-
sis also considers environmental factors. Bhandari et al. [5] provides a review
of the optimisation of hybrid renewable energy power systems and lists different
methods used for mathematical modelling and optimisation of PV arrays, wind
turbines, engine generators, battery banks and their performance.
The review
presents different optimisation techniques applied for optimising the operation of
a hybrid power system with different objectives, such as minimising life-cycle cost
or determining the system size. Techniques used in the reviewed research include
graphical construction for analysing the relation between two variables (PV ar-
ray and battery); a probabilistic approach to investigate the performance of a
hybrid system; a deterministic optimisation approach with specific parameters for
a standalone system; an iterative approach, such as dynamic and linear program-
ming for solar-wind systems; artificial intelligence, such as genetic algorithms and
==PAGE:34==
16
2 Background
neural networks for a solar-wind systems with a battery bank; and a modelling
software called Hybrid Optimization of Multiple Energy Resources (HOMER) for
techno-economic analysis.
Another review by Olatomiwa et al. [52] summarises various energy manage-
ment strategies in hybrid renewable energy systems, classifying them into strate-
gies for standalone systems, grid-connected systems, and smart grids.
For the
first two categories, the paper discusses energy management based on both linear
programming and intelligent techniques, such as fuzzy logic controllers. The lin-
ear programming strategies are of interest for this thesis. Many of the strategies
for standalone systems focus on managing the battery storage behaviour for op-
timal utilisation of renewable energy. The strategies proposed for grid-connected
systems also optimise prices through demand-side management. HOMER is used
in many of the reviewed research papers to model standalone and grid-connected
hybrid systems.
Belfkira et al.
[4] propose a deterministic algorithm with the objective to
minimise the life-cycle cost of a standalone hybrid renewable energy system to
select the optimal wind turbine size and the number of PV panels needed. The
optimisation is based on a dynamic evaluation of the wind and solar energetic
potential with statistical models of the site.
Yang et al.
[76] also propose a
sizing optimisation model for a solar-wind system employing a battery bank. The
paper points out three main approaches for finding the optimal size of a hybrid
system through technical and economic analysis: the least square method, the loss
of power supply probability (LPSP) and the trade-off method. The three-part
sizing method, presented in the paper, includes system models for the PV, wind
and battery bank systems, followed by a technical reliability model based on the
LPSP technique, and an economic model founded on the LCOE concept. The
configuration with the lowest LCOE value for the desired LPSP is the optimal
choice.
Wang et al. [73] introduce a multi-objective model and algorithm for sizing a
standalone hybrid renewable energy system consisting of solar PV, wind turbines,
battery banks and diesel generators. In the sizing procedure, ten decision variables
are optimised so that the following three objectives are minimised: the annualised
system cost, the loss of power supply probability, and the greenhouse gas emissions.
The model also allows the decision-maker to determine the type of the energy
system components in addition to their number. The initial investment cost of the
system components; operation, maintenance and battery bank replacement costs;
and the diesel fuel cost are considered in the annualised system cost. Li et al. [40]
give a sizing algorithm for stand-alone PV/wind/battery hybrid microgrids. The
battery state of charge should be periodically invariant, which is the basis for the
sizing algorithm. The number of PV arrays and wind turbines and the battery
==PAGE:35==
2.5 Hybrid power plant modelling
17
capacity are optimised so that the life-cycle cost of the system is minimised, whilst
satisfying the load power requirement.
Renewable Energy Integration and Optimization (REopt), developed by the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), is a techno-economic decision
support platform that has been used for a number of studies on hybrid power
plant sizing. The REopt solver engine is based on a mixed integer linear program
that provides optimal, least-cost solutions that minimise energy costs subject to
location-specific goals and constraints. The modelРђЎs objective function minimizes
total life-cycle costs, ensuring that energy loads are met at every time step by some
mix of technologies. These technologies include both variable and dispatchable
electrical and thermal generation, energy storage, energy conservation measures,
and the utility grid [58].
Investigation of existing research on hybrid power plant modelling and sizing
shows four main elements of objectives and criteria: the cost of energy and plant
life-cycle cost are the two main cost elements that are minimised to optimally size
different components of a hybrid power plant. Loss of power supply probability
and loss of load probability, in turn, are the two key elements considered in many
papers as the main design criteria for meeting demand and daily peak loads. These
are also described as optimal design criteria for hybrid renewable power systems
by Bhandari et al. [5].
==PAGE:36==
18
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Deterministic model of
the hybrid power plant
This chapter proposes mathematical formulations for evaluating the investment in
the hybrid power plant operating under the RTC tender conditions in India. Bids
in a capacity range of 250 MW to 2,5 GW are accepted under the invitation to
tender. For the analysis, it is assumed that the bid is placed at 250 MW, which is
considered the demand of the system. This is not an actual market demand, but
the maximum power offered to SECI, which will act as an intermediary procurer
of the electricity generated by the power plant. The aim is to construct an optimi-
sation model, which determines the size of the plant needed in order to meet the
250 MW, considering the tender specifications that are defined by SECI.
The model is constructed in steps that are laid out in the following sections.
First, the basis for the modelРђЎs operating principles is described in Section 3.1 as
an economic dispatch model. Then, an investment model for the RTC tender is
presented in Section 3.2 to determine the sizing of the plant. Finally, the invest-
ment model is extended in Section 3.3 to incorporate the compliance criteria that
must be met to operate in the Indian electricity market under the given tender
conditions.
The investment model is considered from the power producerРђЎs perspective
and not from a market perspective. Thus, the model is constructed independent
of any market conditions and demands. Instead, the model will optimise towards
delivering the agreed tender requirement, which is set at an hourly level of 250 MW.
The objective is not to maximise social welfare on the market but the financial
gain of the power producer. This is done by maximising the Net Present Value
(NPV) of the hybrid power plant, which includes solar PV units, wind turbines, a
battery bank and coal-fired power, as elaborated in Section 3.2.
The investment model is deterministic, meaning that РђЊ as opposed to a stochas-
tic model РђЊ the output is fully determined by the input parameter values and the
initial conditions.
As knowledge about some of the parameter values, such as
weather data, is incomplete, there is uncertainty related to the inputs. A sensi-
tivity analysis is provided in Section 6.5 to assess the sensitivity of the modelРђЎs
==PAGE:38==
20
3 Deterministic model of the hybrid power plant
output to changes in selected input parameters. A stochastic investment model is
discussed in Chapter 4.
The main elements feeding into the hybrid power plant sizing optimisation are
illustrated in Figure 3.1
Figure 3.1: Components of sizing optimisation of hybrid power plant under tender
conditions
3.1
Economic dispatch model
The economic dispatch model represents the operating principle of the hybrid
power plant, excluding any investment decision.
As applied to electric power
systems, the objective of solving the economic dispatch problem is to minimise
the cost of meeting the energy requirements over some appropriate time period or
finding the optimal allocation of the power output from various available sources
within given constraints. The model is used to obtain an understanding of the
operating principles of the hybrid power plant and the modelРђЎs functionality. A
general formulation for an economic dispatch model is given below [22].
Set T describes time and I describes generating units. pit is the hourly produc-
tion of each unit and ci the corresponding cost. The power requirement is notated
dt. The objective function minimises total cost.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Investment model
21
min
X
tРѕѕT
X
iРѕѕI
cipit
(3.1)
s.t.
pmin
i
РЅцpit РЅцpmax
i
Рѕђi РѕѕI, t РѕѕT
(3.2)
X
iРѕѕI
pit = dt
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.3)
pit РЅЦ0
Рѕђi РѕѕI, t РѕѕT
(3.4)
The objective function for the operational model, 3.5, minimises cost of the
total system, where the specific production or fuel cost, ci, for a generating unit
is multiplied with the produced energy, pit. The revenues are subtracted from the
cost and finally a penalty is added for shortfalls in power delivery. A more detailed
description can be found in Section 3.2.2, where constraints (3.14) to (3.16), (3.19)
to (3.27), and (3.31) to (3.35) are relevant for the operational model.
min
Cost =
X
tРѕѕT
 
csolar ┬и psolar
t
+ cwind ┬и pwind
t
+ ccoal
t
┬и pcoal
t
╬иfuel + ccharge ┬и pbattery
t
Рѕњ¤ђm
t ┬и pabove
t
Рѕњ¤ђp ┬и ptender
t
!
+ cpenalty
utilisation ┬и enon_delivered
(3.5)
3.2
Investment model
The economic dispatch model is extended to include the investment decision for
sizing the different units of the hybrid power plant. The model has maximum
power capacity parameters as decision variables to find the optimal size of each
unit. Additional cost parameters for capex as well as fixed and variable opex are
included. The numerical cost estimations for the capex and opex parameters can
be seen in Table 5.2 in Section 5.3, where all data inputs are presented.
For evaluating the investment decision, a capital budgeting tool, namely the
Net Present Value (NPV), is applied. The NPV method is used for analysing
the viability of an investment by comparing the initial capital outlay against the
present value of the estimated future cash flows generated by the investment. The
NPV calculation takes into account factors such as the investorРђЎs cost of capital,
opportunity cost, and risk tolerance through the discount rate that is used to
discount the future cash flows to the present day. If an investment project has a
positive NPV, it is considered financially viable [19]. The NPV can be calculated
by:
NPV = РѕњInvestment +
X
yРѕѕY
CashFlowy
(1 + r)y
(3.6)
==PAGE:40==
22
3 Deterministic model of the hybrid power plant
3.2.1
Modelling assumptions
The model gives a picture of a possible investment in and sizing of the hybrid
power plant based on the existing situation in India in 2021. The model reflects
an as-is system: future technical and economic developments are not considered.
For modelling purposes, the plant operates irrespective of market conditions and
market demand is not accounted for in the analysis. The model assumes that
the hybrid power plant will feed all generated power into the grid, optimising
production from the producerРђЎs standpoint РђЊ not from the perspective of the power
system. The system does not allow curtailment of the renewable power generation.
It is assumed that all power produced in excess of the contracted amount will be
sold on the open electricity market. The total plant lifetime is assumed at 30
years, whereas the power purchase contract period is 25 years, as specified in the
invitation to tender.
For the investment model, time needs to be separated into years to account for
the annual criteria of power availability and share of renewable power. The time
sets given below are years as part of all hours T. The first set gives that hours in a
year are a subset of T; the second that combining all hours in all years constructs
T; and the third that the hours in years are different.
1. Ty РіѓT Рѕђy РѕѕY
2.
S
yРѕѕY Ty = T
3. Ty1 РѕЕTy2 = РѕЁ, y1 ╠И= y2 РѕѕY
Future developments of the technologies applied in the hybrid power system
are not considered in the model. For the entire 30-year plant life, it is assumed
that the same technologies are used, and when repairs are made or components
and units are replaced, the same technology is installed from the modelling point
of view. It is impossible to predict 10 to 30 years ahead, for example, what type of
batteries are available, as new technologies are constantly being introduced. The
model is therefore based on the prevailing state of technology.
It is also assumed that any maintenance or replacement of the wind, solar PV,
coal and battery storage systems are covered by equipment warranties. Manufac-
turers and contractors will keep the technologies in operating condition through-
out the 30-year plant service life, and no reinvestment costs are considered in the
model.
It is assumed that technology suppliers guarantee the contracted level of ca-
pacity for their equipment over the entire service life of the hybrid power plant.
Warranties are case-specific and may change in the future, but it is di№гђicult to
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Investment model
23
evaluate how they will evolve in terms of technical details and pricing. It is there-
fore assumed that warranties remain the same for the plantРђЎs entire lifetime. The
technology suppliers are responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement
of parts and components. These costs are included in the fixed opex cost estimates,
which are presented in Section 5.3.
For the battery, an assumption of a 10-year warranty is proposed by Vestas,
who will also decide on how to best prolong the battery life. It is assumed that
the battery will be refurbished or replaced, and the warranty renewed every ten
years against a cost. This cost is assumed at 30% of the initial investment cost
of the battery. The assumption is made so that an agreed battery capacity is
available throughout the entire PPA period. A battery reinvestment cost at 10-
year intervals would be problematic in the bid. The evaluation of how to best
prolong the battery life is left to Vestas.
According to the tender specifications, the hybrid power plant has to be de-
signed for inter-connection with an Inter State Transmission System (ISTS) sub-
station at a voltage level of 220 kV or above.
The model, however, does not
consider the grid connection, grid codes or the transmission system. Frequency
and voltage control are also not a part of the model assumptions. The focus is on
the overall energy balance analysis of the hybrid power plant.
Considering the technical aspects of the power plant units, a few assumptions
and simplifications have been made. As regards the energy storage system, long-
term performance and degradation behaviour are critical for commercial systems
consisting of Li-ion batteries. During long-term operation, the batteriesРђЎ perfor-
mance is subject to capacity fade and power decrease. These depend on factors like
time (calendar ageing), operating temperature, depth of discharge (DoD), charge
and discharge rate (C-rate) as well as state of charge (SoC), which indicates the
ratio between the charge currently available in a battery and the total energy that
can be stored in the battery. The operational model considers an SoC range with
lower and upper bounds.
According to the tender specifications, renewable energy generation in the hy-
brid power plant can also be complemented with power from any other source that
can be tied up with a third-party supplier. The model is built on the assumption of
coal-fired balancing power supplied by a third party. It is assumed that the ther-
mal coal plant uses new technology without carbon capture and storage (CCS).
To provide balancing power, the coal plant has to operate in a flexible manner
with on/off cycling and varying load levels. For modelling purposes, it is assumed
that the coal power unit is online at all times at minimum load to minimise the
cost and wear-and-tear caused by turning the plant on and off too often. Not
needing to consider the status of the coal-fired unit simplifies the mathematical
modelling. The start-up/shut-down time and cost are not accounted for in the
==PAGE:42==
24
3 Deterministic model of the hybrid power plant
model and ramp up/down time and rate are not taken into account when starting
up or shutting down production in the coal unit, as the coal unit is assumed to be
run by an external operator.
Ramping refers to a change in power flow from one time unit to the next.
Production is ramped up and down in order to meet the requirements of the power
system.
Ramping is particularly relevant to conventional power plants, where
power generation is dispatchable. Conventional power is often used as balancing
power for renewable energy to quickly restore the supply-demand balance in a
power system. Requirements for ramping are defined by grid codes. A required
ramp rate is the rate at which a power producer must be able to adjust production.
The IEA specifies minimum ramp rates for coal-fired power plants at 4% of
nominal capacity per minute [46]. This would mean ramping from zero to 100%
operation in 25 minutes. In reality, the power production needs to be ramped
within 15 minutes to the desired power level to be able to deliver the needed energy.
NREL further specifies that the ability to run as a flexible resource below 40% of
capacity requires modifications in both the hardware and operational practice of
a coal-fired power station. Since such modifications cannot be expected here, 40%
is used as the minimum plant load for modelling purposes. As it is possible to
ramp from a 40% to a 100% load in 15 minutes, the ramp rate is not regarded as
a limitation.
The mathematical model of the hybrid power plant is considered in an hourly
resolution. The hourly production profile will not be able to account for the per
minute ramping changes. The model will take a step from one average production
level in one hour to the next. It is interpreted that the ramp rate will not have a
significant effect on the power output of the coal unit. It can potentially have an
effect on the energy output, but this is expected to be minimal, and thus it is not
considered further. Intense cycling and frequent ramping of a coal plant increase
operations and maintenance costs and costs caused by accelerated component dam-
age and higher forced outage rates [8]. These costs are considered external to the
hybrid power plant. Therefore, no cycling or ramping constraint is specified in the
model.
Some specifications in the invitation to tender and the PPA are described in a
manner that makes it unfeasible to interpret them mathematically. Some of the
compliance criteria have therefore been simplified when translated from the legal
and commercial texts into a mathematical formulation. These will be discussed in
more detail in Section 3.3.
The price of the power delivered is assumed to increase annually, regardless of
what may be stipulated in the tender specifications. It is assumed that the plant
can deliver all contracted power as required and can increase the initial price by
3% per year for the first 15 years, after which the price will remain at the level
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Investment model
25
prevailing in year 15.
3.2.2
Mathematical formulation of investment
The investment model optimises the plant sizing by maximising the NPV of the
hybrid power project, as shown in (3.7). The objective function is divided into
six parts: revenue, fuel cost, variable opex, fixed opex, capex and penalty cost.
The different parts are shown in (3.8) to (3.13). The model takes the following
parameters as input: cost parameters; market electricity prices; hourly capacity
factors for solar PV and wind power, and technology specifications.
In constraint (3.8), the cost parameters are denoted with c for each unit and
the decision variable of production with pt.
The cost of coal power is divided
by the fuel e№гђiciency to account for the energy e№гђiciency of the coal unit. The
fuel cost also includes a cost for carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and an emission
factor ╬║emis for coal. Although India has no pricing mechanism for CO2 emissions,
it can become relevant later. Some of the leading Indian companies have already
voluntarily adopted an internal carbon price [51]. Therefore, carbon emissions are
added to the model. Also, a variable for counting the total CO2 emissions in tonnes
is added to be able to evaluate the emissions of the plant. This is presented in
(3.18). The cost of the battery storage is taken into account only as the charging
cost, as it is the same as the discharging cost. The battery cannot be discharged
and charged at the same time, so only one cost is relevant. The state of charge
has no cost attached.
The cost items are subtracted from the revenue from electricity production.
The revenue in (3.12) is based on the PPA tariff, ¤ђp
y, for the amount of electricity
sold within the power purchase agreement and the market price, ¤ђm
t , for the elec-
tricity sold outside the agreement. The power producer is allowed to sell excess
power to any third party or on power exchange. An additional cost is the penalty
cost (3.13), cpenalty
utilisation, for not delivering the agreed amount of electricity as speci-
fied in the PPA. Production of a unit is denoted by a decision variable to evaluate
how much electricity each power source needs to generate to meet a specific energy
requirement.
No existing generation capacity is assumed. Thus, an investment is formulated
for all four technologies. The maximum power capacities are denoted by ┬»psolar
max ,
┬»pwind
max , ┬»pcoal
max, ┬»pbattery
max
and ┬»Ebattery
max
.
max
NPV =
X
yРѕѕY
"
1
(1 + r)y

Revy РѕњFuely РѕњOpexvar
y
РѕњOpexfix
y
РѕњPenaltyy
#
РѕњCapex
(3.7)
==PAGE:44==
26
3 Deterministic model of the hybrid power plant
subject to:
Fuely =
X
tРѕѕTy

csolar ┬и psolar
t
+ cwind ┬и pwind
t
+ ccoal
t
+ cemis ┬и ╬║emis
╬иfuel
┬и pcoal
t
+ ccharge ┬и pbattery
t

Рѕђy РѕѕY
(3.8)
Opexvar
y
=
X
tРѕѕTy

csolar
var
┬и psolar
t
+ cwind
var ┬и pwind
t
+ ccoal
var ┬и pcoal
t
+ cbattery
var
┬и pbattery
t
+ cE
var ┬и Ebattery
t

Рѕђy РѕѕY
(3.9)
Opexfix
y
= csolar
fix,y ┬и ┬»psolar
max + cwind
fix,y ┬и ┬»pwind
max + ccoal
fix,y ┬и ┬»pcoal
max + cbattery
fix,y
┬и ┬»pbattery
max
+ cE
fix,y ┬и ┬»Ebattery
max
+ cbattery
ref,y
┬и ┬»pbattery
max
+ cE
ref,y ┬и ┬»Ebattery
max
Рѕђy РѕѕY
(3.10)
Capex = csolar
capex ┬и ┬»psolar
max + cwind
capex ┬и ┬»pwind
max + ccoal
capex ┬и ┬»pcoal
max
+ cbattery
capex ┬и ┬»pbattery
max
+ cE
capex ┬и ┬»Emax + cbattery
BOS
┬и ┬»pbattery
max
(3.11)
Revy =
X
tРѕѕTy
(¤ђm
t ┬и pabove
t
+ ¤ђp
y ┬и ptender
t
)
Рѕђy РѕѕY
(3.12)
Penaltyy = cpenalty
utilisation ┬и enon_delivered
y
Рѕђy РѕѕY
(3.13)
0 РЅцpsolar
t
РЅцCF solar
t
┬и ┬»psolar
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.14)
0 РЅцpwind
t
РЅцCF wind
t
┬и ┬»pwind
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.15)
Cmin ┬и ┬»pcoal
max РЅцpcoal
t
РЅц┬»pcoal
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.16)
┬»pcoal
max РЅц¤ё
(3.17)
pcoal
emis ┬и pcoal
t
= Emist
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.18)
Рѕњ┬»pbattery
max
РЅцpbattery
t
РЅц┬»pbattery
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.19)
0 РЅцpcharge
t
РЅц┬»pbattery
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.20)
0 РЅцpdischarge
t
РЅц┬»pbattery
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.21)
pbattery
t
= pdischarge
t
Рѕњpcharge
t
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.22)
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Investment model
27
pcharge
t
РЅцpsolar
t
+ pwind
t
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.23)
X
tРѕѕT
pdischarge
t
РЅцcycles ┬и ┬»pbattery
max
(3.24)
SoCmin ┬и ┬»Ebattery
max
РЅцEt РЅцSoCmax ┬и ┬»Ebattery
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.25)
E0 РЅц0, 5 ┬и ┬»Ebattery
max
(3.26)
Et = EtРѕњ1 + ╬иroundРѕњtrip ┬и pcharge
t
Рѕњpdischarge
t
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.27)
Et РЅцDF ┬и ┬»Ebattery
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.28)
┬»pbattery
max
РЅц¤ё
(3.29)
psolar
t
+ pwind
t
+ pbattery
t
РЅцGC
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.30)
psolar
t
+ pwind
t
+ pcoal
t
+ pbattery
t
= ptot
t
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.31)
ptender
t
РЅц¤ё
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.32)
ptender
t
РЅцptot
t
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.33)
ptot
t
Рѕњptender
t
= pabove
t
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.34)
X
tРѕѕTy
ptender
t
РЅЦ¤ё ┬и len(Ty) Рѕњenon_delivered
y
Рѕђy РѕѕY
(3.35)
Constraints in (3.14) to (3.16) limit the hourly production to the minimum
and maximum capacities of the power production units. For solar PV and wind
power generation, an hourly capacity factor, CF, is determined by weather condi-
tions and affects the production potential, depending on the solar irradiance and
wind conditions. Coal power has a minimum load factor, Cmin for the technical
limitation of combustion, but it is still a dispatchable source of power and can be
turned on and off as desired.
The power capacities of coal and battery storage are given an upper bound
in accordance with the tender specifications, in (3.17) and (3.29), to restrict the
potential investment in these technologies, as they are very expensive, and coal is
a non-renewable source of energy.
Battery-related constraints are shown in (3.19) to (3.29). The battery can be
modelled as a separate system from the rest, where pbattery
t
links the two parts
together, being the relative electricity production of the battery.
The battery
production pbattery
t
has an upper and a lower bound, being the maximum power
capacity shown in (3.19). When pbattery
t
is positive, the battery is providing the
==PAGE:46==
28
3 Deterministic model of the hybrid power plant
grid with power, so it is discharging energy and vice versa, the battery is charging
when pbattery
t
is negative. (3.20) and (3.21) show that charging and discharging are
both positive values and are limited by the battery capacity. The battery produc-
tion is the difference between discharging and charging, (3.22), where discharging
means that the battery is delivering energy into the grid, and charging means it
is withdrawing energy from the system, negative production in a sense. The bat-
tery is only charging from renewable energy sources, (3.23), to comply with the
tender specifications and to ensure that the battery contributes to the renewable
production share of the hybrid plant.
The batteriesРђЎ state of charge for each hour t is denoted Et and tracks the
state of energy in the storage unit, revealing the charging and discharging pattern.
(3.25) shows the lower and upper bounds for Et, where SoCmin and SoCmax are
the minimum and maximum share of the available energy capacity. The battery
state of charge is initialised at half energy capacity in (3.26). For the following
hours, Et is calculated by summing the Et from the previous hour with the charged
energy and subtracting the discharged amount as shown in (3.27). An e№гђiciency
loss, ╬иroundРѕњtrip, is associated with using the battery. The battery energy constraint
in Pyomo allows the battery to have energy stored at the end of the simulation
life, to not force the battery to fully discharge, if it is not needed or economically
beneficial. No self-discharge is assumed in the modelling of the battery.
The battery capacity degrades over time. A degradation factor is therefore
calculated by:
max(0, 9; 1 Рѕњdegbat
8760 РѕЌt) = DF,
Рѕђt РѕѕT
(3.36)
This factor is calculated as hourly degradation in the model to avoid a sudden
drop in capacity at the turn of the year. The degradation factor is multiplied by
the maximum energy capacity of the battery, limiting the hourly rate at which
energy can be stored in the battery, shown in (3.28).
Constraint (3.30) limits the size of the total investment by limiting the com-
bined production of solar, wind and battery combined to a maximum, based on
congestion prevention in the grid. The grid-constrained production limit is set
at 500 MW (source: Vestas). Coal is not included in this limitation, as the coal-
fired power is injected into the grid at a separate interconnection point. It is not
expected that the transformer will become overloaded (balance of plant) and there-
fore, no additional cost is associated with the transformer. Transformers have a
long lifespan, so the equipment is assumed to last throughout the plantРђЎs entire
lifetime.
In (3.31), the total production of the system is the sum of production from all
units. The amount of electricity produced under the tender (PPA) and outside
the tender are represented by ptender
t
and pabove
t
, respectively. The tender-related
production is limited by the bid placed, which is at 250 MW represented with
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Extension with tender compliance criteria
29
¤ё in (3.32). The last constraint, (3.35), allows the system to produce less than
the tendered amount with a counting feeler variable enon_delivered
y
, which is used
to penalise for the shortfall of production as an additional cost in the objective
function.
3.3
Extension with tender compliance
criteria
For the model to comply with the tender conditions, it is extended with compliance
criteria. The tender conditions involve round-the-clock firm capacity contracted
in minimum 250 MW capacity blocks with a minimum 85% annual capacity utili-
sation e№гђiciency (or minimum annual power availability from the procurerРђЎs point
of view) of 250 MWyr and at least 51% of annual energy supplied from renewable
sources [57]. The firm capacity required by the tender specifications means that
the power producer has to guarantee the minimum 250 MW capacity at all hours
during the contract period.
The first criterion entails that the power producer has to make available at
least 85% of the agreed 250 MW on a yearly basis. The utilisation e№гђiciency need
not be minimum 85% each and every hour, but on average over any contract year.
This can be translated into 85% ┬и 250 MW ┬и 8760 h. The criterion is only valid
for the contracted power amount, not for the possible extra production (3.37).
The second criterion involves the required ratio, minimum 51%, of annual power
supplied in any contract year from renewable energy sources out of the total annual
power supplied (3.38).
The power producer is penalised for shortfalls in the agreed power availability
and renewable energy share. The penalty is calculated on an annual basis at a
rate of 400% of the cost of the shortfall in energy terms. The penalty payment is
based on the applicable tariff for the contract year in question.
In addition to the overall annual power availability, there is a compliance crite-
rion and an associated 400% penalty related to a minimum 85% power availability
or utilisation e№гђiciency during peak hours. The Regional Load Dispatch Centre
(RLDC), under which the relevant distribution company operates, defines four
hours of each day as peak hours, when electricity usage is the highest. The peak-
hour periods can vary from day to day.
To simplify modelling, the peak-hour
criterion is excluded from consideration at this point.
To sum up, there are compensations for three types of shortfalls: annual power
availability, renewable energy share, and peak-hour power availability. According
to the PPA, maximum of the three compensations will apply for the contract year
==PAGE:48==
30
3 Deterministic model of the hybrid power plant
in question. For modelling purposes, maximum of the first two compensations
above shall be applicable, since the peak-hour availability is not accounted for.
Constraints (3.39) and (3.40) represent the penalty for utilisation e№гђiciency and
renewable share violations, respectively. These constraints replace (3.13) presented
in Section 3.2.2.
The assumptions regarding the simplifications of the compliance criteria and
which criteria to exclude rely on VestasРђЎ evaluation and are not analysed further.
X
tРѕѕTy
ptender
t
РЅЦ0, 85 ┬и ¤ё ┬и len(Ty) Рѕњenon_delivered
y
Рѕђy РѕѕY
(3.37)
X
tРѕѕTy
(psolar
t
+ pwind
t
+ pbat
t ) РЅЦ0, 51 ┬и
X
tРѕѕTy
(ptot
t ) Рѕњerenewable_share
y
Рѕђy РѕѕY
(3.38)
cpenalty
utilisation ┬и enon_delivered
y
РЅцPenaltyy
Рѕђy РѕѕY
(3.39)
cpenalty
renewable ┬и erenewable_share
y
РЅцPenaltyy
Рѕђy РѕѕY
(3.40)
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Stochastic model
Whereas deterministic optimisation problems are formulated with known parame-
ters, as was done in Chapter 3, real-world problems typically include parameters
that are unknown at the time of decision-making. As discussed in Chapter 3, there
is uncertainty related to the input parameters of the deterministic model of the
hybrid power plant. Stochastic programming is an approach for modeling optimi-
sation problems that involve uncertainty, and this chapter presents an extension
of the deterministic model with tender compliance into a two-stage stochastic pro-
gram with recourse. The two-stage approach is elaborated in Section 4.1. Scenarios
that are used for the numerical solution of the stochastic model are discussed in
Section 4.2. The results for the stochastic model are presented in Chapter 7.
The decision variables of stochastic programming models are divided into two
classes: Anticipative variables relate to decisions that must be made here-and-
now, before the uncertainty in the input parameters has been resolved. Adaptive
variables relate to wait-and-see decisions that can be made after some or all of
the uncertainties are resolved. Stochastic programs that incorporate both types of
variables in a single model are called recourse models, where uncertainty is resolved
in discrete stages over time. Such models are widely applied in the financial field
[9].
4.1
Two-stage stochastic program
The two-stage stochastic program with recourse optimises the problem in two
separate stages. In the first stage, a decision is made before the uncertainty is
revealed and in the second stage, after the uncertainty is revealed. To account for
the uncertainty that can occur in the second stage, scenarios are used to create
multiple possible future outcomes using all information of the uncertainty. The two-
stage stochastic model optimises the expected value across all scenarios, resulting
in one solution for the model. The first-stage solution is applied to all scenarios,
and the second decision is made using recourse. The first-stage decision variables
have no scenarios attached to them, whilst in the second stage, a scenario index is
added to all relevant variables and parameters. Each scenario also has a probability
==PAGE:50==
32
4 Stochastic model
attached to determine how likely it is for that specific scenario to happen. The
probabilities of all scenarios sum up to one.
A general formulation for a two-stage stochastic program can be written as
below, where the set ¤Ѕ РѕѕРёдrepresents the scenarios [6, 56]:
min
cTx
|{z}
1. stage
+
X
¤ЅРѕѕРёд
(P(¤Ѕ)q(¤Ѕ)Ty(¤Ѕ))
|
{z
}
2. stage
(4.1)
s.t.
Ax = b
(4.2)
T(¤Ѕ)x + W(¤Ѕ)y(¤Ѕ) = h(¤Ѕ)
Рѕђ¤Ѕ РѕѕРёд
(4.3)
x РЅЦ0
(4.4)
y(¤Ѕ) РЅЦ0
Рѕђ¤Ѕ РѕѕРёд
(4.5)
For the hybrid power plant model, the first-stage decision is the sizing of the
power generating units, and the second-stage decision is the operation of the plant
in uncertain conditions РђЊ weather in this case. The sizing of the plant is thus
decided before the weather uncertainty is revealed.
Uncertainty in weather is
linked with the di№гђiculty of forecasting future solar irradiance and wind speeds. In
reality, weather-dependent renewable production can only be estimated one day
ahead. Anything exceeding this is uncertain. Forecasting solar radiation in India
is relatively straightforward, as the radiation pattern is fairly similar throughout
the year and across years. Forecasting wind is more di№гђicult and a 30-year wind
forecast is far from precise. However, patterns and trends can be identified in
historical weather data, and these can be used to make an evaluation of average
future weather РђЊ excluding the impact of climate change. This work is not extended
to include forecasting of weather conditions.
To simplify modelling, historical data on weather-dependent power production,
provided by Vestas, is used to generate scenarios for the plantРђЎs future operating
years, entailing that perfect foresight of future weather is assumed. This is dis-
cussed in more detail in Section 4.2. The model differs from the deterministic
model only by the scenario index s.
There is also a high degree of uncertainty related to the construction of scenar-
ios. This forecast uncertainty is not taken into account in the model, as perfect
foresight is assumed. When constructing the scenarios using past weather data,
there can be many different combinations of historical years. If a poor production
year occurs multiple times in one scenario versus several good production years
and no poor years occurring in another scenario, the results will be very different.
Risk has to be considered when making decisions under uncertainty. A popular
tool for managing risk in optimisation applications is the conditional value at risk
(CVaR) [3]. In this case, CVaR lowers the average revenue and removes outliers of
the scenarios. The emphasis here is on the average revenue across scenarios and
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Two-stage stochastic program
33
the ends of the distribution spectrum are not in focus. Adding a CVaR element
to the optimisation model will not add much to the final analysis, as it removes
the outliers and changes the average only to a small degree. The risk profile of the
scenarios can be analysed post optimisation by making a distribution of results
across scenarios.
The probability Ps is equal for all scenarios, as it cannot be determined which
scenarios are more probable than others. Thus, the probability is calculated by
dividing one with the number of scenarios, N, (4.6).
Ps = 1
N
Рѕђs РѕѕS
(4.6)
The stochastic model of the sizing and operation of the hybrid power plant is
presented below using the new set of scenarios s РѕѕS, which corresponds to ¤Ѕ РѕѕРёд
in the theoretical formulation above. All time-indexed variables and parameters
have a scenario index added.
In the same way as in the deterministic model, the objective function maximises
the NPV of the system. The first-stage decision includes the total initial investment
made in year 0 before the power plant begins to operate. The second stage includes
all parts relating to the operation of the power plant. The second stage is multiplied
with the probability of each scenario, resulting in one evaluation concerning the
outcome.
max
NPV =
X
sРѕѕS
Ps ┬и
X
yРѕѕY
№БФ
№БГ
1
(1 + r)y
 
Revy,s РѕњFuely,s РѕњOpexvar
y,s РѕњOpexfix
y
РѕњPenaltyy,s
!№БХ
№БИ
|
{z
}
2. stage
РѕњCapex
| {z }
1. stage
(4.7)
subject to:
Fuely,s =
X
tРѕѕTy

csolar ┬и psolar
t,s
+ cwind ┬и pwind
t,s
+ ccoal
t,s + cemis ┬и ╬║emis
╬иfuel
┬и pcoal
t,s
+ ccharge ┬и pbattery
t,s

Рѕђy РѕѕY, s РѕѕS
(4.8)
Opexvar
y,s =
X
tРѕѕTy

csolar
var
┬и psolar
t,s
+ cwind
var ┬и pwind
t,s
+ ccoal
var ┬и pcoal
t,s + cbattery
var
┬и pbattery
t,s
+ cE
var ┬и Ebattery
t,s

Рѕђy РѕѕY, s РѕѕS
(4.9)
==PAGE:52==
34
4 Stochastic model
Opexfix
y
= csolar
fix,y ┬и ┬»psolar
max + cwind
fix,y ┬и ┬»pwind
max + ccoal
fix,y ┬и ┬»pcoal
max + cbattery
fix,y
┬и ┬»pbattery
max
+ cE
fix,y ┬и ┬»Ebattery
max
+ cbattery
ref,y
┬и ┬»pbattery
max
+ cE
ref,y ┬и ┬»Ebattery
max
Рѕђy РѕѕY
(4.10)
Capex = csolar
capex ┬и ┬»psolar
max + cwind
capex ┬и ┬»pwind
max + ccoal
capex ┬и ┬»pcoal
max
+ cbattery
capex ┬и ┬»pbattery
max
+ cE
capex ┬и ┬»Emax + cbattery
BOS
┬и ┬»pbattery
max
(4.11)
Revy,s =
X
tРѕѕTy
(¤ђm
t,s ┬и pabove
t,s
+ ¤ђp
y ┬и ptender
t,s
)
Рѕђy РѕѕY, s РѕѕS
(4.12)
Penaltyy,s РЅЦcpenalty
utilisation ┬и enon_delivered
y,s
Рѕђy РѕѕY, s РѕѕS
(4.13)
Penaltyy,s РЅЦcpenalty
renewable ┬и erenewable_share
y,s
Рѕђy РѕѕY, s РѕѕS
(4.14)
0 РЅцpsolar
t,s
РЅцCF solar
t,s
┬и ┬»psolar
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.15)
0 РЅцpwind
t,s
РЅцCF wind
t,s
┬и ┬»pwind
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.16)
Cmin ┬и ┬»pcoal
max РЅцpcoal
t,s РЅц┬»pcoal
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.17)
Рѕњ┬»pbattery
max
РЅцpbattery
t,s
РЅц┬»pbattery
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.18)
0 РЅцpcharge
t,s
РЅц┬»pbattery
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.19)
0 РЅцpdischarge
t,s
РЅц┬»pbattery
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.20)
pbattery
t,s
= pdischarge
t,s
Рѕњpcharge
t,s
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.21)
pcharge
t,s
РЅцpsolar
t,s
+ pwind
t,s
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.22)
X
tРѕѕT
pdischarge
t,s
РЅцcycles ┬и ┬»pbattery
max
Рѕђs РѕѕS
(4.23)
SoCmin ┬и ┬»Ebattery
max
РЅцEt,s РЅцSoCmax ┬и ┬»Ebattery
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.24)
E0,s РЅц0, 5 ┬и ┬»Ebattery
max
Рѕђs РѕѕS
(4.25)
Et,s = EtРѕњ1,s + ╬иroundРѕњtrip ┬и pcharge
t,s
Рѕњpdischarge
t,s
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.26)
psolar
t,s
+ pwind
t,s
+ pcoal
t,s + pbattery
t,s
= ptot
t,s
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.27)
ptender
t,s
РЅц¤ё
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.28)
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Scenarios
35
ptender
t,s
РЅцptot
t,s
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.29)
ptot
t,s Рѕњptender
t,s
= pabove
t,s
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.30)
pcoal
emis ┬и pcoal
t,s = Emist,s
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.31)
psolar
t,s
+ pwind
t,s
+ pbattery
t,s
РЅцGC
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.32)
Et,s РЅцDF ┬и ┬»Ebattery
max
Рѕђt РѕѕT, s РѕѕS
(4.33)
┬»pcoal
max РЅц¤ё
(4.34)
┬»pbat
max РЅц¤ё
(4.35)
X
tРѕѕTy
ptender
t,s
РЅЦ0, 85 ┬и ¤ё ┬и len(Ty) Рѕњenon_delivered
y,s
Рѕђy РѕѕY, s РѕѕS
(4.36)
X
tРѕѕTy
(psolar
t,s
+ pwind
t,s
+ pbat
t,s ) РЅЦ0, 51 ┬и
X
tРѕѕTy
(ptot
t,s) Рѕњerenewable_share
y,s
Рѕђy РѕѕY, s РѕѕS
(4.37)
4.2
Scenarios
The time-indexed data used for optimisation are the PPA price, ¤ђp
y, the market
electricity prices, ¤ђm
t , the coal prices ccoal
t
and the hourly capacity factors for wind
and solar, CFwindt, CFsolart. As in the deterministic model, it is assumed that
the ¤ђp
y can increase each year for each scenario, provided the compliance criteria
are met. A stochastic evaluation of the ¤ђp
y will increase complexity of the model
significantly and it is therefore excluded from the formulation. So, no stochasticity
is assumed for the ¤ђp
y and therefore it has no scenario index added. The other
inputs are scenario indexed.
The deterministic model takes data indexed with a linear regression of time,
using the historical data as a forecast for future conditions, i.e. assuming perfect
foresight. The stochastic model also assumes perfect foresight for the operation
of the power plant. Scenarios of the modelРђЎs outcome are produced by shuffling
annual weather-dependent power data to create different combinations of years for
the simulation. Time still progresses for the variables, but the data is mixed up in
terms of years. The investment decision has been made in the first stage, and the
second stage provides a combination of historical years as forecasts for future years.
An example is given below: assuming there are two scenarios for the operational
outcome in the second stage, the years could be combined as in Figure 4.1.
==PAGE:54==
36
4 Stochastic model
Figure 4.1: Example of scenario combination
For the first scenario s1, the operational years y1, y2, y3 correspond to the his-
torical years y3, y2, y2 and for the second scenario s2, y1, y3, y2. Accordingly, for
the operating year y1 in scenario s1, hourly data is used from the historical year
y3. In the case of two scenarios, the probability for each is 0,5. A historical year
can appear multiple times as data for different future operating years, as seen in
s1. Assuming perfect foresight means that from the outset, it is known how the
plantРђЎs production will evolve during the entire 30 years of operation. This way
branching is done only once, reducing complexity significantly. Still, considerable
uncertainty related to using past data as future forecasts does exist.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Data inputs
This chapter presents all the data inputs used for the deterministic investment
model of the hybrid power plant. The following data are provided by Vestas: elec-
tricity production by wind turbines and solar PV panels, discussed in Section 5.1;
the majority of the technical parameters in Section 5.2; and the market prices for
electricity in Section 5.3.2. Operating, maintenance and investment cost estimates
for the different technologies applied are listed in Section 5.3. Revenue estimation
is discussed in Section 5.4 and the discount rate for the NPV calculation in Sec-
tion 5.5.
5.1
Wind and solar data
Vestas has provided the power production data for the V155-3MW wind turbine
and Hanwha HSL60P6-PA-4-250T [2013] PV modules. The data gives the amount
of power generated by one unit in kWh. The solar production model is simulated
in PVLIB, an open source tool from Sandia National Laboratories [54], whereas
the wind model is created by Vestas. Both solar and wind power production data
are given for the last 21 years, starting from the year 2000 and ending in 2020.
To match the hybrid power plantРђЎs 30-year operating life in the simulation, the
2000-2020 data set is duplicated with updated years in the timestamp. Data for
the last 9 years of the plantРђЎs operation is production data starting from year 2000
up till 2008. The uncertainty resulting from the use of past data as a proxy for
future production is already considerable, so reusing some data will not make a
big difference in the simulation.
The wind and solar data are modified by replacing negative production values
by a very small positive number close to zero. The wind data has some null values
which are replaced by an 0,0 entry.
Hourly capacity factors, CF1, for solar irradiation and wind are derived from
the data provided by Vestas. To calculate the hourly capacity factors, the power
1The abbreviation CF denotes hourly capacity factor throughout the report unless stated
otherwise.
==PAGE:56==
38
5 Data inputs
produced in one hour is divided by the nominal capacity of the producing unit.
The wind turbine has a nominal capacity of 3,3 MW and the solar PV panel 1
MW. The hourly capacity factors are calculated by:
CF solar
t
= powert(kW)
1000(kW)
CF wind
t
= powert(kW)
3300(kW)
(5.1)
Figure 5.1 shows the distribution of wind and solar capacity factors for the
year 2000, used as data for the first operational year. The median for wind power
varies notably throughout the year, as illustrated in Figure 5.1a. The median is the
highest from April to October and decreases for the winter months. Fifty percent
of the values lie in the coloured box. The circles indicate outliers. In May, the
median and most values are very close to 1,0, but the month also includes many
outliers. The median for the hourly solar capacity does not change visibly across
the year, staying close to zero all year round, as shown in Figure 5.1b. No solar
energy is produced at night, and the difference in the length of day and night is
not large, since the plant is located fairly close to the equator.
(a) Hourly wind capacity factors by month (b) Hourly solar capacity factors by month
Figure 5.1: Hourly capacity factors shown as a monthly distribution for year 2000
5.2
Technical parameters
Other technical parameters for the different technologies of the hybrid power plant
are described in this section. As indicated in Chapter 3, it is assumed that tech-
nology suppliersРђЎ warranties and warranty services ensure that the technologies
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Technical parameters
39
are kept in operating condition throughout the plantРђЎs 30-year service life. Solar
photovoltaic panels have an average lifetime of 30 years [34]. Onshore wind tur-
bines are given an average service life of approximately 35 years [16]. Coal-fired
power plants have been historically decommissioned at an average age of 46 years
globally, but in many cases, they can operate for 50 to 60 years or even longer
[10]. Based on these average useful lives, it is assumed that the warranty contracts
for solar PV, wind and thermal coal technologies cover the plantРђЎs entire lifespan.
The battery warranty is specified as 10 years by Vestas, with refurbishment or
replacement of equipment and renewal of warranty every ten years.
Description
Symbol
Value
Unit
Source
Assumed plant life
LTplant
30
yr
Wind turbines
Assumed lifetime warranty
LTwind
30
yr
Photovoltaics
Assumed lifetime warranty
LTsolar
30
yr
Thermal coal
Assumed lifetime warranty
LTcoal
30
yr
Min online rate
Cmin
0,4
[47]
Thermal e№гђiciency
╬иcoal
fuel
0,44
[69]
Emissions per energy unit
pcoal
emis
0,98
TonnesCO2/MWh
[45]
Lithium-ion battery
Lifetime warranty
LTbattery
10
yr
Vestas
Maximum energy capacity
SOCmax
0,9
[-]
Minimum energy capacity
SOCmin
0,04
[-]
Round trip e№гђiciency
╬иbat
0,8821
[-]
Degradation
degbat
0,02
per yr
Maximum discharge cycles
cycles
365
per yr
Table 5.1: Technical specifications of production technologies
The battery technology parameters are specified by Vestas for a lithium-ion
battery. The battery has maximum accumulated discharge cycles of 365 per year,
so an average of one full discharge per day. The degradation of battery cells is
==PAGE:58==
40
5 Data inputs
linear at 2% per yaer, assuming full use of the cycles during a year.
The 2%
include both minimal static or calendar ageing and dynamic degradation. The
lifetime of the battery can be prolonged by repowering and changing cells in the
battery pack. Technical parameters for thermal coal are based on international
standards for advanced supercritical coal power plants with SO2 and NOx control
technologies.
5.3
Cost estimation
The NPV for the hybrid power plant is calculated as the present value of annual
net cash inflow-outflows minus the required initial investment in the plant. The
main cash outflows include fuel costs and various operations and maintenance
costs. Estimates for these costs and the investment costs or capital expenditures
are summarised in Table 5.2.
It is assumed that the production of renewable power does not have any fuel
costs attached. The same applies to the battery. As the battery is only charged
from renewable power, the fuel (charging) cost for the battery is the same as for
the power source used to charge the battery [39] - in this case solar and wind.
The emission cost for thermal coal is assumed to be 0 Рѓг/MWh, since India has no
regulatory framework for carbon emissions in place yet [38].
The U.S. Department of EnergyРђЎs National Renewable Energy Laboratory
NREL provides current and projected cost and performance data for renewable
and conventional energy technologies in its Annual Technology Baseline (ATB)
dataset. The data are given for the USA and are used as input assumptions, for
example, for technology and fuel costs in energy analysis [47]. With the exception
of the fuel cost for thermal coal and battery refurbishment costs, the data in Ta-
ble 5.2 are based on future cost projections for the year 2021, as presented in the
2019 ATB. It is assumed that the US data can reasonably be used as approxima-
tions for India.
The fuel cost for coal is specific for the Indian market. The price is given in
USD/tonne, and first converted to USD/MWh, using the tonne of coal equivalent
to MWh factor, and then converted to Рѓг/MWh. The refurbishment costs for the
battery refer to estimated costs of extending the battery life and warranty, paid
every ten years of operation, i.e. in years 11 and 21. The costs are calculated as
shown below:
cbattery
ref,y
= f bat ┬и (cbattery
capex + cbattery
BOS )
cE
ref,y = f E ┬и cE
capex
(5.2)
For land-based wind and utility-scale PV, the ATB treats all operations and
maintenance (O&M) costs as fixed. These include costs like insurance and land
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Cost estimation
41
lease payments as well as large component replacement costs and scheduled and
unscheduled maintenance costs. Fixed O&M costs are also provided for battery
storage, whilst O&M costs for coal-fired power plants are classified as variable and
fixed. Non-fuel variable O&M costs for coal plants include costs like water and
wastewater treatment and ash disposal costs. Contracted maintenance services
and materials are included in fixed O&M.
Besides wind turbines and PV modules, capital expenditures (CAPEX) for
the wind and solar systems include cost items like site preparation, foundations,
underground utilities and buildings; electrical infrastructure, such as transformers,
switchgear and wiring; and other so-called balance-of-system costs. The actual
battery pack is the largest capex item for the battery storage. For coal power
plants, capex is calculated in the ATB using the overnight capital cost that is
based on a hypothetical scenario of building a coal plant overnight. This simplistic
approach is used in the power generation industry as a first approximation of
capital costs.
All dollar values in the 2019 ATB dataset are presented in 2017 US dollars.
An inflation adjustment of 7,30% is made to express the data in 2021 dollars. For
currency conversion from USD to EUR, a USD-EUR exchange rate of 0,83 РђЊ the
year to date (YTD) average rate in 2021 РђЊ is used in the calculations.
Description
Symbol
Value
Unit
Source
Wind turbines
Production cost
cwind
p
0
Рѓг/MWh
Variable O&M
cwind
opexV ar
0
Рѓг/MWh
[47]
Fixed O&M
cwind
opexFix,y
39.185,96
Рѓг/MW/yr
CAPEX
cwind
capex
1.445.427,57
Рѓг/MW
Photovoltaics
Production cost
csolar
p
0
Рѓг/MWh
Variable O&M
csolar
opexV ar
0
Рѓг/MWh
[47]
Fixed O&M
csolar
opexFix,y
12.468,26
Рѓг/MW/yr
CAPEX
csolar
capex
993.007,85
Рѓг/MW
Thermal coal
Fuel cost
ccoal
fuel
Section 5.3.1
Рѓг/MWh
[68]
Variable O&M
ccoal
opexV ar
4,45
Рѓг/MWh
[47]
Fixed O&M
ccoal
opexFix,y
29.389,47
Рѓг/MW/yr
==PAGE:60==
42
5 Data inputs
CAPEX
ccoal
capex
3.528.517,58
Рѓг/MW
Emission costs per ton
ccoal
emission
0
Рѓг/TonnesCO2
[38]
Lithium-ion battery
Charging/discharging cost
ccharge
p
0
Рѓг/MWh
Variable O&M
cbat
opexV ar
0
Рѓг/MWh
[47]
Fixed O&M energy
cE
opexFix,y
0
Рѓг/MW/yr
Fixed O&M power
cbat
opexFix,y
31.749,53
Рѓг/MW/yr
CAPEX energy
cE
capex
169.212,10
Рѓг/MW
CAPEX power
cbat
capex
1.269.981,34
Рѓг/MW
Balance of System, BOS
cbat
BOS
594.914,12
Рѓг/MW
Refurbishment cost factor
f bat, f E
0,3
Vestas
Refurbishment cost power
cbat
Ref,y
559.468,64
Рѓг/MW
Refurbishment cost energy
cE
Ref,y
50.763,63
Рѓг/MW
Table 5.2: Numerical economic values for applied production technologies
5.3.1
Coal prices
Coal prices are based on ICE/NYMEX coal futures retrieved from [68]. Rough
estimates of historical average monthly prices from a 2009 to 2020 time series
have been copied and duplicated for the 2021-2050 simulation framework, and the
average monthly price is used for every hour in a particular month. The monthly
variation in coal prices is illustrated in Figure 5.2.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Cost estimation
43
Figure 5.2: Monthly variation in coal prices
5.3.2
Electricity prices
Electricity prices are market prices provided by Vestas and derived from IEX (In-
dian Energy Exchange). After data cleansing to remove incorrect and duplicated
data, hourly prices from 2019 have been applied for all years in the 2021-2050
simulation framework, with a yearly price increase factor from 2021 to 2050 based
on the average annual inflation rate of 6,09% in India over the last 20 years [27].
Figure 5.3 shows the electricity price for 2019 in comparison with the coal price.
Figure 5.3: 2019 electricity prices and coal prices
==PAGE:62==
44
5 Data inputs
5.4
Revenue estimation
Cash inflows in the NPV calculation consist of the annual sales revenue generated
by the hybrid power plant. The revenue depends on the amount of electricity
purchased by SECI and the amount (production exceeding the contracted capacity)
sold on the open market, as well as the PPA-based tariff and the market price for
electricity. The bid tariff is at the discretion of the bidder, and the final tariff
will be decided in the auction process. Hence, a notional or hypothetical price of
70 Рѓг/MWh is used in the investment calculation. As explained earlier, the price
increases 3% per year for the first 15 years and then remains at the level prevailing
in year 15.
5.5
Discount rate
In the NPV analysis, todayРђЎs value of the expected cash flows is compared with
todayРђЎs value of the capital invested in the hybrid project. The future cash flows
are translated into todayРђЎs value by using a discount rate.
The discount rate
accounts for the time value of money РђЊ money in the present is worth more than
an equal amount in the future. The higher the discount rate, the lower the present
value of the future cash flows [21].
A company can determine the discount rate using the rate of return expected
by investors or using the cost of capital raised from various sources. Investors
can compare the returns on an investment project with the returns on comparable
size and risk investments in the securities market. The cost of capital, in turn, is
calculated as the weighted average cost of both debt and equity capital (WACC).
The WACC reflects the companyРђЎs current capital structure, and it should be used
for discounting cash flows with a risk that is similar to the risk of the overall firm.
The WACC is problematic in assessing high-risk projects, because to reflect the
higher risk, the companyРђЎs cost of capital would be higher than its current WACC.
For modelling purposes, a suitable discount rate for the hybrid power plant
investment in India is estimated at 10-12% by Vestas. 11% is used as the discount
rate in the NPV calculation.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 6
Results of deterministic
model
This chapter presents the results obtained from the deterministic model. First,
a pure operational model is simulated without any investment or sizing decision.
As discussed in Chapter 3, the operating principles of the hybrid power plant
are described as an economic dispatch model. The functionality of the economic
dispatch model is examined in Section 6.1, including a sensitivity analysis. The
simulation was made over one year of operation.
Next, the investment model,
which optimises the power plant sizing by maximising the NPV of the plant in-
vestment, is presented.
Two simulations were made: one for a model without
tender compliance, discussed in Section 6.2 below, and another with compliance,
presented in Section 6.3. Simulations were conducted over the entire lifetime of
the plant, which is assumed to be 30 years. The results for the two investment
models are compared in Section 6.4. Section 6.5 outlines sensitivity analyses that
were carried out to determine how changes in the modelsРђЎ input parameter values
affect the results.
6.1
Functionality of economic dispatch
model
The optimal operation of the hybrid power plant is simulated over one year. The
simulation is run on a daily basis, using wind and solar power data and other data
presented in Chapter 5. As the operational model does not consider any sizing of
the plant, the installed capacities of the plant units have to be assumed. Arbitrary
values for the installed capacities or maximum production capacities are set as in
Table 6.1.
It is assumed that all relevant technologies are included in the energy mix and
contribute to the system. As the modelРђЎs input capacity values are arbitrary, the
outputs are not interesting as such. However, the results can be used to assess the
==PAGE:64==
46
6 Results of deterministic model
functionality of the model and to evaluate if it works as expected.
┬»psolar
max
┬»pwind
max
┬»pcoal
max
┬»pbattery
max
┬»Ebattery
max
300 MW
400 MW
250 MW
250 MW
300 MW
Table 6.1: Installed capacities of hybrid power plant units for operational model
The objective of the operational model is to minimise cost, and the objective
function is defined as cost minus revenue in (3.5). The one-year simulation pro-
duces an objective value of -206.781.453,72 Рѓг. A negative value indicates that the
system is profitable, and the power producer is earning money.
An example of the production profiles of the different technologies over a three-
day timespan can be seen in Figure 6.1. The wind power production follows a
random pattern for every 24 hours, whereas the solar PV panels only produce
electricity during the middle of the day-time period, as expected. As the fuel cost
of renewable wind and solar power is zero, the model prioritises these generation
Figure 6.1: Sample production profiles of hybrid power plant units in operational
model simulation
units. The cost of charging the battery is equal to the cost of renewables, as the
battery is charged with solar and wind power. The battery production depends
on the availability of electricity from the wind and solar units, since part of the
renewable power is injected directly into the grid. Coal is used as a balancing
==PAGE:65==
6.1 Functionality of economic dispatch model
47
power to the intermittent renewable power. Coal-fired production is driven by
fuel cost. To push down system costs, the model does not use the maximum coal-
fired capacity at all times. The amount of coal power generated depends on the
marginal cost and the market electricity price: when the marginal cost is smaller
than the electricity price, the coal unit is set to produce to increase profit.
The battery state of charge is initialised at half of its maximum capacity at
125 MW. The batteriesРђЎ charge and discharge patterns, based on an average of one
full charge-discharge cycle a day, can be seen in Figure 6.2a.
Figure 6.2b illustrates how the power production follows the market electricity
prices and how the operational model satisfies the tender-based power requirement
at all hours. For the whole year of simulated operation, no penalty is paid, implying
that the total system satisfies demand without shortfalls.
All power produced
above the required 250 MW is sold at market price, whereas the 250 MW is
supplied at the PPA tariff.
(a) Battery power and state of energy
(b) Total production with market price and
power requirement
Figure 6.2: Sample battery behaviour and total production profile in operational
model simulation
6.1.1
Sensitivity of economic dispatch model
The operational or economic dispatch model is a representation of the hybrid power
plant in operation. As can be seen from the simulation results above, the plant is
economically feasible under the tender condition of 250 MW capacity and when
the installed capacities of the individual power units are as given above. How
changing the values of these metrics affects the plantРђЎs operation and the 250 MW
==PAGE:66==
48
6 Results of deterministic model
requirement is now investigated. The metrics and values tested are presented in
Table 6.2.
Metric
Original
New values tested
Unit
Bid size
250
500, 750, 1000
MW
Solar capacity
300
0, 100, 200, 400, 500
MW
Wind capacity
400
0, 100, 200, 300, 500, 600
MW
Coal capacity
250
0, 50, 100, 150, 200, 300
MW
Battery power capacity
250
0, 50, 100, 150, 200, 300
MW
Battery energy capacity
300
0, 50, 100, 150, 200, 250
MWh
Table 6.2: Values tested for sensitivity analysis of economic dispatch model
Increasing the bid size, whilst keeping the plantРђЎs power unit capacities un-
changed, is first tested to see how much power can be extracted from the units
before the contractual penalties for shortfalls in overall power delivery kick in and
how the changes affect the plantРђЎs profitability. With the unit capacities given
in Table 6.1, the hybrid power plant can deliver the required 250 MW with zero
shortfall penalty for one year of simulation.
However, when the bid size is in-
creased, the shortfall penalties start to take effect. At 500 MW, the plant starts
paying a penalty for the shortfall of power within a year. The objective value is
still negative, meaning the plant still generates a profit at the end of the year. At
750 MW and 1.000 MW, the power delivery deficit is much larger, as can be seen
in Figure 6.3b. The system is not able to cope with a 1.000 MW bid size at any
(a) Total power production by source
(b) Power availability shortfalls
Figure 6.3: Effect of varying bid size on total power production and power avail-
ability shortfalls
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Functionality of economic dispatch model
49
point during the year. Both 750 MW and 1.000 MW produce a positive objective
value, indicating that the plant operates at a loss.
The analysis implies that the bid size cannot be markedly increased without
scaling up the power unit capacities. The plant is already delivering its maximum
energy to meet the 250 MW bid size. As illustrated in Figure 6.3a, the change
in total energy production is minimal. It is also noticeable that at 250 MW, the
system uses very little of the available battery capacity. The same applies to the
500 MW bid size. At 750 MW and 1.000 MW, no battery is used.
Keeping the bid size unchanged, changes in installed unit capacities are then
tested separately for each unit of the plant, keeping the bid size unchanged. As the
original system can satisfy the tender without problems, it is interesting to analyse
how a change in a unitРђЎs capacity affects the profitability and shortfall penalties.
Figure 6.4a shows that changing the solar unit capacity results in a negative ob-
jective value for all cases and no penalty is issued. This means that removing the
solar capacity entirely will still enable a profitable operation. The same conclusion
can be drawn for the decrease or removal of wind power capacity, as well as for the
decrease or removal of both solar and wind capacity simultaneously. In all cases,
the battery is used minimally.
(a) Varying solar capacity
(b) Varying wind capacity
Figure 6.4: Effect of varying renewable capacity on total power production by
source
The coal-fired capacity shows to be more critical for the plant operation. All
tested coal power capacities are profitable with a negative objective value. But all
capacities below 250 MW lead to the plant having issues with satisfying the 250
MW tender requirement at all times, meaning there is a penalty cost to pay. This
can also be seen in Figure 6.5.
==PAGE:68==
50
6 Results of deterministic model
(a) Total power production by source
(b) Power availability shortfalls
Figure 6.5: Effect of varying coal capacity on total power production and power
availability shortfalls
As Figure 6.6 illustrates, changing the battery power or energy capacity does
not have a large effect on the total power production, since the battery is not
utilised to any high degree.
The system is able to meet the 250 MW tender
requirement with or without a battery storage.
(a) Varying battery power capacity
(b) Varying battery energy capacity
Figure 6.6: Effect of varying battery power and energy capacity on total power
production by source
As discussed in Chapter 3, the operating model optimises towards delivering
the agreed 250 MW tender requirement with the objective of generating a profit
==PAGE:69==
6.2 Plant sizing without tender compliance
51
to the power producer РђЊ not maximising social welfare. The sensitivity analysis
shows that when one only needs to consider the 250 MW requirement and the
penalty for overall power availability shortfalls, a profitable operation does not
require renewable power generation. Minimum 250 MW of coal-fired capacity is
needed to meet the required 250 MW at all times and to avoid shortfall penalties.
6.2
Plant sizing without tender compliance
The investment model without tender compliance is a general model for the hybrid
power plant investment in India without consideration of the specific tender com-
pliance criteria. For the purposes of modelling РђЊ and for comparison with plant
sizing with tender compliance РђЊ it is assumed that the plant is required to supply
250 MW of power, pays 400% penalties (calculated at the applicable power tariff)
for all shortfalls in the power supply and sells electricity at 70 Рѓг/MWh under a
25-year PPA. The production profiles of the different technologies over two sample
timespans are shown in Figure 6.7. The energy mix comprises 345 MW of wind,
60 MW of solar PV and 207 MW of coal-fired power capacity. No investment is
made in a battery storage unit. The graphs in Figure 6.7a and 6.7b show that coal
is balancing the power production when wind and solar power generation is low.
(a) 2000-01-01 12:00 to 2000-01-04 11:00
(b) 2000-12-31 11:00 to 2001-01-03 19:00
Figure 6.7: Sample production profiles of hybrid power plant units in simulation
of investment model without tender compliance
Figure 6.8 visualises the power produced in comparison with the required sup-
ply of power, set at 250 MW. The sample timespans are the same as in Figure 6.7.
==PAGE:70==
52
6 Results of deterministic model
For the two periods examined, the power producer is not able to meet the 250
MW requirement, as illustrated in Figure 6.8a and Figure 6.8b. Throughout the
25-year contract period, between 5 and 12 million euros are paid in shortfall penal-
ties each year. The way the model works, penalties are paid to make up for a
smaller investment. The share of penalties of total costs is nevertheless quite low.
(a) 2000-01-01 12:00 to 2000-01-04 11:00
(b) 2000-12-31 11:00 to 2001-01-03 19:00
Figure 6.8: Total power production in relation to power requirement without ten-
der compliance
Figure 6.9a illustrates how the plant sells power only on the open market after
the PPA expires. The costs and revenues are shown without discounting. The last
five years of operation are not shown in Figure 6.9b, as there is no contractual
delivery requirement and hence, no penalty is charged. The expiry of the PPA
affects the production volume and decreases revenues significantly. To still be able
to make a profit, the power plant generates less power.
The total investment for the system in year zero is 1.288.719.647 Рѓг.
The
objective value, which is the NPV, becomes 141.334.170 Рѓг, which is the profit
obtained from operating the system for 30 years. With a positive NPV, the power
project can be viewed as a worthwhile investment. The project has an internal
rate of return (IRR) of 12%, which is higher than the 11% discount rate used
in the NPV calculation, also indicating an economically viable investment profile.
The investment has a payback period of 8,66 years, after which the project will
generate a positive cashflow.
A benefit cost ratio (BCR) is calculated at 2,09.
Whilst the NPV measures the absolute net economic gain, the BCR focuses on
relative profitability, facilitating the comparison of different investment projects.
A BCR above 1 indicates the investment is profitable.
==PAGE:71==
6.3 Plant sizing with tender compliance
53
(a) Annual costs and revenues
(b) Power availability shortfalls
Figure 6.9: Penalty costs and power availability shortfalls without tender compli-
ance
The LCOE for the whole system is 17,15 Рѓг/MWh for the required 250 MW.
The main revenue source is the (hypothetical) PPA tariff, 70 Рѓг/MWh, and since
the LCOE is so low compared to the tariff, the plant generates a healthy profit.
6.3
Plant sizing with tender compliance
The investment model with tender compliance is a model of the hybrid power
plant investment under the specific tender conditions set out in the invitation to
tender and the PPA. According to the conditions, the power producer is allowed to
supply less than 100% of the contracted power: The producer is obliged to ensure
at least 85% power availability annually. There is also a requirement for the share
of renewable power: The producer is required to supply at least 51% of annual
power from renewable energy sources. For shortfalls in availability and renewable
energy share, the power producer is obliged to pay penalties calculated at 400% of
the applicable tariff.
When the tender compliance criteria are observed, the wind capacity is in-
creased to 483 MW and the solar capacity to 231 MW, whereas the coal-fired ca-
pacity is reduced to 21 MW. The production profiles of the different technologies
over two sample timespans are shown in Figure 6.10a and 6.10b. When compared
with Figure 6.7 (with the same sample timespans), there is a clear difference in
coal-fired generation. The battery storage system is still excluded. The invest-
ment cost is high and there are technical limitations as compared to the other
==PAGE:72==
54
6 Results of deterministic model
technologies. Batteries help integrate greater shares of variable renewables into
a power system, improving grid stability and security of supply. In this hybrid
power project, coal-based thermal power is deployed for the same purpose. Battery
storage also remains an early-stage technology and is heavily dependent on policy
support. India has promoted batteries in large-scale solar-plus-storage auctions,
where battery storage is mandated [29]. For this project, batteries are not manda-
tory.
The hybrid power plant can be built with or without an energy storage
system, as long as the 85% power availability is ensured. The 51% renewable en-
ergy share can also include dispatch from the storage system, provided renewable
power is used to charge the battery. However, the model shows that the battery
storage system is not viable in this project.
(a) 2000-01-01 12:00 to 2000-01-04 11:00
(b) 2000-12-31 11:00 to 2001-01-03 19:00
Figure 6.10: Sample production profiles of hybrid power plant units in simulation
of investment model with tender compliance
Figure 6.11 shows how the hybrid power plant produces power to satisfy the
tender criteria of 85% power availability and 51% renewable energy share, and how
much electricity is sold on the open market. Both the 85% and 51% requirements
concern average annual availability. This means that less than 85% of power or
less than 51% of renewable energy can be supplied on an hourly or monthly basis,
as long as the annual averages stay above the thresholds. This leaves some latitude
to the power producer, which can also be seen in Figure 6.12, showing that during
the 25-year contract term, there are only a few years when the producer has to
pay shortfall penalties. The penalty is zero for most years. In years 3, 15, 16, 19
and 24 there is an extra cost for not meeting the tender criteria. The penalties
stem from violating both the availability (Figure 6.12b) and the renewable share
requirement (Figure 6.12a).
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Plant sizing with tender compliance
55
(a) 2000-01-01 12:00 to 2000-01-04 11:00
(b) 2000-12-31 11:00 to 2001-01-03 19:00
Figure 6.11: Total power production in relation to tender requirement with tender
compliance
(a) Annual renewable power produced and
required
(b) Power availability shortfalls
Figure 6.12: Renewable energy share and power availability shortfalls under tender
compliance
Figure 6.13 shows the cost and revenue distribution under tender compliance.
The majority of the revenue originates from electricity sales under the PPA at the
hypothetical 70 Рѓг/MWh tariff. The largest cost item is the fixed opex. Almost no
variable opex or fuel cost is paid, owing to the low amount of coal-fired power and
==PAGE:74==
56
6 Results of deterministic model
the mandatory renewable energy generation with no fuel cost. The penalty cost is
illustrated as red peaks in the graph.
The total investment in the system in year zero for the system is 999.537.213
Рѓг. The objective value (NPV) becomes 503.422.875 Рѓг, and the project has an
IRR of 17%. The payback time of 6,31 years, after which the investment starts to
generate a positive cashflow. The BCR is calculated at 3,23. All values indicate
that the hybrid power project is economically viable. The levelised cost of energy
for the whole system is 13,51 Рѓг/MWh for the contracted power delivered under
the PPA.
Figure 6.13: Annual costs and revenues under tender compliance
6.4
Comparison of results
The simulation results of the investment models with and without compliance have
some differences, which are presented in this section. As can be seen from Table 6.3,
the investment cost is lower in the model with tender compliance. The difference
is almost 290 million euros (289.182.434), even though the installed capacity is 123
MW higher than in the non-compliance alternative. This is mainly because of the
higher share of (less expensive) solar power capacity instead of (more expensive)
coal power capacity in the compliance model.
==PAGE:75==
6.4 Comparison of results
57
Metric
Investment without
compliance criteria
Investment with
compliance criteria
Unit
Total investment
1.288.719.647
999.537.213
Рѓг
Objective value
141.334.170
503.422.875
Рѓг
LCOE
17,15
13,51
Рѓг/MWh
Total capacity
611
735
MW
Solar capacity
60
231
MW
Wind capacity
345
483
MW
Coal capacity
206
21
MW
Battery power capacity
0
0
MW
Battery energy capacity
0
0
MWh
Table 6.3: Comparison of key simulation results of investment models with and
without tender compliance
The investment model with tender compliance suggests that it makes sense
to invest in solar power generation in India. The invitation to tender also notes
that renewable energy support policies РђЊ together with technological advances and
economies of scale РђЊ have brought down the solar (and wind) power tariffs in India
to levels lower than the cost of power from contemporary thermal power plants.
This is facilitating the rapid deployment of solar (and wind) capacity. As one of
the Sunbelt countries, India does have abundant solar radiation and represents an
attractive opportunity both in terms of investment attractiveness and so-called PV
attractiveness (attractiveness of solar PV as a mainstream source in a countryРђЎs
electricity supply) [17]. The cost of PV panels globally has also declined rapidly
over the last decades, driven by factors like increased module e№гђiciency and scale
economies in module manufacturing, catalysed by market-stimulating policies [36].
Adding the compliance criteria to the deterministic model decreases investment
in thermal coal capacity РђЊ even if coal is still deployed to some degree as balancing
power РђЊ and prioritises renewable energy sources, which is also the aim of the
tendering process initiated by SECI.
The NPV of the compliance model is also higher than the NPV of the non-
compliance model, meaning that the earnings are higher at the end of the plant
operating life. The LCOE for the model with compliance is 13,51 Рѓг/MWh and for
the model without compliance 17,15 Рѓг/MWh. The difference is 3,64 Рѓг/MWh. As
a benchmark from the wind power industry, NRELРђЎs 2019 Cost of Wind Energy
Review estimates the LCOE of a representative 2,6 MW land-based wind turbine
at 37 $/MWh, which roughly corresponds to 31 Рѓг/MWh [62]. This is substantially
higher than the LCOE values of the simulated system, indicating that there are
costs, such as labour expenses, that are not accounted for in the model РђЊ even if
no direct comparison can be drawn between a wind power system and a hybrid
==PAGE:76==
58
6 Results of deterministic model
power system.
Also, the discount rate affects the outcome significantly. The discount rate used
in the investment calculations for this hybrid power plant in India is 11%, which
is high compared with the USA, where NREL estimates a discount rate between
5 and 6% for renewable energy investments. A higher discount rate reduces the
LCOE [18].
Table 6.4 shows the share of investment of the solar, wind and coal units of the
total investment cost. For the non-compliance model, the coal capex represents
more than half of the total investment cost, although the coal power capacity is
lower than the wind power capacity. Investment in coal-fired capacity is signifi-
cantly reduced when tender compliance is included in the model. This also reduces
the LCOE.
Capex
Investment without
compliance criteria
% of
total
Investment with
compliance criteria
% of
total
Total investment
1.288.719.647
999.537.213
Solar investment
59.580.471
5%
229.384.813
23%
Wind investment
498.672.512
39%
698.141.516
69%
Coal investment
726.874.621
56%
74.098.869
8%
Table 6.4: Capex shares of hybrid power plant units for investment models with
and without tender compliance
(a) 2000-01-01 12:00 to 2000-01-04 11:00
(b) 2000-12-31 11:00 to 2001-01-03 19:00
Figure 6.14: Total power production in relation to required power over two sample
timespans for investment models with and without tender compliance (compl. =
model with tender compliance)
==PAGE:77==
6.4 Comparison of results
59
The total power production in relation to the power required under the tender
conditions is illustrated over two sample timespans Figure 6.14a and 6.14a for both
models.
For the compliance model, power generation follows the tender-based
power requirement more closely than for the general investment model without
tender compliance. This mostly results from the compliance criteria allowing the
producer to deliver less than 100% of the contracted power capacity.
The non-discounted cost structure and revenue streams in the two simulations
over the plantРђЎs 30-year lifespan are compared in Figure 6.15. For the compliance
model (Figure 6.15b), the revenues are somewhat lower than for the model without
compliance (Figure 6.15a).
(a) Investment model without compliance
(b) Investment model with compliance
Figure 6.15: Comparison of annual costs and revenues for investment models with
and without tender compliance
The compliance model also has very low fuel costs, as coal-fired power is used
only to a limited extent. Adding the tender compliance criteria increases the share
of free-fuel renewable energy, decreasing the share of coal in the cost structure.
The penalty cost structure differs between the models: In the non-compliance
model, penalties are distributed evenly across the 25-year contract term, whereas
in the compliance model, penalties are only paid in some years, as the lower power
availability requirement provides for greater flexibility to the power producer.
6.4.1
Emissions
The CO2 emissions in the two investment models can be seen in Figure 6.16. Car-
bon emissions are not included in the tender compliance criteria, but they were
==PAGE:78==
60
6 Results of deterministic model
calculated to provide an additional metric for comparing the two models.
As
would be expected, the amount of CO2 generated is substantially larger for the
non-compliance model РђЊ with 206 MW of installed coal-fired generation capacity
РђЊ than for the compliance model with only 21 MW of coal power capacity. Coal-
fired power generation also causes other emissions, such as sulphur dioxide and
nitrogen oxides, but only CO2 emissions are considered here. The CO2 emissions
released from other sources during the construction, operation, maintenance and
dismantling of the hybrid power plant are not included in the calculation.
Figure 6.16: CO2 emissions over 30 years for investment models with and without
tender compliance
As an example, the carbon intensity of electricity consumed in Maharashtra,
a central western state in India where power is produced mainly by coal, is 678
kg/MWh [67]. For the compliance model, the average carbon intensity is calcu-
lated at 54 kg/MWh, which is significantly lower than the current level of carbon
emissions from Indian power production.
IndiaРђЎs per capita carbon emissions are low as compared to the global average.
But with about 7% of the total global CO2 emissions, India is the third largest
CO2 emitter in the world РђЊ broadly on par with the EU РђЊ and therefore has a
big role to play in the mitigation of these emissions [28]. CO2 emissions are not
formally regulated in India, but some regulatory measures are likely to be required
in the future, as India has rea№гђirmed its pledge under the Paris Agreement to cut
==PAGE:79==
6.5 Sensitivity analysis
61
the greenhouse gas emissions intensity of its GDP by 33-35% by 2030 from 2005
levels [38].
Although India does not have an explicit price on carbon emissions, there
are some schemes that put an implicit price on carbon. The Perform, Achieve and
Trade (PAT) scheme is a market-based mechanism (a sort of cap-and-trade system)
to incentivise energy e№гђiciency in large energy-intensive industries, also targeting
carbon emission reductions. Excess energy savings can be traded through energy
saving certificates on electricity exchanges such as IEX. There is also a steady
rise in the number of Indian companies that have adopted internal carbon pricing
(ICP) to deliver on their corporate sustainability goals [51]. The fiscal gains from
pricing carbon could be sizeable. According to one estimate, a carbon tax at 35
$/tonne of CO2 emissions in India could generate some 2% of GDP through 2030
[66].
6.5
Sensitivity analysis
In this section, the values of several input parameters are adjusted, and the im-
pact of the adjustments on the results of the investment models is evaluated. The
emphasis is on the investment model that complies with the tender conditions,
as tender compliance is the underlying theme of this thesis. The what-if analysis
focuses on parameters such as the initial PPA tariff, shortfall penalty levels, utili-
sation e№гђiciency and share of renewables. How changes in future electricity prices,
future development of CO2 costs, and the discount rate affect the optimisation of
the hybrid power plant sizing are also investigated. For the non-compliance model,
the power requirement is changed, and the battery cost is scaled down to examine
a possible inclusion of battery storage capacity.
6.5.1
Plant sizing without tender compliance
The power requirement is varied to see how the plant sizing is affected if a larger
amount of power has to be delivered. The amounts tested are 500 MW, 750 MW
and 1000 MW, which are compared with the original 250 MW. Unlike in the sensi-
tivity analysis for the operational (economic dispatch) model РђЊ where an increasing
power requirement resulted in a growing delivery shortfall and associated penal-
ties РђЊ the objective here is to be able to deliver the required amount. Figure 6.17a
shows that if the power requirement is raised, the deficit is filled by increasing the
coal-fired power capacity. Solar and wind capacities change very little and no bat-
tery is added. This is due to the grid interconnection constraint on the renewable
power, which is limited to 500 MW. As coal has a separate interconnection point
==PAGE:80==
62
6 Results of deterministic model
with no such constraint, its share can be increased more freely. Figure 6.17b shows
the total power produced by energy source over the plantРђЎs 30-year lifetime.
(a) Unit capacities
(b) Total power production by source
Figure 6.17: Effect of change in power requirement on results of model without
tender compliance
Because of the high cost of batteries in comparison with the other technologies
in the hybrid power system, the deterministic model does not invest in a battery
energy storage.
The battery cost is scaled down, at 10%, 25%, 50% and 75%
intervals, to see if a cost decrease would warrant an investment in a battery storage.
The cost reduction only applies to the capex and fixed and variable opex of the
battery unit. The costs for energy stay the same.
Figure 6.18a shows that when the battery cost is reduced to one quarter of the
original level, the investment will include a battery storage system. The installed
battery is small, with a 25 MW power capacity and a 54 MWh energy capacity.
Figure 6.18b, in turn, shows that both revenues and costs increase slightly for the
system with the lowest battery cost in the sensitivity analysis.
Figure 6.19b shows the load duration curve for the battery discharge, indicating
low utilisation of the battery. The exceedence is below 10%, which is equal to the
capacity utilisation rate. Figure 6.19a supports this statement, as the battery does
not contribute much to the total power production. The scaled-down battery cost
warrants the investment, but it does not add much to the power production. The
total utilisation of the battery storage is 294 GW of an available 6,5 TW over the
hybrid power plantРђЎs 30-year lifetime. The power throughput for the battery is
thus only 4,5%. It could be argued, that money invested in the battery could be
better spent elsewhere.
==PAGE:81==
6.5 Sensitivity analysis
63
(a) Unit capacities
(b) Cost structure and revenues
Figure 6.18: Effect of change in battery cost on results of model without tender
compliance
(a) Power production by source
(b) Battery discharge duration curve
Figure 6.19: Effect of adjusted battery cost at 0,25 of original for model without
tender compliance
Figure 6.20 shows how the power mix changes when the battery cost is adjusted
from 1,0 to 0,25. The power mix with the original battery cost can be seen in
Figure 6.20a. Figure 6.20b shows the mix when the cost is lowered to 25% of the
original. The battery mainly displaces coal-fired power, but also a small amount of
wind and solar power, since the battery stores renewable power. With the lowest
battery cost that was analysed, the LCOE for the system decreases slightly to
==PAGE:82==
64
6 Results of deterministic model
16,53 Рѓг/MWh from 17,14 Рѓг/MWh for the analysis with the original battery cost.
(a) Unadjusted battery cost at 1,0 of original(b) Adjusted battery cost at 0,25 of original
Figure 6.20: Effect of scaled-down battery cost on energy mix for model without
tender compliance
6.5.2
Plant sizing with tender compliance
The results of the sensitivity analyses concerning the investment model that com-
plies with the tender conditions are presented below. The effect of the model input
value adjustments on the investment NPV is elaborated only where the impact is
notable.
The sensitivity analysis for the battery cost shows that adjusting the cost will
not change the unit sizing, even when the battery cost is scaled down to 25% of
the original. This implies that, under the tender conditions, investing in a battery
energy storage will not be cost-effective.
The impact of possible future electricity price increases on the installed unit
capacities is then analysed. The reference annual price increase is based on the
average annual inflation rate of 6,09% in India in 2020. For the sensitivity analysis,
the average annual electricity price growth rate is adjusted upwards to 8%, 10% and
12% and downwards to 2% and 4% of the reference price increase. The variation
in the future electricity price has no effect on the unit sizing of the hybrid power
plant. Neither changes in the battery cost nor adjustments in the electricity price
have an effect on the cost structure, revenues or LCOE of the plant that operates
in compliance with the tender conditions.
Even if India has not implemented a carbon pricing mechanism, the impact of
a potential future cost of carbon emissions is evaluated in the sensitivity analysis.
==PAGE:83==
6.5 Sensitivity analysis
65
The reference case (case 0) has no cost of CO2. Three other cases are tested. In
cases 1 and 2, India assigns a cost to CO2 emissions in the fifth year of the plantРђЎs
operation, as shown in Table 6.5. The cost increases more steeply in case 1 than
in case 2. In case 3, a cost is already added in the third year and increases by one
euro every year.
year
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
Case 1
0
0
0
0
5
5
5
5
5
10
10
10
10
10
15
15
15
15
15
20
20
20
20
20
20
25
25
25
25
25
Case 2
0
0
0
0
5
5
5
5
5
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
12
12
12
12
12
12
15
15
15
15
Case 3
0
0
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
Table 6.5: CO2 cost development for sensitivity analysis under tender compliance
Figure 6.21a shows that assigning any cost to CO2 emissions will displace coal
from the hybrid power plantРђЎs energy mix. The additional cost for coal-fired gen-
eration is large enough for the model to optimise towards a larger investment in
renewable electricity generation. The total system cost also decreases when coal
is removed, but the shortfall penalties are slightly higher. There is also a small
decrease in revenues, seen in Figure 6.21b. The reference case, with no CO2 cost,
has an NPV of 503.442.875 Рѓг. For the cases that include a CO2 cost, the NPV
declines slightly to 496.171.804 Рѓг.
(a) Unit capacities
(b) Cost structure and revenues
Figure 6.21: Effect of introduction of CO2 price on results of model with tender
compliance
When CO2 costs are included, the emissions will decrease to zero, as the emit-
ting unit is removed. The euro-denominated carbon cost applied in the analysis
is hypothetical, but the analysis indicates that putting a price on CO2 can work
==PAGE:84==
66
6 Results of deterministic model
as an additional incentive to invest in renewable power instead of conventional
power.
The NPV analysis was conducted using an 11% discount rate, which reflects
the circumstances in India (for example, the lending interest rate in India in 2020
was 9,15% [65]). The hybrid power plant investorРђЎs WACC could be much lower
than 11%. On the other hand, the investor could adjust the discount rate up-
wards to reflect a higher perceived risk associated with the investment. For the
sensitivity analysis, the discount rate is adjusted both upwards and downwards.
Decreasing the discount rate slightly increases the capacities of coal, wind and
solar units, seen in Figure 6.22a. Increasing the discount rate, in turn, decreases
the renewable capacities and only increases the coal capacity. The total power
produced decreases with increasing discount rates, visible from Figure 6.22b. The
production of solar power does not change notably, whereas coal-fired power gen-
eration increases somewhat and wind power production decreases significantly. A
lower discount rate favours renewable production.
(a) Unit capacities
(b) Total power production by source
(c) Cost structure and revenues
(d) CO2 emissions over plant lifetime
Figure 6.22: Effect of discount rate on results of model with tender compliance
==PAGE:85==
6.5 Sensitivity analysis
67
Figure 6.22d shows that CO2 emissions follow the coal power generation and
are markedly increased for a 20% discount rate, as the share of coal power is
increased at the expense of renewable power. The carbon intensity of the system
at an 11% discount rate is 54 kg/MWh and increases to 184 kg/MWh at a 20%
discount rate. Both are still substantially lower than the 678 kg/MWh used as a
reference value for the carbon intensity of Indian electricity consumption [67].
A decrease in the discount rate increases fuel cost but removes any shortfall
penalty from the system. An increase, on the other hand, increases both fuel cost
and penalty, as more shortfalls are experienced. A lower discount rate leads to
somewhat larger revenues, and a higher rate to decreasing revenues. The changes
in PPA-based revenues are small (Figure 6.22c), but less power is sold on the
open market when the discount rate is higher. The changes in the LCOE are fairly
small across the adjusted discount rates, varying between 13,51 Рѓг/MWh and 14,74
Рѓг/MWh.
The two main tender compliance criteria are the average annual share of re-
newable power (minimum 51%) and the average annual availability of power or
the utilisation e№гђiciency (minimum 85%). Adjusting the renewable power share
up- or downwards does not change the unit sizing or energy mix at all, when the
annual availability factor is constant at 85%. The utilisation e№гђiciency is more
critical, as illustrated in Figure 6.23. Adjusting this parameter markedly affects
the unit sizing, in Figure 6.23a. An increase in the utilisation e№гђiciency increases
the share of coal, as renewable power generation is limited by the grid interconnec-
tion constraint. Increasing the share of coal power naturally also leads to higher
CO2 emissions, as illustrated in 6.23d. Decreasing the utilisation e№гђiciency below
85% removes the coal capacity entirely. Solar PV capacity (Figure 6.23a) and
solar power production (Figure 6.23b) decrease both below and above the 85%
threshold, so the solar power investment is optimised at 85% utilisation e№гђiciency.
An increase in the utilisation e№гђiciency increases the cost of the system with
growing use of coal, but also growing shortfall penalties, which indicates that in-
creasing coal as balancing power does not create a totally reliable system. Revenues
increase with increasing utilisation e№гђiciency and vice versa, which seems natural,
as more power is sold when more is required, clearly illustrated in Figure 6.23c.
==PAGE:86==
68
6 Results of deterministic model
(a) Unit capacities
(b) Total power production by source
(c) Cost structure and revenues
(d) CO2 emissions over plant lifetime
Figure 6.23: Effect of average annual utilisation e№гђiciency (power availability) on
results of model with tender compliance
The invitation to tender originally stipulated a 25% shortfall penalty, which
was later amended to 400%. Adjusting the shortfall penalty related to the 51%
renewable power share does not change the configuration of the plant, as was the
case when the renewable power share itself was adjusted. Again, the investment
shows to be more sensitive to adjustments in the penalty for not delivering enough
power (the 85% threshold), as shown in Figure 6.24.
A lower penalty decreases the share of coal power is the system (Figure 6.24a),
and with no penalty, only wind power is included. The original 25% penalty and a
somewhat higher penalty level would incentivise investment in a solely renewable
power plant, whereas the 400% penalty level promotes the use of coal-fired power
(when coal is selected as balancing power). Intermediaries have previously taken
care of the balancing needs, ensuring grid stability, as more renewable electricity
is injected into the grid in India. But in this project, it is the responsibility of the
project developer to procure the balancing power and bundle it with renewable
==PAGE:87==
6.5 Sensitivity analysis
69
energy. Whether the shortfall penalty was raised to 400% in response to the more
РђюdecentralisedРђЮ balancing responsibility and how optimal this is in incentivising
renewable power generation are not analysed further.
(a) Unit capacities
(b) Total power production by source
(c) Cost structure and revenues
(d) CO2 emissions over lifetime
Figure 6.24: Effect of average annual power availability shortfall penalty on results
of model with tender compliance
As regards the revenue streams and cost structure, both costs and revenues
decrease significantly at penalty levels below 100%, seen in Figure 6.24c.
Fig-
ure 6.24d shows that the CO2 emissions increase with increasing penalty. As the
penalty increases, shortfalls become more expensive, and the producer increases
production by coal, as it is more expensive to pay the penalty than to invest in
more coal.
The value of the penalty and the NPV at the different penalty levels can be
seen in Table 6.6. The NPV decreases with increasing penalty, meaning the system
costs increase more than the revenues earned.
==PAGE:88==
70
6 Results of deterministic model
Penalty for shortfall of average
annual power availability
NPV
Penalty
0%
605.622.191 Рѓг
0,0 Рѓг
25%
558.327.461 Рѓг
111.593.498 Рѓг
100%
525.165.260 Рѓг
64.084.409 Рѓг
200%
514.330.106 Рѓг
75.282.248 Рѓг
300%
507.267.031 Рѓг
59.942.756 Рѓг
400%
503.422.875 Рѓг
71.848.235 Рѓг
500%
500.548.273 Рѓг
55.913.567 Рѓг
600%
498.813.761 Рѓг
49.810.782 Рѓг
Table 6.6: Effect of power availability shortfall penalty level on NPV and penalty
value for model with tender compliance
The 70 Рѓг/MWh PPA tariff used for modelling is not based on a market analysis
but is a hypothetical price set to be higher than the LCOE. In the sensitivity
analysis, the tariff is adjusted up- and downwards to see the impact on the modelРђЎs
outputs.
For example, an effective power exchange market, where distribution
companies could buy power at lower prices than the PPA tariff, could put pressure
on the PPA price in the future.
The results of the sensitivity analysis are shown in Figure 6.25 on page 72.
Adjusting the PPA tariff changes the sizing of the renewable power units only to
a limited degree and the sizing of the coal unit to a larger degree, as shown in
Figure 6.25a. A higher PPA tariff results in more coal capacity and vice versa.
The power production sources are somewhat differently distributed in the total
production, as shown in Figure 6.25b
PPA tariff
NPV
Penalty
30 Рѓг
-243.350.307 Рѓг
94.357.511 Рѓг
50 Рѓг
125.742.505 Рѓг
99.757.711 Рѓг
70 Рѓг
503.422.875 Рѓг
71.848.235 Рѓг
90 Рѓг
890.301.631 Рѓг
42.708.904 Рѓг
110 Рѓг
1.280.662.732 Рѓг
7.477.544 Рѓг
130 Рѓг
1.677.322.859 Рѓг
0,0 Рѓг
Table 6.7: Effect of PPA tariff on NPV and penalty value for model with tender
compliance
The cost structure and revenues are shown in Figure 6.25c, without discounting.
As is obvious, the revenues generated from the PPA decrease with a lower tariff
and increase with a higher tariff. In contrast, the higher the tariff, the less penalty
==PAGE:89==
6.5 Sensitivity analysis
71
is paid and vice versa. The value of the penalty and the NPV at the different PPA
tariff levels are shown in Table 6.7.
The LCOE increases linearly with the tariff (Figure 6.25f), owing to the larger
share of coal, which increases system costs. A 30 Рѓг/MWh tariff actually results
in a negative NPV, as the revenues generated during the plantРђЎs lifetime are not
su№гђicient to cover the initial capital outlay. So, for the investment to be profitable,
the power producer needs to make a bid that is higher than 30 Рѓг/MWh.
During the 25-year term of the PPA, the power procurerРђЎs expenditures (calcu-
lated as the amount of purchased power multiplied by the tariff) follow a similar
trend at the different tariff levels tested in the sensitivity analysis. The higher the
tariff, the sharper the increase in the expenditures, as shown in Figure 6.25e. This
is because the PPA tariff increases each year for the first 15 years, after which the
tariff stays the same. This is illustrated by the curves plateauing after the 15th
year. The higher the initial PPA, the greater the increase over the years.
Figure 6.25b shows that more power is made available for procurement, when
the PPA tariff is increased. The penalty becomes higher with a higher PPA tariff
level, so the producer will be more reluctant to pay the penalty than when the
tariff РђЊ and consequently also the penalty РђЊ is lower. Table 6.7 also shows that the
total penalties paid over the plantРђЎs lifetime are significantly lower at high tariff
levels. At a high tariff level, the power producer prioritises meeting the set power
requirement and thus increases the share of coal power in the system РђЊ as it is more
profitable than paying the penalty. So, the producer increases power production
to decrease delivery shortfalls and as a result, also the penalty.
Increasing production from the coal-fired power unit also increases CO2 emis-
sions, as shown in Figure 6.25d. At a 130 Рѓг/MWh tariff level, the carbon intensity
of the system is 110 kg/MWh, which is considerably lower than the reference value
used for India.
==PAGE:90==
72
6 Results of deterministic model
(a) Unit capacities
(b) Total power production by source
(c) Cost structure and revenues
(d) CO2 emissions over plant lifetime
(e) Procurement expenditures
(f) LCOE
Figure 6.25: Effect of PPA tariff on results of model with tender compliance
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 7
Results of stochastic
model
This chapter presents the results for the stochastic model of the hybrid power plant
that operates in compliance with the tender conditions. The two-stage stochastic
model is solved to optimality. The simulation is conducted for two scenarios, using
the same historical power production data that is used for the deterministic model.
The data are organised in a different order on a yearly basis, to generate two sets
of operating years, as shown in Table 7.1.
year
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
scenario 1
24
3
23
17
25
1
28
8
2
6
12
10
8
28
23
3
12
19
28
23
24
10
23
20
27
21
4
1
3
9
scenario 2
20
30
29
29
20
1
28
6
30
9
29
11
2
2
7
16
15
9
23
5
29
5
2
17
8
28
18
24
6
8
Table 7.1: Sets of operating years for simulation with two scenarios
The model suggests an investment in 238 MW of solar, 490 MW of wind and 17
MW of coal-fired power capacity. Still, no battery is included in the mix. The total
investment in the 745 MW hybrid power plant is 1.004.494.871 Рѓг, with a positive
NPV of 508.191.961 Рѓг for a 30-year lifetime. The average LCOE for the scenarios
is 13,49 Рѓг/MWh, which is a little lower than the LCOE at 13,51 Рѓг/MWh for
the deterministic model with tender compliance. The investment has an expected
payback time of 6,34 years, an IRR of 17% and a BCR of 3,33, which is very good
and slightly better than for the deterministic model.
Figure 7.1a shows no major differences in the cost structure and revenues and
Figure 7.1b no large differences in energy production for the deterministic model
and the two scenarios from the stochastic model. The LCOE for the first scenario
is 13,44 Рѓг/MWh and 13,55 Рѓг/MWh for the second one, implying there is no
significant difference between the two scenarios or the stochastic and deterministic
models. As the results for the two scenarios are very much like the results from
the deterministic model, similar outcomes can also be expected for a sensitivity
analysis. The additional layer of uncertainty added РђЊ in the form of scenarios РђЊ
does not change the model outcomes much, and no separate sensitivity analysis is
therefore conducted on the simulation with the two scenarios.
==PAGE:92==
74
7 Results of stochastic model
(a) Cost structure and revenues
(b) Total energy production by source
Figure 7.1: Comparison of deterministic and stochastic models РђЊ two scenarios
Adding even more uncertainty, the stochastic model is simulated using three
scenarios, constructed as shown Table 7.2. The results, with a unit sizing of 229
MW of solar, 472 MW of wind and 26 MW of coal-fired power capacity, are fairly
similar to the two-scenario simulation. The NPV slightly decreases to 483.619.094
Рѓг, mostly due to a larger share of coal power, which increases costs. The average
LCOE for the three scenarios is 13,72 Рѓг/MWh. Figure 7.2a and 7.2b show that
the difference between the deterministic model and the three scenarios is fairly
small in terms of cost structure, revenues and total energy production by source.
year
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
scenario 1
30
16
24
8
19
8
8
16
13
23
2
3
11
26
22
22
30
3
5
8
25
19
15
15
28
29
29
6
26
20
scenario 2
13
12
4
14
11
3
7
20
16
30
10
18
7
2
18
20
16
21
7
28
7
23
10
3
24
11
25
9
20
11
scenario 3
1
17
12
25
24
10
3
30
4
15
25
17
29
11
4
23
11
20
27
28
9
16
19
19
23
19
7
30
27
20
Table 7.2: Sets of operating years for simulation with three scenarios
The CO2 emissions for the different scenarios are also compared with the deter-
ministic model. Scen 2.1 and 2.2 in Figure 7.3 refer to the two-scenario simulation
and Scen 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 to the three-scenario simulation. As the two stochas-
tic simulations are conducted independent of each other and the historical years
chosen for the scenarios are random, some differences in the CO2 emissions are to
be expected. The coal capacity is larger in the three-scenario simulation, result-
ing in more emissions. The carbon intensities for the two-scenario simulation are
42 kg/MWh and 43 kg/MWh for the first and second scenario respectively, and
for the three scenarios in the other simulation: 72 kg/MWh, 67 kg/MWh and 70
kg/MWh.
==PAGE:93==
7 Results of stochastic model
75
(a) Cost structure and revenues
(b) Total energy production by source
Figure 7.2: Comparison of deterministic and stochastic investment models РђЊ three
scenarios
All values are relatively close to the carbon intensity for the deterministic model,
which is 54 kg/MWh, and substantially lower than the 678 kg/MWh used as a
reference value for the current carbon intensity of electricity consumed in India.
Figure 7.3: CO2 emissions for deterministic and stochastic models
Further simulations were done with ten scenarios. The results are largely simi-
lar to the results of the simulations with two and three scenarios. The LCOE varies
==PAGE:94==
76
7 Results of stochastic model
between 13,44 Рѓг/MWh and 13,90 Рѓг/MWh. The installed capacities for solar, wind
and coal are 222 MW, 474 MW and 27 MW, respectively.
Extending the deterministic model into a two-stage stochastic model is made to
incorporate more uncertainty in the modelling. The simulations for the stochastic
model show that the outcomes do not differ to any significant extent from the
results of the deterministic model. There could be more differences, if simulations
with even more scenarios were conducted, but the model run time sets a limit to
additional simulations.
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
The objective of this work was to develop a model to determine the optimal size
of a hybrid power system that meets specific tender conditions in India, as well as
to assess how the tender conditions are able to incentivise investment in renewable
power generation. The research also looked into how the technical, economic and
legal requirements in an invitation to tender and a power purchase agreement
(PPA) can be translated into parameters of mathematical models.
The model that was created shows some interesting results in terms of the
production of electricity and the sizing of the different power generating units in
the modelled hybrid energy system. The simulations with and without compliance
with the tender conditions also show a marked difference in the shares of renewable
and conventional power capacities.
Although the model results satisfy all set
constraints, and the model is therefore successful in describing the proposed system,
there are still many aspects that the model does not consider. Several assumptions
have been made to simplify the energy system, and important factors relevant to
a real-life system are not included. These limitations and possible extensions of
the analysis are discussed below.
The conditions and specifications in the invitation to tender and the PPA are
not necessarily updated with technological advances and can therefore be hard
to model. In a similar vein, a mathematical model cannot reflect all the legal
aspects that are essential to the tendering process. This forces simplifications and
assumptions in modelling. For example, the tender criterion that requires mini-
mum 85% utilisation e№гђiciency (power availability) during peak hours of electricity
consumption was excluded from the analysis. This was owing to the fact that peak
hours are defined differently on a day-to-day basis and are thus hard to predict.
Extending the model to peak-hour availability would increase model complexity
and increase solving time. If added, the peak-hour criterion would allow lower
power delivery rates for the given peak hours, compared with the results of the
current model. When one production technology alone covers all power demand,
especially during peak demand, this can lead to over-sizing of capacity. When the
capacity is high enough to cover peak demand, the capacity factor of the technol-
ogy is lower than if the technology were used as baseload, intermediate load or a
mix of these. As solar and wind power are not dispatchable, the only way to have
==PAGE:96==
78
8 Discussion
the solar and wind units of the hybrid plant provide base- or intermediate load
power is to introduce a battery in the system. Alternatively, the share of coal-fired
power must be increased.
As stated in the assumptions, the ramp up/down times and start-up and shut-
down costs of coal power generation are disregarded in the explicit energy system
analysis by reserving spare generation capacity from an external coal-fired power
plant РђЊ although for modelling purposes, greenfield coal power investment is as-
sumed. The model assumes instant start of electricity production by the coal plant,
when wind and solar power are insu№гђicient. In reality, the ramp up/down time will
affect how fast the coal plant can start and stop supplying power. As coal-fired
production slowly starts up, it would most likely adjust the outcome of the model
to include more renewable energy. Moreover, there is a cost related to starting
up and shutting down the coal power unit. If included, this cost would affect the
results. The system also contains noticeable ine№гђiciencies and any heat production
is disregarded, although this can be considered justifiable, as coal-fired heat and
power cogeneration does not play an important in India. Instead of the coal power
being provided by an external supplier, the model could be extended to include
the coal-fired generation as a unit controlled by the power producer.
The lifetime of the power plant technologies is considered in the annualised
capex. The PV modules, wind turbines and coal unit have long lifespans and are
assumed to remain technologically viable throughout the hybrid plantРђЎs lifetime.
The battery has a shorter expected useful life, but it is unfeasible to try to predict
developments in the fast-evolving battery technology and speculate on the best
way to overhaul or replace the energy storage system during the plantРђЎs 30-year
operation. Therefore, refurbishment or replacement of the battery under a war-
ranty arrangement is assumed in the model. The technology choices remain at the
discretion of the battery contractor, and the cost is included as a warranty cost in
the model.
When modelling an energy system, accurate input data is critical for the quality
of the results. The data used in this work is from various sources and from different
past years. Input values for the cost estimations represent realistic capex and opex
data for typical electricity generation plants in the USA, specifically provided for
energy analysis. For more precision, estimates specific for India should be used.
Historical weather-dependent power generation data is used to estimate future
renewable power production that depends on wind conditions and solar radiation
in India. But future weather remains unknown, and the results would look different
in light of another set of weather-dependent data. The model could be extended
to include solar and wind prediction models to estimate forecast errors.
The uncertainty of renewable power generation also affects the decisions con-
cerning the elements that help ensure power availability and provide grid stability
==PAGE:97==
8 Discussion
79
in the hybrid system. If a battery were installed, it would affect the decision on
energy storage: how much should be stored to satisfy future needs? Or how fast
should the coal generation be ramped up and down, if the system is balanced with
thermal coal power?
Any emissions related to the construction of the hybrid power plant and the
decommissioning of the equipment at the end of its service life are not accounted
for. In a more detailed analysis, these emissions should be addressed. Also, any
shutdown and decommissioning costs, including the salvage value of the equipment,
are excluded from the cost estimation. These would be important to consider, as
energy companies are typically required to bear the dismantling costs.
The technology used for coal-fired power generation affects the capex input
data. The design of coal plants has been optimised for baseload and mid-load
provision, and the technical characteristics are not necessarily compatible with
cycling operations. New plant designs and technologies have been developed, in-
cluding carbon capture, utilisation and storage. The investment decision could
be extended to the choice of a coal technology that is best suited for round-the-
clock generation, providing cost-effective short-term flexibility in the hybrid power
system.
The analysis can be extended to include grid interconnection costs, including
the cost of the transmission system up to the point of interconnection. The grid
connection is set at a fixed 500 MW in the model.
Further analysis could be
conducted using a dynamic transformer rating, matching the minimum voltage
level of 220 kV. There is a fixed investment cost for connecting to the grid. For
projects with a capacity below the tendered 250 MW, power can be injected into
the grid without an additional cost. But the conditions for exceeding the tendered
capacity are still unclear. In case the location and other factors would justify a
larger power plant, the excess output could be sold on the open electricity market
for a market price. It could then make sense to exceed the capacity. However, it
is not yet known how much of the associated expenses would fall on the operator.
A sensitivity analysis for different grid interconnection scenarios, using different
installed capacities, could be included.
In the model, curtailment of renewable power is not allowed. An analysis of
whether it would be more beneficial to curtail the excess production to increase
the levelised cost of electricity, or to sell at market price, could be included. This
could be further extended to let the model evaluate when it would be best to sell
at market price and when at the PPA tariff. The model could assess, whether it is
more profitable to sell more power on the open market and pay the shortfall penal-
ties under the PPA or whether the PPA actually ensures the best outcome. Then
again, this could involve some legal issues, as meeting the PPA energy requirement
is prioritised over energy sales to a third party or on the power exchange.
==PAGE:98==
80
8 Discussion
For the wind park, an analysis of the wake effect could be included in a wind
prediction model to evaluate the impact on the power capacity factors. When wind
turbines operate in clusters, downwind turbines experience energy losses because
of the wake (a trail of turbulent and slowed down wind behind a turbine) caused
by the upwind turbines. Some turbines in a wind farm may be affected by multiple
upwind wakes. Wake-induced production losses are typically of the order of 5% to
20% of the annual energy production. The analysis could extend to evaluate how
investing in more turbines can impact the capacity factor of a given individual
turbine.
IndiaРђЎs ambitious renewables targets act as a catalyst for the power system
modelled in this thesis, and todayРђЎs policy settings and constraints are reflected
in the model and its inputs. India is currently drafting its new national electricity
policy, but the thesis does not try to assess future policy ambitions or market
developments and their potential impact on the investment. For example, major
tax-induced changes in the price of coal or a faster phase-out of coal-burning
power plants РђЊ because of concern about climate change РђЊ could have an impact
on the cost and availability of the coal-fired balancing power. Factors like this
could be examined by testing alternative cases for possible futures, the same way
the possible introduction of a carbon pricing mechanism was evaluated in the
sensitivity analysis. Such an analysis would allow the investor to better assess
the risks involved in this complex investment with several uncertainties in the
underlying assumptions.
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
This thesis set out to propose a mathematical model for optimising a power pro-
ducerРђЎs bid for a hybrid power plant to be built in India under a long-term power
purchase agreement. The bid is intended for a tariff-based capacity auction process.
The model describes a grid-connected power system that supplies round-the-clock
electricity from renewable wind and solar energy, complemented with energy from
a coal-fired power plant. A battery storage system for renewable power is also
considered in the model. Both the coal power and the batteries can be used to
ensure continuous electricity supply and to help balance the grid.
The model was constructed under tender guidelines issued by the Indian gov-
ernment with the aim of promoting the generation of renewable electricity through
a competitive auction. One purpose of this study was to examine how the tender
conditions succeed in incentivising investment in renewable power capacity in In-
dia. The tender conditions that were considered in the modelling include minimum
250 MW capacity, minimum 85% annual availability of power, minimum 51% share
of annual power generated from renewable sources, and a 400% shortfall penalty
on not meeting the thresholds for power availability and renewable energy share.
The plantРђЎs operating principles were first described as an economic dispatch
model. A deterministic investment model was then created to optimise the sizing
of the plant РђЊ first without consideration of the tender conditions and then incorpo-
rating the specific tender conditions that the plant must meet. The deterministic
model optimises the sizing of the plant by maximising the net present value (NPV)
of the investment, which maximises the power producerРђЎs profit.
The investment model without tender compliance suggests plant sizing, where
solar power covers 9,8%, wind power 56,5%, and coal 33,7% of the installed ca-
pacity. When the model is extended to comply with the tender conditions, the
power mix changes: the share of solar power increases to 31,4% and wind power to
65,7%, and the coal capacity decreases to 2,9%. This indicates that the objective
to incentivise renewable electricity generation is achieved under the specific tender
conditions. The share of renewable power capacity increases by a factor of 1,5.
The deterministic model with tender compliance was also extended into a
stochastic model to investigate the uncertainty related to the inputs of the model.
The stochastic formulation produces similar results as the deterministic model,
==PAGE:100==
82
9 Conclusion
with a mix of 31,9% solar, 65,8% wind and 2,2% coal-based capacity. Since ad-
ditional uncertainty, introduced in the form of scenarios, does not significantly
change the sizing outcome, the deterministic model can be considered robust for
this case.
None of the models suggests a battery storage to maximise profits. The cost
of the proposed battery technology is too high for a battery energy storage to be
included in the investment. The sensitivity analyses imply that possible future cost
reductions in battery technology and increasing cost of carbon emissions could lead
to the inclusion of a battery system to provide round-the-clock electricity instead
of relying on thermal coal as balancing power.
==PAGE:101==
References
[1]
Shalu Agrawal et al. State of Electricity Access in India: Insights from the
India Residential Energy Survey (IRES) 2020. Technical report October.
New Delhi, 2020.
[2]
Sanjeev Ahluwalia. РђюNational Electricity Policy 2021: Making IndiaРђЎs Power
Sector Future-Ready.РђЮ In: Observer Research Foundation June (2021). url:
https://www.orfonline.org/research/national-electricity-policy-
2021-making-indias-power-sector-future-ready/.
[3]
L. A. Barroso and A. J. Conejo. Decision making under uncertainty in elec-
tricity markets. 2006. isbn: 1424404932. doi: 10.1109/pes.2006.1709323.
[4]
Rachid Belfkira et al. РђюModeling and optimal sizing of hybrid renewable
energy system.РђЮ In: 2008 13th International Power Electronics and Motion
Control Conference, EPE-PEMC 2008 (2008), pages 1834РђЊ1839. doi: 10.
1109/EPEPEMC.2008.4635532.
[5]
Binayak Bhandari et al. РђюOptimization of hybrid renewable energy power
systems: A review.РђЮ In: International Journal of Precision Engineering and
Manufacturing - Green Technology 2.1 (2015), pages 99РђЊ112. issn: 21980810.
doi: 10.1007/s40684-015-0013-z.
[6]
John R. Birge and Fran├Дois Louveaux. Introduciton to Stochastic Program-
ming. second. 2011, pages 163РђЊ177. isbn: 9781461402367. doi: 10.1007/978-
1-4614-0237-4{\_}4.
[7]
Riad Chedid and Rahman Saifur. РђюUNIT SIZING AND CONTROL OF
HYBRID WIND-SOLAR POWER SYSTEMS.РђЮ In: IEEE Transactoins on
Energy Conversion 12.1 (1997), pages 79РђЊ85.
[8]
Jaquelin Cochran, Debra Lew, and Nikhil Kumar. Accelerating the transfor-
mation of power systems Flexible Coal Evolution from Baseload to Peaking
Plant. Technical report, page 72283000.
[9]
Gerard Cornuejols and Reha Tutuncu. РђюOptimization Methods in Finance
(Mathematics, Finance and Risk).РђЮ In: January (2007), pages 257РђЊ258. url:
http://www.amazon.com/Optimization-Methods-Finance-Mathematics-
Risk/dp/0521861705.
==PAGE:102==
84
References
[10]
Ryna Yiyun Cui et al. РђюQuantifying operational lifetimes for coal power
plants under the Paris goals.РђЮ In: (). doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-12618-3.
url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12618-3.
[11]
Deloitte. Assessing the flexibility of coal-fired power plants for the integration
of renewable energy in Germany. Technical report. 2019.
[12]
Dibyanshu et al. Round The Clock Supply Of Power РђЊ Renewable Energy
Synergises With Coal - Energy and Natural Resources - India. 2020. url:
https://www.mondaq.com/india/renewables/977362/round-the-clock-
supply-of-power-renewable-energy-synergises-with-coal.
[13]
Katherine Dykes, Jennifer King, and Nicholas Diorio. Research Opportuni-
ties in the Physical Design Optimization of Hybrid Power Plants. Technical
report. 2019.
[14]
Katherine Dykes et al. Opportunities for Research and Development of Hybrid
Power Plants. Technical report. 2020. url: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/
fy20osti/75026.pdf..
[15]
Electric Generator - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/topics/engineering/electric-generator.
[16]
Energistyrelsen. ├єldre vindm├Иller p├Ц land forventes at leve l├дngere end hidtil
antaget. 2020. url: https://ens.dk/presse/aeldre-vindmoeller-paa-
land-forventes-leve-laengere-end-hidtil-antaget.
[17]
European Photovoltaic Industry Association (EPIA). РђюUnlocking the Sun-
belt Potential of Photovoltaics.РђЮ In: Second edi (2010). url: https : / /
www.mesia.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/EPIA-Unlocking_the_
Sunbelt_Potential-of-PV.pdf.
[18]
David Feldman, Mark Bolinger, and Paul Schwabe. РђюCurrent and Future
Costs of Renewable Energy Project Finance Across Technologies.РђЮ In: Na-
tional Renewable Energy Laboratory July (2020).
[19]
Jason Fernando and Julius Mansa. Net Present Value (NPV) Definition.
2021. url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/n/npv.asp.
[20]
Jyoti Gulia and Vibhuti Garg. Wind-Solar Hybrid: IndiaРђЎs Next Wave of
Renewable Energy Growth. Technical report. 2020. url: https://ieefa.
org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/Wind-Solar-Hybrid-Indias-Next-
Wave-of-Renewable-Growth_October-2020.pdf.
[21]
Adam Hayes and Gordon Scott. Discount Rate Definition. 2021. url: https:
//www.investopedia.com/terms/d/discountrate.asp.
==PAGE:103==
References
85
[22]
John Hetzer, Davis C. Yu, and Kalu Bhattarai. РђюAn Economic Dispatch
Model Incorporating Wind Power.РђЮ In: IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EN-
ERGY CONVERSION VOL. 23.2 (2008), page 56. url: http://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B978012014901850005X.
[23]
India Brand Equity Foundation (IBEF). Power. Technical report 1. 2021.
doi: 10.36548/jaicn.2021.1. url: www.iebf.org.
[24]
India Energy Outlook 2021 РђЊ Analysis - IEA. 2021. url: https://www.iea.
org/reports/india-energy-outlook-2021.
[25]
Indian Energy Exchange (IEX). ELECTRICITY MARKET. Technical re-
port. Noida.
[26]
Indian Energy Exchange (IEX). Green Term-Ahead Market. 2020. url: https:
//www.iexindia.com/G-TAM-Overview.aspx?id=DiJlX4UgMBM%3D&mid=
IT8b%2BZM5cBA%3D.
[27]
InfaltionTool. Value of 2019 Indian Rupees today - Inflation calculator. url:
https://www.inflationtool.com/indian-rupee/2019-to-present-
value?amount=1.
[28]
International Energy Agency (IEA). CO2 emissions. 2021. url: https://
www.iea.org/reports/global-energy-review-2021/co2-emissions.
[29]
International Energy Agency (IEA). Energy Storage. 2020. url: https://
www.iea.org/reports/energy-storage.
[30]
International Energy Agency (IEA). Renewables 2020 - Analysis and forecast
to 2025. Technical report. 2020.
[31]
International Energy Agency (IEA) and Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA).
РђюProjected Costs of Generating Electricity.РђЮ In: (2020).
[32]
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). РђюRenewable Energy Auc-
tions in Developing Countries.РђЮ In: (2013). url: www.irena.org/Publications..
[33]
IRENA. Innovation landscape brief: Utility-scale batteries. International Re-
newable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi, 2019. isbn: 978-92-9260-139-3. url:
www.irena.org.
[34]
Irena and Iea-pvps. РђюEnd-of-Life Management: Solar Photovoltaic Panels.РђЮ
In: (2016). url: www.irena.org.
[35]
Shreya Jai. National Electricity Policy-21 bats for quality power, private
investment. 2021. url: https://www.business-standard.com/article/
economy-policy/national-electricity-policy-21-bats-for-quality-
power-private-investment-121042800905_1.html.
==PAGE:104==
86
References
[36]
Goksin Kavlak, James McNerney, and Jessika E. Trancik. РђюEvaluating the
causes of cost reduction in photovoltaic modules.РђЮ In: Energy Policy 123
(2018), pages 700РђЊ710. issn: 03014215. doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2018.08.
015.
[37]
Ram Nath Kovind. India to have 450 GW renewable energy by 2030: Presi-
dent, Energy News, ET EnergyWorld. 2020. url: https://energy.economictimes.
indiatimes.com/news/renewable/india-to-have-450-gw-renewable-
energy-by-2030-president/73802626.
[38]
Surender Kumar and Rakesh Kumar Jain. РђюCost of CO2 emission mitigation
and its decomposition: evidence from coal-fired thermal power sector in In-
dia.РђЮ In: Empirical Economics 2454 (2020). issn: 14358921. doi: 10.1007/
s00181-020-01892-6.
[39]
Patrik Larsson and Philip Borjesson. РђюCost models for battery energy storage
systems.РђЮ In: kTH Industrial Engineering and Management (2018), page 31.
url: http : / / www . diva - portal . org / smash / get / diva2 : 1254196 /
FULLTEXT01.pdf.
[40]
Jing Li, Wei Wei, and Ji Xiang. РђюA simple sizing algorithm for stand-alone
PV/Wind/Battery hybrid microgrids.РђЮ In: Energies 5.12 (2012), pages 5307РђЊ
5323. issn: 19961073. doi: 10.3390/en5125307.
[41]
Lithium-ion batteries for large-scale grid energy storage (ESS). 2018. url:
https : / / researchinterfaces . com / lithium - ion - batteries - grid -
energy-storage/.
[42]
Peter D Lund et al. РђюReview of energy system flexibility measures to enable
high levels of variable renewable electricity.РђЮ In: (2015). doi: 10.1016/j.
rser.2015.01.057. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.01.
057.
[43]
Shannon Meraw. The case for US cooperation with India on a just transition
away from coal. 2021. url: https://www.brookings.edu/research/the-
case-for-us-cooperation-with-india-on-a-just-transition-away-
from-coal/.
[44]
Stephen Mills. РђюCombining solar power with coal-fired power plants, or cofir-
ing natural gas.РђЮ In: Clean Energy 2.1 (2018), pages 1РђЊ9. doi: 10.1093/ce/
zky004. url: https://academic.oup.com/ce.
[45]
Moti L Mittal and Sharma Chhemendra. РђюEstimates of Emissions from Coal
Fired Thermal Power Plants in India.РђЮ In: 39.November (2010), pages 1РђЊ22.
[46]
Hermin├Е Nalbandian-Sugden. РђюOperating ratio and cost of coal power gener-
ation. IEA Clean Coal Centre.РђЮ In: December (2016).
==PAGE:105==
References
87
[47]
NREL. 2019 Annual Technology Baseline. 2019.
[48]
NREL. India Renewable Integration Study. 2020. url: https://www.nrel.
gov/analysis/india-renewable-integration-study.html.
[49]
NTPC. 44th inetgarted annual report. Technical report. 2020. url: https:
//www.ntpc.co.in/sites/default/files/downloads/44-final-NTPC-
AR-30082020.pdf.
[50]
Observer research foundation (ORF). Energy News Monitor. 2021. url:
https://www.orfonline.org/research/energy-news-monitor-volume-
xvii-issue-43/.
[51]
Observer research foundation (ORF). Pricing carbon: Trade-offs and oppor-
tunities for India | ORF. 2021. url: https://www.orfonline.org/expert-
speak/pricing-carbon-trade-offs-opportunities-india/.
[52]
Lanre Olatomiwa et al. РђюEnergy management strategies in hybrid renewable
energy systems: A review.РђЮ In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 62
(2016), pages 821РђЊ835. issn: 18790690. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2016.05.040.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.05.040.
[53]
NITHIN THOMAS PRASAD. Shortfall in Supply of Bundled Renewable
Power to Attract Penalty of 400% - Mercom India. 2020. url: https://
mercomindia.com/shortfall-supply-bundled-renewable-power/.
[54]
PVFree. Hanwha HSL60P6-PA-4-250T [2013]. 2014. url: https://pvfree.
herokuapp.com/pvmodules/1562/.
[55]
Prasanth Regy et al. Turning Around the Power Distribution Sector: Learn-
ings and Best Practices from Reforms. NITI Aayog, RMI, RMI India, 2021.
isbn: 978-81-949510-3-2. doi: 10 . 31219 / osf . io / fd5y4. url: https :
//www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2021- 08/Electricity-
Distribution-Report_030821.pdf.
[56]
Andrzej Ruszczy┼ёski and Alexander Shapiro. Stochastic Programming Mod-
els. Volume 10. C. 2003, pages 1РђЊ64. doi: 10.1016/S0927-0507(03)10001-
1.
[57]
SECI. Request for Selection ( RfS ). Technical report. New Delhi: Solar
Energy Corporation of India Limited ( A Government of India Enterprise ),
2020.
[58]
T. Simpkins et al. РђюReopt: A platform for energy system integration and op-
timization.РђЮ In: ASME 2014 8th International Conference on Energy Sustain-
ability, ES 2014 Collocated with the ASME 2014 12th International Confer-
ence on Fuel Cell Science, Engineering and Technology 2.September (2014).
doi: 10.1115/ES2014-6570.
==PAGE:106==
88
References
[59]
РђюSolar Cell Operational Principles.РђЮ In: Solar Cells. Chapter 4.
[60]
Solar Energy Corporation of India Limited. РђюStandard power purchase agree-
ment.РђЮ New Delhi.
[61]
Solar energy corporation of India LTD. Amendment-04 to RfS for (RTC-
II). Technical report. New Delhi, 2021. url: https://www.seci.co.in/
Upload/Tender/SECI000022- 6926272- Amendment- 04toRfSforRTC- II-
finalupload.pdf.
[62]
Tyler Stehly, Philipp Beiter, and Patrick Duffy. 2019 Cost of Wind Energy
Review. Technical report. 2020.
[63]
Team ProductLine. Decoding the National Wind-Solar Hybrid Policy. 2019.
url: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/small-biz/productline/
power - generation / decoding - the - national - wind - solar - hybrid -
policy/articleshow/71742000.cms?utm_source=contentofinterest&
utm_medium=text&utm_campaign=cppst.
[64]
Suuhas Tenddulkar. IndiaРђЎs first hybrid project online. 2018. url: https:
//www.windpowermonthly.com/article/1463046/indias-first-hybrid-
project-online.
[65]
The World Bank. Lending interest rate (%) - India. 2020. url: https://
data.worldbank.org/indicator/FR.INR.LEND?locations=IN.
[66]
Vinod Thomas and Ed Araral. The benefits of a carbon tax. 2020. url:
https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op- ed/the- benefits- of- a-
carbon-tax/article32709677.ece.
[67]
Tomorrow. electricityMap. 2021. url: https://www.electricitymap.org/
zone/IN-MH.
[68]
Trading Economics. Coal | 2008-2021 Data | 2022-2023 Forecast. 2021. url:
https://tradingeconomics.com/commodity/coal.
[69]
Branimir Tramo┼Аljika et al. РђюAdvanced ultra-supercritical coal-fired power
plant with post-combustion carbon capture: Analysis of electricity penalty
and CO2 emission reduction.РђЮ In: Sustainability (Switzerland) 13.2 (2021),
pages 1РђЊ20. issn: 20711050. doi: 10.3390/su13020801.
[70]
Clive Turton. The new V155-3.3MW turbine. 2020. url: https://www.
vestas.com/en/media/blog/markets/20201202_v155_india#!.
[71]
Vaisala. Does the sun shine more brightly during a wind drought? Technical
report. 2018. url: www.vaisala.com/energy%20https://www.vaisala.
com/sites/default/files/documents/WEA-ERG-G-2018-Wind-Drought-
B211746EN-A.pdf.
==PAGE:107==
References
89
[72]
Vestas. Vestas | Options & Solutions. 2021. url: https://www.vestas.com/
en/products/options_and_solutions#!.
[73]
Rui Wang et al. РђюAn e№гђicient multi-objective model and algorithm for siz-
ing a stand-alone hybrid renewable energy system.РђЮ In: Energy 141 (2017),
pages 2288РђЊ2299. issn: 03605442. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2017.11.085.
url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.11.085.
[74]
WindEurope. Database for wind + storage co-located projects | WindEurope.
2021. url: https://windeurope.org/about-wind/database-for-wind-
and-storage-colocated-projects/.
[75]
WindEurope. Renewable Hybrid Power Plants. 2019. url: https://windeurope.
org/wp-content/uploads/files/policy/position-papers/WindEurope-
renewable-hybrid-power-plants-benefits-and-market-opportunities.
pdf.
[76]
Hongxing Yang, Lin Lu, and Wei Zhou. РђюA novel optimization sizing model
for hybrid solar-wind power generation system.РђЮ In: Solar Energy 81.1 (2007),
pages 76РђЊ84. issn: 0038092X. doi: 10.1016/j.solener.2006.06.010.
==PAGE:108==
