==PAGE:1==
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
Autonomous search of solid-state electrolytes with antiper-
ovskite symmetry and machine learning guided discovery
of ion migration descriptors
Andrea Fedrigucci
Master Thesis
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
==PAGE:2==
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
Autonomous search of solid-state electrolytes with antiperovskite symmetry and machine
learning guided discovery of ion migration descriptors
Master Thesis
September 5, 2021
Author
Andrea Fedrigucci
MSc Sustainable Energy
Technical University of Denmark
Email: fedro.andrea@gmail.com
Supervisors
Professor Ivano Eligio Castelli
Section for Atomic Scale Materials Modelling
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
Email: ivca@dtu.dk
Dr. Felix Tim Bölle
Section for Atomic Scale Materials Modelling
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
Email: feltbo@dtu.dk
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
IMAGE COURTESY OF SECOND BAY STUDIOS/HARVARD SEAS
Published by:
DTU, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Anker Engelunds
Vej, Building 301, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.energy.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Atomic Scale Materials
Modelling, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering -
Sustainable Energy.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge of material science.
Andrea Fedrigucci - s192465
Signature
Date
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Antiperovskites have been recently emerged as a new class of high ionic conductive
materials, with potential application as solid-state electrolyte (SSE) in the vibrant sector
of solid-state batteries. The small number of tested and simulated structures is limiting
our knowledge and the application of this class of functional materials. In this study, we es-
tablish a high-throughput screening method to autonomously identify the most promising
SSE candidate.
Starting from a database containing 6234 distinct antiperovskites through a funnel
approach we were able to select the most interesting candidates based on their crystal
geometry, their insulator properties, and the economic and environmental sustainability
of their chemical composition. The latter selection was carried out with the newly created
Periodic Table Sustainability Index, which collects and classifies four literature indexes to
investigate the criticalities of use of a chemical element, under different perspectives. A
set of 139 antiperovskites was collected and submitted to the in-house iiwPBEU workflow,
which has been appropriately readapted to autonomously detect their thermodynamic sta-
bility and ionic conductivity. Within the framework of DFT, on the previous collection
of antiperovskites we calculated their energy above the convex hull and then the migra-
tion energy barrier of the most stable structures. A total of 21 structures are obtained,
among which 12 highly conductive antiperovskites are discovered.
All interesting SSE
candidates conduct elements of alkali (Li, Na, K, Rb) or alkaline earth metals (Mg, Ca).
Reactivity with moisture and electrochemical stability voltages with respect to the metal
anode were also investigated. The well-known instability with water of antiperovskites is
confirmed, together with the stability of two Li-based antiperovskites with lithium metal
anode. Two machine learning techniques have been finally applied to produce a descriptor
able to predict the migration energy barriers of antiperovskite, starting only from three
tabulated chemical-physical properties of the compositional elements: Pauling electroneg-
ativity, oxidation number, and ionic radii. The discovered scaling relation produced the
highest predictivity of migration energy barriers for antiperovskites showed in literature.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the principal supervisor of
this master’s thesis, Professor Ivano Eligio Castelli. His guidance was essential throughout
the duration of the project. Despite the unconventional remote set up of the work, he
proved to be attentive to my scientific training and really helpful to discuss my most
disparate doubts. Also, I am very grateful to the commitment showed by Dr. Felix Tim
Bölle. He is the kind of supervisor you want to have when you are at the beginning of
a new adventure. He was capable to give me all the technical tools I needed to conclude
this project with proficiency.
Let me also express my deepest gratitude to my partner, she was able to support me in
moments of greatest diﬀiculty. Now, let me apologize to the reader, but the next session
is aimed at a smaller audience.
Il più grande ringraziamento è rivolto alla mia famiglia, ed in particolare a mia madre
e a mio padre, a cui sono e sarò sempre immensamente grato per avermi dato la possibilità
di realizzare i miei sogni. Questo lavoro di tesi è interamente dedicato a voi. Infine, un
saluto speciale è rivolto alla mia nonna paterna.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Methods
4
2.1
Density Functional Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Nudged Elastic Band Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
High-Throughput Screening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Automated Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
MEBs Descriptors Discovery With Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
Stability Under Operation Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Results And Discussion
17
3.1
Antiperovskites’ Database Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
High-Throughput Screening Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
MEBs Descriptors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Bandgap Recalculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5
The Pourbaix Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.6
Electrochemical Stability Window
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Conclusions and Outlook
36
Bibliography
38
A Methods
45
B Results And Discussion
47
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The spread of lithium-ion batteries and portable electronics occurred concurrently in
the last decades [1], making the former dominate many market sectors of electrochemical
storage devices [2]. The increasing demand of renewable energy sources [3, 4] is leading
towards the electrification of many sectors [5, 6], such as the automotive industry [7],
making battery devices highly requested in multiple contexts. In addition, the intrinsic
discontinuity in production of resources closely linked to the sun irradiation (i.e. solar
and wind) generate a mismatch between power generation and actual market demand [8].
Thus, grid energy storage is also becoming a pressing need nowadays [9]. The widespread
adoption of the single lithium-ion technology entails overcoming some fundamental obsta-
cles. The increase in energy density is required for longer-lasting batteries, enhanced safety
and extended lifespan is needed for reliable operation in a variety of conditions, and more
abundant and potentially cheaper chemical elements are explored for large-scale energy
storage [10]. In view of these concerns, solid-state batteries (SSBs) are regarded as one of
the most promising future energy storage technology. The solid-state electrolytes (SSEs)
applied in SSBs are less flammable, nonvolatile, less sensitive to temperature change, and
their stiffens can be effective against dendrite formation (a common Li-ion battery failure)
[11, 12]. This last fact makes SSBs to potentially benefit of an increased anode capacity
due to the substitution of the currently available negative electrodes with lithium-metal
anode. Indeed, the latter is considered as one of the most promising anode materials given
its high specific capacity (3860 mAh/g) and the negative electrochemical potential (−3.04
V vs SHE), however its commercial applications have been seriously hindered so far due
to safety and lifetime concerns caused by the formation of Li dendrites [13]. Furthermore,
SSBs can be assembled in stackable formats that are able to enhance their energy density
by 50% or greater [14].
Naturally, to make this technology competitive, its ionic conductivity must be at least
comparable to conventional liquid organic electrolytes. Recently, a growing number of
solids with high conductivity of Li, Na, and Mg cations have been identified [12, 15, 16].
However, ionic conductivity per se does not guarantee that material to be a viable option
for SSBs. Usually, the bottlenecks to its commercialization come from other undesired
properties, such as high reactivity for direct contact with electrodes and moisture, low
viable voltages under operation, and dendrite penetration [12].
Very recently, a specific class of material called antiperovskites showed promising fea-
tures capable of combining high ionic conductivity [17], large band gap [18], and stability
against lithium-metal anode [19]. In this work we decided to look inside this promising
class of material to seek out the best candidates of antiperovskites for SSE.
Antiperovskites
Antiperovskites (APs) possess the well-known crystal structure of perovskite material,
with sites inverted in charges, i.e. anion sites are occupied by cations and vice-versa. The
ideal AP unit cell is a Pm-3m space group (number 221) that conduces to the reduced
formula X3AB; B anion is at the center of an octahedron of X cation vertices, which is
enclosed by cubic framework with A anion at its vertices (Figure 1.1). As for perovskites,
many APs are not stable in their high-symmetric form and distortions may stabilize the
crystal structure. The two most frequent distorted geometries are tetragonal (I4-mcm
space group) and orthorhombic (Pnma space group) [20]. In the first case the unit cell
is stretched along one axes, and in the second the octahedron is tilted, leaving the three
lengths of the unit cell with different distances and the three angles mutually orthogonal.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
1
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.1: Unit cell of anti-perovskite Li3OCl in the cubic Pm-3m structure. Li (X-site)
cation in blue, Cl (A-site) and O (B-site) anions respectively in yellow and red.
APs can accommodate diverse elements to form a large family of functional materials
with various interesting properties, such as magnetism, ionic conductivity, superconduc-
tivity, negative thermal expansion, the ability to act as photoluminescence host materials,
and other utilities [20]. The abundance of X site cations endows APs with unconventional
physical and chemical properties related to d-spin states/the band structure or ion trans-
port. In a pioneering work [17] Li3AO (A = Cl, Br) was synthesized and was found to
be a superionic solid electrolyte, achieving a Li ionic conductivity as high as 1.94 x 10−3
S/cm in Li3OCl0.5Br0.5. A further improvement of the conductivity was also achieved
through structural design and chemical doping [21, 22]. The same approach was extended
to the design of Na batteries with the development of a series of Na-rich APs [23]. The
mechanism behind the impressive cation transport of AP has already been investigated
for Li-ion conductive structures and two main schemes were proposed. These include a
vacancy mechanism involving Li-ion hoping along the edges of the Li-octahedron [24] and
hopping of a Li interstitial dumbbell with a barrier which is about half that of the vacancy
mechanism [25]. The relative importance of these two mechanisms is still under debate
and they are likely to depend on the AP structural design [26, 27] and vicinity to the
positive or negative electrode [28]. However, in typical doping conditions Li vacancies
showed to dominate the bulk of the electrolyte [28].
The number of synthesized and simulated AP compounds is still very limited compared
with the great possibilities shown in the elemental periodic table [20]. No more than fifty
papers are published annually on these structures, less than one thousandth of the most
popular perovskites. Indeed, a high-throughput screening of the AP chemical space is
still missing in literature, and the only studies looking towards a chemical exploration
mainly focus on the isovalent variations of few well-studied and experimentally tested APs
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
2
==PAGE:9==
[29–31]. In this work APs application are investigated within a high-throughput screening
approach, in order to expand our knowledge on their chemical composition and related
SSE properties of interest.
High-Throughput Screening
One of the main goals of materials science is to create materials with properties that are
optimized for a certain use. Materials development, on the other hand, has traditionally
relied on time-consuming and costly experiments that limit the number of investigated
structures. Over the last decades, quantum mechanical calculations, mostly within the
framework of Density Functional Theory (DFT), have been eﬀiciently used to predict
properties and design novel materials for multiple applications. High-throughput screen-
ing (HTS) of large material databases is a tool to identify candidate materials that may
have optimized properties for subsequent experimental evaluation. In this work we apply
a HTS approach, within the framework of DFT, to screen a large database of potential
antiperovskite crystal structures. The goal of the screening process is to detect APs that
are promising candidates for SSE application. The HTS proceeds through a so-called fun-
nel scheme; at each steps materials not fulfilling the desired properties are discarded, with
calculation complexity and simulation costs that increases at each step. APs materials are
selected for their geometry, insulator capacity (electronic band gap), elemental composi-
tion, thermodynamic stability, and ionic conductivity. Then, all the selected candidates
are characterized for their stability under operational conditions: stability with moisture
and stable voltage range with respect to the associated metal anode. To accelerate the com-
putational screening an existing autonomous workflow is re-used and adapted to calculate
the thermodynamic stability and estimate the ionic conductivity through the calculation
of cation migration energy barriers. The latter are investigated in the context of a single
vacancy migration mechanism; the percolation paths are detected, and the migration bar-
rier are calculated with the nudged elastic method (NEB). Once migration energy berries
(MEBs) are identified, with the assistance of two machine learning techniques we discover
a mathematical descriptor linking MEBs to chemical-physical properties which are merely
based on the elemental composition of the AP structures. Few pre-relaxation descriptors
for MEBs of solid electrolytes exist in literature. Those are also tested and compared with
our mathematical relation.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
3
==PAGE:10==
2
Methods
2.1
Density Functional Theory
At the atomic-scale nothing better than Quantum Mechanics (QM) can predict prop-
erties and behaviors of a system. When it comes to chemistry problems, the properties of
interest can be obtained by resolving the time-independent (non-relativistic) Schrödinger
equation (1926) [32], directly derivable by the QM postulates:
ˆHΨ(ri, RI) = EΨ(ri, RI).
(2.1)
E represents the eigenvalue of the total energy of the system, i.e. the real value we
can actually measure, ˆH is the Hamiltonian operator, i.e. the quantum observable corre-
sponding to the total energy, and Ψ is the eigenfunction (or wavefunction) which resolves
the equation. Generally, this eigenvalue problem is satisfied by a set of eigenvalues En
and eigenfunctions Ψn. Within the adiabatic or Born-Oppenheimer approximation (1927)
[33], nuclei are treated as a stationary medium imposing an external potential and the
Hamiltonian accounts for the kinetic energy and coulomb interactions of all electrons in
the system. In atomic unit it is expressed as follows:
ˆH = −1
2
X
∇2
ri −
X
i
X
I
ZI
|ri −RI| +
X
I
X
J>I
ZIZJ
|RI −RJ| +
X
i
X
j>i
1
|ri −rj|.
(2.2)
The first term ( ˆTe) represents the electronic kinetic operator, the second term ( ˆVe−n)
accounts for the interactions between electrons at ri with nuclei fixed at position RI,
the third is the nuclei-nuclei repulsion term ( ˆVn−n), and the fourth is the electron-electron
repulsion term ( ˆUe−e). The Ue−e operator makes the Schrödinger equation of a N electrons
system a many-body problem of 3N spatial coordinates, and its analytical and numerical
solutions are respectively impossible and unfeasible for multi-electron system.
Here is
where Density Functional Theory (DFT) comes into play. DFT is a formally rigorous way
of approaching a many-body problem, by mapping it exactly to a much easier-to-solve
non-interacting problem. Its methodology is applied in a large variety of fields and found
its roots in the Thomas–Fermi model for the electronic structure of materials (1927) [34,
35].
The Hohenberg-Kohn Theorems
DFT was firstly proven as an exact theory for many-body electron system with the
two Hohenberg-Kohn (HK) theorems in 1964 [36].
1. The ground-state energy from Schrödinger’s equation is a unique functional of the
electron density.
2. The electron density that minimizes the energy of the overall functional is the true
electron density corresponding to the full solution of the Schrödinger equation.
The key variable is the electron density n(r), which for a normalized Ψ is given by:
n(r) = N
Z
d3r2 · · ·
Z
d3rNΨ∗(r, r2, ..., rN)Ψ(r, r2, ..., rN).
(2.3)
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
4
==PAGE:11==
From the HK theorems follows that this relation can be reversed; for a given ground-
state density n0(r) exists the corresponding ground-state wavefunction Ψ0(r1, ..., rN). In
other words Ψ0 = Ψ[n0], and consequently the ground-state energy of the observable
ˆH = ˆT + ˆU + ˆV is also a functional of n0:
E0 = E[n0] = T[n0] + U[n0] + V [n0] =

Ψ[n0]
 ˆT + ˆV + ˆU
Ψ[n0]

.
(2.4)
Kohn-Sham Equations
A useful way to write down the functional described by the HK theorem is through
the Kohn-Sham scheme (1965) [37]. The idea is to describe a system of non-interacting
electrons which generates the same ground state density as the interacting many-body
system. The non-interacting energy functional E[n] can be expressed as:
E[n] = Ts[n] + UH[n] + Vext[n] + EXC[n],
(2.5)
where Ts[n] denotes the kinetic-energy of the non-interacting system, UH[n] is the Hartree
term which takes into account the electron Coulomb repulsion with the charge distribution
of N electrons, Vext[n] takes into account the external potential contribution, and EXC[n]
the exchange–correlation functional which incorporates the differences between the fully
interacting and the non-interacting N-electron system. The ground-state energy of this
auxiliary system can be found by minimizing the total energy functional E[n]. For this
purpose, a set of single electron equations are written. Each electron moves inside an
effective potential veff(r) which becomes:
veff(r) = vext(r) +
Z
n(r′)
|r −r′|d3r′ + δEXC[n]
δn
.
(2.6)
The first term is the external potential, the second term is the Hartree potential (vH),
and the third term is the exchange-correlation potential (vXC) defined as the functional
derivative of the exchange-correlation energy. The wavefunction of each electron is thus
represented by:

−1
2∇2
r + veff(r)

φi(r) = εiφi(r),
(2.7)
where φi represents a one electron wavefunction with the eigenvalue εi.
The electron
density is calculated from the wavefunctions as:
n(r) =
N
X
i=1
φi(r)
2.
(2.8)
Together, equations (2.6), (2.7), (2.8) comprise the set of Kohn-Sham equations, which are
solved iteratively and self-consistently with an initial guess of n(r). Although equation
(2.5) formally provides the real total energy, the exact expression for EXC is not known.
Exchange-Correlation Functionals
However, approximations of the Exchange-Correlation functional exist, and they range
in terms of accuracy for the prediction of specific structure properties. One of the simplest
approximations is the Local-Density Approximation (LDA) [37], which is derived from the
homogeneous electron gas. Assuming the system to be locally homogeneous, the functional
depends only on the density at the coordinate, where the functional is evaluated:
ELDA
XC [n] =
Z
εXC[n]n(r)d3r,
(2.9)
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
5
==PAGE:12==
where εXC[n] represents the energy per electron. A natural extension of LDA is used in
the so called Generalized-Gradient Approximations (GGAs). On top of the density at
point r, GGAs also considers its gradient, which allows corrections based on the spatially
varying density founds in electronic systems.
One of the most popular GGAs is the
Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional [38], which is applied extensively throughout
this work. While PBE usually gives a good agreement with experiments over a wide range
of properties, revisions of the original functional have led to the PBEsol functional [39].
PBEsol has proven to improve the lattice constant predictions over PBE when compared
with experimental values, making it especially valuable for estimating the ionic conduction
properties in the materials investigated in this work.
Hubbard And Anion Corrections
In DFT the Hartree term includes the interaction with its own electron-density, which is
known as the self-interaction. This error has a particular strong impact on highly localized
electrons (like d and f electrons), which tend to delocalize under the influence of strong
self-interaction. In this work, in order to account for the strong electrostatic interaction
in transition metals, a Hubbard-U correction is applied. A more detailed explanation of
this method can be found in Refs. [40, 41] and on the Materials Project website [42]. For
many elements, with a negative oxidation state in solids, differences in electron localization
between the elements and the solid can result in substantial errors in formation energies
computed from DFT calculations. In this study, the issue was addressed by applying a
correction to anionic species [43], coherently with the approach used by the Materials
Project [44]. For consistency with the functional used in these methods, these corrections
are only applied in this study when GGA PBE functional is used.
2.2
Nudged Elastic Band Method
A cation migration process in a bulk material defines a change in its configuration
leaving unaltered its composition. When one or more atoms change their relative positions,
they simultaneously move the structure location on the Potential Energy Surface (PES).
If we want to obtain the energy involved along this process, from the initial to the final
configuration, the Minimum Energy Path (MEP) is the trajectory on the PES we need to
extract, and the highest energy point on it (the transition state) is the energy bottleneck
we need to overcome to allow the migration.
Then, the Nudged Elastic Band (NEB)
method optimizes an initial path guess towards the MEP.
In this study we evaluate the cation migration process via a single vacancy mechanism
in cubic (Pm-3m) antiperovskites. Our investigation (see section 3.2 - Workflow Results),
supported by a previous study [29], shows that this migration path can be guessed pro-
ducing a linear interpolation between the initial and the final position of the cation in
an adjacent vertex of the octahedron (along one of its edges). Once the initial guess is
defined, N structures are created, and each represents a different step of the migration
process. These structures are called images and they are denoted by Ri. The images are
”nudging” each other under the influence of an assigned force [45, 46]:
F NEB
i
= F s,∥
i
+ F ⊥
i ,
(2.10)
where F s,∥
i
is the parallel component of a spring force connecting each image:
F s,∥
i
= s(|Ri+1 −Ri| −|Ri −Ri−1|) · ˆτi,
(2.11)
F ⊥
i
is the perpendicular component of the true (PES) force acting on each image:
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
6
==PAGE:13==
F ⊥
i
= Fi −Fi · ˆτi,
(2.12)
and ˆτi is the normalized local tangent at image i.
The NEB method optimizes the forces acting on each image until it reaches a defined
convergence criterion. This constrained optimization allows each image to find the lowest
energy configuration perpendicular to its local tangent, while maintaining with the spring
force equal spacing to neighboring images. For a better estimate of the transition state,
the Climbing Image NEB method (CI-NEB) has been introduced [47]. With this approach,
the spring force acting on the maximum energy image is removed and the force along the
tangent is reversed, so that the image can climb up the PES along the elastic band:
F CI
i
= Fi −2Fi · ˆτi.
(2.13)
The optimization process is carried out applying several DFT calculations and can be
prohibitive in terms of computational cost, making NEB calculations incompatible for high-
throughput screening. To partially overcome this issue, it has been recently implemented
the Reflective NEB (R-NEB) [48]. If a reflection symmetry along the full MEP path is
present and initial and final images are symmetrically equivalent, R-NEB takes advantage
of it, calculating only half of the images including the middle one.
In this work, we perform R-NEB calculations including only a single intermediate
image, a method that is also referred to as the reflective-middle-image NEB (RMI-NEB).
RMI-NEB needs only the initial image, since the final image can be created through
symmetry operations from it. On top of that only one single image (middle image) is
calculated. With this approach, the found energy barrier is always smaller or equal to the
energy of the real transition state. Indeed, it does not return the true transition state, if
the MEP highest maximum is not centered between final and initial image. In order to find
the global maximum and the true height of the energy barrier, a climbing image reflective
NEB (CI-RNEB) can be subsequently performed. Reflection symmetry is again applied by
mirroring half of the intermediate images. The climbing image now finds the exact energy
of the transition state on the MEP. The computational advantage to apply the CI-RNEB
method after RMI-NEB, it is given by the fact that if all intermediate images are found
to lie below the maximum energy extracted via RMI-NEB the calculation is stopped, not
requiring time consuming convergence. In case the MEP is not reflective, or the initial
and final images are symmetrically in-equivalent, a conventional NEB is performed.
2.3
High-Throughput Screening
The high-throughput screening (HTS) is a method which was originally applied to drug
discovery by pharmaceutical companies in the latter half of the 1990s [49]. Newly created
assay systems and robotics allowed researchers to quickly conduct chemical, genetic, or
pharmacological tests. In the context of computational materials science, HTS identifies
a materials discovery process that allows automated simulations of large numbers of can-
didate materials for specific target properties. With computational methods, thousands
of candidates can be screened in order-of-magnitude shorter times than ever possible in
experiments. From the computational results, a list of materials with optimized properties
can be deduced and eventually subjected to experimental evaluation.
In this work, we adopt a HTS approach following a funnel scheme, where material prop-
erty calculations are sorted for increasing complexity, and more demanding parameters
are calculated after filtering off candidates for more straightforward criteria.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
7
==PAGE:14==
Database
HTS is applied to a material database produced by Ivano E. Castelli in 2020 (AP2020),
It was compiled using the Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE) and the commercial DFT
code Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). For each antiperovskite, the AP2020
contains relaxed structure in a 5-atoms unit cell with X3AB stoichiometry initialised in
Pm-3m (221) spacegroup, total energy, band gap, and density of states (DOS). DFT
relaxations and band gap calculations were performed with VASP using a planewave basis
set and the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof revised for solids (PBEsol) GGA functional.
The first selection is done after cleaning AP2020 from eventual duplicates and unit
cell with improper stoichiometry. The target properties are chosen in order to exploit the
information already available in the database itself.
Band Gap
Band gap > 0 is used as criterion to distinguish between a metal (electronic conductive)
material and an insulator. GGA functionals are known to widely underestimate band gap
in solids [50]. In a recent study [51], where 12 functionals have been tested to predict
the known experimental band gaps of 472 selected crystal structure, PBEsol showed to
underestimate their values of 45% in average and to predict false metal materials about
7.5% of the times. A comparison of explored chemical space between the study mentioned
above and the candidates obtained after the cleaning procedure, it is shown in Appendix A,
Figure A.2. A more accurate functional on band gap prediction, such as HSE06 [51], would
allow a more careful selection of the candidates, at the price to become an unfeasible
approach for many large and/or complex systems due to a higher computational cost and
a larger memory requirement. With the aim to establish an HTS approach applicable to a
large variety of materials, the band gaps calculated via PBEsol are used here to pursue the
insulators selection. Recently, a trained neural network of PBE charge density functional
showed to accurately predict HSE band gaps [52], leaving space for further improvement
of the approach employed in this work.
Structure Geometry
The compounds selected by their band gap are then carefully filtered based on the
relaxed geometry of the unit cell. Only antiperovskite with an almost ideal Pm-3m space-
group structure are kept. This geometric filter is based on the work carried out by Jacob
L. Matthiessen (BSc Thesis, 2021) on the same antiperovskite database. In that study,
it was produced a Python code based on the ASE package to inspect the unit cell of
each candidate and measure five key parameters quantifying the deviations from the ideal
cubic geometry. The threshold values used to select a valid candidate are then shown in
Table 2.1.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
8
==PAGE:15==
Table 2.1: Descriptors used to check the deviation from Pm-3m spacegroup unit cell. The
candidates passing the filter possess all the five descriptors within the threshold value.
Angle deviation measures if the three internal angles of the cell are 90°, distance deviation
measures if the three edge length of the cell are equal, distance from cubic and octahedron
center measure if both A and B sites are centered between their respective neighboring
X atoms, and deviation from right octahedron angles measures if the three X ˆBX angles
form a 90° angles.
Description
Threshold value
Cell angle deviation
2°
Cell lenght deviation
0.5 Å
Distance from cubic center
0.5 Å
Distance from octahedron center
0.5 Å
Deviation from right octahedron angles
13°
The second layer of the screening process, used here to select the best material candi-
dates, does not yet rely on computational simulation, but rather on an extensive scientific
literature review.
Periodic Table Sustainability Index
The Periodic Table Sustainability Index (PTSI), built in this study, is used to define
which chemical elements to include in the screening process based on their both economic
and environmental sustainability. From this perspective, several criteria could be applied,
and many indexes are available in literature [53–58]. When looking for potential large-scale
applications, it is easy to think of critical elements we want to exclude as main components
of a candidate material. To produce a comprehensive and solid list of critical elements
five different indexes from four different sources are used in this work. In order to create a
unique index on the basis of the four indexes presented below, it is assigned a score scale
for every element in every index. This scale ranges from 0 to 3 (0: no criticality, 1: low
criticality, 2: high criticality, 3: max criticality) and the final index is calculated taking
the arithmetic mean over the indexes for each element. When only two levels of criticality
were available the assigned scores are 0, 1.5 (medium criticality), 3. When an element
is not investigated by a given index, no value is assigned to it and it is discarded by the
mean calculation.
1. The 2020 EU Critical Raw Materials List [56]: the Commission reviews the list of
critical raw materials for the EU every three years. In 2020 they screened 83 different
materials and published a list of 30 critical materials and elements. Economic im-
portance and supply risk are the two main parameters used to determine criticality
for the EU. The resulting list of critical raw materials provides a factual tool to sup-
port EU policy development, identifying investment needs, and guiding research and
innovation under the EU’s Horizon 2020, Horizon Europe and national programmes,
especially on new mining technologies, substitution and recycling. This list does
not provide a range of values distinguish the level of criticality. The score used to
produce the sustainability index is assigned as follows: 0: no critical elements, 1.5:
elements related to a critical material, 3: critical elements.
2. Herfindahl−Hirschman Index (HHI) of Elements [53]: the HHI is a commonly ac-
cepted measure of market concentration, and in this context it has been subdivided
in two separated indexes calculated from geological data (i.e. the known reserves
of elements) and geopolitical data (i.e. the production of elements) for 83 periodic
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
9
==PAGE:16==
table elements. The U.S. Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission
have designated markets as highly concentrated when HHI > 2500, and this number
is used as threshold value to define an element as critical in this thesis. The score is
assigned as follows: 0: HHI < 2500, 1: 2500 ≤HHI < 4000, 2: 4000 ≤HHI < 7000,
3: HHI ≥7000.
3. Abundance of elements in Earth’s crust [53, 59]: In order to assign a score based
on this criterion, lithium is used as reference abundance. The Earth’s crust concen-
tration of each elements is normalized over the lithium concentration (Abnorm) and
the score is assigned as follows: 0: Abnorm ≥1, 1: 10−2 ≤Abnorm < 1, 2: 10−4 ≤
Abnorm < 10−2, 3: Abnorm < 10−4
4. Chemical Element Sustainability Index (CESI) [58]: CESI is a single value supported
by the aggregation of the Human Development Index, Global Warming Potential,
and National Economic Importance indicators, derived through a rigorous and sys-
tematic selection process. This index aims to evaluate the sustainability of 59 chem-
ical elements over a triple bottom line principle: environment, economy and society.
Three values are assigned to the elements analyzed in the report; therefore they are
directly used in this work following the scheme described above for the EU Critical
Raw Materials List: 0: not critical, 1.5: critical, 3: high critical.
The results of the produced Sustainability index are presented in section 3.2 - Periodic
Table Sustainability Index.
Energy Above The Convex Hull
The energy above the convex hull is evaluated for all the candidate materials which
pass through the band gap, geometry, and sustainability selections unharmed, and it gives
an indication on the thermodynamic stability of the analyzed structure respect to the
other compounds of its compositional phase diagram.
All the possible phases that may exist starting from a combination of the constituent
elements are accounted for, and their formation energy is plotted against their elemental
composition (express in fraction of element). All the phases connected by the convex hull
are considered stable. The distance of an arbitrary compound from the convex hull is a
measure of the thermodynamic stability of that compound. It predicts the decomposition
energy of that material into the most stable phases. At any composition, the most stable
phases in a binary diagram are the two closest stable nodes, while in a ternary phase
diagram the equilibrium phases are given by vertices of the triangle bounding that compo-
sition. In practice, large energies above the hull will have implications on the structures
cyclability and synthesizability and might lead to unwanted conversion reactions, on the
other hand, the kinetic stabilization of metastable structures can lead to the discovery of
viable materials. For this reason it is diﬀicult to define a threshold value upfront. A con-
servative value of the convex hull threshold of 0.1 eV/atom is chosen. For the formation
energy and convex hull calculations, the reference structures are obtained from the Materi-
als Project database [60]. In order to keep consistency between AP2020 and the references
both set of structures are optimized with the same calculation setup. DFT relaxations are
performed with VASP using a planewave basis set [61–63]. The exchange and correlation
effects were approximated using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof revised for solids (PBEsol)
GGA functional [64]. An energy cut-off of 520 eV was applied to describe the valence
electrons. Sampling the Brillouin zone is done using a k-point density > 4.7/Å
−1. As a
required convergence criterion all forces on the movable nuclei had to be less than 0.03
eV/Å.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
10
==PAGE:17==
Migration Energy Barriers
The Migration Energy Barriers (MEBs) via vacancy mechanism are then calculated
on the stable antiperovskite candidates passing through the whole selection process, using
NEB methods with DFT calculations.
As explained above, NEB consists of a linear
interpolation between the initial and final site. To limit possible errors associated with
vacancy-vacancy interactions, a supercell is created by repeating the relaxed unit cell
until it satisfies the condition that the spacing between two vacancies is at least twice the
longest considered NEB path, which in this case is defined as 5.5 Å. To ensure relatively
fast calculations, the number of atoms in the supercell is constrained to be below 200, and
if this limit is reached, the longest considered NEB path is adjusted to ensure that the
maximum number of atoms in the supercell is not exceeded. To save computational time
and retain symmetries, we assume that the supercell is fully relaxed after its creation.
Subsequently, one cation vacancy is created in the supercell and the new structure
is analyzed by the Symmetry Equivalence Check tool, as implemented in ASE. The tool
is based on the method reported in Ref. [65], and it checks symmetry inequivalent sites
for percolating paths. Possible diffusion paths are only accepted if intermediate images,
obtained through linear initialization between initial and final image, do not get closer than
1 Å to any atom in the host structure. If no diffusion paths are detected the structure is
discarded. Once the symmetry in-equivalent sites have been identified, a similar procedure
is used to determine the symmetry in-equivalent NEB paths by removing the initial and
final cation site of the path from the structure. Symmetry Equivalence Check tool identifies
all the in-equivalent NEB paths that can be drawn between two cations, which are spatially
apart by less than the NEB path length value. Once a list of which vacancy defect pairs
are symmetrically in-equivalent is compiled the supercell can be optimized.
structure-prototype screening approach and therefore always know the unit cell
Given the high symmetry of the unit cells reaching this stage, in this study we are in
the framework of a structure-prototype screening approach, where the in-equivalent NEB
paths of different materials are known a priori and are the same across all candidates.
Therefore, it is tested among few candidates which of the selected path shows to have
lower MEBs. For all tested materials the shortest path shows the lowest MEBs, therefore
once in-equivalent NEB paths are obtained the shortest is used to perform the NEB
calculation. A single cation-vacancy is then created in the supercell by removing only
cation from the symmetry in-equivalent sites with the shortest NEB path.
All NEB
simulations are calculated using the PBEsol functional and the same VASP setup as in
section 2.3 - Energy Above The Convex Hull, excluding the convergence criterion of all
nuclei forces which is increased at 0.05 eV/Å. The optimization of the vacancy defect
structures is carried out keeping the cell shape and volume fixed during the relaxation and
only the atomic positions are optimized.
By keeping the cell shape fixed, the symmetries are preserved, and the reflection sym-
metries have not changed. This enables to use the advantage of the reflection symmetry
(when present) explained in section 2.2. If the initial and final image are symmetrically
equivalent, the NEB path is tested for reflection symmetry. If at least one reflection sym-
metry is found, we can perform a RMI-NEB calculation followed by CI-RNEB. In case
the in-equivalent NEB shortest path is not reflective, or the initial and final image are
symmetrically in-equivalent, a conventional NEB is performed (see section 2.2).
2.4
Automated Workflow
In order to autonomously perform the DFT calculations mentioned in the previous
section, in this work a recently developed and published in-house workflow named Ion
Insertion Battery Workflow (iiwPBEU) [66, 67] is adapted and used. iiwPBEU has been
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
11
==PAGE:18==
created with the intent to automate all calculation steps that are needed to investigate
bulk properties of insertion cathode materials, in a HTS approach.
Stability (volume
change and convex hull), voltages (high and low state of charge) and kinetic properties
(migration barriers) using the NEB methods are autonomously calculated for a given list
of candidate electrodes, which are either discarded or selected during the process on the
basis of defined threshold values. The workflow is interfaced with the Atomic Simulation
Environment (ASE) [68], commercial VASP DFT code [61, 62], as well as with the workflow
management system MyQueue [69].
Although some manipulations and simulations of iiwPBEU are peculiar for an ion
insertion cathode characterization (i.e. deionized unit cell, cell volume, change and volt-
ages), the main skeleton of the workflow can be used to screen solid electrolytes following
the aforementioned HTS approach. In particular, the tail of the screening process repre-
sented by the energy above the convex hull and migration energy barrier calculations can
be automatized with iiwPBEU. Re-adapting an already existing workflow embraces the
reusability concept under at least two different perspectives.
1. In the computer science context, reusability allows to reduce the software developing
time and increases its reliability, since usually the reused code has already been tried,
tested, and corrected for any bugs. Reliability (fidelity) of published data is arising
concern in the scientific community [70, 71], and the scheme proposed here fits into
this growing need.
2. From a sustainability point of view, reusability allows to extend the life cycle of a
given product where resources have been already invested, amortizing its cost from
an economic and environmental perspective. If further investments are needed in
order to adapt the product to its new use, the employed resources must be less than
what is required to build it from scratch.
Furthermore, to avoid unnecessary and computationally expensive simulations, the
workflow is adapted to the needs of a solid electrolytes screening. In this perspective, the
workflow works in the so-called dilute vacancy limit, where only one cation is removed
in the supercell created to perform the NEB calculation. A specific input is added to
the list of options required by the user, which let the workflow works only in the dilute
vacancy limit, deactivating many calculations and function requirements connected with
the deionized cell and supercell. For this study, a function finding the shortest in-equivalent
NEB paths is also added in order to avoid multiple NEB calculations (as described in
the previous section). The set of contributions provided by this thesis has been already
added into the workflow oﬀicial repository, available on GitLab at https://gitlab.com/asc-
dtu/workflows/ion-insertion-battery-workflow.
To summarize, the workflow is organized in two parts, the first one provides (a) the en-
ergy above the convex hull selection criteria through structure relaxation and comparison
with references, and (b) the supercell used in the NEB calculations together with the list of
inequivalent NEB sites and paths. The second part (c) define which NEB methods to use
based on the previously in-equivalents structure information, and (d) performs the associ-
ated DFT calculations based on the scheme presented in section 2.3 - Migration Energy
Barriers. A flowchart summarizing the workflow operations is presented in Figure 2.1
The input provided by the user consists of:
1. material candidates database, containing composition, structure, and ID name.
2. references database for the convex hull calculation, containing composition, structure,
and ID name.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
12
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.1: Structure of the workflow iiwPBEU adapted to identify suitable materials to be
used as ion-conductive electrolytes for solid-state batteries. In this study the percolation
path is always found, since antiperovskites structures are previously selected based on
their geometry.
3. Four user’s input, consisting of magnetic state, longest NEB path length, stability
threshold, and MEB threshold. In this study, MEB threshold is chosen high enough
to avoid discarded structures.
The reference structures extraction and re-relaxation process are handled by a differ-
ent workflow called Ref Structures Workflow (https://gitlab.com/asc-dtu/workflows/ref-
structures-workflow) (based on ASE, VASP and MyQueue), which ensures a consistent
choice of DFT parameters for the reference re-relaxation.
2.5
MEBs Descriptors Discovery With Machine Learning
Having many calculated migration energy barriers of various antiperovskite structures
give us the opportunity to explore possible links between the MEB values and other ma-
terials properties. As thoroughly explained in section 3.3, no reliable descriptors can be
found in literature to predict antiperovskite MEBs, without performing previous DFT
calculations. Two machine learning techniques are employed to investigate possible cor-
relation between tabulated composition-based features and calculated migration energy
barriers of the antiperovskites. A Random Forest Regressor and a Symbolic Regressor are
chosen respectively to qualitatively highlight the properties which main correlate with the
MEBs, and mathematically quantify their relations.
Random Forest Regressor
The Random Forest Regressor is an ensemble learning method that operates by con-
structing a multitude of decision trees at training time, and the mean or average prediction
of the individual trees is returned [72]. With this approach a random forest regressor im-
prove the predictive accuracy and control over-fitting of single decision trees. A decision
tree arrives to a prediction by asking a series of questions to the data features, each ques-
tion narrows the possible target values until the model get confident enough to make a
single prediction. A qualitative idea of what it is a decision trees learning process follows:
1. find those descriptive features which contain the most information regarding the
target values of a dataset;
2. split the dataset along the values of these features such that the target values for
the resulting sub-datasets are as homogeneous as possible;
3. repeat the process of finding the most informative features until a stopping criterion
is accomplished;
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
13
==PAGE:20==
4. the model is trained and can make predictions based on the descriptive features.
A more technical introduction to the decision trees model can be found in Ref. [73]. In
this work it is used the random forest regressor model as implemented by scikit-learn, a
free software machine learning library for Python [74]. The featurization of the selected
antiperovskites is based only on their elemental composition. It is partially handled auto-
matically by matminer [75], a Python library for data mining the properties of materials,
and in part compiled adding manually other features such as Pauling electronegativities,
ionic radii and oxidation states (inspired by [76]).
Symbolic Regression
Once the most important features predicting the MEBs are detected, a Symbolic Re-
gression is used to search for a mathematical relation linking features with the target.
Symbolic Regression is a machine learning technique that searches the space of mathe-
matical expressions to find the model that best fits a relationship between data, both in
terms of accuracy and simplicity. Initial expressions are formed by randomly combining
mathematical operators, constants, and independent variables (features), to predict a vari-
able target. Each successive generation of programs is then evolved from the one that
came before it, by selecting the fittest individuals from the population to undergo genetic
operations. [77, 78].
In this work it is used a Symbolic Regressor as implemented by gplearn [79], a genetic
programming in Python. The list of mathematical operations used to create the math-
ematical space of exploration are addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, square,
square root, absolute value. This choice is done in order to keep low the mathematical
complexity and eventually produce physically understandable expressions. This method
is carried out over the full spectrum of possible elemental variations of an antiperovskite
structure, letting vary one per time the following sites: A, B, X, AB, AX, BX, ABX.
2.6
Stability Under Operation Conditions
After the HTS is completed, a more in-depth stability analysis is performed for the
selected antiperovskites. Stability in an aqueous system and the electrochemical stability
windows are calculated using Pymatgen (Python Materials Genomics), a robust open-
source Python library for materials analysis [80]. This package relies on the Materials
Project database [60] for many calculations requiring reference structures. In the Materials
Project the structures have been optimized with PBE functional and in order to keep our
analysis consistent, the total energy of our database is recalculated using PBE. In addition,
the Materials Project accounts for Hubbard and anion correction as explained in section 2.1
- Hubbard And Anion Corrections, therefore those corrections are also used in the total
energy recalculation.
Stability In An Aqueous System - The Pourbaix Diagram
The stability analysis is extended to include the possibility of corrosion of the selected
antiperovskites under different electrode potential and pH conditions, using the so-called
Pourbaix diagram. This diagram considers the solid and aqueous phases generated by
the material elemental combination + hydrogen and oxygen. To calculate the Pourbaix
diagram as implemented by Pymatgen we can consider the following chemical and ther-
modynamic equations.
We start by calculating the chemical potential at standard states of a generic solid/ion
HhXxOoc (with c = charge) respect to hydrogen and oxygen gas:
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
14
==PAGE:21==
1
2 hH2(g) + 1
2 oO2(g) + xX (s)
µ0
HhXxOco
−−−−−−→HhXxOoc + ce−.
(2.14)
We assign the enthalpy of the compound as the energy calculated by DFT and neglect
entropic contributions (valid for moderate temperatures) to obtain the Gibbs free energy
of the compound. Then, using the reference states for the elements, we can calculate the
chemical potential in its standard state:
µ0
HhXxOco = E0,DFT
HhXxOco + cU −1/2hµref
H2 −1/2oµref
O2 −xµref
X .
(2.15)
The enthalpies of formation of the selected antiperovskites are self-calculated, instead
reference compounds are obtained by the Materials Project database [60] using only the
most stable combinations on the convex hull of the ternary phase diagrams. Note that the
oxygen molecule is not well described by standard DFT, therefore the energy of oxygen is
obtained as the energy difference between water and a hydrogen molecule: 1/2EDFT (O2) =
EDFT (H2O)+ZPE(H2O)−EDFT (H2)−ZPE(H2)−1/2ZPE(O2)−∆E. Then, instead
of oxygen gas as oxygen source we can use water, adding the chemical potential of water
at T = 298 K to reaction (2.14):
oH2O(l)
−oµ0
H2O
−−−−−−→oH2(g) + 1
2 oO2(g),
(2.16)
oH2O(l) + xX (s)
µ0
HhXxOco −oµ0
H2O
−−−−−−−−−−−−→HhXxOoc + ce−+ (o −1
2 h)H2(g).
(2.17)
The hydrogen’s standard electrode potential is conventionally defined at zero volts at any
temperature, and we can add it to reaction (2.17):
(o −1
2 h)H2(g)
(o −1
2 h)µ0
H2 = 0
−−−−−−−−−−−→(2 o −h)H+(aq) + (2 o −h)e−,
(2.18)
oH2O(l) + xX (s)
µ0
HhXxOco −oµ0
H2O
−−−−−−−−−−−−→HhXxOoc + (2 o −h)H+(aq) + (2 o −h + c)e−.
(2.19)
If reactant and product concentrations and electrode potential are variable, we can re-
elaborate reaction (2.19) as follows:
∆g = µ0
HhXxOco −oµ0
H2O + 0.0591 log aHhXxOco a2o−h
H+
ao
H2O ax
X
+ (2o −h + c)U,
(2.20)
with 0.0591 = RTln(10) at room temperature, aH2O = 1, aX = 1, aHhXxOco = [HhXxOc
o]
at low concentration, and pH = −log10 aH+:
∆g = µ0
HhXxOco −oµ0
H2O + 0.0591 log [HhXxOc
o] + (h −2o)pH + (2o −h + c)U.
(2.21)
The concentrations of the analyzed compound are equal to 1 M when solid, and 10−6
M when ionic. The Pourbaix diagram represents a phase diagram plotted as function of
electrode potential (U) and pH. Once plotted, it consists of regions constrained by line
segments which represent different equilibrium reactions [81]. The lines can be of three
types:
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
15
==PAGE:22==
1. Vertical lines: the reaction involves solid and aqueous compounds with hydrogen ion
but without free electrons, therefore the equilibrium is independent of the potential.
2. Horizontal lines: the reaction involves solid and aqueous compounds with free elec-
trons but without hydrogen ions, therefore the equilibrium is independent of the
pH.
3. Straight lines with a slope equal to 0.0591 h/n: the reaction involves solid and
aqueous compounds with n free electrons and h hydrogen ions.
For each antiperovskite, we plot the Pourbaix diagram and the relative stability of the
candidate compound across it. The relative stability is calculated as the energy differences
between the antiperovskite phase and the most stable phases.
Electrochemical Stability Window - Grand Potential Phase Diagram
The electrochemical stability window is the electrode potential range within which a
compound is neither oxidized nor reduced. If the electrochemical stability window does
not match the negative electrode potential, interfacial interaction electrode-compound can
produce new phases or electron exchanges. The electrochemical stability window can be
calculated through the grand potential phase diagram (GPPD) [82–84]. GPPD is a phase
diagram (see section 2.3 - Energy Above The Convex Hull) representing phase equilibria
that are open to a particular element, i.e. the chemical potential of the element is an
external input variable. In our case GPPD are open to the cation element, which is relevant
when the solid electrolyte is in contact with a reservoir of the conduced ion, such as for a
metal anode. A grand potential phase diagram, involving n components, is presented in
the same way as a compositional phase diagram involving n-1 components. By examining
the changes in the phase equilibria as the chemical potential changes, we can obtain
insights into how the phase equilibria are modified with changes in the chemical potential.
The critical chemical potentials are the transition points where chemical stability changes,
i.e. when the phase diagram stability changes. In this work, we calculate the GPPDs as
implemented in Pymatgen [80]. For plotting the GPPD we use the middle’s potential from
between two critical potentials, since these should be regions of stable phase equilibria. In
this way all the stable phases are identified. The electrochemical stability windows of our
selected antiperovskites are identified in the region between the minimum and maximum
potential of eventual stability.
According to literature [25], the decomposition of antiperovskite into alkali metal oxide
X2O is assumed to be kinetically suppressed within the electrochemical stability window,
therefore those compounds are discarded for the GPPD construction. From a thermody-
namic point of view these GPPDs are metastable phase diagrams.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
16
==PAGE:23==
3
Results And Discussion
3.1
Antiperovskites’ Database Analysis
The antiperovskite database created by Ivano E. Castelli in 2020 (AP2020) contains
a total of 6596 compounds with antiperovskite symmetry.
The chemical space of the
database is shown in Appendix A, Figure A.1. B site elements were selected among atoms
with high electronegativity and high probability of negative oxidation states. X and A
sites were selected from a broad range of elements across the periodic system. The crystal
structures were relaxed as explained in section 2.3 - Database. Before starting any selection
process AP2020 is compared with literature (when available), in order to confirm its data
reliability. The Materials Project (MP) database [60] is used as a benchmark to verify
the mean lattice constants of AP 2020, due to its widespread acceptance in the materials
science community.
Both the datasets are calculated using GGA functionals; Perdew-
Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) for the Materials Project and PBE revised for solids (PBEsol) for
AP2020. For this work, VASP is setup as explained in section 2.3 - Energy Above The
Convex Hull, retracing the settings used by the Materials Project.
Different functionals do not allow a direct comparison of the calculated values, but
rather the presence of a congruous trend between them can be observed. The two databases
have in common a total of 94 structures. Their mean lattice constant (the mean of the
three unit cell lengths of each structure) shows a consistent trend and correlation (see
Appendix B, Figure B.1). The mean of the differences between MP and AP2020 lattice
values is centred around zero (0.0033 Å) with a standard deviation of 0.023 Å. This gives
us confidence that AP2020 was properly produced, and it can be used as starting database
of the high-throughput screening. Despite the lack of experimental screening on antiper-
ovskites, the simulated lattice constants of few well-known antiperovskites structures (such
as X3AO with X = Li, Na, K and A = Cl, Br, I) show agreement with PXRD data [17,
23, 85, 86].
3.2
High-Throughput Screening Results
The High-Throughput Screening (HTS) process is pursed as explained in section 2.3.
After duplicates and structure with wrong antiperovskites stoichiometry (i.e. X, A, and
B sites must be different from each other) are discarded, the number of total candidates
drops by 362 from the 6596 initial structures.
The HTS process starts with a properties-based selection; antiperovskites are filtered
based on their band gaps and crystal geometries. Only structures with a positive band
gap and close to the ideal cubic geometry (Pm-3m space group) are accepted and fur-
ther studied. A positive band gap is chosen since a candidate material for Solid-State
Electrolyte (SSE) must be an insulator to avoid short circuits of the Solid-State Battery
(SSB). The reasons behind fixing the threshold value at just above zero can be found in
section 2.3 - Band Gap. Concerning the close to cubic geometry criteria, we mean that
threshold values are used to check for distortions of the crystal structure (see section 2.3 -
Structure Geometry). If these distortions are within the fixed constrains, the candidates
are considered a cubic-like structure and kept for additional investigation.
The reasons why in this study we did not include distortions are several. The inclusion
of distortion is not trivial, the structures discarded by this filter may be in one of other
22 possible space groups [20], but we found that more likely the crystal structure did not
hold together during the relaxation process, leading to complete displacement and rear-
rangement of the atom sites in structures which are then out of the antiperovskite class.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
17
==PAGE:24==
Therefore, the inclusion of distorted geometry would require multiple and complex filtering
criteria. Furthermore, initializing the structures in cubic geometry can lead to relaxation
in metastable configuration, and a proper analysis of distorted geometry would need a full
relaxation starting from lower symmetric configurations. A consistent database expansion
would therefore imply much more calculations. In addition, the computational time re-
quired to calculate MEBs in low-symmetry configuration is much higher. A distortion in
the geometric structure opens up many possible percolation paths of the cation, as showed
in previous studies [29, 31]. Moreover, at the current stages, the only existing descriptor
which try to relate migration energy barriers with pre-DFT properties, rely on geometric
distortion predicted with the Goldschmidt tolerance factor [29, 31]. However, this descrip-
tor still present quite important outliers. With our work we try to find a more solid and
deeper connection between MEBs and easy to calculate chemical-physical properties, and
we can do that by getting rid of strong distortion in the analyzed structures.
The results of this first screening are shown in Figure 3.1.
More than 90% of the
antiperovskite candidates are predicted to be metal conductors.
Due to the choice of
PBEsol functional, we know that this number is likely to be overestimated, but as discussed
in section 2.3 - Band Gap this error is acceptable within a HTS approach. This leaves
us with 589 acceptable candidates, that once selected for their geometry are reduced to a
total number of 139 candidates. Barley 25% of the insulator antiperovskites show stability
in a cubic geometry. Instead, when the selection process is inverted (the geometric filter is
followed by the band gap selection) it can be notice that almost 50% (3027) of the relaxed
antiperovskites are in cubic geometry.
Since the final number is still the same (139),
this leads us to the conclusion that most of the cubic antiperovskites are good electronic
conductors, about 95% of them in a PBEsol approximation.
Figure 3.1:
High-Throughput Screening (pre-DFT) of the antiperovskites’ database
AP2020.
Each step represents a selection process that is applied to the previous list
of candidates.
The following selection process still not requires any DFT calculations, but it is pursued
relying on an extensive literature review.
Periodic Table Sustainability Index
In the context of large-scale applications of SSBs, we need to rely on materials which are
quite abundant, not prohibitively expensive, accessible with consistency, and not harmful
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
18
==PAGE:25==
for the environment. In section 2.3 - Periodic Table Sustainability Index, we explained how
different resources are used to compose the Periodic Table Sustainability Index (PTSI)
presented in this work: the 2020 EU Critical Raw Materials List (EUCRML) [56], the
Herfindahl−Hirschman Index for elemental reserves HHIr and production HHIp [53], the
abundance of elements in Earth’s crust [53, 59], and the Chemical Element Sustainability
Index (CESI) [58]. Thanks to these studies we were able to assign a score ranging from
0 (no criticality) to 3 (max criticality) to all the first 83 elements of the periodic table.
The use of many indexes which look at different issues to build PTSI, it is applied with
the scope to make a solid and consistent choice of the elements to discard. Naturally,
PTSI suffers of the intrinsic arbitrariness present in the process of selecting an index and
assigning a score to each of them. Averaging among different indexes, which overlap in
some of the investigated fields, can also lead to unbalance results. In order to reduce this
risk, a conservative choice of the threshold PTSI score used to discard an element is done.
Only elements with PTSI ≥2 are discarded.
What follows is the PTSI plotted on a periodic table of the elements, in traﬀic light color
fashion to suggests their criticality Figure 3.2. A table containing all the used indexes and
the necessary calculations to convert them in PTSI can be found in Appendix B, Table B.1
and Table B.2.
Figure 3.2: Periodic Table Sustainability Index plotted over the first 83 elements of the
periodic table. The colorbar indicates the PTSI score of each element (from green - not
critical, to red - high critical). The element surrounded by a black box have a PTSI score
≥2 and have been discard from the list of antiperovskites candidates.
About 32% of the initial cubic and insulator antiperovskites are discarded by PTSI,
thereby reducing the total number candidates to 94 Figure 3.1. It can be noticed that
many known toxic (Be, Nb, Ru, Rh, Pd, Sb, La, W, Os, Ir, Pt, Bi [87, 88]) and scarce
elements (Ru, Rh, Pd, Os, Ir, Pt [89]) are caught by our index. Interestingly enough, some
controversial elements fall outside that high-critical fraction. For instance, cobalt is not
discarded. It is classified with medium criticality, even if its substitution from the cathode
of Li-ion battery has been the driving force of huge advancement and investment in the
battery field in last decades. Many factors, as the questionable and unethical supply chain
behind the cobalt market, are probably not well represented by this index. Also, elements
with high abundance but high toxicity are maintained due to the averaging process. These
results give us confidence that this filter is selective only towards the elements with a
criticality spread over all considered fields, maintaining the wanted conservative approach.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
19
==PAGE:26==
Workflow Results
Downstream of the easy to calculate selection criteria and literature review, we must
rely on Density Functional Theory calculations to complete our screening. Although the
number of candidates is reduced around the 1.5% of the full AP2020 database, the pur-
pose of this study is to establish a methodology extendable over others (and perhaps more
fortunate) class of materials. When it is the time to setup the VASP parameters to per-
form DFT calculations, the trade between accuracy and computational cost needs to be
considered. Most of them are defined following the Materials Project guide as presented in
section 2.3 - Energy Above The Convex Hull. Among others, spin polarization is an impor-
tant variable. Most solid-state systems are non-magnetic [90] and ferromagnetic elements
represent a large minority in the selected list of antiperovskites. Indeed, many transition
metal, that often are the cause of spin-polarized calculations, have been discarded by band
gap selection criteria since they also lead to electronically conductive materials. However,
we cannot know in advance the final magnetic moment of the crystal without perform-
ing a spin polarized calculation. Along with the bulk relaxation of the unit cell, a NEB
calculation of the supercell with a cation vacancy is performed. Vacancy is chosen over
the dumbbell migration scheme because it seems to be prevalent in bulk structure and it
can be considered as the upper limit mechanism, since it usually more than doubles the
energy of the interstitial [25, 28, 30]. From literature there is no suggestion about mag-
netic initialization for MEBs calculations by vacancy mechanism on antiperovskites [29,
31]. The test we made over two different antiperovskite structures (Li3ClO and Li3BrO),
each initialized in non-magnetic and high-spin ferro-magnetic state, showed that for both
the compounds the difference between the two MEBs is close to 8% of the highest value
(belonging to high-spin ferro-magnetic initialization), together with an expected doubled
calculation time. Keeping in mind the aforementioned goal of this project, we decided to
rely on faster non-spin polarized calculations.
DFT calculations are performed via iiwPBEU [66], an in-house workflow created for
ion-insertion cathodes screening [67] and adapted within this project for the autonomous
discovery of solid-state electrolytes (more details can be found in section 2.4).
The first part is initiated after all the required user inputs are provided (see section 2.4).
The threshold value used to discard unstable structures is 0.1 eV/atom. With this con-
strain the number of interesting electrolytes drops from 94 to 33 (see Figure 3.7). The
calculated values are showed in Figure 3.3 and correlations with literature [30, 60] can be
checked in Appendix B - Table B.3, Figure B.4, Figure B.5, Figure B.6. Despite some
differences observed with Ref. [30] (due to the limited set of references they used) the ener-
gies above the convex hull calculated by the workflow follow the same trend produced by
literature values, confirming the reliability of our data. However, differences are expected
due to the use of distinct functionals (PBEsol vs PBE).
Kim et al. in a previous study on Li, and Na antiperovskite [29], reported an inverse
linear trend between the Goldschmidt tolerance factor (TF) and the calculated energy
above the convex hull of their set of investigated antiperovskites. From their study, this
correlation seems to hold particularly well when looking at a single class of cation. This
rough correlation seems to underline a connection between stability and the geometric
distortion predicted by TF. Indeed, the tolerance factor was created to underline that the
ionic packing in an ideal cubic perovskite-like structure ABX3 (with B at the center of the
octahedron), from a pure geometric point of view, should follow this simple equivalence:
(rA + rX) =
√
2(rB + rX),
(3.1)
where ri is the ionic radius of the elements in site i. Deviations from this equivalence may
indicate distortion and connected instability of the perovskite-like structures [91]. How-
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
20
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.3: Energy above the convex hull of the stable antiperovskite selected structures
in eV/atom.
ever, a research investigating chemical-physical trends across a large perovskite database
highlighted the criticality of using TF to predict their thermodynamic stability [92]. Given
the same geometric reasons, the TF has been adopted also for antiperovskite structures.
Therefore, we decided to investigate the same correlation among our set of antiperovskites:
ionic radii data are collected using mendeleev Python package [93, 94] and are integrated
with Ref. [95]. Contrary to what previously reported, there is no such a trend within out
set of antiperovskite. There is no clear trend among all candidates or even within the
same cation type (Figure 3.4). This leads us to the conclusion that, within the spectrum
of out cubic-like and stable antiperovskites, this correlation does not hold anymore. We
can assume that it can appear when a wide variety of antiperovskites, with an increasing
level of distortion, is investigated.
We tried to deeper investigate the relation between stability and structure distortions.
As explained in section 2.3 - Structure Geometry, multiple parameters are necessary to
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
21
==PAGE:28==
properly investigate distortions in a crystal unit-cell. Instead of looking at the predicted
distortion with TF, we directly apply these parameters to measure distortions inside the
crystal structures and we plot those values versus the energetic stability of our candidates.
In a such a case, no correlation emerged between stability and distortions for cubic-like
antiperovskites. However, unit cell angles distortion parameters and TF showed to follow a
similar trend. This fact let us suppose that distortions are related with the tolerance factor,
but both are not related with the thermodynamic stability of our set of antiperovskites.
Also noteworthy is the calculated tolerance factor of the selected antiperovskites, the values
of which ranged from 0.81 to 1.19. As a rule of thumb, antiperovskites with a tolerance
factor lower than 0.85 are predicted to be in distorted geometry [20] and this is quite
consistent with our results.
Figure 3.4: Relation between TF and the energy above the convex hull of the investigated
antiperovskites. Each point represents a different antiperovskite structure. In order to
highlight the trend among antiperovskites with the same cation, bigger points are plotted
for Li and Ca (chosen at example because of their high number of samples) and colored
respectively in green and red. All the other cation types are represented by the dark-blue-
little spot.
The 33 structures are then submitted to the second part of the workflow in order to
calculate their migration energy barriers. The threshold value of the MEBs was set high
enough to avoid any further selection. This is done mainly within the scope to produce
and analyze as many MEBs as possible of cubic-stable antiperovskites. Nevertheless, since
we did not manage to converge the NEB relaxation of 12 structures the total amount of
calculated MEBs fell to 21. In Figure 3.6 all the energy migration barriers and relative
unit cell formula are reported. Correlation with literature can be checked in Appendix B
- Table B.4. Our data showed good agreement, in terms of correlation, with the values
obtained by Kim et al. in their recent works [29, 31].
At our knowledge, 12 of the antiperovskites presented in Figure 3.6 have never been
presented in literature before; their MEB values are colored in blue.
Some new high-
conductive candidates emerged from our screening process (< 0.5 eV), such as Li3SeH
(0.29 eV), Li3TeH (0.33 eV), Li3TeF (0.24 eV), Na3AuO (0.47 eV), Ca3TeC (0.44 eV), and
Rb3TeH (0.28 eV), together with the already reported Li3ClO (0.40 eV), Li3SeF (0.22
eV), Li3BrO (0.46 eV), Li3IO (0.41 eV), Na3ClO (0.25 eV), K3BrO (0.20 eV), K3IO (0.37
eV), and Ca3AsN (0.41 eV). Alkali metals and alkali earth metals cation turn out to be
the most stable and ionic-conductive antiperovskites.
This is high promising in terms
of SSB applications. Kim et al. in their computational studies reported other stable and
high-conductive antiperovskites (previously synthesized), which are not present in the final
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
22
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.5: Migration energy barriers (MEBs) by vacancy mechanism of stable antiper-
ovskite selected structures in eV/supercell. MEBs value in green are for new discovered
ionic conductive antiperovskites. Bar chart which compares MEBs of antiperovskite stable
structures obtained in this study (AP2020, PBEsol) with the recent study by Kim et al.
[29] (PBE). The comparison must be intended only to highlight trends and correlations
between data; different values are expected due to the use of different functionals. The
compared data correlates well between them.
set of candidates produced here. However, this shall not be imputed to a failure of the
selection process, indeed this depends on the following two reasons: the combination of
elements initially chosen to construct AP2020 database; the structures discarded by PTSI
because containing antimony and bismuth. The high toxicity of antimony and the highly
centralized production of bismuth (China) have caused materials with these elements not
to be selected. The only issue that can be attributed to the workflow is about the failure
in convergence of 3 NEB calculations, which were already calculated by Kim et al.
Again, a correlation between the tolerance factor and MEBs was reported by Kim
et al., for both monovalent and multivalent cation antiperovskites. Three key points are
highlighted by their studies; (1) when TF gets below 0.8 the number of possible percolation
paths increase together with the reduced value of TF, (2) the spread of percolation paths
leads to a spread of the MEBs values, with lower and higher migration barriers than less
distorted geometry, and (3) MEBs are positively related with TF all over the TF range.
Basically, distortions pave the way to inaccessible migration paths for the cubic geometry,
among which lower MEBs can be found. Then, accounting only for the lower migration
path of each structure a quite good correlation with MEBs holds throughout the TF
interval. The trend is particularly solid when comparing antiperovskites with the same B-
site group. The same investigation is pursed among our set of antiperovskites, taking into
account the B sites constrain. From Figure 3.13b a positive correlation seems to emerge for
each B class of candidates, partially confirming that this descriptor may indicate a trend
for MEBs. However, despite the interesting interpretation of such a connection between
predicted distortion and MEBs, this descriptor is far from being predictive and usable
from an accelerated material discovery point of view. In this dissertation, we decided
to dive deep into the research of such descriptors, that not relying of DFT can produce
impressive speed up of guided material design (see section 3.3).
The funnel approach applied in this HTS study is concluded with the workflow outputs.
Its results are quantified in Figure 3.7. The re-used and adapted workflow (iiwPBEU [66])
showed to produce consistent results with literature, therefore confirming its reliability.
Much time was saved from not creating a new script to perform the main DFT calculations
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.6: Migration energy barriers (MEBs) by vacancy mechanism of stable antiper-
ovskite selected structures in eV/supercell. MEBs value in blue are for new discovered
ionic conductive antiperovskites.
pursued in this work, and this confirms the strong role that workflow reusability can play
to accelerate material discovery in computational material science.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
24
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.7: High-Throughput Screening (DFT based) of the antiperovskites’ database
AP2020. Each step represents a selection process that is applied to the previous list of
candidates.
3.3
MEBs Descriptors
If we have a careful look at the chemical space explored by our AP2020 antiperovskites
database Figure A.1, we can observe that a wide part of it is still unexplored, in particular
due to the limited amount of B elements selected when the database was first conceived.
Providing some numbers: if we expand the chemical space considering all periodic elements
from H to Bi for X and A sites, all non-metal elements for B site, and then we discard all
the combination already accounted by AP2020, all potential unit cell with odd number of
electrons (metals from band theory), with X electronegativity higher than A or B, and all
unsustainable elements discarded by our aforementioned sustainability index (PTSI), we
still have left more than 6000 potential antiperovskites, about the same amount we started
with in this study. It would be really valuable if we could detect inside this expensive-to-
compute list, which of these structures are more likely to be highly ionic-conductive. A
fascinating option relies on the application of specific descriptors, which once identified are
able to define mathematical relations linking a target feature of interest with an already
calculated properties of that specific material. These descriptors have been extensively
used to drive and accelerate the discovery of heterogeneous catalysts. In fact, it has been
found a very general rule for solid catalytic surfaces interacting with an adsorbent; the
adsorption energies of different surface intermediates that bind to the surface through the
same atom(s) scale with each other [96].
An analogous descriptor translated for solid ionic conductive materials would be a big
step forward for the research in solid-state electrolytes. Naturally, a cation moving inside
bulk materials of different classes of material can find completely different chemical envi-
ronment and physical constrains that make hard the construction of an unique and simple
model. Structural descriptors (post-DFT calculations) of the ion mobility in bulk struc-
tures have been discussed extensively in literature, producing an electrostatic estimation
of the migration barrier [97] and a prediction based on geometrical consideration along
the migration path [98–100]. Very recently, a study in preliminary print [76] proposed
a descriptor for the ion mobility in battery electrodes and solid electrolytes, which only
relies on tabulated chemical-physical properties of the constituents. Within two classes
of materials (binary compounds and ternary spinels), the migration barriers have been
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
25
==PAGE:32==
connected through linear scaling relations to the ionic radii, oxidation states and Pauling
electronegativities of each material species. For a given XmAn binary compound, where
X is the moving cation with m sites, and A the fixed anion with n sites, for a cation X the
migration energy barrier can be calculated with the relation:
EX
migr(A) = EX
0 + CXNXA
migr,
(3.2)
where EX
migr(A) is the MEB of X as function of A, EX
0 and CX are respectively the intercept
and the slope of the scaling relation of a given cation X, and NXA
migr is the variable defining
the mathematical relations, called from the authors migration parameter. The migration
parameter is calculated as:
NXA
migr = (rX + rA)nXnA
(χX −χA)2
m + n
,
(3.3)
where ri is the ionic radii of the species i, ni is its oxidation state, χi is its Pauling
electronegativity, and m and n the number of atoms per unit cell of X and A.
Being the descriptor based on transition states with only two interacting elements, it
is hard that the same relation can hold for ternary compounds as in the case of antiper-
ovskites. Indeed, if this descriptor is applied to our set of antiperovskites no coherent
trends emerge from the data. By the fact that this descriptor does not need any structure
relaxation, we pursed the same analysis over the set of antiperovskite and relative MEBs
reported by Kim et al. [29, 31], leading to the same conclusion. To our knowledge, the
only other descriptor available in literature for antiperovskite MEBs, is the Goldschmidt’s
tolerance factor (TF) [29, 31] presented in the section above. The poor generalizability of
TF for predicting MEBs left us no doubts about the need of a solid descriptor as reported
for binary compounds. In the following section we examine the results obtained by apply-
ing two machine learning techniques in sequence, random forest regressor and symbolic
regressor, to discover such a descriptor.
Random Forest Regressor
This machine learning technique represents our tools to dig deep on the vast number
of easy-to-access features purely dependent on the material constituents and establish
which subset of these properties is mostly used to predict our target property, in this case
migration energy barrier. A more in-depth description of the method can be found in
section 2.5 - Random Forest Regressor.
The two datasets, AP2020 and Kim et al., are analyzed separately, since the calculated
MEBs have been obtained using different functionals, PBEsol and PBE respectively. The
random forest regressor showed low predictivity when used on the Kim dataset as a whole,
therefore in this case we split the investigation between mono and multivalent cation.
The five most important features used to produce the MEBs prediction are presented
below. The actual MEBs prediction, which is not the goal of this analysis, can be found
inAppendix B - Figure B.7, Figure B.8, Figure B.9.
The MEBs prediction of the candidates generated by this study mainly relies on those
properties that already presented by Sotoudeh et al. [76]: Pauling electronegativity differ-
ences, ionic radii summation, and elemental charges (Figure 3.8). This gives us a strong
suggestion that those factors are also involved in the prediction of MEBs in stable, cubic-
like antiperovskites. In particular, the electronegativity difference between X and A shows
to be strongly involved in the process. From the Kim et al. set of data emerges that the
tolerance factor is actually highly relevant for MEBs prediction, both for alkali metal (Fig-
ure 3.9) and alkaline earth metal (Figure 3.10) antiperovskite X-site groups. Thus, at first
glance this analysis confirms TF as one of the most important descriptors for migration
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
26
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.8: The five most important features used for the random forest regression of
MEBs: XA_en_diff represent the difference between X and A electronegativity in absolute
value, AB_rad the summation of A and B ionic radii, gap_AO is the estimated bandgap
from HOMO and LUMO energies (matminer estimation based on atomic orbital energies
of the compositional elements), XB_charge is the multiplication of predicted charge of X
and B, and A_rad is the ionic radii of A.
barriers in antiperovskites. What we can also notice is that electronegativity differences
between compositional elements and ionic character are often involved in the prediction
of MEBs, together with the predicted band gap difference (matminer estimation based on
atomic orbital energies of the compositional elements) and ionic/atom radii properties.
Figure 3.9: The five most important features used for the random forest regression of
MEBs: Goldschmidt_tf is the Goldschmidt tolerance factor, XB_en_p represent the
difference between X and B electronegativity in absolute value, XB_rad the summation
of X and B ionic radii, avg_ionic_char is the average ionic character (by matminer), and
HOMO_energy is the highest occupied molecular orbital (matminer estimation based on
atomic orbital energies of the compositional elements)
Figure 3.10: The five most important features used for the random forest regression of
MEBs: Goldschmidt_tf is the Goldschmidt tolerance factor, gap_AO is the estimated
bandgap from HOMO and LUMO energies (matminer estimation based on atomic orbital
energies of the compositional elements), dist from 3/5 clusters |APE| < 0.010 are values
related to the packing eﬀiciency given the elemental radii (by matminer), and A_rad is
the ionic radii of A.
This first analysis makes us aware of the particular importance that electronegativity,
charge distribution, and geometric constrains related with atomic radii, play in defining the
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
27
==PAGE:34==
barrier to be overcome during the migration process, thus confirming the features already
detected by Sotoudeh et al. [76] and Kim et al. [29, 31]. Therefore, we decided to further
investigate those properties with a symbolic regression technique, in order to search and
establish a mathematical relation which is coherent for each set of antiperovskites.
Symbolic Regression
With the symbolic regressor as implement by gplearn [79], we randomly combine the
previously featured dataset with mathematical operators and constants. Exploiting the
information gathered by the aforementioned analysis we focus the featurization with the
parameters highlighted by the random forest regressor. We start by simple system, where
only one site per time is changed, and then we increase the sites variability when we
notice recurring and persistent relations. The main hyperparameters used to optimize
the learning process are mathematical complexity, population size, number of generations,
and the parsimony coeﬀicient. The mathematical complexity is kept low, as explained
in section 2.5 - Symbolic Regression, in order to produce clearer and easier to interpret
relations (trigonometric functions are discarded). Population size and number of genera-
tions are increased until the obtained results tend to converge despite further increment. A
high parsimony coeﬀicient penalizes the generation of expression with an excessive number
of operators and coeﬀicients; in this work this number is fixed in order to avoid expres-
sions with more than 9 parameters. At the end, one simple, clear, and persistent relation
emerges by our analysis:
Emigr(A, B, X) ≈k|χA −(χB + χX)|.
(3.4)
For a unit cell X3AB, the Pauling electronegativity (χ) difference between A site and
the sum of B and X sites is proportional (k = constant) to the migration energy barrier
Emigr(A, B, X) of an antiperovskite. This first approximation produces a positive cor-
relation with MEBs when considering all possible variation of ion sites inside the crystal
(keeping constant 2, 1 and 0 sites). We notice that when the B site is fixed within the same
periodic element group, the relation is stronger, when we mix more B groups together the
relation gets weaker.
The Antiperovskite Scaling Relation of Cations Migration
After further attempts the correlation in Equation 3.4 was improved by multiplying it
with the A site ionic radius. At this stage B site of different periodic group still gives quite
distinct trend. What we notice is that B sites with low oxidation number (e.g. C with
-4) tend to be underestimated by the scaling relation, while B sites with high oxidation
number (e.g. F and H with -1) are overestimated. This little tip led us to the final form
of the relation which includes the B site anion charge:
Emigr(A, B, X) ≈k|χA −(χB + χX)|(rA)(−nB),
(3.5)
where ri is the ionic radii of the ion i, and nB is the oxidation number of B site. This
expression creates a linear and positive correlation with the MEBs, providing the cur-
rently (to our knowledge) most accurate descriptor predicting energy migration barriers
in antiperovskites. We called this descriptor Antiperovskite Scaling Relation for Cations
Migration (antiperovskites SRCM). In Figure 3.11 and Figure 3.12 the relation that arouse
using the antiperovskites SRCM is showed for AP2020 and Kim et al. MEBs. The coef-
ficient of determination (R2) is used to evaluate the quality of fit of the linear regression
between the two variables, and more importantly, the Pearson correlation coeﬀicient (PCC)
is used to express the correlation between MEBs and antiperovskites SRCM.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
28
==PAGE:35==
For comparison, the same trends are showed as a function of the tolerance factor in
Figure 3.13 and Figure 3.14. For both the datasets R2 increase widely when the antiper-
ovskites SRCM is used instead of TF. When looking at whole set of antiperovskites for
AP2020 it rose from 0.02 to 0.64, for Kim et al. dataset it grew from 0.49 to 0.90. The same
improvement is showed in terms of PCC: from -0.15 to 0.80 for AP2020 and from 0.70 to
0.95 for Kim et al. The reason why our dataset present lower correlation coeﬀicients, it is
likely to be caused by our smaller test sample combined with a wider range of explored B
sites. Indeed, in both datasets (AP2020 and Kim et al.) and descriptors (antiperovskites
SRCM and TF) antiperovskites of the same B group tend to be more correlated between
them.
Looking at the most import factor of the antiperovskites SRCM, |χA −(χB +χX)|, we
can express some considerations. In our database, B site is generally more electronegative
than A site and therefore the first two addends turn easily to be negative, and since the
third one is also negative (−χX) it is diﬀicult to have low migration barriers given this
factor. By the fact that the B anion charge linearly scale with the antiperovskites SRCM,
a strong electronegative B anion as fluoride can still result in low migration energy barrier
if compared with another B group.
In their study, Kim et al. also included B anions
with lower electronegativity, such as sulfur and selenium, and generally to these structures
correspond a lower migration energy barrier, when compared for instance with oxygen.
We may interpret the electronegativity factor thinking of B and X site as a unique
system. Their net electronegativity as to be as similar as possible to the A site electroneg-
ativity, in order to let the X cation free to move between the two vertices of the octahedron.
The radius of site A is also an improving factor of the presented scaling relation. A higher
A radius leads to higher migration energy, which can be interpenetrated as a steric hin-
drance to the migration process caused by bulky A sites. This effect is also captured by
the tolerance factor when applied over structures with comparable B and X radii.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
29
==PAGE:36==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.11: The antiperovskites SRCM correlation with migration energy barriers of
AP2020 antiperovskites. (a) The linear regression and its coeﬀicient of determination R2
is showed for the whole set of antiperovskites; (b) the linear regression is highlighted for
antiperovskites with the same B group.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.12: The antiperovskites SRCM correlation with migration energy barriers of Kim
et al. antiperovskites dataset. (a) The linear regression and its coeﬀicient of determination
R2 is showed for the whole set of antiperovskites; (b) the linear regression is highlighted
for antiperovskites with the same B group.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
30
==PAGE:37==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.13: Tolerance factor correlation with migration energy barriers of AP2020 antiper-
ovskites. (a) The linear regression and its coeﬀicient of determination R2 is showed for
the whole set of antiperovskites; (b) the linear regression is highlighted for antiperovskites
with the same B group.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.14: Tolerance factor correlation with migration energy barriers of Kim et al.
antiperovskites dataset. (a) The linear regression and its coeﬀicient of determination R2
is showed for the whole set of antiperovskites; (b) the linear regression is highlighted for
antiperovskites with the same B group.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
31
==PAGE:38==
3.4
Bandgap Recalculation
The band gap calculated in AP2020 uses the approximation produced by PBEsol
functional and, as explained in section 2.3 - Band Gap, its band gap underestimation in
crystal structures is a well-known issue. In order to estimate the real insulator properties
of the candidates, the band gap values are re-calculated using HSE06 hybrid functional
and keeping unchanged the other critical VASP parameters. HSE06 has been identified as
one of the most accurate functionals for band gap calculation in solid [101]. We resubmit
to this process all the antiperovskites calculated to be stable from the energy above the
convex hull decision filter. In Table 3.1 PBEsol and HSE06 band gap values are compared.
All the calculated band gaps are underestimated by PBEsol functional of 2.020 eV in
average (with 1.756 eV of standard deviation). All antiperovskites are re-confirmed as
insulator. HSE06 calculated band gaps are in good agreement with literature [102].
Table 3.1: Band gaps of stable antiperovskites AP2020 database calculated with PBEsol
and HSE06 approximations to the exchange–correlation energy functional.
PBEsol
HSE06
￿(HSE06 - PBEsol )
Formula
eV
eV
eV
Li3ClO
4.890
7.507
2.618
Li3SeH
3.585
8.927
5.341
Li3SeF
3.836
6.204
2.368
Li3BrO
4.460
6.930
2.470
Li3TeH
3.091
7.511
4.419
Li3TeF
2.994
5.945
2.951
Li3IO
4.074
6.526
2.453
Li3HgN
0.265
7.893
7.628
Na3ClO
2.032
3.322
1.290
Na3BrO
1.858
3.119
1.261
Na3IO
1.972
3.163
1.191
Na3AuO
1.335
6.750
5.414
Mg3AsN
1.306
2.489
1.183
Mg3SeC
1.011
2.343
1.332
Mg3TeC
0.794
1.459
0.665
K3ClO
0.976
1.436
0.460
K3BrO
0.884
1.426
0.542
K3AgO
0.669
3.744
3.075
K3IO
1.023
1.535
0.513
K3AuO
0.671
4.048
3.377
Ca3SiO
0.004
1.120
1.116
Ca3GeO
0.006
1.184
1.178
Ca3AsN
0.719
1.105
0.386
Ca3SnO
0.003
1.144
1.141
Ca3TeC
0.001
1.034
1.033
Ti3CdO
0.018
3.483
3.465
V3GeO
0.139
-
-
V3PbO
0.117
-
-
Rb3SeH
2.314
2.878
0.564
Rb3SeF
1.855
2.478
0.624
Rb3TeH
2.545
3.193
0.648
Rb3TeF
2.044
2.761
0.717
Ba3AsN
0.396
1.604
1.208
AVERAGE
1.572
3.686
2.020
STANDARD DEVIATION
1.430
2.438
1.756
3.5
The Pourbaix Diagram
The stability analysis is extended to include the eventual corrosion of a potential
solid electrolyte material in presence of moisture in a working battery. Every selected
antiperovskite is tested at different electrode potentials (-4,4 eV) and pH conditions (-2,
16 pH), at constant pressure (1 atm) and temperature (25°C), using the so-called Pourbaix
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
32
==PAGE:39==
diagrams. This diagram considers all known solid and aqueous phases generated by the
elemental combination of the investigated material and water. The set of equations useful
to produce the diagram are presented in section 2.6 - Stability In An Aqueous System - The
Pourbaix Diagram. We pursed this analysis over the AP2020 with calculated migration
energy barriers. The formation energy used for this calculation is obtained with PBE
relaxation (with Hubbard and anion correction as explained in section 2.1 - Hubbard And
Anion Corrections). This choice is done to be coherent with the approximated exchange–
correlation energy functional used for the formation energies of the Materials Project
reference database [44], which contains the known solid and aqueous phases.
The calculated Pourbaix diagrams are shown in Appendix B (from Figure B.10 to
Figure B.30) together with the calculated decomposition energy of the antiperovskite
against the most stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull). Our
Pourbaix diagrams showed to be consistent with the one produced by materilasproject for
the few common sample of antiperovskites. As an example, the Pourbaix diagrams with
stable phases and decomposition energy of Li3ClO is reported here in Figure 3.15.
(a) Li3ClO Pourbaix diagram
(b) Li3ClO decomposition energy
Figure 3.15: Pourbaix diagrams of Li3ClO at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
The selected antiperovskites do not show stability in presence of moisture. Antiper-
ovskite cations tend to dissolve in water at 0 voltage all along the pH spectrum. At pH
higher than 14 for Li, 12 for Mg and 13 for Ca, these cations form they respective hy-
droxide species. Focusing on the anion at the center of the octahedron (B site), N and
C are the less stable compounds with a decomposition energy above 1 eV in almost all
the selected areas. Oxide antiperovskites show areas of higher stability (> 0 and < 0.6
eV) below 0 voltages and for high pH values, where they compete with hydroxide and
dissolved cations. The same trend is obtained for compounds with F B-site. The only
materials proving stability along the entire pH scale at high reducing potential (< -2 V)
are the hydride antiperovskites. The presence of a negative charged hydrogen makes these
structures more stable at low potential than its direct competitors, alkali and alkaline
earth elements in their metal form. Indeed, the latter are the dominant species at low
potential for all the other antiperovskites B sites.
Their sensitivity to moisture at neutral potential and wide range of pH may be an
issue for synthesis, processing, and practical applications of this new materials. When
looking at the most experimentally synthesized antiperovskites (X3AO with X = Li, Na
and A = Cl, Br), their reactivity with atmospheric moisture is a well-known problem,
and many measures are taken to avoid direct contact with atmosphere during synthesis
and characterization [103–105]. This can highly affect the performance of a SSE under
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
33
==PAGE:40==
operational conditions. However, a cost-effective spray coating method has been recently
developed on garnet-type solid-state electrolytes that suffer of high instability against
moisture [106, 107]. Two-dimensional hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) nanosheets are used
to protect the interface between the ionic-conductive material and atmosphere, suppressing
degradation for over 120 h in an open atmosphere. Such an approach could be applied
over the most promising antiperovskites candidates selected in this study.
3.6
Electrochemical Stability Window
The Electrochemical Stability Window (ESW) is then evaluated over the antiperovskite
candidates with calculated MEBs. The computational method of investigation is the grand
potential phase diagram, as explained in section 2.6 - Electrochemical Stability Window
- Grand Potential Phase Diagram, and it is used to detect the voltage range of material
stability with respect to the associated metal anode (X-site element). In Figure 3.16 are
showed the obtained ESWs and their comparison with literature values [30], which confirm
the reliability of the applied method.
According to literature [25], Li, Na and K antiperovskites have a kinetically suppressed
decomposition into alkali metal oxide X2O, therefore the calculated ESWs are obtained
from metastable grand potential phase diagrams where this compound is discarded.
Most of the tested antiperovskites showed interesting ESWs, with the highest values
obtained by lithium conductive materials.
Li3ClO and Li3BrO show thermodynamics
stability against Li metal in a range voltage between 0 - 3 V, in agreement with a previous
study [108]. Cyclability and compatibility of Li3OCl film with Li metal has been already
proven in literature [109].
All antiperovskites with a positive ESW are stable at 0 V,
implying no reduction against the direct contact to their metal anode. This is an important
advantage for antiperovskite material as SSEs, which will pave the way to SSBs with
high energy densities. For instance, most of the Li SSEs currently studied are inherently
unstable against a Li-metal anode [84]. Viable voltage ranges are 1.5 – 3.1 V for Li based
antiperovskites (Li3HgN excluded), 0.44 – 2.16 V for the Na based, 1.26 – 1.62 V for the
K based, and 0.92 V for the Rb3TeH based. The range is lower for larger alkali cation.
Multivalent cation showed lower stability than monovalent candidates; only Mg3AsN and
Ca3AsN obtained a positive ESW of 1.25 and 1.76 V respectively.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
34
==PAGE:41==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.16: Electrochemical stability windows calculated with grand potential phase dia-
gram method. The total energy of the selected antiperovskite candidates through the HTS
process is recalculated with GGA - PBE functional (with Hubbard and anion corrections)
in order to match DFT approximation methods used for references. (a) All electrochemi-
cal stability windows of the antiperovskites with calculated MEBs. (b) Comparison with
literature value calculated by Kim et al. [30, 31].
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
35
==PAGE:42==
4
Conclusions and Outlook
Antiperovskites are emerging as a new promising class of functional materials. The
prominent ionic conductivity of a few detected structures led to the investigation of an-
tiperovskites as potential solid-state electrolyte to implement in solid-state batteries.
In this study we screened a large database containing 6234 antiperovskites using a high-
throughput approach. With the only data obtained by structure relaxations and band
gap calculations, we were able to extract some general trends of the AP class of material.
About half of the generated structures (3027) have a geometry close to the ideal cubic
Pm-3m space group, which means that this configuration seems to stabilize a large variety
of antiperovskites in the wide explored chemical space. The vast majority of them turned
out to be electronic conductors, therefore not suitable as SSE. Only 139 antiperovskites
showed insulator property (band gap > 0), less than 5% of the cubic fraction, but this
percentage is likely to be underestimated (around 7.5% of the total metal conductors
[51]) due to the fact that we used PBEsol as approximation of the exchange-correlation
functional.
DFT calculations were performed to calculate the thermodynamic stability (energy
above the convex hull) and energy barriers of vacancy migrations of the selected antiper-
ovskites. The ratio between thermodynamically stable antiperovskites and cubic-insulator
selected candidates is around one-third of the total. The migration energy barriers were
obtained for only 21 candidates, due to convergency failures of the nudge elastic method
simulations. From our screening process new high ionic conductive candidates are discov-
ered and migration barriers lower than 500 meV were found for Li3SeH, Li3TeH, Li3TeF,
Na3AuO, Ca3TeC, and Rb3TeH. Other already known structures were obtained confirm-
ing previous literature report.
For all the candidates with calculate migration energy barriers we also investigated sta-
bility against moisture and stable voltages with respect to the metal anode (negative elec-
trode of X-site metal element). Confirming previous literature research, antiperovskites
showed high instability in water across all pH and potential values investigated with the
Pourbaix diagrams. The electrochemical stability window of each candidate was inves-
tigated with the grand potential phase diagram open to the X-site elements.
Respect
to metal anode only Li based antiperovskites (Li3ClO, Li3BrO) showed the capability to
be stability against reduction by the metal anode, without the need for interface coat-
ing.
These two last analyses turned to be the weak features of antiperovskites in the
context of application of solid-state electrolytes. Cost-effective coating methods, already
proved on solid materials [106, 107], shall be investigated on antiperovskites for real-world
applications.
Using the here produced migration energy barriers we were able to create a new de-
scriptor, which is able to produce a linear mathematical scaling relation to predict energy
barrier with high confidence (PCC = 0.80). The two machine learning methods used to
support this discovery were a random forest regression and a symbolic regression. This
descriptor relies only on tabulated chemical-physical properties such as Pauling electroneg-
ativity, oxidation number and ionic radii. We tested this descriptor over the data obtained
by Kim et al. [29–31] in a previous computational study, and confirming its reliability
with an even stronger correlation than on our set of data (PCC = 0.95). This descriptor is
the most accurate pre-DFT antiperovskite migration energy barriers predictors currently
known in literature.
Thanks to this study, and the recently accumulated knowledge on superconductive
antiperovskites, we can define a few design rules useful to purse a guided screening over the
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
36
==PAGE:43==
antiperovskites class of material for solid-state electrolytes, and to indicate the direction
of future research projects:
1. GEOMETRY: our geometric filter can be used to selected cubic-like antiperovskites
crystal structures. The tolerance factor of our selected candidates ranges from 0.81
to 1.19. These numbers can be approximately used as first threshold values if our
investigation is limited to cubic structures. Many other geometries are available (23
in principle [20]), and the design of specific filters is still needed. If distortions are
explored, the lowest values obtained from literature for stable structures lie between
0.6 and 0.7. Stable antiperovskites with lower tolerance factor are not found but
cannot be excluded.
2. BAND GAP: for large database screening we recommend the use of fast PBEsol (or
PBE) functional, whereas HSE06 may be applied over a selected set of candidates.
The band gap filter is the one that lowers the eﬀiciency of the screening process
the most, discarding in this study more than 95% of the previous step candidates.
However, a more accurate selection of the compositional elements could avoid useless
and costly DFT calculation. Indeed, in a recent study [18] is shown that in antiper-
ovskites only X and B-sites contribute to the band gap value. Further investigations
in this direction are recommended. Moreover, following the band theory, unit cell
with an odd number of electrons must be discarded.
3. DESCRIPTOR: the migration energy barrier descriptor we proposed can be utilized
to select the best antiperovskite candidates for high ionic conductivity. B-site with
low electronegativity and low oxidation number shall be preferred by the given cor-
relation. Among the non-metallic groups, these properties go in opposite direction
and the optimal trade-off must be checked as a function of the other components (A
and X-sites). In general, within the same periodic group, elements of higher period
showed to produce lower migration barrier [29], in accordance with our description.
Lastly, in our scaling relation the A-site ionic radius increase linearly with the mi-
gration barrier, therefore within the same group lower period shall be preferred, as
it was confirmed by Kim et al. [29].
Our exploration over the period table is still missing of many potential elemental con-
stituents of antiperovskites. A guided exploration of the remaining structures would allow
to a faster and more accurate and precise discovery process.
In the framework of a large-scale application we also create a filter with the aim to
remove the most undesirable elements from the screening process. The called periodic table
sustainability index (PTSI) discard 29 elements over the first 83 elements of the periodic
table. At the price of restricted chemical space, eventually affecting the generalization
of our analysis, this index takes into account sustainability factors, market distribution,
European criticality towards raw materials, and Earth’s crust abundance.
Ultimately, we established a high-throughput screening scheme for solid-state elec-
trolytes, and we validated the re-use of an already built computational workflow. Despite
the needs of some changes in the workflow structures to apply iiwPBEU to this study,
the amount of time saved for building an ad-hoc script, collating the data, and lunching
parallel jobs is much bigger that the initial investment.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
37
==PAGE:44==
Bibliography
[1]
Mogalahalli V Reddy et al. “Brief history of early lithium-battery development”.
In: Materials 13.8 (2020), p. 1884.
[2]
Christophe Pillot. “The rechargeable battery market and main trends 2018-2030”.
In: 36th Annual International Battery Seminar & Exhibit. Avicenne Energy. 2019.
[3]
European Commission. Amendment to the Renewable Energy Directive to imple-
ment the ambition of the new 2030 climate target. https://ec.europa.eu/info/files/
amendment-renewable-energy-directive-implement-ambition-new-2030-climate-target.
(Accessed on 09/04/2021). July 2021.
[4]
Paris IEA. Renewable Power. https://www.iea.org/reports/renewable-power. (Ac-
cessed on 09/04/2021). 2020.
[5]
Zachary J Schiffer and Karthish Manthiram. “Electrification and decarbonization
of the chemical industry”. In: Joule 1.1 (2017), pp. 10–14.
[6]
Felix Creutzig et al. “Transport: A roadblock to climate change mitigation?” In:
Science 350.6263 (2015), pp. 911–912.
[7]
Association internationale pour l’évaluation du rendement scolaire. “Global EV
outlook 2016: Beyond One million electric cars”. In: IEA. 2016.
[8]
Yushu Sun et al. “Overview of energy storage in renewable energy power fluctuation
mitigation”. In: CSEE Journal of Power and Energy Systems 6.1 (2019), pp. 160–
173.
[9]
Raymond H Byrne et al. “Energy management and optimization methods for grid
energy storage systems”. In: IEEE Access 6 (2017), pp. 13231–13260.
[10]
Michel Armand and J-M Tarascon. “Building better batteries”. In: nature 451.7179
(2008), pp. 652–657.
[11]
Xiayin Yao et al. “All-solid-state lithium batteries with inorganic solid electrolytes:
Review of fundamental science”. In: Chinese Physics B 25.1 (2015), p. 018802.
[12]
Feng Zheng et al. “Review on solid electrolytes for all-solid-state lithium-ion bat-
teries”. In: Journal of Power Sources 389 (2018), pp. 198–213.
[13]
Dingchang Lin, Yayuan Liu, and Yi Cui. “Reviving the lithium metal anode for
high-energy batteries”. In: Nature nanotechnology 12.3 (2017), pp. 194–206.
[14]
Darren HS Tan et al. “From nanoscale interface characterization to sustainable en-
ergy storage using all-solid-state batteries”. In: Nature nanotechnology 15.3 (2020),
pp. 170–180.
[15]
Yong Lu et al. “Electrolyte and interface engineering for solid-state sodium batter-
ies”. In: Joule 2.9 (2018), pp. 1747–1770.
[16]
Jing Cuan et al. “Borohydride-Scaffolded Li/Na/Mg Fast Ionic Conductors for
Promising Solid-State Electrolytes”. In: Advanced Materials 31.1 (2019), p. 1803533.
[17]
Yusheng Zhao and Luke L Daemen. “Superionic conductivity in lithium-rich anti-
perovskites”. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 134.36 (2012), pp. 15042–
15047.
[18]
Zhiyang Liu et al. “Bandgap engineering and thermodynamic stability of oxyhalide
and chalcohalide antiperovskites”. In: Ceramics International (2021).
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
38
==PAGE:45==
[19]
Kwangnam Kim and Donald J Siegel. “Predicting Wettability and the Electro-
chemical Window of Lithium-Metal/Solid Electrolyte Interfaces”. In: ACS applied
materials & interfaces 11.43 (2019), pp. 39940–39950.
[20]
Yonggang Wang et al. “Antiperovskites with exceptional functionalities”. In: Ad-
vanced Materials 32.7 (2020), p. 1905007.
[21]
Zhi Deng, Balachandran Radhakrishnan, and Shyue Ping Ong. “Rational Composi-
tion Optimization of the Lithium-Rich Li3OCl1–x Br x Anti-Perovskite Superionic
Conductors”. In: Chemistry of Materials 27.10 (2015), pp. 3749–3755.
[22]
Hong Fang et al. “Superhalogen-based lithium superionic conductors”. In: Journal
of Materials Chemistry A 5.26 (2017), pp. 13373–13381.
[23]
Yonggang Wang et al. “Structural manipulation approaches towards enhanced
sodium ionic conductivity in Na-rich antiperovskites”. In: Journal of Power Sources
293 (2015), pp. 735–740.
[24]
Yi Zhang, Yusheng Zhao, and Changfeng Chen. “Ab initio study of the stabilities of
and mechanism of superionic transport in lithium-rich antiperovskites”. In: Physical
Review B 87.13 (2013), p. 134303.
[25]
Alexandra Emly, Emmanouil Kioupakis, and Anton Van der Ven. “Phase stability
and transport mechanisms in antiperovskite Li3OCl and Li3OBr superionic con-
ductors”. In: Chemistry of Materials 25.23 (2013), pp. 4663–4670.
[26]
Rodolpho Mouta et al. “Concentration of charge carriers, migration, and stability
in Li3OCl solid electrolytes”. In: Chemistry of Materials 26.24 (2014), pp. 7137–
7144.
[27]
R Mouta, EM Diniz, and CWA Paschoal. “Li+ interstitials as the charge carriers
in superionic lithium-rich anti-perovskites”. In: Journal of Materials Chemistry A
4.5 (2016), pp. 1586–1590.
[28]
Saskia Stegmaier et al. “Li+ defects in a solid-state Li ion battery: theoretical in-
sights with a Li3OCl electrolyte”. In: Chemistry of Materials 29.10 (2017), pp. 4330–
4340.
[29]
Kwangnam Kim and Donald J Siegel. “Correlating lattice distortions, ion migration
barriers, and stability in solid electrolytes”. In: Journal of Materials Chemistry A
7.7 (2019), pp. 3216–3227.
[30]
Kwangnam Kim. “Computational Discovery of Solid Electrolytes for Batteries: In-
terfacial Phenomena and Ion Mobility”. PhD thesis. 2020.
[31]
Kwangnam Kim and Donald J Siegel. “Multivalent Ion Transport in Anti-Perovskite
Solid Electrolytes”. In: Chemistry of Materials 33.6 (2021), pp. 2187–2197.
[32]
Erwin Schrödinger. “An undulatory theory of the mechanics of atoms and molecules”.
In: Physical review 28.6 (1926), p. 1049.
[33]
Max Born and Robert Oppenheimer. “Zur quantentheorie der molekeln”. In: An-
nalen der physik 389.20 (1927), pp. 457–484.
[34]
Llewellyn H Thomas. “The calculation of atomic fields”. In: Mathematical proceed-
ings of the Cambridge philosophical society. Vol. 23. 5. Cambridge University Press.
1927, pp. 542–548.
[35]
Fermi Enrico. “Un Metodo Statistico per la Determinazione di alcune Prioprieta
dell’Atomo”. In: Rend. Accad. Naz. Lincei 6 (1927), pp. 602–607.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
39
==PAGE:46==
[36]
Pierre Hohenberg and Walter Kohn. “Inhomogeneous electron gas”. In: Physical
review 136.3B (1964), B864.
[37]
Walter Kohn and Lu Jeu Sham. “Self-consistent equations including exchange and
correlation effects”. In: Physical review 140.4A (1965), A1133.
[38]
John P Perdew, Kieron Burke, and Matthias Ernzerhof. “Generalized gradient ap-
proximation made simple”. In: Physical review letters 77.18 (1996), p. 3865.
[39]
John P Perdew et al. “Restoring the density-gradient expansion for exchange in
solids and surfaces”. In: Physical review letters 100.13 (2008), p. 136406.
[40]
A Rohrbach, J Hafner, and G Kresse. “Electronic correlation effects in transition-
metal sulfides”. In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 15.6 (2003), p. 979.
[41]
Lei Wang, Thomas Maxisch, and Gerbrand Ceder. “Oxidation energies of transition
metal oxides within the GGA+ U framework”. In: Physical Review B 73.19 (2006),
p. 195107.
[42]
Shyue Ping Ong. GGA+U calculations. url: https://docs.materialsproject.org/
methodology/gga-plus-u.
[43]
Amanda Wang et al. “A framework for quantifying uncertainty in DFT energy
corrections”. In: (2021).
[44]
Anubhav Jain et al. Total energy calculations. url: https://docs.materialsproject.
org/methodology/total-energies.
[45]
Hannes Jónsson, Greg Mills, and Karsten W Jacobsen. “Nudged elastic band method
for finding minimum energy paths of transitions”. In: (1998).
[46]
Daniel Sheppard, Rye Terrell, and Graeme Henkelman. “Optimization methods for
finding minimum energy paths”. In: The Journal of chemical physics 128.13 (2008),
p. 134106.
[47]
Graeme Henkelman, Blas P Uberuaga, and Hannes Jónsson. “A climbing image
nudged elastic band method for finding saddle points and minimum energy paths”.
In: The Journal of chemical physics 113.22 (2000), pp. 9901–9904.
[48]
Nicolai Rask Mathiesen et al. “R-neb: Accelerated nudged elastic band calculations
by use of reflection symmetry”. In: Journal of chemical theory and computation 15.5
(2019), pp. 3215–3222.
[49]
Robert P Hertzberg and Andrew J Pope. “High-throughput screening: new tech-
nology for the 21st century”. In: Current opinion in chemical biology 4.4 (2000),
pp. 445–451.
[50]
John P Perdew. “Density functional theory and the band gap problem”. In: Inter-
national Journal of Quantum Chemistry 28.S19 (1985), pp. 497–523.
[51]
Pedro Borlido et al. “Large-scale benchmark of exchange–correlation functionals
for the determination of electronic band gaps of solids”. In: Journal of chemical
theory and computation 15.9 (2019), pp. 5069–5079.
[52]
Levi C Lentz and Alexie M Kolpak. “Predicting HSE band gaps from PBE charge
densities via neural network functionals”. In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter
32.15 (2020), p. 155901.
[53]
Michael W Gaultois et al. “Data-driven review of thermoelectric materials: per-
formance and resource considerations”. In: Chemistry of Materials 25.15 (2013),
pp. 2911–2920.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
40
==PAGE:47==
[54]
The periodic table of endangered elements. url: https://www.acs.org/content/acs/
en/greenchemistry/research-innovation/endangered-elements.html.
[55]
David A Atwood. The rare earth elements: fundamentals and applications. John
Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[56]
European Commission. “Communication from the Commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the
Committee of the Regions - Critical Raw Materials Resilience: Charting a Path
towards greater Security and Sustainability”. In: COM(2020) 474 final (2020).
[57]
Element scarcity - euchems periodic table. 2021. url: https://www.euchems.eu/
euchems-periodic-table/.
[58]
Lucy Smith et al. “A Chemical Element Sustainability Index”. In: Resources, Con-
servation and Recycling 166 (2021), p. 105317.
[59]
Prices of chemical elements - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prices_of_
chemical_elements. (Accessed on 08/25/2021).
[60]
Anubhav Jain et al. “Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome ap-
proach to accelerating materials innovation”. In: APL materials 1.1 (2013), p. 011002.
[61]
Georg Kresse and Jürgen Furthmüller. “Eﬀicient iterative schemes for ab initio
total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set”. In: Physical review B 54.16
(1996), p. 11169.
[62]
Georg Kresse and Daniel Joubert. “From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector
augmented-wave method”. In: Physical review b 59.3 (1999), p. 1758.
[63]
Peter E Blöchl. “Projector augmented-wave method”. In: Physical review B 50.24
(1994), p. 17953.
[64]
Gábor I Csonka et al. “Assessing the performance of recent density functionals for
bulk solids”. In: Physical Review B 79.15 (2009), p. 155107.
[65]
David C Lonie and Eva Zurek. “Identifying duplicate crystal structures: XtalComp,
an open-source solution”. In: Computer Physics Communications 183.3 (2012),
pp. 690–697.
[66]
Welcome to the ion insertion workflow (iiwPBEU) — iiwPBEU documentation.
https://asc- dtu.gitlab.io/workflows/ion- insertion- battery- workflow/index.html.
(Accessed on 08/27/2021).
[67]
Felix T. Bölle et al. “Autonomous Discovery of Materials for Intercalation Elec-
trodes”. In: Batteries & Supercaps 3.6 (2020), pp. 488–498. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1002/batt.201900152.
[68]
Ask Hjorth Larsen et al. “The atomic simulation environment—a Python library
for working with atoms”. In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29.27 (2017),
p. 273002.
[69]
Jens Jørgen Mortensen, Morten Gjerding, and Kristian Sommer Thygesen. “MyQueue:
Task and workflow scheduling system”. In: Journal of Open Source Software 5.45
(2020), p. 1844.
[70]
Monya Baker. “1,500 scientists lift the lid on reproducibility”. In: Nature News
533.7604 (2016), p. 452.
[71]
Claudia Draxl and Matthias Scheffler. “Big-Data-Driven Materials Science and its
FAIR Data Infrastructure”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05859 (2019).
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
41
==PAGE:48==
[72]
Tin Kam Ho. “Random decision forests”. In: Proceedings of 3rd international con-
ference on document analysis and recognition. Vol. 1. IEEE. 1995, pp. 278–282.
[73]
J. Ross Quinlan. “Induction of decision trees”. In: Machine learning 1.1 (1986),
pp. 81–106.
[74]
Fabian Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python”. In: the Journal
of machine Learning research 12 (2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[75]
Logan Ward et al. “Matminer: An open source toolkit for materials data mining”.
In: Computational Materials Science 152 (2018), pp. 60–69.
[76]
Mohsen Sotoudeh and Axel Groß. “Descriptor and scaling relations for ion mobility
in crystalline solids”. In: (2021).
[77]
Lynne Billard and Edwin Diday. “Regression analysis for interval-valued data”. In:
Data Analysis, Classification, and Related Methods. Springer, 2000, pp. 369–374.
[78]
Lynne Billard and Edwin Diday. “Symbolic regression analysis”. In: Classification,
Clustering, and Data Analysis. Springer, 2002, pp. 281–288.
[79]
Welcome to gplearn’s documentation! url: https://gplearn.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
index.html.
[80]
Shyue Ping Ong et al. “Python Materials Genomics (pymatgen): A robust, open-
source python library for materials analysis”. In: Computational Materials Science
68 (2013), pp. 314–319.
[81]
Ivano E Castelli, Kristian S Thygesen, and Karsten W Jacobsen. “Calculated Pour-
baix diagrams of cubic perovskites for water splitting: stability against corrosion”.
In: Topics in Catalysis 57.1-4 (2014), pp. 265–272.
[82]
Shyue Ping Ong et al. “Li- Fe- P- O2 phase diagram from first principles calcula-
tions”. In: Chemistry of Materials 20.5 (2008), pp. 1798–1807.
[83]
Yifei Mo, Shyue Ping Ong, and Gerbrand Ceder. “First principles study of the
Li10GeP2S12 lithium super ionic conductor material”. In: Chemistry of Materials
24.1 (2012), pp. 15–17.
[84]
Yizhou Zhu, Xingfeng He, and Yifei Mo. “Origin of outstanding stability in the
lithium solid electrolyte materials: insights from thermodynamic analyses based on
first-principles calculations”. In: ACS applied materials & interfaces 7.42 (2015),
pp. 23685–23693.
[85]
Stephan Sitta et al. “Kristallstruktur von gelbem K3OBr”. In: Zeitschrift für anor-
ganische und allgemeine Chemie 597.1 (1991), pp. 197–200.
[86]
H Sabrowsky et al. “Die Kristallstrukturen von α-und β-K3OCl”. In: Zeitschrift für
anorganische und allgemeine Chemie 622.1 (1996), pp. 153–156.
[87]
Ulrich Förstner and Gottfried TW Wittmann. Metal pollution in the aquatic envi-
ronment. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
[88]
Claudio Bini and Mohammad Wahsha. “Potentially harmful elements and human
health”. In: PHEs, environment and human health. Springer, 2014, pp. 401–463.
[89]
Gordon Haxel. Rare earth elements: critical resources for high technology. Vol. 87.
2. US Department of the Interior, US Geological Survey, 2002.
[90]
Rudolf Zeller. “Spin-polarized dft calculations and magnetism”. In: Computational
Nanoscience: Do It Yourself 31 (2006), pp. 419–445.
[91]
Luis Ortega-San-Martin. “Introduction to perovskites: A historical perspective”. In:
Revolution of perovskite. Springer, 2020, pp. 1–41.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
42
==PAGE:49==
[92]
Ivano Eligio Castelli and Karsten Wedel Jacobsen. “Designing rules and probabilis-
tic weighting for fast materials discovery in the perovskite structure”. In: Modelling
and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering 22.5 (2014), p. 055007.
[93]
Lukasz Mentel. “Mendeleev—A Python Resource for Properties of Chemical Ele-
ments”. In: Ions and Isotopes.[(accessed on june 2021)] (2021).
[94]
Welcome to mendeleev’s documentation — mendeleev 0.7.0 documentation. https:
//mendeleev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/. (Accessed on 08/28/2021).
[95]
David W Oxtoby, H Pat Gillis, and Laurie J Butler. Principles of modern chemistry.
Cengage learning, 2015.
[96]
Jens K Nørskov et al. Fundamental concepts in heterogeneous catalysis. John Wiley
& Sons, 2014.
[97]
Nils ER Zimmermann et al. “Electrostatic estimation of intercalant jump-diffusion
barriers using finite-size ion models”. In: The journal of physical chemistry letters
9.3 (2018), pp. 628–634.
[98]
Nebil A Katcho et al. “An investigation of the structural properties of Li and Na
fast ion conductors using high-throughput bond-valence calculations and machine
learning”. In: Journal of Applied Crystallography 52.1 (2019), pp. 148–157.
[99]
Felix T. Bölle et al. “Topological descriptors for predicting kinetic barriers in mag-
nesium cathode materials”. In: (2021).
[100]
Felix Tim Bölle et al. “Automatic migration path exploration for multivalent bat-
tery cathodes using geometrical descriptors”. In: Batteries & Supercaps (2021).
[101]
Pedro Borlido et al. “Exchange-correlation functionals for band gaps of solids:
benchmark, reparametrization and machine learning”. In: npj Computational Ma-
terials 6.1 (2020), pp. 1–17.
[102]
Kwangnam Kim and Donald J Siegel. “Supporting information: Correlating Lattice
Distortions, Ion Migration Barriers, and Stability in Solid Electrolytes”. In: ().
[103]
Matthew Dondelinger et al. “Electrochemical stability of lithium halide electrolyte
with antiperovskite crystal structure”. In: Electrochimica Acta 306 (2019), pp. 498–
505.
[104]
Xujie Lü et al. “Antiperovskite Li3OCl Superionic Conductor Films for Solid-State
Li-Ion Batteries”. In: Advanced Science 3.3 (2016), p. 1500359.
[105]
James A Dawson et al. “Elucidating lithium-ion and proton dynamics in anti-
perovskite solid electrolytes”. In: Energy & Environmental Science 11.10 (2018),
pp. 2993–3002.
[106]
Sathish Rajendran et al. “Toward Moisture-Stable and Dendrite-Free Garnet-Type
Solid-State Electrolytes”. In: ACS Applied Energy Materials 3.7 (2020), pp. 6775–
6784.
[107]
Sathish Rajendran et al. “An All-Solid-State Battery with a Tailored Electrode–
Electrolyte Interface Using Surface Chemistry and Interlayer-Based Approaches”.
In: Chemistry of Materials 33.9 (2021), pp. 3401–3412.
[108]
William D Richards et al. “Interface stability in solid-state batteries”. In: Chemistry
of Materials 28.1 (2016), pp. 266–273.
[109]
Xujie Lü et al. “Li-rich anti-perovskite Li 3 OCl films with enhanced ionic conduc-
tivity”. In: Chemical Communications 50.78 (2014), pp. 11520–11522.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
43
==PAGE:50==
[110]
Laurids Schimka, Judith Harl, and Georg Kresse. “Improved hybrid functional for
solids: The HSEsol functional”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 134.2 (2011),
p. 024116.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
44
==PAGE:51==
A
Methods
Figure A.1: The Chemical space of the atomic selections in the antiperovskite database,
plotted on to the periodic system. With A, B, X selections color coded.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
45
==PAGE:52==
(a)
(b)
Figure A.2: Frequency of elements in (a) the data set used in reference [51] and (b)
our database candidates. Gray boxes indicate elements not present in the data set. (a)
reprinted with permission from Pedro Borlido et al., J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2019, 15,
9, 5069–5079, Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
46
==PAGE:53==
B
Results And Discussion
Figure B.1: Mean lattice constant of antiperovskite structures shared between AP2020
(PBEsol) and the Materials Project (PBE) databases. The colorbar highlights the distance
between lattice values calculated as PBEsol - PBE. The mean in centred around zero -
0.0033 Å (SD = 0.023 Å). A previous study comparing PBE and PBEsol for property
calculations of solids shows a similar trend [110].
Figure B.2: Total energies of antiperovskite structures shared between AP2020 (PBEsol)
and the Materials Project (PBE) databases. The colorbar highlights the distance between
energy values calculated as PBEsol - PBE. PBEsol predicts higher energies per unit cell
than PBE of about 0.44 eV in mean (SD = 0.39 eV). A previous study comparing PBE
and PBEsol for property calculations of solids shows a similar trend [110].
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
47
==PAGE:54==
Figure B.3: Band gaps of antiperovskite structures shared between AP2020 (PBEsol) and
the Materials Project (PBE) databases.
The colorbar highlights the distance between
band gap values calculated as PBEsol - PBE. Among the 20 structures with a positive
band gap PBEsol predicts lower band gaps than PBE of about -0.33 eV (SD = 0.33 eV).
A previous study comparing PBE and PBEsol for property calculations of solids shows a
similar trend [110].
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
48
==PAGE:55==
Table B.1: Table showing the literature indexes used to produce the Periodic Table Sus-
tainability Index (PTSI). The showed values are directly obtained by the references. A
criticality range is assigned to each author’s classification, which is then converted in
PTSI score in Table B.2. The label critical∗of CRM is not in reference; it was arbitrary
assigned for those elements which are not directly indicated in the CRM list, but that
are presented in the form of some raw materials.
Abundance is recalculated using Li
abundance as normalization factor.
Literature Indexes
CRM [57]
CESI[58]
HHIp [53]
HHIr [53]
Abundance (A) [53, 59]
Units
see index
see index
see index
see index
log10(Aele/ALi)
Assigned Criticality Range
not mentioned
-
-
-
-
-
no criticality
not critical
> 60
HHIp < 2500
HHIr < 2500
A ≥0
low criticality
2500 ≤HHIp < 4000
2500 ≤HHIr < 4000
-2 ≤A < 0
medium criticality
critical*
20 - 40
high criticality
4000 ≤HHIp < 7000
4000 ≤HHIr < 7000
-4 ≤A < -2
max criticality
critical
0 - 20
HHIp ≥7000
HHIr ≥7000
A < -4
Literature Indexes Score per Element
H
not critical
-
-
-
1.85
He
not critical
-
3200
3900
-3.4
Li
critical
0 - 20
2900
4200
0
Be
critical
0 - 20
8000
4000
-0.85
B
critical
20 - 40
2900
2000
-0.3
C
critical*
-
500
500
1
N
not critical
-
1300
500
-0.02
O
not critical
-
500
500
4.36
F
critical*
-
1500
1500
1.47
Ne
not critical
-
-
-
-3.6
Na
not critical
20 - 40
1100
500
3.07
Mg
critical
0 - 20
5300
500
3.07
Al
critical*
> 60
1600
1000
3.61
Si
critical*
20 - 40
4700
1000
4.15
P
critical
-
2000
5100
1.72
S
not critical
-
700
1000
1.24
Cl
not critical
-
1500
1500
0.86
Ar
not critical
-
-
0
-0.76
K
not critical
-
1700
7200
3.02
Ca
not critical
-
3900
1500
3.32
Sc
critical
0 - 20
5500
4500
0.04
Ti
critical
> 60
1100
1600
2.45
V
critical
0 - 20
3300
3400
0.78
Cr
not critical
20 - 40
3100
4100
0.71
Mn
not critical
20 - 40
1600
1800
1.68
Fe
not critical
> 60
2400
1400
3.45
Co
critical
0 - 20
3100
2700
0.1
Ni
not critical
20 - 40
1000
1500
0.62
Cu
not critical
> 60
1600
1500
0.48
Zn
not critical
20 - 40
1600
1900
0.54
Ga
critical
0 - 20
5500
1900
-0.02
Ge
critical
-
5300
1900
-1.12
As
not critical
-
3300
4000
-1.05
Se
not critical
20 - 40
2200
1900
-2.6
Br
not critical
-
3300
6900
-0.92
Kr
not critical
-
-
-
-5.3
Rb
not critical
-
6000
6000
0.65
Sr
critical
0 - 20
4200
3000
1.27
Y
critical
0 - 20
9800
2600
0.22
Zr
not critical
0 - 20
3400
2600
0.92
Nb
critical
0 - 20
8500
8800
0
Mo
not critical
0 - 20
2400
5300
-1.22
Tc
-
-
-
-
-9.82
Ru
critical
0 - 20
3200
8000
-4.3
Rh
critical
0 - 20
3200
8000
-4.3
Pd
critical
0 - 20
3200
8000
-3.12
Ag
not critical
20 - 40
1200
1400
-2.43
Cd
not critical
0 - 20
1700
1300
-2.1
In
critical
0 - 20
3300
2000
-1.9
Sn
not critical
20 - 40
2600
1600
-0.94
Sb
critical
0 - 20
7900
3400
-2
Te
not critical
-
2900
4900
-4.3
I
not critical
0 - 20
4900
4800
-1.65
Xe
not critical
-
-
-
-5.82
Cs
not critical
-
6000
6000
-0.82
Ba
critical*
0 - 20
3000
2300
1.33
La
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
0.29
Ce
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
0.52
Pr
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
-0.34
Nd
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
0.32
Pm
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
trace
Sm
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
-0.45
Eu
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
-1
Gd
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
-0.51
Tb
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
-1.22
Dy
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
-0.59
Ho
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
-1.19
Er
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
-0.76
Tm
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
-1.59
Yb
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
-0.8
Lu
critical
0 - 20
9500
3100
-1.4
Hf
critical
-
3400
2600
-0.82
Ta
critical
0 - 20
2300
4800
-1
W
critical
20 - 40
7000
4300
-1.19
Re
not critical
0 - 20
3300
3300
-4.46
Os
critical
0 - 20
5500
9100
-4
Ir
critical
0 - 20
5500
9100
-4.3
Pt
critical
0 - 20
5500
9100
-3.6
Au
not critical
0 - 20
1100
1000
-3.7
Hg
not critical
0 - 20
5500
3100
-2.37
Tl
not critical
-
6500
6500
-1.37
Pb
not critical
20 - 40
2700
1800
-0.15
Bi
critical
0 - 20
5300
6000
-3.35
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
49
==PAGE:56==
Table B.2: Table showing the literature indexes conversion to produce the Periodic Table
Sustainability Index (PTSI). The showed values are calculated based on the criticality
range assigned to each author’s index score in Table B.1. PTSI is calculated from the
arithmetic average of each indexes score. Missing values are not accounted.
Literature Indexes Conversion to PTSI
CRM [57]
CESI [58]
HHIp [53]
HHIr [53]
Abundance (A) [53, 59]
PTSI
criticality range
criticality range
criticality range
criticality range
criticality range
Average literature indexes
Assigned Score per Criticality Range
Assigned Criticality Range
not mentioned
-
-
-
-
-
-
no criticality
0
0
0
0
0
PTSI < 1
low criticality
1
1
1
medium criticality
1.5
1.5
1 ≤PTSI < 2
high criticality
2
2
2
max criticality
3
3
3
3
3
PTSI ≥2
Assigned Score per Element
H
0
-
-
-
0
0.00
He
0
-
1
1
2
1.00
Li
3
3
1
2
0
1.80
Be
3
3
3
2
1
2.40
B
3
1.5
1
0
1
1.30
C
1.5
-
0
0
0
0.38
N
0
-
0
0
1
0.25
O
0
-
0
0
0
0.00
F
1.5
-
0
0
0
0.38
Ne
0
-
-
-
2
1.00
Na
0
1.5
0
0
0
0.30
Mg
3
3
2
0
0
1.60
Al
1.5
0
0
0
0
0.30
Si
1.5
1.5
2
0
0
1.00
P
3
-
0
2
0
1.25
S
0
-
0
0
0
0.00
Cl
0
-
0
0
0
0.00
Ar
0
-
-
-
1
0.25
K
0
-
0
3
0
0.75
Ca
0
-
1
0
0
0.25
Sc
3
3
2
2
0
2.00
Ti
3
0
0
0
0
0.60
V
3
3
1
1
0
1.60
Cr
0
1.5
1
2
0
0.90
Mn
0
1.5
0
0
0
0.30
Fe
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
Co
3
3
1
1
0
1.60
Ni
0
1.5
0
0
0
0.30
Cu
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
Zn
0
1.5
0
0
0
0.30
Ga
3
3
2
0
1
1.80
Ge
3
-
2
0
1
1.50
As
0
-
1
2
1
1.00
Se
0
1.5
0
0
2
0.70
Br
0
-
1
2
1
1.00
Kr
0
-
-
-
3
1.50
Rb
0
-
2
2
0
1.00
Sr
3
3
2
1
0
1.80
Y
3
3
3
1
0
2.00
Zr
0
3
1
1
0
1.00
Nb
3
3
3
3
0
2.40
Mo
0
3
0
2
1
1.20
Tc
-
-
-
-
3
3.00
Ru
3
3
1
3
3
2.60
Rh
3
3
1
3
3
2.60
Pd
3
3
1
3
2
2.40
Ag
0
1.5
0
0
2
0.70
Cd
0
3
0
0
2
1.00
In
3
3
1
0
1
1.60
Sn
0
1.5
1
0
1
0.70
Sb
3
3
3
1
1
2.20
Te
0
-
1
2
3
1.50
I
0
3
2
2
1
1.60
Xe
0
-
-
-
3
1.50
Cs
0
-
2
2
1
1.25
Ba
1.5
3
1
0
0
1.10
La
3
3
3
1
0
2.00
Ce
3
3
3
1
0
2.00
Pr
3
3
3
1
1
2.20
Nd
3
3
3
1
0
2.00
Pm
3
3
3
1
0
2.00
Sm
3
3
3
1
1
2.20
Eu
3
3
3
1
1
2.20
Gd
3
3
3
1
1
2.20
Tb
3
3
3
1
1
2.20
Dy
3
3
3
1
1
2.20
Ho
3
3
3
1
1
2.20
Er
3
3
3
1
1
2.20
Tm
3
3
3
1
1
2.20
Yb
3
3
3
1
1
2.20
Lu
3
3
3
1
1
2.20
Hf
3
-
1
1
1
1.50
Ta
3
3
0
2
1
1.80
W
3
1.5
3
2
1
2.10
Re
0
3
1
1
3
1.60
Os
3
3
2
3
2
2.60
Ir
3
3
2
3
3
2.80
Pt
3
3
2
3
2
2.60
Au
0
3
0
0
2
1.00
Hg
0
3
2
1
2
1.60
Tl
0
-
2
2
1
1.25
Pb
0
1.5
1
0
1
0.70
Bi
3
3
2
2
2
2.40
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
50
==PAGE:57==
Table B.3:
Energy above the convex hull of calculated stable antiperovskites (< 0.1
eV/atom). Values from literature are reported for comparison, materilasproject database
(MP) and Kim et al. [29]. The comparison must be intended only to highlight trends
and correlations between data; different values are expected due to the use of different
functionals as underlined in the table.
AP2020
MP
Kim et al.
Formula
eV/atom (PBEsol)
eV/atom (PBE)
eV/atom (PBE)
Li3ClO
0.0064
0.0276
0.0111
Li3SeH
0.0096
Li3SeF
0.0389
0.0676
Li3BrO
0.0115
0.0182
0.0219
Li3TeH
-0.0032
Li3TeF
0.0419
Li3IO
0.0714
0.0870
Li3HgN
0.0580
Na3ClO
0.0000
0.0000
0.0002
Na3BrO
0.0000
0.0000
-0.0239
Na3IO
-0.0076
-0.0187
Na3AuO
0.0754
Mg3AsN
0.0000
0.0000
Mg3SeC
0.0606
Mg3TeC
0.0374
K3ClO
0.0272
-0.0017
K3BrO
0.0000
0.0000
-0.0171
K3AgO
0.0894
K3IO
-0.0001
0.0000
-0.0380
K3AuO
0.0389
0.0000
Ca3SiO
0.0019
Ca3GeO
0.0000
0.0000
Ca3AsN
0.0052
0.0058
Ca3SnO
0.0000
0.0000
Ca3TeC
0.0615
Ti3CdO
0.0233
V3GeO
-0.1906
V3PbO
-0.1292
Rb3SeH
0.0496
Rb3SeF
0.0226
Rb3TeH
-0.0069
Rb3TeF
-0.0271
Ba3AsN
0.0859
0.0811
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
51
==PAGE:58==
Figure B.4: Bar chart which compares energy above the convex hull of antiperovskite
stable structures obtained in this study (AP2020, PBEsol) with the Materials Project
database (MP, PBE) and the recent study by Kim et al. [29] (PBE). The comparison
must be intended only to highlight trends and correlations between data; different values
are expected due to the use of different functionals. The few compared data well-correlates
between them, except for Kim et al.
Figure B.5: Bar chart which compares energy above the convex hull of antiperovskite stable
structures obtained in this study (AP2020, PBEsol) with the Materials Project database
(MP, PBE). The comparison must be intended only to highlight trends and correlations
between data; different values are expected due to the use of different functionals. The
values well-correlates except for K3AuO.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
52
==PAGE:59==
Figure B.6: Bar chart which compares energy above the convex hull of antiperovskite stable
structures obtained in this study (AP2020, PBEsol) with the recent study by Kim et al.
[29] (PBE). The comparison must be intended only to highlight trends and correlations
between data; different values are expected due to the use of different functionals. Na and
K structures shows solid divergences. This trend is confirmed in Figure B.4 and further
investigation showed that is probably correlated with the fact that Kim et al. did not rely
on MP references for the convex hull calculation. Instead, a simplified calculation that
use only chalcogenide and halide references is performed and lower values are obtained.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
53
==PAGE:60==
Table B.4: Migration energy barriers (MEBs) by vacancy mechanism of calculated stable
antiperovskites. Kim et al. [29, 31] values are reported for comparison. The comparison
must be intended only to highlight trends and correlations between data; different values
are expected due to the use of different functionals as underlined in the table.
AP2020
Kim et al. [29, 31]
Formula
eV (PBEsol)
eV (PBE)
Li3ClO
0.40
0.33
Li3SeH
0.29
Li3SeF
0.22
0.14
Li3BrO
0.46
0.37
Li3TeH
0.33
Li3TeF
0.24
Li3IO
0.41
0.30
Li3HgN
0.70
Na3ClO
0.25
0.24
Na3AuO
0.47
Mg3AsN
0.60
0.52
Mg3SeC
0.69
Mg3TeC
1.17
K3BrO
0.20
0.20
K3IO
0.37
0.36
Ca3SiO
0.59
Ca3GeO
0.58
Ca3AsN
0.41
0.51
Ca3SnO
0.83
Ca3TeC
0.44
Rb3TeH
0.28
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
54
==PAGE:61==
Figure B.7: (Prediction via random forest regression of MEBs of the antiperovskites sim-
ulated in this study (AP2020 database) featured on their elemental composition.
Figure B.8: Prediction via random forest regression of MEBs of the antiperovskites re-
ported by D. J. Kim et al. [29] featured on their elemental composition.
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
55
==PAGE:62==
Figure B.9: Prediction via random forest regression of MEBs of the antiperovskites re-
ported by D. J. Kim et al. [31] featured on their elemental composition.
(a) Li3ClO Pourbaix diagram
(b) Li3ClO decomposition energy
Figure B.10: Pourbaix diagrams of Li3ClO at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
(a) Li3SeH Pourbaix diagram
(b) Li3SeH decomposition energy
Figure B.11: Pourbaix diagrams of Li3SeH at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
56
==PAGE:63==
(a) Li3SeF Pourbaix diagram
(b) Li3SeF decomposition energy
Figure B.12: Pourbaix diagrams of Li3SeF at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
(a) Li3BrO Pourbaix diagram
(b) Li3BrO decomposition energy
Figure B.13: Pourbaix diagrams of Li3BrO at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
(a) Li3TeH Pourbaix diagram
(b) Li3TeH decomposition energy
Figure B.14: Pourbaix diagrams of Li3TeH at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
57
==PAGE:64==
(a) Li3TeF Pourbaix diagram
(b) Li3TeF decomposition energy
Figure B.15: Pourbaix diagrams of Li3TeF at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
(a) Li3IO Pourbaix diagram
(b) Li3IO decomposition energy
Figure B.16: Pourbaix diagrams of Li3IO at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable species
of the aqueous electrochemical system.
(b) Decomposition energy against most stable
phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
(a) Li3HgN Pourbaix diagram
(b) Li3HgN decomposition energy
Figure B.17: Pourbaix diagrams of Li3HgN at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
58
==PAGE:65==
(a) Na3ClO Pourbaix diagram
(b) Na3ClO decomposition energy
Figure B.18: Pourbaix diagrams of Na3ClO at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
(a) Na3AuO Pourbaix diagram
(b) Na3AuO decomposition energy
Figure B.19: Pourbaix diagrams of Na3AuO at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
(a) Mg3AsN Pourbaix diagram
(b) Mg3AsN decomposition energy
Figure B.20: Pourbaix diagrams of Mg3AsN at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
59
==PAGE:66==
(a) Mg3SeC Pourbaix diagram
(b) Mg3SeC decomposition energy
Figure B.21: Pourbaix diagrams of Mg3SeC at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
(a) Mg3TeC Pourbaix diagram
(b) Mg3TeC decomposition energy
Figure B.22: Pourbaix diagrams of Mg3TeC at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
(a) K3BrO Pourbaix diagram
(b) K3BrO decomposition energy
Figure B.23: Pourbaix diagrams of K3BrO at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
60
==PAGE:67==
(a) K3IO Pourbaix diagram
(b) K3IO decomposition energy
Figure B.24: Pourbaix diagrams of K3IO at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable species
of the aqueous electrochemical system.
(b) Decomposition energy against most stable
phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
(a) Ca3SiO Pourbaix diagram
(b) Ca3SiO decomposition energy
Figure B.25: Pourbaix diagrams of Ca3SiO at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
(a) Ca3GeO Pourbaix diagram
(b) Ca3GeO decomposition energy
Figure B.26: Pourbaix diagrams of Ca3GeO at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
61
==PAGE:68==
(a) Ca3AsN Pourbaix diagram
(b) Ca3AsN decomposition energy
Figure B.27: Pourbaix diagrams of Ca3AsN at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
(a) Ca3SnO Pourbaix diagram
(b) Ca3SnO decomposition energy
Figure B.28: Pourbaix diagrams of Ca3SnO at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
(a) Ca3TeC Pourbaix diagram
(b) Ca3TeC decomposition energy
Figure B.29: Pourbaix diagrams of Ca3TeC at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
62
==PAGE:69==
(a) Rb3TeH Pourbaix diagram
(b) Rb3TeH decomposition energy
Figure B.30: Pourbaix diagrams of Rb3TeH at -4/4 V and -2/16 pH. (a) Most stable
species of the aqueous electrochemical system. (b) Decomposition energy against most
stable phases (energy above the Pourbaix diagram convex hull).
Antiperovskites for Solid-State Batteries
63
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej
Building 301
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tel. 45 91198369
www.energy.dtu.dk
