==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Neural network interpretability for forecasting
of aggregated renewable generation and
control of the aggregated load
Yucun Lu
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3800
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
With the rapid growth of renewable energy, lots of small photovoltaic (PV) prosumers
emerge.
Due to the uncertainty of PVs, there is a need for aggregated prosumers
to predict solar power generation and whether solar power generation will be larger
than load so that they can make bid/offer decisions.
In recent years, deep learning
has emerged and rapidly grown as a promising alternative in renewable power output
forecast and load forecast.
However, its application in real-life operation is limited
by overconfident predictions and few transparency.
In this thesis, two interpretable
neural networks are proposed to solve the problem: one binary classification neural
network and one regression neural network. To interpret the neural networks and gain
insights in the inner workings of the neural networks, global feature importance and local
feature contributions are examined by five gradient-based methods. The attribution map
methods of Gradient, Gradient * Input, Integrated Gradients, Expected Gradients, and
DeepLIFT are implemented and applied with different baselines for understanding the
neural networks and ensuring that they utilize reasonable input-output correlations to
make predictions. It has been shown that the methods generally produce reasonable
interpretations that are well matched with human domain expertise and intuition and
that they provide valuable insights into model inner workings in both local and global
prediction of the networks. Moreover, aleatoric uncertainty and epistemic uncertainty of
neural networks are estimated using Bayesian neural networks. The estimated uncertainty
can successfully detect abnormal cases when predictions might fail. Neural networks,
interpreted by the gradient-based methods and complemented with estimated uncertainty,
provide robust and explainable forecasting for decision-makers.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This Master thesis has been prepared over five months during the spring semester of 2021
at the department of Electrical Engineering in Technical University of Denmark (DTU
Elektro), in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in
Sustainable Energy.
Kongens Lyngby, July 9, 2021
Yucun Lu
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This thesis is a precious opportunity for me to gain research experience in the application
of interpretable neural networks in energy system related fields. Furthermore, it also
provides me with good chances to practice working with Python and TensorFlow for
data processing, model training, and model validation. I am pretty sure this experience
will be my valuable asset in my future career.
The thesis has expanded my knowledge in prediction in power systems. I am happy
to have learned about the topics of deep learning, explainable artificial intelligence,
uncertainty estimation, and power forecasting through the work of this thesis.
I would like to thank my supervisor Professor Spyros Chatzivasileiadis for providing
me a valuable opportunity to work on this interesting and novel topic.
Spyros has
been a great supervisor, who could always provide sharp and insightful suggestions and
directions when I feel confused and aimless. A thank also goes to Ilgiz Murzakhanov
who has worked with me on the thesis throughout the past five months. Ilgiz is always
glad to have a meeting with me whenever I need it. His timely assistance and useful
feed backs really help a lot. I am very grateful for having Ilgiz as my supervisor and I
really enjoy my work with him in the past five months.
I would also like to thank my friends for their support and accompany throughout
my studies, especially in this tough lockdown period due to COVID 19. I also want to
express my gratitude to my family for their support through my studies.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
Nomenclature
vii
List of Figures
viii
List of Tables
x
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Main contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory and Methodology
5
2.1
Deep learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Feedforward Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Activation functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Cost functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.4
Back-propagation and training methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.5
Regularization techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.6
Hyperparameter tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Interpretability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.2
Overview of interpretability methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.3
Introduction of attribution methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.4
Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.5
Perturbation-based methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.6
Gradient-based methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.7
Evaluation of Interpretability methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3
Uncertainty quantification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
2.3.1
Uncertainty decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.3.2
Bayesian neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Numerical results
33
3.1
Description of data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.1.1
Original data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.1.2
Processed data set for model training and testing . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2
Neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2.1
Implementation of neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.2
Performance evaluation and Improvement
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2.3
Load control and Decision makings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3
Interpretability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3.1
Implementation details: Completeness checking . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3.2
Global feature importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.3.3
Evaluation of attribution methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.3.4
Global feature influences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.3.5
Local feature contributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4
Uncertainty quantification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4
Conclusion
55
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
AI
Artificial intelligence
ANN Artificial neural network
ARMA Auto-Regressive and Moving Average
BNN Bayesian neural network
CNN Convolutional neural network
CV
Computer vision
DeepLIFT Deep Learning Important Features
FN
Flase negative
FP
False positive
GBRT Gradient boosted regression tree
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation
LSTM Long Short-Term Memory
MAP Maximum A Posteriori
ML
Machine learning
MLE Maximum likelihood estimation
MLP Multilayer perceptron
MSE Mean square error
NLP
Natural language processing
PV
photovoltaic
ReLu Rectified linear unit
RMSE Root mean square error
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
RNN Recurrent neural network
SGD
Stochastic gradient descent
SVR
Support vector regression
TN
True negative
TP
True positive
UTC Coordinated Universal Time
XAI
Explainable artificial intelligence
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
2.1
Simple illustration of a feedforward neural network consisting of five input
units in the input layer, two hidden layers both with 4 neurons and one
output unit in the output layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Gradient descent variants’ trajectory towards minimum [31]
. . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Illustration of Dropout Neural Network. Left: A standard neural network
with 2 hidden layers. Right: An example of a thinned network after applying
dropout to the network on the left. Crossed units have been dropped [33] . .
13
2.4
Comparison of the basic operations of a standard and dropout network [33] .
13
2.5
Illustration of the reason to apply early stopping. Observe that the training
error decreases consistently over time, but the validation error begins to
increase again at ’Early termination’ point, forming an asymmetric U-shaped
curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Comparison of random search and grid search [34] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.7
Attributions generated by occluding portions of the input image with squared
grey patches of different sizes. Notice how the size of the patches influence
the result, with focus on the main subject only when using bigger patches [42] 18
2.9
Left: each weight has a fixed value provided by classical backpropagation.
Right: each weight is assigned a distribution provided by Bayes Backprop [56] 29
3.1
Locations of weather prediction grid points and substations in map [58] . . .
34
3.3
Illustration of one-hot encoding scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.5
Confusion matrix of classification neural network with loss function as binary
cross entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.6
Confusion matrix of classification neural network with modified loss function
40
3.7
Convergence of Integrated gradients through completeness on the test set
(Left: Classification model, Right: Regression model) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.8
Convergence of Expected gradients through completeness on the test set
(Left: Classification model, Right: Regression model) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.13 Summary plot of the classification model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.14 Summary plot of the regression model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.17 Force plot of the regression model for TP case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.18 Force plot of the classification model for TP case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.19 Force plot of the regression model for TN case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.20 Force plot of the classification model for TN case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.21 Force plot of the regression model for FN case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.22 Force plot of the classification model for FN case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
ix
3.23 Force plot of the regression model for FP case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.24 Force plot of the classification model for FP case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.25 Uncertainty estimation using Bayesian neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.26 Probabilistic forecast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.27 Interpretations of regression model output at hour 38 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
==PAGE:12==
List of Tables
2.8
Gradient-based formulation of several attribution methods, g denotes the
replaced derivative at each non-linearity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Description of attributes in data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4
Optimal hyperparameters for the 5-best performing feed-forward regression
neural networks and classification neural networks (For regression model,
root mean square error functions as evaluation metric, while for classification
model, accuracy is used as evaluation metric)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.9
Global feature importance of the classification model. Feature importance is
represented as each feature’s average attribution values of all test cases . . .
43
3.10 Global feature importance of the regression model. Feature importance is
represented as each feature’s average attribution values of all test cases . . .
44
3.11 Top-k ablation test for classification model with k=1, k=2 and k=3 being
tested . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.12 Top-k ablation test for regression model with k=1, k=2 and k=3 being tested 46
3.15 Feature contribution to the prediction of the classification model . . . . . . .
48
3.16 Feature contribution to the prediction of the regression model . . . . . . . .
48
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
In the past few years, Artificial intelligence (AI) has become a key enabling technology
for the sciences and industry. Nowadays, the Machine learning (ML) algorithms have
already achieved excellent performance on an increasing number of complex tasks [1].
They not only outperform humans in complex Computer vision (CV) tasks [2] [3] [4] or
Natural language processing (NLP)[5], but also do amazing jobs in strategic games, such
as Alpha Go [6] who beat the 18-time world-champion Lee Seedol in 2016. Moreover,
machine learning has also become crucial tools in scientific research and industry fields,
such as genomics [7], drug discovery [8] and medical diagnosis [9], etc.
Besides, AI methods have also been widely applied in energy systems, the applications
include: electric network operation and control [10], energy management and control [11],
demand response [12], energy generation [13]and load forecasting [14]. AI methods have
been critical in the modernization of the electrical grid and making it a ’smart’ grid [15].
Nevertheless, one challenge AI models face in these fields is the lack of transparency and
explainability because of the absence of a simple understanding of the inner workings of
the models. The problem is originated from the black-box nature of models due to their
nested nonlinear structures [1]. Numerous engineers in energy industry are hesitant to
deploy AI-based techniques considering their lack of insight and explainability, which
can help understand their dynamic decision-making procedure [15]. Explainable artificial
intelligence (XAI) addresses the concern by enhancing the explainability and transparency
of the AI models and thus ’whitening’ the black-box prediction results. One method to
interpret the models is dedicated to examining the contributions of specific input features
to the final output predictions by attribution maps.
In addition, the knowledge of uncertainty is also fundamental to the development of
robust and interpretable machine learning techniques. Traditional models such as neural
networks only provide point estimations, so it remains unknown to us how confident the
model is about its predictions. The uncertainty estimation of models allows for applying
alternative approaches or making robust and conservative decisions when predictions
are in doubt.
This thesis focuses on the above-mentioned two goals, interpretability and uncertainty
estimation, applying interpretable neural networks along with Bayesian neural networks
(BNN’s), and it does so through the problem of forecasting of aggregated renewable
generation and control of the aggregated load as a guiding example.
==PAGE:14==
1.2 Research Directions
2
1.2
Research Directions
In the coming years, wind turbine generators and photovoltaic (PV) solar panels will
generate a major part of the electricity in Europe. While wind farms tend to be large
and provide the network with their power production at medium and high voltage
levels, solar power capacities tend to be smaller and spreader at lower voltage levels
of the overall network, typically at the distribution grid level. Generating power at the
distribution grid level, which may be consumed locally or going up to higher voltage
levels, is relatively new and creates new challenges in distribution grid operation and
management. Unlike big PV farms which can sign a contract with the system operators
and participate in the wholesale electricity market to make profits, the owners of small
PV panels are not considerable parties for the system operators. As a result, small PV
producers can only benefit from the net metering scheme [16] and sell excess power for
a much lower price than big PV farms’ owners. In recent years, the situation gets even
worse. For example, in Denmark, with progressive reductions in the feed-in tariff level
of the net metering scheme, currently, the only advantage for new PV prosumers under
the Danish net metering scheme is the compensation of self-generation and consumption
within an hourly basis, with total or partial exemptions on certain tariffs and taxes [16].
To mitigate the problem and help small PV prosumers make more profits, one
method is to virtually aggregate small PV producers via electronic services and sign
one collaborative agreement with the system operator to participate in the electricity
market. Besides, another advantage of this method is that load aggregation of different
prosumers would lead to a less variable load, thus increasing the rate of self-consumption
of PV systems [17].
As the output of PVs is intermittent, there is a need for customers to know their solar
power generation and whether solar power generation will be larger than load so that
they can determine to sell surplus energy to system operators or buy energy to fulfill
their electricity needs or cut down their loads. However, few of the service functions are
collecting the weather and load data of small PV prosumer households and providing
directives on selling power for aggregated small PV owners.
A number of research efforts have been exerted to build models to predict solar power
generation and load with the focus on either reducing forecasting errors or improving
computation eﬀiciency.
The traditional methods for solar power/load prediction are
classical statistical algorithms, such as linear (polynomial) regression and Auto-Regressive
and Moving Average model (ARMA). In [18], the authors present a linear regression
model to predict solar radiation using temperature data. In [19], the authors propose
an hourly ARMA model to predict the power output from a PV panel.
Recently,
a great number of researchers work on the development and improvement of several
machine learning algorithms in solar power forecasting. The algorithms include Support
vector regression (SVR), Gradient boosted regression tree (GBRT), and Artificial neural
network (ANN), etc. In [20], the researchers present a support vector regression model
to produce solar power forecasts on a rolling basis for 24 hours ahead. In [21], a GBRT
model is proposed using historical power generation data and relevant meteorological
variables. The study in [22] suggests an artificial neural network for producing solar
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Main contributions
3
power forecasts. Moreover, the study in [23] and [24] applies Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) and Convolutional neural network with LSTM (CNN-LSTM) to provide more
accurate forecast results respectively.
While the literature on machine learning in
solar power and load forecasting has increased substantially in recent years and the
machine learning algorithms have proven to be able to predict the power output more
accurately. However, one disadvantage of these models is the lack of transparency and
interpretability, which also hinders the deployment of machine learning in this field.
Thus, the interpretations of the models are urgently needed, which can both support
decision makings and improve the eﬀiciency of solar power prediction. This thesis makes
several contributions towards this goal.
1.3
Main contributions
The main contributions of this thesis are the following:
• Two neural networks are developed: a PV power generation forecasting model,
based on the regression neural network, and a load control model, based on a
classification neural network. Both models can be used to predict whether solar
generation will be larger than the load to help small PV prosumers make decisions.
• Both local and global feature importance analysis are conducted for the designed
classification and regression neural networks. From the feature analysis, several
interesting dependencies between the features and the outputs are discovered,
which match with the physical phenomena behind the PV generation process.
• Five gradient-based methods are implemented to interpret the designed models
and determine the major causes why models fail in some cases. Recommendations
on building robust neural networks are also given.
• A Bayesian neural network is designed to estimate two types of uncertainties:
aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty of the solar power forecast model, with which
abnormal PV generation hours can be detected. Thus, when it comes to cases that
our models might fail, these hours can be considered more carefully.
Moreover, the core idea of the thesis has been summarized and written as a paper
which has been submitted as a conference paper to IEEE International Conference on
Communications, Control, and Computing Technologies for Smart Grids. The submitted
paper is currently under review and can now be seen on arXiv [25].
1.4
Structure of the thesis
The thesis is structured as follows:
==PAGE:16==
1.4 Structure of the thesis
4
1. Section 1 briefly introduces the thesis topic in three perspectives: Background &
Motivation (section 1.1), Research directions (section 1.2) and Main contributions
of the thesis (section 1.3).
2. Section 2 covers all theory and methodology used in this thesis:
section 2.1
introduces theoretical background in deep learning and neural networks, section
2.2 presents theories in interpretability of neural networks, section 2.3 covers
background in uncertainty estimation using Bayesian neural networks.
3. In section 3, numerical results and corresponding analysis are presented. Firstly,
implementation details and performance evaluation of neural networks will be
given in section 3.2. Then, interpretability analysis and uncertainty estimation
results will be followed in section 3.3 and section 3.4 respectively.
4. Finally, conclusions are given in section 4.
The main works of the thesis are divided into three parts: implementation and
training of neural networks, application of five gradient-based attribution methods to
interpret neural networks, and uncertainty quantification of neural networks. All code
used for the analysis can be found at the following GitHub repository: https://github.
com/yucunlu/Interpretability [26].
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Theory and Methodology
2.1
Deep learning
In this section, the theoretical background regarding deep learning and neural networks
will be given. The contents of the section are mainly adopted from [27] and [28]. For a
more in-depth and comprehensive coverage of basic deep learning theory, please also
refer to [27] or [28] for help.
This section goes as follows:
Firstly, a feedforward
neural network is introduced. After that, training and optimization are covered through
relevant cost functions and optimization procedures. Finally, regularization techniques
and hyperparameter tuning learning will be covered. The notations used in this section
follow that in [27].
2.1.1
Feedforward Neural Networks
Feedforward neural network, also called multilayer perceptron (MLP), is one of the
quintessential deep learning models. The goal of a feedforward neural network is to
approximate some function f∗. A feedforward neural network defines a mapping y =
f(x; θ) and learns parameters values θ which achieves the best function approximation
[27].
These models are called feedforward neural networks because information always
flows forward through the model and is never fed back. The model is associated with a
directed acyclic graph describing how the functions are composed together. For example,
in Fig 2.1, three functions f (1), f (2), and f (3) are connected in a chain, to form f(x) =
f (3)(f (2)(f (1)(x))). f (1) is called the ’first layer’ of the network, and f (2) is called the
second layer, and so on. In this case, the model only has three layers, so f (3) is called
the output layer. The node associated with each computation (each circle shown in
Fig. 2.1) is denoted as a ’neuron’. The neurons are organized in layers with connections
from one layer feeding into the next. In this way, information is processed sequentially
(layer-wise) in the network: Firstly, the input pattern (which is just a vector x = (x1,...,
xM)) is fed to the input layer such that neuron i in the input layer is given an activation
equal to xi. The activation is then propagated to one or several hidden layers and finally
to the output layer consisting of one or more neurons corresponding to the coordinates
of the output vector.
Consider the input x = [1 x1 x2 ... xM]T ∈RM+1, each neuron j in the first hidden
layer is given activity a(1)
j
= xTw(1)
j , where j denotes the jth neuron and the superscript
(1) indicates ’first layer’, the quantities w are called the weights. Then, each of the H1
hidden unit are transformed using a nonlinear activation function h to give z(1)
j
= h(a(1)
j ).
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Deep learning
6
Figure 2.1: Simple illustration of a feedforward neural network consisting of five input
units in the input layer, two hidden layers both with 4 neurons and one
output unit in the output layer.
Thus, the output of each neuron j in the first layer f (1) can be represented as:
z(1)
j
= h(xTw(1)
j )
(2.1)
Note that in general, each hidden unit contains a bias term corresponding to an
additional input to each neuron of 1, with the corresponding weight term accounting for
the bias, just as a column of 1 is appended to the input data x above.
Using Eq. 2.1 to calculate the output of the first layer, the output can be represented
as a vector. Considering the bias term, the following vector can be obtained: z(1) =
[1 z(1)
1
z(1)
2
... z(1)
H ]T.
In the same way, each neuron k in the second layer is given an activation of a(2)
j
=
(z(1))Tw(2)
j . Then the output neurons are non-linear transformed by function h(2), the
output of each neuron k in the second layer f (2) can be represented as:
z(2)
k
= h(2)((z(1))Tw(2)
j )
(2.2)
This cascade continues layer-wise sequentially and ends at the ’output layer’, which
is the final layer of the chain.
2.1.2
Activation functions
There are several choices for the nonlinearity transformation h. The transformations are
also called activation functions. In deep learning, the default recommendation is to use
the rectified linear unit, or ReLu, defined by the activation function h(z) = max{0, z}
for it tends to show better convergence performance and typically learn much faster [29].
However, one drawback of ReLu is that it cannot learn via gradient-based methods on
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Deep learning
7
samples for which their activation is zero. Thus, some smooth activation functions such
as hyperbolic tan (tanh) or sigmoid are also widely used for their unique advantages. For
example, when in the training of Recurrent neural network (RNN), tanh sometimes can
be more suitable because ReLu can have very large outputs, which is much easier to incur
the problem of gradient exploding [30]. Besides, for units with bounded values (tanh,
sigmoid), the output can be controlled within a desired range. A few other reasonably
common activation function types include: RBF, softplus, leaky ReLu, etc.
tanh(z) = e2z + 1
e2z −1
(2.3)
sigmoid(z) =
1
e−z + 1
(2.4)
ReLu(z) = max{0, z}
(2.5)
softplus(z) = ln(1 + ez)
(2.6)
leaky ReLu(z) =
(
0.01z
for z < 0
z
for z ≥0
(2.7)
In this thesis, for DNNs, all activation functions are chosen to be ReLu except for the
output layers that are chosen to be sigmoids for both classification model and regression
model. For the classification model, sigmoid is chosen as the activation function rather
than softmax, as the classification considered is binary; for the regression model, ReLu
is also added to the output layer because the output needs to be controlled within a
specific range which will be introduced in detail in later section 3.2.2.
2.1.3
Cost functions
Another important aspect of a neural network is the choice of cost functions. As is
illustrated before, neural networks try to approximate some functions. Denote the output
of a neural network to be f(x, w), for a fixed w this function maps x values to real
target labels y values such that w contains the set of all weights and biases in the
network w = {W (1), W (2), ..., W (L)}, where L is the number of layers.
As neural networks cannot be expected to perfectly map from xi to the corresponding
yi, it is assumed that yi is normally distributed around the predicted outputs of the
neural network. Denote y has K dimensions, the probability density of observation yi
can be then obtained:
p(yi|xi, w) = N(yi|f(xi, w), Iσ2)) =
1
(2πσ2)N/2e−||yi−f(xi,w)||2
2σ2
(2.8)
Most neural networks are optimized using maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), which
means that the cost function is simply the negative log-likelihood.
==PAGE:20==
2.1 Deep learning
8
For the regression neural network, assuming that the N observations are independent
of each other and identically distributed, the following likelihood function considering
all observations can be obtained:
p(y|x, w) =
N
Y
i=1
p(yi|xi, w) =
N
Y
i=1
N(yi|f(xi, w), Iσ2))
(2.9)
The optimal value of w that maximize the likelihood function is equivalent to minimizing
the negative log-likelihood, which can be expressed as:
JMLE(w, σ2) = −log(p(y|x, w)) =
1
2σ2
N
X
i=1
(f(xi, w)−yi)2−N
2 log 1
σ2 +N
2 log2π (2.10)
Thus, after removing all constants in Eq.
2.10, it can be shown that finding w
which minimizes the negative log-likelihood corresponding to finding parameters w which
minimizes the squared loss (mean square error) defined as:
J(w) =
N
X
i=1
||f(xi, w) −yi||2
(2.11)
For classification problems, a similar approach is applied to find the optimal weights.
Let us take a binary classification problem for example.
Assume the output is the
conditional probability for class 1 C1, so that:
p(C1|x) = f(x, w),
p(C0|x) = 1 −f(x, w)
(2.12)
Thus, the conditional probability can be described as:
p(y|x, w) = Bernoulli(y|f(x, w)) = f(x, w)y(1 −f(x, w))1−y
(2.13)
And the negative log-likelihood becomes:
J(w) = −
N
X
i=1
[yi · log(f(xi, w)) + (1 −yi) · log(1 −f(xi, w))]
(2.14)
This term is also known as the binary cross entropy loss function. A similar derivation
can be easily extended to a multi-class classification problem. In that case, the loss
function is called categorical cross entropy. The binary cross entropy is also used as the
loss function for the training of the classification neural networks in this thesis.
Combining the negative log-likelihood term deducted from the maximum likelihood
framework introduced above with a L2 regularization term which will be introduced in
section 2.1.5 later, the cost function J to be minimized is defined as:
JL2(w) = J(w) + λwTw
(2.15)
where λ is the regularization strength needs to be specified. Training a neural network is
thus reduced to minimize the loss function J(w) over the training set with the purpose
that the found weights w also minimizes the generalization error.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Deep learning
9
2.1.4
Back-propagation and training methods
As is illustrated in section 2.1.1, The process when the initial information provided by
input x propagating through layers and finally outputting y is called forward propagation,
while back-propagation allows the information to flow backward from the cost through
the network to compute the gradients.
The calculation of back-propagation is quite simple, so it will only be introduced
briefly here. To compute the gradient of some scalar z with respect to one of the input
x in neural networks, we begin from the gradient with respect to each parent of z which
can be computed by multiplying the current gradient by the Jacobian of the operation
that produce dz. Continuing multiplying by Jacobians, traveling backward through the
neural network in this way until finally reaching x, the gradients can be obtained. For
any node that may be reached by going backward from z through two or more paths,
simply sum the gradients arriving from different paths at that node.
Gradient descent
With the gradients computed from back-propagation algorithm, different optimization
methods can be developed to perform learning. One of the most common and basic
optimization algorithms in machine learning and deep learning is gradient descent.
Consider a small perturbation dw of w′, the multivariate Taylor expansion yields:
J(w′ + dw) ≈J(w′) + dwT∇J(w′)
(2.16)
Then, if we select dw = −α∇J(w′) where α is a small number ∈[0, 1] and is denoted
as learning rate in deep learning. Thus:
J(w(t)) = J(w(t−1) + dw) ≈J(w(t−1)) −α||∇J(w(t−1))||2 ≤J(w(t−1))
(2.17)
The algorithm of gradient descent can be defined as:
• Initialize weights w(0) by random guess.
• For each epoch t, compute the divergence g(t−1) = ∇J(w(t−1)).
• Compute and update weights w(t) = w(t−1)−αg(t−1).
• Repeat for a large number T of iterations (epochs) to produce a sequence of better
guesses of weights w∗.
Stochastic gradient descent & Mini-batch gradient descent
Gradient descent computes the gradient of the cost function for the entire training data
set, which can sometimes be very slow and even intractable for a large data set. Besides,
it performs many redundant computations when the data set is large, since it computes
gradients for similar examples repeatedly before the update of parameters. To overcome
the above problems, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is proposed to perform only one
==PAGE:22==
2.1 Deep learning
10
update at a time. Thus, this method is usually much faster and can also be used to
learn online. The stochastic gradient for each training example i can be computed as:
gi = ∇˜J(w) = ∇(||f(xi, w) −yi||2)
(2.18)
Mini-batch gradient descent finally takes the best of both algorithms. Instead of
going over the whole data set nor performing an update for each sample, Mini-batch
gradient descent sums up over a lower number of examples called batches and performs
an update for every mini-batch. In Mini-batch gradient descent, with a batch size of
B, all examples in the data set is divided into m = N/B smaller data sets D1, ... ,
Dm, each containing B observations. Thus, instead of using the gradient, mini-batch
gradient descent algorithm uses the approximate gradients computed for the samples in
each batch k:
gk = ∇˜J(w) = N
B ∇(
X
i∈Dk
||f(xi, w) −yi||2)
(2.19)
Fig. 2.2 shows different algorithm’s variants and their direction towards the minimal,
it can be seen that stochastic gradient descent is noisier than mini-batch gradient descent
which is also noisier than batch gradient descent.
Figure 2.2: Gradient descent variants’ trajectory towards minimum [31].
Momentum, RMSprop and Adam
Stochastic gradient descent and mini-batch gradient descent both have a problem that
they tend to be very slow because of the noise. Momentum is a method that helps to
accelerate learning in the relevant direction and dampens oscillations by introducing a
velocity term v that captures the direction and speed at which the parameters move
through the parameter space:
v(t) = αv(t−1) + ϵ∇J(w)
(2.20)
w(t) = w(t−1) + v(t)
(2.21)
where α and ϵ are hyperparameters within the range of (0,1].
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Deep learning
11
The momentum term increases for dimensions whose gradients point in the same
direction and reduces updates for dimensions whose gradients change directions [27]. As
a result, faster convergence and decreased oscillations can be achieved.
Another method is the usage of adaptive learning rates which changes throughout the
training process instead of only one fixed learning rate. One typical example is RMSprop
algorithm which accumulates gradients into an exponentially weighted moving average.
The algorithm is as follows:
E[g]t = βE[g]t−1 + (1 −β)g2
t
(2.22)
w(t+1) = w(t) −
α
p
E[g]t + ϵ
gt
(2.23)
where g is the gradient, E[g] is the running average of gradient, while α and β are
hyperparameters. β is suggested to be set to 0.9 and a good default value for the learning
rate α is 0.001. The term ϵ is to avoid the running average E[g] being zero and is usually
set to be a small number 10−8.
Finally, Adam algorithm is proposed by Kingma and Ba in 2015 [32]. The name of
the algorithm ’Adam’ derives from the phrase ’adaptive moments’ and it combines the
idea of momentum with RMSprop with a few important distinctions. Firstly, momentum
is incorporated as an estimate of the first-order moment of the gradient and applied to the
rescaled gradients. Second, Adam includes bias corrections to the estimates of both the
first-order moments and the second-order moments [27]. The algorithm is introduced
as follows. Firstly, the decaying averages of the past and past squared gradients are
calculated:
mt = β1mt−1 + (1 −β1)gt
(2.24)
vt = β2vt−1 + (1 −β2)g2
t
(2.25)
where mt and vt are estimates of the first moment (mean) and the second moment
(uncentered variance) of the gradients, respectively. Then, the bias corrections to the
estimates are expressed as:
ˆ
mt =
mt
1 −βt
1
(2.26)
ˆvt =
vt
1 −βt
2
(2.27)
Finally, the update rule of the algorithm is:
w(t+1) = w(t) −
α ˆ
mt
√ˆvt + ϵ
(2.28)
Due to Adam’s good performance in practice shown by empirical results [32], it is
applied as the optimization method in all neural networks training in this thesis.
==PAGE:24==
2.1 Deep learning
12
2.1.5
Regularization techniques
In neural network training, one of the most intractable problems is overfitting, which
means a situation where the model performs exceptionally well on the train set, but fails
to predict accurately using test data. The reason is that the model tries to learn all
details and even noise from the training set, which ultimately leads to poor performance
on the unseen data from the test set. In the machine learning field, many strategies
have already been developed aiming to reduce the test error, possibly at the expense of
increased training error. Those strategies are known as regularization.
L2 & L1 Regularization
One idea of regularization is to limit the capacity of models by penalizing the coeﬀicients.
In neural network, it actually penalizes the weight matrices of the nodes. L1 and L2
regularization are the most common regularization techniques of this type. Both of them
update the cost function by adding another parameter norm penalty term. Applying L2
regularization, the cost function is changed to:
JL2(w) = J(w) + λwTw
(2.29)
where lambda is the regularization parameter. L2 regularization is also known as weight
decay as it forces the weights to decay towards zero.
In L1 regularization, the absolute value of the weights is penalized:
JL1(w) = J(w) + λ||w||1
(2.30)
In comparison to L2 regularization, L1 regularization results in a more sparse solution,
which means some parameters might have an optimal value of zero [27]. This property
has induced L1 regularization being used extensively as a feature selection mechanism.
Dropout
Another different type of regularization technique is dropout, which is proposed in [33].
Dropout can also produce very good results and is thus the most frequently used
regularization technique in the field of deep learning.
At every iteration, dropout
randomly selects some nodes and removes them along with all of their incoming and
outgoing connections as shown in Fig. 2.3.
During training, each iteration has a different set of nodes which also generates a
different set of outputs. The trained dropout network can also be seen as an ensemble
consisting of all such ’thinned’ networks sampled from the original neural network. Thus,
the training of a n-neuron neural network with dropout can also be seen as training a
collection of 2n possible thinned networks with extensive weight sharing. With dropout
implemented, the feed forward operation becomes:
r(l)
j
∼Bernoulli(pl)
(2.31)
˜
y(l) = r(l) × y(l)
(2.32)
y(l+1)
i
= h(w(l+1)
i
˜
y(l) + b(l+1)
i
)
(2.33)
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Deep learning
13
Figure 2.3: Illustration of Dropout Neural Network. Left: A standard neural network
with 2 hidden layers.
Right: An example of a thinned network after
applying dropout to the network on the left.
Crossed units have been
dropped [33].
where pl is the probability of dropout in layer l and r(l) is a vector of independent
Bernoulli random variables with probability pl of 1. In Fig. 2.4, a comparison of the
basic operations between a standard and dropout network is shown.
Figure 2.4: Comparison of the basic operations of a standard and dropout network [33].
At test time, it is not eﬀicient and feasible to take an average of the predictions from
abundant thinned models. The idea is to use a single neural net at test time without
dropout. The weights of this network are scaled-down trained weights, that is, if a unit
is retained with probability p during training, the weights of that unit are multiplied by
p at test time [33]. This method can make sure the expected output is the same as the
==PAGE:26==
2.1 Deep learning
14
actual output at test time. With the help of scaling, 2n networks with shared weights
can be combined into one single neural network to be used at test time [33].
Early stopping
Early stopping is probably the most commonly used regularization technique in deep
learning for its simplicity and eﬀiciency.
The idea originates from the observation
that when training large models with suﬀicient representational capacity, training error
decreases steadily, but test error rises again after some epochs. Fig. 2.5 can be a good
example to illustrate this phenomenon. It can be seen that after a certain epoch (labelled
by a vertical dotted line in the figure), training error continues to decrease while testing
error goes up again.
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the reason to apply early stopping. Observe that the training
error decreases consistently over time, but the validation error begins
to increase again at ’Early termination’ point, forming an asymmetric
U-shaped curve.
This means that a better model (with better test error) can be obtained by simply
stopping training and saving the model parameters at the point in time with the lowest
test error (Early termination point in Fig. 2.5).
Early stopping is an unobtrusive form of regularization since it is simple to use the
early technique without damaging the learning dynamics: the only thing need to do when
implementing early stopping is to maintain a copy of the best parameters. However, this
cost is generally negligible, because the best parameters are saved infrequently and never
read again during the training process, the occasional writes will only have little effect
on the total training time.
2.1.6
Hyperparameter tuning
When in model training, hyperparameter tuning is of crucial importance. A good choice
of hyperparameters can greatly improve the model performance without complicating
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Deep learning
15
the model structure. Significant hyperparameters include:
• Layer types
• Learning rate
• Activation functions
• Learning rate decay
• Mini-batch size
• Regularization parameters
• Number of layers
• Number of neurons
Grid search, together with random search are the two most widely used strategies
for hyperparameter optimization in neural networks [34]. In grid search, every possible
configuration of the parameters is tried. The steps of grid search are:
1. Define a grid with n dimensions which map for n hyperparameters.
2. For each dimension, define the range of possible values.
3. Search for all the possible configurations and find the best one.
It can be easily seen that with more dimensions, the more time complexity of grid search
will explode.
Thus, although this method guarantees to find the best configuration,
it is still not the best option. Instead, it’s better to use Random Search. Sampling
hyperparameters randomly with appropriate probability density has been shown to be
more computationally eﬀicient as for most data sets, only a few of the hyperparameters
really matter, but different hyperparameters are important on different data sets [34].
Random Search does a random search on step 1 to pick a point randomly from
the configuration space. The intuition of how random search works better is that the
hyperparameter space can be explored more widely compared to grid search (especially
for the more influential variables), which helps us to find the best configuration in fewer
iterations.
For example, as is shown in Fig. 2.6, for grid search, it’s easy to notice
that even if 9 models are trained, only 3 values of the important parameters are tested.
Whereas, by sampling the hyperparameters randomly, it is extremely unlikely that the
same parameter values will be chosen more than once, which leads to more evaluations
of important parameters (9 models are trained with 9 different parameter values).
==PAGE:28==
2.2 Interpretability
16
Figure 2.6: Comparison of random search and grid search [34].
2.2
Interpretability
In this section, motivations and theoretical background of interpretability methods will
be introduced. To be more specific, two types of attribution methods to interpret neural
networks are introduced: perturbation-based methods and gradient-based methods. In
this thesis, the main focus is on the gradient-based methods.
Different explanation
axioms and the methods of Integrated gradients, Expected gradients and DeepLIFT
will be presented. In addition, an overview of methods to evaluate the interpretability
will also be covered.
2.2.1
Motivation
Nowadays, artificial intelligence (AI) systems based on machine learning have shown
immense successes in various fields thanks to the improvements and breakthroughs in
deep learning methodology. Although DNNs have excelled on a variety of different tasks
[2] [5] [6] [7] [8], challenges still exist which slow down or even hinder the prevalence of this
technology in some applications. One of the biggest challenges is the lack of transparency
and explainability.
The black-box nature of DNNs has hindered the application of
these models, which reduces the trust in and verifiability of the decisions made by the
models [1], especially in fields where explanation and reliability are crucial, such as
medical prognosis, self-driving car controlling, and assessing risks in finance. For all
these tasks, the decisions taken will have profound effects on people’s lives or have
substantial economic losses if predictions fail, thus the importance of interpretability
are enhanced and more precise guarantees need to be enforced.
In Europe, the regulations are quite strict in this sense.
In 2018, General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) took effect and restricted automated individual decision
makings by algorithms which significantly affect users. In Articles 13, 14, and 22, GDPR
has newly created a right of nondiscrimination and a right to explanation, which means
users have every right to be provided with an explanation of the algorithmic decision
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Interpretability
17
made about them by. In this regard, non-explainable machine learning models are de
facto banned in some domains and the deployment of neural networks is posed with the
biggest challenge for their nonlinear complex architectures [35].
AI has been used in the context of energy systems and the energy market domain
for at least two decades.
In the field of renewable generation and load forecasting,
interpretability of models can help detect improper biases in the model or the data.
Besides, interpretability can help to identify the key features in predictions so that
we can prioritize for which features we need the most accurate prediction and further
improve models’ performance and eﬀiciency. For this reason, explanation can become an
important part of the training and validation process of future AI models [1]. Moreover,
interpretability can help to convince the field that data-driven approaches are eﬀicient
and reliable. The interpretability of both the inner workings of models (how models make
predictions) and individual cases (why such an output prediction is made) can provide
reasonable and convincing explanations for model output and give further support for
decision-makings.
2.2.2
Overview of interpretability methods
Interpretability in machine learning can be achieved in different ways. The first method
is to use models that are inherently interpretable, like linear models [36]. Although
this way is the easiest and fastest, the price is a trade of interpretability for limited
predictive power. The second way is to design models capable of outputting predictions
and explanations at the same time [36]. Training such models is very challenging because
they require real explanations to train.
More importantly, since the interpretation
generator itself is a trained model, the problem of assessing fairness and accuracy is
only transferred from the operational model to the interpretation model. Finally, an
interpretation method can be built on the basis of existing models. Potentially, this
allows generating explanations for any existing black box models without the need to
retrain and without sacrificing the performance of the best model.
Another important dimension to consider is the scope of interpretability methods.
Global interpretability is about understanding how the overall model makes decisions,
which input patterns it captures, and how to transform these patterns to produce
output [37]. On the contrary, local interpretability focuses on explaining the reasons
for specific decisions and justifies the model predictions on a case-by-case basis [37].
Global interpretability is very useful for detecting deviations that might lead to unfair
or discriminatory behavior of model, but it is diﬀicult to achieve as the number of
interactive parameters increases [36].
For this reason, most of the researches only
focus on the local interpretability of deep neural networks, such as attribution methods
[38] [39] [40] [41].
Attribution methods assign an attribution value, sometimes also
called ”relevance” or ”contribution”, to each input feature of a network. The detailed
introductions will be covered in the next section.
==PAGE:30==
2.2 Interpretability
18
2.2.3
Introduction of attribution methods
Consider a model that takes an N-dimensional input x = [x1, ..., xN] ∈RN, and produces
an C-dimensional output f(x) = [f1(x), ..., fC(x)], where C is the total number of output
neurons if we consider the model to be a DNN. The output of the network can either
be a numerical quantity (in regression problems) or the probability of a corresponding
class (in classification problems). Attribution methods aim at producing explanations
by assigning a scalar attribution value to each input feature of the network so that we
can know which of the network input features have a greater impact on the predicted
output, as well as the direction of their influence [36]. Given a specific target neuron
c, the goal of attribution methods is to determine the contribution Rc = [Rc
1, ..., Rc
N] ∈
RN of each input feature xi to the output Sc.
For a classification task, the target
neuron of interest is usually the output neuron associated with the correct class for
a given sample.
When the attributes of all input features are arranged together to
have the same shape as the input sample, an attribution map is formed, which is
usually displayed as a heat map, where the red color represents features that positively
contribute to the activation of the target output and the blue color indicates features
that have an inhibitory effect on it.
One example of an attribution map is shown
in Fig. 2.7, in which perturbation-based attribution methods are used and compared to
interpret the model. Attribution methods can be broadly partitioned into two categories:
perturbation-based methods and backpropagation-based methods [42], which will be
elaborated more further.
Figure 2.7: Attributions generated by occluding portions of the input image with
squared grey patches of different sizes. Notice how the size of the patches
influence the result, with focus on the main subject only when using bigger
patches [42].
2.2.4
Baseline
When using attribution methods to estimate different features’ contributions, the focus
is mainly on the marginal effect of a feature and how the output would change without
that feature. Besides, it has also been emphasized that humans assign blame to a cause
by comparing the outcomes of a process including or not including such cause [39]. As
a result, many attribution methods require the definition of a baseline to indicate the
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Interpretability
19
absence of information. Unfortunately, in deep neural networks, there is no suitable
method to remove one or more features from the input, as most network architectures
assume fixed input dimensions.
Although one alternative is to retrain the network
with a reduced set of input features, this will generate a different model whose internal
mechanism is not necessarily related to the original model we focus on.
To solve the problem, many attribution methods tend to select a baseline to simulate
the absence of a feature instead of removing it. The criterion of choosing baseline is that
the baseline should best represent the absence of information, such as the black image
in computer vision domain. With the chosen baseline, attributions can be computed
with respect to it, replacing each feature with its baseline value when the absence of the
feature needs.
Attributions are greatly affected by the choice of the baseline as the attribution
values are calculated as a function of the difference between the input and the selected
baseline instead of the input alone. How to choose an appropriate baseline for different
domains is still an open research question today. For many attribution methods, the
zero baseline is the canonical choice [43] [39]. If the data has been normalized by a
standard score in data preprocessing, the zero baseline can be seen as the mean of the
training set. Thus, sometimes, the expected value of each feature over the training set
can also be used as a baseline [41].
Baselines with low information content, referred to as uninformative baselines, are
often seen as ideal baselines and are widely applied in classification problems with
many classes. However, for binary classification, uninformative baselines are often not
well defined. Apart from using uninformative baselines, it can also be useful to use
informative baselines, that is, select baselines with high information content to highlight
the most important feature attributions resulting in the observed outcome divergence.
For example, in credit scoring applications, a person with ”perfect credit” can be selected
as the baseline, the explanations are then around deducting points due to sub-optimal
factors like having ”short credit history” or ”many open accounts with balances” [44].
2.2.5
Perturbation-based methods
Perturbation-based methods directly calculate the attribution of an input feature or a
set of input features by removing, masking or altering the features, and then running
a forward pass with the new input, assessing the difference compared with the original
output. This technique has been applied to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
in the domain of image classification in 2014, visualizing the probability of the correct
class as a function of the position of a grey patch occluding part of the image [43]. The
simplest perturbation method is to compute attributions by setting one feature to zero
baseline and then measure the effect of this perturbation on the target output [43]. The
method is often referred to as occlusion.
Rc
i = fc(x) −fc(x\{xi})
(2.34)
==PAGE:32==
2.2 Interpretability
20
Perturbation methods are straightforward interpretations of models, as they can
directly measure the marginal effect of input features to the output.
They are also
model-agnostic, meaning that they can be applied to any black-box model that provides
an evaluation function, without any need to access the internal operations [36]. While
perturbation-based methods can direct estimate the marginal effect of a feature and are
simple to implement, they tend to be very slow, as several evaluations of the network are
necessary. A standard perturbation method can take several hours for a single image [42].
Additionally, given the nonlinear nature of DNNs, the number of features perturbed at
each iteration and the choice of the perturbation itself are hyper-parameters of these
methods that can heavily affect the resulting explanations, which adds to the diﬀiculty
of interpreting the results, as is shown in Fig. 2.7. In power market analysis, prosumers
tend to have very short time to conduct the analysis of forecast and make decisions,
thus, computational speed is of vital importance and for this reason, perturbation-based
methods are not considered in this thesis.
2.2.6
Gradient-based methods
Instead of considering the model as a black-box that cannot be inspected, gradient-based
methods take advantage of lower level access to the model’s computational components
and of the knowledge of how information flows in a DNN. Most often, gradient-based
methods compute the attribution values for each input feature in the forward propagation
and backward propagation through neural networks. The gradient-based methods are
generally more computationally eﬀicient when compared to perturbation-based methods.
In this section, several popular gradient-based attribution methods for DNNs will be
introduced. Besides, the similarity and differences of these methods taking into account
the non-linearity nature of the network function will also be discussed.
2.2.6.1
Salience and Sensitivity methods
Firstly, let us start from the most interpretable machine learning model: multiple linear
regression to introduce the role of the gradients when generating attributions. The model
is expressed as:
yc = w0 + w1x1 + w2x2 + ... + wNxN
(2.35)
where wi are the learned model weights. A global interpretation of this model can be
immediately derived: If xi increases by 1, y will increase by wi, independently of the
values xi in a concrete scenario. The interpretability is based on the partial regression
coeﬀicients. These coeﬀicients can be a natural candidate for attribution values as the
coeﬀicients are the partial derivatives of the model output with respect to independent
input features and the attribution map can be expressed as:
Rc
i(x) = ∂yc
∂xi
(x)
(2.36)
Sometimes, it might be interesting to know, in particular cases, how different input
features xi and xj influence the model, i.e., how the two different variables contribute
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Interpretability
21
to the model final output. In this case, we need a local interpretability to explain the
result for a specific data point. This kind of attribution can be formulated as the gradient
multiplied element-wise by the input:
Rc
i(x) = xi · ∂yc
∂xi
(x)
(2.37)
Equation (2.36) is a sensitivity method, while Equation (2.37) is a saliency method.
Sensitivity methods, such as Equation (2.36), aim at describing how the model output
changes when one or more input features are perturbed. In a linear model, this effect is
constant for arbitrarily large perturbations. For nonlinear models, sensitivity methods
still represent the expected effect of a change in the input, but as first-order Taylor
expansion of a nonlinear function, they are only accurate for infinitesimal perturbations
around the original input [36]. However, salience methods, such as gradient times the
input in Equation (2.37), describe the marginal effect of an input feature to the output
with respect to the same feature where such feature has been removed. In other words,
the attribution values estimated by saliency methods are to describe the contributions
of the different input features to the final model output. In this sense, for a salience
method, it is often considered desirable that all attribution values sum up to the final
target score, so that the attributions can be directly related to the output as additive
contributions [36]. As discussed in section 2.2.4, in neural networks, the marginal effect
of one input feature is not well defined, so that most salience methods require to define
a baseline value.
One of the first gradient-based methods adapted to the deep learning domain is
sensitivity analysis [38]. Attributions are constructed by taking the absolute value of
the partial derivative of the target output Sc with respect to the inputs xi.
Rc
i(x) = |∂yc
∂xi
(x)|
(2.38)
Sensitivity analysis can provide a valid measure of the variation of the model output
for a perturbation of the input variables, but it is usually rather noisy and taking the
absolute value prevents the detection of positive and negative evidence that might be
present in the input [36]. Moreover, in the case of a nonlinear model, for the estimated
attributions are the first-order terms of a Taylor decomposition computed at a point
infinitesimally close to the actual input [45], the attribution values are only accurate for
infinitesimally small perturbations around the original input. Similarly, as the gradient
is not constant, Gradient ∗Input also does not necessarily represent the correct marginal
effect of a feature. Additionally, both methods violate a set of desired theoretical axioms
which will be covered in the next section. To overcome the above-mentioned limitations,
more advanced gradient-based methods have been adapted to take into account the
nonlinear nature of DNNs. An overview of the gradient-based methods used in this
thesis can be seen in Table 2.8.
==PAGE:34==
2.2 Interpretability
22
Table 2.8: Gradient-based formulation of several attribution methods, g denotes the
replaced derivative at each non-linearity.
Method
Attribution
Sensitivity analysis
|∂yc(x)
∂xi
|
Gradient ∗Input
xi · ∂yc(x)
∂xi
Integrated Gradients
(xi −¯xi) ·
Z 1
α=0
∂yc(˜x)
∂˜xi

˜x=¯x+α(x−¯x)
dα
Expected Gradients
Z
¯x
 
(xi −¯xi) ·
Z 1
α=0
∂yc(˜x)
∂˜xi

˜x=¯x+α(x−¯x)
dα
!
pD(¯x)d¯x
DeepLIFT (Rescale)
(x −¯xi) · ∂gyc(x)
∂xi
, g = σ(z) −σ(¯z)
z −¯z
2.2.6.2
Motivations of advanced gradient-based attribution methods
The advanced gradient-based methods are mainly motivated by three main reasons:
Smoothing noise, avoiding the saturation problem and fulfilling desirable axioms. For
the noises in sensitivity analysis and Gradient ∗Input, a possible explanation is that the
derivative of the function yc may fluctuate sharply at small scales. In other words, the
apparent noise in a sensitivity map may be due to essentially meaningless local variations
in partial derivatives [46]. The reason can be attributed to the discontinuity of the ReLu
activation functions commonly used in neural networks.
Another problem is called saturation, which has been previously reported in [47].
Saturation problem means the gradients of input features might have small magnitudes
around a sample even if the network depends heavily on those features when the network
function flattens after those features reach a certain magnitude [48]. Several approaches,
DeepLIFT [41], Integrated Gradients [39] and Expected Gradients [40], have attempted
to address this potential problem by more global descriptions.
Finally, the last motivation is the fulfillment of some desired properties. There exists
various kinds of approaches to construct attribution maps.
However, one significant
challenge in designing an attribution technique is that they are often hard to evaluate
empirically [39] which complicates the consideration of which method best explains the
actual inner workings of the models. It is hard to tease apart the error stemming from
the misbehavior of the model versus the misbehavior of the attribution method [39]. To
compensate for this shortcoming, several researchers have taken an axiomatic approach
and proposed different axioms that attribution methods should satisfy [39], all of which
are introduced below:
• Sensitivity(a)
For every input and baseline that differ in one feature but have different predictions,
then the differing feature should be given a non-zero attribution [39].
• Implementation Invariance
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Interpretability
23
The attributions are always identical for two functionally equivalent networks. Two
networks are functionally equivalent if their outputs are equal for all inputs, despite
having very different implementations [39].
• Completeness
The attributions add up to the difference between the output of F evaluated at
the input x and the output of function value evaluated at the baseline x0 [39].
• Sensitivity(b)
If the function implemented by the neural network does not depend mathematically
on some variable, then the attribution to that variable is always zero. This is a
natural complement to the definition of Sensitivity(a) [39].
• Linearity
If a function f(x) is a linear combination of two sub-networks f1 and f2: f(x) =
a · f1 + b · f2, the attributions of f(x) should also be the weighted sum of the
attributions for f1 and f2 with weights a and b respectively [39]. In other words,
linearity requires the attributions to preserve the linearity within the network.
• Symmetry-Preserving
Two input variables are symmetric w.r.t. a function if swapping them does not
change the function.
An attribution method is symmetry-preserving, if for all
inputs that have identical values for symmetric variables and baselines that have
identical values for symmetric variables, the symmetric variables receive identical
attributions [39].
• Explanation continuity
Given a continuous prediction function to be explained fc(x), it also produces
continuous attributions Rc(x) [36].
With all motivations, several advanced gradient-based methods are proposed and
will be introduced in the later section.
2.2.6.3
DeepLIFT
DeepLIFT (Deep Learning Important Features) is firstly proposed in [41] as a method
to decompose the output of a neural network on a specific input by backpropagating the
contributions of all neurons in the network to every feature of the input. To be more
specific, DeepLIFT compares the activation of each neuron x to its activation of the
baseline ¯x and assigns contribution scores according to the difference (Equation 2.39).
The attribution propagation rule can be seen in Equation 2.40.
r(L)
i
=
(
fi(x) −fi(¯x)
if unit i is the target unit of interest
0
otherwise
(2.39)
r(L)
i
´ =
X
j
zij −¯zij
P
i′ zi′j −P
i′ ¯
zi′j
rl+1
j
(2.40)
==PAGE:36==
2.2 Interpretability
24
where ¯zij = x(l)
i w(l,l+1)
ij
is weighted activation of a neuron i onto neuron j when the
baseline ¯x is fed into the network. The attributions at the input layer are defined as
Rc
i(x) = r(1)
i . As for Integrated gradients, DeepLIFT is designed to satisfy Completeness.
Here, the rule described in Equation (2.40), referred to as Resacle rule, is used in the
original formulation of the method.
2.2.6.4
Integrated gradients
In some cases, DeepLIFT can be seen as computing a backward pass through the
network where the gradient of the non-linearities is replaced by their average gradient.
However, there is one problem with the method that DeepLIFT fails to satisfy the axiom
implementation invariance.
The reason might be that DeepLIFT computes discrete
gradients (averaged gradients) to replace instantaneous gradients and backpropagate to
compose discrete gradients into attributions. Instantaneous gradients are invariant to
implementation due to its hold of the chain rule: ∂f
∂g = ∂f
∂h · ∂h
∂g. Unfortunately, the chain
rule does not hold for discrete gradients in general. Formally
f(x1) −f(x0)
g(x1) −g(x0) ̸= f(x1) −f(x0)
h(x1) −h(x0) · h(x1) −h(x0)
g(x1) −g(x0)
(2.41)
As a result, the quantity computed by replacing each instantaneous gradient by the
average gradient at each non-linearity does not necessarily equal to the average gradient
of the function as a whole [36]. Moreover, two different implementations of the same
function might lead to different results when the chain rule is applied.
Integrated Gradients can be considered a generalization of DeepLIFT, designed
to satisfy implementation invariance [36].
Consider the straight-line path from the
baseline x0 to the input x, Integrated gradients are obtained by accumulating these
gradients at all points along the path and then averaging them. In this case, the original
instantaneous gradients are used for the non-linearities, thus preserving the validity of
the chain rule. The Attributions obtained by Integrated Gradients are defined as follows:
Rc
i(x) = (xi −¯xi) ·
Z 1
α=0
∂yc(˜x)
∂˜xi
|˜x=¯x+α(x−¯x)dα
(2.42)
When in practical implementation, the integral of Integrated gradients can be eﬀiciently
approximated via a Riemann sum. In other words, we can simply sum the gradients
at points occurring at suﬀiciently small intervals along the straight-line path from the
baseline point to the point being explained. It has been shown in practice that steps
between 20 and 300 are enough to approximate the integral [39], which means the method
of Integrated gradients is also a factor of 20-300 slower than methods requiring only one
time of forward and backward pass.
Integrated gradients present several interesting
properties. Apart from axioms of Sensitivity and Implementation Invariance, Integrated
gradients also satisfy Completeness, Linearity and Symmetry-Preserving.
Note that while Integrated gradients method computes the average partial derivative
of feature as the input varies from a baseline to its final value, DeepLIFT approximates
==PAGE:37==
2.2 Interpretability
25
this quantity in a single step by replacing the gradient at each non-linearity with its
average gradient [42].
Although the chain rule does not hold in general for average
gradients, it has been shown empirically that DeepLIFT is often a good approximation
of Integrated gradients in the case of feedforward architectures [36].
2.2.6.5
Expected gradients
Expected gradients is an extension of Integrated gradients method, intended to remove
baseline ambiguity [40].
Integrated gradients method estimates feature attribution
values by explaining the difference between the model’s output for a sample point and
its output for a baseline. As illustrated in section 2.2.4, while the ideal baseline should
better be uninformative, the uninformative baseline is not well-defined in most cases
because it is not easy to choose a baseline that correctly represents the information
absence. It is natural to think of one way to solve the problem by integrating gradients
over multiple baselines and then taking an average over them. However, this requires
multiple integrals, which is expensive in terms of time and memory. Expected gradients
method collapses these multiple integrals using sampling to yield accurate attributions
with multiple baselines that can be calculated quickly [40]. To be more specific, the
selected baselines are drawn from some baseline distribution D with density function pD,
which can represent the absence of features. The attribution values can be calculated
as:
Rc
i =
Z
¯x
 
(xi −¯xi) ·
Z 1
α=0
∂yc(˜x)
∂˜xi

˜x=¯x+α(x−¯x)
dα
!
pD(¯x)d¯x
=
E
¯x∼D,α∼U(0,1)

(xi −¯xi)∂yc(˜x)
∂˜xi

(2.43)
where the first integral is an expectation over the baseline distribution D and the second
is an expectation over the straight-line path from the sample point x to the baseline
point ¯x.
Expected gradients method, the same as Integrated gradients, satisfies a variety of
desirable interpretability axioms such as completeness and implementation invariance.
Moreover, according to [40], experiments show that, in terms of reliably identifying the
features that models use to make predictions, Expected gradients outperform Integrated
gradients.
2.2.7
Evaluation of Interpretability methods
Unlike metrics of model performance such as accuracy, the criteria of interpretability
often cannot be completely quantified.
Moreover, there is little consensus on what
interpretability in machine learning is and how to evaluate it for benchmark [37]. Prior
work on evaluating attribution methods generally falls into four categories: 1) measuring
sensitivity of explanations to model and input perturbations, 2) inferring correctness
of explanation from accuracy drop upon feature removal, 3) evaluating explanations
==PAGE:38==
2.2 Interpretability
26
in a controlled setting with some knowledge of feature importance, and 4) evaluating
explanations based on human visual assessment [49]. In this thesis, the focus will mainly
be on the first three categories of methods to evaluate models’ interpretability because
the attribution maps of solar power and load forecasting are not easily visualized as in
computer vision domain so that option 4 is not suitable in this case.
2.2.7.1
Human evaluation
Evaluation of different attribution methods is often based upon human studies which
assess whether the rankings are meaningful to humans. More specially, this approach
either asks humans to use interpretability methods to perform a task or evaluates
how often humans can correctly predict model behavior after seeing explanations [50].
Different attribution methods can generate different explanations even with the same
input and the same model. Thus, commonsense and instinctive explanations to expert
knowledge about the significance and influence of features are often used as a qualitative
assessment.
In [51], the authors showed the utility of explanation by conducting a
comprehensive evaluation with simulated and human subjects,where they measured
the impact of explanations on trust and associated tasks. In their experiments, they
examined whether the interpretability of models can help non-experts decide if one
should trust a prediction, choose a better model, and improve an untrustworthy classifier.
However, it should be cautious when involving humans in the evaluation loop for
interpretability. The lack of robustness for neural networks has been revealed in work
[52] that image classifiers, for instance, fail spectacularly once the images are subjected
to adversarial changes that appear minor to humans. Adversarial samples suggest that
neural networks are much more sensitive to small variations than the human brain. Thus,
it is unreasonable to expect the image recognition tasks to be wildly different, but the
corresponding explanations fail to reflect this difference [36].
2.2.7.2
Ablation test
One simple way to evaluate the interpretability of models is to see whether ablating
the input features as ranked by their importance decreases the prediction accuracy or
confidence, which is called ablation test [48]. Top-K ablation test substitutes the K most
relevant features with their baseline values and observes the degradation in performance.
Let x ∈RM be a sample point with attribution values Rc ∈RM and gK(x, R) be a
function which replaces the K most influential features with their baseline values. Then
the Top-K ablation metric Abl −K is expressed as:
ABI −K(Rc, x) = f(x) −f(gK(x, Rc))
(2.44)
Thus, the attribution map with higher Abl-K values shows that these features are more
important for the predicted output, compared to the baseline. However, the ablation
test has also some significant drawbacks. One drawback is called feature correlation,
which means that when ablating one feature in the data set, similar performance might
be obtained because similar information is also stored in another correlated feature, but
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Uncertainty quantification
27
that does not mean the ablated feature is not important. Another disadvantage is that
it is unclear whether the degradation in model performance comes from the distribution
shift or because the features removed are truly informative [48].
There are also some other evaluation metrics proposed in some other literature. For
example, in [49], the researchers propose a variant of an ablation test in computer vision.
Firstly, they ablate pixels in the training and test sets, and then retrain a new model
on the ablated data and measure by how much the test set performance drops. This
method has the advantage of better capturing whether or not the methods highlight
the pixels that are the most important for predicting the output class, however, it has
the drawback of higher computational expense for the need to retrain the model several
times [48]. This metric may also get confused by feature correlation.
In this thesis, we choose to carefully perturb the samples with one feature at a time.
Thus, how the different methods attribute this ablated feature is used as a qualitative
evaluation.
2.3
Uncertainty quantification
The knowledge of uncertainty is essential to the development of robust and interpretable
neural networks. A general regression/classification neural network can only provide a
point estimation, which means the network is “equally confident” in all samples, even
in those ones the model provides inaccurate or wrong predictions. The overconfident
predictions made by neural networks might be harmful or offensive in some cases, for
example, a classifier could give the wrong medical diagnosis with such high confidence
that the data is not flagged for human inspection, or a language model could output
offensive text that it confidently believes is non-problematic [53].
Thus, as neural
networks have become increasingly essential in larger decision making pipelines, the
needs for representing model uncertainty is of crucial importance [54]. The estimated
neural networks uncertainty can not only help detect abnormal cases model might
fail so that uncertain inputs and special cases can be treated explicitly, but also can
help to improve accuracy of model and make better decisions.
For the solar power
generation forecast considered in this thesis, because of the high uncertainty of solar
power generation, the captured uncertainties can help detect cases that predictions might
fail so that decision makers can make more robust decisions considering the estimated
uncertainties.
2.3.1
Uncertainty decomposition
The uncertainty associated with machine learning models can be broadly classified into
two types, which represent two inherently different sources of uncertainty: aleatoric
uncertainty and epistemic uncertainty.
The overall uncertainty of any model is a
combination of the above two types of uncertainty.
Aleatoric uncertainty refers to the irreducible error of the uncertainty, which means
the error cannot be reduced by choosing a better model because the uncertainty originates
==PAGE:40==
2.3 Uncertainty quantification
28
from the non-deterministic nature of the sought input/output dependency. Aleatoric
uncertainty refers to the variability in the outcome of an experiment, which is due to
inherently random effects and captures the uncertainty concerning information that our
data cannot explain [55]. For example, in lab experiments, even when all input values
are similar, the values measured after multiple trials are never the same. This type
of uncertainty is a typical aleatoric uncertainty. As opposed to uncertainty caused by
randomness, uncertainty due to a lack of knowledge about the perfect predictor, for
example, caused by uncertainty about the parameters of a model, is called epistemic
uncertainty. Epistemic uncertainty captures our limited understanding of the real-world
process for which we are building the model, as we are not able to capture all input
features that affect the target variable [55].
In principle, epistemic uncertainty is a
reducible error which means this uncertainty can be reduced on the basis of information.
2.3.2
Bayesian neural networks
In this thesis, BNNs (Bayesian neural networks) are applied to estimate the mentioned
two types of uncertainties. A brief introduction of Bayesian neural networks and how to
use BNNs to estimate the two types of uncertainties will be covered in this section.
2.3.2.1
Background
In general neural networks, both MLE and MAP (Maximum A Posteriori) are applied
to give point estimations of parameters as introduced in section 2.1. However, Bayesian
neural networks are similar to general neural networks except that instead of having a
model parameterized by its point weights, each weight of the Bayesian neural network
now has a posterior distribution with a mean and variance which is tuned during the
training process (See Fig. 2.9). Then, full Bayesian inference is applied to use Bayes rule
in the light of the seen data to estimate a full posterior distribution of the parameters [56].
The posterior parameter distribution is given by:
p(w|D) = p(D|w)p(w)
p(D)
(2.45)
where p(w￿D)is the posterior parameter distribution, p(w) is called prior parameter
distribution, p(D) is the evidence, and p(D￿w) is our data likelihood. Then, the output
of new samples is calculated by taking an expectation of the output over the optimized
posterior parameter distribution. The Bayesian predictive distribution is given by:
p(y|x) = Ep(w|D)[p(y|x, w)]
(2.46)
Functionally, the exact Bayesian inference is equivalent to making predictions by
averaging an infinite number of neural networks by weighing their predictions with their
posterior probability [56]. The merit is that this results in a built-in model-averaging
component to our model, making it more resistant to noise. However, as the number
of parameters is very large, calculating an exact solution is computationally expensive.
==PAGE:41==
2.3 Uncertainty quantification
29
Besides, the averaging approach also means the function is not differentiable, which
means it is impossible to approximate by backpropagation. Thus, instead of the exact
Bayesian inference, a variational approximation, so-called Variational Inference, is taken
to exact Bayesian updates.
Figure 2.9: Left: each weight has a fixed value provided by classical backpropagation.
Right:
each weight is assigned a distribution provided by Bayes
Backprop [56].
2.3.2.2
Variational Inference
Variational Inference approximates the true posterior with a variational distribution
q(w|θ) to find the parameters θ of a distribution on the weights. This can be done
by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence between q(w|θ) and the true posterior
p(w|D) with respect to θ. The Kullback-Leibler divergence between two distributions
q(x) and p(x) is given by:
KL[q(x)||p(x)] =
Z ∞
−∞
q(x)logq(x)
p(x)dx = Eq(x)[log(q(x))] −Eq(x)[log(p(x))]
(2.47)
Thus, the Kullback-Leibler divergence between q(w|θ) and p(w|θ) is expressed as:
KL[q(w|θ)||p(w|D)] = Eq(w|θ)[log(q(w|θ))] −Eq(w|θ)[log(p(w|D))]
(2.48)
Applying the definition of posterior distribution in Equation 2.45, it becomes:
KL[q(w|θ)||p(w|θ)] = Eq(w|θ)[log(q(w|θ))]−Eq(w|θ)[log(p(w))]−Eq(w|θ)[log(p(D|w))]+log(p(D))
(2.49)
Then, it can be shown that the corresponding optimization objective or loss function
can be written as:
F(D, θ) = KL[q(w|θ)||p(w|D)] −Eq(w|θ)log(p(D|w))
= Eq(w|θ)[log(q(w|θ))] −Eq(w|θ)[log(p(w))] −Eq(w|θ)log(p(D|w))
(2.50)
==PAGE:42==
2.3 Uncertainty quantification
30
which is also known as the variational free energy. In the equation, the first term is the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between the variational distribution q(w|θ) and the prior w
and is called the complexity cost. The second term is the expected value of the likelihood
with respect to the variational distribution and is called the likelihood cost [56]. Then,
the optimal parameters θ are given by:
θ∗= argminθF(D, θ)
(2.51)
The loss function can be minimized by Monte Carlo sampling wi from q(w|θ):
F(D, θ) ≈1
N
N
X
i=1
[log(q(w(i)|θ)) −log(p(w(i))) −log(p(D|w(i)))]
(2.52)
where w(i) denotes the ith Monte Carlo sample drawn from the variational posterior
q(w(i)|θ) and N is the number of Monte Carlo samples used for approximations.
2.3.2.3
Networks training
In the training of Bayesian neural networks, a Gaussian distribution will be used for the
variational posterior: θ = (µ, σ), where
and σ are the mean and standard deviation
vector correspondingly. Here, σ is a diagonal covariance matrix, which means that the
weights are assumed to be uncorrelated. As illustrated before, instead of parameterizing
the plain neural networks with weights w directly, in Bayesian neural networks, the
weight is now a distribution with µ and σ and therefore the number of parameters is
doubled compared to a plain neural network.
A training iteration is composed of a forward pass and and backward pass. In the
forward pass, one single sample point is drawn from the variational posterior distribution
to evaluate the approximate loss function defined above in Equation 2.52. The first two
terms of the loss function are data-independent and can be evaluated layer-wise, but
the last term is data-dependent and is evaluated at the end of the forward propagation.
During a backward pass, gradients of µ and σ are calculated through back-propagation
and updated.
In the process of a forward pass, a stochastic sampling step is involved and a
re-parameterization trick needs to be implemented in order for back-propagation to
work [56]. The trick is simply to let the stochasticity of the sampling be contained in a
parameter-free noise ϵ and then transform the sampled w with a deterministic function
t(µ, σ, ϵ), for which a gradient can be defined. Here ϵ is drawn from a standard normal
distribution, so that:
w = t(µ, σ, ϵ) = µ + σ ⊙ϵ,
ϵ ∼q(ϵ) = N(0, I)
(2.53)
where ⊙means a point-wise multiplication. Thus, a sample of weights w can be obtained
by sampling a unit Gaussian, shifting it by a mean µ and scaling by a standard deviation
σ. Now, for a function f with derivatives in w, it can be proven that:
∂
∂θEq(w|θ)[f(w, θ)] = Eq(ϵ)[∂f(w, θ)
∂w
∂w
∂θ + ∂f(w, θ)
∂θ
]
(2.54)
==PAGE:43==
2.3 Uncertainty quantification
31
which means now the derivative of an expectation can be expressed as the expectation
of a derivative so that back-propagation works.
Since the standard deviation σ is always positive, we parameterize the standard
deviation with ρ and transform it with the softplus function as σ = log(1 + exp(ρ)), so
that the posterior sample of weights w is now:
w = t(µ, σ, ϵ) = µ + log(1 + exp(ρ)) ⊙ϵ,
ϵ ∼N(0, I)
(2.55)
The steps of optimisation proceeds as follows [56]:
1. Sample ϵ ∼N(0, I)
2. let posterior sample weight w = µ + log(1 + exp(ρ)) ⊙ϵ
3. let variational parameters θ = (µ, ρ)
4. Let cost function f(w, θ) = logq(w|θ) −logP(w) −logP(D|w)
5. Calculate the gradient with respect to the mean
∆µ = ∂f(w, θ)
∂w
+ ∂f(w, θ)
∂µ
(2.56)
6. Calculate the gradient with respect to the standard deviation parameter ρ
∆ρ = ∂f(w, θ)
∂w
·
ϵ
1 + exp(−ρ) + ∂f(w, θ)
∂ρ
(2.57)
7. Update the variational parameters:
µ ←µ −α∆µ
(2.58)
ρ ←ρ −α∆ρ
(2.59)
Lastly, in terms of mini-batching, partitioning the data set D into M equally-sized
subsets D1, D2, ..., DM, mini-batch cost should be used:
Fi(Di, θ) = 1
M KL[q(w|θ)||p(w)] −Eq(w|θ)[log(p(Di|w))]
(2.60)
as the sum of all M mini-batch costs add up to the total cost:
M
X
i=1
Fi(Di, θ) = F(D, θ)
(2.61)
==PAGE:44==
2.3 Uncertainty quantification
32
2.3.2.4
Uncertainty characterization
For a regression model, the overall uncertainty can be described as a summation of the
estimated aleatoric uncertainty and epistemic uncertainty.
V ar(y) ≈σ2 + [ 1
T
T
X
t=1
f ˆ
wt(x)Tf ˆ
wt(x) −E(y)TE(y)]
(2.62)
where ˆwt is the weight values sampled from the posterior distribution and E(y) ≈
1
T
PT
t=1 f ˆ
wt(x). In the equation, the first term in the predictive variance, σ2 corresponds
to the amount of noise inherent in the data (aleatoric uncertainty), and the second
term of the predictive variance measures how much the model is uncertain about its
predictions (epistemic uncertainty) which will vanish when the parameter uncertainty is
zero (constant weight values) [57].
In this thesis, Bayesian neural network is applied to capture both epistemic and
aleatoric uncertainty in one single model. As illustrated before, by sampling weights from
the posterior distribution, the epistemic uncertainty can be estimated simply through
Monte Carlo sampling, while for the aleatoric uncertainty, instead of a single output,
now the model output is changed to a Gaussian distribution which is composed of both
predictive mean ˆyas well as predictive variance σ2. Then, aleatoric uncertainty can be
directly estimated by using negative log likelihood as the loss function as introduced in
section 2.1.3.
To summarize, the predictive uncertainty for one sample can be approximated using:
V ar(y) ≈1
T
T
X
t=1
ˆy2
t −( 1
T
T
X
t=1
ˆyt)2 + 1
T
T
X
t=1
ˆσt
2
(2.63)
with {ˆyt, ˆσt}T
t=1 is a set of T sampled outputs: ˆyt, ˆσt = f ˆwt(x) where ˆwt are randomly
sampled from the posterial distribution q(w).
Thus, both aleatoric uncertainty and
epistemic uncertainty can be estimated through the Bayesian neural networks.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3
Numerical results
In this section, numerical results and corresponding analysis will be presented. Firstly,
a short introduction of the data set used to generate results will be presented. Then,
the built two neural networks (one classification neural network and one regression
neural network) will be introduced and their performance will be evaluated. After that,
interpretability of the two neural networks will be given. In the interpretability analysis,
importance and influence of features will be examined both globally and locally. Finally,
uncertainty estimation for solar power forecasting model (regression neural networks)
will also be covered.
3.1
Description of data set
3.1.1
Original data set
For numerical simulations, the original data set is obtained from Presumed Open Data:
Data Science Challenge, which is provided by Western Power Distribution energy data
hub [58]. The raw data set includes three kinds of data: load demand data, solar PV
generation data and weather forecast data, all of which will be briefly introduced in the
following parts.
The load demand data comes from Stentaway Primary substation near Plymouth,
on the south coast of the United Kingdom.
The approximate (latitude, longitude)
co-ordinates are (50.364, -4.086). The data consists of half-hourly average Power values
in Megawatts (MW) from November 2017 to July 2020.
The solar PV generation data is from a solar Farm in Devon, UK. The site is located
at (longitude, latitude) = (50.33, -4.034) and is not too far from Stentaway substation.
The data is also in 30 minute resolution with timestamps in UTC, also starting from
November 2017 to July 2020 (same as the load data). The following variables are part
of this data set:
1. PV generation (in MW) is an average value over the next 30-minute period.
2. Solar irradiance data (in Wm−2) is also given as an average value over the next
30-minute period from the given time stamp.
3. Average instantaneous measurements of the PV module temperature in 0C.
Weather data are estimates of weather variables at the numerical weather prediction
grid points based on assimilation of historical weather data. In this data set, hourly
==PAGE:46==
3.1 Description of data set
34
irradiance forecast (in Watt per square meter, or Wm−2) and surface temperature (in
0C) forecast data from January 2015 to July 2020 have been extracted from six different
sites which are close to Devon but in different directions (See Fig. 3.1). The locations
correspond to grid points on the numerical weather prediction grid. It can be seen from
Fig. 3.1 that locations 1, 2, 5 and 6 surround the substation location but location 5 and
6 are within the English Channel.
Figure 3.1: Locations of weather prediction grid points and substations in map [58].
Note that the irradiance data is time-averaged over the next hour period (e.g. 10:00
AM time stamps means the period 10:00 to 11:00 AM), but the temperature is an
instantaneous value at each hour of the day.
3.1.2
Processed data set for model training and testing
To finalize the data set for our neural networks training and test, firstly, several attributes
are selected as input features in order to train two neural networks. In this process, load
demand, PV generation, PV panel temperature, as well as solar irradiance and surface
temperature forecast data in site 1 are selected. Load demand and PV generation data
are selected because the focus of the thesis is to predict aggregated solar power generation
and whether it will exceed aggregated load demand. Solar PV panel temperature data is
selected because when solar panel temperature increases, it will decrease the eﬀiciency of
solar power generation. Finally, only site 1’s irradiance and temperature forecast data is
selected because the high co-linearity of six sites’ weather data found in feature selection
process.
After feature selection, standard data preprocessing procedures are conducted. After
data cleaning, outlier detection, data imputation and data normalization, the final data
set for model training and testing is generated. During this process, only samples from
7:00 AM - 18:00 PM in each day are retained because of zero or close to zero solar power
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Neural networks
35
generation in other hours throughout the whole year. Those hours are meaningless for
models to make predictions of solar power generation. Besides, all features in the data
set have been converted to hourly resolution, so that our models can focus on predictions
of hourly solar power generation and whether solar power generation will be larger than
load in this hour. In this process, weather data is already in hourly resolution so that
there is no need to make any changes to weather data. For load data and PV generation
data, an average of two 30-minute data is taken as hourly resolution data. After data
processing, PV generation and load demand data (in MW) have been converted to
average values over the next one hour period.
In the final data set after processing, the aggregated solar PV capacity is 2000 KW.
During all hours, the highest solar power generation is 1524 KWh (as one hour’s solar
power generation is predicted) and the lowest solar power generation is zero. Besides, the
highest load demand is 1609 KW and the lowest demand is 312 KW (with all abnormal
cases and outliers removed). The final data set consists of 10623 hourly instances from
November 2017 to July 2020 with 7 different attributes, all of which will be used to
predict hourly solar power generation(regression neural network) and whether solar
power generation will be larger than load in this hour. For all these daytime hours
in the data set after preprocessing, there are around 62% of the cases when solar power
generation is smaller than load demand. A description of all data attributes and their
type is presented in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Description of attributes in data set.
Feature
Description
Type
1
Index
Hour index
Categorical
2
STemp
Surface temperature forecast (0C)
Float
3
Irra
Irradiance forecast (W/m2)
Float
4
PTemp
Solar panel temperature in last hour (0C)
Float
5
HPow
Previous hour’s solar power (KWh)
Float
6
DPow
Solar power at the same hour at previous day (KWh)
Float
7
HLoad
Previous hour’s load (KWh)
Float
Note that before model training, the hour index will be encoded using a one-hot
(also called ‘one-of-K’ or ‘dummy’) encoding scheme which creates new binary columns
to indicate the presence of each hour from the original data (See Fig. 3.3 as illustration).
One-hot encoding can make the representation of categorical data more expressive and
ensure that models will not assume that categories with higher numbers are more
important which is the problem of usual integer encoding.
3.2
Neural networks
In this section, two neural network models will be described in details, both of which
can be used to predict whether solar power will exceed load in the next 15-60 minutes.
Depending on the models’ output, a bid/offer decision can be made by prosumers.
==PAGE:48==
3.2 Neural networks
36
Figure 3.3: Illustration of one-hot encoding scheme.
The first model is a regression neural network, which is to predict solar power
generation. By comparing it with the predicted load, it can concluded whether solar
power will be larger than load. The advantage of the regression model is that it can be
used to predict the exact amount of PV generation.
The second model is a binary classification neural network that directly predicts
whether solar power generation will be larger than load.
If the classification model
outputs 1, it means that solar power generation will exceed load; and vice versa if the
model outputs 0. This model considers both effects of solar power generation and load.
The classification model is more robust than the regression one and it can effectively
avoid unwanted false positive cases. The implementation details and performances of
two models will be presented at length below.
3.2.1
Implementation of neural networks
Conventionally, the data set is divided into training and test sets. 10% of the data are
randomly shuffled for testing and the rest are used for training. The motivation behind
random shuffling is that the performance of neural networks is dependent on how many
previously unseen data samples are contained in the test set. By randomly shuffling the
data, it can be guaranteed that the model trains on as many data samples as possible to
avoid overfitting. When randomly shuffling the data set, a common random seed is used
so that different models can be compared and validated with a consistent train/test split.
As a result, the training and testing sets are the same for the regression and classification
models. Note that for classification neural network training, all features introduced in
Table 2.8 are used while for regression model, HLoad is not used because the regression
neural network is to predict solar power generation.
In the training of neural networks, as introduced before in section 2.1, Adam is chosen
to be the ideal optimizer because of its good performance in practice shown by empirical
results [32]. Relu is chosen to be activation functions for all layers except the output
layer because its faster and better convergence performance [30]. Moreover, the most
common choices: MSE (mean square error) and binary cross entropy are set as the loss
function for regression and classification model correspondingly. To avoid overfitting,
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Neural networks
37
L2 regularization is applied to each hidden layer. As the problem size and data set is
relatively small, the mini-batch size is set by default to be 32. Finally, the remaining
three hyperparameters need to be tuned are learning rate, number of layers and number
of neurons.
In the hyperparameter tuning process, the following range of hyperparameters are
sampled:
1. Number of hidden layers: {2, 3}
2. Number of neurons in each hidden layer: {10,20,30,40,50}
3. Learning rate {10−2,10−3,10−4}
Thus, in total, there are 450 models trained in the hyperparameter tuning process for
both regression neural network and classification neural network. During the process, the
models are only trained for 300 epochs in order to save time and computation power. For
each type of neural network, the best five models are chosen and their hyperparameter
details are shown in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Optimal hyperparameters for the 5-best performing feed-forward regression
neural networks and classification neural networks (For regression model,
root mean square error functions as evaluation metric, while for classification
model, accuracy is used as evaluation metric).
No.
n(1)
n(2)
n(3)
learning rate
Accuracy/RMSE
Regression
1
30
20
10
10−3
143.77
2
50
40
30
10−3
143.77
3
50
20
50
10−3
143.87
4
50
10
10
10−3
143.88
5
10
40
50
10−3
143.89
Classification
1
40
40
30
10−3
91.2%
2
30
40
40
10−3
90.8%
3
10
40
50
10−3
90.6%
4
20
30
30
10−3
90.6%
5
30
10
10
10−3
90.5%
From Table 3.4, it can be concluded that for both models, the best learning rate
is chosen to be 10−3. The best neural network structure for regression neural network
is: 30, 20, and 10 neurons in the direction from input to output while the best neural
network structure for classification neural network is: 40, 40, 30. Their performance will
be further evaluated and compared in later section.
3.2.2
Performance evaluation and Improvement
With the selected hyperparameters, both models are trained for more epochs.
The
performance of both models are described below in this section.
==PAGE:50==
3.2 Neural networks
38
Before evaluating the performance, remember that in the processed data set, the
aggregated solar PV capacity is 2000 KW and there are around 62 % of hours when
solar power is smaller than load demand in the whole data set. These basic information
of data set will be helpful when evaluating the performance of models.
For the regression neural network, root mean square error (RMSE) metric is applied
to evaluate model’s performance, which can provide a global error measure during the
entire forecasting period [59]. The calculation of RMSE is shown in Equation 3.1.
RMSE =
rPn
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2
n
(3.1)
The RMSE of the solar power forecast model is around 142.53 KWh. Comparing the
predicted solar power generation with the predicted load, whether solar power generation
is larger than load can be forecast. Here, the previous hour’s load is used as the predicted
load because the load does not vary a lot in one hour compared to the solar power
generation. As a result, model’s prediction is largely dependent on the accuracy of solar
power prediction. The accuracy of predicting whether solar power exceeds load demand
is 90.2% using the solar power forecast regression model.
One drawback of the implemented solar power forecast model is that, in some cases,
the model will output a negative solar power generation prediction which is impractical
in reality. The output might mean a low solar power generation in this hour, however,
as the model does not understand the physical meaning of the model output, sometimes
it will give obviously wrong predictions. In this case, both negative power generation
and generation larger than the capacity of solar PV are obviously wrong predictions. If
some restrictions can be added to the neural network, the model can provide a better
forecast.
There are several methods to restrict the model output by modifying the output layer.
For example, by transforming the output layer to one neuron with the sigmoid activation
function combined with a lambda layer. The lambda layer is to do simple mathematical
operations on the previous layer without adding more trainable weights.
Here, the
lambda layer is used to multiply the sigmoid output with the desired maximum output
so that the model output can be restricted to positive numbers smaller than the set
maximum value. However, in this thesis, the problem is solved by a much easier method.
As it can be found that the regression model actually won’t predict power generation
larger than capacity. Thus, what need to do is to simply add a ReLu activation function
to the output layer to make sure the model output is always positive. Another advantage
of this way is that, the trained weights in previous models can be directly used in the
new model because the model structure remains unchanged.
With the modified model,now the neural network will not output some implausible
negative solar power generations. After the improvement, the RMSE of the modified
network slightly drops to 142.51 KW, and there will be no negative power predictions
anymore.
For the classification model, the output layer has one neuron and the activation
function is sigmoid so that when the output is larger than 0.5, it predicts that solar
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Neural networks
39
power is larger than load (1), vice versa. Accuracy is the metric used to measure the
performance of classification models. The test accuracy of the implemented model is
91.4%. Moreover, the confusion matrix of the model based on test set is also shown in
Fig. 3.5 so that a overview of the model performance can be examined.
Figure 3.5: Confusion matrix of classification neural network with loss function as
binary cross entropy.
From Fig. 3.5, it can be seen that for the wrong prediction cases: FN and FP cases.
Fp cases are fewer than FN cases which means there are fewer number of cases when the
model predicts 1 but it turns out 0 than the cases when the model predicts 0 but it turns
out 1. This phenomenon is good because when in electricity market, usually FP cases
are more unwanted. When solar power generation turns out to be insuﬀicient for load
demand, customers need to buy additional electricity from power market to meet the
needs of their previous electricity offer which will generate economic loss to customers.
However, to further reduce FP cases, one simple method is to make some modifications
to the loss function to put more weights on the cost of unwanted FP cases.
Currently, the loss function is binary cross entropy which is defined as:
J(w) = −
N
X
i=1
[yi · log(f(xi, w)) + (1 −yi) · log(1 −f(xi, w))]
(3.2)
where f is the model output and y is the real value. In order to avoid FP cases, more
weights should be put on the term (1 −yi) · log(1 −f(xi, w).
After that, now the
customized loss function is expressed as:
J(w) = −
N
X
i=1
[yi · log(f(xi, w)) + 2 · (1 −yi) · log(1 −f(xi, w))]
(3.3)
By doing so, the model’s accuracy drops to 91.0 %. However, number of FP cases
also decreases. From Fig. 3.6, it can be found number of FP cases decreases to 27 now
==PAGE:52==
3.2 Neural networks
40
but at the same time number of FN cases increases to 69. If the weights increase, number
of FP cases can be further dropped at the sacrifice of accuracy.
Figure 3.6: Confusion matrix of classification neural network with modified loss
function.
3.2.3
Load control and Decision makings
When there is imbalance between aggregated load demand and aggregated solar power
generation, bid or offer decisions need to be made by customers.
When there are extra solar power generation after satisfying self-consumption, the
power surplus can be sold to electricity market. However, when aggregated solar power
generation is not suﬀicient for self-consumption, there are two methods to handle this.
The first way is to curtail part of the unnecessary load demand so that the remaining
demand can be fully satisfied by solar power. However, this method is hard to implement
in the case of prosumers aggregation, as it is hard and troublesome to decide which
households and which part of load should be controlled. Besides, it is quite expensive
for prosumers to curtail their load demand considering their dissatisfaction. Another way
is to simply buy electricity from power market which is also the preferred option in this
thesis. With the predicted aggregated solar power generation and load, the exact amount
of energy to trade can be obtained. However, with the interpretability and estimated
uncertainty of models which will be introduced later, more favourable decisions can be
made. As the bidding/offering strategy is not the main focus of this thesis and the
strategy should be determined by customers’ preferences: whether customers would like
a robust decision or more profitable but risky decisions, the details of strategy are out
of scope of this thesis.
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Interpretability
41
3.3
Interpretability
The main focus of this section is interpretability aspects of the two implemented neural
networks: why and how the networks make the prediction and which features have
more or fewer contributions to the final predicted results. Firstly, five gradient-based
attribution methods are implemented in order to provide explanations for both models.
Then, global feature importance of two models will be examined by the five methods.
The different methods with different baselines will then be compared and evaluated by
ablation studies introduced in section 2.2.7. Finally, local feature importance of several
selected cases are examined for more insights different features’ role contributing to the
model output in different situations.
3.3.1
Implementation details: Completeness checking
Recall in section 2.2.6.2, advanced gradient-based attribution methods such as Integrated
gradients have one desirable axiom: completeness which means if one attribution method
satisfy completeness, then all attribution values should add up to the difference between
the output of F evaluated at the input x and the output of function value evaluated at
the baseline x0.
For Integrated gradients and Expected gradients methods, when in implementation,
the integral is usually approximated via summing the gradients at points occurring at
suﬀiciently small intervals along the straight-line path from the baseline point to the
point being explained [39].
As the estimated attribution values are approximations,
completeness might not be satisfied if number of steps (sample points drawn from the
path) is limited. Thus, the number of steps of the two methods are examined here so that
completeness of two methods can be checked. The convergence of Integrated gradients
for classification neural network and regression neural network are shown in Fig. 3.7.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Number of steps
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
Completeness difference
Completeness convergence of Integrated Gradients
Mean
Worst/best case
[10%,90%] -percentile
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Number of steps
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
Completeness difference
Completeness convergence of Integrated Gradients
Mean
Worst/best case
[10%,90%] -percentile
Figure 3.7: Convergence of Integrated gradients through completeness on the test set
(Left: Classification model, Right: Regression model).
==PAGE:54==
3.3 Interpretability
42
In Fig. 3.7, the left plot is the convergence check of the classification neural network
while the right one is that of the regression neural network.
The y-axis means the
difference between summation of all attribution values and the model output minus
model output evaluated at baseline. If completeness is satisfied, the y-axis value should
be close to 0. Additionally, it is expected that when number of steps increases, the
difference should converge to zero as the approximation is getting better.
The plots also include worst and best-case scenarios so that a more comprehensive
analysis can be conducted. From the two plots, it appears that after 300 steps, both
models’ gradients start to converge which corresponds to authors’ experiments in [39]
that steps usually between 20 and 300 are enough to approximate the integral. However
for some bad cases, their performances do not improve a lot even number of steps
increases. Those cases are quite sensitive to the number of steps that the path integral
is calculated with because Integrated gradients method is only sensitive when the path
crosses decision boundaries. However, the overall performance is satisfying and it can
be concluded that for both models, completeness of Integrated gradients is satisfied.
Then, convergence of Expected gradients for two models are also checked. As in
Expected gradients, multiple baselines are selected and averaged as the final baseline,
the definition of completeness for Expected gradients is also a bit different. The definiton
is modified as: The attributions add up to the difference between the output of F
evaluated at the input x and the average output of function values evaluated at the
selected multiple baselines. Completeness of Expected gradients has been proven to
be substantially harder to satisfy compared to Integrated gradients [40]. The results
are shown in Fig 3.8 below.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Number of steps
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
Completeness difference
Completeness convergence of Expected Gradients
Mean
Worst/best case
[10%,90%] -percentile
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Number of steps
0
50
100
150
200
250
Completeness difference
Completeness convergence of Expected Gradients
Mean
Worst/best case
[10%,90%] -percentile
Figure 3.8: Convergence of Expected gradients through completeness on the test set
(Left: Classification model, Right: Regression model).
From Fig. 3.8, it can be seen that Expected gradients can also be seen as converged
when the number of steps increases to 300. However, the overall performance is not as
good as that of Integrated gradients and it performs worse for bad cases. For the bad
cases, the completeness cannot be thought of satisfied, which needs extra attention when
making further analysis.
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Interpretability
43
3.3.2
Global feature importance
Then, the global feature importance of all five different gradient-based methods with
different baselines will be presented and compared to determine the most influential
features for the two models to make predictions.
The global feature importance is
examined by calculating all features’ average magnitude of attribution values. Thus, the
higher calculated value of one feature means that this feature will have an overall higher
contribution to the predicted model output. The most important global features for the
classification and regression models are shown in Table 3.9 and Table 3.10, respectively.
The hour index’s importance is not shown in this table as they have rather small global
influences, however, in some cases, they will have significant local contributions to the
model output. In the table, ’Extreme’ means extreme baseline: all input features are
set to be zero as a baseline to represent the absence of information, ’Average’ means
average baseline using the average values of all input features of training set.
Table 3.9: Global feature importance of the classification model. Feature importance
is represented as each feature’s average attribution values of all test cases .
Feature importance
Attribution method
DPow
HPow
HLoad
Irra
PTemp
STemp
Sensitivity
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.001
0.006
0.002
Gradient * Input
0.124
0.211
0.289
0.182
0.107
0.027
Integrated Gradients (Extreme)
0.228
0.400
0.825
0.337
0.180
0.046
Integrated Gradients (Average)
0.059
0.182
0.095
0.209
0.116
0.024
Expected Gradients
0.052
0.208
0.081
0.173
0.094
0.016
DeepLIFT (Extreme)
0.236
0.409
0.834
0.345
0.187
0.048
DeepLIFT (Average)
0.049
0.200
0.091
0.175
0.091
0.019
Table 3.9 shows the global feature importance of the classification model. The feature
importance is expressed as each feature’s average attribution of throughout the test set.
From the table, it can be seen that features have different ’importance’ when interpreted
by different attribution methods.
For sensitivity, it seems that the interpretations
are quite unsatisfying as nearly all features do not have significant influence on the
model output. For the methods of Gradient * Input, Integrated gradients using extreme
baseline, DeepLIFT using extreme baseline, they share a similar pattern that all methods
rank the significance of features from highest to lowest in this order: HLoad, HPow, Irra,
DPow, PTemp, STemp. This significance ranking makes sense and corresponds to our
intuitions. When predicting whether solar power is larger than load, the previous hour’s
load and solar power generation are good references. Besides, irradiance forecast also
has influential impacts on predictions.
For methods of Expected gradients, Integrated gradients using average baseline, and
DeepLIFT using average baseline, the patterns are a little different. These methods deem
that the most important three features are HPow, Irra and PTemp, and load (HLoad)
becomes much less influential compared to it being the most significant feature in other
methods. The reason is that the choice of baselines will have significant impacts on the
==PAGE:56==
3.3 Interpretability
44
interpretation of model behaviour. As discovered from the data set, load aggregation
can greatly reduce its variation, while aggregated solar power generation is still highly
unstable. In other words, the variance of the load is much smaller than the variance
of solar power generation. Thus, when using the average value of each feature as a
baseline (Expected gradient uses different baselines and takes an average over them,
thus the baseline of Expected gradients is close to the average value of each feature), the
influence of load will be greatly reduced.
Additionally, it is also found that the global feature importance interpreted by
Integrated gradients and DeepLIFT using the same baseline have similar patterns: their
average magnitudes of feature contributions are very close to each other. The observations
match with the previous research, where DeepLIFT is characterized as a good and fast
approximation of Integrated Gradient [42].
Table 3.10: Global feature importance of the regression model. Feature importance is
represented as each feature’s average attribution values of all test cases.
Feature importance
Attribution method
DPow
HPow
Irra
PTemp
STemp
Hour17
Hour7
Sensitivity
0.2
1.1
4.5
8.5
4.5
130.2
101.3
Gradient * Input
66.1
405.1
124.8
137.4
55.7
5.0
8.1
Integrated Gradients (Extreme)
59.9
461.1
137.1
164.7
46.1
6.2
6.5
Integrated Gradients (Average)
60.2
315.5
84.0
79.6
23.7
24.1
22.4
Expected Gradients
33.2
324.3
98.5
78.8
18.6
16.9
19.6
DeepLIFT (Extreme)
60.0
409.3
142.2
125.6
46.8
4.9
5.7
DeepLIFT (Average)
66.6
305.7
84.0
80.0
27.0
24.2
23.0
Table 3.10 shows the global feature importance of the regression model. The feature
importance is also represented as each feature’s average attribution throughout the test
set. It can be found that the magnitude of feature importance of regression model is
much larger than that of classification model. The reason is that the feature importance
is expressed as average attribution values which are essentially the decomposition of
model output. As the classification model only outputs 0 to 1, the attributions are also
smaller.
For the regression model, all methods with different baselines except Sensitivity
method show that the previous hour’s solar power (HPow), irradiance forecast (Irra),
and solar panel temperature (PTemp) are the most important features for solar power
prediction. The reason of why PTemp is also informative is that the high solar panel
temperature will decrease its eﬀiciency, thus leading to a lower generation of solar PV. It
can also be found that some hour index features will also have great effects on the model
output, especially for Hour7 and Hour17. These two hour indexes are selected because
for methods that take average feature values as a baseline, the two hours have obvious
effects on the model output, which will be shown more in later local case examinations.
The potential reason for this might be that these hours are close to the start and end of
daytime, solar power generations are more likely to have dramatic changes in the hours,
and the hour index features can help to make ’special’ predictions in these hours.
==PAGE:57==
3.3 Interpretability
45
3.3.3
Evaluation of attribution methods
Now, five attribution methods with two different baselines have been implemented to
interpret the models. Besides, global feature importance have also been examined for all
methods. There are some similarities on feature importance among all these methods,
but there are also some differences. With the model and test case being the same, it
is hard to know which method best interprets the inner workings of models. Although
different methods with different baselines actually explain the neural networks from
different perspectives, a naive ablation evaluation of the models would still be able
to prioritize one method over the others.
Thus, the ablation studies introduced in
section 2.2.7 are conducted here to evaluate the five attribution methods with different
baselines.
Top-k ablation tests with K = 1, K = 2, and K = 3 are conducted to replace the
K most influential features with their baseline values to evaluate different attribution
methods. For Sensitivity and Gradient * Input methods, extreme baseline is used for
replacement as there is no baseline needed for both methods. The results for the two
models are shown below in Table 3.11 and Table 3.12.
Table 3.11: Top-k ablation test for classification model with k=1, k=2 and k=3 being
tested.
Decrease of accuracy
Attribution method
k=1
k=2
k=3
Sensitivity (Extreme)
0.053
0.076
0.500
Gradient * Input (Extreme)
0.438
0.461
0.552
Integrated Gradients (Extreme)
0.438
0.461
0.552
Integrated Gradients (Average)
0.068
0.488
0.294
Expected Gradients
0.100
0.495
0.292
DeepLIFT (Extreme)
0.438
0.461
0.552
DeepLIFT (Average)
0.102
0.488
0.294
In Table 3.11, evaluation of attribution methods for classification model is shown.
The evaluation of classification model is depended on the accuracy drop after removal
of the most influential features. Based on the ablation test results, it can be seen that
Gradient* Input, Integrated gradients, and DeepLIFT using extreme baseline have the
same performance, which outweigh other methods with other baselines. However, finally,
DeepLIFT using extreme baseline is selected for further research for two reasons. Firstly,
Gradient* Input does not satisfy the completeness axiom which is highly desirable
when explaining local contributions.
Secondly, DeepLIFT is a faster approximation
of Integrated gradients. As they are equally good in explaining neural networks based
on the test results, the faster, the better.
In Table 3.11, evaluation of attribution methods for regression model is shown.
For the regression model, the evaluation is based on the error (RMSE) increase after
removal of the most influential features.According to the ablation test results, Gradient*
Input, Integrated Gradients and DeepLIFT using extreme baseline also have the same
==PAGE:58==
3.3 Interpretability
46
Table 3.12: Top-k ablation test for regression model with k=1, k=2 and k=3 being
tested.
Increase of RMSE
Attribution method
1
2
3
Sensitivity (Extreme)
4.15
7.47
7.47
Gradient * Input (Extreme)
525.77
527.61
545.75
Integrated Gradients (Extreme)
525.77
527.61
545.75
Integrated Gradients (Average)
255.17
401.66
307.76
Expected Gradients
259.37
399.79
307.42
DeepLIFT (Extreme)
525.77
545.42
545.75
DeepLIFT (Average)
255.17
401.66
307.76
performance, which outweigh other methods with other baselines. Finally, DeepLIFT
using extreme baseline is selected for further research for the same reasons.
3.3.4
Global feature influences
The aforementioned global feature importance analysis helps to find the most influential
features for prediction. However, this analysis does not explain how exactly the features
affect the model output. To gain more insights on that, the chosen method (DeepLIFT
with extreme baseline) is applied to plot the summary plots for the classification and
regression models in Fig. 3.13 and Fig. 3.14, respectively. The summary plots are made
by SHAP package [60] and they can show the global feature impacts on the models’
output, through which the inner workings of neural networks can be revealed. In the
figures, blue dots mean points with relative low feature values, while red dots mean
points with relative high feature values.
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
SHAP value (impact on model output)
STemp
PTemp
DPow
Irra
HPow
HLoad
Low
High
Feature value
Figure 3.13: Summary plot of the classification model.
==PAGE:59==
3.3 Interpretability
47
For the summary plot of classification model shown in Fig. 3.13, HLoad generally
has a negative contribution while HPow and Irra have positive impacts on the model
output in most cases. When HPow and Irra have high values, they also tend to have
large positive impacts on the model output, which means the model will be more likely
to predict 1 (solar power is greater than load). On the contrary, when HPow and Irra
have small values, their small impacts will be more likely to push the model’s output to
0 (solar power is smaller than load demand). For HLoad, it has negative impacts on the
model output, that is, when HLoad has high values, it will promote the model output
to 0, and vice versa. Both of these observations perfectly match with common-sense
expectations.
500
250
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
SHAP value (impact on model output)
STemp
DPow
PTemp
Irra
HPow
Low
High
Feature value
Figure 3.14: Summary plot of the regression model.
For the regression model in Fig. 3.14, as the baseline is chosen to be extreme baseline,
Irra and HPow always have positive contributions compared to zero irradiance forecast
or zero generation in the last hour. When the regression model predicts a large solar
power generation, HPow and Irra will also have larger contributions. Besides, it can be
discovered that PTemp has negative effects on solar power predictions, that is, when
PTemp value is high, it decreases the model output. As explained earlier, it happens
due to high temperature decreases the eﬀiciency of the solar panel. It is also interesting
to see that STemp generally has positive contributions to the model output for the
classification model, despite it has negative impacts on the regression model output. One
possible explanation might be: Higher surface temperature usually means good weather
conditions, resulting in a possible higher solar power generation; however, higher surface
temperature might also increase consumers’ load demand for cooling and ventilating,
which brings about a negative contribution to the classification model output.
3.3.5
Local feature contributions
To get a better understanding of the role of different features contributing to the output
and compare the roles those features play in each case, four individual cases of local
==PAGE:60==
3.3 Interpretability
48
interpretability are examined: True Positive (TP), True Negative (TN), False Negative
(FN), False Positive (FP). The attribution values of the four individual cases interpreted
by DeepLIFT using extreme baseline for the classification and regression models are
presented in Table 3.15 and Table 3.16, respectively.
Table 3.15: Feature contribution to the prediction of the classification model.
Features
Attribution
TP
TN
FN
FP
Base value
0.675
0.675
0.675
0.675
Index
0.000
0.000
-0.002
-0.001
Stemp
-0.037
-0.007
-0.119
-0.031
Irra
0.303
0.006
0.860
0.470
Ptemp
-0.192
-0.014
-0.488
-0.180
HPow
0.603
0.064
0.527
0.305
DPow
0.103
-0.016
-0.008
0.256
HLoad
-0.458
-0.706
-1.045
-0.511
Predicted value
0.996
0.000
0.400
0.984
Table 3.16: Feature contribution to the prediction of the regression model.
Features
Attribution
TP
TN
FN
FP
Base value
0.59
0.59
0.59
0.59
Index
-86.86
-25.76
-51.94
-86.40
Stemp
-4.31
16.36
11.21
78.40
Irra
536.24
4.81
318.93
282.08
Ptemp
-299.68
-4.52
-123.20
-205.33
HPow
674.72
14.31
457.60
767.30
DPow
324.72
7.70
9.69
103.12
Predicted value
1145.43
13.49
622.88
939.77
Real value
1180.00
6.00
826.00
470.00
Predicted load
400
810
649
414
Real load
463
881
625
555
All selected local cases will be examined individually and analyzed in detail as follows.
As observations of the models are similar, for a single individual case, both classification
model and regression model will be analyzed together. To visualize and analyze the
contributions of each feature, force plots will be drawn for each case using SHAP [60].
In force plots, all positive contributions are in red color, while all negative contributions
are in blue, and the length of each feature characterizes the magnitude of contribution.
Thus, the influence of each feature can be directly seen from the plots for further analysis.
For True Positive (TP) case, it can be seen that in Fig. 3.18, Irra, Hpow and DPow
have large positive contributions and promote the predicted solar power generation to a
==PAGE:61==
3.3 Interpretability
49
400
200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
PTemp = 41.2
Hour15 = 1.0
HPow = 1390.0
Irra = 607.8
DPow = 1202.0
higher
lower
base value
1145.43
f(x)
Figure 3.17: Force plot of the regression model for TP case.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
HLoad = 400.0
PTemp = 41.2
HPow = 1390.0
Irra = 607.8
DPow = 1202.0
higher
lower
base value
1.00
f(x)
Figure 3.18: Force plot of the classification model for TP case.
higher value. Despite the fact of high solar panel temperature, it does not drop the solar
power generation a lot and the regression model still predicts a rather high solar power
generation. After comparing the solar generation with the predicted load in Table 3.16,
the regression model can provide a prediction that solar power will exceed load. For
the classification model, as can be seen in Fig. 3.17, in the same way, due to the large
positive attributions of Hpow and Irra, although HLoad has significant negative effects
on the model output, the model still makes a prediction close to 1, which shows that the
model is quite confident that the solar power will exceed load demand in this predicted
hour. In this case, both models agree on the forecast and perform well.
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
Hour15 = 1.0
PTemp = 10.3
STemp = 9.7
HPow = 98.0
DPow = 16.0
Irra = 5.1
higher
lower
base value
13.49
f(x)
Figure 3.19: Force plot of the regression model for TN case.
For True Negative (TN) case, from Fig. 3.19, it can be seen that the two most
influential features Irra and HPow have very small attributions, which generates a very
low predicted solar power generation.
Thus, when compared to the previous hour’s
relatively high load (810 KWh), the model predicts that solar power is smaller than
load in this hour.
For the classification model, because of the low Irra and HPow
==PAGE:62==
3.3 Interpretability
50
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
HLoad = 810.0
HPow = 98.0
Irra = 5.1
higher lower
base value
0.00
f(x)
Figure 3.20: Force plot of the classification model for TN case.
contributions and great negative HLoad contributions, the model also outputs a quite
confident prediction (close to 0) that the solar power generation will be smaller than
load in this hour. In this case, both models make perfect predictions too.
Next, let us look into the cases when models fail and determine why the models make
wrong predictions. For False Negative (FN) case, in Fig. 3.22, the model predicts 622.88
KWh solar power output. The prediction should be mainly attributed to two reasons:
1) a relatively low irradiance forecast which turns out to be inaccurate concluded from
the real output, and 2) a medium previous hour’s generation. Thus, these two features’
small or medium contributions finally generate a medium-leveled model output value.
As a result, when compared to the predicted load demand (649 KWh), it predicts that
solar power is smaller than load in this hour. However, the predicted power output
and predicted load are very close to each other: there is only a difference of around
26 Kwh between them. For the classification model, the aforementioned two features’
performance, along with a high negative contribution of HLoad due to its relatively high
feature value, finally contributes to a lower predicted model output (0.4). However, it
is also found that the classification model’s output can be thought of being unsure as
it is close to 0.5, which corresponds to the results from the regression model that the
predicted power output is very close to the predicted load demand.
200
100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
PTemp = 17.7
Hour14 = 1.0
HPow = 756.0
Irra = 286.2
higher
lower
base value
622.88
f(x)
Figure 3.21: Force plot of the regression model for FN case.
For False Positive (FP) case, high contributions of HPow, Irra and DPow finally
output a high predicted solar power and a confident prediction (close to 1) that the
solar power is larger than load. However, it turns out that both models are wrong. The
reason is that solar power generation has a dramatic decrease in this hour which the
irradiance forecast fails to detect. Although the solar power is high in the last hour
which is 1012 KWh, it drops sharply to 470 KWh. Meanwhile, the failure of irradiance
==PAGE:63==
3.3 Interpretability
51
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
HLoad = 649.0
PTemp = 17.7
Irra = 286.2
HPow = 756.0
higher
lower
base value
0.40
f(x)
Figure 3.22: Force plot of the classification model for FN case.
forecast also contributes to the wrong prediction of the two models. What is worse, the
load demand also increases sharply by nearly 35% to 555 KWh in this hour, which is
very uncommon. Although the load increase is not the principal cause of model failure,
it does exacerbate the prediction errors.
400
200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
PTemp = 28.2
Hour15 = 1.0
HPow = 1012.0
Irra = 545.0
DPow = 1066.0
STemp = 14.5
higher
lower
base value
939.77
f(x)
Figure 3.23: Force plot of the regression model for FP case.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
HLoad = 414.0
PTemp = 28.2
Irra = 545.0
HPow = 1012.0
DPow = 1066.0
higher
lower
base value
0.98
f(x)
Figure 3.24: Force plot of the classification model for FP case.
To sum up, according to the most effective interpretation of the models evaluated by
ablation tests: DeepLIFT with extreme baseline, the most influential features for solar
power forecast are HPow (previous hour’s generation) and Irra (Irradiance forecast).
These two features, together with HLoad (previous hour’s load) have significant impacts
on the classification model output as well. From the examined individual cases, it is
also proven that if the solar irradiance forecast is accurate and the solar power does not
have a sudden dramatic change within one hour, both models can work very well and
provide accurate predictions.
==PAGE:64==
3.4 Uncertainty quantification
52
3.4
Uncertainty quantification
The neural networks only provide a point estimation of solar power generation. As a
result, the regression neural network in section 3.3 is ”equally confident” in all described
TP, TN, FP, FN cases, while hours during a day are not equivalent in terms of solar
irradiance. How to quantify the confidence of neural network predictions for safer and
more robust decisions still remains a question. In this section, uncertainty quantification
of neural networks is proposed to address this problem.
Uncertainty estimation of models allows increasing eﬀiciency of the decision-making
process. To be more specific, the designed neural networks can perform autonomously
in hours with low uncertainty. On the contrary, in those hours with high estimated
uncertainty, the models can request the intervention of the domain expert or simply
take a safer and more robust decision to avoid potential risks. As introduced in section
2.3, aleatoric uncertainty and epistemic uncertainty are quantified by designing Bayesian
neural networks. The epistemic uncertainty is estimated simply through Monte Carlo
sampling, while the aleatoric uncertainty is estimated by placing a distribution over the
output of the model output, so both predictive mean ˆy as well as predictive variance
(aleatoric uncertainty) σ2 can be estimated.
0
10
20
30
40
Hour
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Solar power prediction (KWh)
Epistemic uc
aleatoric uc(95% CI)
Figure 3.25: Uncertainty estimation using Bayesian neural networks.
Firstly, the implementation details and performance of Bayesian neural networks to
estimate uncertainties will be briefly introduced. The surrogate variational posterior
distribution and prior distribution are defined the same as what has been introduced in
section 2.3. When training the Bayesian neural networks, the hyperparameter tuning
process is skipped and the same structure of the final regression neural network is directly
used. The neural network is composed of three hideen layers and the number of neurons
==PAGE:65==
3.4 Uncertainty quantification
53
in each hidden layer is 30, 20, and 10 in the direction from input to output.
The
activation function for all hidden layers is Relu. Regularization is not considered here
because using a posterior distribution to some extent avoids overfitting. The loss function
is negative log likelihood and the optimizer is Adam. After training with a learning rate
of 10−3, the implemented Bayesian neural networks can effectively predict solar power
generation with an RMSE of around 150.80 KWh, which is slightly higher than the error
of regression neural network (142.53 KWh).
With the trained BNN, one sample plot of uncertainty estimation for the test set
using Bayesian neural network is shown in Fig. 3.25, where red lines depict different
predictions made through Monte Carlo sampling, and the standard deviation of these
values can be interpreted as epistemic uncertainty. Green lines represent the standard
deviation of the model’s output distribution, which can be seen as aleatoric uncertainty.
In Fig. 3.25, it can be found that both uncertainties are high when solar power
generation is high and most of these hours happen in the middle of the day. Moreover,
aleatoric uncertainty is high in some abnormal hours which are the exact hours we would
like to detect to avoid inaccurate predictions. Summing up aleatoric uncertainty and
epistemic uncertainty using Equation 2.63, a probabilistic forecast with 95% confidence
can be plotted in Fig. 3.26.
0
10
20
30
40
Hour
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Solar power prediction (KWh)
Predict
Real
95% CI
Figure 3.26: Probabilistic forecast.
In Fig. 3.26, the prediction of solar power (mean of output distribution) is in red
color and the real power output is in green. Besides, the gray areas represent the 95%
confidence intervals. From the plot, it can be concluded that while for some abnormal
hours, the predicted solar output is far from the real one, it is still within the confidence
interval.
==PAGE:66==
3.4 Uncertainty quantification
54
Bayesian neural networks allow finding the reason for this difference, which is a
sudden change in solar irradiance. For example, in hour 38 (marked with a black dashed
line), the overall uncertainty is very high and reaches 245.55 KWh, which is the second
highest uncertainty for all hours in the sample plot. The high uncertainty successfully
detects the sudden drop of solar power generation. Let the regression neural network
predict this hour and examine the interpretation of the model output. The force plot is
plotted below in Fig. 3.27.
200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
PTemp = 18.6
HPow = 1110.0
Irra = 630.5
DPow = 1268.0
STemp = 7.8
higher
lower
base value
1150.96
f(x)
Figure 3.27: Interpretations of regression model output at hour 38.
In Fig. 3.27, it can be seen that due to high feature values of HPow, Irra and DPow,
they have great positive contributions to the model output, predicting a very high solar
power generation of 1150.96 KWh in this hour. However, the actual generation turns
out to be only 750 KWh. There is a nearly 50% forecast error in this hour, and it is
successfully detected by the implemented Bayesian neural networks.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4
Conclusion
In this thesis, several contributions towards interpretability and uncertainty estimation
of neural networks in aggregated solar power generation and load forecast are made. In
order to help aggregated prosumers make bid/offer decisions in the electricity market,
two neural networks are designed to provide directives for them: one regression neural
network for solar power forecast, and one classification neural network to predict whether
solar power generation will exceed load demand in hourly resolution.
Firstly, through an elaborate hyperparameter tuning process and model training,
the final regression model has an RMSE of only 142.51 KWh, and the classification
model has an prediction accuracy of 91.4%. When in the implementation of models, to
avoid negative solar power predictions in the regression model and reduce unwanted false
positive cases in the classification model, some improvements are made to the networks
for better performance of models.
However, without becoming human interpretable, neural networks can hardly be
implemented in such critical infrastructures as power systems. To interpret the designed
classification and regression neural networks, both global and local feature analysis are
conducted. In the thesis, five gradient-based attribution methods: Sensitivity, Gradient
* Input, Integrated gradients, Expected gradients, and DeepLIFT, with two different
baselines: extreme baseline and average baseline, are implemented.
The analysis of
global feature importance is conducted using five methods. It can be concluded that
all five methods apart from Sensitivity method agree that load and solar generation of
the previous hour and solar irradiance have the greatest impacts on the outcome of the
neural network. After a quantitative ablation-type evaluation of the different methods
with different baselines, DeepLIFT with extreme baseline turns out to be the most
effective method in highlighting the most important features for both models. Based on
the interpretation of DeepLIFT with extreme baseline, influences of different features
to model output as well as the inner workings of two networks are revealed. Besides,
several interesting dependencies between the weather parameters and outputs of the
neural networks are also discovered.
After deeper research on individual cases, a better understanding of different features’
contributions to the output in different situations is obtained.
The main source of
inaccurate forecasts is also discovered: the sudden dramatic change of solar irradiance,
which can be caused, for example, by cloud movements. To resolve this problem, one
Bayesian neural network is implemented to determine the uncertainty of PV output
in each hour. Thus, those hours with high uncertainty can be known beforehand and
considered more carefully by the domain expert. Neural networks, interpreted by the
gradient-based methods and complemented with estimated uncertainty, can provide
==PAGE:68==
4 Conclusion
56
more robust and explainable forecasting for decision-makers.
This work can be seen as the first step towards the creation of continuously learning
neural networks for PV forecasting. Currently, the designed neural networks can perform
autonomously in hours with low uncertainty, while in the hours with high uncertainty,
the models can request the intervention of the domain expert.
The neural network
can learn from the decisions made by the human expert, which will further enhance
the neural network performance and make a step towards autonomous forecasting and
decision-making algorithms performing on the above human level.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Wojciech Samek and Klaus Robert Müller. “Towards Explainable Artificial Intelligence”.
In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 11700 LNCS (2019),
pages 5–22. issn: 16113349. doi: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 28954 - 6 _ 1. arXiv:
1909.12072.
[2]
Sebastian Lapuschkin et al. “Unmasking Clever Hans predictors and assessing what
machines really learn”. In: Nature Communications 10.1 (2019), pages 1–8. issn:
20411723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-08987-4. arXiaforementionev: 1902.10178.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-08987-4.
[3]
Dan Cireşan, Ueli Meier, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “A committee of neural networks
for traﬀic sign classification”. In: Proceedings of the International Joint Conference
on Neural Networks July 2011 (2011), pages 1918–1921. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2011.
6033458.
[4]
Chaochao Lu and Xiaoou Tang. “Surpassing human-level face verification performance
on LFW with GaussianFace”. In: Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence 5.Lowe 2004 (2015), pages 3811–3819. arXiv: 1404.3840.
[5]
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyung Hyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. “Neural machine
translation by jointly learning to align and translate”. In: 3rd International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 - Conference Track Proceedings (2015),
pages 1–15. arXiv: 1409.0473.
[6]
David Silver et al. “Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree
search”. In: Nature 529.7587 (2016), pages 484–489. issn: 14764687. doi: 10.1038/
nature16961. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature16961.
[7]
James Zou et al. “A primer on deep learning in genomics | Nature Genetics”. In:
Nature Genetics 51.January (2019). url: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41588 - 018 - 0295 - 5 ? WT . ec _ id = NG - 201801 & #38 ; sap - outbound - id =
4CE115C445E8C823DC69D56B4DA2CBA8C0FA56D4.
[8]
Jessica Vamathevan et al. “Applications of machine learning in drug discovery
and development”. In: Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 18.6 (2019), pages 463–477.
issn: 14741784. doi: 10.1038/s41573-019-0024-5. url: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1038/s41573-019-0024-5.
[9]
Mihalj Bakator and Dragica Radosav. “Deep learning and medical diagnosis: A
review of literature”. In: Multimodal Technologies and Interaction 2.3 (2018). issn:
24144088. doi: 10.3390/mti2030047.
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
58
[10]
James A. Momoh. “Smart grid design for eﬀicient and flexible power networks
operation and control”. In: 2009 IEEE/PES Power Systems Conference and Exposition,
PSCE 2009 (2009). doi: 10.1109/PSCE.2009.4840074.
[11]
Hong Zhou, Ming Rao, and Karl T. Chuang. “Artificial Intelligence Approach to
Energy Management and Control in the HVAC Process: An Evaluation, Development
and Discussion”. In: Developments in Chemical Engineering and Mineral Processing
1.1 (1993), pages 42–51. issn: 19322143. doi: 10.1002/apj.5500010105.
[12]
Anil Kumar Pathak, S Chatterji, and Mahesh S Narkhede. “Artificial Intelligence
Based Optimization Algorithm for Demand Response Management of Residential
Load in Smart Grid”. In: International Journal of Engineering and Innovative
Technology 2.4 (2012), pages 136–141.
[13]
Adel Mellit and Soteris A. Kalogirou. “Artificial intelligence techniques for photovoltaic
applications: A review”. In: Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34.5
(2008), pages 574–632. issn: 03601285. doi: 10.1016/j.pecs.2008.01.001.
[14]
Muhammad Qamar Raza and Abbas Khosravi. “A review on artificial intelligence
based load demand forecasting techniques for smart grid and buildings”. In: Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 50 (2015), pages 1352–1372. issn: 18790690. doi:
10.1016/j.rser.2015.04.065. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.
2015.04.065.
[15]
Murat Kuzlu et al. “Gaining insight into solar photovoltaic power generation
forecasting utilizing explainable artificial intelligence tools”. In: IEEE Access 8
(2020), pages 187814–187823. issn: 21693536. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3031477.
[16]
Helena Martín et al. “Analysis of the net metering schemes for PV self-consumption
in Denmark”. In: Energies 14.7 (2021). issn: 19961073. doi: 10.3390/en14071990.
[17]
Vera Reis et al. “Demand aggregation for photovoltaic self-consumption”. In: Energy
Reports 5 (2019), pages 54–61. issn: 23524847. doi: 10.1016/j.egyr.2018.11.
002. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2018.11.002.
[18]
S. Ibrahim et al. “Linear regression model in estimating solar radiation in perlis”.
In: Energy Procedia 18 (2012), pages 1402–1412. issn: 18766102. doi: 10.1016/j.
egypro.2012.05.156.
[19]
Bismark Singh and David Pozo. “A Guide to Solar Power Forecasting using ARMA
Models”. In: arXiv (2018), pages 0–3. issn: 23318422. arXiv: 1809.03574.
[20]
Mohamed Abuella and Badrul Chowdhury. “Solar power forecasting using support
vector regression”. In: arXiv (2017). issn: 23318422.
[21]
Caroline Persson et al. “Multi-site solar power forecasting using gradient boosted
regression trees”. In: Solar Energy 150 (2017), pages 423–436. issn: 0038092X.
doi: 10.1016/j.solener.2017.04.066. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
solener.2017.04.066.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
59
[22]
Mohamed Abuella and Badrul Chowdhury. “Solar power forecasting using artificial
neural networks”. In: 2015 North American Power Symposium, NAPS 2015 (2015).
doi: 10.1109/NAPS.2015.7335176.
[23]
Hussein Sharadga, Shima Hajimirza, and Robert S. Balog. “Time series forecasting
of solar power generation for large-scale photovoltaic plants”. In: Renewable Energy
150 (2020), pages 797–807. issn: 18790682. doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2019.12.131.
url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2019.12.131.
[24]
Vishnu Suresh et al. “Forecasting solar PV output using convolutional neural
networks with a sliding window algorithm”. In: Energies 13.3 (2020). issn: 19961073.
doi: 10.3390/en13030723.
[25]
Yucun Lu, Ilgiz Murzakhanov, and Spyros Chatzivasileiadis. Neural network interpretability
for forecasting of aggregated renewable generation. 2021. arXiv: 2106.10476 [cs.LG].
[26]
Yucun Lu. Interpretability. 2021. url: https://github.com/yucunlu/Interpretability.
[27]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press,
2016. url: http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[28]
Michael A. Niesen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination Press,
2015. url: http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/index.html.
[29]
Yicheng Zhang, Jipeng Gao, and Haolin Zhou. “Breeds Classification with Deep
Convolutional Neural Network”. In: ACM International Conference Proceeding
Series (2020), pages 145–151. doi: 10.1145/3383972.3383975.
[30]
Quoc V. Le, Navdeep Jaitly, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. “A Simple Way to Initialize
Recurrent Networks of Rectified Linear Units”. In: (2015), pages 1–9. arXiv: 1504.
00941. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1504.00941.
[31]
Ethan Irby. Gradient Descent vs Stochastic GD vs Mini-Batch SGD. 2021. url:
https://medium.com/analytics-vidhya/gradient-descent-vs-stochastic-
gd-vs-mini-batch-sgd-fbd3a2cb4ba4.
[32]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Lei Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization”.
In: 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 - Conference
Track Proceedings (2015), pages 1–15. arXiv: 1412.6980.
[33]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from
Overfitting”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 15.56 (2014), pages 1929–1958.
url: http://jmlr.org/papers/v15/srivastava14a.html.
[34]
James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. “Random search for hyper-parameter optimization”.
In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 13 (2012), pages 281–305. issn: 15324435.
[35]
Bryce Goodman and Seth Flaxman. “European union regulations on algorithmic
decision making and a ”right to explanation””. In: AI Magazine 38.3 (2017),
pages 50–57. issn: 07384602. doi: 10.1609/aimag.v38i3.2741. arXiv: 1606.
08813.
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
60
[36]
Marco Ancona et al. “Gradient-Based Attribution Methods”. In: Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence
and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 11700 LNCS (2019), pages 169–191. issn:
16113349. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-28954-6_9.
[37]
Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. “Towards A Rigorous Science of Interpretable
Machine Learning”. In: Ml (2017), pages 1–13. arXiv: 1702.08608. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1702.08608.
[38]
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. “Deep inside convolutional
networks: Visualising image classification models and saliency maps”. In: 2nd
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014 - Workshop
Track Proceedings (2014), pages 1–8. arXiv: 1312.6034.
[39]
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. “Axiomatic attribution for deep
networks”. In: arXiv (2017). issn: 23318422.
[40]
Gabriel Erion et al. “Improving performance of deep learning models with axiomatic
attribution priors and expected gradients”. In: (2019). arXiv: 1906.10670. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.10670.
[41]
Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. “Learning important
features through propagating activation differences”. In: 34th International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML 2017 7 (2017), pages 4844–4866. arXiv: 1704.02685.
[42]
Marco Ancona et al. “Towards better understanding of gradient-based attribution
methods for deep neural networks”. In: 6th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2018 - Conference Track Proceedings (2018), pages 1–16.
arXiv: 1711.06104.
[43]
Matthew D. Zeiler and Rob Fergus. “Visualizing and Understanding Convolutional
Networks”. In: Analytical Chemistry Research 12 (2017), pages 40–46. issn: 22141812.
doi: 10.1016/j.ancr.2017.02.001.
[44]
Google LLC. “AI Explanations Whitepaper”. In: (2019), pages 1–28.
[45]
Grégoire Montavon et al. “Explaining nonlinear classification decisions with deep
Taylor decomposition”. In: Pattern Recognition 65 (2017), pages 211–222. issn:
00313203. doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2016.11.008. arXiv: 1512.02479.
[46]
Daniel Smilkov et al. “SmoothGrad: removing noise by adding noise”. In: (2017).
arXiv: 1706.03825. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03825.
[47]
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. “Understanding the diﬀiculty of training deep
feedforward neural networks”. In: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research 9
(13–15 May 2010). Edited by Yee Whye Teh and Mike Titterington, pages 249–256.
url: http://proceedings.mlr.press/v9/glorot10a.html.
[48]
Pascal Sturmfels, Scott Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. “Visualizing the Impact of
Feature Attribution Baselines”. In: Distill (2020). doi: 10.23915/distill.00022.
url: https://distill.pub/2020/attribution-baselines.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
61
[49]
Sara Hooker et al. “A benchmark for interpretability methods in deep neural
networks”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32.NeurIPS
(2019). issn: 10495258. arXiv: 1806.10758.
[50]
Mengjiao Yang and Been Kim. “Benchmarking Attribution Methods with Relative
Feature Importance”. In: 2018 (2019). arXiv: 1907.09701. url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1907.09701.
[51]
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. “”Why should i trust
you?” Explaining the predictions of any classifier”. In: Proceedings of the ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
13-17-August-2016 (2016), pages 1135–1144. doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939778.
arXiv: 1602.04938.
[52]
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. “Explaining and
harnessing adversarial examples”. In: 3rd International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2015 - Conference Track Proceedings (2015), pages 1–11.
arXiv: 1412.6572.
[53]
Dario Amodei et al. “Concrete Problems in AI Safety”. In: (2016), pages 1–29.
arXiv: 1606.06565. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06565.
[54]
Chuan Guo et al. “On calibration of modern neural networks”. In: 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017 3 (2017), pages 2130–2143. arXiv:
1706.04599.
[55]
Eyke Hüllermeier and Willem Waegeman. “Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in
machine learning: an introduction to concepts and methods”. In: Machine Learning
110.3 (2021), pages 457–506. issn: 15730565. doi: 10.1007/s10994-021-05946-3.
arXiv: 1910.09457.
[56]
Charles Blundell et al. “Weight uncertainty in neural networks”. In: 32nd International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2015 2 (2015), pages 1613–1622. arXiv:
1505.05424.
[57]
Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal. “What uncertainties do we need in Bayesian deep
learning for computer vision?” In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 2017-December.Nips (2017), pages 5575–5585. issn: 10495258. arXiv: 1703.
04977.
[58]
Western Power Distribution Innovation. Presumed Open Data: Data Science Challenge.
2021. url: https://www.westernpower.co.uk/pod-data-science-challenge.
[59]
J Zhang et al. “Metrics for Evaluating the Accuracy of Solar Power Forecasting”.
In: 3rd International Workshop on Integration of Solar Power into Power Systems
17436.October (2013), pages 1–10.
[60]
Scott M. Lundberg and Su In Lee. “A unified approach to interpreting model
predictions”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2017). issn:
10495258. arXiv: 1705.07874.
==PAGE:74==
