==PAGE:1==
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variaбґ
tional Autoencoders
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
Master Thesis
August, 2021
By
Darius Chira and Ilian Haralampiev
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cusбґ
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000бґ0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000бґ00бґ0000бґ000бґ0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000бґ0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000бґ00бґ0000бґ000бґ0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Machine Learning,
Deep Learning and Image Analysis.
Darius Chira бґ s193157
Signature
Date
Ilian Haralampiev бґ s193163
Signature
Date
ii
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Image superбґresolution (SR) techniques are used to generate a highбґresolution image
from a lowбґresolution image. Deep Generative Models (DGMs) such as autoregressive
(AR) models, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) have proven to be effective at modelling highбґresolution images. In particular,
GANбґbased SR models have achieved stateбґofбґtheбґart SR performances. Whereas VAEs
used to be criticised for their feeble generative performances, there is now strong evбґ
idence that deep VAEs can outperform both GANs and AR models for highбґresolution
image generation. The project aims at exploiting the most recent deep VAE, specifically
the stateбґofбґtheбґart VDVAE generative model to improve upon existing SR models.
This project uses transfer learning to utilize the VDVAE model combined with an extra
component in order to support the task of image superбґresolution with four times upscalбґ
ing (x4). The model we present, which we call VDVAEбґSR, was able to output sharper
images than a purely Convolutional Neural Network method EDSR (winner of NTIRE17
SR Challenge) in terms of FID score and even comparing to the popular GANбґbased SR
method ESRGAN (winner of PIRMбґ2018 SR Challenge).
The source code can be found on: https://github.com/dman14/VDVAEбґSR
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
[Ole Winther], [Professor], [Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science]
[Andrea Dittadi], [Phd Student], [Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sciбґ
ence]
[Valentin Victor David Julien Lievin], [Phd Student], [Department of Applied Mathematбґ
ics and Computer Science]
We would like to thank our Professor, Ole Winther, for helping and offering us the opбґ
portunity to work on this Master Thesis after participating in his Deep Learning course at
DTU, which provided us with the prerequisites needed for this work.
Also, we would like to give our thanks to Andrea and Valentin, acting as our supervisors
throughout the whole thesis period, helping us with feedback, the development of the
project, and all the other problems that we encountered on the way.
iv
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Image superбґresolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Generative models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Deep Variational Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Superбґresolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Experimental protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
SetбґUp
9
3.1
Data sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Data preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Train Setбґup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Test Setбґup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Deep Learning Methods
13
4.1
Fundamentals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Vanilla Variational Autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
Conditional Variational Autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.4
Very Deep Variational Autoencoder (VDVAE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5
Development
23
5.1
Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Evidence lower bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.3
Transfer learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.4
Trivial
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.5
VDVAE LR encoder architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.6
LRбґactivations in posterior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.7
Final Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Results
35
6.1
Model VDVAEбґSR 64
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.2
Model VDVAEбґSR 256 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
7
Final Remarks
41
7.1
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Bibliography
45
A Appendix 1
49
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Image superбґresolution
Image superбґresolution has long been considered as one of the harder tasks in image
processing until the emerging of deep learning with its huge progress in the field of comбґ
puter vision. The super resolution task and more precisely single image superбґresolution
SISR consists of producing a highбґresolution image from its lowбґresolution counterpart.
Great improvements in the field have started with purely Convolutional Neural Network
models and currently dominated by GANбґbased and autoregressive methods.
1.1.1
Main Objective
Until now, Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) based models havenБ─≥t made an impact in the
field, which could be explained as they have been criticised for their feeble generative
performances compared to other stateбґofбґart generative models. However, recent imбґ
provements in VAEs with the introduction of hierarchical structure of latent variables and
findings that performance can be enhanced by greater stochastic depth among others,
show strong evidence that deep VAEs can outperform both GANs and AR models for
highбґresolution image generation.
The main objective of this thesis is to use such models and adapt a stateбґofбґtheбґart deep
VAE for the task of superбґresolution.
Some of the intentions of this thesis is to achieve:
Б─╒ Review stateбґofбґtheбґart Deep VAE models (LVAE, NVAE, VDVAE)
Б─╒ Review stateбґofбґtheбґart techniques for SR (SRGAN, ESRGAN)
Б─╒ Implement and test baseline SR models
Б─╒ Develop an SR model based on VDVAE
Б─╒ Design an experimental protocol to compare our methods against existing methods
1.1.2
Applications
Even though the project and the topic are more research oriented, there are vast amount
of applications and services using similar techniques in the industry. This can range from
graphic processing tasks, as superбґsampling for spatial antiбґaliasing, or virtual superбґ
resolution for rendering, digital zoom in cameras, or photo resolution restoration.
During the recent years, as Deep Learning became more popular as well, upscalling methбґ
ods using it started to emerge. One example of this is the Deep Learning Super Sampling
(DLSS) developed by NVIDIA that by using dedicated tensor core were able to achieve
higher FPS (framesбґperбґsecond) and lower computation strain in video processing.
This is one area where Deep VAEs could improve the present stateбґofбґtheбґart as the synбґ
thesis time is generally much lower for them when compared to autoregressive models.
Child 2020.
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:11==
2
Related Work
In this section, we present a carried out literature review divided in two parts. The first part
focuses on deep variational autoencoders, where more details about two recent and best
performing works in the field are given, as well as a brief comparison between them. The
second part consists of different methods for image superбґresolution that have achieved
best results and they have been divided in categories depending on the type of the used
model.
2.1
Generative models
The deep generative models are separated into three categories: Variational autoenбґ
coders (VAEs), Generative adversarial networks (GANs) and Autoregressive models (AR).
The VAEs (Kingma and Welling 2013) generate new data, sampling from a learned latent
space. They model an explicit but intractable density function, which cannot be optimized
directly, so the lowerбґbound of likelihood is optimized instead. GANs (Goodfellow et al.
2014), on the other hand, perform an implicit density estimation and learn to generate from
true data distribution using a game theory approach. The third category бґ autoregressive
models, use explicit density estimation as the VAEs, but the density function is tractable,
meaning that they are able to optimize the exact likelihood. An example of an autoreбґ
gressive model is the PixelCNN (Oord et al. 2016), which generates pixels sequentially
depending on previous pixels of the image.
In terms of comparison between the three methods, the generation process of the autoreбґ
gressive model such as PixelCNN is much slower as it is performed sequentially. Based
on training, GANs have long been considered as tricky and unstable to train, but able
to achieve very good sample quality once training is carried properly. The VAEs have
mostly been known for their not so good sample quality, but latest research show sigбґ
nificant improvement by using more flexible approximations and adding structure to the
latent variables. In the next section we are describing some of the most recent papers
that use VAE architecture, while achieving stateбґofбґtheбґart results in image generation.
2.2
Deep Variational Autoencoders
Standard Variational Autoencoders have been criticized for their inability to accurately
model complex datasets and that they generate blurry images, which has been considered
to be because of the usage of a similarity metric in pixel space (Dosovitskiy and Brox
2016). More recent work however, argues that the poor performance of VAEs has been
due to lack of model expressiveness when modelling more complex input distributions
and shows that deep hierarchical VAEs can model complex data structures and generate
sharp natural images (Maalц╦e et al. 2019).
Standard VAEs that consist of several layers of stochastic latent variables have been
problematic to train because of the so called prior collapse, where the top stochastic latent
variable collapses into the prior. The Ladder Variational Autoencoder (LVAE) (Sц╦nderby
et al. 2016) is one of the first works that handles this issue by proposing a new inference
model which shares information with the generative model resulting in an interaction beбґ
tween the bottomбґup and topбґdown model of the VAE. However, it has been observed that
in practice LVAEs, with a very deep hierarchy of stochastic latent variables, experience
variable collapse (Maalц╦e et al. 2019).
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
3
==PAGE:12==
One of the most recent works in the field is the Nouveau VAE (NVAE) (Vahdat and Kautz
2020), which is a deep hierarchical VAE built for image generation. The authors claim that
their goal is to Б─²make VAEs great againБ─² and they introduce a network architecture with a
main building block being depthwise convolutions in the generative model. The depthwise
separable convolutions (Chollet 2017) increase the receptive field of the network, which
improves modelling longбґrange correlations in data and specifically for faces бґ the uniform
skin tone and leftбґright symmetry. Another difference from previous work is that the NVAE
uses batch normalization (BN), which the authors have investigated that it is an important
component for successful results of deep VAEs. Additionally, they propose techniques for
solving instability issues during training, such as residual parameterization of the approxiбґ
mate posteriors and spectral regularization. Another important technique that NVAE uses
is the inverse autoregressive flows (IAF) (Kingma, Salimans, et al. 2016) in the encoder
network, which is a type of normalizing flow with the main feature that it scales well to highбґ
dimensional space. This technique provides more expressive distributions and since its
only used in the encoder network, sampling time is not increased because of it. In terms
of quantitative results however, the authors find out that the performance of the NVAE
is only slightly improved by the usage of flows. Nevertheless, the NVAE outperforms the
thenбґcurrent stateбґofбґtheбґart nonбґautoregressive and VAE models and closes the gap with
autoregressive ones. When looking into the qualitative results, the generated images of
faces look sharp with much better hair details and diversity compared to two other flow
models images presented in the paper. Vahdat and Kautz 2020
Another recent work in the field of deep VAEs is the Very Deep Variational Autoencoder
(VDVAE) (Child 2020). In the beginning of the paper, the authors argue that deep VAEs
should at least match the performance of autoregressive models. In this line of thought,
they claim that depth is key in order to improve performance and achieve better results
than autoregressive models, while proposing an architecture that can scale to a higher
number of stochastic layers. This network architecture is composed by residual blocks
similar to ResNet blocks (He et al. 2016), but not the same as the depthwise separable
convolutions of the NVAE generative model. Another difference from the NVAE model
is the usage of residual scaling, nearestбґneighbor upsampling and gradient skipping for
performance and stability improvement. When experimenting with a 48 layer network,
where layers were not conditioned on each other, the authors of VDVAE found out that
statistical depth, independent of other factors, is correlated with performance. In terms of
quantitative results, VDVAE outperforms NVAE and PixelCNN type autoregressive modбґ
els, achieving higher likelihoods with fewer parameters. Comparing it with autoregressive
models specifically, the VDVAE generates samples much faster, which could be very benбґ
eficial in realбґtime applications. Child 2020
Comparing the NVAE and VDVAE model, the NVAE introduces some powerful compoбґ
nents in their network architecture like depthwise separable convolutions, residual normal
distributions, spectral regularization and normalizing flows, and provides quite a few techбґ
niques for improving the training of the model. On the other hand, the VDVAE focuses
more on the idea that depth of the stochastic layers of the VAE matters on performance
and shows that it can outperform other VAE and some autoregressive models, and achievбґ
ing this without using the complex components of the NVAE.
2.3
Superбґresolution
2.3.1
CNN Based
One of the first studies that achieved quite good results in the area of superбґresolution is
the SRбґCNN (Dong, Loy, He, et al. 2015), based on a threeбґlayer CNN structure, using a
4
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:13==
bicubic interpolated lowбґresolution image as an input to the network. Afterwards, with the
proposal of residual neural networks (ResNet) (He et al. 2016), which provide fast training
and better performance for deep architectures, numerous works have adapted ResNets
and its modifications. One such work is the SRбґResNet (Ledig et al. 2017), that was
used in GAN implementation and another work is SRбґDenseNet (Tong et al. 2017), where
the model size was further expanded in order to improve performance. Another popular
work, which we have seen many superбґresolution methods compare with, is the Enhanced
Deep Super Resolution network (EDSR) (Lim et al. 2017). It again uses ResNets similar
to the architectures of SRбґResNet but with the modification that the authors remove batch
normalization from the residual block. They achieve impressive results and get the first
place on the NTIRE2017 SuperбґResolution Challenge.
2.3.2
GAN Based
One of the currently best performing image superбґresolution algorithms is the ESRGAN
(X. Wang et al. 2018), which is an enhanced version of the SRGAN (Ledig et al. 2017).
The SRGAN is based on gated adversarial networks with the idea that the lowбґresolution
image is passed as an input to the generator network and the discriminator network tries
to distinguish between the superбґresolution output produced by the generator network and
the original highбґresolution image. The authors of SRGAN argue that PSNR does not necбґ
essarily reflect perceptually better SR results and use an extensive mean opinion score
(MOS) for evaluating perceptual quality. With that in mind, SRGAN introduces a percepбґ
tual loss different from previous work, based on adversarial as well as content loss. The
ESRGAN builds up on SRGAN by improving the architecture adding ResidualбґResidual
Dense Block (RRDB) for better performance compared to the ResNet used in SRGAN.
Also, enhanced discriminator is used based on Relativistic GAN (JolicoeurбґMartineau
2018) and the features before the activation loss are used to improve perceptual loss.
With these modifications, ESRGAN is able to achieve first place on the PIRMбґSR Chalбґ
lenge 2018 (Blau et al. 2018) with the best perceptual index.
2.3.3
Transformer Based
Since the introduction of Transformers by (Vaswani et al. 2017), Transformers and attenбґ
tion based architectures have been dominating the field of Natural Language Processing,
quickly becoming best performing when compared to other methods used at the time as
LSTMs or RNNs. Some of the most popular implementations being models as: BERT
(Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) (Devlin et al. 2019), GPT
(Generative Preбґtrained Transformer) (Radford and Narasimhan 2018)(Liu et al. 2019),
or T5 (TextбґtoбґText Transfer Transformer) (Raffel et al. 2020).
With the impressive results in other fields, transformers entered in vision too, being used
for multiple tasks as image classification, object detection, and even superбґresolution, with
models such as Yang et al. 2020 which achieve really good results in superбґresolution,
more specifically in texture recovery. In order to achieve this, multiple parts come together
in the final model, including a Texture Transformer consisting of a learnable texture exбґ
tractor, relevance embedding module, hardбґattention module for feature transfer, and a
softбґattention module for feature synthesis. Another detail about the model is that in order
to attain more details about the lowбґresolution textures, the model uses 4 images as input:
the lowбґresolution image, the highбґquality reference image, a 4x bicubic upsampled lowбґ
res image, and a ref image that has been downбґsampled and upбґsampled sequentially.
Transformers also showed impressive results in image generations, as shown in Esser,
Rombach, and Ommer 2021 which showed the potential of them in highбґresolution Images
by heavily improving over previous stateбґofбґtheбґart techniques in related fields as image
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
5
==PAGE:14==
completion. Also with the advancements of Dosovitskiy, Beyer, et al. 2020, transformers
have been seen achieving really good results when compared with CNNs over the same
amount of training time.
2.3.4
VAE Based
One recent work that has adopted a VAE architecture for image superбґresolution is the
srVAE (Gatopoulos, Stol, and Tomczak 2020). In this work, the authors use a bijective
model to obtain a richer prior distribution corresponding to RealNVP (Dinh, SohlбґDickstein,
and Bengio 2016). Furthermore, the architecture consists of three latent variables: y is a
downscaled version of the original image and u and z are stochastic latent variables. The
interaction between the variables is represented on the probabilistic graphical model on
fig. 2.1.
(a) Generative part
(b) Variational part
Figure 2.1: srVAE Graphical model (Gatopoulos, Stol, and Tomczak 2020)
The joint probability is described as:
p(p, z, y, u) = p(x|y, z)p(z|y, u)p(y|u)p(u)
And the approximate posterior is expressed as:
q(z, y, u|x) = q(z|y, x)q(u|y)q(y|x)
The idea behind using the second stochastic variable u is that it allows to capture the
lowбґlevel information as it is based on the compressed representation y, while the latent
variable z produces the highбґlevel features of the data.
In order to generate a superбґresolution image given its lowбґresolution counterpart y, the
process is as follows: u Б┬╪q(u|y) Б┬▓Б├▓z Б┬╪p(z|y, u) Б┬▓Б├▓x Б┬╪p(x|z, y).
For the encoder and decoder, the authors use DenseNet (G. Huang et al. 2017) archiбґ
tecture. Gaussian as well as discretized logistic mixture likelihood (Salimans et al. 2017)
probability distributions are used in the model. Based on the qualitative results, the auбґ
thors conclude that the novel twoбґstep process is able to successfully first capture the
global structure of the image through the latent variable u and then add the local structure
using the latent variable z resulting in a sharp image.
6
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:15==
Another relevant work introduces the AIPO and AIPOбґR models (Harvey, Naderiparizi,
and Wood 2021) in the field of image completion with the possibility to be extended for
superбґresolution tasks as well. The authors of the paper use the aforementioned VDVAE
model taking advantage of its hierarchical architecture in order to produce images with
highбґlevel details. In order to condition the VAE on the incompleted image, they propose
a partial encoder к├q(z|к├I) where к├I is the corrupted image. The probability distribution of the
completed images given their incompleted counterparts is approximated as:
pmodel(I|к├I) Б┴┬
Б┬╚
pmodel(I|z)к├q(z|к├I)dz
and sampling from this approximation can be achieved by: z Б┬╪к├q(бЇ|к├I) Б┬▓Б├▓I Б┬╪pmodel(I|z).
The authors propose two approaches for training, where the first one is derived from
maximising logpmodel(I|к├I) and the second one is based on maximising a lower bound
on logpmodel(к├I) named AIPO (amortized inference with partial observations) and AIPOбґR
(amortized inference with partial observations and the reverse KL) respectively. For the
AIPO model The lower bound pmodel(I|к├I) is similar to an unconditional VAE lowerбґbound
logpmodel(I) with the difference that the prior p(z) is replaced with the partial encoder
к├q(z|к├I).
A graphical representation of the AIPO model is observed on fig. 2.2 on the right, while
a hierarchical VAE unconditioned model is shown on the left. The architecture consists
of 3 groups of latent variables, the blocks ho, ..., hL represent the deterministic hidden
states of the decoder, the orange lines represent the encoder, the black lines represent
the decoder and the partial encoder is represented by the blue lines.
(a) Unconditioned VAE
(b) AIPO
Figure 2.2: AIPO Graphical model (Harvey, Naderiparizi, and Wood 2021)
In order to speed up the training process, the authors of the AIPO model have used a
pretrained generator and encoder, while training only the partial encoder. Based on the
achieved quantitative and qualitative results, the authors conclude that the AIPO model
outperforms the baselines that is compared with producing diverse and plausible image
completions. Harvey, Naderiparizi, and Wood 2021.
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
7
==PAGE:16==
2.4
Overview
Based on the conducted literature review, we observe that recent works on deep variaбґ
tional autoencoders show impressive results in generation tasks and especially the VDбґ
VAE that focuses on depth as a key component of the architecture achieving stateбґofбґtheбґ
art performance. In the field of image superбґresolution, GANбґbased are currently one of
the best performing in the field, while emerging Transformerбґbased methods show a great
potential. To the best of our knowledge, there are not any studies that use deep variational
autoencoders for superбґresolution. Based on the notable results of VDVAE for image genбґ
eration, we believe that with the right adaptation, it should be able to obtain results at least
as close to the current top performing algorithms in the area of superбґresolution.
2.5
Experimental protocol
In order to compare our model with other image superбґresolution techniques, we built
an experimental protocol where we include EDSR бґ Convolutionalбґbased and ESRGAN бґ
GANбґbased methods. We were able to find code and official preбґtrained models from the
creators of those methods on Github: Son 2017 and X. Wang 2018.
To make sure the output the same results as in their corresponding papers, we tested
them on common datasets for all of them. We use the bicubic interpolation to downscale
the images and then calculate the quality measure metrics PSNR and SSIM on the YcbCr
channel. These processing techniques are common for the two papers and for most of
the superбґresolution methods overall, which we explain further in section 3.4.
We show the PSNR and SSIM scores on table 2.1 , where it can be seen that the produced
results for each model are very close to the official metrics on the papers.
Model/
Dataset
Set5
Set14
Urban100
PSNR
SSIM
PSNR
SSIM
PSNR
SSIM
EDSR exp. prot.
32.09
0.88
28.33
0.77
26.04
0.78
EDSR official
32.46
0.90
28.80
0.79
26.64
0.80
ESRGAN exp.prot.
32.71
0.88
28.74
0.78
27.04
0.81
ESRGAN official
32.73
0.90
28.99
0.79
27.03
0.81
Table 2.1: Comparison between official paper scores and our experimental protocol
Numerical differences can be expected as some of the functions, for example the bicubic
interpolation is used on the actual MATLAB software for some of the papers and others
use a nonбґofficial Python implementation of that function. However, when performing
the comparison of our model to the others in chapter 6, we use the same functions as
implemented in our experimental protocol to produce quality measure scores for all the
models.
8
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:17==
3
SetбґUp
This chapter will focus on the general preбґrequirements for the development of the model,
as the general setбґup, used data and data sets, preprocessing of the data, and training
and test methods employed for the development and for the benchmarking of the models
made.
3.1
Data sets
During the development of the project, multiple datasets were used in order to satisfy the
criteria that we have set.
For the reasons of making the benchmarks and comparisons closer to the truth later on,
it was decided to use the same datasets that most of the other models are using for both
testing and training.
3.1.1
Training Dataset
For training, the DIV2K dataset, introduced by Agustsson and Timofte 2017, was used.
The DIV2K dataset consists of 800 RGB high definition high resolution images for training,
100 images for validations, and 100 pictures for testing. As seen in fig. 3.1, there are a
diversity of pictures and types of pictures in the dataset, not limited by any restrictions as
the type of shot (portrait, scenery, object shot, etc.).
Figure 3.1: Example images from the DIV2K dataset
3.1.2
Testing Datasets
For the testing sets, the most popular benchmarking datasets commonly used for this
purpose were used. between them there are:
Б─╒ Set5: Firstly introduce by Bevilacqua et al. 2012 itБ─≥s a dataset consisting of 5 pictures
often used with the purpose of testing performance of image related tasks.
Б─╒ Set14: Introduced by Zeyde, Elad, and Protter 2010 consists of 14 images. Adopted
by the image processing field, these images are often seen and widely recognised.
Б─╒ T91: is a dataset from BasicSR (Basic Super Restoration) n.d. mainly consisting of
cropped images of flowers.
Б─╒ General100: Found in Dong, Loy, and Tang 2016, the dataset made for superбґ
resolution, consists of 100 pictures with a varying sizes from 710 x 701 to 131 x
112.
Б─╒ Urban100: From J.бґB. Huang, Singh, and Ahuja 2015 is a dataset of 100 images
consisting of building and urban scenes.
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
9
==PAGE:18==
Б─╒ BSD100: Seen firstly in Martin et al. 2001, the Berkeley Segmentation Dataset and
Benchmark was made with the purpose of creating a more standardized process of
comparing results and papers.
Б─╒ Manga109: compiled and introduced by Matsui et al. 2016, it consists of 109 images
of manga volumes drawn by manga artists from Japan. intended to be used for
academic research on the media processing of Japanese manga, it is often used as
a benchmark dataset.
Figure 3.2: Example images from the test datasets. In order: Set14, BSD100, Urban100,
Manga109
3.2
Data preprocessing
Before using the data as input to the networks, firstly it will be preprocessed to accomбґ
modate the fixed input size of the models and to ease the process of downбґscaling and
upбґscaling. There are two steps: the dataset preprocessing, and the model specific preбґ
processing.
3.2.1
Dataset preprocessing
When creating a dataloader for a specific model, all the images are going to get preproбґ
cessed in order to deal with different restrictions. This is exemplified in fig. 3.3
Б─╒ After loading the data, as the size of all images vary, they will be resized according
to the specification of the used model, or specific resolution that will be tested.
Б─╒ After the resize, some of the images have different ratios, and in order to normalize
this aspect, the images are going to be center cropped to get square inputs.
Б─╒ As a last adjustment before extracting the lowбґresolution image, the image is checked
to be divisible by the scale factor, otherwise it will be readjusted again by one pixel.
Б─╒ The image resulted afterwards is considered the high resolution image, or the ground
truth in the analysis afterwards. The same image is going to be down scaled by the
scaling factor and the lowбґresolution image, or the input to the networks will be obбґ
tained.
Б─╒ As a last step, all the images are transformed into tensors in order to be able to be
used as inputs to the models.
3.2.2
Model Specific preprocessing
After the standard preprocessing of the dataset, based on specific requirements of the
different models implemented, another preprocessing function will be used. For the case
of the VDVAEбґSR, the images require a few extra adjustments before being used.
Firstly the scale of the data is going to be changed from a 0 to 1 range to бґ1 to 1. The
10
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:19==
channels are going to be permuted, and then itБ─≥s going to be multiplied by a shift and
scaled based on the training dataset statistics. This can be seen in the last image in
fig. 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Example image through the preбґprocessing step. First Image is the original
one, followed by a rescaled version, center cropped, downбґscaled, and then normalized
version.
3.2.3
Bicubic Interpolation
Both for downsampling the images for the preбґprocessing, and for upsampling them for
testing purposes (ex. baseline) the Bicubic Interpolation method is used.
Bicubic Interpolation is a method often used for image processing, and superбґresolution
used as a baseline. The advantages of it are that is an easy to use method, fast, and
better then others like bilinear or nearestбґneighbor methods. The methods uses 4x4 pixel
patches of the images, with the general formulation of it, as described in Gavade and
Sane 2013, is:
Suppose the function values f and the derivatives fx, fy, and fxy are known at the four
corners (0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 1), and of the unit square. The interpolated surface can
then be written as:
p(x, y) =
3
Б┬▒
i=0
3
Б┬▒
j=0
aijxiyj
The interpolation problem then consists of determining 16 coefficients aij.
3.3
Train Setбґup
For both the development and training, multiple tools were used to ease the process.
For the convenience of having access to a GPU, and to be able to work in the cloud
with access to more data, Google Colab was used. Google Colab is a cloud service that
gives access to a jupyter notebook environment with GPU capabilities. Asides from that,
WandB was used in order to be able to track all the experiments, plot the needed graphs
and extract samples from the models during training in an organized manner.
The Training Setбґup was made in a way to be able to change models, hyperбґparameters,
datasets, and different options for the training in the fastest way in order to make the
training, testing and development more streamlined for the higher number of needed exбґ
periments.
3.4
Test Setбґup
In order to be able to test and compare the developed networks, a test setбґup was made
with multiple metrics to track. Then the testing routine accepts either a picture or a set of
pictures that will be ran through the model, after which the comparison metrics are going
to be calculated based on the output image and the reference image. The used metric
are:
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
11
==PAGE:20==
Б─╒ PSNR (Peak Signalбґtoбґnoise Ratio): commonly used for measuring the quality of
reconstructions for superбґresolution, image generation, or compression algorithms,
it is expressed as the ratio between maximum possible power of a signal and the
power of corrupting noise, as described in Horц╘ and Ziou 2010. Usually it is defined
as:
PSNR = 10 бЇ log10( MAX2
I
MSE )
where MAXI is the maximum possible value of a pixel (255 generally), and MSE is
the mean squared error between the reconstructed image and the reference image.
Б─╒ SSIM (Structural Similarity index measure): is a metric used for the perceived qualбґ
ity, measuring the similarity between two pictures.It is usually regarded as a closer
metric to human perception and in some cases used for the same reason even
though in works like Nilsson and AkenineбґMцІller 2020 it is shown that it is not adбґ
hering to human visual properties.Even with this being true, the measurement grew
vastly in popularity after itБ─≥s appearance, being very useful in benchmarks and comбґ
parisons. In Z. Wang et al. 2004 it is defined as:
SSIM(x,y) =
(2б╣xб╣y + c1)(2о┐xy + c2)
(б╣2x + б╣2y + c1)(о┐2x + о┐2y) + c2
Depending on factors such: luminance, contrast, and structure.
Б─╒ FID (Frц╘chet inception distance) is another metric used to measure the the quality
of pictures, usually from created images from generative models such as GANs or
VAEs. the FID is based on a comparison between the distribution of two datasets: a
generated one, and a real one. Instead of using and comparing the samples directly,
the FID compares the activations of the last layer of a inceptionбґv3 model, using the
generated and real images as input. Heusel et al. 2018 proposed using the the
Frц╘chet distance between multivariate gaussians like:
FID = ||б╣r Б┬▓б╣g||2 + Tr(нёr + нёg Б┬▓2(нёrнёg)1/2)
where Xr and Xg represent the multiбґdimensional activations of a inceptionбґv3 pool3
layer, for both the real and generated images respectively.
Usually a 2048бґdimensional activations are used, representing a dataset with 2048
samples, but methods with either higher and lower number of samples have been
experimented with. In our case, most of the test datasets have a lower number of
images.
All pictures are converted from RGB to YCbCr and the metrics are run on the Y chanбґ
nel (luma component) of the pictures. The reason for this is that it has been seen( as
in Pisharoty, Jadhav, and Dandawate 2013) that the performance of the evaluation on
the luminosity channel of a YCbCr instead of RGB provides better results and closer to
the actual perceived structural noise of the image. It also serves for the convenience of
benchmarking and comparisons as most of the related works also calculated their metrics
on this representation of the images. Another note to be made is that this method of picбґ
ture conversion is used during the testing phase exclusively, the training and validation
still only using the RGB scale.
12
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:21==
4
Deep Learning Methods
The Deep Learning Methods Chapter describes the methods and techniques used for the
development of the model. Alongside VAEs, CVAEs, and Deep VAEs, other techniques
as ResNets, CNNs, and specific activation functions will be presented, which are used in
the model we are adapting in the next chapter.
4.1
Fundamentals
4.1.1
Convolutional Neural Networks
The main difference between an artificial neural network (ANN) and a convolutional neural
network (CNN) is that in an ANN each neuron in a layer is connected to all the other
neurons of the previous layer, while in a CNN each unit receives input only from a small
subset of units known as the unitБ─≥s receptive field.
The procedure is done using kernels where a kernel (ex. 3x3, 5x5 etc.) has learnable
weights and is slid over the input performing elementбґwise multiplication and summation
which results in convolved features. Afterwards, an elementбґwise nonбґlinear transformaбґ
tion is performed. Figure 4.1 shows an example of an image, kernel filter and the resulting
convolved features.
Figure 4.1: Convolution feature extraction
Pooling operations can also be performed and are usually used for downбґsampling the
input. Such operations do not involve any weights and they are a simple way to change
the dimension of the data by just selecting the size of a window/patch that is slid over
the input. Most popular pooling techniques are max and average pooling, where for max
pooling, the maximum value of the window is the output for each window. For average
pooling, the output of the pooling operation for each window corresponds to calculating
the mean value.
4.1.2
Activation functions
The activation functions are used to add nonбґlinearity and are usually applied on each
layer of a neural network. One of the most popular activation functions for deep neural
networks is the ReLU, which maps all negative values to zero while keeping the same
value for all the positive ones: ReLU(x) = max(0, x). Another activation function that we
need to describe as it is used in the model we are adapting for image superбґresolution is
the Gaussian Error Linear Unit or GeLU (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016) which is performed
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
13
==PAGE:22==
by multiplying the input with the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) for Gaussian
Distribution ні(x) as: GeLU(x) = x бЇ ні(x).
4.1.3
ResNets
Residual networks or ResNets were first introduced in He et al. 2016 in order to tackle the
problem where the accuracy of networks with many number of layers rapidly decreases
when the model is about to converge, also known as the degradation problem in deep
neural networks.
The ResNet consists of neural networks with skipping connections as shown on fig. 4.2a
which represents one residual block.
(a) ResNet block
(b) ResNet bottleneck
Figure 4.2: ResNet building blocks
The skip connections perform an identity mapping without any extra parameters and are
added to the output of the stacked layers resulting in F(x) + x. This way, in the case
where the identity mapping x is the optimal solution, it can be easily produced by just
setting F(x) to zero, instead of being learned by F(x) in the conventional case without
the skip connection. The original ResNet consists of 34 convolutional layers with 3x3
filters and ReLU activation function on the output of each block.
Another version of the ResNet is the bottleneck architecture made for deeper networks
with a building block that consists of three layers instead of two where the middle one
serves as a bottleneck with 3x3 convolutions, while the other two layers are 1x1. A diaбґ
gram is shown on fig. 4.2b. In terms of results, the ResNets tested with 50, 101 and 152
number of layers outperform the 34бґlayer one. He et al. 2016
4.2
Vanilla Variational Autoencoder
The derivation of the Variational Autoencoder in this section mainly follows the notation
used in the Deep Learning course at DTU (DTU 2020) and Doersch 2016.
4.2.1
Generative process and Intractability
As briefly introduced in 2.1, the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) is a generative model that
generates new data by sampling from a learned sampled space using probabilistic prinбґ
ciples. This way, the generative process includes the latent variable z, which is sampled
from the prior pн╦(z) and the observation variable sampled from the observation model
pн╦(x|z):
z Б┬╪pн╦(z), x Б┬╪pн╦(x|z)
14
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:23==
In order to find a model that fits well the data, it can be defined by maximizing the total
probability p(x) as:
н╦Б▀├:= argmax
н╦
pн╦(x) =
Б┬╚
z
pн╦(x|z)p(z)dz
(4.1)
where p(x) is parameterized by н╦ and the joint distribution pн╦(x, z) is expressed as the
likelihood pн╦(x|z) and prior p(z).
As the idea is to produce meaningful latent variables from which we can generate new
data, we can define a posterior distribution according to Bayes Theorem:
pн╦(z|x) = pн╦(x|z)pн╦(z)
pн╦(x)
However, in practice, p(x) is intractable as it needs to be evaluated over all the different
configurations of z, which makes the posterior p(z|x) also intractable.
4.2.2
Variational Inference
In order to solve the intractability issue, approximation of the posterior is required and it is
performed using Variational Inference (VI). The approximated posterior is introduced as:
qо∙(z|x) Б┴┬pн╦(z|x)
and usually chosen among the Gaussian family, parameterized by the mean б╣о∙(x) and
variance о┐о∙(x).
With the introduction of the approximate posterior qо∙(z|x), the marginal probability pн╦(x)
can be expressed as an expectation over the approximate posterior if we multiply and
divide by it inside the integral as:
pн╦(x) =
Б┬╚qо∙(z|x)
qо∙(z|x)pн╦(x, z)dz = Eqо∙(z|x)
[pн╦(x|z)pн╦(z)
qо∙(z|x)
]
4.2.3
Evidence Lower Bound
Based on JensenБ─≥s Inequality, which states that a function over an expectation is greater
than or equal to the expectation of the function with respect to some random variable X,
if the function is concave: logE(X) Б┴╔Elog(X), taking the logarithm on both sides of the
previous equation and applying JensenБ─≥s Inequality results in:
logpн╦(x) = logEqо∙(z|x)
[pн╦(x|z)pн╦(z)
qо∙(z|x)
]
logEqо∙(z|x)
[pн╦(x|z)pн╦(z)
qо∙(z|x)
]
Б┴╔Eqо∙(z|x)
[
logpн╦(x|z)pн╦(z)
qо∙(z|x)
]
where the right hand side is equivalent to the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) and can be
further derived to:
ELBO = Eqо∙(z|x) [logpн╦(x|z) + logpн╦(z) Б┬▓logqо∙(z|x)]
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
15
==PAGE:24==
The ELBO can be further expressed using KL divergence, which is a measure of similarity
between two distributions and has the properties of being nonбґnegative and not symmetric.
The KL divergence for two discrete probability distributions P and Q is calculated by the
following formula:
DKL(P||Q) =
Б┬▒
x
P(X)log P(X)
Q(X)
When applying the KL divergence, the ELBO can be written as:
ELBO = Eqо∙(z|x) [logpн╦(x|z)] Б┬▓DKL(qо∙(z|x)||pн╦(z))
(4.2)
where the first term on the right hand side of the equation is known as the reconstruction
error and the second term is the regularization. When optimizing the ELBO, there is a
tradeбґoff between these two terms. The reconstruction term measures the reconstruction
quality, where the expectation value is taken over the approximate posterior qо∙(z|x) and
the regularization term is pulling the approximate posterior to match the prior pн╦(z) as the
prior is usually fixed.
4.2.4
Reparameterization trick
As the ELBO is the lower bound to the logбґlikelihood logpн╦(x), in order to maximize the
likelihood, the ELBO needs to be maximized. This can be achieved using the backpropбґ
agation algorithm as the approximated posterior and generative model are implemented
using neural networks. However, backpropagation is not possible to flow in the layer
when sampling z from the approximate posterior z Б┬╪qо∙(z|x) as there is a stochastic
node within the network. To be able to backpropagate through that layer, the so called
Б─²reparameterization trickБ─² is used, which changes the stochastic process to happen in an
input node. This is achieved by first sampling a noise variable from a fixed distribution
о╣ Б┬╪N(0, I) and then computing z using a deterministic and differentiable transformation
z = б╣(X) + нё1/2(X) Б┬≈о╣. Doersch 2016.
4.2.5
Implementation
The implementation of Variational Autoencoders is similar to the classical autoencoders,
which have an encoder and decoder architecture. For VAEs, the encoder represents the
approximate posterior qо∙(z|x) that tries to produce meaningful latent variables from X and
the decoder represents the observation model pн╦(x|z) that generates data points using the
latent variables z. The approximate posterior is usually chosen as a diagonal Gaussian
distribution:
qо∙(z|x) = N(z|б╣о∙(x), о┐о∙(x)I)
where the mean б╣о∙(x) and variance о┐о∙(x) are the outputs of the neural network.
The prior pн╦(z) is usually chosen as a Gaussian with a mean of zero and variance of one
pн╦(z) = N(0, I). The observation model pн╦(x|z) is implemented using a neural network
where the input latent features are sampled from the approximate posterior during training
and sampled from the prior when in generation mode.
16
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:25==
4.3
Conditional Variational Autoencoder
In this section, we introduce the conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE) as in order to
perform superбґresolution we need to generate very specific data and this is not possible
using only a vanilla VAE.
The loss for the conditional variational autoencoder is derived similarly as for a normal
variational autoencoder, where again we want to maximize the marginal probability similar
to 4.2 but this time conditioned on a random variable which could be for example a lowбґ
resolution image y:
pн╦(x|y) =
Б┬╚
z
pн╦(x|y, z)p(z|y)dz
(4.3)
Using Bayes Theorem with multiple conditions, the inference model can be expressed as:
pн╦(z|x, y) = pн╦(x|z, y)pн╦(z|y)
pн╦(x|y)
(4.4)
where again pн╦(x|y) is intractable and needs to be approximated using Variational Inferбґ
ence:
qо∙(z|x, y) Б┴┬pн╦(z|x, y)
The ELBO can be derived once again using the JensenБ─≥s Inequality corresponding to:
logpн╦(x|y) = logEqо∙(z|x,y)
[pн╦(x|z, y)pн╦(z|y)
qо∙(z|x, y)
]
Б┴╔Eqо∙(z|x,y)
[
logpн╦(x|z, y)pн╦(z|y)
qо∙(z|x, y)
]
= ELBO
And further shown as:
ELBO = Eqо∙(z|x,y) [logpн╦(x|z, y) + logpн╦(z|y) Б┬▓logqо∙(z|x, y)]
When applying KL Divergence, the ELBO can be expressed as the reconstruction and
regularization term:
ELBO = Eqо∙(z|x,y) [logpн╦(x|z, y)] Б┬▓DKL(qо∙(z|x, y)||pн╦(z|y))
(4.5)
In terms of implementation, the random variable y is added as an input to the encoder as
well as the decoder. In addition, the prior becomes conditioned on the random variable y
resulting in pн╦(z|y) which can be implemented as a neural network.
4.4
Very Deep Variational Autoencoder (VDVAE)
As briefly explained in chapter 2 the Very Deep Variational Autoencoder is the current
stateбґofбґtheбґart, showing the best results compared to other VAEбґbased models and even
outperforming some autoregressive ones. Their work is mainly focused on increasing
performance with greater depth, which has also been shown in previous works as BIVA
(Maalц╦e et al. 2019) and NVAE (Vahdat and Kautz 2020). In this section, we will go more
into detail about the main propositions of the paper, the type of variational autoencoders
their research is based on, the architecture of the VDVAE and their experimental findings.
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
17
==PAGE:26==
4.4.1
Hierarchical Variational Autoencoders
Hierarchical Variational Autoencoders, first introduced in Ladder Variational Autoencoder
Sц╦nderby et al. 2016, consist of multiple layers of latent variables which are dependent
on each other. This results in a more flexible prior and posterior compered to just a diбґ
agonal Gaussian prior like the one used in Vanilla VAE section 4.2 which could be too
limiting. The VDVAE conditioning structure is adapted from the LVAE, where an iterative
interaction between a Б─²bottomбґupБ─² and Б─²topбґdownБ─² layers is achieved due to parameter
sharing between the inference and generative models in each layer. The prior and the
approximate posterior for a Kбґlayer model in the VDVAE paper are expressed as:
pн╦(z) = pн╦(z0)pн╦(z1|z0)...pн╦(zK|z<K)
qо∙(z|x) = qо∙(z0|x)qо∙(z1|z0, x)...qо∙(zK|z<K, x)
where pн╦(z0) is represented as a diagonal Gaussian distribution N(z0|0, I) and the latent
variable group z0 is at the top layer that corresponds to small number of latent variables
at low resolution. Intuitively, zK is at the bottom of the network having larger number of
latent variables at high resolution. (Child 2020).
4.4.2
Main propositions
The authors of the VDVAE have two main propositions in their argumentation that depth
is an important factor for hierarchical variational autoencoders.
The first one states that hierarchical VAEs generalize autoregressive models when the
number of stochastic layers of the VAE equals the dimension of the data D. The authors
show theoretically that if the approximate posterior q(z|x) just outputs the observed variбґ
ables in a given order and if the generator p(x|z) performs the identical function, the ELBO
becomes logpн╦(x) = logpн╦(z) = Б┬▒N
i=1 logpн╦(zi|z<i) = Б┬▒N
i=1 logpн╦(xi|x<i), which is the
equivalent of an autoregressive model over the observed variables. (Child 2020)
The second proposition states that shorter procedures such as a Kбґlayer VAE, where K
< D, are also learnable if such latent representation exist, which is usually the case for
images. This means that these models could learn a lowбґdimensional representation of
the data. The authors argue that the lowest possible value for K may be deeper than the
VAEs implemented so far and this is why they test hierarchical VAEs with a depth above
30 stochastic layers. (Child 2020)
4.4.3
Architecture of VDVAE
Bottomбґup path
The architecture of the VDVAE is shown on the diagram on fig. 4.3 where on the bottomбґup
path, the image passes through a number of residual blocks, followed by average pooling.
These concepts were previously explained in section 4.1 where the residual block is with
bottleneck architecture.
18
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.3: VDVAE Architecture
This procedure is repeated in order to calculate the features or so called Б─²activationsБ─² up
to the topбґmost layer of the bottomбґup path. Each convolutional layer of the residual block
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
19
==PAGE:28==
shown on fig. 4.4 is followed by a GELU activation function that was previously mentioned
in section 4.1.
Figure 4.4: Res Block (residual block)
Topбґdown path
The topбґdown path consists of so called Б─²topdownБ─² blocks shown on fig. 4.5
Figure 4.5: Topбґdown block
On the left side of the figure is where the approximate posterior for each layer qо∙(zi|z<i, x)
is being calculated by concatenating the output of the previous topdown block with the acбґ
tivations from the bottomбґup path and passing it through a convolutional neural network
20
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:29==
that outputs the mean and variance vectors of the diagonal Gaussian distribution. The
prior pн╦(zi|z<i) on the right is also parameterized by a convolutional neural network and is
also a diagonal Gaussian distribution. The unpooling layer consists of nearestбґneighbor
upsampling, which is a simple upsampling technique that just copies the value from the
nearest pixel. During training, the latent variable z is sampled from the approximate posбґ
terior, and when in generative mode, z is sampled from the prior.
Additional components
For initialization of the weights throughout the network, the default PyTorch weight iniбґ
tialization is used. Only the final layer of each residual block is scaled by
1
Б┬ 
N , with N
being the depth. The authors quantitatively show that this scaling increases stability and
performance for a model that consists of many number of layers. (Child 2020)
For training, the authors propose skipping the update of the weights when the gradient
norm is above a specified threshold and they ensure smooth training of the model using
this approach.
4.4.4
Experimental findings
Based on the performed tests, the authors found that statistical depth improves perforбґ
mance. They trained models on CIFARбґ10, ImageNetбґ32 and ImageNetбґ64 with a larger
number of stochastic layers, but with fewer parameters than related work and were able
to achieve better results than all nonбґautoregressive models and outperforming the Gatбґ
edPixelCNN/PixelCNN++ autoregressive model concluding that the stochastic depth exбґ
plains the gap between VAEs and autoregressive models. (Child 2020).
Another finding is that VAEs are able to learn hierarchical representation of the data as the
authors show that the latent variables at lowбґresolution explain almost the whole global
structure of the data while being only less than 1% of all the latent variables. The auбґ
thors argue that these hierarchical representations of the data are also efficient as higherбґ
resolution latent variables look like spatially independent on the resulting images. This
means that the latent variables at higher resolution can be emitted in parallel instead of
conditioning them on each other and this way making the sampling process much faster.
(Child 2020).
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:31==
5
Development
In this chapter the development process of the SRбґVDVAE is described. Each section
reports on the different parts of the model, and their additions to the task at hand. We base
our image superбґresolution model on the Conditional Variational Autoencoder introduced
in Section 4.3 and Very Deep Variational Autoencoder, Section 4.4.
5.1
Concept
We base our image superбґresolution model on the Conditional Variational Autoencoder
introduced in Section 4.3 and Very Deep Variational Autoencoder, Section 4.4. The goal
is to generate a highбґresolution image x, given its lowбґresolution counterpart y referring
to maximizing of the conditional probability as stated in Equation 4.3.
5.2
Evidence lower bound
The evidence lower bound used for the image superбґresolution can be expressed as the
ELBO for conditional variational autoencoder, but with slight modifications. Stating the
ELBO for CVAE here again as in Equation 4.5:
ELBO = Eqо∙(z|x,y) [logpн╦(x|z, y)] Б┬▓DKL(qо∙(z|x, y)||pн╦(z|y))
The approximate posterior qо∙(z|x, y) is conditionally dependent on both the high and low
resolution images. However, as the lowбґresolution image information is contained inside
the highбґresolution one, we can omit conditioning the posterior on y. In the above equaбґ
tion, the prior pн╦(z) is conditioned on the low resolution image y, resulting in pн╦(z|y).
Based on these changes, the ELBO can be expressed as:
ELBO = Eqо∙(z|x) [logpн╦(x|z, y)] Б┬▓DKL(qо∙(z|x)||pн╦(z|y))
(5.1)
The conditioned prior pн╦(z|y) can be expressed as a neural network that maps the low
resolution image to a distribution over the latent variables z. In the next few sections,
we experiment with a simple linear model as well as a more complex one, adopting the
bottomбґup path architecture from the VDVAE model and refer to it as LR encoder because
it is based on the inference network of the VDVAE. To make it more clear, we refer to the
VDVAE original model encoder and decoder as the HR encoder and HR decoder, someбґ
times omitting the HR in front of the decoder as we donБ─≥t have an LR decoder component.
Fig. 5.4 shows the architecture of one of the VDVAEбґSR model configurations we are
using, which should make this a bit more clear.
5.3
Transfer learning
The VDVAE models, as described in 4.4, were trained for 2.5 week on 32 V100 GPUs
in order to get the presented results. As a similar setбґup was out of our computational
capabilities, one of the main objective during the project was to be able to use a preбґ
trained VDVAE model in our architecture to drastically decrease the training time needed
for the development of our model.
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
23
==PAGE:32==
In the next subsection, the concept of using a preбґtrained generative model with an LR
Encoder for low resolution images is proved and it will serve as the first step in the develбґ
opment process.
For all the models that we train, we use the preбґtrained HR encoder of the VDVAE model
without updating its weights as we observed that the posterior samples are perfect quality
бґ same as the original images.
5.4
Trivial
To serve as a proofбґofбґconcept and to find out if the transfer learning is correctly impleбґ
mented, the first model created was the simplest way to introduce an LR encoder, which
we call a Trivial version. This model consists of a VDVAE with an additional LR encoder
with only one convolutional layer that serves just as a linear transformation to the desired
dimension (latent representation at the top of the network).
The equation for the conditioned prior using this method can be expressed as:
pн╦(z|y) = pн╦(z0|y)
K
Б┬▐
i=1
pн╦(zi|z<i, y)
where pн╦(z0|y) = N(б╣Linear(y), о┐2
Linear(y))
We decided to train two models based on this configuration. Taking advantage of the preбґ
trained model of the VDVAE, the difference between the two models is that the first oneБ─≥s
decoder is trainable, while the second one is fixed, where on both of them the decoders
are initialized with the preбґtrained weights.
5.4.1
Trainable Decoder
The results of the model with trainable decoder are shown on fig. 5.1 where the test
samples are conditioned on the lowбґresolution picture of the bird from Set5. The idea is
to show the visual improvement through the different phases of training. The Б─²distortionБ─²
graph represents the reconstruction error of the ELBO, while the Б─²rateБ─² represents the KL
divergence. The KL divergence presented on each of the following graphs is calculated
as the average over all the layers. We also show the evaluation metrics on the validation
dataset through training.
5.4.2
Fixed decoder
Another variation of the Trivial version was to see how the training performs when the
decoder is not trainable (not updating the weight parameters). The produced test samples
are shown on fig. 5.2. The metrics are quite similar except with the KL divergence where
we donБ─≥t see that decrease as in the previous model. Based on the quality of the images,
these are a bit sharper compared to the one with trainable decoder but still far off the
desired result.
5.4.3
Posterior Collapse
Based on the KL divergence metric and visual inspection of test samples, we believe that
the averaging out of the test samples for the version where the decoder is trainable could
be because of posterior collapse, a problem that often occurs in VAEs earliest described
in Bowman et al. 2015. This problem can happen when the decoder is expressive enough
and learns to ignore some or all of the latent variables resulting in the encoder to collapse
into the prior: qо∙(z|x) Б┴┬p(z). An example of pictures from a model with a heavily collapsed
posterior can be seen in fig. 5.3.
24
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:33==
(a) epoch 24
(b) epoch 96
(c) epoch 150
(d) Ref image
Figure 5.1: Picture (a), (b), and (c) are test samples taken during the training process,
while picture (d) is the reference image. The plots represent the tracked parameters
during training the Trivial model with trainable decoder. These include the distortion, rate
(klбґdivergence), and the elbo for both training and evaluation
(a) Sample1
(b) Reconstruction 1
(c) Sample 2
(d) Reconstruction 2
Figure 5.3: Example of images from a model with collapsed posterior.
5.5
VDVAE LR encoder architecture
The next step in the development process is to increase the complexity of the LR enбґ
coder as we concluded that the Trivial version is not expressive enough to produce latent
variables from which we can generate good samples for superбґresolution. Based on the
VDVAE architecture, we create a smaller version of the HR encoder similar to the preбґ
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
25
==PAGE:34==
(a) epoch 24
(b) epoch 96
(c) epoch 150
(d) Ref image
Figure 5.2: Picture (a), (b), and (c) are test samples taken during the training process,
while picture (d) is the reference image. The plots represent the tracked parameters
during training the Trivial model with fixed decoder. These include the distortion, rate
(klбґdivergence), and the elbo for both training and evaluation.
trained one, but without the bottom most layers that represent the 64 and 32 dimensions.
A lowбґresolution 16x16 image as shown on fig. 5.4 is used as the input to the new LR
encoder on the right.
26
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.4: VDVAEбґSR architecture
The prior equation is similar to the Trivial version with the difference that z0 is sampled
from a Gaussian distribution with mean and variance outputs of the LRencoder:
pн╦(z0|y) = N(z0|б╣LRenc(y), о┐2
LRenc(y))
We again experiment with two versions бґ one with a trainable and the other with fixed deбґ
coder to find out differences in training and visual results. The results from the model with
trainable decoder are shown on fig. 5.6 where the metrics of a fixed decoder are shown
on fig. 5.5.
Based on the shown results, we can conclude that the global features are better captured
than the Trivial models as we see black, yellow and green colors dominating the test samбґ
ples that should refer to the main colours of the toucan image.
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
27
==PAGE:36==
However, once again, the individual shapes on the image are not produced when samбґ
pling. Again, the KL divergence of the model with trainable decoder follows a similar
pattern as the Trivial model but we donБ─≥t observe samples that seem to average out. This
is a good sign as we hypothesize that having a trainable decoder is more useful when we
pass in more information from the LR encoder (not only on the top layer) as modified in
the next section.
(a) epoch 25
(b) epoch 60
(c) epoch 100
(d) Ref image
Figure 5.5: Picture (a), (b), and (c) are test samples taken during the training process,
while picture (d) is the reference image. The plots represent the tracked parameters
during training the VDVAEбґSR model with fixed decoder. These include the distortion,
rate (klбґdivergence), and the elbo for both training and evaluation
28
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:37==
(a) epoch 25
(b) epoch 60
(c) epoch 100
(d) Ref image
Figure 5.6: Picture (a), (b), and (c) are test samples taken during the training process,
while picture (d) is the reference image. The plots represent the tracked parameters during
training the VDVAEбґSR model with trainable decoder. These include the distortion, rate
(klбґdivergence), and the elbo for both training and evaluation
5.6
LRбґactivations in posterior
As we observed in the previous section, there was an improvement in capturing lowбґlevel
details, however, the model still lacked capturing highбґlevel ones. We hypothesize, that
we need to add more information to the decoder on all layers, not only on the top one, in
order to have better results.
Based on this argument, we made modifications in order to add the activations from the
LR encoder with the activations from the HR encoder before they are concatenated with
the input at each topdown block. This means that we are adding new information from
the LR encoder on each layer only to the posterior in the topбґdown block. We still feed
the activations of the top layer of the LR encoder to the top layer of the decoder as the
previous model. The diagram of how the activations are added is shown on fig. 5.7.
Based on this architecture, we rely on the KL divergence term to make the prior distriбґ
butions on each topdown block similar to the distributions of the approximate posterior,
which now consists also of activations from the LR encoder. The results of this model are
presented on fig. 5.8 and it can be seen that similarly to the model without added activaбґ
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.7: Topбґdown block adding activations in posterior
tions on each layer, this one is also not able to capture highбґlevel features properly.
Nevertheless, we learn that passing the extra information from the LR encoder only in the
posterior is not enough,reflected also in eq. (5.1), as especially during generative mode,
the model is not able to use the new information, which leads us to the next and final
model explained in the next section.
5.7
Final Model
5.7.1
Architecture
As seen in the last iteration, the model was still not able to capture enough information
besides global features. For this reason, instead of passing information from the LR enбґ
coder only at the top of the topбґdown path and in the posterior part of the decoder, we
modified it so we add activations directly to the input on each topбґdown block. This can
be seen in fig. 5.9. Using the LR activations in this manner, the new information will have
an impact on both the prior and the posterior sampling.
30
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:39==
(a) epoch 25
(b) epoch 60
(c) epoch 100
(d) Ref image
Figure 5.8: Picture (a), (b), and (c) are test samples taken during the training process,
while picture (d) is the reference image. The plots represent the tracked parameters
during training the VDVAEбґSR model with activations in the posterior. These include the
distortion, rate (klбґdivergence), and the elbo for both training and evaluation
Figure 5.9: Topбґdown block adding activations to both prior and posterior
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
31
==PAGE:40==
The conditioned prior is expressed again as:
pн╦(z|y) = pн╦(z0|y)
K
Б┬▐
i=1
pн╦(zi|z<i, y)
where pн╦(z0|y) = N(б╣LRenc(y), о┐2
LRenc(y))
The posterior can be expressed as:
qо∙(z|x, y) = qо∙(z0|x, y)
K
Б┬▐
i=1
qо∙(zi|z<i, x, y)
5.7.2
Gate parameters
Another addition to the model are the gate parameters seen in fig. 5.9, similar to the
concept introduced by Bachlechner et al. 2020. Using another trainable parameter like
that, initialized with zeros, will gradually introduce the new information to the preбґtrained
model.
During the development of the architecture it was observed that the model became really
hard to train and having really big gradients if the new information was introduced in an
uncontrolled manner. Having the gate parameters greatly improved the stability, and in
some case, made the models trainable where it was previously not able to train, exploding
the gradient to infinity and receiving NaN values in the calculated ELBO.
5.7.3
Results
The results of the training can be seen on fig. 5.10, where now highбґlevel details as well
as global features are captured by the model. Adding together all the presented methods,
end up in a model that is now able to more accurately sample a picture closer to a high
resolution version of the input LR image, having a higher degree of fidelity in both color
and shape estimation.
This can be seen even after only 200 epochs of training, on a smaller dataset (DIV2K).
More examples of images, alongside metrics and comparison between multiple models
can be seen in the next chapter, chapter 6.
32
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:41==
(a) epoch 30
(b) epoch 100
(c) epoch 200
(d) Ref image
Figure 5.10: Picture (a), (b), and (c) are test samples taken during the training process,
while picture (d) is the reference image. The plots represent the tracked parameters
during training the VDVAEбґSR final model architecture. These include the distortion, rate
(klбґdivergence), and the elbo for both training and evaluation
5.7.4
Overfitting
As observed on all the trained models from the evaluation graphs, the models seem to
overfit on the training data as we see an increase in the validation loss. For the final
model, this can be seen after around 25 epochs according to the elbo on fig. 5.10.
However, we decided to continue training as we were still able to see improvement on the
samples from the validation dataset as as it can also be seen on the bird from Set14 on
fig. 5.10. A reason for this could be that the likelihood that we are trying to maximize and
the perceptual quality are not necessarily correlated.
5.7.5
Comparison table
We show the differences between the models on section 5.7.5 to be more clear on what
exactly configuration has been used on each model.
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
33
==PAGE:42==
Model/
Configuration
pн╦(z0|y)
(activations passed
on top of the decoder)
Activations passed
in the posterior on
each layer
Activations passed
in the prior on each
layer
Gate parameters
Trivial
Yes
No
No
No
LR encoder
Yes
No
No
No
Activations in posterior
Yes
Yes
No
No
Final model
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Table 5.1: Comparison between models based on the different configurations used
34
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:43==
6
Results
In this section the final models for 64x64 images and 256x256 images, with all the modбґ
ification presented in chapter 5 are presented. The results, training methods, and comбґ
parisons with other stateбґofбґtheбґart models are shown in this chapter.
6.0.1
Training
The training of the two models are based on the final model architecture as described in
section 5.7, which includes passing the activations from the LR encoder to the decoder on
each layer as well as having the gate parameters for increased stability during training.
The training hyperparameters for both models are kept the same as the ones from the
VDVAEбґmodel shown on fig. 6.1
Figure 6.1: Figure of hyperparameters used during training. The table was taken from
Child 2020.
64бґresolution model
The 64бґresolution model has been trained on the DIV2K dataset, having an LRбґencoder
trained from scratch and an HR encoder and decoder preбґtrained on the ImageNet64
dataset, where the HR encoderБ─≥s weight parameters are not updated during training, but
the decoderБ─≥s parameters are being updated. The stochastic depth of the used preбґtrained
VDVAE model is 75 layers.
The training has been performed for 200 epochs using a batch size of 4. Each epoch conбґ
sists of 200 iterations on the training set (800 images) and 50 iterations on the validations
set (200 images).
256бґresolution model
Similar to the 64бґresolution model, we are utilizing the preбґtrained versions provided by
VDVAE for the 256бґresolution model as well, having the same weights update procedure
in both encoders and decoder. The only difference this time is that we initialize the weights
of the LRбґencoder with the preбґtrained model on ImageNet64 and the HR decoder and
encoder are preбґtrained on the FFHQ 256x256 dataset. The stochastic depth of the used
preбґtrained VDVAE model is 62 layers. The training has been performed for 95 epochs
as training time takes much longer than the 64бґresolution model. We use a batch size of
1, similar to the VDVAE model and so an epoch consists of 800 iterations for training and
200 iterations for validation. Samples conditioned on the lowбґresolution bird image from
Set5 during training are shown on fig. 6.2
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) epoch 5
(b) epoch 60
(c) epoch 95
(d) Ref image
Figure 6.2: Test samples throughout training for our model 256 resolution
6.0.2
Temperature
The Б─²temperatureБ─² t parameter between 0 and 1 is used in the VDVAE during sampling
from prior in generative mode where by default is equal to 1 in the equation:
pv = pv + I бЇ log(t)
where pv is the variance and I is the identity matrix having the same dimension as pv. Reбґ
ducing the temperature results in reducing the variance and so achieving more regularity
in the generated samples. fig. 6.3 and fig. 6.4 show samples with different temperature
for the 64 and 256 model respectively.
Figure 6.3: Prior sampling difference with varying temperature values for 64x64 pictures
Figure 6.4: Prior sampling difference with varying temperature values for 256x256 pictures
36
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:45==
6.1
Model VDVAEбґSR 64
This section presents the results for the 64бґresolution model showing test samples from
our model with temperatures 0.2 and 0.8 compared to samples generated from the two
other models that we use for comparison, namely the EDSR and ESRGAN. Additionally,
we also include the images generated by bicubic interpolation. The baboon and monarch
images from Set14 are used for comparison and shown on fig. 6.5 and fig. 6.6.
(a) LR
(b) Bicubic
(c) HR
(d) EDSR
(e) ESRGAN
(f) VDVAEбґSR(T=0.8)
(g) VDVAEбґSR(T=0.2)
Figure 6.5: Prior Samples comparison between multiple models for 16x16 to 64x64 on
the baboon picture of the Set14 DataSet
(a) LR
(b) Bicubic
(c) HR
(d) EDSR
(e) ESRGAN
(f) VDVAEбґSR(T=0.8)
(g) VDVAEбґSR(T=0.2)
Figure 6.6: Prior Samples comparison between multiple models for 16x16 to 64x64 on
the monarch picture of the Set14 DataSet
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
37
==PAGE:46==
6.1.1
Quantitative results
In table 6.1, we compare the methods using the PSNR and SSIM scores previously exбґ
plained in section 3.4 on each test dataset using our experimental protocol. Based on
the calculated scores on the 64бґresolution model, we see that EDSR performs best on
both PSNR and SSIM, while our model is second where there is a very small difference
between the temperatures 0.2 and 0.8. It is hard to say the results are justified comparing
them visually to the images on fig. 6.5 and fig. 6.6 as the lowбґresolution one consists of
small number of pixels only, so it is definitely difficult for all the models to output samples
close to the highбґresolution image. However it can be seen that the EDSR image seems
a bit more blurry than ESRGAN and our model even though it achieves the best scores.
Table 6.1: Table with the evaluation of the chosen model using PSNR and SSIM on the
Y Channel.The results are the average score on every dataset. All the images were
downscaled to 64x64 resolution, the lowбґresolution input image being a 4x downscaled
image of that as well (16x16)
Model/
DataSet
Bicubic
EDSR
ESRGAN
VDVAEбґSR(0.2)
VDVAEбґSR(0.8)
PSNR
SSIM
PSNR
SSIM
PSNR
SSIM
PSNR
SSIM
PSNR
SSIM
Set5
23.13
0.6621
26.13
0.8082
23.61
0.7283
24.90
0.7610
24.79
0.7600
Set14
23.43
0.6385
25.08
0.7484
22.63
0.6454
24.44
0.7187
24.44
0.7168
T91
25.03
0.6722
27.07
0.7782
24.30
0.6671
26.04
0.7324
26.01
0.7291
General100
23.53
0.6730
25.97
0.7884
23.31
0.6890
25.10
0.7522
25.08
0.7506
Urban100
22.36
0.5428
23.96
0.6701
21.68
0.5837
23.37
0.6344
23.35
0.6338
BSD100
25.10
0.6741
26.87
0.7679
23.81
0.6472
26.00
0.7294
25.95
0.7265
Manga109
20.84
0.5840
22.39
0.7081
19.74
0.5966
21.93
0.6859
21.89
0.6833
6.2
Model VDVAEбґSR 256
For the 256бґresolution model, we show the produced superбґresolution images from all
models based on two random images from the BSD100 dataset on fig. 6.7 and fig. 6.8.
(a) LR
(b) Bicubic
(c) HR
(d) EDSR
(e) ESRGAN
(f) VDVAEбґSR(T=0.8)
(g) VDVAEбґSR(T=0.2)
Figure 6.7: Prior Samples comparison between multiple models for 64x64 to 256x256 on
a test picture from BSD100
38
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:47==
(a) LR
(b) Bicubic
(c) HR
(d) EDSR
(e) ESRGAN
(f) VDVAEбґSR(T=0.8)
(g) VDVAEбґSR(T=0.2)
Figure 6.8: Prior Samples comparison between multiple models for 64x64 to 256x256 on
a test picture from BSD100
6.2.1
Quantitative results
We calculate PSNR and SSIM scores for the 256бґresolution model the same way as the
64бґresolution one and present the results for all the models and test datasets on table 6.2.
Based on the calculated scores, once again, EDSR shows best results on all datasets.
VDVAEбґSR is again on second place but this time we see a bit bigger difference between
the 0.2 and 0.8 temperatures, where the model with more regularity is better.
Table 6.2: Table with the evaluation of the chosen model using PSNR and SSIM on the
Y Channel.The results are the average score on every dataset. All the images were
downscaled to 256x256 resolution, the lowбґresolution input image being a 4x downscaled
image of that as well (64x64)
Model/
DataSet
Bicubic
EDSR
ESRGAN
VDVAEбґSR(0.2)
VDVAEбґSR(0.8)
PSNR
SSIM
PSNR
SSIM
PSNR
SSIM
PSNR
SSIM
PSNR
SSIM
Set5
28.88
0.8185
32.98
0.9025
30.92
0.8523
31.68
0.8850
31.06
0.8732
Set14
26.09
0.7261
28.75
0.8166
26.57
0.7330
28.04
0.7993
27.44
0.7787
T91
31.52
0.8452
35.32
0.9112
33.37
0.8606
34.02
0.8917
33.13
0.8731
General100
28.41
0.7957
32.14
0.8741
29.95
0.8128
31.15
0.8570
30.36
0.8382
Urban100
23.12
0.6229
25.58
0.7608
22.90
0.6704
24.96
0.7370
24.51
0.7188
BSD100
27.00
0.7101
28.94
0.7846
26.41
0.6921
28.24
0.7633
27.54
0.7370
Manga109
22.72
0.6867
25.78
0.8253
23.86
0.7645
25.22
0.8178
24.80
0.8029
The problem with PSNR and SSIM scores has been previously pointed out in several
works including SRGAN and ESRGAN as previously mentioned in chapter 2 where SRбґ
GAN has even created their own score called MOS using people that manually evaluate
test images giving them a score from 1 to 5 showing that the PSNR and SSIM scores
actually differ from human visual perception especially when new highбґlevel details are
generated.
This can be observed on the test samples previously shown on fig. 6.7 and fig. 6.8 that
EDSR lacks highбґlevel details compared to ESRGAN and VDVAE models but it is still
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
39
==PAGE:48==
favourite in the PSNR and SSIM scores. Because of this, we use the FID score metric
described in section 3.4 using the implementation on PyTorch by Seitzer 2020. We show
the results for the 256бґresolution model on table 6.3 where lower numbers indicate better
results. This time, the ESRGAN tops the table and EDSR is on third place. We also show
results produced with different temperatures by the VDVAEбґSR model, where this time
the 0.8 temperature has better score than the 0.2 temperature samples. This can also
be justified visually on the fig. 6.7 and fig. 6.8 when zooming in, observing that there are
more highбґlevel details synthesized by the 0.8 temperature images. The samples with
highest variance introduce more highбґlevel details as previously shown on fig. 6.4 and
this is correctly reflected in the scores as well.
Table 6.3: FID metric Table
Model/
DataSet
Bicubic
EDSR
ESRGAN
VDVAEбґSR(0.2)
VDVAEбґSR(0.8)
VDVAEбґSR(1)
T91
92.44
61.23
39.00
61.73
59.13
68.03
General100
113.68
68.99
42.52
67.22
63.78
70.72
Urban100
165.34
109.78
66.15
96.28
95.61
102.55
BSD100
146.36
124.45
66.87
95.89
82.27
85.75
Manga109
171.76
80.22
58.11
74.25
76.93
82.43
More output images from the different models with 256бґresolution on test dataset Set14
can be seen in the appendix A.
40
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:49==
7
Final Remarks
In this chapter we will summarize the project, discuss itБ─≥s strengths and shortcomings,
while also concluding the report. In the end some future works will be proposed and other
aspects that could be improved or worked upon.
7.1
Discussion
7.1.1
Impact of images cropping on metrics
The final results we obtain from our experimental protocol, when comparing the different
models based on the quality scores, are based on cropped images, so we can fit the
appropriate image dimension in our model resulting in the same height and width for the
output. However, this approach differs from other works like EDSR and ESRGAN where
it was possible to input any image resolution to their models resulting in not a square
image output as ours. This could be one of the reasons why we see difference between
the scores in the Results section and table 2.1 for the same models and datasets, where
table 2.1 was calculated without cropping the images. The other difference is the fact that
we produce output images that are smaller in dimension compared to the original test
datasets, while the other models calculate the scores with output samples that are the
same or with only a few pixels difference of the original images.
7.1.2
Adding activations strictly in prior (gradient explosion)
Something that we also need to comment on is the fact that for the final model we feed
the activations from the LR encoder to both the posterior and the prior in the topбґdown
path, which is different from what we are based on in eq. (4.5) as according to it, the LR
activations in the posterior could be omitted. We actually tried to train a model where
we feed the activations from the LR encoder to the prior only, but the training was not
stable resulting in many NaN values for the ELBO. This is why we had to go with the
configuration explained in the final model, but future work might be able to achieve stable
training possibly with the right hyperparameters.
7.1.3
Comparison against other VAEбґbased SR methods
Another model that could have been informative to compare with would be a VAEбґbased
superбґresolution model. However, there are only very few papers that we were able to find
and the only one that had an implementation on GitHub, which we discussed in chapter 2
as srVAE by Gatopoulos, Stol, and Tomczak 2020, outputs images only up to 32x32 diбґ
mension using x2 upscaling instead of x4, making it unfeasible to compare with our model.
It is important to mention that we also had an autoregressive model in our experimental
protocol that we had to remove in the end as we found out later that the superбґresolution
task is executed in a manner that is different than single image superбґresolution making
it not comparable with the other models in our experimental protocol.
7.1.4
Training challenges
Another aspect of the project that could be discussed is the training and training enviбґ
ronment used. As the network was really big ( 180 million parameters) even by using
preбґtrained parts of the network the training time needed was quite long. The preбґtrained
models used were trained for 2.5 weeks on 32 V100 GPUs. This is an amount of comбґ
puting power that we did not have access to, but by using the preбґtrained models in our
development this time was cut to a time frame between 24бґ72 hours for most of our modбґ
els, training on either a P100 or a V100 GPU, as those were the available GPUs in the
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
41
==PAGE:50==
development platform that we chose (Google Colab). A problem that we had was when
training the 256бґresolution model as training was very slow and we had to wait and be
lucky to get a v100 GPU from Google Colab to be able to train faster.
7.2
Conclusion
Through this thesis, we investigated the use of Deep Variational Autoencoders for the purбґ
pose of generating SuperбґResolution images. Even though more research and developбґ
ment can be conducted in the future (presented in the next section), based on the results
presented in chapter 6, we can conclude that the project and its results are satisfying as
they are comparable to models that are both winners on superбґresolution challenges from
years 2017 and 2018 that still hold high ranking on official leaderboards. Based on our
findings,it can be feasible to say that VAEбґbased models can achieve even greater results
in the future of superбґresolution.
7.3
Future Work
7.3.1
Overfitting and use of larger datasets
Most of the models shown during the report, even though PSNR and SSIM still increase
over time, show clear signs of overfitting. This is mainly because of the choice of training
datasets, specifically DIV2K dataset which only consists of 800 training pictures. This
was done for the reason of being able to compare more directly with other models trained
similarly, and because of the time constraints that we had. In the future, a good experiment
could be to train on a much larger dataset, as ImageNet, to be able to see data and results
from a longer training time. This is actually an experiment that was attempted by us as
well, but it was not included in the report as we were not able to train for more than 24
hours at the time, and splitting training sessions with such a large dataset would have
been quite difficult.
7.3.2
Training iterations
One aspect of training that we failed to do was to properly track quality measure scores
as well besides loss metrics. By doing this a better view of the actual results could be
seen. Although this was not implemented, by analysing saved models along a training
session, it can be observed that the PSNR and SSIM scores continue to increase, even
though the tracked metrics indicate that the network is slowly overfitting on the dataset.
This can indicate that training more could in fact give better results, even using the same
small dataset.
7.3.3
Probabilistic Distributions
Another improvement that can be made, even suggested by Child 2020, is the use of
more flexible distributions, like discretized mixture of logits. Besides in the output sample
where the discretized mixture of logits is used, Gaussian distributions are implemented at
every block. This is a limitation that the original developers of VDVAE did take in account
but did not implemented as the main study was about hypothesizing depth, not elemenбґ
twise density, as more important for their specific task. By going around the restrictions
that a Gaussian distribution holds upon the expressiveness of the network, better superбґ
resolution samples could be hypothesized.
7.3.4
Hyperparameter search
Another aspect that can be improved is the chosen hyperparameters. Doing a hyperpaбґ
rameter search, and a more inбґdepth analysis of them could be very beneficial for such
a deep network, as during our development phase we mainly used the hyperparameters
given by the VDVAE developers in Child 2020, but as the task is different, this factor can
be improved.
42
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:51==
7.3.5
Layer Architecture and Distribution
The actual architecture of both the topбґdown network and bottomбґup can be also changed.
The configuration and distribution of layers at each resolution can greatly impact the perбґ
formance of the network. A similar analysis for this aspect can also be seen in Child 2020,
and experimenting with multiple layers for the higher resolution blocks, as 256x256, could
have some success, as these blocks are the only ones which do not have any extra inбґ
formation or activations from the LR topбґdown encoder.
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
Child, Rewon (2020). Б─°Very Deep VAEs Generalize Autoregressive Models and Can Outбґ
perform Them on ImagesБ─². In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.10650.
Kingma, Diederik P and Max Welling (2013). Б─°Autoбґencoding variational bayesБ─². In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1312.6114.
Goodfellow, Ian J et al. (2014). Б─°Generative adversarial networksБ─². In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.2661.
Oord, Aaron van den et al. (2016). Б─°Conditional image generation with pixelcnn decodersБ─².
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05328.
Dosovitskiy, Alexey and Thomas Brox (2016). Б─°Generating images with perceptual simiбґ
larity metrics based on deep networksБ─². In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.02644.
Maalц╦e, Lars et al. (2019). Б─°Biva: A very deep hierarchy of latent variables for generative
modelingБ─². In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.02102.
Sц╦nderby, Casper Kaae et al. (2016). Б─°Ladder variational autoencodersБ─². In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1602.02282.
Vahdat, Arash and Jan Kautz (2020). Б─°Nvae: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoderБ─².
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.03898.
Chollet, Franцїois (2017). Б─°Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convoluбґ
tionsБ─². In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogбґ
nition, pp. 1251Б─⌠1258.
Kingma, Diederik P, Tim Salimans, et al. (2016). Б─°Improving variational inference with
inverse autoregressive flowБ─². In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04934.
He, Kaiming et al. (2016). Б─°Deep residual learning for image recognitionБ─². In: Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 770Б─⌠778.
Dong, Chao, Chen Change Loy, Kaiming He, et al. (2015). Б─°Image superбґresolution using
deep convolutional networksБ─². In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence 38.2, pp. 295Б─⌠307.
Ledig, Christian et al. (2017). Б─°Photoбґrealistic single image superбґresolution using a generбґ
ative adversarial networkБ─². In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pp. 4681Б─⌠4690.
Tong, Tong et al. (2017). Б─°Image superбґresolution using dense skip connectionsБ─². In: Proбґ
ceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 4799Б─⌠4807.
Lim, Bee et al. (2017). Б─°Enhanced deep residual networks for single image superбґresolutionБ─².
In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
workshops, pp. 136Б─⌠144.
Wang, Xintao et al. (2018). Б─°Esrgan: Enhanced superбґresolution generative adversarial
networksБ─². In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV)
Workshops.
JolicoeurбґMartineau, Alexia (2018). Б─°The relativistic discriminator: a key element missing
from standard GANБ─². In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.00734.
Blau, Yochai et al. (2018). PIRM challenge on perceptual image superбґresolution (2018).
Vaswani, Ashish et al. (2017). Attention Is All You Need. arXiv: 1706.03762 [cs.CL].
Devlin, Jacob et al. (2019). BERT: Preбґtraining of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for
Language Understanding. arXiv: 1810.04805 [cs.CL].
Radford, A. and Karthik Narasimhan (2018). Б─°Improving Language Understanding by Genбґ
erative PreбґTrainingБ─². In:
Liu, Yinhan et al. (2019). RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach.
arXiv: 1907.11692 [cs.CL].
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
45
==PAGE:54==
Raffel, Colin et al. (2020). Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Textбґtoбґ
Text Transformer. arXiv: 1910.10683 [cs.LG].
Yang, Fuzhi et al. (2020). Learning Texture Transformer Network for Image SuperбґResolution.
arXiv: 2006.04139 [cs.CV].
Esser, Patrick, Robin Rombach, and BjцІrn Ommer (2021). Taming Transformers for Highбґ
Resolution Image Synthesis. arXiv: 2012.09841 [cs.CV].
Dosovitskiy, Alexey, Lucas Beyer, et al. (2020). An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transбґ
formers for Image Recognition at Scale. arXiv: 2010.11929 [cs.CV].
Gatopoulos, Ioannis, Maarten Stol, and Jakub M Tomczak (2020). Б─°Superбґresolution variбґ
ational autoбґencodersБ─². In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05218.
Dinh, Laurent, Jascha SohlбґDickstein, and Samy Bengio (2016). Б─°Density estimation using
real nvpБ─². In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.08803.
Huang, Gao et al. (2017). Б─°Densely connected convolutional networksБ─². In: Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4700Б─⌠4708.
Salimans, Tim et al. (2017). Б─°Pixelcnn++: Improving the pixelcnn with discretized logistic
mixture likelihood and other modificationsБ─². In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.05517.
Harvey, William, Saeid Naderiparizi, and Frank Wood (2021). Б─°Image Completion via Inбґ
ference in Deep Generative ModelsБ─². In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.12037.
Son, Sanghyun (2017). EDSRбґPyTorch. https://github.com/sanghyun-son/EDSR-PyTorch.
Wang, Xintao (2018). ESRGAN. https://github.com/xinntao/ESRGAN.
Agustsson, Eirikur and Radu Timofte (July 2017). Б─°NTIRE 2017 Challenge on Single Imбґ
age SuperбґResolution: Dataset and StudyБ─². In: The IEEE Conference on Computer Viбґ
sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops.
Bevilacqua, Marco et al. (2012). Б─°LowбґComplexity SingleбґImage SuperбґResolution based
on Nonnegative Neighbor EmbeddingБ─². In: Proceedings of the British Machine Vision
Conference. BMVA Press, pp. 135.1Б─⌠135.10. ISBN: 1бґ901725бґ46бґ4. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.5244/C.26.135.
Zeyde, Roman, Michael Elad, and Matan Protter (June 2010). Б─°On Single Image ScaleбґUp
Using SparseбґRepresentationsБ─². In: vol. 6920, pp. 711Б─⌠730. ISBN: 978бґ3бґ642бґ27412бґ1.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-27413-8_47.
BasicSR (Basic Super Restoration) (n.d.). URL: https://github.com/xinntao/BasicSR/wiki.
Dong, Chao, Chen Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang (2016). Accelerating the SuperбґResolution
Convolutional Neural Network. arXiv: 1608.00367 [cs.CV].
Huang, JiaбґBin, Abhishek Singh, and Narendra Ahuja (June 2015). Б─°Single Image Superбґ
Resolution From Transformed SelfбґExemplarsБ─². In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conferбґ
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Martin, D. et al. (2001). Б─°A database of human segmented natural images and its appliбґ
cation to evaluating segmentation algorithms and measuring ecological statisticsБ─². In:
Proceedings Eighth IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision. ICCV 2001.
Vol. 2, 416Б─⌠423 vol.2. DOI: 10.1109/ICCV.2001.937655.
Matsui, Yusuke et al. (Nov. 2016). Б─°Sketchбґbased manga retrieval using manga109 datasetБ─².
In: Multimedia Tools and Applications 76.20, pp. 21811Б─⌠21838. ISSN: 1573бґ7721. DOI:
10.1007/s11042-016-4020-z. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11042-016-4020-z.
Gavade, Anil and Prasana Sane (Oct. 2013). Б─°SUPER RESOLUTION IMAGE RECONбґ
STRUCTION BY USING BICUBIC INTERPOLATIONБ─². In: pp. 205Б─⌠209. DOI: 10.13140/
RG.2.1.4909.0401.
Horц╘, Alain and Djemel Ziou (2010). Б─°Image Quality Metrics: PSNR vs. SSIMБ─². In: 2010
20th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, pp. 2366Б─⌠2369. DOI: 10.1109/
ICPR.2010.579.
Nilsson, Jim and Tomas AkenineбґMцІller (June 2020). Б─°Understanding SSIMБ─². In:
46
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:55==
Wang, Z. et al. (Apr. 2004). Б─°Image Quality Assessment: From Error Visibility to Structural
SimilarityБ─². In: IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 13.4, pp. 600Б─⌠612. DOI: 10.
1109/TIP.2003.819861.
Heusel, Martin et al. (2018). GANs Trained by a Two TimeбґScale Update Rule Converge
to a Local Nash Equilibrium. arXiv: 1706.08500 [cs.LG].
Pisharoty, Narayan, Manisha Jadhav, and Yogesh Dandawate (Apr. 2013). Б─°Performance
Evaluation of Structural Similarity Index Metric in Different Colorspaces for HVS Based
Assessment of Quality of Colour ImagesБ─². In: International Journal of Engineering and
Technology 5, pp. 1555Б─⌠1562.
Hendrycks, Dan and Kevin Gimpel (2016). Б─°Gaussian error linear units (gelus)Б─². In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.08415.
DTU (2020). Deep Learning with PyTorch. https://github.com/DeepLearningDTU/02456-
deep-learning-with-PyTorch.
Doersch, Carl (2016). Б─°Tutorial on variational autoencodersБ─². In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05908.
Bowman, Samuel R et al. (2015). Б─°Generating sentences from a continuous spaceБ─². In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06349.
Bachlechner, Thomas et al. (2020). ReZero is All You Need: Fast Convergence at Large
Depth. arXiv: 2003.04887 [cs.LG].
Seitzer, Maximilian (Aug. 2020). pytorchбґfid: FID Score for PyTorch. https://github.com/
mseitzer/pytorch-fid. Version 0.1.1.
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:57==
A
Appendix 1
(a) LR
(b) EDSR
(c) ESRGAN
(d) VDVAEбґSR (t=1)
(e) bicubic
(f) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.2)
(g) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.8)
(h) Reference
Figure A.1: Set14 Zebra
(a) LR
(b) EDSR
(c) ESRGAN
(d) VDVAEбґSR (t=1)
(e) bicubic
(f) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.2)
(g) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.8)
(h) Reference
Figure A.2: Set14 Monarch
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
49
==PAGE:58==
(a) LR
(b) EDSR
(c) ESRGAN
(d) VDVAEбґSR (t=1)
(e) bicubic
(f) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.2)
(g) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.8)
(h) Reference
Figure A.3: Set14 Comic
(a) LR
(b) EDSR
(c) ESRGAN
(d) VDVAEбґSR (t=1)
(e) bicubic
(f) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.2)
(g) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.8)
(h) Reference
Figure A.4: Set14 Man
50
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:59==
(a) LR
(b) EDSR
(c) ESRGAN
(d) VDVAEбґSR (t=1)
(e) bicubic
(f) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.2)
(g) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.8)
(h) Reference
Figure A.5: Set14 ppt3
(a) LR
(b) EDSR
(c) ESRGAN
(d) VDVAEбґSR (t=1)
(e) bicubic
(f) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.2)
(g) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.8)
(h) Reference
Figure A.6: Set14 Pepper
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
51
==PAGE:60==
(a) LR
(b) EDSR
(c) ESRGAN
(d) VDVAEбґSR (t=1)
(e) bicubic
(f) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.2)
(g) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.8)
(h) Reference
Figure A.7: Set14 Foreman
(a) LR
(b) EDSR
(c) ESRGAN
(d) VDVAEбґSR (t=1)
(e) bicubic
(f) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.2)
(g) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.8)
(h) Reference
Figure A.8: Set14 Face
52
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:61==
(a) LR
(b) EDSR
(c) ESRGAN
(d) VDVAEбґSR (t=1)
(e) bicubic
(f) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.2)
(g) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.8)
(h) Reference
Figure A.9: Set14 Flowers
(a) LR
(b) EDSR
(c) ESRGAN
(d) VDVAEбґSR (t=1)
(e) bicubic
(f) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.2)
(g) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.8)
(h) Reference
Figure A.10: Set14 Barbara
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
53
==PAGE:62==
(a) LR
(b) EDSR
(c) ESRGAN
(d) VDVAEбґSR (t=1)
(e) bicubic
(f) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.2)
(g) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.8)
(h) Reference
Figure A.11: Set14 Coastguard
(a) LR
(b) EDSR
(c) ESRGAN
(d) VDVAEбґSR (t=1)
(e) bicubic
(f) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.2)
(g) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.8)
(h) Reference
Figure A.12: Set14 Bridge
54
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
==PAGE:63==
(a) LR
(b) EDSR
(c) ESRGAN
(d) VDVAEбґSR (t=1)
(e) bicubic
(f) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.2)
(g) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.8)
(h) Reference
Figure A.13: Set14 Lenna
(a) LR
(b) EDSR
(c) ESRGAN
(d) VDVAEбґSR (t=1)
(e) bicubic
(f) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.2)
(g) VDVAEбґSR (t=0.8)
(h) Reference
Figure A.14: Set14 Baboon
Image SuperбґResolution using Deep Variational Autoencoders
55
==PAGE:64==
Image superбґresolution (SR) techniques are used to generate a highбґresolution image from a lowбґ
resolution image. Deep Generative Models (DGMs) such as autoregressive (AR) models, Generaбґ
tive Adversarial Networks (GANs) and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) have proven to be effective
at modelling highбґresolution images. In particular, GANбґbased SR models have achieved stateбґofбґ
theбґart SR performances. Whereas VAEs used to be criticised for their feeble generative perforбґ
mances, there is now strong evidence that deep VAEs can outperform both GANs and AR models
for highбґresolution image generation. The project aims at exploiting the most recent deep VAE,
specifically the stateбґofбґtheбґart VDVAE generative model to improve upon existing SR models.
This project uses transfer learning to utilize the VDVAE model combined with an extra component
in order to support the task of image superбґresolution with four times upscaling (x4). The model we
present, which we call VDVAEбґSR was able to output sharper images than a purely Convolutional
Neural Network method EDSR (winner of NTIRE17 SR Challenge) in terms of FID score and even
comparing to the popular GANбґbased SR method ESRGAN (winner of PIRMбґ2018 SR Challenge).
The source code can be found on: https://github.com/dman14/VDVAEбґSR
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
