==PAGE:1==
Frequency stability analysis and model de-
velopment of zero-inertia system with high
wind penetration in the North Sea
Master Thesis
DTU Electrical Engineering
Center for Electric Power and Energy
==PAGE:2==
Frequency stability analysis and model development of zero-inertia sys-
tem with high wind penetration in the North Sea
Master Thesis
25-06-2021
By
Stefanos Ntomalis
Supervisors:
Spyros Chatzivasileiadis, Associate Professor, DTU Electrical Engineering, Center
for Electric Power and Energy
Georgios Misyris, Postdoc, DTU Electrical Engineering, Center for Electric Power
and Energy
Matas Dijokas, Research Assistant, DTU Electrical Engineering, Center for Electric
Power and Energy
Project Period:
Ferbuary 2021 - June 2021
Education:
MSc
Field:
Wind Energy
ECTS:
30
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Center for Electric Power and Energy, Elektrovej Building
325, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.cee.elektro.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Electrical
Engineering, Center for Electric Power and Energy, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Wind
Energy, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Electrical Engi-
neering.
Stefanos Ntomalis - s200176
Signature
Date
ii
25-06-2021
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Due to climate change, a great importance has been given worldwide in the de-
fossilization of the power system and the utilization of different renewable energy
sources. Offshore wind is one of the key building blocks for the green transition
of Europe and to meet the Paris Climate Goals. In 2017, Energinet and TenneT,
the Danish and Dutch Transmission System Operators (TSOs) respectively, have
announced the North Sea Wind Power Hub (NSWPH) project. The goal of this
project is to increase the North Sea wind capacity by 3 GW, with final goal 10
GW by 2030, with the implementation of an artificial island which will collect all
the power produced by the wind turbines and transmit it with HVDC links to the
onshore grids.
This project brings a lot of challenges regarding the frequency stability of the North
Sea Hub. In order to confront them, two different configurations have been dis-
cussed, the low and zero inertia concept. This thesis aims to investigate the zero
inertia configuration and all available control schemes to ensure the uninterrupted
operation and the stability of the system. For the development and simulation of
all appropriate models in RSCAD®software has been used.
The zero inertia hub demands the utilization of grid forming converter, since no
synchronous generation exists. The obtained results show that a zero inertia con-
figuration is feasible, although different control schemes should be used in order to
ensure stability especially in case of high loading of the offshore HVDC converters.
Thus the outcome of this thesis is to propose and compare different control schemes
for the operation of the system to ensure stability during different conditions and
outages.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my thanks to all of my supervisors Spyros Chatzivasileiadis,
Giorgos Misyris and Matas Dijokas for giving me this great opportunity and sup-
porting me during this very interesting and challenging topic. Special thanks to
Giorgos Misyris and Matas Dijokas for their continuous guidance and the valuable
contributions throughout the entire thesis project.
This thesis is dedicated to my family for their constant support throughout my
entire thesis. Their encouragement has always been crucial in all my educational
and professional goals.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Components modeling
4
2.1
Switching MMC model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Average VSC model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Grid following converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Phase locked loop (PLL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.2
P −Q control - Wind power Plant (WPP) model . . . . . . .
11
2.3.3
Vdc −Q control- Onshore VSC converter model . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.4
Current limitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Grid forming converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.1
Active power sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.2
Current limitation techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4.2.1
Current limiters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4.2.2
Adaptive droop gains based on current amplitude . .
24
2.4.2.3
Virtual Impedance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
North Sea Hub modelling and simulation
27
3.1
System description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Detailed switching vs average model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.1
Events during low loading of VSC HVDC converters
. . . . .
30
3.3.2
Events during high loading of VSC HVDC converters . . . . .
33
3.3.2.1
Current limiters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.2.2
Adaptive droop based on current amplitude . . . . .
36
3.3.2.3
Virtual Impedance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3.3
Short-circuit event . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
v
==PAGE:7==
4
Conclusions and future work
47
4.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
References
49
A APPENDIX
53
B Abbreviations
57
C List of Figures
58
D List of Tables
60
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
Over the last years, the need for reducing Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions’ rates
and decarbonize the power system has been widely increased. International agree-
ments which aims to reduce the negative effects of climate change such as Kyoto
Protocol, Paris Agreement [1] have been signed by many countries. According to
the European Union’s (EU) targets, Renewable Energy Generation in Europe has
to reach the amount of at least 27 of the total energy consumption by 2030. In
Denmark, the policies on climate change mitigation have been formulated partly in
compliance with these international agreements enacted by both the United Nations
(UN) and EU and partly by the Danish national target decisions instituted in the
energy sector. According to the Danish climate policies towards this direction and
the Danish government platform in 2015, Denmark has set the target to be inde-
pendent of fossil fuels by 2050 [2].
To achieve the aforementioned goals, the increase of penetration of renewable en-
ergy sources (RES) in the power system is necessary. Offshore wind plays a vital
role in the green transition of the grid. Energinet and TenneT announced in 2017
the North Sea Wind Power Hub (NSWPH) project. The goal of this project is to
increase the North Sea wind capacity by 3 GW, with final goal 10 GW by 2030 with
the implementation of an artificial island which will collect all the power produced
by the wind turbines and transmit it to the onshore grids [3],[4]. Due to the great
distance of Wind Turbines and the onshore grid, HVDC transmission is selected
instead of HVAC, since it is a more cost effective and technically feasibly solution
[5]. Regarding, the collection system, a DC configuration would be more eﬀicient
due to the absence of reactive losses, but since a DC breaker in such a high voltage
does not exist, AC configuration will be utilized [6]. For AC configuration, two
different concepts have been discussed. The first one is the low inertia topology,
where offshore HVDC converters operate in grid following mode and therefore a
synchronous condenser in necessary to form the voltage and the frequency. The
second is the zero inertia topology, where offshore HVDC converters operate in grid
forming mode and no synchronous generator exists.
Although there is a lot of research for low inertia islanded power systems [7–9],
1
==PAGE:9==
and for zero-inertia microgrids such in [10, 11], where the dynamics of the frequency
and voltage are investigating during lack of inertia and primary frequency reserves,
recent years researchers are focusing on investigating on zero inertia systems utiliz-
ing offshore wind power [12–16].
Over the last decades the power system operation was based on synchronous gen-
erators and the stability definition [17] stated that RMS domain simulations are
suﬀicient for frequency stability and electromechanical dynamics investigation. In
2020, a revision of stability definition [18] requires EMT domain for proper simu-
lation of electromechanical dynamics including frequency stability due to the high
increase of inverter-based units in the power system. In addition to that, in [19] it is
showed that in zero inertia grids, RMS domain is not suﬀicient and EMT is required
to investigate all instabilities occur.
This thesis aims on the modelling and investigation of dynamics of the NSWPH
of 3 GW Wind Power and the implementation of two HVDC links for connection
with the onshore grid, as well as to the implementation of various control schemes to
ensure frequency stability under different conditions and outages. RSCAD®software
is used in order to perform time domain EMT simulations and also mitigate the
large simulation time of other power system simulation softwares.
1.2
Objectives
The main goal of this thesis is to investigate the frequency stability of the NSWPH
zero-inertia topology. Thus, the overall objective is to develop a dynamic model of
NSWPH and perform different simulation scenarios to investigate the stability of
the system. To achieve this, the main tasks are:
• Modelling and control of grid forming converter - HVDC offshore converter
• Modelling and control of parallel operation of grid forming converters using
droop control
• Modelling and control of grid following converter with Vdc−Q control - HVDC
onshore converter
• Modelling and control of grid following converter with P −Q control - Wind
power plant simplified model
• Development of the dynamic model of NSWPH zero inertia topology
• Investigation of different control schemes for HVDC offshore converter to im-
prove frequency stability
2
==PAGE:10==
The dynamic modelling of NSWPH was performed in RSCAD®software. RSCAD®is
a software for Electromagnetic Transient (EMT) simulations and it is the interface
of RTDS Simulator which is the world’s benchmark for real-time power system
simulation.
1.3
Thesis structure
The thesis structure is as follows:
Chapter 1: Introduction
In this chapter, the background and motivations as well as the objectives are dis-
cussed.
Chapter 2: Components modeling
In this chapter, all the necessary components for the NSWPH with performance
tests are presented.
Chapter 3: North Sea Hub modelling and simulation
In this chapter, the NSWPH zero-inertia topology is described and different simu-
lation scenarios are performed and discussed.
Chapter 4: Conclusion and Future Work
In this chapter, the conclusions as well as suggestions for further investigation are
presented.
3
==PAGE:11==
2
Components modeling
In this section the main components which were used to develop NSWPH zero-
inertia topology model are presented. Namely, the switching and average Voltage
Source Converter (VSC) as well as their control schemes modeling approach and
implementation are discussed.
In figure 2.1 the modelling approach in RSCAD®is depicted.
Figure 2.1: Modelling approach in RSCAD®. [20]
It is mentioned that controller gains used in 2.3.2, 2.3.3, 2.4 for the control of Grid
Following and Grid Forming Converters respectively were taken from [21],[22].
2.1
Switching MMC model
Until 1970, power electronics used for power transfer between AC and DC circuits
were thyristor based and operated as Current Source Converters (CSC).
This technology has a lot of disadvantages especially for HVDC lines. The most
important disadvantages are that they cannot control reactive power, the low-order
harmonics that they produce require large harmonic filters and the fact that they
are not able to form the grid, since they cannot operate as VSCs.
Later with the development of Insulated-Gate Bipolar Transistors (IGBTs), the
4
==PAGE:12==
controlability of the converters improved significantly due to the fact that higher
switching frequency could be used. Nowadays, for applications above 1 MVA Mul-
tilevel Converters (MMC) are used.
In order to describe more eﬀiciently MMC operation and advantages, the opera-
tion principle of a two-level converter (figure 2.2) presentation is necessary.
Figure 2.2: Three-phase two-level converter. [20]
In most cases, two-level converters are controlled using Pulse Width Modulation
(PWM). In PWM modulation a triangle wave (vtrig) is compared with the 3phase
modulation sinusoidal signals (vcontrol,a, vcontrol,b, vcontrol,c).
If the sinusoidal signal is greater than the triangle wave then the upper IGΒT is
on and the down IGΒT is off. The resulted phase to phase voltage is a pulse wave
(pulses of Vdc
2 and −Vdc
2 ) including harmonics proportional to the switching frequency
and with the utilization of an harmonic filter to obtain the fundamental harmonic
voltage occurs as shown in figure below.
Figure 2.3: PWM modulation. [23]
5
==PAGE:13==
Two-level converters are economical solution for low power ratings and low voltage
applications, up to approximately 1 MVA and 1800 V DC Voltage [20]. Some ex-
amples are small motor drive applications and low power renewable energy sources
like photovoltaics connected directly to the low or medium voltage grid. They have
a simple structure with few components. For large power scale applications like
HVDC transmision which is of interest in this project MMCs are used for several
reasons.
Figure 2.4: N-level MMC converter. [24]
In Figure 2.4 a N-level MMC converter is presented. As shown is this figure, each
phase has N-submodules consisting of two IGΒTs is series and a capacitor in parallel.
Comparing with two-level converter where output voltage before the harmonic filter
6
==PAGE:14==
is a pulse signal with pulses of
Vdc
2
and −Vdc
2 , with the MMC configuration it is
possible to get voltage steps between N·Vdc
2
and −N·Vdc
2
.
Figure 2.5: N-level MMC output voltage. [20]
Figure 2.5 depicts the output voltage of a N-level MMC converter. The higher the
N, the more close to a sinusoidal wave form the output voltage is since the number
of harmonics is reduced.
The increasing number of submodules may increase the cost of the converter, al-
though it allows to use lower switching frequency and reduce the switching losses as
well as reduce the size of harmonic filter or even avoid using it.
Another important advantage is that MMCs can be used in applications which de-
mand high DC voltage levels. This is due to the fact that each submodule maximum
applied voltage is Vdc
2·N , so the higher the N, the less the voltage of each submodule
and thus high voltages can be used since the IGΒTs can withstand it. This is impor-
tant for application like HVDC transmission, since the higher the DC voltage, the
lower the resistive losses in the HVDC link and thus the greater the power transfer
ability.
In this project, the DC voltage is equal to 1050 kV and the voltage in the AC side for
both offshore and onshore converters is 525 kV. The number of submodules selected
is 525 for the upper leg and 525 for the down one. This number of 1050 submodules
per phase in total gives a voltage output as close as possible to a sinusoidal signal.
7
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Average VSC model
In power system studies where power electronics switching transients like harmonic
distortion are not of interest like transient stability studies, average converter model
can be used.
Average converter is actually a controllable voltage source.
This means that it
receives directly the desired voltage signals and not switching pulses as a detailed
switching model. As a result, average converter output voltage are pure sinusoidal
waves since no IGΒT switching occurs.
The control circuits are the same and only the appropriate scaling needs to be
implemented since switching model receive inputs usually from -1 to 1 while average
models receive directly the AC voltage in Volts.
The main advantage of using average model instead of detailed switching model is
the simulation time, since larger time steps can be used and the ability to decrease
modeling requirements, which is of high interest for real-time modeling applications..
Figure 2.6: RSCAD®Average Converter model.
Figure 2.6 depicts average converter as implemented in RSCAD®. The AC voltages
VA, VB, VC are obtained directly from the converter control scheme either for grid
following or grid forming converters as described later. The DC current idc is calcu-
8
==PAGE:16==
lated from the power balance as shown in equation 2.1 and is input in a controlled
current source in the DC side. The power losses in the converter can be included
by using Rloss.
PAC(t) −Plosses(t) = PDC(t) = VDC(t) · IDC(t)
(2.1)
Since in RSCAD®simulation time is not an obstacle, the complete NSWPH will
be simulated with both switching and average models and a comparison between
them will be performed. It is mentioned, that even if the simulation time is not an
obstancle, average models are more user friendly and computational power needed
for using switching models is much greater and multiple racks should be used to
develop the complete NSWPH model.
2.3
Grid following converter
In this section the grid following control principles as well as the control schemes
used in this project are presented.
VSC grid following converters need be connected to a voltage source to be operative,
since they operate as current sources and therefore they need to be synchronized
and follow the grid. This means that grid following converters cannot operate au-
tonomously, since they cannot form the frequency and the voltage. In figure 2.7,
a grid following converter including RLC filter connected to an AC voltage source
is shown. The purpose of the control scheme is to control the voltage at the PCC
in order to perform various actions and services to the power grid. In this project
grid following converters are used to control the active and reactive power at PCC
(P −Q control) or DC Voltage and reactive power at PCC (Vdc −Q control) and
will be described explicitly in sections 2.3.2, 2.3.3 respectively.
Figure 2.7: Grid following converter connected to the grid.
9
==PAGE:17==
2.3.1
Phase locked loop (PLL)
In order for the converter to be synchronized with the grid, a phase-locked loop
(PLL) implementation is necessary.
To achieve stable reference tracking, dq transformation is introduced [25].
Con-
trollers tracking sinusoidal signals are diﬀicult to tune and they demand high gain
values that most of the times lead to instability. On the other hand, lower gain
values result to a steady state error and so the controller cannot track the reference
value.
Dq transformation converts the sinusoidal signal to constant values and so the ref-
erence tracking is achievable without steady state error.
A dq reference frame PI-based PLL, locks the converter angle (θg) and acts on Vq
to make it zero, so that Vd is aligned with Vq.
Figure 2.8: PLL control scheme.
The figure above shows the control scheme of a dq PI-based PLL. The three phase
voltage in the PCC (Vg −abc) is input in the abc −dq transformation block which
receives the PLL output angle (θg) as a rotation angle. Afterwards q-axis voltage is
compared with zero and the error is input in a PI controller so Vd is aligned with Vg.
The PI output is the frequency deviation from nominal frequency is rad/s. Finally,
this error is added with 2 · π · 50 and integrated and has as a result the grid rotation
angle. It is worth mentioning that misalignment between Vd and Vg occurs when Vq
is non-zero and this happens during transient phenomena while in steady-state the
difference between them is equal to zero.
10
==PAGE:18==
2.3.2
P −Q control - Wind power Plant (WPP) model
In this type of control scheme, active and reactive power are controlled at the PCC.
As already mentioned offshore wind is implemented in the NSWPH and thus Wind
Turbine (WT) Type 4 is used in this project [26]. Since, mechanical dynamics are
much slower than the electrical ones and for the purposes of this study, the electrical
characteristics are of interest, the generator and the machine side converter can be
neglected and the WT can be simplified and represented with a grid following con-
verter connected with a constant DC voltage source [27]. In addition to that, it is
mentioned that several WTs are modelled by using an aggregated model for further
simplification, since the dynamics and different power variations due to changes in
wind speed of each unique WT are out of interest in this thesis.
As shown in figure 2.9, the control scheme consists of an outer and an inner loop
for both active and reactive power. In principle, in order for the controllers to be
stable, inner loop is faster than outer loop.
Outer loops have as input the active and reactive power respectively. The outer PI
controllers have as output the references for the currents in d and q axis and then
the inner PI controllers produce the appropriate voltage values in d and q axis to
achieve the desired active and reactive power at PCC. The purpose of terms Iq·ω·L
and Id · ω · L at the summation blocks just before the dq transformation is to fully
decouple the d and q axis and control P and Q independently.
Figure 2.9: VSC grid following converter P −Q control.
11
==PAGE:19==
In order to test the performance of the aforementioned controller, two tests were
performed using a grid following converter connected to a voltage source as shown
in figure 2.10.
Additionally, the parameters used for the PI controllers of the converter for both P,
Q for the outer and inner loop are indicated in the table below.
Figure 2.10: System to evaluate grid following converter control.
Table 2.1: P −Q control PI controllers parameters
Controller
Proportional gain
Integral gain
P outer-loop
0
39
P inner-loop
0.477
5
Q outer-loop
0.1
9
Q inner-loop
0.477
5
The first test is a step change in the active power, namely from 0 to 600 MW and
the second is a step change in the reactive power, namely from 0 to 600 MVar. It
is obvious from the results above that the controller manages to track the reference
signals without overshooting within few milliseconds.
Furthermore, Q response is slower that P, since Q outer loop is slower than P outer
loop.
12
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.11: P −Q controller step response for active and reactive power.
2.3.3
Vdc −Q control- Onshore VSC converter model
Vdc −Q control scheme is similar with P −Q. The difference is that now instead
of keeping the active power in a desired value, the target is to keep the DC voltage
constant. This type of control is used in the onshore VSC in order to maintain the
DC voltage within appropriate limits and protect the DC link capacitors and also
to balance the active power transfer in the DC line and ensure its transfer in the
onshore grid.
Figure 2.12: VSC grid following converter Vdc −Q control.
13
==PAGE:21==
As shown in the figure above, the only difference comparing with the control scheme
described in 2.3.2 is that instead of active power error, the DC voltage error is in
this case the input in d axis outer loop. In order to test the performance of the
aforementioned controller, two tests were performed using a grid following converter
connected to a voltage source as presented in 2.3.2.
In this case istead of using a DC voltage source in the DC side, a 37µF capacitor is
used in order to make the DC side voltage of the grid following converter controllable.
Additionally, the parameters used for the PI controllers of the converter for both
Vdc, Q for the outer and inner loop are indicated in the table below.
Table 2.2: Vdc −Q control PI controllers parameters
Controller
Proportional gain
Integral gain
Vdc outer-loop
1.3
70
Vdc inner-loop
1.43
30
Q outer-loop
0.1
9
Q inner-loop
1.43
30
The first test is a step change in the DC voltage setpoint, namely from 1 to 0.9 pu
and the second is a step change in the reactive power, namely from 0 to 1850 MVar.
It is obvious from the results above that the controller manages to track the reference
signals within few milliseconds. Furthermore, Q response is slower that Vdc, since Q
outer loop is slower than Vdc outer loop.
Figure 2.13: Vdc −Q controller step response for DC Voltage and reactive power.
14
==PAGE:22==
2.3.4
Current limitation
Since IGBTs are very sensitive to high currents, overloading should be avoided to
ensure safe operation of the converter and avoid damaging the semi-conductors.
To achieve that in grid following converters, current limiters should be implemented
in the control scheme for both Id, Iq as shown in figure below.
Figure 2.14: VSC grid following converter control scheme including current satura-
tion .
The purpose of saturation blocks is to ensure that the current flowing through power
electronics is no more than 1 pu in all conditions.
During normal operation, namely when voltage in the converter terminal is greater
than 0.8 pu priority is given on d-axis current, thus:
-1≤Id≤1
Iq = ±
p
I2 −I2
d
|
{z
}





Idmax
=
1
Idmin
=
−1
Iqmin = √1 −Id
Iqmax = −√1 −Id
(2.2)
Priority given to Id means priority to active power setpoint. So, for instance if P is
equal to nominal apparent power and voltage is 1 pu then reactive power is limited
to zero.
To evaluate the performance of the control system the same circuit as in 2.3.2
is simulated. The system composed of a grid following converter connected to a
3phase voltage source through a 3-phase transformer. At 0.5s, P setpoint change
stepwise from 0-1 pu while Q setpoint is kept constant to 0 pu at the PCC.
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.15: Id and P in VSC grid following converter including current saturation
.
In the figure above current in d-axis as well as its limits are depicted. It is obvious
that when active power gets 1 pu, Id reaches is upper limit namely 1 pu. Since, Id
is equal with 1 pu and the amplitude of the current should be less or equal to 1 pu,
Iq should be limited as shown in the figure below.
Figure 2.16: Iq and Q in VSC grid following converter including current saturation
.
Normally, if current in q-axis was not limited it should have a non-zero value in
order for the converter to absorb reactive power due to the capacitive behavior of
the AC cables and keep Q to zero at PCC. In contrary, as shown in the figure 2.16,
Iq is limited to zero.
16
==PAGE:24==
While in normal operation, priority is given on d-axis current and active power,
when voltage goes below a certain value, priority is given to q-axis current and re-
active current.
Particularly, during short-circuit, WT Type 4 should limit their active power to 0
and produce maximum reactive current to help the protection system to detect the
fault and support voltage during and after the fault clearance [28].
It is mentioned that in modern Wind Turbines, mainly Type 3 and 4 Fault Ride
Through Curves (FRT) are provided [29]. Thus FRT curves determine the ammount
of reactive power that wind turbines should provide as well as the time that they
should remain connected as a function of voltage .
Although, it is mentioned that FRT curves are not included in the WPP model
developed in this thesis and WPP remains connected during and after the fault.
In the following figure the results of the aforementioned system are presented in
case of a 100ms 3ph short circuit at PCC to evaluate the performance of the control
system during severe faults.
As shown in this figure during fault Id is limited to 0 pu and Iq is equal to 1 pu.
After the fault clearance the grid following converter get back to their initial values
successfully within few milliseconds.
Finally as shown in figure 2.18 converter current does not exceed its limits and has
1 pu as maximum value.
Figure 2.17: Id and Iq in VSC grid following converter including current saturation
during short-circuit .
17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.18: I in VSC grid following converter including current saturation during
short-circuit .
2.4
Grid forming converter
In this section the grid forming converter, its control scheme and its operation
principles are presented as shown in figure below.
Figure 2.19: Grid forming control .
Grid forming converter have the ability to form the grid as they operate as voltage
sources. They are a very promising technology to achieve high renewable penetra-
tion in power systems and they are widely used in low or zero inertia microgrids.
The control logic is similar with that of grid following converter. It also consists
18
==PAGE:26==
of an inner and a slower outer loop for both d and q axis including the V q · ω · C,
V d · ω · C and Iq · ω · L, Id · ω · L decoupling terms for the outer and inner loop
respectively. The main differences with the grid following controllers that already
explained in 2.3.2, 2.3.3 are the objectives of the outer loops and that the rotation
angle does not come from a PLL.
Since the objective is that the converter operates as a voltage source, the outer
loop setpoints are voltage in d and q axis, in order to achieve the desired voltage
value in PCC, for example 1 pu.
As for angle θ it could rotate constantly in 50 Hz, either variably. In most cases,
the first method is used in topologies with only one grid forming converter, while
the second one in topology with multiple converters for reasons that will explained
explicitly in section 2.4.1.
Regarding the operation in low voltage conditions etc.
short circuit events, the
operation and control scheme has to be changed similarly as that of grid following
converters that has already been explained. Thus, while in normal operation the
voltage setpoint is adjusted by changing the voltage reference in d-axis outer loop
and the voltage reference in q axis is zero, in circumstances where the voltage is
below a certain level, the d-axis setpoint should be zero and the q-axis voltage ref-
erence should be equal to 1, in order for the converter to give priority to reactive
power and support the voltage [30]. Finally, it is mentioned that in this project,
they are used as offshore VSC HVDC converters to form the grid in the zero inertia
topology.
2.4.1
Active power sharing
As already mentioned, VSC grid forming converter control system objective is to
maintain the voltage at the PCC at a certain value and so it actually operates as a
voltage source.
AC voltage sources have the characteristic to act as a slack bus during a load event,
meaning that the active power production or absorption depends on their terminal
voltage and their impedance.
Due to that fact, grid forming converter needs an additional droop control scheme
in order to achieve active power sharing in case of multiple converters operating in
parallel.
As shown in figure 2.20, the droop controller of a grid forming converter is similar
19
==PAGE:27==
with that of synchronous generators.
Figure 2.20: Grid forming converter droop control.
In principle, synchronous generator’s droop controller has as input the measured
frequency which is compared with the nominal one. Afterwards the frequency error
is multiplied with a droop gain and a new value dP occurs, which is added to the
initial active power setpoint.
Similarly, grid forming converter’s droop controller has as input the measured ac-
tive power which is compared with the reference one. Afterwards the active power
is multiplied with a droop gain and a new value df occurs, which is added to the
initial frequency in rad/s. Then the frequency is integrated and results to the rota-
tion angle θ to synchronize the converter.
Figure 2.21: Grid forming converters operating in parallel.
To investigate the performance of the droop controller as well as the necessity of
it, in order to achieve active power sharing when multiple grid forming converters
20
==PAGE:28==
operate in parallel, the system in figure 2.21 with parameters as shown in table 2.3
is investigated. The system consists of two grid forming converters, which supply a
variable load.
Table 2.3: HVDC Offshore controllers parameters
Controller
Proportional gain
Integral gain
Vd outer-loop
0.59
736
Vd inner-loop
1.27
14.3
Vq outer-loop
0.59
736
Vq inner-loop
1.27
14.3
As already mentioned, grid forming converters operate as voltage sources. As a
result, in absence of droop control, the power production/absorption depends on
voltage magnitude and their impedance. In principle in case of different character-
istics and no droop control, the converter with the lower equivalent grid impedance
will take more from the disturbance. In the first simulation, no droop controller is
implemented in both converters and at 0.2s load active power increases from 0-500
MW.
Figure 2.22: Active power increase without droop control for two parallel connected
converters.
As shown in figure 2.22, the frequency remains constant and since the converters
are identical in terms of grid equivalent impedance and they have the same voltage
setpoint equal to 1 pu, they produce the same active power equal to 250 MW each.
21
==PAGE:29==
In the second test, the same event is examined.
In this test, droop gain of the
first converter is equal to 0.05 and the second one is 0.04.
As figure 2.23 depicts, active power sharing is achieved. The first converter produces
less power than the second converter since the droop gain is higher than the second’s
one.
Finally, when the event occurs, converters’ frequencies are slightly different during
the first 0.1s after the event but afterwards the system balances to 49.7 Hz.
Figure 2.23: Active power increase with droop control for two parallel connected
converters.
2.4.2
Current limitation techniques
As already mentioned, IGBTs are sensitive to high currents and special measures
should be taken in order to avoid exceeding their nominal currents. Therefore cur-
rent limiters should be included also in grid forming control scheme.
Although the current limitation in grid following converter is more straightforward,
since limiting the current references is suﬀicient because grid following converters
operate as current sources.
One way to confront this issue is to change the operation from grid forming to
grid following [10], during overcurrent situations by enabling a backup PLL since
in normal operation PLL is not needed in grid forming mode. But in this case, the
switching from grid following to grid forming mode can cause instability issues [31]
and therefore is not examined in this thesis.
22
==PAGE:30==
Additionally, the current limiting in grid forming mode, means that the voltage
is uncontrolled due to the steady state error in the outer loop [32]. Based on previ-
ous research [33], this could lead to instability due to loss of synchronization of the
grid forming converter.
Therefore, it is evident that enhanced current limitation techniques should be es-
tablished in order to respect the IGBTs operation limits and ensure stability under
several faults and great power imbalances.
In the literature, the following some of the following current limitation methods have
been identified:
• Switching to a grid-following converter [34]
• Modify outer references during fault [33]
• Current limitation through virtual impedance [method_3]
• Adaptive droop based on current amplitude [35]
In this thesis, the virtual impedance control and the adaptive droop based on cur-
rent amplitude method are examined. Additionally, the simple current limitation
method, which is based on signal limiters is implemented to asses the performance,
the instability cases, and a comparison with advanced current limiting techniques is
provided .
Finally, it is mentioned that the current limit used in this thesis for the grid forming
converters is 1.1 pu since it is allowed to operate the converter with this value of
current for a specific time.
2.4.2.1
Current limiters
As already mentioned the simple current limitation method in similar with that
presented in 2.3.4 for grid following converters. As shown in figure 2.24 after the
outer loop the current references are limited in order to avoid converter overloading.
During normal operation, namely when voltage in the converter terminal is not
lower than 0.8pu priority is given on d-axis current, thus:
-1.1≤Id≤1.1
Iq = ±
p
I2 −I2
d
|
{z
}





Idmax
=
1.1
Idmin
=
−1.1
Iqmin = √1.1 −Id
Iqmax = −√1.1 −Id
(2.3)
23
==PAGE:31==
Priority given to Id means priority to active power setpoint. So, for instance if Id is
equal to nominal apparent power and voltage is 1 pu then reactive power is limited
to zero.
When voltage is below 0.8 pu etc.
short ciruit event priority is given to q-axis
current as presented in 2.3.4 for the grid following converters.
Figure 2.24: Grid forming VSC control scheme including current limiters.
It is mentioned that current limiters are used also in the adaptive droop and virtual
impedance current limiting techniques, since the purpose of these methods is to
avoid current saturation and not limit the current.
2.4.2.2
Adaptive droop gains based on current amplitude
Next investigated method is the adaptive droop gain based on current amplitude
method.
This current limiting method is a combination of current limiters and
adaptive droop gain. As shown in figure 2.25, the droop control is enhanced with
an additional term to modify the droop gain.
Namely, when current is greater or equal to 1 then the droop gain is increased
ten times. This means that actually converter’s active power will not increase in
case of an active power increase if another converter has the available active power
bandwidth to absorb this extra amount of active power. This is due to the fact that
in case of a multiple converter system, the converter with the higher droop gain will
absorb less power and thus the current saturation maybe avoided.
24
==PAGE:32==
Figure 2.25: Adaptive droop based on current amplitude control scheme.
Current limiters are also necessary in this method since the adaptive droop does not
guarantees that the current is limited, since the objective of the adaptive droop is
to avoid saturation but for instance in case of a short circuit this is not possible, so
the use of current limiters is mandatory.
Some of the disadvantages of this current limiting method is that a second con-
verter with available active power reserve is necessary, else the adaptive droop will
not have any affect on a single converter system and it will still absorb whole active
power imbalance. In addition to that, it is clear that adaptive droop cannot com-
pensate a converter outage event in a two parallel converter system. Furthermore,
the adaptive droop is not holistic, which means that it affects only the active power.
Thus, in case of reactive power increase, the adaptive frequency droops might me
insuﬀicient.
2.4.2.3
Virtual Impedance
Next method implemented is the virtual impedance method [36]. Again similarly
with the adaptive droop method, the purpose of virtual impedance current limiting
technique is to avoid saturation. Thus, current limiters should be included before
the inner current controllers to limit the current references and ensure that in any
case, current will not exceed 1.1 pu.
The the virtual impedance controller can be described by the following equations:
δVd = RV I · Id −XV I · Iq
(2.4)
δVq = RV I · Iq + XV I · Id
(2.5)
25
==PAGE:33==
This current limiting technique aim to add a virtual impedance to implement a volt-
age drop across it and compensate it by adjusting the voltage reference. Equations
2.4, 2.5 describe the voltage drop across a virtual impedance in dq frame, with resis-
tance equal to RV I and reactance equal to XV I. The terms δVd and δVq express the
appropriate deviation in d and q axis voltage reference respectively to compensate
the additional voltage drop caused by the virtual impedance.
As shown in figure 2.26, the virtual impedance controller is enabled when current
amplitude is greater than 1 in order to avoid unnecessary deviations in the voltage
reference and increase the reactive power sharing [37].
Figure 2.26: Grid forming VSC control scheme including virtual impedance.
The appropriate selection of RV I and XV I which depends on the initial load flow as
well us the event occurs can change the voltage reference and prevent the current
from exceeding its limit.
The main advantage of this method comparing with the adaptive droop method is
that it is effective also for standalone operation and thus in a two parallel converter
system, a converter outage can be compensated.
On the other hand a disadvantage of virtual impedance current limiting technique
is the complexity of the gain selection and its dependency on converter impedance
[38]. Additionally, high steady state voltages may arise in the system, which can
cause another outage. Thus special attention should be given in the selection of RV I
and XV I values.
26
==PAGE:34==
3
North Sea Hub modelling and
simulation
In this chapter the NSWPH zero-inertia topology is described and different simula-
tion scenarios are performed and discussed.
3.1
System description
Figure 3.1 illustrates an overview of the NSWPH zero-inertia topology. As shown
in this figure, the NSWPH consists of five WPP of 600 MVA each and two HVDC
links of 1850 MVA capacity each which are used to transfer the power produced by
the WPPs to the onshore grid.
The Hub voltage is equal to 400 kV and both offshore and onshore HVDC converters
operate in 525 kV on the AC and on 1050 kV on the DC side. The onshore grid AC
Voltage is 220 kV.
Furthermore, AC cables of the collector system have been modelled as π-equivalents.
Detailed electrical characteristics of transformers, lines as well as controller param-
eters of all of the converters used in this topology are given in A APPENDIX.
Figure 3.1: NSWPH zero-inertia topology.
As already mentioned, in this topology there is no synchronous generator, thus
27
==PAGE:35==
HVDC offshore converters should operate in grid forming mode in order to form the
voltage and the frequency in the offshore grid.
The utilization of droop controllers in the HVDC offshore converters as presented in
2.4.1 is necessary in order to achieve a desired power sharing among the converters.
The onshore HVDC converters operate in Vdc −Q grid following mode. With this
type of control active power balance in the HVDC-link is achieved and the active
power is transferred eﬀiciently to the onshore grid.
Finally, as already mentioned WPPs are modelled as P −Q control grid following
converters, since mechanical dynamics are out of interest of this thesis and addi-
tionally the worst case is assumed and therefore WPPs operate always in maximum
power point and they do not provide ancillary services to the grid. Thus, for in-
stance the rotor speed of the WTs do not have to me modelled since inertial support
and droop control is not considered.
3.2
Detailed switching vs average model
In this section a comparison between switching MMC and average converter model is
performed. Two different models have been developed, in the first one both offshore
and onshore HVDC VSCs have been modelled as detailed switching MMCs and in
the second one as average VSCs. In both models, for WPPs average models have
been used.
Although, as already mentioned, in RTDS there is no simulation time issue, since
it is a Real Time simulation, the use of switching model demands the use of more
computational power and racks and thus it would be more suﬀicient to use average
models to reduce the model, simplify it and avoid numerical instabilities caused by
the operation of RTDS processors close to their limits.
Figure 3.2: Frequency and active power- Switching vs Average Model.
28
==PAGE:36==
The event performed is a WPP active power increase from 0 to 1 pu namely a 600
MW step and the initial active power flow of the offshore HVDC VSCs is zero.
In figure 3.2 the NSWPH frequency and offshore HVDC VSC active power are
illustrated. Due to the active power increase, the frequency of the Hub goes up to
50.13 Hz since offshore VSCs absorb more active power than their setpoints and
since they have the same droop gain equal to 0.0167, the active power imbalance is
shared equally among them. It is also evident that the results from the switching
and average model are almost identical in both steady state and transient terms.
Finally, in figure 3.3 the Hub Voltage is shown. When the event occurs, the Hub
voltage increases and then it gets a new steady state value. The new state value
mainly depends on the reactive power flow, since it is an AC system. The minor
differences in the peak value on the voltage are mainly due to modelling of the
switching model’s impedance, which is a small time step model and therefore it
could be considered numerical.
Figure 3.3: Hub Voltage- Switching vs Average Model.
As shown in the results above, the differences between the two models are minor
and occur mainly on the onshore grid. Thus since this thesis is focused on the zero-
inertia offshore grid, the average model can be used since the computational power
and the number of racks used will be reduced significantly even if the computational
time is the same. Furthermore, it would be more simple for the user to increase the
number of the HVDC links and use this model for further expansion of NSWPH
model.
29
==PAGE:37==
3.3
Simulations
In this section, the simulations and discussion of the results is performed.
The
simulations performed are divided into three main parts:
• Simulations during low initial loading of HVDC VSC and converter outage
• Simulations during high initial loading of HVDC VSC and wind power increase
• 3-phase AC short circuit in the offshore grid
The main assumptions made for the scope of this study are the following:
• WPPs do not provide ancillary services to the grid and operate on MPP. So,
no virtual inertia response and primary frequency support are considered.
• Only primary frequency control is considered and there is no secondary control
action for the HVDC offshore VSCs.
• No FRT curve is provided for all converter models. They produce maximum
reactive power when voltage on their PPC is lower than 0.8 pu.
• In the short circuit event, none protection device is considered and the fault
is cleared manually.
3.3.1
Events during low loading of VSC HVDC converters
In this subsection, the results in case of a load event during low HVDC converters’
loading are presented. Table 3.1 shows the initial load flow before the event. As
shown in this table, while WPPs produce 900 MW in total and offshore HVDC
VSCs absorb 447.7 MW each, one HVDC converter disconnects.
Table 3.1: Initial Load Flow
Active power [pu]
Reactive power [pu]
WPP1
0.3
0
WPP2
0.3
0
WPP3
0.3
0
WPP4
0.3
0
WPP5
0.3
0
Offshore converter 1
-0.2420
-0.0520
Onshore converter 1
0.2330
0
Offshore converter 2
-0.2420
-0.0520
Onshore converter 2
0.2330
0
30
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.4: Offshore active power and frequency.
In figure 3.4 the NSWPH frequency and offshore HVDC VSC active power are
illustrated. When the converter disconnects, the second one absorbs all the active
power produced from the WPP. Since, the active power absorbed by the second
converter is less than its setpoint, the Hub frequency increases and stabilizes to 50.2
Hz. It is evident that the frequency reaches immediately the new steady state value
because of the absence of inertia support.
In the figure below, the reactive power on offshore HVDC VSCs terminals as well
as the Hub Voltage are shown.
Figure 3.5: Offshore reactive power and Hub Voltage.
When the event occurs the reactive power of the disconnected converter becomes
zero while the reactive power of the second converter goes from -96.2 MVar to al-
most -180 MVar and so it obtains a more inductive behavior since it absorbs more
31
==PAGE:39==
reactive power.
The increase in the reactive power is explained by the fact that the second con-
verter, should absorb the reactive power from the converter which disconnected and
produced by the AC cables.
The Hub Voltage when the event occurs increases up to 1.15 pu and the new steady
state value is 1.01 pu. It is evident, that the final voltage value is higher than the
initial one. This is due to the fact that the reactive power flowing from the Hub bus
to the converter terminal increases because the converter absorbs also the reactive
power from the converter lost and thus greater voltage difference between those two
buses exists.
Figure 3.6 illustrates the DC Voltages of the converter that remains connected, in
the onshore and offshore DC terminals as well as the active power transferred to the
onshore grid.
When the disconnection occurs, the DC voltage increases because on the active
power increase. Then the onshore converter Vdc controller operates and maintains
the onshore dc voltage (Vdccon2) to its nominal value, namely 1050kV.
Since the active power transferred to the onshore grid from the second converter al-
most duplicates, also the voltage difference of the onshore and offshore DC Voltage
geminates. This is simply explained by the Kirchhoff’s law. The HVDC link can
be represented as two DC Voltages for onshore and offshore terminal having one
resistance in between to represent the HVDC line. Thus, the higher the power that
needs to be transferred from the offshore side to the onshore, the higher the voltage
difference between them.
Figure 3.6: Onshore, Offshore DC Voltage and active power.
32
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.7: Onshore reactive power.
Finally, figure 3.7 illustrates the reactive power in the onshore side. As already
mentioned the reactive power in Vdc −Q control is controlled independently of the
active power transfer.
Therefore, the new steady state value is equal which the
initial one, since the setpoint is in both cases zero.
3.3.2
Events during high loading of VSC HVDC converters
In this section, the performance of HVDC grid forming in a load event during high
loading is examined. The purpose of simulations is to test the eﬀiciency of current
limitation methods described in section 2.4.2 and analyze the stability of the system
in circumstances when an HVDC converter operate close to its current limit (1.1 pu).
In table 3.2 the pre-fault conditions for the active, reactive power and current for
WPPs and offshore HVDC converters are presented.
Table 3.2: Initial Load Flow
Active power [pu]
Reactive power [pu]
Current [pu]
WPP1
0.73
0
0.73
WPP2
0.73
0
0.73
WPP3
0.73
0
0.73
WPP4
0.8
0
0.8
WPP5
0
0
0
Offshore converter 1
-0.8585
0.1658
0.959
Offshore converter 2
0
-0.0415
0.041
33
==PAGE:41==
As shown in this table, offshore converter 1 has initial current equal to 0.956 pu,
so a wind production increase could enable the current limiters and saturate the
converter. So, the event is selected to be a wind power increase of 0.9 pu in WPP5
namely from 0 to 540 MW.
3.3.2.1
Current limiters
The first method examined is the current limiters method. Figure 3.8 illustrates the
currents of the grid forming converters.
This figure shows that when the event occurs an almost equal (differece because
of different reactive power flow) current increase happens to the converters due to
the fact that they have the same active power droop gain. It is evident from the
results, that converter 1 is saturated and its current is limited to 1.1 pu with os-
cillations caused by the instability occured due to converters’ desynchronization as
shown in figure 3.9.
Figure 3.8: Grid forming converter current-Current limiters method
This figure shows the frequencies and the active power of both grid forming con-
verter. As shown in the frequency plot, the converters lose their synchronization
34
==PAGE:42==
with the grid and the frequency oscillations are depicted also to the active power.
Figure 3.9: Grid forming converter active power and frequency-Current limiters
method
Figure 3.10 presents the reactive power and the Hub voltage. The active power
oscillations caused by the frequency oscillations due to desynchronization affect also
the reactive power which also oscillates and obtains high values. Thus this oscilla-
tions in active and reactive power explain the oscillations in converters’ currents.
Furthermore, the high reactive power values affect the Hub Voltage which has a
maximum RMS value of 1.08 pu.
Figure 3.10: Grid forming converter reactive power and Hub Voltage-Current lim-
iters method
Thus, it is clear that the converter desynchronization could also cause a converter
outage due to the overvoltage protection scheme, which as a chain reaction could
35
==PAGE:43==
lead to a system collapse.
Finally, as shown in the results above, when the current limiters are enabled and
the converter is saturated, then it is desynchronized, since as already mentioned the
voltage outerloops have a steady state error and the voltage is uncontrolled. So, to
avoid the instability enhanced methods are necessary to limit the current and avoid
converter saturation in high loading conditions.
3.3.2.2
Adaptive droop based on current amplitude
The first enhanced current limiting method to mitigate the instability occurred with
the current limiters technique is the adaptive droop based on current amplitude
method.
Figure 3.11: Grid forming converter current-Adaptive droop method
As explained in 2.4.2.2 the purpose of this method is to configure the droop gain in
order to control the converter active power and avoid converter saturation.
Figure 3.11 illustrates the current of both offshore HVDC converters. As shown in
this figure, when the event occurs, the current of first converter is greater than one
and thus the adaptive droop controller starts operating.
The new steady state value of converter’s 1 current is below 1.1 pu and increased
slightly in comparison with its pre-fault value and instability is avoided.
36
==PAGE:44==
The unequal current share happens because of the adaptive droop operation for
converter 1. When WPP5 active power increases, the droop gain of converter 1
increases ten times, which means that almost all active power increase in is absorbed
from converter 2 as shown in figure 3.12.
The small change of the new steady state frequency is explained from the following
equation:
f = −
δP
Pnom
kdroop1 · fnom
+
Pnom
kdroop2 · fnom
= −
−540
1850
0.0167 · 50 +
1850
0.00167 · 50
=
= 0.022Hz
(3.1)
It is mentioned that the minor difference between the calculation and the simulation
results are because losses are not included in δP.
Figure 3.12: Grid forming converter active power and frequency-Adaptive droop
method
Furthermore, figure 3.13 depicts the reactive power and the Hub voltage. As shown
in this figure, the reactive power produced from converter 2 increases because of
the active power rise which causes reactive power losses increase in the transformer
which connects the second converter with the Hub bus. For the same reason, re-
active power from converter 1 remains almost unchanged since the active power is
almost equal with the initial one.
The voltage drop in the Hub bus is explained from the raise in reactive power flow
from converters to the Hub bus and the fact that the converters do not have any
QV voltage droop, which means that their voltage setpoint is equal to 1 pu. Thus,
since the greater the voltage difference, the greater the reactive power flow, Hub
37
==PAGE:45==
obtains a lower new steady state value.
Figure 3.13: Grid forming converter reactive power and Hub Voltage-Adaptive droop
method
From the obtained results, it is showed that the implementation of adaptive droop
gain assist the system to maintain stability in a wind power increase. But, it is also
evident that a second converter should exist in order for this control scheme to be
eﬀicient and also that it is not appropriate for a converter outage in a two converter
system. Thus, a different method should also be explored to mitigate also this type
of event.
3.3.2.3
Virtual Impedance
Next method implemented is the virtual impedance method. Similarly with the
adaptive droop method, it aims to limit the current, so that it is below 1.1 pu and
avoid converter saturation. As already mentioned, this method inserts a virtual
voltage drop and adjusts the voltage setpoint to mitigate it, therefore it is clear that
the selection of RV I and (X/R)V I is important. For simplicity, in this thesis a sen-
sitivity analysis is performed to select the appropriate values of virtual impedance
controller. It is mentioned that for the sensitivity analysis, the current limiters are
not included to see the gains’ infuence even if current is greater than 1.1 pu.
Firstly, the influence of (X/R)V I is examined, RV I is equal to 0.6 and (X/R)V I
is increased from 0.6 with steps of 0.3.
Figure 3.14 illustrates the final current
value of converter 1 after the wind power increase. As shown, for every (X/R)V I
gain tested, the current is below 1.1 pu and the higher the gain, the higher the
current final value. Additionally, 3.14 shows the current as a function of time for
(X/R)V I = 2.4, where it is evident that even the current is below 1.1 pu the system
38
==PAGE:46==
is unstable due to small signal stability issues.
Figure 3.14: Xvi gain sensitivity analysis for RV I=0.6, Current
In figure below, the reactive power and external (PCC) and internal bus (converter’s
terminal) voltage of converter 1 are presented.
Figure 3.15: (X/R)V I gain sensitivity analysis for RV I=0.6, reactive power and
Voltage
As shown there, the higher the gain value, the lower the reactive current and the
lower the voltage setpoint at the PCC and as a result the lower the voltage at con-
verter’s terminal. This means that the increase of (X/R)V I infuences the reactive
power of the converter by decreasing it due the virtual reactance added. This also
explains the decrease in the voltage setpoint, since lower voltage difference for reac-
tive power to be transferred is needed. In addition to that, the decrease of voltage
setpoint explains the current increase.
39
==PAGE:47==
Next, the influence of RV I is examined, (X/R)V I is equal to 0.3 and 2.3 and RV I is
increased from 0.0 with steps of 0.1. Figure 3.16 illustrated the final current value
of converter 1 after the wind power increase. Since, for (X/R)V I = 2.3, RV I > 0.7
and (X/R)V I = 0.3, RV I > 1.8 small signal instability occured, the results are not
presented.
It is evident that the influence of RV I is not linear and also that very low RV I val-
ues or greater than 1.7 lead to current greater than 1.1 pu. The non-linear behavior
is also reflected to the active power as shown in figure 3.17 where active power is
maximum for RV I = 0.9
Figure 3.16: RV I gain sensitivity analysis for X/R=2.3 and X/R=0.3, Current
Figure 3.17: RV I gain sensitivity analysis for (X/R)V I=2.3 and (X/R)V I=0.3, ac-
tive power
Figure 3.18 represents the reactive power of converter 1 for the different RV I values.
As shown the higher the RV I, the higher the reactive power produced by the con-
verter. This is explained in figure 3.19 where the internal and external voltages are
presented. It is evident that higher RV I result in higher voltage setpoints (external
bus voltage) and thus in greater reactive power flow.
40
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.18: RV I gain sensitivity analysis for (X/R)V I=2.3 and (X/R)V I=0.3, re-
active power
Figure
3.19:
RV I
gain
sensitivity
analysis
for
(X/R)V I=2.3
and
(X/R)V I=0.3,Internal and External bus voltage
From the sensitivity analysis performed it seemed that different gain values of the
virtual impedance controller lead to current values lower than 1.1 pu and than
high gain values could lead to small signal instability. Although, the gains do not
only influence the current, but also the voltage setpoints and the reactive power,
thus multiple factors should be taken into account. For instance, even if the gains
selected, lead to current value lower than 1.1 pu, voltages greater than 1.05 pu may
occur. For this thesis for simplicity, RV I = 0.7 and (X/R)V I = 2.3 are selected, so
that the system is small signal stable, current is below 1.1 pu, voltages are below
1.05 pu and reactive power flow is within reasonable range. For better performance,
an optimization problem should be solved, where the constraints are the current and
voltage limits and the objective function is the reactive power.
The figure below shows the current of both converters as obtained from the dynamic
analysis.
As shown, the current of converter 1 is below 1.1 pu, thus converter
saturation is avoided.
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.20: Grid forming converter current-Virtual Impedance method
Figure 3.21: Grid forming converter active power and frequency-Virtual Impedance
method
As depicted in figure 3.21, WPP5 active power increase is shared equally among the
two converters and new steady state frequency is equal to 50.12 Hz as also calculated
in the equation below:
f = −
δP
Pnom
kdroop1 · fnom
+
Pnom
kdroop2 · fnom
= −
−540
1850
0.0167 · 50 +
1850
0.0167 · 50
=
= 0.12Hz
(3.2)
Figure 3.22 shows the reactive power of converters and the Hub Voltage. As shown,
42
==PAGE:50==
the virtual impedance controller increase the converter 1 voltage setpoint and thus
voltage in the Hub bus gets higher. This, explains the decrease in converter 2 reac-
tive power, which does not occur in adaptive droop method. Since the Hub voltage
increases and converter 2 voltage setpoint is 1 pu because its current is below 1
pu and the virtual impedance is disabled, higher voltage difference occurs and thus
higher reactive power is transferred from Hub bus to converter bus.
Figure 3.22:
Grid forming converter reactive power and Hub Voltage-Virtual
Impedance method
It is evident from the results, that virtual impedance limitation method is more
robust than the adaptive droop method, since it can be also used for converter outage
in a two converter system and an extra converter is not necessary. Although, the
selection of virtual impedance gains is more complex and an inappropriate selection
may lead to high bus voltages and increase the reactive power flow and thus the
system losses.
3.3.3
Short-circuit event
In this section, a symmetrical 3-ph short circuit event of 100ms occured in the Hub
Bus is examined. It is mentioned that the purpose of this analysis is to test the
performance of current limiting control scheme in terms of current limitation in
severe faults, therefore no protection scheme is implemented and the fault is cleared
manually.
Generally, the fault clearance in a system with high penetration of converter based
units is challenging and it is not investigated in this thesis. Synchronous generators,
are able to provide high short circuit currents, which help the protection system to
43
==PAGE:51==
clear the fault fast [39]. Converters do not have this ability and it maybe diﬀicult
for the protection system to detect the fault and clear it.
In table 3.3 the initial load flow is shown and in figures 3.23, 3.24, 3.25, 3.26 the
results for 3ph short circuit in Hub bus for currents in d and q axis, total current,
active and reactive power, Hub Voltage respectively, including all three current
limiting techniques. It is mentioned that converters’ results are identical, therefore
only converter 1 results are analyzed.
Table 3.3: Initial Load Flow
Active power [pu]
Reactive power [pu]
Current [pu]
WPP1
0.8
0
0.8
WPP2
0.8
0
0.8
WPP3
0.8
0
0.8
WPP4
0.8
0
0.8
WPP5
0.8
0
0.8
Offshore converter 1
-0.64
0.03
0.64
Offshore converter 2
-0.64
0.03
0.64
From the above results, it is evident that the results are almost identical for all
current limiting techniques.
This is, due to the fact that during short circuit, current references are limited ,
thus the converter gets saturated for all methods.
As shown in figure 3.23 priority is given in q-axis instead of d-axis when the fault
occurred in order to support the voltage when it gets below 0.8 pu as already ex-
plained. Thus the d-axis current gets a very low value and the q-axis current is
limited.
Figure 3.23: Grid forming converter currents in d and q axis during 3ph short circuit
44
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.24: Grid forming converter current during 3ph short circuit-Current limiters
method
As show in figure above, the total current just after the fault and at the fault clear-
ance gets above 1.1 pu for few us and during the fault is limited to 1.1 pu successfully.
These high currents occurred after the fault and at the fault clearance are allowed
according to [40], since their duration is small and are not insecure for IGBTs safe
operation. It is mentioned that the amplitude the current in these states depends
on fault location and converter impedance.
Figure 3.25: Grid forming converter active and reactive power during 3ph short
circuit
45
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.26: Hub Voltage during 3ph short circuit
Figures above present the active, reactive power and the Hub Voltage. As shown,
during the fault active power decreases and reactive power increases, since priority
in given on q-axis. Hub Voltage during the fault gets very low value and it is restored
successfully after the fault clearance and has a maximum RMS value equal to 1.45
pu, which is considered safe and will not enable any overvoltage protection.
As shown in the results above, the system is stable during a 3ph short circuit of
100ms in the Hub Voltage and grid forming converter currents are limited eﬀi-
ciently. Νevertheless, it is proposed that different fault duration and different fault
locations should be tested, since these different conditions may lead to instability
and additional measures should be taken to mitigate them.
46
==PAGE:54==
4
Conclusions and future work
4.1
Conclusions
The purpose of this thesis was the development of NSWPH zero-inertia topology
dynamic EMT model and the investigation of frequency stability. Different control
schemes were implemented to ensure stability for different conditions and ensure
safe operation for various emergencies.
The first task was the implementation and validation of different individual models
to utilize the final NSWPH in RSCAD®. Thus, switching and average VSC model,
grid following controls (P −Q, Vdc −Q) and grid forming controls (droop control,
current limiters, adaptive droop based on current amplitude, virtual impedance)
were developed and various simulations were performed to validate the performance
of each individual model.
Next, the synthesis of all aforementioned components was utilized for the construc-
tion of NSWPH zero-inertia topology dynamic model. Two different model were
developed for switching and average VSC model and the simulations showed that is
it safe to use average VSC models for the purpose of this study.
Afterwards, different simulation scenarios performed for various conditions, mainly
for emergencies during low and high loading of offshore VSC converters and 3ph
short circuit. Simulation results showed that during high loading of offshore VSC
converters enhanced control schemes should be utilized to avoid instability occurred
by converter saturation. Two different enhanced methods were investigated, mainly
the adaptive droop based on current amplitude and the virtual impedance method.
Although the first one is simpler to utilize, it has several disadvantages with most
important that it is not suitable for all kind of emergencies like converter outage.
Virtual impedance method is a more promising method and more robust compared
to the adaptive droop method. The disadvantage is that its tuning and gain selection
is more complex and a lot of factors should be taken into account.
4.2
Future work
In this thesis the main task to model the NSWPH zero-inertia topology dynamic
EMT model as well as the tasks mentioned in 1.2 were accomplished. In addition
47
==PAGE:55==
to that, it was observed that some topics need more research. Therefore, below are
some points, which can be used for further investigation:
• Implementation of WPP ancillary services (primary frequncy control, inertial
response).
• Integration of FRT curves for both grid following and grid forming converters.
• Protection scheme implementation for the short circuit analysis to achieve a
realistic fault clearance time.
• Development of optimization algorithm for the virtual impedance controller
parameters.
• Investigation for different short circuit duration and fault locations.
• Implementation of more current limiting techniques for grid forming converter.
• Development and comparison of low-inertia NSWP model.
48
==PAGE:56==
References
[1]
European Commission. Available on-line: EU contribution to international
goals. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_16_502/.
[Accessed on 22-May-2021].
[2]
Danish Energy Agency. Available online: Danish climate policies. https://
ens.dk/en/our-responsibilities/energy-climate-politics/danish-climate-policies.
[Accessed on 23-May-2021].
[3]
Enerdata. Available on-line: https://www.enerdata.net/publications/daily-
energy - news / denmark - approves - 3 - gw - offshore - wind - hub - north - sea . html.
[Accessed on 22-May-2021].
[4]
Energinet. Available on-line: https://en.energinet.dk/Green-Transition/Energy-
Islands/Visuals. [Accessed on 22-May-2021].
[5]
Kala Meah and Sadrul Ula. “Comparative Evaluation of HVDC and HVAC
Transmission Systems”. In: 2007 IEEE Power Engineering Society General
Meeting. 2007, pp. 1–5. doi: 10.1109/PES.2007.385993.
[6]
Spyros Chatzivasileiadis. multiDC: Controlling the power flows. DTU Center
of Electric Power and Energy, 08-03-2019.
[7]
T. Gallery et al. “Medium-term dynamic studies for a large island power sys-
tem with high levels of wind”. In: vol. 2014-August. 2014. url: https://www.
scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85047086359&partnerID=40&md5=
cefef8301c452e552f87e2871e8465ef.
[8]
M. Karystianos, Y. Kabouris, and T. Koronides. “Operation of the electrical
system of Crete in Interconnection with the mainland grid: A stability study”.
In: vol. 2014-August. 2014. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?
eid=2-s2.0-85047210795&partnerID=40&md5=86d6731a7f182b99e176cfbf3460c948.
[9]
S. Ntomalis et al. “Dynamic Modeling and Simulation of Non-Interconnected
Systems under High-RES Penetration: The Madeira Island Case”. In: Energies
13.21 (2020). issn: 1996-1073. doi: 10.3390/en13215786. url: https://www.
mdpi.com/1996-1073/13/21/5786.
[10]
Soo Hyoung Lee, DongHee Choi, and Jung-Wook Park. “Inertia-Free Stand-
Alone Microgrid—Part I: Analysis on Synchronized GPS Time-Based Control
and Operation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications 54.5 (2018),
pp. 4048–4059. doi: 10.1109/TIA.2018.2840089.
49
==PAGE:57==
[11]
Upama Bose et al. “A Novel Method of Frequency Regulation in Microgrid”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications 55.1 (2019), pp. 111–121. doi:
10.1109/TIA.2018.2866047.
[12]
Yida Ye et al. “A Coordinated Frequency Regulation Strategy for VSC-HVDC
Integrated Offshore Wind Farms”. In: 2018 IEEE Power Energy Society Gen-
eral Meeting (PESGM). 2018, pp. 1–5. doi: 10.1109/PESGM.2018.8586620.
[13]
Zhenyu Du et al. “Emergency power control strategies applied for offshore
wind farms connected by HVDC system”. In: 2019 4th IEEE Workshop on
the Electronic Grid (eGRID). 2019, pp. 1–5. doi: 10.1109/eGRID48402.2019.
9092647.
[14]
Oriol Gomis-Bellmunt et al. “Multiterminal HVDC-VSC for offshore wind
power integration”. In: 2011 IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting.
2011, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/PES.2011.6039238.
[15]
Risheng Li et al. “Grid Frequency Control Design for Offshore Wind Farms
with Naturally Commutated HVDC Link Connection”. In: 2006 IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Industrial Electronics. Vol. 2. 2006, pp. 1595–1600.
doi: 10.1109/ISIE.2006.295710.
[16]
Rasik Sarup et al. “Interfacing Offshore Wind Farms with Onshore Utility
Power Grids using MT-HVDC Link”. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Power Electronics, Drives and Energy Systems (PEDES). 2018, pp. 1–6.
doi: 10.1109/PEDES.2018.8707777.
[17]
P. Kundur et al. “Definition and classification of power system stability IEEE/-
CIGRE joint task force on stability terms and definitions”. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Power Systems 19.3 (2004), pp. 1387–1401. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.
2004.825981.
[18]
N. Hatziargyriou et al. “Definition and Classification of Power System Stability
Revisited Extended”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems (2020), pp. 1–
1. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2020.3041774.
[19]
Georgios Misyris, S. Chatzivasileiadis, and Tilman Weckesser. “Zero-inertia
Systems: Suﬀicient Conditions for Phasor Modeling”. In: ArXiv abs/2002.11209
(2020).
[20]
Nee Sharifabadi Harnefors. Design, Control, and Application of Modular Mul-
tilevel Converters for HVDC Transmission Systems. IEEE PRESS, WILEY,
2016.
[21]
G. Misyris et al. “North Sea Wind Power Hub: System Configurations, Grid
Implementation and Techno-economic Assessment”. In: ArXiv abs/2006.05829
(2020).
50
==PAGE:58==
[22]
Georgios Misyris et al. “Zero-inertia Offshore Grids: N-1 Security and Active
Power Sharing”. In: ArXiv abs/2009.11039 (2020).
[23]
Ned Mohan. First course on power electronics and drives. MNPERE, Mine-
neapolis, 2003.
[24]
M. Zygmanowski et al. “Selected aspects of Modular Multilevel Converter
operation”. In: 62.No 2 (2014), pp. 375–385. doi: 10.2478/bpasts-2014-0038.
url: http://journals.pan.pl/Content/83928/PDF/19_paper.pdf.
[25]
Direct-quadrature-zero transformation. Available online: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Direct-quadrature-zero_transformation. [Accessed on 05-June-2021].
[26]
Ioannis D. Hansen Anca Daniela; Margaris. Type IV Wind Turbine Model.
DTU Wind Energy, 2014.
[27]
Oscar Saborío-Romano. Module 5-Control and Dynamic Models of Wind Tur-
bines. Offshore wind grid connection and HVDC transmission, DTU Wind
Energy, 02-10-2020.
[28]
Bin Xu et al. “Analysis of Influence of Wind Turbine on Short Circuit Capacity
of System”. In: 2019 IEEE 3rd Conference on Energy Internet and Energy
System Integration (EI2). 2019, pp. 1704–1709. doi: 10.1109/EI247390.2019.
9061778.
[29]
R LI, H. GENG, and G. YANG. “Fault ride-through of renewable energy
conversion systems during voltage recovery.” In: J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean
Energy (2016), pp. 28–39. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s40565-015-0177-0.
[30]
Gustav Lammert et al. “Dynamic grid support in low voltage grids — fault
ride-through and reactive power/voltage support during grid disturbances”. In:
2014 Power Systems Computation Conference. 2014, pp. 1–7. doi: 10.1109/
PSCC.2014.7038468.
[31]
Junru Chen, Federico Prystupczuk, and Terence O’Donnell. “Use of voltage
limits for current limitations in grid-forming converters”. In: CSEE Journal of
Power and Energy Systems 6.2 (2020), pp. 259–269. doi: 10.17775/CSEEJPES.
2019.02660.
[32]
X. Wang et al. “Grid-Synchronization Stability of Converter-Based Resources—
An Overview”. In: IEEE Open Journal of Industry Applications 1 (2020),
pp. 115–134. doi: 10.1109/OJIA.2020.3020392.
[33]
Mads Graungaard Taul et al. “Current Limiting Control With Enhanced Dy-
namics of Grid-Forming Converters During Fault Conditions”. In: IEEE Jour-
nal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics 8.2 (2020), pp. 1062–
1073. doi: 10.1109/JESTPE.2019.2931477.
51
==PAGE:59==
[34]
Kai Shi et al. “Low-Voltage Ride-Through Control Strategy for a Virtual Syn-
chronous Generator Based on Smooth Switching”. In: IEEE Access 6 (2018),
pp. 2703–2711. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2784846.
[35]
Taoufik Qoria et al. “Current limiting algorithms and transient stability anal-
ysis of grid-forming VSCs”. In: Electric Power Systems Research 189 (2020),
p. 106726. issn: 0378-7796. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2020.106726.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378779620305290.
[36]
Xiongfei Wang et al. “Virtual-Impedance-Based Control for Voltage-Source
and Current-Source Converters”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics
30.12 (2015), pp. 7019–7037. doi: 10.1109/TPEL.2014.2382565.
[37]
Andrew D. Paquette and Deepak M. Divan. “Virtual Impedance Current Lim-
iting for Inverters in Microgrids With Synchronous Generators”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications 51.2 (2015), pp. 1630–1638. doi: 10.
1109/TIA.2014.2345877.
[38]
Alexander Micallef et al. “Performance comparison for virtual impedance tech-
niques used in droop controlled islanded microgrids”. In: 2016 International
Symposium on Power Electronics, Electrical Drives, Automation and Motion
(SPEEDAM). 2016, pp. 695–700. doi: 10.1109/SPEEDAM.2016.7526013.
[39]
Nasser Tleis. “7 - Short-circuit analysis techniques in large-scale ac power sys-
tems”. In: Power Systems Modelling and Fault Analysis (Second Edition). Ed.
by Nasser Tleis. Second Edition. Academic Press, 2019, pp. 597–664. isbn:
978-0-12-815117-4. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-815117-4.00007-2.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128151174000072.
[40]
Mads Graungaard Taul et al. “Current Limiting Control With Enhanced Dy-
namics of Grid-Forming Converters During Fault Conditions”. In: IEEE Jour-
nal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics 8.2 (2020), pp. 1062–
1073. doi: 10.1109/JESTPE.2019.2931477.
52
==PAGE:60==
53
==PAGE:61==
A
APPENDIX
Figure A.1: NSWPH zero-inertia topology in RSCAD®.
54
==PAGE:62==
Table A.1: Transformers parameters
Vprim [kV]
Vsec [kV]
S [MVA]
R [pu]
X [pu]
Trfon1
525
220
1850
0.01
0.15
Trfon2
525
220
1850
0.01
0.15
Trfoff1
525
400
1850
0.01
0.15
Trfoff2
525
400
1850
0.01
0.15
Trf1
400
66
1850
0.01
0.15
Trf2
400
66
1850
0.01
0.15
Trf3
400
66
1850
0.01
0.15
Trf4
400
66
1850
0.01
0.15
Trf5
400
66
1850
0.01
0.15
Trfwind1
66
66
1850
0.01
0.15
Trfwind2
66
66
1850
0.01
0.15
Trfwind3
66
66
1850
0.01
0.15
Trfwind4
66
66
1850
0.01
0.15
Trfwind5
66
66
1850
0.01
0.15
Table A.2: Transformers parameters
Length [km]
R [Ohm/km]
X [Ohm/km]
C [uF/km]
Line1
10
0.0021
0.0031
0.0072
Line2
15
0.0021
0.0031
0.0072
Line3
20
0.0021
0.0031
0.0072
Line4
25
0.0021
0.0031
0.0072
Line5
30
0.0021
0.0031
0.0072
HV DCline1
200
0.011
-
-
HV DCline2
200
0.011
-
-
Table A.3: Converters’ electrical parameters
AC Voltage[kV]
DC Voltage[kV]
S[MVA]
R[pu]
L[pu]
C[pu]
HVDC Onshore VSC 1
525
1050
1850
-
-
-
HVDC Onshore VSC 2
525
1050
1850
-
-
-
HVDC Offshore VSC 1
525
1050
1850
0.1
0.08
0.074
HVDC Offshore VSC 2
525
1050
1850
0.1
0.08
0.074
WPP 1
66
132
600
-
-
-
WPP 2
66
132
600
-
-
-
WPP 3
66
132
600
-
-
-
WPP 4
66
132
600
-
-
-
WPP 5
66
132
600
-
-
-
55
==PAGE:63==
Table A.4: HVDC Onshore controllers parameters
Controller
Proportional gain
Integral gain
Vdc outer-loop
1.3
70
Vdc inner-loop
1.43
30
Q outer-loop
0.1
9
Q inner-loop
1.43
30
Table A.5: HVDC Offshore controllers parameters
Controller
Proportional gain
Integral gain
Vd outer-loop
0.59
736
Vd inner-loop
1.27
14.3
Vq outer-loop
0.59
736
Vq inner-loop
1.27
14.3
Table A.6: WPP controllers parameters
Controller
Proportional gain
Integral gain
P outer-loop
0
39
P inner-loop
0.477
5
Q outer-loop
0.1
9
Q inner-loop
0.477
5
56
==PAGE:64==
B
Abbreviations
TSO
Transmission System Operator
NSWPH
North Sea Wind Power Hub
HVDC
High Voltage Direct Current
GHG
Green House Gas
EU
European Union
UN
United Nations
RES
Renewable Energy Sources
DC
Direct Current
AC
Alternate Current
RMS
Root Mean Square
EMT
Electromagnetic Transient
VSC
Voltage Source Converter
CSC
Current Source Converter
IGPT
Insulated-Gate Bipolar Transistor
MMC
Modular Multilevel Converter
PWM
Pulse Width Modulation
PCC
Point of Common Coupling
PLL
Phase Locked Loop
PI
Proportional-Integral
WPP
Wind Power Plant
FRT
Fault Ride Through
WT
Wind Turbine
57
==PAGE:65==
C
List of Figures
2.1
Modelling approach in RSCAD®. [20] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Three-phase two-level converter. [20] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
PWM modulation. [23] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
N-level MMC converter. [24] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
N-level MMC output voltage. [20] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6
RSCAD®Average Converter model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.7
Grid following converter connected to the grid. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.8
PLL control scheme. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.9
VSC grid following converter P −Q control. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.10 System to evaluate grid following converter control. . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.11 P −Q controller step response for active and reactive power. . . . . .
13
2.12 VSC grid following converter Vdc −Q control.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.13 Vdc −Q controller step response for DC Voltage and reactive power. .
14
2.14 VSC grid following converter control scheme including current satu-
ration .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.15 Id and P in VSC grid following converter including current saturation . 16
2.16 Iq and Q in VSC grid following converter including current saturation . 16
2.17 Id and Iq in VSC grid following converter including current saturation
during short-circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.18 I in VSC grid following converter including current saturation during
short-circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.19 Grid forming control .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.20 Grid forming converter droop control. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.21 Grid forming converters operating in parallel.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.22 Active power increase without droop control for two parallel con-
nected converters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.23 Active power increase with droop control for two parallel connected
converters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.24 Grid forming VSC control scheme including current limiters. . . . . .
24
2.25 Adaptive droop based on current amplitude control scheme.
. . . . .
25
2.26 Grid forming VSC control scheme including virtual impedance.
. . .
26
3.1
NSWPH zero-inertia topology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Frequency and active power- Switching vs Average Model.
. . . . . .
28
58
==PAGE:66==
3.3
Hub Voltage- Switching vs Average Model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Offshore active power and frequency. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.5
Offshore reactive power and Hub Voltage.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.6
Onshore, Offshore DC Voltage and active power. . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.7
Onshore reactive power.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.8
Grid forming converter current-Current limiters method
. . . . . . .
34
3.9
Grid forming converter active power and frequency-Current limiters
method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.10 Grid forming converter reactive power and Hub Voltage-Current lim-
iters method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.11 Grid forming converter current-Adaptive droop method . . . . . . . .
36
3.12 Grid forming converter active power and frequency-Adaptive droop
method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.13 Grid forming converter reactive power and Hub Voltage-Adaptive
droop method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.14 Xvi gain sensitivity analysis for RV I=0.6, Current . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.15 (X/R)V I gain sensitivity analysis for RV I=0.6, reactive power and
Voltage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.16 RV I gain sensitivity analysis for X/R=2.3 and X/R=0.3, Current . .
40
3.17 RV I gain sensitivity analysis for (X/R)V I=2.3 and (X/R)V I=0.3,
active power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.18 RV I gain sensitivity analysis for (X/R)V I=2.3 and (X/R)V I=0.3,
reactive power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.19 RV I gain sensitivity analysis for (X/R)V I=2.3 and (X/R)V I=0.3,Internal
and External bus voltage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.20 Grid forming converter current-Virtual Impedance method . . . . . .
42
3.21 Grid forming converter active power and frequency-Virtual Impedance
method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.22 Grid forming converter reactive power and Hub Voltage-Virtual Impedance
method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.23 Grid forming converter currents in d and q axis during 3ph short circuit 44
3.24 Grid forming converter current during 3ph short circuit-Current lim-
iters method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.25 Grid forming converter active and reactive power during 3ph short
circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.26 Hub Voltage during 3ph short circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A.1
NSWPH zero-inertia topology in RSCAD®. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
59
==PAGE:67==
D
List of Tables
2.1
P −Q control PI controllers parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Vdc −Q control PI controllers parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
HVDC Offshore controllers parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1
Initial Load Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Initial Load Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3
Initial Load Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.1
Transformers parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.2
Transformers parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.3
Converters’ electrical parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.4
HVDC Onshore controllers parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.5
HVDC Offshore controllers parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.6
WPP controllers parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
60
==PAGE:68==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej Building 325
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. (+45) 4525 3500
www.cee.elektro.dtu.dk/
