==PAGE:1==
Design and test of an ammonia/Dimethyl
ether fuel injection pump for a
compression ignition engine
Tómas Gíslason
M.Sc. Thesis
2021
==PAGE:2==
Design and test of an ammonia/Dimethyl ether fuel injection pump for a compression
ignition engine
Copenhagen, Denmark
5th of August 2021
Author:
Tómas Gíslason (student no. s192305)
Supervisor:
Anders Ivarsson, Associate Professor, Mechanical Engineering, DTU
Credits :
30 ECTS
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
An Ignition Quality Tester (IQT) which was designed to evaluate distilled fuels had been
modiﬁed to be able to also test residual fuels. The Tester was calibrated using Cetane and
Isocetane reference fuels and the cetane number of Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) measured. The
fuel injection system was then modiﬁed further to be able to test toxic, gaseous fuels such as
Dimethyl ether (DME) and ammonia.
As the current form of the IQT was not able to fulﬁll any speciﬁc standard because it was
designed to fulﬁll ASTM and residual IP standard requires twice the chamber pressure,
a custom correlation curve was derived to connect the ignition delay and derived cetane
number (DCN) parameters and new standard parameters decided.
The initial setup of the IQT could not be calibrated using standard methods and therefore
the Ignition delay of four mixtures with a known cetane number where tested to create a
correlation curve between the resulting ID from the tester and the DCN.
Part of the IQT modiﬁcations was a mechanical fuel injection pump modiﬁed to include
a pressurised oil chamber behind the injection plunger. This was to create a pressure that
would prevent gaseous fuels from reaching atmospheric pressures, vaporising and reacting
with sensitive components of the lubrication system.
The fuel system was modiﬁed by changing the fuel tank, altering the fuel lines and modifying
the injector to be gas tight so fuel wouldn’t leak out into the testing room.
Results show that the IQT design is very capable of measuring the ignition delay of residual
fuels as well as distilled under the same conditions. The gaseous fuel system showed
promising results in containing the gaseous fuels in liquid form so they could be pressurised
by the injection pump. During testing the pressures never reached values high enough to
lift he injector needle and therefore it was not possible to inject the fuel into the combustion
chamber of the IQT. With small ﬁne tuning, full DCN measurements can be completed for
gaseous fuels.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was conducted by Tómas Gíslason (s192305) from the 15th of February 2021 to the
5th of August 2021 in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree Master of Science
in Mechanical Engineering, M.Sc. The work was carried out at the Technical University of
Denmark in DTU Mekanik 413.
My greatest thanks go to Anders Ivarsson, for the opportunity of working on this project, all
the helpful advises and insight into problem solving and analysing the data. I would also
like to thank Jeppe Vilsboll Larsen, Motoki Terauchi and Mads Carsten Jespersen for their
helpfulness, will to brainstorm ideas and for celebrating all the small victories along the way
with me.
I dedicate this thesis to my father, mother, family and friends who have had incredible faith in me
through out my study career and given me incredible support. I’m thankful for having had you with
me.
Tómas Gíslason
DTU Mekanik, 5th of August 2021
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Kongens Lyngby
==PAGE:5==
List of Abbreviations
IQT
Ignition Quality Tester
HFO
Heavy Fuel Oil
DME
Dimethyl Ether
DCN
Derived Cetane Number
CI
Compression Ignition
CVCC
Constant Volume Combustion Chamber
ID
Ignition delay
BTDC
Before Top Dead Center
CFR
Cooperative Fuel Research
NP
Needle Position
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
The Compression Ignition Engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Jerk type fuel injection pumps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
The cetane number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
IQT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Experimental setup
7
3.1
IQT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
The initial setup of the IQT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.2
Sealing oil system on the IQT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.3
Injector Modiﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Gaseous Fuel System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
IQT Testing
17
4.1
Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Calibration of the IQT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Evaluating the cetane number of HFO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Testing of the gaseous fuel system and DME attempt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Evaluation Of Injection Pump Design
29
5.1
Measuring The Effect of Fuel Contamination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Sealing oil leakage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Effect of sealing oil pressure on ID
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Final Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Conclusion
35
7
Further Work
36
7.1
IQT Next Steps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.2
Injection Pump Next Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.3
Implementing Onto A Running Engine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Appendix
i
A Troubleshooting
i
A.1 Faulty injector signal due to injection pump wear
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
B
Technical Drawings
iv
i
==PAGE:7==
C IQT calibration Matlab Code
xi
D Injector and injection pump force calculations and thought processes
xiii
ii
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1
How the rotation of the plunger controls the injected fuel amount. [1].
. . . .
3
2
An example from the ASTM6890 standard of the injector needle movement
signal and the pressure increase signal of a single combustion cycle in an IQT [2].
5
3
A combustion analyzer schematic of an IQT from the ASTM6890 standard [2].
6
4
The different systems and components of the IQT shown (left), The diagram
showing the fuel system of the IQT for liquid fuels (right).
. . . . . . . . . . .
7
5
A simpliﬁed explanation of an injection pump with and without sealing oil
modiﬁcations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6
The modiﬁed injection system of the IQT with the built in sealing oil chamber.
10
7
A photo of the piston removed from the cylinder (left) and part of the technical
drawings showing the assembly and a section view of the pressurising system
(right).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
8
The original IQT mechanical injector components (left), the inner workings of
the injector and the fuel ﬂow through it. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
9
The modiﬁed injector assembled with the gaseous fuel sealing components. .
13
10
A cutaway view of the mechanical injector assembled with the sealing oil
system, showing how the different parts seal together. The fuel leaking past
the needle returns to the fuel system.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
11
The fuel tank used for gaseous fuels including the quick connectors, needle
valve and a pressure gauge for controlling the fuel ﬁlling. . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
12
A diagram of the gaseous fuel system (left) and the system assembled. . . . .
15
13
A single cycle data of Cetane logged from the IQT showing the pressure rise,
needle movement, the maximum pressure increase value, the point of ignition
shown with a vertical black line and the point of injection shown with a green
circle. Y-axis does not have a unit and is simply the sensor signal from 0 to 1.
17
14
The pressure and NP curves for a) Isocetane, b) 28 cetane, c) 40 cetane, d)
Cetane. Y-axis does not have a unit and is simply the sensor signal from 0 to 1.
19
15
Measured ID and cetane numbers along with the ﬁtted least square curve for
the IQT calibration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
16
Result of a 47 shot diesel test on the IQT. The pressure rise and needle positions
of the 32 measured cycles are shown. Y-axis does not have a unit and is simply
the sensor signal from 0 to 1. Black vertical lines represent the point of ignition. 21
17
The grooves in the faceplate the plunger slides in during injection a) before
and b) after the friction issue was temporarily resolved. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
18
Pressure and NP curves for ISO (left) and 100 cetane fuels (right) after modiﬁcations.
The y-axis shows the sensor output value without units and the black vertical
line shows the point of ignition. Y-axis does not have a unit and is simply the
sensor signal from 0 to 1. Black vertical line represents the point of ignition. .
23
19
Measured ID and Cetane numbers along with the ﬁtted least square curve for
the ﬁrst calibration along with the measured and calculated ID points for the
second calibration.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
20
The location and numbers of the temperature sensors. By mistake the T3
temperature sensors was located in the T5 ﬁtting from the beginning of testing
[2]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
iii
==PAGE:9==
21
Result of a 47 shot HFO test on the IQT. The pressure rise and needle positions
of the 32 measured cycles are shown. Y-axis does not have a unit and is simply
the sensor signal from 0 to 1. Black vertical lines represent the point of ignition. 26
22
The assembled injector sealing mechanism fully mounted on the IQT. . . . . .
27
23
Result of a 24 shot DME test on the IQT. The pressure rise and needle positions
of all the 24 measured cycles are shown but no combustion is detected. Y-axis
does not have a unit and is simply the sensor signal from 0 to 1. . . . . . . . .
28
24
The pressures of the sealing oil compared to resulting measured ID of Isocetane
during a 114 cycle long IQT test.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
25
a) Shots 83-86 from Table 7 with sealing oil pressure under 230 bar. b) Shots
79-82 from Table 7 with sealing oil pressure under 230 bar. . . . . . . . . . . .
32
26
DME mixed with the sealing oil ﬂowing from the top bleeding ﬁtting (left).
Sealing oil after the low pressure DME test showing no signs of mixing (right).
33
27
A 3D recreation made in Solidworks of the original Hatz fuel injection pump
(left) and the mechanism driving the pump from the camshaft (right) [3]. . . .
37
28
Cutaway views of the Hatz sealing oil fuel injection pump. . . . . . . . . . . .
38
29
Concept for a sealing oil Fuel injection pump for the Hatz. . . . . . . . . . . .
39
30
bad signal of the injector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
31
Damaged plunger grooves after around 2500 measured shots. Not including
cleaning or circulating procedures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
32
plunger grooves after modiﬁcation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
33
A clean needle position signal.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
iv
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
1
Chemical and physical properties of the different fuels used in this project
[4],[5], [6], [7]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Reference fuel testing results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
ID of fuels before and after modiﬁcations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
IQT CVCC average T3 and T4 temperatures during calibration.
. . . . . . . .
25
5
ID of contaminated Isocetane ﬁrstly mixed with sealing oil and then Xylene
added to the same oil contaminated mixture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Sealing oil leakage from the IQT. The pressure was held for the length of the
test and then waited until it had decreased down to zero before weighing to
make sure all the oil had leaked out. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Sealing oil pressures and ignition delay data from the sealing oil test performed
over 114 shots using Isocetane. For shots 76 - 78 and 82 - 114 no pressure
increases were being made and so the pressure drop is from the leakage past
the rear plunger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
v
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The reduction of energy-related CO2 emissions is vital in the battle against climate change and
the transition from fossil-based fuels over to zero-carbon fuels is a massive step in the right
direction. As shipping is responsible for 80% of the world trade and 2-3% of the global CO2
emissions the potential for the industry to improve has been recognised. Maersk for example
has the goal of emitting net-zero CO2 by the year 2050 but has said the only way to do so
is by completely transforming to carbon-neutral fuels and supply chains [8]. Because of the
long lifetime of the massive vessels responsible for the shipping industry, the next generation
of ships that will sail from 2030, will already need to be able to sail on carbon-neutral fuels.
A potential alternative marine fuels is ammonia as it burns CO2 free and can be produced
green using renewable sources. It is more energy dense than Hydrogen and can be transported
in a safer matter. The issue is that it is hard to ignite in combustion ignition (CI) engines
though and therefore ammonia requires another fuel to initiate ignition in order to create
an efﬁcient combustion. DME is a soot free, green fuel with a high cetane number and
therefore easily ignites in a CI engine. It is a good option for a green ignition promoter with
ammonia. More fuels can be used as an alternative to the conventional HFO and they all
have their unique combustion properties. The quality of the ignition and combustion of fuels
is something that is crucial to be able to evaluate and quantify how well they function in an
engine. Possibly the most important and well recognised parameters of a CI engine fuel is
the Cetane number which describes how easily the fuel auto ignites under certain conditions.
An ignition quality tester is a tool that evaluates the cetane number of a fuel based on a
certain standard. It injects the fuel in a single injections into a heated and pressurised constant
volume combustion chamber (CVCC) where the fuel auto ignites. The time delay between the
start of injection and the beginning of combustion, called the ignition delay (ID), is measured
which then correlates to a certain derived cetane number. The standard IQT test stand is
limited to distilled fuels and is therefore not optimised for testing gaseous fuels such as
ammonia, DME or residual fuels such as HFO.
In this study an IQT, which has been modiﬁed to test residual fuels, will be evaluated and a
suggestion of a custom calibration standard will be deﬁned. The test stand will be modiﬁed in
order to be able to test gaseous fuels and thus the DCN of alternative fuels can be compared
with the DCN of residual fuels under the exact same conditions.
1
==PAGE:12==
The mechanical fuel injection pump on the IQT has been modiﬁed using sealing oil for testing
gaseous fuels and a proposal of the same concept implemented onto a running engine will be
given.
2
==PAGE:13==
2
Theory
2.1
The Compression Ignition Engine
The CI engine works on the principle of auto ignition where the piston on the power stroke
pressurises and heats the intake air up to a point where the fuel that is injected ignites
automatically when entering the combustion chamber under injection. At a certain point
in the power stroke, usually 5-20 degrees before top dead center (BTDC) [1] depending on
the engine and load conditions, the fuel is injected into the engine and self-ignites some
milliseconds later. When the fuel ﬁnally ignites, its energy is released and it pushes down
onto the piston which turns the crankshaft, completing the powerstroke.
2.2
Jerk type fuel injection pumps
Diesel engines have traditionally used Jerk type fuel injection pumps which is a piston-cylinder
mechanism where the fuel pressure is generated by pushing the cylinder with a high force,
fast forward, forcing the fuel towards the injector. The pump relies on the tight tolerances
between the piston and cylinder walls that are precision manufactured to ﬁt together.
Figure 1: How the rotation of the plunger controls the injected fuel amount. [1].
Two holes are in the sidewalls of the cylinder, the inlet and the by-pass valve. There is a
groove in the plunger as can be seen on Figure 1 and depending on its rotation, uncovers the
by-pass whole earlier or later in its stroke. The plunger moves forward and at a certain point
it covers both the inlet and by-pass hole. As it moves further forward the fuel is pressurised
and injected into the engine. Eventually the by-pass hole is uncovered by the plunger groove,
3
==PAGE:14==
releasing the pressure and stopping the injection. The part of the plunger stroke the by-pass
hole is covered is called the effective stroke and that is the part of the stroke that the fuel
injection is actually happening. [1].
The components in the jerk-type injection pump are precision manufactured and very well
suited to create the pressures needed for diesel injection but a gaseous fuel that has been
pressurised in order to stay in liquid form can still easily leak past the plunger and reach
atmospheric pressure and vaporise.
2.3
The cetane number
The time delay between the start of injection and start of ignition, namely the ID, consists
of a physical delay and a chemical delay. The physical happens due to fuel atomisation,
vaporization and air mixing while the chemical delay happens because of pre-combustion
reactions. The quality of the entire combustion is highly dependant on the ID of the fuel. For
a long ID, more fuel has entered the combustion chamber at the moment of ignition and it
is more homogeneous due to being able to inject and mix for a longer time. The following
explosion is then bigger and more complete with a steeper pressure rise that can create high
undesirable forces in the engine. A fuel with a short ID burns closer to the injector while
injection is still happening and the following fuel is therefore ignited more by the already
happening combustion rather than the hot pressurised air from the compression stroke which
results in smoother running engine. The drawbacks of a short ID are possibly, less complete
combustion which leads to smoke and a less efﬁcient engine [9].
To quantify this quality the Cetane Number was invented. Using a Cooperative Fuel Research
(CFR) engine, which is a standard single cylinder engine speciﬁcally designed for this purpose,
the test fuel is ran in the engine and the compression ratio adjusted until the ID is measured
to be 2.407ms. At the same compression ratio a mixture of two reference fuels is then tested to
ﬁnd out at what proportions the same ID is found. The real cetane number is then calculated
from the mixture of the two fuels according to the D613 standard [10].
2.4
IQT
A cheaper, more time and fuel efﬁcient alternative to the CFR engine is the CVCC method.
This alternative method does not require a specialized running engine and only needs a small
4
==PAGE:15==
fuel sample compared to the CFR, all while producing accurate results[11]. The method
utilises a test stand where a chamber of a certain volume is heated and pressurised to the
point where a CI engine fuel injected into the chamber self-ignites. The chamber is ﬁtted with
sensors that detect the opening of the injector and a pressure trace sensor that detects any
change in pressure. By logging the signal from them, the start of injection and start of ignition
can be found. The ID of the fuel is then calculated as the time delay between the two events.
An example of these signals are shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2: An example from the ASTM6890 standard of the injector needle movement signal and the
pressure increase signal of a single combustion cycle in an IQT [2].
Parameters such as the chamber size, temperature, pressure and how the start of ignition is
deﬁned is all decided by standards such as the ASTM6890 [2] for Diesel Fuel Oils along with
many more deﬁnitions and set values.
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3: A combustion analyzer schematic of an IQT from the ASTM6890 standard [2].
Figure 3 shows a combustion chamber from the ASTM6890 standard. The injector tip and
pressure sensor are water cooled so they can withstand the high heats of the chamber. Nine
cartridge type resistance heaters surround the chamber and an insulation blanket retains the
heat in the chamber. The combustion chamber outer surface temperature sensor monitored
by the computer which uses it to control the heating elements and thus the air temperature
in the chamber. According to the standard, one way of calibrating the original IQT is by
controlling the surface temperature (T1) and adjusting it until a given reference fuel has a
certain ID.
6
==PAGE:17==
3
Experimental setup
3.1
IQT
Made available in the bomb lab in DTU Mek was an IQT Lab Model produced by CFR
Engines Canada ULC. The fuel system of the IQT had been modiﬁed from its original form
to be able to evaluate low viscosity fuels such as marine heavy fuel oils.
3.1.1
The initial setup of the IQT
The setup of the IQT before the project began can be seen in Figure 4. The combustion
chamber, heating and cooling remain relatively unchanged from the original ASTM6890
setup but the fuel system is modiﬁed and a fuel heating system is added. Also an optical
ﬁtting had been added to the combustion chamber so the ﬂame of the combustion could also
be seen from outside the chamber [12].
Figure 4: The different systems and components of the IQT shown (left), The diagram showing the
fuel system of the IQT for liquid fuels (right).
The IQT consists of multiple systems and components. Arguably the main component being
the chamber itself which is designed to withstand the immense forces of the fuel combustion.
The high air pressures needed for the combustion chamber are created by a pressure booster
and the intake and exhaust controlled using pneumatic valves. A computer monitors
the temperature thermocouples in the chamber and adjusts the camber heating elements
7
==PAGE:18==
accordingly. The computer also monitors and controls the pressure gauges, pneumatic
actuator components and many more functions of the IQT while also controlling the test
sequences, accumulating the sensor data, processing it and outputting the ﬁnal results.
Originally this system is highly automated. The cooling system uses a coolant media to keep
the injector tip and pressure rise sensor at operating temperatures next to the hot chamber.
The pressure trace is measured by a single piezo pressure sensor. The sensor measures the
change in pressure in the chamber and outputs a digital signal to the computer. The absolute
value of the sensor output is not important but simply the curve itself since the start of
ignition is calculated from the maximum pressure increase.
To measure the needle movement a Bentley Nevada 3300 NSv series eddy current transducer
is used. It is positioned around 2mm from the injector pin where it induces a magnetic ﬁeld
and measures any disturbance to the ﬁeld when the injector pin moves towards it during
injection.
Originally the fuel injection system is pneumatically controlled but the current setup, shown
in Figure 4, has been changed from the original system. The new fuel system does not use
a pneumatic injection pump but an electric push-pull solenoid that directly pushes onto
a Yanmar mechanical injection pump with a 60V power supply. The solenoid works at a
10% duty cycle providing the maximum force in the beginning of the force at 2000N which
decreases down to 900N in the end of the 4mm stroke of the injection pump [13].
All the systems except the sealing oil and fuel heaters are controlled using a custom Labivew
control system that outputs a text ﬁle with the measured data and then Matlab is used for the
data processing.
The original IQT injector is still used but has been modiﬁed to allow continuous ﬂow
through it to allow for complete fuel circulation throughout all components. The fuel tank is
pressurised using nitrogen at 14.5 bar. The low fuel pressure from the nitrogen pushes the
fuel from the bottom of the fuel tank and into the fuel ﬁlter before it goes into the sensitive
components of the injection pump. With the plunger in its resting position, fuel at over 12
bar pressure can ﬂow through the built in check valve and into the injector.
With the circulation valves open the fuel can freely ﬂow through the injector but before
injection, the pneumatic fuel circulation valve is closed shut, forcing the pressurised fuel to
be injected into the combustion chamber. After going through the pneumatic fuel circulation
8
==PAGE:19==
valve the fuel returns to the fuel tank and the circulation is complete.
The mechanical bleeding, draining and circulation valves are used for removing any air
from the system or emptying the fuel tank. The fuel tank and ﬁlter are ﬁtted with heating
elements that are controlled with heater controllers. With the heaters turned on, the fuel
can be circulated at 3.33 ml
min by powering the electric solenoid repeatably with the circulation
valves open and the others closed. By heating and circulating the fuel for 30 minutes it can be
assumed that all the fuel has the same temperature and viscosity. Heated fuel in the injector
tip should be obvious from the increase in injector water tip temperature.
Air bleeding is done by pressurising the system with nitrogen, closing the manual circulation
valve, making sure the pneumatic valve is open and then ﬁnally by opening the bleed
valve liquid fuel is forced through the system pushing any air before it and into a container.
Emptying the fuel tank can be done without letting the fuel ﬂow throughout the entire system
simply by opening the drain valve.
Circulating the fuel is done by powering the solenoid repeatably with only the circulation
valves open so the injection pump moves the fuel trough the system. This is to make sure the
fuel is homogeneous in temperature or mixture and also to make sure no air is in the system,
mainly between the injection pump and pneumatic fuel circulation valve.
The additional parts of the IQT fuel system are the heating elements on the ﬁlter and fuel
tank, the sealing oil apparatus behind the injection pump and the cooling system for the
injector tip and pressure sensor.
3.1.2
Sealing oil system on the IQT
The Yanmar injection pump used in this project had a single inlet line into the injection
chamber in its sidewalls and one fuel delivery line that goes to the injector. Built into the
injection pump is a check valve that was measured to open at 12 bar pressure. The pump had
been modiﬁed so that the plunger was in a ﬁxed position and could not rotate in order to
disable the grooves in the plunger and the maximum amount of fuel of 0.08ml was injected
each time. [13].
Because the rear of the plunger is at atmospheric pressure, or slightly higher while the fuel
inside the injection pump is pressurised to stay in liquid form, a force drives the fuel past the
plunger due to the pressure difference. When the fuel reaches the lower pressured volume it
9
==PAGE:20==
instantly vaporises and because it is heavier than air it can mix with the oil creating frothy
engine oil. This compromises the lubrication properties of the engine oil and can cause engine
failure especially if corrosive fuels react to the oil.
Figure 5: A simpliﬁed explanation of an injection pump with and without sealing oil modiﬁcations.
To combat this problem a sealing oil chamber can be implemented into the injection pump.
As explained in Figure 5, a chamber behind the plunger is created which can hold high oil
pressures. By keeping oil at pressures above the vapour pressure of the fuel the gaseous fuels
are kept in liquid form and are much less likely to leak past the plunger and into places where
they are not supposed to be. This has not been tested, implemented into fuel injection pump.
The most recent modiﬁcation to the IQT was the sealing oil system designed by a student at
DTU and built by the workshop in 413, shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6: The modiﬁed injection system of the IQT with the built in sealing oil chamber.
10
==PAGE:21==
Two identical Yanmar injection pumps were modiﬁed to create the chamber and connected
via a linkage by welding together two Yanmar top hats the plungers sit in. The rear plunger
makes sure the chamber can hold oil pressure due to its tight tolerances to the cylinder, while
also being able to slide smoothly when the solenoid hits like the injection pump mechanism
was originally designed to do. The oil pressure is created by the custom pressurising cylinder
shown in Figure 7. A piston is crewed into a cylinder in a closed system, decreasing the
volume of the system and thus increasing the pressure using tight o-ring seals. When turning
down the piston spring washers are also compressed and as oil leaks out of the system, the
washers compensate for the missing ﬂuid and keep the pressure constant.
Figure 7: A photo of the piston removed from the cylinder (left) and part of the technical drawings
showing the assembly and a section view of the pressurising system (right).
11
==PAGE:22==
3.1.3
Injector Modiﬁcations
The injector used in this project is a fully mechanical spring loaded injector that is the original
components to the speciﬁc IQT tested. It is a single hole injector with a S-type pintle nozzle
that conforms to the ISO 4010 standard, and at atmospheric conditions the pressure required
to initiate an injection was measured to be 240 bar maximum at atmospheric conditions.
This pressure is called the popping pressure of the injector. When the injector is mounted
in the IQT the chamber pressure pushes onto the needle tip. This force works against the
injector and therefore when mounted the popping pressure is around 213 bar as calculated in
Appendix D.
The inner workings of the original IQT component can be seen on Figure 8.
Figure 8: The original IQT mechanical injector components (left), the inner workings of the injector
and the fuel ﬂow through it.
Fuel ﬂows from the bottom of the injector, passes the injector nozzle and returns through
the top. When the injection pump ﬁres the fuel pressure reaches up to 200-300 bar pressure.
While the small conical end of the needle sits in the injector body, sealing any fuel from
leaking out, the large conical part is pushed on by a force in the negative x-direction caused
by the fuel pressure. The injector needle pushes onto the injector pin which is pushed on by
a stiff spring. The spring sits in the tightening screw and as the name suggests screws into
the injector body and thus sets the pretension of the spring. The locking nut makes sure the
tightening screw stays in place.
When the force of the fuel pressure overcomes the pretension in the spring, the injector needle
moves in the negative x-direction, lifting the needle from its seat and injecting fuel. As the
injection concludes and pressure drops, the spring force overcomes the fuel pressure again
12
==PAGE:23==
and closes the injector. During injection due to the tolerances in the injector nozzle and
high fuel pressures, there is always some fuel that leaks past the needle and into the volume
behind the nozzle. To scavenge this fuel a drain pipe is located in the injector for the fuel to
leak through and into a container.
With gaseous fuels such as ammonia or DME the injector needs to be sealed off to prevent
toxic gases being released into the air and to simply retain the fuel in the fuel system. That is
why the rear of the injector needs to be gas tight and preferably connected to the low pressure
side of the fuel system. To solve these issues the system that shown in Figure 9 was designed
and built.
Figure 9: The modiﬁed injector assembled with the gaseous fuel sealing components.
The tightening nut is replaced with a sealed tightening nut which seals with an O-ring to the
injector body. The injector body is turned down in a lathe to the speciﬁcation needed for the
O-ring and the pressures it needs to seal from according to M-seals website. The material
used is Kalrez and Teﬂon as it can withstand DME and by using O-rings the system can be
easily disassembled without compromising its sealing capabilities. The sealing nut screws
onto the sealed tightening nut and between them there is a Teﬂon washer that creates a seal
between the two components. The needle position sensor is cylindrical shaped with a 1/4"
UNF - 28 threaded body. The components called the sealing end screws onto the threads
of the sensor. In order to create a seal between the sensor and sealing end two O-rings are
squeezed at 45 degree angle against the threads and the sealing end by chamfer washers
and nuts on either side. An O-ring is then used to seal between the sealing end and nut to
close off the system. A weld on ﬁtting is then used to be able to connect to the rest of the fuel
system. All in all this system shown in Figure 10 holds the low fuel pressure of 14.5 bar. All
13
==PAGE:24==
the technical drawings used to build these components can be seen in Appendix B.
Figure 10: A cutaway view of the mechanical injector assembled with the sealing oil system, showing
how the different parts seal together. The fuel leaking past the needle returns to the fuel system.
3.2
Gaseous Fuel System
To test gaseous fuels a new fuel tank is needed. As ﬁlling happens far away from the IQT it
needs to be portable with quick connect ﬁttings that can withstand the pressures and fuels
tested.
Figure 11: The fuel tank used for gaseous fuels including the quick connectors, needle valve and a
pressure gauge for controlling the fuel ﬁlling.
14
==PAGE:25==
The new fuel tank shown in Figure 11 was used and connect to the IQT with the sealed
injector as shown in Figure 12.
Figure 12: A diagram of the gaseous fuel system (left) and the system assembled.
The new fuel system does not have a bleed valve since any gaseous fuel would vaporise
when it reached atmospheric pressure. Therefore only circulation is applied to make sure
that anything in gas form in the system ﬂoats to the top and away from high pressure system
between the injection pump and pneumatic circulation valve. Using clear fuel lines in certain
parts, it can be seen clearly weather or not the fuel is in liquid or gas form. The fuel can be
circulated until the fuel returning to the fuel tank is in liquid form.
3.3
Materials
The fuels tested in this project can be seen in Table 1.
The diesel was sourced from a local gas station close to DTU in 2021 and therefore should
fulﬁll the euro 5 standard and be of at least 51 cetane [4]. Isocetane from two manufacturers
was used, from TCI and ACROS Organics, the Cetane tested came from Merck Schuchardt.
The heavy fuel oil was provided by Skagen and had been tested to be of good quality and no
issues reported. According to Winterthur Gas & Diesel[14], the required kinematic viscosity
of HFO being injected into their engines is between 10-20 cSt. For the Skagen HFO being
tested that temperature is 115.7◦C minimum in order to reach the injection viscosity of 20 cSt.
15
==PAGE:26==
This temperature is above the boiling point of the injector nozzle coolant so in order to keep
the nozzle cool pressurised air is used instead. For cleaning the fuel system of the IQT after
testing distilled fuels, Xylene from J.T.Baker™was used according to the ASTM standard
[15].
Table 1: Chemical and physical properties of the different fuels used in this project [4],[5], [6], [7].
,
Properties:
Diesel
Isocetane
(TCI)
Isocetane
(Acros)
Cetane
HFO
DME
Chemical Formula
CxHy
C16H34
C16H34
C16H34
-
C2H6O
Cetane number
> 51
15
15
100
-
55 - 60
Boiling point [◦C]
0.84
247
240
287
350-500
-25
Flash point [◦C]
458
102
95
240
240
-42
Purity [%] (GC)
-
> 97
≥97.5
> 99
-
> 98.5
Liquid
density [g/cm3]
0.84
0.79
0.79
0.77
0.99
0.66
Liquid
Viscosity [cSt]
2.0 - 4.5
4.28
4.28
4.46
> 337.8
< 1
lower heating
value [MJ/kg]
42.5
-
-
-
40.29
28
Stoichiometric
air/fuel ratio
14.6
15.08
15.08
15.03
-
9.0
16
==PAGE:27==
4
IQT Testing
4.1
Method
The IQT that is used in this project was originally designed to estimate the derived cetane
number (DCN) of distilled fuels according to the ASTM6890 standard at 21.30 - 21.44 bar
charge air pressure and 515◦C - 575◦C temperature [2]. In order to test residual fuels the
temperature and pressure inside the CVCC is set to 500◦C and 45±1 bar as determined by the
IP541 standard [15]. The CVCC of the IQT is 0.211 l while the IP541 uses a 0.6 l CVCC and
therefore neither standard can be completely fulﬁlled with the current setup. Since the CVCC
and rest of the testing setup is originally from the ASTM689 standard the testing method of
doing 47 shots, disregarding the ﬁrst 15 and taking the average ID of the 32 left over is used.
Since testing will be made on residual fuels a 75 µm fuel ﬁlter is used according to the IP541
standard [15]. For the same reason the deﬁnition of start of ignition is used from the IP541
standard [15], which is the point where the pressure increase is 1% of the maximum pressure
increase which is the peak value of the pressure curve shown in Figure 13.
Figure 13: A single cycle data of Cetane logged from the IQT showing the pressure rise, needle
movement, the maximum pressure increase value, the point of ignition shown with a vertical black
line and the point of injection shown with a green circle. Y-axis does not have a unit and is simply the
sensor signal from 0 to 1.
17
==PAGE:28==
The start of injection is deﬁned as the point where the needle position (NP) signal reaches
10% of its maximum value. A good example of a single cycle of 100 cetane can be seen in
Figure 13. The Y-axis has no units as it is only the output signal of the sensors that deﬁne
when the measured events happen.
To create a correlation curve between the measured ID of the IQT and the DCN, reference
fuels with a known cetane number are used. n-Hexadecane, also called Cetane, has been
assigned the cetane number of 100 as it combusts very easily under compression while
2,2,4,4,6,8,8-Heptamethylnonane, also called Isocetane, combusts much less easily and is
assigned the cetane number of 15. To create fuel mixtures with cetane numbers between 15
and 100 the two reference fuels are mixed and the cetane number calculated based on the
volumetric percentage on each fuel as shown in Equation 1.
Cetane rating no. = 100 ∗volume % Cetane + 15 ∗volume %ISOcetane
(1)
To describe the DCN correlation Equation 2 is used as it is the same form as the equation for
the unmodiﬁed device in the [2] standard for the full DCN range.
DCN = A(ID −B)C + D
(2)
Equation 2 has four unknowns constants A,B,C and D and therefore a minimum of 4 known
measured points are needed in order to solve for them. The ID in the equation is the ignition
delay in milliseconds. When testing a fuel with an unknown ignition qualities, the measured
ID can be inserted into the calibrated equation to ﬁnd its derived cetane number.
In order to be able to compare other fuels to the values derived from this calibration the
conditions need to be the same in terms of mechanics, temperatures and charge air pressures.
The average values will be determined from the reference fuel tests and the margin of error
deﬁned by the standards.
4.2
Calibration of the IQT
Along with the Cetane and Isocetane, two reference fuel mixtures with the cetane numbers of
27.9 ± 1.6 and 39.8 ± 1.6 were tested. They will be referenced as 28 cetane and 40 cetane
18
==PAGE:29==
fuels from now on. The resulting pressure curves along with the needle positions can be seen
in Figure 14. In this calibration the Isocetane from TCI was used.
Figure 14: The pressure and NP curves for a) Isocetane, b) 28 cetane, c) 40 cetane, d) Cetane. Y-axis
does not have a unit and is simply the sensor signal from 0 to 1.
All four fuels show slightly differently shaped pressure curves depending on their cetane
number. The lower cetane fuels have a much steeper pressure increase after ignition because
the fuel has more time to mix in the chamber before it all ignites rapidly. The needle position
in all four cases has the same shape in the beginning while in cases such as for 100 and 28
cetane it seams to show some noise after injection where the injector stays open. Despite these
differences all four fuels show a steady and reliable start of injection and start of ignition with
constant, close to identical pressure curves. Therefore the tests were deemed successful and
the resulting ID can be seen in Table 2.
Using the least square ﬁt function in Matlab, shown in Appendix C, the four constants are
found to be A = 152.5576, B = 1.9150, C = −1.5362 and D = 9.5173 resulting in the equation
DCN = 152.5576(ID −1.9150)−1.5362 + 9.5173
(3)
19
==PAGE:30==
Table 2: Reference fuel testing results
Fuel mixture
Cetane number
ID [ms]
std. [ms]
100% Isocetane
15
10.63
0.25
85% Isocetane
15% Cetane
27.9 ± 1.6
5.88
0.22
71% Isocetane
29% Cetane
39.8 ± 1.6
4.78
0.22
100% Cetane
100
3.32
0.07
The resulting correlation curve can be seen on Figure 15 along with measured points, the ID
standard deviation and the estimated maximum and minimum cetane number of the fuels.
Figure 15: Measured ID and cetane numbers along with the ﬁtted least square curve for the IQT
calibration.
The four points can be seen to lay all almost directly on the resulting correlation curve showing
a good relationship between the DCN correlation equation derived and the measurements
made. To estimate the validation of this calibration a test was performed using diesel and the
resulting pressure and NP data can be seen in Figure 16.
The ID was measured to be 4.04 ms ± 0.20 ms and by inserting the diesel ID into Equation 3
20
==PAGE:31==
Figure 16: Result of a 47 shot diesel test on the IQT. The pressure rise and needle positions of the 32
measured cycles are shown. Y-axis does not have a unit and is simply the sensor signal from 0 to 1.
Black vertical lines represent the point of ignition.
the DCN of this diesel fuel is found to be equal to 57. As mentioned in subsection 3.3 the
standard for gas station diesel for normal cars is a minimum of 51 cetane or a maximum ID of
4.25 according to Equation 3. Including the standard deviation the diesel fuel measurements
are well within these limits. These results show a good correlation with real world standards.
Despite the injector signal not being as perfect as the ASTM6890 standard suggests, as the
signal ﬂuctuates a lot and the injector seams to remain open after injection, the important
events showing the moment of injection and ignition seem to be well deﬁned and detected
reliably and thus the ID measurements are considered good.
After the calibration was completed the injector signal kept getting worse and worse to the
point where the IQT data was completely unusable. The issue was a lot of friction in the
injection pump which was increasing throughout the tests resulting in the plunger hesitating
in its stroke. This could be clearly felt simply by pressing the injector forward by hand. This
21
==PAGE:32==
had created unwanted pressure spikes in the fuel lines that were not high enough to open
the injector but were still sensed by the NP sensor and therefore the data was showing early,
false injection. The friction issue was ﬁxed by removing material and polishing the grooves
the plunger slid in, as shown in Figure 17. By pressing the pump together with hands, no
hesitation could be found except in the complete beginning. This hesitation was from the
bottom of the plunger neck that sat in a square edge. The hardened metal of the plunger
could catch in the soft edges of the grooves which deformed them. To make sure this was
not an issue a thick washer was made to ﬁt around the rear plunger so when the return
spring pulled the system backwards the rear plunger would hit the chamber walls before the
injection plunger would hit the end of the grooves.
Figure 17: The grooves in the faceplate the plunger slides in during injection a) before and b) after the
friction issue was temporarily resolved.
The reference fuel tests with the Cetane and Isocetane were repeated to measure the effects
the modiﬁcations had had on the calibration. The resulting pressure and NP curves can be
seen in Figure 18. Isocetane from Acros Organics was used for the second calibration since
the TCI Isocetane tank was empty.
22
==PAGE:33==
Figure 18: Pressure and NP curves for ISO (left) and 100 cetane fuels (right) after modiﬁcations.
The y-axis shows the sensor output value without units and the black vertical line shows the point of
ignition. Y-axis does not have a unit and is simply the sensor signal from 0 to 1. Black vertical line
represents the point of ignition.
After removing the friction in the plunger movement the needle position signal became much
more consistent. As can be seen on Figure 18 the injector opens very clearly after around 10ms
and closes back down right after injection. This show the force from the solenoid is moving
the plunger smoothly, creating a uniform instant pressure increase without much oscillation
during the closing of the injector. The single steep injection peak deﬁnes the injection moment
very well and the pressure increase curve can clearly be seen drop moments later because of
the evaporative cooling effect from the fuel.
The new Isocetane from Acros Organics does not have identical chemical properties to the
previous Isocetane from TCI despite having the same cetane number. The new Isocetane
experience a distinctive 2 stage combustion where the maximum pressure value ﬂuctuates
a lot between shots. No obvious pattern could be observed and no air was found in the
system that could explain this trend. The injection amount was consistent throughout testing.
The ﬁrst stage of the combustion is close to identical between all cycles and in all cases the
ignition is deﬁned during the ﬁrst stage. Due to this the measured ID has very little variance
and so the inconsistent second stage of the combustion is not an issue.
As the feasibility of the IQT to create a solid correlation curve between the ID and cetane
number was already proven, the ID of 28 and 40 cetane mixtures were calculated based on
how much the ID decreased for the other two reference fuels. The resulting data can be seen
in Table 3.
23
==PAGE:34==
Table 3: ID of fuels before and after modiﬁcations.
ID before
ﬁxing
[ms]
ID after
ﬁxing
[ms]
Measured
difference
[ms]
ID %
decrease
Calculated ID
after ﬁxing
[ms]
Isocetane
10.63
7.05
3.58
33.7%
-
27.9 cetane
5.88
-
-
34%
3.88
39.8 cetane
4.78
-
-
34%
3.15
Cetane
3.32
2.09
1.23
37.0%
-
The two reference fuels mixture were much closer to 15 cetane than 100 cetane and that is
why the ID decrease of 34% was chosen. Using those four new point with the same method
as before the new DCN correlation equation is found to be
DCN = 225.1869(ID −0.5510)−2.1530 + 10.9964
(4)
And the apparent shift in the correlation curve can be seen in Figure 19.
Figure 19: Measured ID and Cetane numbers along with the ﬁtted least square curve for the ﬁrst
calibration along with the measured and calculated ID points for the second calibration.
The combustion chamber temperature is supposed to be 500◦C according to the IP541
24
==PAGE:35==
standard for residual fuels. There is a temperature gradient across the combustion chamber by
nature and the exact temperature in the reaction zone is difﬁcult to measure exactly without
disturbing the spray pattern of the injector. The location of the temperature sensors used in
this project can be seen in Figure 20.
Figure 20: The location and numbers of the temperature sensors. By mistake the T3 temperature
sensors was located in the T5 ﬁtting from the beginning of testing [2].
The most consistent temperature sensor is T1, the outer surface of the chamber and this sensor
was set to 500◦C steady throughout testing. The average values of the other temperature
sensors T3 and T4, shown in Table 4, over the calibration tests were measured and set as the
new average standard operating conditions.
Table 4: IQT CVCC average T3 and T4 temperatures during calibration.
T3 [◦C]
T4 [◦C]
Isocetane
449.75
520.15
28 cetane
446.26
519.88
40 cetane
444.44
520.78
Cetane
450.88
520.71
Average
447.83
520.38
According to the ASTM6890 standard the charge pressure T4 should be between 515◦C and
575◦C or in other words 545 ± 30◦C. Judging by that the new temperature parameters should
be 448 ± 30◦C or the standard charge air temperature should be between 418◦C and 478◦C.
The difference between the minimum and maximum T4 temperature should be less than
2.5◦C for the 32 combustion cycle measurements, the same as the ASTM6890 standard [2].
The minimum and maximum values for T3 should be less than 8◦C apart for the same reasons
25
==PAGE:36==
as before. These values can now be used for comparing any unknown fuel to the correlation
curve to make sure the conditions were close to identical or as close as the standards suggest.
4.3
Evaluating the cetane number of HFO
The results of a full 47shot HFO test are shown in Figure 21.
Figure 21: Result of a 47 shot HFO test on the IQT. The pressure rise and needle positions of the 32
measured cycles are shown. Y-axis does not have a unit and is simply the sensor signal from 0 to 1.
Black vertical lines represent the point of ignition.
As can be seen from Figure 21, the pressure rise curve is very consistent between shots
showing that the fuel amount injected each time is constant. The NP signal is clean showing
a good detection of injection with a single steep curve increase. As can be seen the injector
is kept open for 6 - 7 ms unlike before which could be due to the high viscosity of the fuel
resulting in less ﬂow time for the same amount of fuel being injected. The HFO takes long to
ignite and therefore has a lot of time for mixing in the chamber resulting in a very long and
steep pressure rise curve. As shown by Figure 21 the MPI of the fuel remains very high and
very consistent for most of the shots so no issues can be observed concerning the injection of
the fuel.
26
==PAGE:37==
The resulting ID of the HFO is measured to be 7.06 ms ± 0.24 ms or DCNHFO = 15.0 or the
same cetane number as Isocetane according to Equation 4.
The average charge air temperature, T4, in the HFO test was 463.28◦C so well within the 448
± 30◦C range. The minimum and maximum temperature values were 459.10◦C and 464.66◦C
so a difference of 5.57◦C so not within the ASTM6890 standard limits. The standard test uses
coolant media as a cooling agent and not air as was used for the HFO test so more deviation
is to be expected. The resulting standard deviation of the ID is still very good at 0.24 ms
which can be considered a good results.
4.4
Testing of the gaseous fuel system and DME attempt.
The sealed injector mechanism is show in Figure 22 assembled and installed on the IQT.
Figure 22: The assembled injector sealing mechanism fully mounted on the IQT.
The new gaseous fuel system was tested using pure nitrogen at 14.5 bar and also using DME
pressurised with nitrogen at 14.5 bar. The circulation worked well and DME in liquid form
could be seen clearly in the feed and fuel return lines without any apparent gas bubbles in
the system. No leaks were discovered showing that the injector sealing design and the rest of
the fuel system is gas tight and ready for further testing.
With the new system full of DME an attempt was made to measure its ID. No injection while
the NP sensor detected some needle movement. As can be seen on Figure 23 no pressure
increase was detected and also no combustion was seen in the optical ﬁtting. Some needle
movement is measured but there is obviously no injection or combustion happening so it
is deﬁnitely not reaching pressures high enough to open the injector. This was done with
27
==PAGE:38==
helium at 10 bar pressure to make sure there was no chance of the pressurising gas mixing
with DME as can happen with nitrogen.
Figure 23: Result of a 24 shot DME test on the IQT. The pressure rise and needle positions of all the
24 measured cycles are shown but no combustion is detected. Y-axis does not have a unit and is simply
the sensor signal from 0 to 1.
When the fuel is in the injector it is exposed to a lot of heat coming from the combustion
chamber. The injector tip coolant temperature was measured to be at 55◦C steady. The vapour
pressure of DME at 55◦C is around 12 bar [11] and therefore the fuel pressure on the system
might noy be high enough to be completely sure it is in liquid form before injection. No
bubbles were seen coming from the return line and by circulating the fuel the pressure is also
increased momentarily and by keeping the ﬂow constant the fuel should spend as little time
in the warm injector as possible. To monitor if this is an issue a temperature gauge can be
added in the fuel lines.
Before any attempt of lowering the popping pressure of the injector was made to account for
the compressibility of DME, the relay controlling the combustion heaters on the IQT burnt
over leaving the IQT broken down with no time left of the project. No cetane measurements
of the DME or any gaseous fuels were therefore made.
28
==PAGE:39==
5
Evaluation Of Injection Pump Design
The IQT is used as a test stand for the sealing oil fuel injection pump to evaluate how well it
works, if the ﬂuids are mixing at certain conditions and what effect this mixing will do to the
functionality of the IQT.
5.1
Measuring The Effect of Fuel Contamination
The same Castrol GTX Diesel 15W-40 engine oil used in the IQT was mixed into some already
contaminated Isocetane with a known ID, to test how the ID of the fuel would change and by
how much. Then Xylene was mixed into the already oil contaminated Isocetane to see how
much the ID is effected if there are remains of Xylene in the fuel system after cleaning. The
three tests with old Isocetane, oil mixed Isocetane and ﬁnally Xylene and oil mixed Isocetane
can be seen in Table 5. Before these tests were conducted some full 47 shot tests had already
been done just before. Therefore the chamber had been hot for some time and at a good
equilibrium. Only 15 shots were measured for each point as the ID was shown to be quite
steady during the test as can also be seen from the low standard deviation.
Table 5: ID of contaminated Isocetane ﬁrstly mixed with sealing oil and then Xylene added to the
same oil contaminated mixture.
Fuel
no. shots
ID [ms]
std
Difference
Contaminated ISO cetane
15
12.47
0.24
-
2.4% sealing oil
15
11.86
0.38
5% decrease
4% Xylene
15
12.25
0.24
3.3% increase
It can be seen that if sealing oil or Xylene have contaminated the fuel being tested it will be
apparent from the change in ID. If sealing oil is leaking past the injection plunger and into
the fuel the ID should get shorter relatively quickly and continuously shorter as the sealing
oil becomes a bigger percentage of the fuel mixture. In the same way if the ID of a fuel being
tested is giving out longer ID than was excepted or is inconsistent between tests then it is
possible that it has been contaminated with Xylene.
These tests were made when the friction in the injection pump was still an issue as described
in Appendix A, where injection was being detected too early because of uneven fuel pressure
increase and so the resulting ID was measured to be longer than else. All three tests were
made under the same mechanical conditions and same parameters and so the comparison
between the three is valid.
29
==PAGE:40==
5.2
Sealing oil leakage
As the piston in the sealing oil pressurizing cylinder is turned further down it dissipates a
certain volume of oil. This oil pressurizes but as the sealing oil chamber is not perfectly tight
some of the oil leaks out past the rear plunger into a container. By measuring the movement
of the piston in the pressurizing cylinder the oil displaced can be calculated. By weighing the
oil that leaks past the rear plunger and comparing with the displaced amount the amount
leaking past the injection pump and the rear plunger can be estimated.
Area of the pressurizing piston is A = 314.16mm2, by measuring how much the piston travels
in order to hold pressure on the system while testing, the oil volume displaced can be found.
The oil density is ν = 0.8725 g
cm3 and therefore the weight can be calculated. The oil was at
room temperature.
The pressurising cylinder did not work very well as it wasn’t able to keep up and the pressure
fell quite quickly as the oil leaked past the rear plunger. The container catching the oil is then
weighted before and after the test to ﬁnd out how much of the displaced oil has leaked past
the rear plunger. The results can be found in Table 6.
Table 6: Sealing oil leakage from the IQT. The pressure was held for the length of the test and then
waited until it had decreased down to zero before weighing to make sure all the oil had leaked out.
Pressure [bar]
no. shots
Oil displaced [g]
oil leaked [g]
Difference [g]
100
15
3.2
3.4
0.2
100
41
3.1
3.3
0.2
As can be seen from Table 6 the two tests show that the measured oil leaking past the plunger
was in both cases greater than the calculated displaced oil. The assumptions can therefore
be made that no oil is leaking into the fuel from the sealing oil chamber and all of the oil
leaks past the rear plunger. This makes sense as the oil would always take the path of least
resistance. No more leak tests were done as the inaccuracy of the displacement measurement
and weighing were far too great to be able to justify any other conclusion.
5.3
Effect of sealing oil pressure on ID
Isocetane was used do make a 114 shot sealing oil test on the IQT while increasing the pressure
of the sealing oil incrementally. The pressurising cylinder was turned by hand before each
30
==PAGE:41==
and every shot unless otherwise stated. The time between each shot was consistently 55 ± 5
seconds. The sealing oil pressures tested along with the ID results can be seen in Table 7.
Table 7: Sealing oil pressures and ignition delay data from the sealing oil test performed over 114
shots using Isocetane. For shots 76 - 78 and 82 - 114 no pressure increases were being made and so the
pressure drop is from the leakage past the rear plunger.
Shots no.
no. of shots
Pressure [bar]
ID [ms]
std [ms]
1 - 10
10
0
6.91
0.37
11 - 20
10
20
6.91
0.15
21 - 30
10
40
7.17
0.11
31 - 40
10
60
6.88
0.23
41 - 50
10
80
7.01
0.15
51 - 60
10
100
7.29
0.21
61 - 70
10
140
6.95
0.30
71 - 75
5
200
7.03
0.29
76 - 78
3
137 - 86
7.28
0.27
79 - 81
3
300
8.17
0.11
82 - 114
33
230 - 0
6.96
0.24
Throughout all the shots the standard deviation remains very consistent. The ID shows very
good correlation to the already successful full Isocetane test done during calibration except
during shots 79-81 when the sealing oil pressure increases to 300 bar.
Figure 24: The pressures of the sealing oil compared to resulting measured ID of Isocetane during a
114 cycle long IQT test.
31
==PAGE:42==
It can be seen on Figure 24 and from Table 7 that up until 200 bar, the only deviation in the ID
that can be observed is the normal, natural deviation. No correlation between the ID and the
sealing oil pressure is there. When the pressure is increased all the way up to 300 bar during
shots 79 - 81, the ID also increases by 1ms as can be seen in Table 7 and in Figure 25.
This observation is opposite to what would have been expected if oil was leaking into the fuel
past the plunger as explained in subsection 5.1. These three shots along with the following
fourth shot all had sealing oil pressures above 230 bar. They also had much different pressure
rise curves as shown on Figure 25 and a less distinctive second combustion stage. The
increased pressure rise is thought to be directly connected to the fuel amount injected and
therefore these four shots likely had more injected fuel into the chamber than the others.
Figure 25: a) Shots 83-86 from Table 7 with sealing oil pressure under 230 bar. b) Shots 79-82 from
Table 7 with sealing oil pressure under 230 bar.
This phenomenon is happening when the sealing oil pressure is above the 213 bar popping
pressure of the injector. It should not be effecting the properties of the fuel but in the case
of Isocetane from Acros Organics which has a very apparent two stage combustion, the
fuel seems to be sensitive to these changes. The moment of ignition is calculated from the
maximum pressure rise and because of the two stage combustion, the pressure rise curve is
not very steep around this value meaning a small change in 1% maximum pressure increase
can create more deviation in the ID and DCN of the fuel being tested.
In general a 1 ms ID increase in testing where the standard deviation is around 0.3 is not
acceptable. Therefore the sealing oil pressure on the IQT should be kept below the popping
pressure of the injector too keep the testing conditions consistent. Pressures up to that don’t
seem to result in such deviations.
32
==PAGE:43==
5.4
Final Evaluation
The results show that by placing pressurised sealing oil behind the plunger and also giving it
a path to escape the sealing oil chamber, the fuel is not effected. Up to 200 bar pressure the ID
is not effected by the sealing oil at all and therefore the sealing oil can be kept at a constant
high pressure to make sure all the gaseous fuel remains in liquid form and won’t evaporate
out of the system. Without any pressure on the sealing oil the DME leaked easily past the
plunger, mixing with the oil, compromising its lubrication qualities. The DME is heavier than
air and so it resulted in froth like oil as can be seen in Figure 26.
A ﬁnal test was done to see if DME was mixing into the sealing oil. The sealing oil pressure
was kept constant at 100 bar with the fuel system empty. Then the system was ﬁlled with
DME, the fuel circulated, all while keeping the sealing oil pressure above 80 - 100 bar. Finally
the fuel tank was disconnected, the fuel system emptied and the sealing oil inspected.
Figure 26: DME mixed with the sealing oil ﬂowing from the top bleeding ﬁtting (left). Sealing oil
after the low pressure DME test showing no signs of mixing (right).
As can be seen in Figure 26, there were no obvious signs of DME mixing into the oil. At
least not in as great amounts as before. This is a good indication that the sealing oil concept
works, in keeping the fuel in liquid form during injection. In previous tests using a jerk type
injection pump and a mechanical injector the popping pressure was set to 100 bar [1]. The
33
==PAGE:44==
sealing oil can therefore be kept at pressure very close to the maximum fuel pressure pending
further testing. It shows promising results even only at lower pressures, keeping the sealing
oil above the fuel pressure.
The design of the fuel injection is validated to work well with the IQT in testing ID but
lacking robustness in the terms of friction in the system. A rebuild or a redesign of the
plunger grooves and seat would be ideal to make sure the full force of the solenoid reaches
the fuel evenly and is not disturbed by additional, unpredictable friction.
34
==PAGE:45==
6
Conclusion
A fuel injection pump design for gaseous, corrosive fuels such as ammonia and DME was
tested on an IQT. The sealing oil system proved to be a feasible design in order to test gaseous
fuels on the IQT. The design made sure the gaseous fuels remained in liquid form in the
pump without compromising fuel quality. During circulation the sealing oil kept the fuel
inside the fuel system where it was supposed to be, separating it from the outside conditions
in the testing lab. There was no sign of frothing or fuel contamination in the oil while the
pressures where kept above the low fuel pressure.
Converting the IQT to test gaseous fuels showed good indication in being able to evaluate the
cetane number on gaseous fuels despite not being able to complete a ID test on one. Refueling
the tank could be done far away under safe conditions and the fuel tank brought to the test
stand and ﬁnally connected to the fuel system. All components sealed nicely against DME
and the fuel could be pumped in liquid form throughout the system to remove any gas from
the high pressure lines where it mattered the most.
The IQT calibration was successful and a relationship was established for the cetane number
and the ID outputted by he modiﬁed test stand. The average parameters such as pressure
and temperatures for the current setup were deﬁned along with deﬁnition on how close to
the average values these parameters need to be for a valid test.
DCN measurements of HFO proved successful using the modiﬁed fuel system and now it
can be compared to any other fuel or mixture in gaseous or liquid form, with low or high
viscosity. For marine engines this means that alternative fuel mixtures can be tested in low
quantities, quickly and accurately to match or exceed the ignition quality of HFO.
35
==PAGE:46==
7
Further Work
7.1
IQT Next Steps
Since no successful measurements of the ID of gaseous fuels could be completed, the next
step would be to lower the popping pressure of the injector by decreasing the pretension in
the injector spring to as low as 100 bar. This could be done experimentally by turning the
tightening screw outwards in small increments of perhaps quarter turns or by measuring
the spring constant and estimate a relationship between the popping pressure and spring
pretension. This could in the end of the day be faster than having to disassemble and assemble
the injector sealing mechanism for every increment and important data for future tests. By
removing the injector and connecting it to a test stand the popping pressure can also be
directly measured while adjusting the tightening screw.
If there is still suspicion of DME heating up and vaporising in the injector tip the fuel pressure
could be increased in order to stay above the vapour pressure.
To improve consistency testing residual fuels that require heating, the fuel lines and components
can be wrapped in insulation to minimise heat loss between the fuel tank and injector. A new
O-ring for the fuel tank lid is needed to withstand the high temperatures as the current one
expands too much and is very difﬁcult to reﬁt into its groove in the fuel tank lid when it is
very hot. Circulation between shots could be implemented into labview. As the time between
shots is around 1 minute, the fuel can be circulated for perhaps 30-40 seconds between each
one to prevent fuel in the lines furthest away from the heating elements from cooling down
and becoming too viscous.
7.2
Injection Pump Next Steps
For further testing gaseous fuels, the sealing oil pressure system needs to be automated. It
is not enough to have a person constantly screwing in the pressurising cylinder every 1 - 5
minutes while also operating the computer and monitoring the rest of the systems on the
IQT.
There is no need for a high ﬂow system and therefore a pneumatic oil pressure booster can
be used or a low volume, high pressure oil pump. A scavenging system would need to be
connected to the injection pump to catch any oil leaking past the plunger. In that way the
leaking oil could also be monitored for any contamination or frothing coming from the fuel
36
==PAGE:47==
being tested. With this system working reliably the sealing oil tests can be repeated with
more measuring points and more precision as the oil pressure is constant and not increased
just before every shot is made.
The custom faceplate needs to be redesigned so that it will not wear out from the plunger
sliding in the grooves. This can be achieved using other materials, by hardening or perhaps
simply by having more space between the plunger and grooves is all that is needed along
with proper polishing and chamfering of edges. It is obvious that in order to have a well
deﬁned injection and therefore needle position signal the plunger needs to be able to slide
unhindered in the injection pump.
When this friction is no longer an issue the calibration can be repeated and with more data
points for a better correlation.
7.3
Implementing Onto A Running Engine
The IQT was a good test stand to test this concept and the next level would be to implement
it into a running engine. A 1B30V Hatz engine is already set up at DTU and it has good
potential to have a sealing oil fuel injection pump retroﬁtted to it.
The original jerk type fuel injection pump and how it works can be seen in Figure 27.
Figure 27: A 3D recreation made in Solidworks of the original Hatz fuel injection pump (left) and the
mechanism driving the pump from the camshaft (right) [3].
As can be seen on Figure 27, the cylinder is a single component that is independent of the
injection pump body. There is really no injection pump body but the cylinder sits directly
in the Hatz engine. A groove in the cylinder ﬁts into a slot in the Hatz and so its rotation is
37
==PAGE:48==
ﬁxed in space. The mechanism of the Hatz is unique as it is driven from the camshaft via a
rocker arm which both pushes onto the plunger and also pulls it back to resting position. The
plunger location is ﬁxed in space relative to the rest of the engine and the injection volume
of the pump is adjusted by placing thin shims underneath the cylinder, moving it further
away from the plunger or closer. That is why the surface the cylinder lies on is an important
parameter as it deﬁnes the relationship between the plunger and cylinder.
Surrounding the cylinder is the fuel groove which connects both cylinder feed holes to the
low pressure side of the fuel system. The fuel check valve body screws into the Hatz with
M20 threads and holds the check valve components and cylinder in place.
The design shown in Figure 28 is a concept for a sealing oil fuel injection pump on the Hatz
which uses original Hatz components for the injection mechanism while retaining all of the
injection pumps functions such as fuel adjustments and throttle control. Because the plunger
and cylinder mechanism are such high precision components the goal of the design was to
not modify them at all.
Figure 28: Cutaway views of the Hatz sealing oil fuel injection pump.
The design consists of a two piece injection pump body. The bottom part screws into the
Hatz engine and lies on the bottom surface where the cylinder originally sat. The top part
includes the fuel feed groove and check valve threads to replicate the original ﬁtment of the
Hatz. Additionally the connection for the sealing oil feed line is in the top part. Because the
38
==PAGE:49==
injection pump sits so close the the cylinder of the engine, no ﬁttings can stick out of the body
sideways because the pump needs to be able to screw into the engine.
The distance between the new cylinder seat and the new is how far the plunger needs to
be extended. The plunger extension replicates the Hatz plungers bottom part to retain the
original throttle control mechanism. As shown in Figure 29 the extension reaches to the
plunger neck to control its rotation. Because the way the Hatz is designed, the extension also
needs to be able to pull the plunger backwards and therefore two pins are pushed into the
extension, fastening the bottom of the plunger in place. This feature can also be directly built
into the extension, depending on what is simpler. The ﬁt shouldn’t be too tight between the
two and with the pins locked in place by threads, press ﬁt or using any DME proof material,
the Hatz plunger can slide in and out of the extension sideways during disassembly.
Figure 29: Concept for a sealing oil Fuel injection pump for the Hatz.
The ﬁt between the bottom and top half needs to be sealing oil tight. The use of Teﬂon or
copper washers is not possible as depending on how much they are crushed or tightened the
top part moves further or closer to the bottom part. This alters the height of the top cylinder
surface which effects the fuel amount injected. Therefore an O-ring seal is needed as shown
in Figure 28 and the distance between the two cylinder surfaces, of the Hatz and the injection
pump, only depends on the dimensions of the two components that make up the injection
body.
Three points of sealing are needed to make sure the sealing oil chamber holds pressure, not
counting the point between the plunger and cylinder. Between the cylinder and injection
pump body, between the two components making up the injection body, and ﬁnally between
the plunger extension and the injection pump body. The ﬁrst two points are sealed of using
O-rings but as the plunger extension needs to be able to move linearly in the z-direction while
39
==PAGE:50==
also needing to rotate it needs to be precision manufactured to ﬁt inside the injection pump
in the same way as the injection pump itself is made.
Because the pump screws into the engine, the threads on the injection pump need to be made
with the location of the sealing oil and fuel inlets in mind as they can not be pointing towards
the engine block when assembled as the ﬁttings would not be able to screw into them.
40
==PAGE:51==
References
[1] Spencer C. Sorenson, Engine Principles and Vehicles.
Department of Mechanical
Engineering Technical University of Denmark, 2014.
[2] ASTM D6890 13b, “Standard Test Method for Determination of Ignition Delay and
Derived Cetane Number (DCN) of Diesel Fuel Oils by Combustion in a Constant Volume
Chamber,” ASTM International, 2021.
[3] M. H. G. . C. KG, “Hatz B-series: Flexible solution for all areas,” 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://www.hatz-diesel.com/ﬁleadmin/tx_hatzproducts/TB_1B_70252829_EN.pdf
[4] Dieselnet. (2000) EU: Fuels. [Online]. Available: https://dieselnet.com/standards/eu/
fuel.php
[5] Fisher Scientiﬁc, “2,2,4,4,6,8,8-Heptamethylnonane 97.0+%, TCI AmericaTM,” last
accessed on 10.06.2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.ﬁshersci.ca/shop/products/
2-2-4-4-6-8-8-heptamethylnonane-tci-america-3/p-7130511
[6] ——, “2,2,4,4,6,8,8-Heptamethylnonane, 98%, ACROS OrganicsTM,” last accessed
on 10.06.2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ﬁshersci.com/shop/products/
2-2-4-4-6-8-8-heptamethylnonane-98-acros-organics-3/AC156250500
[7] Merk, “n-Hexadecane,” last accessed on 10.06.2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.
merckmillipore.com/INTL/en/product/n-Hexadecane,MDA_CHEM-820633
[8] Taylor
Johnson,
“Towards
a
zero-carbon
future,”
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.maersk.com/news/articles/2019/06/26/towards-a-zero-carbon-future
[9] N. V. Petrukhin, N. N. Grishin, and S. M. Sergeev, “Ignition delay time an important
fuel property,” Chemistry and Technology of Fuels and Oils, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 581–584, 2016.
[10] N. K. Patel and S. N. Shah, “Biodiesel from plant oils,” Food, Energy, and Water: the
Chemistry Connection, pp. 277–307, 2015.
[11] D. Karonis, I. Zahos-Siagos, D. Filimon, and F. Vasileiou, “A multivariate statistical
analysis to evaluate and predict ignition quality of marine diesel fuel distillates from
their physical properties,” Fuel Processing Technology, vol. 166, pp. 299–311, 2017.
41
==PAGE:52==
[12] A. L. Ehrenreich, “Modiﬁcation Of An Ignition Quality TesterTM And Its Use In
Characterising Middle Distillate Fuels,” Master’s thesis, University of Cape Town,
South Africa, 2015.
[13] R. W. K. Christen and M. N. Jensen, “IQT Ignitability testing of new marine fuels,”
Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, 2019.
[14] Winterthur Gas & Diesel, Diesel engine fuels all engines.
Winterthur Gas & Diesel Ltd.,
2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.wingd.com/en/documents/w-2s/tribology/
fuel-lubricants-water/diesel-fuels-for-wingd-engines-v2/
[15] IP541, “Determination of ignition and combustion characteristics of residual fuels -
Constant volume combustion chamber method,” SAI Global Energy Institute, 2006.
42
==PAGE:53==
Appendices
A
Troubleshooting
A.1
Faulty injector signal due to injection pump wear
After the ﬁrst calibration the sealing oil testing began. It was during these tests the injector
signal began to be unreliable. As can be seen in Figure 30 the injector signal increases just like
the injector was opening but nothing was being injected as can be seen from the pressure rise
rate curve being completely stable. It isn’t until a few ms later that the change in pressure
rise can be seen and ﬁnally ignition is detected.
Figure 30: bad signal of the injector
This can also be seen from the longer ignition delay resulting from the early, false injection
being detected. Previously this fuel had been measured to have an ID of 5.88ms but now with
the same test the ID measured 12.60ms so obviously there was an issue where the sensor
detected movement but no injection was happening.
In total around 2500 measured shots had been done until this point with the new sealing oil
system. In the new sealing oil design the original Yanmar pump is modiﬁed so that it bolts
into the front plate and built into the front plate are the grooves the plunger sits in which
i
==PAGE:54==
ﬁxes its rotation in the pump. In this front plate the seat of the plunger when it is in its most
rearwards position is also deﬁned. The return spring pushes the plunger backwards into its
seat, ready for the next injection. Under inspection the movement of the plunger inside these
grooves was not smooth. It took some force to get it started like it was forced into the plunger
seat and there was friction for the ﬁrst 2mm of movement. Pushing the plunger slowly it was
obviously catching onto something while it was moving in the pump.
Figure 31: Damaged plunger grooves after around 2500 measured shots. Not including cleaning or
circulating procedures.
As can be seen from Figure 31 the shape of the grooves are far from straight which is how it
was designed and manufactured originally. By ﬁling down material inside the grooves and
smoothing down the surface with 240grit sandpaper as can be seen on Figure 32, the plunger
can move freely without friction throughout its travel. Because the plunger is turned 180◦
from original the effective stroke is not determined by grooves in the plunger. Therefore it
does not matter if the plunger can rotate around 5◦either direction with groves being slightly
bigger, the injected amount is still constant.
Figure 32: plunger grooves after modiﬁcation.
Now Figure 33 shows how much the signal has improved where the injector signal increases
ii
==PAGE:55==
immediately and drops down to return to zero quickly. This signal ﬁts perfectly to the change
in pressure rise rate indicating that indeed injection has happened. Figure 33 shows the
Isocetane fuel being tested but now because the injection system has been modiﬁed the ID
has changed and it needs to be recalibrated.
Figure 33: A clean needle position signal.
iii
==PAGE:56==
B
Technical Drawings
iv
==PAGE:57==
 31,0 
 9,0 
 10,0 
 
30,0 
A
A
M30x1.5
 30,00 
 
25,35 ±0,01 
 4,0 
 
27,87 ±0,01 
B
SECTION A-A
M21x1.5
 15° 
 1,5 
 2,35 ±0,01 
 9,0 
 R0,25 
 R0,10 
DETAIL B
SCALE 2 : 1
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
Notes:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
1.6582 (34CrNiMo6)
+45 52 64 51 29
Should be made from scratch
Project: IQT
WEIGHT: 
Tómas Gíslason
16.06.2021
1
Sealed tightening 
nut IQT
s192305
==PAGE:58==
 
35,0 
 33,0 
 10,0 
 18,0 
B
B
Ø6mm
 
15,86 ±0,01 
 30,00 
 34,1 
C
C
 10,0 
 15° 
 1,50 
1,50 X 15°
SECTION B-B
M30x1.5
It's ok to make an 
indent for thread 
making
SECTION C-C
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
Note:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Stainless Steel
+45 52 64 51 29
Should be made from scratch
Project: IQT
Orientation of hole not important.
WEIGHT: 
Tómas Gíslason
16.06.2021
2
Sealing nut
s192305
==PAGE:59==
 
15,74 ±0,01 
1/4" 28 UNF
 2,0 
 2,0 
 R0,25 
 R0,10 
 2,61 ±0,01 
 
12,69 ±0,01 
 R0,25 
 R0,25 
1:1
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
Note:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:2:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
1.6582 (34CrNiMo6)
+45 52 64 51 29
Should be made from scratch
Project: IQT
WEIGHT: 
Tómas Gíslason
16.06.2021
3
Injector sensor sealed end
s192305
==PAGE:60==
 3,0 ±0,1 
 2,00 ±0,01 
 2,00 ±0,01 
 45° 
 
13,0 ±0,1 
 
6,40 ±0,01 
scale 5:1
Number of pieces: 2
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:2:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Stainless Steel
Made from scratch
+45 52 64 51 29
chamfered O-ring washer
Project IQT
WEIGHT: 
Tómas Gíslason
13.07.2021
1
Chamfered O-ring 
washer. inj_sensor
s192305
==PAGE:61==
C
C
Weld swagelok 
fitting onto hole.
SECTION C-C
1:2
2
3
1
?
ITEM NO.
PART NUMBER
Material
QTY.
1
Sealed tightening nut IQT
1.6582 (34CrNiMo6)
1
2
Sealing nut
Stainless steel
1
3
Injector sensor sealed end
1.6582 (34CrNiMo6)
1
4
SS-400-1-2W-Swagelok
Stainless steel
1
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
Notes:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
16.06.2021
4
Injector sealing apparatus 
assembly
Tómas Gíslason
+45 52 64 51 29
Assembled parts
Weld fitting on sealing nut
Project: IQT
s192305
==PAGE:62==
6
5
1
 
25,19 ±0,01 
Remove pipe and weld hole shot 
before turning down injector body.
turn down injector body in 
order to fit the sealed tightening nut on.
ITEM NO.
PART NUMBER
DESCRIPTION
QTY.
1
Injector_body
1
5
sealed_tightening_nut
1
6
Spring_screw
1
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
removed
WEIGHT: 
Tómas Gíslason
07.07.2021
1
Injector_mod
+4552645129
Mofifie injector body to fit 
the sealed tightening nut.
Project: IQT
s192305
==PAGE:63==
C
IQT calibration Matlab Code
c l c ;
clear
a l l ;
xdata =
. . .
[ 3 . 4 1
4.78
5.88
1 0 . 6 3 ] ;
ydata =
. . .
[100
39.8
27.9
1 5 ] ;
fun = @( x , xdata ) x ( 1 ) * ( xdata −x ( 2 ) ) . ^ x (3)+ x ( 4 ) ;
x0 = [ 8 3 . 9 9 ,
1.512 ,
−0.658 ,
0 ] ; %f i r s t
guess from Rune
x = l s q c u r v e f i t ( fun , x0 , xdata , ydata )
x ( 1 )
x ( 2 )
x ( 3 )
x ( 4 )
times = linspace ( xdata ( 1 ) , xdata ( end ) ) ;
figure
plot ( xdata , ydata , ’ ko ’ , times , fun ( x , times ) , ’ b−’)
legend ( ’ Measured data ’ , ’ Fitted
curve ’ )
t i t l e ( ’ Measured IQT data vs the
f i t t e d
curve ’ )
xdata =
. . .
[ 3 . 3 2
4.78
5.88
1 0 . 6 3 ] ;
xerr =
. . .
[ 0 . 0 7
0.22
0.22
0 . 2 5 ] ;
ydata =
. . .
[100
39.8
27.9
1 5 ] ;
yerr =
. . .
xi
==PAGE:64==
[0
1.6
1.6
0 ] ;
fun = @( x , xdata ) x ( 1 ) * ( xdata −x ( 2 ) ) . ^ x (3)+ x ( 4 ) ;
x0 = [ 8 3 . 9 9 ,
1.512 ,
−0.658 ,
0 ] ; %f i r s t
guess from Rune
x = l s q c u r v e f i t ( fun , x0 , xdata , ydata )
x ( 1 )
x ( 2 )
x ( 3 )
x ( 4 )
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
xdata2 =
. . .
[ 2 . 0 9
3.15
3.88
7 . 0 5 ] ;
xerr2 =
. . .
[ 0 . 0 7
0.22
0.22
0 . 2 9 ] ;
ydata2 =
. . .
[100
39.8
27.9
1 5 ] ;
fun = @( x2 , xdata2 ) x2 ( 1 ) * ( xdata2 −x2 ( 2 ) ) . ^ x2 (3)+ x2 ( 4 ) ;
x02 = [ 8 3 . 9 9 ,
1.512 ,
−0.658 ,
0 ] ; %f i r s t
guess from Rune
x2 = l s q c u r v e f i t ( fun , x02 , xdata2 , ydata2 )
x2 ( 1 )
x2 ( 2 )
x2 ( 3 )
x2 ( 4 )
%%%%%%%%%
times = linspace ( xdata ( 1 ) , xdata ( end ) ) ;
figure
xii
==PAGE:65==
plot ( xdata , ydata , ’ k * ’ , times , fun ( x , times ) , ’ b −’ , ’ LineWidth ’ , 1 )
hold on
errorbar ( xdata , ydata , yerr ,
’ Color ’ ,
’k ’ , ’ LineStyle ’ , ’ none ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ , 1 )
hold on
errorbar ( xdata , ydata , xerr , ’ horizontal ’ ,
’ Color ’ ,
’k ’ , ’ LineStyle ’ , ’ none ’ , ’ Lin
times = linspace ( xdata2 ( 1 ) , xdata2 ( end ) ) ;
plot ( xdata2 , ydata2 , ’ ko ’ , times , fun ( x2 , times ) , ’ r −’ , ’ LineWidth ’ , 1 )
hold on
errorbar ( xdata2 , ydata2 , yerr ,
’ Color ’ ,
’k ’ , ’ LineStyle ’ , ’ none ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ , 1 )
hold on
errorbar ( xdata2 , ydata2 , xerr2 , ’ horizontal ’ ,
’ Color ’ ,
’k ’ , ’ LineStyle ’ , ’ none ’ ,
hold on
legend ( ’1 st
calibration ’ , ’ f i t t e d
curve
1 ’ , ’ cetane
error ’ , ’ ID std . ’ , ’ 2 nd cali
xlabel ( ’ ID [ms] ’ )
ylabel ( ’DCN’ )
t i t l e ( ’ Measured ID and Cetane numbers along with the
f i t t e d
l e a s t
square cu
%’red ’
D
Injector and injection pump force calculations and thought
processes
xiii
==PAGE:66==
Injector Force calculations
restart;
with Units Simple
:
There are three forces acting on the needle while it is static with the fuel pressure at its minimum of 
14.5bar. The force from the spring, fuel and then the force from the air in the combustion chamber. 
Popping pressure testing was done at atmospheric conditions and so the force from the air, which direction
is against the spring, needed to be calculated to esimate the popping pressure decrease when installed. At 
the moment of injection the spring force is equal to the force from the fuel over the A1 surface area. The 
needle lifts and the third surface area is revealed. The pressure acting on that surface is assumed to be the 
average between the fuel being injected and the air pressure. These calculations are made at the moment the
needle lifts.
A
1
A
2
A
3
F_air
F_fuel
==PAGE:67==
(1.5)
(1.5)
(1.6)
(1.6)
(1.7)
(1.7)
(1.2)
(1.2)
(1.4)
(1.4)
(1.8)
(1.8)
(1.1)
(1.1)
(1.9)
(1.9)
(1.3)
(1.3)
g
9.81 m
s2 : pfuel_atm
240bar : pair
45bar : pfuel
14.5bar : pmean
evalf
pfuel_atm
pair
2
pmean
142.5000000 bar
OD1
6 mm :
OD2
2.5mm :
OD3
1mm :
OD4
0.5mm :
A1
OD1
2
2
OD2
2
2
A1
23.36559537 mm2
A2
OD2
2
2
OD3
2
2
A2
4.123340358 mm2
A3
evalf
OD3
2
2
A3
0.7853981635 mm2
Fspring_atm_opening
 pfuel_atm A1
Fspring_atm_opening
560.7742889 N
Fair
 evalf
pair A3
Fair
3.534291736 N
Fmean
 pmean A2
Fmean
58.75760010 N
Ftotal
Fspring_atm_opening
Fair
Fmean
Ftotal
498.4823971 N
ptotal
pfuel_atm
Ftotal
Fspring_atm_opening
ptotal
213.3403361 bar
Injection Pump Forces
==PAGE:68==
(2.1)
(2.1)
(2.2)
(2.2)
(2.3)
(2.3)
(1.10)
(1.10)
Dplunger
5mm : k
18.4 N
mm : Aplunger
evalf
Dplunger
2
2
: pfuel
14.5bar :
 psealingoil
20bar :
Fplunger
ptotal Aplunger
Fplunger
418.8927705 N
Therefore the force needed for initiating injections is around 418N.
At the end of the solenoid stroke the maximum force excerted is 700N so still plenty of force but prehaps 
the difference is small enough for the sealing oil force to start to have an effect.
The sealing oil pushes the plungers out of the sealing oil chamber because of the pressure difference. The 
top hat linkage between the two plungers keeps them together 
Spring pressure calculations
L0
32mm : m
5.5kg :
L1
29.1mm :
Fg
 m g
Fg
53.955 N
Ldelta
L0
L1
L
2.9 mm
k1
Fg
Ldelta
: convert k1,'units', N
mm
 
18.60517241 N
mm
==PAGE:69==
(2.5)
(2.5)
(2.10)
(2.10)
(2.4)
(2.4)
(2.8)
(2.8)
(2.6)
(2.6)
(2.9)
(2.9)
(2.7)
(2.7)
L0
32mm : m
10.5kg :
L1
26.4mm :
Fg
 m g
Fg
103.005 N
Ldelta
L0
L1
L
5.6 mm
k2
Fg
Ldelta
: convert k2,'units', N
mm
18.39375000 N
mm
L0
29.1mm : m
10.5kg
5.5kg : 
L1
26.4mm :
Fg
 m g
Fg
49.050 N
Ldelta
L0
L1
L
2.7 mm
k3
Fg
Ldelta
: convert k3,'units', N
mm
18.16666667 N
mm
k
k1
k2
k3
3
: convert k,'units', N
mm
18.38852969 N
mm
k
18.4 N
mm :
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
DTU Mechanical
Building 413
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
