==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Segmentation of cardiac structures based on MRI data using
neural networks with analysis and evaluation of anatomical
implausible segmentation errors
Master Thesis
Katrine Munch Ejlev (s154137)
Michala Zwicki Blicher (s153649)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Diagnosis of cardiovascular diseases rely on the segmentation of cardiac structures and the task
is currently performed manually. This process is both time-consuming and prone to inter- and
intra-observer variability. Semantic segmentation performed by neural networks are therefore
highly desirable, however, these methods have shown to lack reliability making them unsuitable
for clinical practice despite achieving high performance scores. This project seeks to investi-
gate the errors arising from segmentation models with seemly good performance measures.
Especially the extend of anatomical implausible segmentations is highlighted throughout this
project as these will cause distrust in clinical practice and consequently making the networks
unsuitable for clinical application.
A pipeline for cardiac segmentation and detection of potential segmentation errors is proposed
and evaluated on the cMRI data set provided by the MICCAI 2017 ACDC challenge. The seg-
mentation was performed by implementing a 2D U-Net and label three cardiac tissue structures;
right ventricle, myocardium and left ventricle. The model was trained with different loss func-
tions to obtain a model with the least amount of anatomical impossible errors. A set of metrics
was implemented measuring the number of anatomically impossible errors which showed that
the best performing model obtained a Dice score of 0.957 but still produced segmentations with
anatomical implausible characteristics in 60 % of the patient volumes. A secondary network
was introduced to detect local segmentation errors and get additional spatial information of
the errors. The aim of the detection network was to utilize information about the segmentation
uncertainty and to detect errors within segmentations for post-processing correction.
The obtained results suggest that the task of solving problematic segmentation errors is more
promising than the task of building secondary networks to detect already produced segmenta-
tion errors. The need for a proper metric is clearly underlined as the standard metrics will not
capture small anatomical impossible errors.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in collaboration with Cellari, in fulfillment of
the requirements for acquiring a Master degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computation.
The thesis was written under the supervision of Associate Professor Tommy Sonne Alstrøm,
Associate Professor Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen and external supervisor Peter Lunding Jensen
from Cellari.
The work was carried out in the spring semester of 2021 and the project covers a workload of
35 ECTS points for each student.
Kongens Lyngby, August 1, 2021
Katrine Munch Ejlev (s154137)
Michala Zwicki Blicher (s153649)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First of all we would like to thank our three supervisors; Tommy Sonne Alstrøm, Rasmus Rein-
hold Paulsen and Peter Lunding Jensen for inspiration, guidance and motivation throughout
the work of this project. Furthermore, we would like to thank the Cellari oﬀice for providing
GPU support and guidance whenever needed. We would also like to thank PhD-student Bo
Li for valuable assistance and support.
A special thanks to our friends and families for their support and encouragement throughout
the duration of this project. Thank you for taking the time to engage in fruitful discussions
and proofreading.
Lastly, we would like to thank each other for the extensive teamwork and cherished friendship
over the past 6 years at DTU. It will be the end of an era.
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Description
ACDC
Automated Cardiac Diagnosis Challenge
ADAM
Adaptive Moment estimation
AE
Anatomical error
ARV
Abnormal right ventricle
BGR
Background
CE
Cross Entropy
cMRI
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
CVD
Cardiovascular disease
DCM
Dilated cardiomyopathy
DCNN
Dilated Convolutional Neural Network
ECG
Electrocardiography
ED
End-diastolic
EDV
End-diastolic volume
EF
Ejection fraction
ES
End-systolic
ESV
End-systolic volume
FN
False negative
FP
False positive
FPR
False positive rate
GPU
Graphics processing unit
HCM
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
HD
Hausdorff distance
HD95
95 % Hausdorff distance
==PAGE:7==
v
Abbreviation
Description
LV
Left ventricle
MAE
Mean absolute error
MCD
Monte Carlo Dropout
MICCAI
Medical Image Computing and Computer Aided Intervention
MINF
Previous myocardial infarction
MR
Magnetic resonance
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
MYO
Myocardium
NOR
Normal cardiac function
ReLU
Rectified Linear Unit
ResNet
Residual Neural Network
RF
Radio frequency
ROI
Region of Interest
RV
Right ventricle
SD
Soft Dice
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent
SSFP
Steady-state free precession sequence
TN
True negative
TP
True positive
TPE
Tree-base Parzen estimator
TPR
True positive rate
U-map
Uncertainty map
WHO
World Health Organization
ZP
Zero-padding
==PAGE:8==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Clinical background
6
2.1
Heart anatomy and physiology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Magnetic Resonance Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Theory
11
3.1
Segmentation using Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Model features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Training process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Hyperparameter Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Performance evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Data presentation
23
4.1
Data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Methods
25
5.1
Project pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Segmentation Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Optuna optimization experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Detection Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Experiments and Results
38
6.1
Segmentation Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Optimization of hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3
Optimized Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.4
Detection Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7
Discussion
72
7.1
Data challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.2
Evaluation of methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
7.3
Evaluation of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
8
Conclusion
77
List of Figures
78
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
List of Tables
83
A
Code repository
85
B
Results for systolic data
86
C
Optimization of segmentation models
99
Bibliography
103
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are according to World Health Organization (WHO), the pri-
mary cause of death worldwide and are responsible for 17.9 million deaths each year [1]. Hence,
early and reliable diagnostics are a key factor in reducing the mortality of CVDs. Cardiac mag-
netic resonance imaging (cMRI) can be used for analysis of cardiac function and the assessment
of cardiac anatomical structures, due to its excellent soft tissue contrast, high spatial and tem-
poral resolution, and the absence of ionizing radiation [2].
The field of medical imaging has experienced great advances over the last two decades due to
improved imaging systems and data processing. Especially, development in the field of deep
learning techniques possesses great possibilities for improvement of medical image analysis [3].
Automatic segmentation is of special clinical interest as the amount of medical imaging data
acquisitions has increased immensely. In clinical practice the segmentation of cardiac struc-
tures is a valuable index and supports the diagnostics, disease monitoring, treatment planning,
and prognosis of CVDs [4]. The segmentation of cardiac structures can be used to determine
cardiac volumes and thereby estimate relevant clinical measurements of the cardiac function.
Figure 1.1 shows an example of a cMRI scan of the heart and the manual segmentation of
three cardiac tissue structures; right ventricle cavity, myocardium and left ventricle cavity.
The remaining area visible in the image will be labeled as background.
Figure 1.1: Example of a cMRI showing the cardiac structures and the corresponding manual
segmentation. The cardiac structures are marked with a red box and labels of the cardiac
structures are shown furthest to the right.
The current clinical approach for segmentation and registration of cardiac structures is per-
formed manually by trained medical experts. This is tedious work, as it is usually performed
in a slice-by-slice manner where regions of interest (ROIs) are delineated. Despite the expert
knowledge, this method can be extremely time-consuming and prone to both intra- and interob-
server variability [5]. Segmentation networks have therefore been proposed in order to improve
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Related Work
2
clinical workflow. In recent years there have been an increasing use of Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) for the task of cardiac structure segmentation. However, these methods tend
to lack reliability and robustness, which can cause them to fail unnoticed and eventually pro-
duce anatomical implausible segmentations with errors that medical experts would not make
[6]. An example of a typical anatomical impossible error is a segmentation with disconnected
cardiac tissue components which is anatomically impossible as the heart is one fully connected
coherent structure. Even though most segmentation networks have high performance scores
in terms of accuracy, Dice score and shape similarity, studies show that they generate at least
one anatomical impossible segmentation in more than 80% of the patient scans [5]. This issue
needs to be addressed before the segmentation networks can reach the level of a clinical expert
and achieve acceptance in clinical practice.
In order to produce segmentation networks suitable for clinical practice, the segmentation
errors with anatomically impossible characteristics needs to be solved. This can be achieved ei-
ther by improving the results of the segmentation network or by explicitly detect segmentation
errors. To exploit the domain specific expert knowledge which makes the manual segmenta-
tion approach superior today, a priori knowledge of cardiac structures can be incorporated in
the network with the aim of targeting specific anatomical impossible segmentation errors [7].
Furthermore, regions containing local segmentation errors can be detected by combining the
segmentation network with the assessment of segmentation uncertainty. The main notion be-
hind uncertainty estimation is that segmentation outputs with low uncertainties are expected
to be correctly segmented, whereas it will be reasonable to expect an area with high uncertainty
to contain segmentation errors [6]. The segmentation of cardiac structures and evaluation of
potential segmentation errors with anatomically impossible characteristics will be investigated
throughout this project.
1.1
Related Work
1.1.1
Segmentation Networks
Segmentation of cardiac structures is an essential tool in clinical practice, and it is therefore
an area of great research. In order to solve some of the issues with manual segmentation,
automatic methods for image segmentation have been developed and are continuously gaining
ground in medical image analysis. Image segmentation is the task of dividing an image into
multiple segments based on the varying properties of the pixels. The aim of segmentation tasks
is to extract meaningful and relevant information from the image. Each pixel in the image will
be associated with an object type and the pixels will be labeled according to certain character-
istics such as color, intensity, etc. [8]. This process is known as semantic segmentation which
assigns a class label to each pixel within the image.
Traditional machine learning techniques such as deformable models, cardiac atlases and sta-
tistical models, have been utilized for the task of image segmentation.
However, prior ex-
pert knowledge and significant feature-engineering is required to achieve a model with clinical
satisfactory performance [4]. In order to achieve an automatic segmentation model, several
deep-learning networks have been proposed, which have gradually outperformed the traditional
==PAGE:12==
1.1 Related Work
3
methods. For medical image analysis and segmentation deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) are commonly used. This type of network was first proposed by K. Fukushima [9] in
a seminal paper on ”Neocognition” from 1980 and introduces layers with convolutional oper-
ations. For the task of image segmentation, a popular choice is the U-Net architecture first
presented by Ronneberger et al. [10]. This architecture is a two-stage network which learns
to map information from the input to the output domain. Semantic information from the
input image is captured by the encoding function which is used as feature representation for
the decoder function which predicts a segmentation map. The models are trained using a loss
function which aims to minimize the difference between the ground truth and the predicted
segmentation.
In previous years various segmentation challenges have been presented, such as the Auto-
mated Cardiac Diagnosis Challenge (ACDC) from the Medical Image Computing and Com-
puter Aided Interventions (MICCAI) conference in 2017 [11]. This challenge focused on the
segmentation of the left ventricle cavity (LV), right ventricle cavity (RV) and left ventricle my-
ocardium (MYO). In Table 1.1 the three best performing models for LV cavity segmentation
are presented.
Reference
Method
Details
Loss
Isensee et. al [12]
2D + 3D U-Net
Ensemble of 2D and 3D U-Net
architecture
Dice loss
Simantiris et. al [7]
Dilated CNN
CNN w. Domain specific
constraints
Soft Dice loss w.
anatomical constraints
Zotti et. al [13]
2D Grid-Net
Grid-Net w. automatically
registered shape prior
Multi-term
optimization loss
Table 1.1: Overview of the three best performing models for LV cavity segmentation evaluated
by the ACDC from MICCAI 2017 [11].
The best performing model from the ACDC was submitted by Isensee et al.
[12].
They
proposed an ensemble method composed of 2D and 3D U-Net architectures, which are inter-
connected at multiple levels.
In order to make the 3D model computational tractable the
number of feature maps are almost halved from the 2D to 3D model. Furthermore, the lower
MRI resolution in the z-axis arising from large inter-slice gaps, was addressed by only perform-
ing certain operations in the xy-plane, such as pooling and upscaling of the input images. The
3D convolutions ensure that context from the z-dimension is passed through the model. The
final ensemble model utilizes the information of both a 2D and a 3D model and the proposed
pipeline is therefore robust against different cMRI protocols and slice misalignments.
Simantiris et. al [7] proposed a Dilated Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) for semantic
segmentation of cMRI. The dilated convolution enables the network layers to work in full
image resolution and thereby preserving the localization accuracy and keeping the amount of
trainable parameters to a minimum. Data augmentation was applied as a preprocessing step,
using basic image transformation techniques such as rotation, scaling and flip. Additionally,
intensity transformation were applied to the areas of the LV cavity and the MYO in order to en-
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Related Work
4
hance the distinction between the two structures. The model is trained with a customized loss
function, where anatomical constraints are taken into consideration. Extensive post-processing
steps were also applied to utilize 3D information with a 3D discrete Markov random field and
consequently an anatomically consistent segmentation is obtained.
A modification of the U-Net is the Grid-Net implemented by Zotti et al. [13] placing third
in the challenge. In this architecture convolutional layers are placed at the skip connections
and a shape prior is applied as an additional feature map. The loss function is comprised of
multiple loss terms, which includes e.g., loss for the prior, the contour, the predicted labels,
and the Dice loss.
1.1.2
Segmentation error estimation
Even though CNNs have shown promising results for segmentation of cMRI there are still some
issues to be addressed. In the presented methods in Table 1.1 the model presented by Isensee
et al. [12] performed best on the ACDC data set, with a Dice score of 0.967 for segmentation
of the LV cavity [11]. However, further inspection revealed that in more than 80 % of the
patients at least one segmentation was deemed anatomically impossible by a clinical expert
[5]. These types of errors do not occur when manual segmentation is applied and are not ac-
ceptable in clinical practice. In order to make use of the segmentation methods it is therefore
crucial to know where the models fail, how they fail and why they fail. This can be explored
by estimating the segmentation uncertainty of the networks to know which segmentations are
problematic and further explore the segmentation errors in order to improve the segmentation
performance and robustness.
A study by Sander et. al. [6] proposed an automatic segmentation method with detection of
local segmentation errors. This method presented a combination of automatic segmentation
and assessment of segmentation uncertainty in order to increase the robustness and perfor-
mance of the segmentation. The aim is to detect segmentation errors that are not clinically
tolerated and report them per image region. Three different network architectures are pro-
posed; Bayesian Dilated CNN, Bayesian Dilated Residual Network and a Bayesian U-Net. For
the task of detecting the resulting segmentation errors from the listed networks, an auxiliary
Residual Network (ResNet) is deployed. For the ResNet two different types of spatial uncer-
tainty maps are evaluated. Firstly, a multiclass entropy per voxel was computed and secondly
a Bayesian uncertainty map was computed using Monte Carlo Dropout. The training of the
networks is evaluated using different loss-functions; Soft Dice, Cross Entropy, and Brier loss.
The resulting performance of the networks are assessed quantitatively with Dice score and
Hausdorff distance. Additionally, the performance was evaluated by multiple clinical metrics.
The study concludes that a method combining a segmentation and a detection network can
increase the overall performance of the cardiac segmentation. Furthermore, detection of errors
is possible on a region-based level and the approach is generic and applicable to other model
architectures.
The experiments showed that the combination of model architectures, loss
functions and uncertainty measures is crucial for the segmentation and the quality hereof.
==PAGE:14==
1.2 Contributions
5
1.2
Contributions
Based on the review of related work, a deep neural network setup was implemented for segmen-
tation of cardiac structures with an additional network for detection of potential segmentation
errors.
The models used in this project were trained, tested and evaluated on the ACDC
dataset, which is one of the largest publicly-available and fully-annotated data sets for the
purpose of cMRI assessment.
This project seeks to investigate the following hypotheses:
1. A segmentation network can predict cardiac structures with good performance measures.
However, it is expected that the segmentation will also contain some critical errors that
would not be tolerated in clinical practice.
2. The amount of anatomical impossible segmentation errors can be reduced by employing
a loss function with a priori knowledge of cardiac structures.
3. A secondary network for detection of local segmentation errors can achieve better under-
standing of the errors and can be used to estimate and evaluate errors that are in need
of correction in order to improve the final segmentation.
The aim of this project is to develop a network for segmentation of cardiac structures based
on cMRI data. The proposed pipeline is a CNN for semantic segmentation which is combined
with exploration of uncertainties and a detection network with the aim of detecting potential
segmentation errors.
The initial approach is based on the dual network setup proposed by Sander et. al. [6]. The aim
is to obtain the best performing model by examining and optimizing hyperparameters, explore
different loss functions and incorporate anatomical a priori knowledge of cardiac structures. It
is assumed that the segmentation model produces clinically non-tolerated segmentation errors
which should be detected, evaluated and corrected in order to obtain a model suitable for
clinical practice. The performance of the models will be evaluated using Dice score, Hausdorff
Distance, quantification of segmentation errors and clinical metrics.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Clinical background
2.1
Heart anatomy and physiology
The heart is a muscular organ responsible for pumping blood through the body. The basic
structure of the heart is composed of four chambers: two atria and two ventricles. A sketch
of the circulatory flow is shown in Figure 2.1, with white arrows showing the direction of
the circulatory blood flow.
The complex muscle structure of the heart allows the flow of
deoxygenated blood from the venous system into the right atrium and to be pumped further
into the right ventricle (RV) before continuing into the pulmonary arteries. The blood will
then be oxygenated in the lungs before entering the pulmonary veins from where it will flow
to the left atrium. From here the blood will enter the left ventricle (LV) which will pump the
oxygen-rich blood into the body through the aorta and further into the arterial circulation.
Figure 2.1: Sketch of the heart anatomy with arrows indicating direction of blood flow [14].
The contraction of the heart chambers are responsible for generating blood pressure to ensure
oxygenated circulation through the blood vessels of the entire body. Cardiac valves ensure a
one-way blood flow as shown in Figure 2.1. The right atrium and right ventricle are separated
by the tricuspid valve, while the left atrium and left ventricle are separated by the mitral
valve. The blood pressure regulates the blood flow and is clinically reported as the diastolic
and the systolic pressure. The diastolic pressure is the pressure exerted in the arteries when
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Heart anatomy and physiology
7
the cardiac ventricles are being filled and the ventricular muscles are relaxed. The systolic
pressure arises when the ventricles are contracted, and the blood is pumped either to the body
or the pulmonary system. A sketch of diastolic and systolic phase is shown in Figure 2.2 and it
can be observed how the shape of the cardiac structure and the volumes of the ventricles will
appear differently throughout the phases of the heartbeat. The normal end-diastolic volume
of the LV is 120 ml of blood and 50 ml for the end-systolic volume [15].
Figure 2.2: Sketch of the heart in systole and diastole with arrows indicating blood flow
direction [14]
The myocardium (MYO) is the muscle layer responsible for contraction of the chambers. For
clinical examination of the cardiac function, it is relevant to investigate the muscle thickness
and motion during contraction [16]. It is also relevant to obtain measurements for the ven-
tricular volumes and thereby the ejection fraction (EF). The latter is an expression for the
percentage of blood pumped out of the left ventricle during contraction. A normal healthy EF
is between 55 % to 70% and an EF below 40% may indicate CVDs [17].
2.1.1
Cardiomyopathy
Cardiomyopathy is a term for a variety of diseases in the heart muscle that can affect the hearts
ability to pump blood through the body. There are multiple types of cardiomyopathy, with
different characteristics that would be visible on a cMRI. Some of the most common cardiac
diseases and their characteristics with an explanation of their impact on the cardiac function
are listed below [11]:
• Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a weakening of the tissue walls of the heart chambers,
which results in poor contraction of the heart. Consequently, the ventricles enlarge and
this dilation of volumes results in an ejection fraction of the LV lower than 40%.
• Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an abnormal thickening of the heart muscle,
which makes it harder for the heart to maintain normal pump function. However, a
normal ejection fraction is observed within this patient group.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Magnetic Resonance Imaging
8
• Previous myocardial infarction (MINF) can lead to permanent damage to the heart
muscle which can be visible on a cMRI and result in abnormal contraction. Typically,
this will result in a low ejection fraction less than 40% for the LV cavity.
• Abnormal right ventricle (ARV) is a condition with an abnormal large cardiac volume
for the right ventricle. This results in an ejection fraction lower than 40% for the RV.
2.2
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a noninvasive imaging modality used to create 3D
images of organs and soft tissue structures by utilizing the magnetic properties of mainly hy-
drogen nuclei. The human body consists of approx. 70 % water which contains a high degree
of free hydrogen nuclei. These have useful magnetic properties, as the nuclei have both charge
and spin, resulting in a small magnetic moment [16]. The small magnetic vectors will precess
along their own randomly oriented rotational axis and this orientation can be manipulated and
aligned by the MR scanner. The data acquisition starts by aligning the magnetic moments in a
basic magnetic field denoted as B0. The alignment is only partial due to interactions between
the individual spins but will still result in a net magnetization that will precess as well.
The net magnetization can be manipulated in order to differentiate between the tissue types.
This is done by pushing the net magnetization out of equilibrium with an external radio
frequency (RF) pulse. The nuclei will begin to recover the alignment with the B0 field by
emitting RF signals. By recording these RF signals it is possible to measure the relaxation
over time in both the longitudinal plane and the transverse plane. The relaxation times will
determine the intensity of the emitted RF signal, and these will be different for various tissue
types due to the different hydrogen compositions. By applying different sequences of RF pulses
and thereby manipulating the nuclei, different tissue properties can be imaged.
2.2.1
Cardiac MRI
The cardiac function can be evaluated using the steady-state free precession (SSFP) sequence,
which will produce an image where the blood appears bright. This is due to its high signal
intensity, as the blood has a high amount of hydrogen nuclei compared to the surrounding
muscle tissue [18]. The resulting image will therefore have a well defined tissue contrast be-
tween the muscle structures and the blood filled ventricles. Furthermore, the signal from the
flowing blood will be enhanced, hence appear bright.
Special methods are needed to acquire precise images of the beating heart as the constant
motion causes artifacts. A solution to this issue is electrocardiography (ECG)-gated MRI where
the beating of the heart is monitored by ECG which enables image acquisition at multiple time
points covering the entire cardiac cycle from end-diastolic to end-systolic phase [19].
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Magnetic Resonance Imaging
9
2.2.2
Imaging Planes
Cardiac imaging does not match standard body planes due to the obliquity of the heart and
therefore specialized imaging planes for the heart are proposed. In order to have a common
point of reference for the anatomical structures of the heart, three standard orientations are
established. This set of orientations is defined in reference to the left ventricle. In Figure 2.1
the line of reference connects the ventricular apex in the bottom of the heart to the center
of the mitral valve [20]. From the reference the three different orientations are defined and
the cardiac structures visible in each orientation is described in the list below. All planes are
perpendicular to one another and are shown in Figure 2.3 with a green box on the cMRIs
marking the heart for each view.
• Short axis view: This orientation will show two heart chambers; either the atria or the
ventricles.
• Horizontal long axis: This orientation will show all four chambers of the heart.
• Vertical long axis: This orientation will show a ventricle and the corresponding atrium
for either the left or right side of the heart.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the three cardiac planes with respect to the heart anatomy. The
heart is marked in each cMRI with a green box. Modified from [18]
The short axis view is commonly used for segmentation of LV due to the anisotropic resolution
of MRI, where the spatial resolution along the z-axis is inferior to the in-plane resolution along
the xy-axes [4]. When examining the heart in this direction, three different terms are used to
describe the localization in the z-axis, as shown in Figure 2.4. The top slice is called the basal
slice and is placed at the mitral valve, which divides the left atrium from the left ventricle.
The mid-cavity slice is placed in the middle and shows a good division between blood pool and
myocardium. The apical slice denotes the apex (bottom) of the heart where the right and left
ventricles end.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Magnetic Resonance Imaging
10
Figure 2.4: Illustration of the cardiac structure with xyz-orientations. The three lines represent
the described cardiac slices. Modified from [21]
Based on the anatomy of the heart described in Section 2.1 a set of characteristics of cardiac
structures can be observed in the short axis view and are valid for all pathological subgroups
in the ACDC data set. These characteristics are defined by clinical experts and will be used to
evaluate the correctness of the segmentations of the cardiac structures [22]. A list of cardiac
characteristics of special interest when performing segmentations is listed below for the three
tissue structures visible in short axis view; right ventricle (RV), myocardium (MYO) and left
ventricle (LV). The remaining area visible in the image will be denoted as background (BGR):
• The MYO fully surrounds the LV cavity
• There can only be one connected component of each structure; RV, MYO, LV and BGR
• The RV cavity is always bound to the MYO
• The full heart structure is one coherent connected structure
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
3.1
Segmentation using Neural Networks
Segmentation networks are widely used for medical image analysis and have the potential to
become the clinical gold standard of cardiac segmentation and diagnostic [4]. Deep neural
networks are employed in order to perform semantic segmentation where each pixel of the
input image is classified and assigned to a class label based on its characteristics such as color,
intensity, etc. [8]. Neural networks possess the ability to decompose the given inputs into la-
tent feature maps and thereby learn to predict the classes of new input images. This property
is highly desirable in clinical tasks as it does not require direct human intervention.
A neural network consists of an input layer, a number of hidden layers and an output layer. An
illustration of a basic network architecture is presented in Figure 3.1, showing the interconnec-
tion of layers and units. The network learns the representation of features in the input image
by a series of operations between the hidden layers where successive layers take the output
of previous layers as input. The units of the hidden layers contain activation functions with
different properties depending on the network architecture.
Figure 3.1: Illustration of a neural network with an input layer, two hidden layers and an
output layer. Image from [23]
A commonly used network architecture for image segmentation is the Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN), first proposed by K. Fukushima [9]. In a CNN some of the units will per-
form convolutional operations with a specified kernel setting, while others will perform pooling
operations which reduce the dimensionality of the data. The network is constructed of a set
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Model features
12
of layers which learn filters of increasing complexity. The first layers will learn basic feature
detection filters, such as contours and edges. The deeper hidden layers will learn more complex
filters and perform non-linear transformations which enables the network to model non-linear
relationships between features. At every layer each unit learns certain weights in an iterative
manner, which enables the network to learn features and eventually provide accurate output
predictions. A softmax activation function of the features can be added to the last layer of the
network as a final classifier, which will output the probabilities of each pixel belonging to each
of the output channels.
Some disadvantages of the CNNs are the high computation time due to the large number of
trainable parameters and require a large amount of training data. Furthermore, the networks
are prone to overfitting to specific characteristics of the training data due to the flexibility of
the model. To prevent overfitting different regularization methods can be applied, including
weight decay, dropout layers and data augmentation.
3.2
Model features
A neural network is designed from different layers, operations, and hyperparameters which can
be combined into a specific architecture setup. This section presents the theory of the different
elements applied to the network architectures used in this project. The final networks and
training processes are described in Section 5.2.
3.2.1
Building blocks
A neural network is constructed from a variety of different operations. The connective struc-
ture of the neural network results in each unit responding to stimuli in their receptive fields.
These fields are restricted regions of space, which partially overlaps and thereby over-covers the
entire visual field. A commonly used operation in image-based feature learning is convolution
which is responsible for much of the computational work in the network and will mathemati-
cally approximate the unit response [24]. This type of operation consists of a filter kernel being
multiplied elementwise with the input image and subsequently summed together to produce
an activation map of the filter responses at every spatial location [23]. The kernel can have
different sizes and weights defining the field of view of the convolution.
To preserve data in the border regions of the input image, zero-padding can be applied to
match the dimension of input and output and the size of the padding can be used to control
the dimensions of the network output. The convolutional kernel transverses the input during
the forward pass with a specified stride length. If the stride is larger than 1, the operation will
downsample the input. Another way to downsample the data and reduce the dimensionality is
to add a max pooling operation to the network. The pooling operation applies an aggregation
function to the pixels of the feature map within the receptive field of the pooling filter and
will select the maximum value. Though some information is lost, this method helps reduce the
number of parameters and complexity of model while preserving essential features and combat
overfitting [25].
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Model features
13
Normalization can be applied to a layer in different forms to stabilize the learning process. In
batch normalization the mean and variance will be calculated for each channel across the batch
and spatial dimensions of the input, whereas the mean and variance will be found across the
spatial dimensions for each channel in each input image when applying instance normalization.
To recover the spatial dimensions and interpret the feature maps, transposed convolutions can
be applied [4]. These work opposite of a normal convolution, as they apply a kernel to a single
pixel, hence increasing the size of the receptive field and upsamples the coarse feature maps to
match the dimensions of the input.
3.2.2
Activation functions
Activation functions in a neural network are added to each unit and defines how the weighted
sum of inputs is transformed before it is passed to the next layer. The function chosen for
this transformation will affect the learning process and the output of the network. For the
model to learn nonlinearities, these must be introduced in the network by nonlinear activation
functions [26].
For CNNs the most common activation function is the rectified linear unit (ReLU), which
produces an output if the input (x) is positive and otherwise outputs zero. This activation
function is computationally eﬀicient and works well in many settings. However, negative input
values are always set to zero and the neurons remain inactive as the first derivative is zero.
This will decrease the models ability to learn and thereby to train properly on the data. A
way to solve this issue is by applying Leaky ReLU which works in the same way as ReLU but
instead of setting the output to zero for negative input values, the output will instead have a
small slope (k ∈[0, 1]) [27]. Though the output value is close to zero, gradient-based learning
will be enabled for the negative half of the interval. The difference between the ReLU and
Leaky ReLU activation function is shown in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the input and output of the ReLU and the Leaky ReLU activation
function. For Leaky ReLU the value of k is fixed. Image from [27].
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Training process
14
The final layer of the network often involves a softmax activation function since it outputs a
normalized probability distribution over the predicted output classes. The softmax function is
a normalized exponential and will map the elements of the input to an output between 0 and
1 [28]. The outputs across channels will sum to 1 and thereby facilitate easier interpretation
of the network output and its confidence in each class prediction. The function is described in
Equation 3.1 for the input vector ⃗z containing the elements zj. The denominator represents
the normalization term, where j indexes the output units for the classes K.
σ(z)j =
ezj
PK
k=1 ezk
for j = 1, 2 . . . , K
(3.1)
3.2.3
Skip connections
To preserve small low-level details through the downsampling skip connections can be applied
to the network. These connections can be implemented as a concatenation of feature maps at
similar resolution levels. This provides an alternative path for the gradient by enabling the
output of one layer to be fed as input to other layers than just the subsequent one. Another
way to implement skip connections is by addition, where a layer can feed into another layer
multiple steps away. By doing so layers located deeper in the network are allowed to learn
from features that are captured in the initial layers of the network.
The residual blocks is a special case of skip connections, first proposed by Kaiming He. [29].
These can be applied to the network and will result in each layer feeding both into the subse-
quent adjacent layer and into layers located deeper in the network. This enables the network
to learn features without the need for a deeper network and additional hyperparameters, which
otherwise would increase the computational cost. An illustration of a residual block is presented
in Figure 3.3 where identity mapping is applied in order preserve the gradient.
Figure 3.3: Illustration of a single residual block. Image from [29].
3.3
Training process
Through a defined training scheme, the network will learn to recognize features in the input and
make predictions for the output. The training process of the network applies an optimization
algorithm which enables the model to find the best set of weights and biases by updating them
iteratively. The best set is determined by a loss function describing the error, which should
be minimized to obtain a high performance for the model. The performance is measured for a
validation set, which was not part of the training process [26].
==PAGE:24==
3.3 Training process
15
3.3.1
Backpropagation
During the forward pass the input is run through the network and the output can be evaluated
against the training labels by the specified loss function. The backwards pass will propagate
the error back through the network to optimize the weights and biases and consequently reduce
the loss for the next forward pass. For eﬀicient updating of the network, the first order partial
derivative of the loss function is computed to determine the rate of change with respect to
the weights and biases [30]. The gradient of the loss function will govern the updating of the
weights and biases for each training iteration. Furthermore, the gradient is used to determine
the direction of the steepest gradient decent of the loss and a step in this direction will be taken
before the next iteration [26]. The size of the updating steps can be regulated throughout the
training process. The principles of this weight updating by the gradient decent algorithm is
illustrated in Figure 3.4.
For the training procedure to be successful it is required that the chosen loss function L is
applicable to all (n) individual training examples (x) and therefore can be written as an average
L = 1
n
P
x Lx. Additionally, the loss function must be able to be written as a function of the
network output [30].
Figure 3.4: Illustration of the gradient descent algorithm. Image modified from [31].
3.3.2
Loss functions
For this project three different loss functions were implemented; the cross entropy loss, the soft
Dice loss [32] and a loss function with cardiac specific anatomical constraints [7]. These loss
functions were chosen for this project based on the reviewed literature and the state-of-the-art
models presented in Section 1.1.
Cross Entropy loss:
The most commonly used loss function for image segmentation is the
cross entropy (CE) loss which is a pixel-wise classification that examines each pixel individually
[33]. The CE loss function shown in Equation 3.2 is the result of the negative log-likelihood of
a Bernoulli distribution. This is calculated for all c classes, where ti is the ground truth label
and the softmax probability is denoted as pi for the i′th class. A disadvantage of using CE as
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Training process
16
loss function is the fact that all pixel classes have the same contribution and due to the large
amount of background pixels in medical images these will dominate training.
LCE = −
c
X
i=1
ti log(pi)
(3.2)
Soft Dice loss:
The soft Dice (SD) loss function is based on the principles of the Dice score
which measures the overlap between two samples; segmentation and ground truth. The SD
loss is calculated for each class separately and then averaged to yield a final score, which
is advantageous for class imbalanced data sets. The SD loss can be described as shown in
Equation 3.3, where Y and T denote the network’s prediction and manual ground truth,
respectively. The summation on s is over all pixels in the image and the number of classes is
denoted as N. A small error term ϵ can be added to avoid the case of zero division.
LSD =
N
X
c=1

1 −
2 P
s Y (s, c)T(s, c) + ϵ
P
s (Y 2(s, c) + T(s, c)) + ϵ

(3.3)
Loss function with anatomical constraints:
A loss function with cardiac specific anatom-
ical constraints can be used to reduce certain anatomical errors produced by the segmentation
network. The loss function used for this project is based on the loss function proposed by
Simantiris et. al. [7], which is built on three separate terms targeting anatomical errors.
The first term in the loss function is based on the SD loss function presented in Equation 3.3.
The second term aims to penalize predictions for classes that are not annotated in the manual
reference in the given slice. This is aimed at issues such as ones found in the systolic phase,
where the RV is not always visible on the short axis cMRI and therefore not included in the
manual segmentation T(u, n, c).
LC(n, c) = −
X
u
ln(1 −Y (u, n, c) + ϵ)
(3.4)
In this equation u represents the image voxels in a slice n for all four tissue classes c. In this
case the loss presented in Equation 3.4 will be added to the final loss function presented in
Equation 3.6. However, no cost will be added if all classes exist in the manual reference. The
parameter ϵ is added for proper numerical computations.
Finally, voxels predicted as LV that are neighboring voxels predicted as BGR or RV are penal-
ized since this is anatomically impossible as the LV is always completely surrounded by the
MYO. The penalization term is presented in Equation 3.5. An additional loss will therefore
be added to the final loss function 3.6 if a voxel segmented as LV is immediate neighbor to
any other class than MYO. The summation over u is performed for all voxels in the image n,
where t is the immediate neighboring voxels to u.
LN =
X
u
X
t∈N(s)
Y (u, n, LV ) · (Y (t, n, BGR) + Y (t, n, RV ))
(3.5)
The three terms are combined in a total anatomical error (AE) loss function with the two
anatomy-based constraints LC and LN weighted with the parameters α and β.
LAE = LSD + αLC + βLN
(3.6)
==PAGE:26==
3.3 Training process
17
3.3.3
Weight initialization
A common problem in training of neural networks is exploding or vanishing gradients, which
can be addressed by weight initialization. If the initial weight values are too small the input
signal will attenuate during propagation. Though these weights are less likely to overfit, the
risk of vanishing gradients may result in problems when networks become deeper. Contrarily,
if the initial values are too large the activation will risk saturation, hence resulting in exploding
values. When using a non-linear activation function such as ReLU the weight initialization
technique could be based on the proposed technique presented by He et. al. [34]. This will
initialize the weight of a node as a random number with a Gaussian probability distribution
with zero mean and a standard deviation of
q
2
N , where is N is the number of inputs.
3.3.4
Optimizer
An optimization algorithm can be implemented in the training process to update the model
parameters eﬀiciently and thereby achieve convergence faster. Basic algorithm choices for op-
timization are Gradient Descent, Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and Adaptive Moment
estimation (Adam).
The most basic optimizer algorithm is the Gradient Descent, which calculates the gradient
of the loss function and identifies in which direction the weights should be altered in order
for the loss function to reach a minimum and converge [35]. The learning rate of the model
then determines the step size of the value change in the given direction. This algorithm is
computationally heavy as it requires large memory to calculate gradients on the whole data
set. A variant of the method is the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), which updates the
parameters of the model more frequently. The parameters of the model are updated for each
training example which minimizes the computation time.
Adaptive Moment estimation (Adam) is another commonly used optimizer, which incorporates
both first and second order moments into the algorithm [36]. This will reduce the variance
and thereby the oscillations of the parameter estimates and lead to a better parameter search
without overstepping. This method stores the exponentially decaying average of past gradients
and utilizes these to update the gradients [35]. This optimizer accepts a stability parameter
epsilon, which ensures numerical stability by avoiding zero-division.
3.3.5
Overfitting
Deep neural networks contain multiple non-linear hidden layers which enables them to learn
very complicated relationships between their inputs and outputs. However, the small amount
of labeled training data is a limiting factor in analysis of medical images. Therefore, the models
are prone to overfitting, where the predictions are fitted perfectly to the training data but will
fail on new unseen test data. To prevent overfitting and improve generalization and robustness
of the model, regularization techniques can be applied. Regularization controls the complexity
of the model by penalizing the weights and reducing the impact of each feature.
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Training process
18
The concept of over- and underfitting is shown in Figure 3.5, where a model of varying com-
plexity is fitted to a set of data points.
Figure 3.5: Illustration of under- and overfitting a model to training data. Image from [37].
Regularization terms can be added to the loss function to avoid overfitting. This will help de-
crease the values of the weight terms towards zero as a simpler model will hold fewer weights
and thereby be less prone to overfitting. The most common types of regularization are L1
and L2 and the difference between the two regularization methods is in the nature of the term
added to the loss. In L1 regularization the model can be compressed since the value of the
weight terms can be set to zero. In L2 regularization the values are less encouraged to become
zero, this type of regularization is also known as weight decay.
Another common way to reduce overfitting is to apply dropout to the network. An illustration
of a standard neural network and a network with dropout is presented in Figure 3.6. This
process will randomly turn off weights in the network including their incoming and subsequent
connections during the training process. The dropout rate specifies the percentage of weights
that are dropped and this will depend on the size and type of data set. Since the selection
process is random it will result in a different output for each iteration even though the input
data is consistent. This type of method helps increase the robustness of a model [30].
Figure 3.6: Illustration of a Neural Network with dropout added. Image modified from [38]
==PAGE:28==
3.4 Hyperparameter Optimization
19
3.4
Hyperparameter Optimization
The search for the best set of hyperparameters which maximizes the model performance is
known as hyperparameter optimization or tuning. Different approaches can be taken to the
task yielding different search schemes. The task can be performed manually, though this can be
tedious work. Other tuning techniques therefore include e.g., grid search, random search, and
Bayesian optimization. Grid search is a traditional way of hyperparameter optimization, where
a manually defined search space is discretized and an exhaustive search is performed. In random
search the exhaustive search through all parameter combinations is performed randomly. The
advantage of this approach is that it can be applied to both continuous and discrete search
spaces. In Bayesian optimization a probability distribution is fitted in order to direct the search
and focus only on sampling sets of hyperparameters from promising areas of the search space.
Several automatic optimization frameworks based on the Bayesian optimization approach are
available e.g., Optuna, which is applied in this project.
3.4.1
Optuna: Hyperparameter optimization
Optuna is a framework for hyperparameter optimization developed in 2019 by T. Akiba et
al. [39]. In this framework a study is created for each process of minimizing or maximizing a
defined objective function, and a trial is set up for each evaluation of the objective function.
This optimization tool allows for dynamic construction of the parameter search space, where
the evaluated values are statistically sampled based on the history of previously evaluated
trials. Through the process of optimizing the defined objective function, a validation score is
outputted for each evaluated set of hyperparameters. The framework then dynamically gen-
erates a suggestion for a new set of hyperparameters within the specified range for the next trial.
Optuna implements independent sampling of each parameter and uses Tree-Structured Parzen
Estimator (TPE) as sampling algorithm. Thereby avoiding the redundancy observed in other
methods such as grid search and random search. The TPE algorithm models the likelihoods
p(x|y) and p(y), where y is the value on the response surface, i.e., the validation loss, and x
is the set of hyperparameters. TPE starts by randomly searching the response surface and
subsequently splits the resulting observations into two groups based on their performance [40].
The best scores and the related parameters are placed in one group g(x), while the remaining
parameters are placed in the other group l(x) as shown in Equation 3.7. The split value between
the two groups is denoted by y∗and is usually defined as the upper quartile e.g. (y∗= 0.75)
[41].
p(x|y) = g(x)
if
y > y∗
p(x|y) = l(x)
if
y < y∗
(3.7)
The likelihood of the two groups g(x) and l(x) are modelled by Parzen estimators, by calculat-
ing the average of kernels placed upon the existing data points. The hyperparameters are then
drawn from the set of likelihoods with the greatest expected improvement defined as l(x)/g(x).
Then the next point is chosen as the maximization of l(x)/g(x). This allows the algorithm
to determine areas of the search space with good results and focusing on sampling from there.
The selected hyperparameters are then evaluated on the defined objective function and the
trial with the best objective score is selected as the best trial.
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Performance evaluation
20
3.5
Performance evaluation
The evaluation of the models will be measured using several metrics based upon both geomet-
rical and clinical performance. In order to compare the performance to state-of-the-art models
the metrics proposed in the ACDC are applied along with additional metrics focused on errors
with anatomical impossible characteristics [5]. For the training and testing data set a manual
segmentation of the cardiac tissue structures is available as ground truth and will be used for
the evaluation. The geometrical performance is evaluated on pixel-level comparing the manual
ground truth with the output of the segmentation network and the following indices can be
measured; true positives (TP), true negatives (TN), false positives (FP) and false negatives
(FN).
3.5.1
Geometrical metrics
Dice Coeﬀicient
[42] is one of the most used metrics for evaluation of medical image seg-
mentations [43]. The Dice score is an overlap metric ranging between 0 (no overlap) and 1
(complete overlap), which evaluates the ground truth segmentation Sg and the output segmen-
tation from the models St for a given class c and is given by:
Dice =
2
Sc
g ∩Sc
t

Scg
 + |Sc
t |
=
2TP
2TP + FP + FN
(3.8)
Accuracy
measures the proportion of correctly assigned pixels in the output segmentation
compared to the total number of pixels. The performance in this regard is measured class-wise
on pixel level and is computed as:
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + FP + TN + FN
(3.9)
Sensitivity
is a measure of the true positive rate (TPR), which denotes the model’s ability
to correctly predict the class of the pixels. It is calculated as the amount of positive identified
pixels from the evaluated network that are also positive in the ground truth reference:
TPR =
TP
FN + TP
(3.10)
False positive rate
is a measure of the model’s tendency to wrongly predict the class of the
pixel. It is calculated as the ratio between the number of negative pixels wrongly segmented as
positive and the total number of actual negative events. A good performance will be achieved
if this score is low.
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
(3.11)
Hausdorff Distance
The Hausdorff Distance (HD) is a measure of the shape similarity
between two objects as illustrated in Figure 3.7. This measure is calculated as the maximum
euclidean distance between corresponding points, as defined in Equation 3.12.
The HD is
therefore a measure of how well the edges of the segmentations overlap with the reference,
where low measure of distance being favorable.
==PAGE:30==
3.5 Performance evaluation
21
Figure 3.7: Illustration of the HD measurement. Image modified from [44]
.
H(G, S) = max
(
sup
x∈G
inf
y∈S ∥x −y∥,
sup
y∈S
inf
x∈G ∥x −y∥
)
(3.12)
The HD is sensitive to potential outliers and the quantile method proposed by Huttenlocher et
al. [45] is therefore applied to cope with this. The 95% quantile is chosen in order to exclude
possible outliers and HD95 will be used as metric for this project.
3.5.2
Clinical metrics
The models will also be evaluated based on their clinical performance, using metrics computed
from clinical measurements. The clinical metrics can be measured for each cardiac structure
(RV, MYO and LV) for both the segmentation and the manual ground truth and are calculated
for each patient volume.
End-Diastolic Volume (EDV) and End-Systolic Volume (ESV)
is a blood volume
estimation expressed in mL. The end-diastolic volume (EDV) is the volume of blood within a
ventricle at the end of diastole, when the heart is fully dilated. The end-systolic volume (ESV)
is the volume of bloods in the end of the systole, when the heart is fully contracted.
Ejection fraction (EF)
is the fraction of the EDV that is ejected with each heartbeat. This
is measured as the difference between EDV and ESV, also called stroke volume, divided by
EDV. EF is expressed as the percentage and is calculated as follows:
EF(%) = EDV −ESV
EDV
× 100
(3.13)
To evaluate the clinical parameters for the entire data set the following indices were used;
correlation (ρ), bias with standard deviation and the mean absolute error. The Pearson corre-
lation coeﬀicient is calculated between the clinical measure of the segmentation and the manual
ground truth. The bias is calculated as the mean difference between the segmentation and
the manual ground truth and will show whether the network will have a tendency to over-
or under-estimate the clinical volumes. Furthermore, the standard deviation is calculated for
the bias. Lastly, the mean absolute error is computed as the mean of the absolute differences
between the volume calculations in order to quantify the overall volume estimation error for
the network segmentations.
==PAGE:31==
3.5 Performance evaluation
22
3.5.3
Anatomical error metrics
To evaluate potential errors with anatomical impossible characteristics, special metrics are
needed. The evaluation is based upon a priori anatomical knowledge of the cardiac structures
and the three anatomical constraints used for construction of the anatomical error metrics in
this project are listed below:
1. The MYO fully surrounds the LV cavity
2. There can only be one connected component of each structure; RV, LV, MYO and BGR
3. The full heart structure is one coherent connected structure
The anatomical constraints will be used to measure the size of the anatomical impossible errors
as well as the number of slices and patient volumes containing each type of error. The project
will use three metrics aimed for the three constraints and a final metric which indicates if the
segmentation contains a segmentation error violating at least one of the provided anatomical
constraints.
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4
Data presentation
4.1
Data set
The data set used for this project is provided by the MICCAI 2017 Automated Cardiac Diagno-
sis Challenge (ACDC) and consists of cMRIs from 100 patients [11]. The patients belong to five
different subgroups with 20 patients in each, one group with normal cardiac function (NOR)
and four groups with different diagnosed cardiac diseases: dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM),
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), previous myocardial infarction (MINF), and abnormal
right ventricle (ARV). The images were acquired by two MR scanners with different magnetic
field strengths (1.5T and 3T) and are obtained in short axis orientation providing the most
optimal view for ventricle segmentation. Image acquisition were made with a conventional
steady-state free precession (SSFP) sequence and during breath hold to minimize breathing
artifacts. For each patient approximately 10 slices were provided fully covering the heart from
the top slice starting at the mitral valve to the ventricular apex at the bottom slice. Manual
reference segmentations were provided by clinical experts for the cardiac structures; left ventri-
cle cavity, right ventricle cavity and left ventricle myocardium for all cMRI slices. The data is
obtained as ECG-gated cine MRI covering the entire cardiac cycle from the end-diastolic to the
end-systolic phase. For this project only labeled data for the end-diastolic and the end-systolic
phase was provided and these will be considered as two separate data sets. The data set of the
diastolic phase shows a fully dilated heart and the systolic data set shows the fully contracted
heart.
4.1.1
Preprocessing
The spatial resolution of the images ranges between 1.37 and 1.68 mm2/pixel, with a mean
value of 1.51 mm2/pixel and a median of 1.56 mm2/pixel. For this project resampling to 1.40
mm2/pixel was chosen in accordance with the work by Sander et. al.[6] in order to facilitate
better comparison of results. The resampling was done by a B-spline interpolation of first order
for the cMRI and zero order for the manual reference label. In order to decrease background
noise and computational cost the resampled images were cropped to 128×128 pixels. To ensure
that the cropped images contained the entire cardiac structure without cropping off any part
of the labels, the center of the manual reference label were computed. These coordinates for
the center of gravity in the manual reference label were then used as center to crop the images.
Lastly, the image intensities for each cropped cMRI was normalized to zero mean and unity
variance with regard to the patient volume.
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Data set
24
An example of the provided data with the original cMRI and the corresponding manual anno-
tation for the three cardiac structures is shown in Figure 4.1 for the end-diastolic phase and
the corresponding images are shown in Figure 4.2 for the end-systolic phase.
Figure 4.1: Example of a cMRI for a slice in a patient volume shown in the end-diastolic phase.
Left column is the original sized image and manual reference labels, while the right column
shows the cropped versions.
Figure 4.2: Example of cMRI for the same patient in the end-systolic phase. Left column is
the original sized image and manual reference labels. Cropped versions are shown to the right.
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 5
Methods
5.1
Project pipeline
The segmentation of cardiac structures with analysis and detection of potential anatomical
impossible segmentation errors require several processing steps with different network setups
and architectures. First a network is proposed for cardiac segmentation using different loss
functions to investigate the potential reduction of errors.
For each of the loss functions a
segmentation model is constructed, and the performance of each model is evaluated from a
geometrical and a clinical standpoint with additional metrics aimed at quantifying typical
anatomical errors. To improve segmentation and reduce potential errors a hyperparameter
optimization framework is applied to the models. Additionally, an evaluation of the potential
segmentation errors with anatomical impossible characteristics is presented. In order to identify
the potential errors and consider the uncertainties of the segmentations, a secondary network
is proposed to detect ROIs with segmentation errors. These errors must be corrected in order
to make a reliable segmentation suitable for clinical use. A sketch of the overall pipeline of the
methods applied in this project is presented in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Sketch of the overall method pipeline.
The setup is divided into subsets each
targeting a different element of the issue with anatomical impossible segmentations.
5.1.1
Data partition
The amount of annotated data available for this project is relatively limited, therefore it is
important to make a sensible data partition with respect to training of the two networks as
well as data details such as patient subgroups and cardiac phases. The data set is divided
into two sets based on the cardiac phase, either diastolic or systolic and these are never mixed
due to their explicit structural differences. Additionally, the clinical metrics require volume
estimations for both the systolic and the diastolic phase.
The five patient subgroups are
==PAGE:35==
5.1 Project pipeline
26
divided such that they are equally represented in both training and test set ensuring a strati-
fied data split. Furthermore, the partition of data between training and test set is performed
on a patient-wise level, such that no patient volume is represented in both training and test set.
The data contains 100 patient volumes, and the data pool is split in a 60/40 patient partition
with regard to training and test set for the segmentation network. The models are trained
using 6 fold cross-validation, whereof one fold is holdout for validation while the model trains
on the remaining. The number of folds were chosen in order to match the number of patient
volumes as the fold split is kept on patient level to ensure no overlap between patient slices.
The detection network uses the output of the segmentation network as an input and therefore
only the 40 patients from the test set of the segmentation network is available for training the
detection model. The remaining data of 40 patients is therefore divided into a train and a test
set for the detection network in a 30/10 patient split and again all subgroups are represented
equally in each set and kept on patient level. The detection network is also trained using
cross-validation with 6 folds.
In Figure 5.2 a sketch of the data split structure is presented showing how the data is divided
with regard to patients and subgroups. The five subgroups are denoted as DCM, HCM, MINF,
NOR and ARV and are equally divided into all splits. The upper section of the figure shows
how the data is split for the segmentation network and the lower section shows how the data
is split for the detection network.
Figure 5.2: Sketch of the data split structure used for the segmentation and detection networks.
The data is divided at patient level ensuring no overlap and all subgroups are represented
equally in each split.
==PAGE:36==
5.2 Segmentation Network
27
When examining the data set prior to model training it was observed that the apical slice,
showing the bottom of the heart, had very different structural characteristics compared to the
remaining cardiac slices. These slices were inspected as they are known from the literature to
have low tissue contrast, where the outline of the ventricles is poorly defined [4]. Additionally,
a 2D segmentation model does not consider 3D information such as inter-slice dependencies.
Consequently, the last slice in each patient was removed from the data set for both of the
cardiac phases. An example of a patient volume is presented below in Figure 5.3 showing all
slices from the basal slice (Slice: 0) to the apical slice (Slice: 7). From the figure it is clear
that the last apical slice appears very different from the remaining slices. This was observed
for all patients throughout the entire data set.
Figure 5.3: Patient example of a cMRI showing the 8 slices covering the cardiac structure
starting from the basal slice (Slice: 0) and moving down to the apical slice (Slice: 7)
5.2
Segmentation Network
The multi-chamber cardiac segmentation model is based upon a CNN, which is the most
common network type for medical image analysis [4]. The architecture used for this model
is based upon the standard U-Net structure proposed by Ronneberger et al. [10]. The 2D
network was implemented and will analyze the 3D cMRI data in a slice-by-slice manner, which
is a common approach for studies with limited amount of labeled data [5]. The details regarding
the network architecture, model features, operations and hyper parameters used for this project
will be presented in this chapter.
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Segmentation Network
28
5.2.1
U-Net architecture
The architecture of the U-Net is an encoder-decoder network type containing both a contract-
ing and an expanding path. The network uses the cMRI as input and outputs a segmentation
map in four channels for each tissue structure. Each path within the network consists of four
blocks containing two convolutional layers and a set of repeated operations. A sketch of the
U-Net architecture is shown in Figure 5.4.
The first block of the contracting path takes the input image of size 128x128 pixels with only
1 feature map and applies convolutions with a 3x3 kernel, and the number of feature maps
are increasing to 64. Zero-padding is applied to preserve original image size and information
located in the border regions. Subsequently, instance normalization and a Leaky ReLU acti-
vation function is applied after each convolutional layer. A max pooling operation with size
2x2 and stride 2 is added after each block to downsample the dimensions of each feature map.
Dropout is applied as a regularization term as the last operation in each block [46]. This
operation randomly drops a percentage of the hidden units to reduce overfitting of the model.
The contracting path repeats these operations for all four blocks, each with two convolutional
layers, instance normalization, a Leaky ReLU activation function, max pooling and dropout
resulting in a bottom layer with 1024 feature maps of size 8x8 pixels.
In the expansive pathway, the max pooling operation is replaced by transposed convolution,
which upsamples the dimensions of the feature maps while the number of feature maps is halved.
The transposed convolution uses the same kernel size and stride as the max pooling operation,
which is a kernel size of 2x2 and stride 2. The resolution of each block level will therefore be
the same for both the contracting and expansive path enabling them to be interconnected by
skip connections. Here the feature maps in the expanding path are concatenated with a copy
of the corresponding maps from the contracting path. These copies are marked by an orange
box in Figure 5.4. This allows small low level features to be preserved that would otherwise
disappear when heavy downsampling is applied. The final layer in the expanding path is a
1x1 convolution with a softmax activation function providing a posterior probability for each
of the four classes.
Figure 5.4: Illustration of the U-Net architecture. Image modified from [47]
==PAGE:38==
5.2 Segmentation Network
29
5.2.1.1
Training
The segmentation network was initially trained using hyperparameters proposed by Sander et.
al. [6]. The Adam optimizer is used with a learning rate of 1e−4 and weight decay at 1e−4.
Furthermore, a value epsilon of 1e−4 is added to the optimizer to secure numerical stability.
Batch size was set to 32 images and a 6 fold cross-validation was applied in order to compensate
for the small amount of available training data. Each fold will provide a separate model with
probabilities for each cardiac tissue class, which will be averaged to obtain one final ensemble
model for testing.
The network was trained over 150 epochs using different loss functions; Cross Entropy loss, Soft
Dice loss [32] and a loss function with anatomical constraints [7]. To examine the segmentations
and the extend of anatomically impossible errors, models trained with cross entropy loss and
soft Dice loss were used as baseline models.
Subsequently, a model trained with the loss
function with anatomical constraints was implemented. Thus, yielding a total of three different
segmentation models as presented in the list below.
• Model CE: Cross Entropy Loss
• Model SD: Soft Dice Loss
• Model AE: Soft Dice Loss with anatomical error constraints LC + LN
The loss function in Model AE aims to penalize two specific cases, using the anatomical error
constraints LC and LN presented in Section 3.3. The first case is penalized by LC and arises
when the manual annotation is not present in the image, but a prediction was made by the
segmentation model anyway. The clinical protocol for the manual reference segmentation of
this data set dictates that the RV is not annotated manually if it appears as a divided structure
in the short axis view. This is the case for the basal slices in some patient volumes. An example
of an empty manual reference segmentation for the RV cavity is presented in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Example of a slice where the RV is not manually annotated.
The second term LN aims to penalize cases where LV pixels are neighboring pixels from the
RV or BGR classes, which is deemed anatomically impossible since MYO should always fully
surround the LV cavity.
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Segmentation Network
30
5.2.1.2
Evaluation
The models are evaluated in terms of geometrical and clinical performance measures presented
in Section 3.5. Additionally, metrics aimed at measuring the violation of specific anatomical
constraints are implemented in order to facilitate proper comparison and evaluation of the
models. The metrics are constructed as a binary count indicating if an error violating the
constraints listed below is present in the segmentation. This is measured on both a slice- and
patient volume level.
1. The MYO fully surrounds the LV cavity
2. There can only be one connected component of each structure; RV, LV, MYO and BGR
3. The full heart structure is one coherent connected structure
First, a metric measuring cases where LV pixels are neighboring RV or BGR pixels is con-
structed as this violates the first constraint from the list above. The metric is computed on
an absolute pixel level calculating the LV pixels directly neighboring RV or BGR pixels. A
binary count is calculated on both a slice- and patient level indicating the presence of errors.
Figure 5.6 (1) shows a sketched example of such a segmentation error, where LV pixels are
neighboring RV pixels. The red line indicates the area measured as an error.
A second metric is constructed to measure segmentations containing multiple components of
the four tissue structures, as this is in violation with the second anatomical constraint. The
metric counts the number of connected components for each of the four classes and provides
a binary count if there is more than one component for each structure. Figure 5.6 (2) shows
a sketched example of such an error, where the RV structure is segmented as two separate
components. Neither component is known to be more correct, hence both are marked in red.
The third anatomical constraint is targeted by a third metric, which measures whether the
entire cardiac volume is one coherent structure without any disconnected components of any
class. The metric counts the number of connected components for the entire segmentation and
provides a binary count if there is more than one structure. Figure 5.6 (3) shows a sketched
example of an error, where the RV structure is not connected to the MYO and therefore the
entire cardiac structure is not one coherent connected structure. The error is marked in red,
however, it should be noted that the RV could be connected anywhere on the MYO.
A final metric is constructed, indicating if any of the anatomical errors presented above is
present in a slice or patient volume. Violation of the three anatomical constraints which are
measured with the anatomical error metrics is visualized in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Sketched examples of the anatomical errors targeted with the anatomical metrics.
==PAGE:40==
5.3 Optuna optimization experiments
31
5.3
Optuna optimization experiments
The Optuna framework creates a study with a specified number of trials or a specified run time
and then evaluates a set of selected hyperparameters. The optimization framework provides
optimized hyperparameters using the Dice score of the validation set across all tissue structures
as objective value, which is to be maximized. The optimization was run for 150 epochs for a
6 fold cross-validation model and the number of trials in the study was set to 20 resulting in
an approximate run time of 30 hours.
The Adam optimizer was used and the hyperparameters selected for tuning were the dropout
rate, the learning rate, weight decay and epsilon. Additionally, the weightings α and β for
the LC and the LN penalization terms in the AE model were optimized. The initial set of
hyperparameters and a suggested interval for the hyperparameters were defined as follows:
Initial hyperparameters
Suggested hyperparameters
Dropout rate
0.1
[0.0 : 0.5]
Learning rate
1e−4
[1e−8 : 1e−2]
Weight Decay
1e−4
[1e−8 : 1e−2]
Epsilon
1e−4
[1e−8 : 1e−2]
α (LC loss )
1
[0.1 : 10] (AE model)
β (LN loss )
1
[0.1 : 10] (AE model)
Table 5.1: The initial hyperparameters and the suggested interval of hyperparameters used as
search space for optimization of the SD and the AE models.
For this project the models trained with the SD and the AE loss function were optimized
for both the diastolic and systolic data set. The Optuna framework chooses the best set of
hyperparameters for each model within the suggested range based on the objective value which
is then used to train the segmentation models.
5.4
Detection Network
Potential segmentation errors and their location within each slice can be evaluated using a
detection network. The network is implemented in order to detect areas of the segmentations
with potential errors that should be corrected in order to make a reliable segmentation suitable
for clinical use. A detection network based on the residual neural network (ResNet) architec-
ture proposed by He. et. al. [29] is used for this project. The network is applied in a modified
version based upon the approach by Sander et. al. [6].
The cardiac segmentations produced by the U-Net is used as input for the detection network, in
addition to the original cMRI and a spatial uncertainty map (U-map). The detection network
will then in a patch-based manner produce a probability of each patch containing a segmenta-
tion error. The estimation of spatial uncertainties can be used to detect segmentation errors
arising from the model, as it assumed that incorrect segmentations are covered by a higher
spatial uncertainty than correct segmentations [6].
==PAGE:41==
5.4 Detection Network
32
A simple measure of uncertainty is the entropy of the softmax probabilities p over the differ-
ent tissue classes for each image (I) as presented in Equation 5.1. These entropy maps are
normalized and of the same dimensions as the cMRI, hence E ∈[0, 1]H×W .
E(I) = −
X
I
p(I) log2 p(I)
(5.1)
The U-maps ranges between 0 and 1, where 1 indicates areas where the segmentation model
is most uncertain about the predictions i.e., yielding relatively high softmax probabilities for
more than one tissue class. Consequently, low values in the U-map indicate that only one
tissue class was assigned a high softmax probability. However, regions placed upon boundaries
of cardiac structures yield high uncertainties even though they are segmented correctly. There-
fore, the detection network is constructed for the task of detecting the potential segmentation
errors since a direct implementation of the U-maps would show errors on the boundaries of
the cardiac structures [6].
An example of the three inputs used for the detection network is presented in Figure 5.7. The
left image shows an original cMRI, the middle image a segmentation of the cardiac structures
(BGR, RV, MYO and LV) and to the right a U-map calculated as the entropy of the softmax
probabilities from the segmentation network.
Figure 5.7: Examples of the three inputs used for training the detection network. To the
left is the original cMRI, in the middle the resulting segmentation from the U-Net and the
corresponding U-map on the right.
5.4.1
Residual Neural Network (ResNet)
The ResNet consists of a feature extraction module followed by a classifier indicating the pres-
ence of segmentation errors. The architecture of the network is sketched out in Figure 5.8.
The feature extraction module is built from 4 levels each with two convolutional layers, pro-
viding a total of 8 convolutional layers. For each level the number of kernels increases while
the dimensions of the feature maps decrease. In the first level, the initial layer applies 16 con-
volutional kernels with 7x7 pixels. In order to preserve feature information in border regions,
==PAGE:42==
5.4 Detection Network
33
zero-padding of 3 is applied. The following convolutional layer uses 32 kernels of size 3x3 pixels
and zero-padding of 1 pixel. The subsequent levels, contains a residual block and two convolu-
tional layers with kernel size of 3x3 and zero-padding of 1. Each convolutional layer is followed
by batch normalization, a ReLU activation function and then dropout is applied as the last
operation in each residual block with a rate of 0.5. Consequently, the number of kernels is
increased by a factor of 2 starting with 16 kernels in level 1 and increasing to 128 kernels in
level 4. The dimensions of the corresponding feature maps are reduced from 128 × 128 pixels
to 16 × 16 pixels.
The final classifier module consists of three convolutional layers with dropout applied between
each layer with a rate of 0.5. The convolutional layers have a kernel size of 1 × 1 pixel and are
thereby fully connected, meaning that the size of the feature maps will not be downsampled
further. The resulting dimensions of the feature maps are therefore 16 × 16 pixels where each
patch is 1 × 1 pixel. This will then equal a patch size of 8 × 8 pixels when the feature map
is upsampled to match the dimensions of the original input image of 128 × 128 pixels. The
resulting 128 feature maps are reduced to 2 channels before a softmax operation is applied to
obtain the probability of each patch containing a segmentation error or not.
Figure 5.8: Sketch of the ResNet architecture where each arrow represents an operation in
accordance with the provided description.
==PAGE:43==
5.4 Detection Network
34
5.4.2
Detection Network Pipeline
A sketch of the pipeline for the detection network is presented in Figure 5.9. The figure shows
the three different inputs used for training the network: the cMRI, the uncertainty map and
the segmentation from the U-Net. Furthermore, the manually annotated reference segmen-
tation is provided in order to sample a set of segmentation errors that are used as reference
labels for training of the detection network.
Manual segmentations are known to contain a degree of intra- and interobserver variability
and some of the incorrectly segmented pixels from the segmentation network are within this
range of variability [48]. These errors should therefore not count as segmentation errors as they
will be considered as tolerated and only non-tolerated errors should be corrected. A subset of
non-tolerated errors denoted as the SI error set was created based on the size of the errors and
their spatial location as suggested by the framework presented by Sander et. al. [6].
The SI error set uses two different constraints for the inclusion of non-tolerated segmentation
errors. Firstly, in order to only detect errors of interest a requirement of a minimum cluster size
is used to filter the segmentation errors. Secondly, the errors located at the boundaries of the
cardiac structures are excluded from the SI error set to incorporate the discussed variability
found in manual segmentations. The two constraints are combined to obtain a binary label tj
per patch j in an image I. This label indicates whether the specific patch contains any pixels
included in the SI error set. The network is trained with a soft Dice loss function using the
binary labels tj as reference. The output of the network will be a softmax probability pj of
each patch containing a segmentation error.
Figure 5.9: Sketch of the pipeline of the detection network. Inputs for the network are shown
on the left together with the inputs used for creating the SI error set used as reference labels.
==PAGE:44==
5.4 Detection Network
35
5.4.2.1 SI error set
The SI error set is created on the basis of the output from the segmentation network and
the manual segmentation reference label. The initial error set is computed as the difference
between the manual reference label and the segmentation from the U-Net.
A minimum cluster size constraint is applied to the computed difference and dictates that only
clusters larger than 10 pixels are being considered for the non-tolerated errors included in SI
error set. The cluster size is measured as a 4-connected cluster in 2D, and the size constraint is
based on preliminary experiments conducted by Sander et. al. [6]. The impact of the minimum
cluster size constraint is presented in steps in Figure 5.10. The figure shows an example of a
single cMRI slice overlaid with the segmentation of the right ventricle (RV) marked in yellow.
The first image shows the segmentation made by the U-Net, while the second image shows the
manual reference segmentation. The third image shows the computed difference between the
two which is used as the initial error set. The last image shows the cluster size constrained
segmentation error, where all clusters smaller than 10 connected pixels have been removed.
The resulting segmentation reveals large clusters close to the border of the cardiac structure.
In order to determine whether they belong to the SI error set an error margin needs to be
implemented.
Figure 5.10: Example of the steps taken for the cluster selection in the SI error set. The
first image shows the segmentation from the U-Net and second image the manual reference
segmentation. The third image shows the computed difference between the two used as the
initial error. The last image shows the pixels considered as non-tolerated errors after applying
the constraint of a minimum cluster size of 10 pixels.
Segmentation errors located close to the boundaries of the cardiac structures are discarded as
these lies within the intra- or interobserver variability range and should not be included in
the SI error set. A distance transform map is calculated for each slice, which measures the
Euclidean distance at any pixel to the nearest boundary of the manually segmented cardiac
structure [49]. This is done with the use of binary erosion and logical operations. An allowed
displacement of 2 or 3 pixels is incorporated, depending on whether the potential error is lo-
cated inside or outside the target tissue structure (RV, MYO or LV), respectively. These error
margins are in agreement with the reported intra- and interobserver variability presented by
Bernard et. al. [5].
==PAGE:45==
5.4 Detection Network
36
In Figure 5.11 the distance transform maps for all cardiac tissue classes in a single slice are
shown in the top row. From the figure it can be observed that darker areas indicating low
pixel-wise euclidean distance values are placed on top of the boundaries of the cardiac struc-
tures. The second row shows the filtered error clusters computed as the difference between
the segmentation from the network and the manual segmentation, as described above. By
combining these two constraints the results shown in the third row are obtained and the errors
will be included in the set of segmentation errors SI. By applying this pipeline of operations
for construction of the SI error set, only segmentation errors that would not arise during man-
ual segmentation are included. The values for distance margins and minimum cluster size are
based on the reported intra- and interobserver variability presented by Bernard et. al. [5] and
these constraints determine how many errors that are included in the training of the detection
network.
Figure 5.11: Top row shows the distance transform maps for each tissue class, where darker
areas indicate low pixel-wise distance values. The second row shows the segmentation difference
filtered with minimum cluster size. The last row shows the resulting SI error set with both
the cluster size constraint and error margins applied.
The training of the detection network requires a binary reference label tj. The label is obtained
by dividing the resulting SI error set for each slice into patches of 8×8 pixels. A patch will be
given the value 1 if any pixel in the corresponding area belongs to the SI error set and the value
0 if not. Since potential segmentation errors of the background class is of no clinical interest,
this channel is dropped from further analysis. The channels representing the three remaining
tissue classes are summed together and binarized in order to obtain one final label for whether
or not a segmentation error is located within the patch regardless of which tissue class it is
==PAGE:46==
5.4 Detection Network
37
originating from. An example of the binarized patch labels which are used as training labels
are shown in Figure 5.12a for the same patient volume as shown in Figure 5.10 and Figure 5.11.
For a better understanding of the spatial location of the detected errors, the binary labels in
Figure 5.12a is upsampled with interpolation to the original image size of 128×128 pixels. The
resulting label map is shown in Figure 5.12b overlaid with the original cMRI to provide tissue
structural context.
(a) Binary tj labels indicating segmentation er-
rors within patches.
(b) The binary tj labels upsampled and over-
laid with the segmentation from the U-Net.
Figure 5.12: Left: Binary error labels used as reference for training of the detection network.
Value of 1 (yellow) indicates the presences of error and value of 0 (purple) indicating no error.
Right: The error label upsampled from 16 × 16 pixels to 128 × 128 pixels overlaid with the
segmentation containing the errors included in the SI error set. The cardiac structures shown
in the segmentation are BGR (purple), RV (blue), MYO (green), and LV (yellow).
5.4.2.2
Training
The detection network was trained using the hyperparameters proposed by Sander et.
al.
[6]. The Adam optimizer was used with a learning rate of 1e−4 and weight decay at 1e−4.
Furthermore, a epsilon value of 1e−4 was added in order to secure numerical stability. The
model was trained over 150 epochs using the SD loss function and a 6 fold cross-validation
setup. Each fold will provide a separate model with probabilities of errors for each patch,
which will be averaged to obtain one final ensemble model for testing.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 6
Experiments and Results
The experimental setup for this project will include comparisons and evaluations of different
segmentation models, with subsequent hyperparameter optimization, uncertainty estimation
and lastly detection of segmentation errors. The aim is to predict cardiac structures from
cMRI data and reduce the amount of segmentation errors with anatomically implausible char-
acteristics. This chapter will describe the general setup for the conducted experiments with
training process and performance evaluation for each model. The chapter will first include a
comparison of two baseline segmentation models trained with a cross entropy (CE) and a soft
Dice (SD) loss function with an evaluation and discussion of their performances. This is fol-
lowed by an evaluation of the model trained with the anatomical error (AE) loss function using
the same initial parameters as the baseline models with corresponding performance evaluation
and discussion of results. An optimization scheme is then proposed in order to obtain the best
set of hyperparameters for the SD and the AE models for both the diastolic and systolic data
set. Finally, the segmentations will be further examined by uncertainty estimation and lastly
a detection network for error detection is presented.
The experiments for this project were performed using the ACDC data set where the pre-
processing steps described in Chapter 4 were applied. Each model was trained on both the
diastolic and the systolic data set and these are never mixed. The evaluation of the models was
done using the performance metrics described in Section 3.5. A global performance evaluation
of the entire test set is provided as well as examples of patients with characteristic errors or
abnormal features. The models will be evaluated from both a geometrical and a clinical per-
formance standpoint with further evaluation of the most common anatomical impossible errors.
All network implementations were done in Python using the Pytorch 1.8.0 library and trained
end-to-end on a NIVIDIA Tesla K80 12 GB RAM GPU with CUDA version 10.2. A link to
the GitHub repository containing all code used for this project can be found in Appendix ??.
==PAGE:48==
6.1 Segmentation Network
39
6.1
Segmentation Network
The segmentation network is a modified U-Net architecture providing a segmentation for each
of the four cardiac tissue structures; right ventricle (RV), myocardium (MYO), left ventricle
(LV), and background (BGR). The models are trained with a 6 fold cross-validation, each fold
providing class probabilities which are averaged to obtain a final robust ensemble model.
In this section, the results from the segmentation models are presented, evaluated, and dis-
cussed. A detailed description of the experiments can be found in Section 5.2.1. Firstly, this
section will describe the results obtained from the baseline models trained with CE loss and
the SD loss. Secondly, the model trained with AE loss will be presented and evaluated. All
figures are presented for the diastolic data set and the corresponding figures for the systolic
data set can be found in Appendix B unless otherwise stated.
6.1.1
Baseline models
For each of the two baseline models an ensemble model was created. This was done by averaging
the predictions from the 6 folds obtained by the cross-validation for either the CE or SD
segmentation model. The mean loss and accuracy are shown in Figure 6.1 with the standard
deviation for the 6 folds. This is presented in order to confirm a robustness in the training
and ensuring that each of the 6 models has the same trend and development. The figure shows
the training and evaluation for both the CE model and the SD model performed on the data
for the diastolic phase for the first 100 epochs. It can be observed that all training curves are
following the same trends, with low standard deviation indicating no folds standing out.
==PAGE:49==
6.1 Segmentation Network
40
Figure 6.1: The plots in the top row show the training and validation losses for the two
ensemble models using either the CE or the SD loss function, while the plots in bottom row
show the accuracy for the two models. The std over all 6 folds are shown for all plots, which
are generated on the diastolic data.
An example of the softmax probabilities for each model trained with CE loss is shown in Figure
6.2 as overlay on the original cMRI for structural context. The first row is the manual binary
reference label and then the softmax probabilities for each of the 6 models are presented in the
rows below. A high probability close to 1 is indicated with a bright yellow color, whereas a
dark blue color indicates a low probability of the specific cardiac tissue class. The predictions
of BGR, RV, MYO and LV are shown from left to right, respectively.
The softmax probabilities were also computed for each tissue class for the 6 models trained
with SD loss and is shown in Figure 6.3.
==PAGE:50==
6.1 Segmentation Network
41
Figure 6.2: Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the diastolic phase
predicted by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with CE loss. The first
row shows the manual ground truth annotation which is binary and used as reference label for
training the models. All plots are overlaid with the original cMRI for structural context.
==PAGE:51==
6.1 Segmentation Network
42
Figure 6.3: Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the diastolic phase
predicted by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with SD loss. The first
row shows the manual ground truth annotation which is binary and used as reference label for
training the models. All plots are overlaid with the original cMRI for structural context.
==PAGE:52==
6.1 Segmentation Network
43
An example of the averaged softmax probabilities for each tissue class is shown in Figure 6.4
for both the ensemble model trained with the CE and the SD loss. The presented slice is from
the test data set for the diastolic phase.
(a) Ensemble model trained with CE loss.
(b) Ensemble model trained with SD loss.
Figure 6.4: Softmax probabilities for all tissue classes predicted by the ensemble model trained
on CE and SD, respectively.
The shown slice is from the diastolic test data set.
A high
probability close to 1 is indicated with a bright yellow color, whereas a dark blue color indicates
a low probability of the specific cardiac tissue class.
The final output of each ensemble model is obtained with an argmax function. This results
in a segmentation of each tissue structure, where each pixel is assigned to the class yielding
the highest softmax probability. The resulting segmentation for the given example is shown in
Figure 6.5. These binary segmentation masks will be used for the performance evaluation of
the models.
Figure 6.5: The final segmentation of a single slice for both the model trained with CE and
SD as loss functions on diastolic data. The segmentations are shown together with the original
cMRI used as input to the models and the manual segmentation used as reference label.
==PAGE:53==
6.1 Segmentation Network
44
Performance evaluation
For performance evaluation the metrics are divided into three
categories: geometrical, clinical and anatomical errors.
The geometrical results are shown in Table 6.1 for the CE models and the SD models. The
results are calculated as the mean over all slices presented with the variance. The results are
provided for each cardiac structure (RV, MYO and LV) and for each of the two cardiac phases;
diastole and systole.
Diastole
Systole
RV
MYO
LV
RV
MYO
LV
Dice CE ↑
0.840 ± 0.053
0.802 ± 0.018
0.920 ± 0.010
0.658 ± 0.116
0.817 ± 0.003
0.848 ± 0.005
Dice SD ↑
0.852 ± 0.053
0.822 ± 0.015
0.933 ± 0.010
0.676 ± 0.112
0.839 ± 0.023
0.870 ± 0.036
HD95 CE ↓
4.57 ± 35.86
2.91 ± 13.81
2.89 ± 16.13
5.44 ± 49.23
3.64 ± 13.41
3.27 ± 12.65
HD95 SD ↓
4.22 ± 29.01
3.08 ± 19.71
2.88 ± 19.85
4.84 ± 36.60
3.34 ± 10.76
3.05 ± 14.41
Table 6.1: Geometrical results for the CE models and the SD models. The results are presented
as the mean over all slices ± the variance and these are provided for each cardiac structure
(RV, MYO, and LV) and for each of the two cardiac phases; diastole and systole. The arrows
indicate whether a high or low value is desirable for the given metric.
The Dice scores are examined further for both the CE and the SD model with a boxplot in
order to visualize how the values are distributed for each cardiac structure in both the diastolic
and the systolic phase. Figure 6.6 includes two sets of boxplots; the left plot for the diastolic
data and the right plot for the systolic data. The boxes marked in blue represents the CE
models and the green the SD models. Dice scores are deemed as outliers if they place more
than 1.5 times the interquartile range away from either the first or third quartile. These are
marked as individual data points in the boxplot.
Figure 6.6: Boxplots of Dice scores for each cardiac structure for both the CE and SD models.
Left plot shows the diastolic phase and right plot the systolic phase. Median is marked in red.
==PAGE:54==
6.1 Segmentation Network
45
The results for the clinical metrics are presented in Table 6.2 for the CE and the SD models.
A correlation score, bias, standard deviation and mean absolute error are provided for each
of the three clinical metrics; ejection fraction (EF), end-diastolic volume (EDV) and end-
systolic volume (ESV). The indices are calculated between the clinical metrics obtained from
the segmentation mask and the clinical metrics obtained from the manual reference label.
The presented values are calculated for the LV cavity as this structure is commonly used for
examination in clinical practice. The metrics are computed on a patient-level, meaning that
values for slices belonging to the same patient volume are summed together.
Ejection fraction (EF)
End-Diastolic Volume (EDV)
End-Systolic Volume (ESV)
Corr (ρ)
Bias ± std
MAE
Corr (ρ)
Bias ± std
MAE
Corr (ρ)
Bias ± std
MAE
CE
0.888
1.19 ± 8.42
5.75
0.901
6.57 ± 26.29
13.75
0.978
0.474 ± 14.00
9.89
SD
0.904
1.13 ± 7.82
5.23
0.902
6.13 ± 26.17
12.38
0.986
0.419 ± 11.40
8.15
Table 6.2: Clinical results for the CE and SD models. The results are calculated on a patient
volume level as the mean for the LV cavity.
Lastly, an estimate of anatomical errors is provided in Table 6.3. The errors are determined
from the three criteria described in Section 3.5.3. The test set contains 337 slices covering
40 patients and the number of errors is reported on both a slice- and patient level, with the
relevant percentages. Additionally, a pixel count is provided for the first constraint calculating
the number of pixels with erroneous neighbors. A final anatomical error score is provided for
each model indicating if the segmentations contain at least one of the anatomical errors.
CE Diastole
CE Systole
SD Diastole
SD Systole
LV not fully surrounded by MYO
Pixels
616
518
688
623
Slices
34 (10.09 %)
38 (11.28 %)
32 (9.50 %)
50 (14.84 %)
Patients
14 (35.00 %)
19 (47.50 %)
14 (35.00 %)
27 (67.50 %)
Multiple RV, LV, MYO or BGR
Slices
51 (15.13 %)
82 (24.33 %)
76 (22.55 %)
108 (32.05 %)
components
Patients
22 (55.00 %)
34 (85.00 %)
31 (77.50 %)
37 (92.50 %)
Disconnected structures
Slices
5 (1.48 %)
21 (6.23 %)
21 (6.23 %)
30 (8.90 %)
Patients
5 (12.50 %)
14 (35.00 %)
15 (37.50 %)
21 (52.50 %)
Anatomical Errors
Slices
59 (17.51 %)
90 (26.71 %)
78 (23.15 %)
117 (34.72 %)
Patients
23 (57.50 %)
36 (90.00 %)
31 (77.50 %)
38 (95.00 %)
Table 6.3: Anatomical error results for the CE and SD models. The results are given for each
of the three anatomical constraints and as a total count of anatomical errors. For the first
constraint a pixel count is provided indicating how many pixels in the test set contains this
error. The values are given for slices and patients with a percentage of errors. The values are
provided for each of the two cardiac phases; diastole and systole.
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Segmentation Network
46
Discussion
The experiments presented above confirms the hypothesis that models trained
with a CE or a SD loss function produce segmentations of cardiac structures with high per-
formance scores even though many anatomical implausible errors occur. The training of the
models was firstly performed for a large number of epochs (500) in order to confirm convergence.
The presented training results are for the diastolic data set, however the same tendencies were
observed for the systolic data set. The evaluation of the baseline loss functions presented in
Figure 6.1 yielded a consistent training for both ensemble models both with low standard devi-
ations. The accuracy evaluation yielded high scores already after 50 epochs. However, a high
accuracy score is somewhat expected due to the large class imbalance between BGR pixels and
the cardiac structures, where BGR on average represents more than 80 % of all pixels in the
images.
The 6 models produced slightly different predictions of cardiac structures for both the CE
and SD loss and are averaged to a final robust prediction model for each loss function. The
predictions from the CE model presented in Figure 6.2 show small changes around the edges
of the cardiac structures between each fold especially around the MYO, for which the ring
shape is very thin. Additionally, the prediction for the right side of the RV cavity is changing
for each fold. This results in the averaged predictions presented in Figure 6.4 (a), where the
edges of the cardiac structures appear uneven and blurry due to lower probabilities. Especially,
the right side of the RV cavity is missed due to the large variation between the 6 folds in the
predictions of this structure. The corresponding predictions from the SD model is presented in
Figure 6.3 and the averaged predictions in Figure 6.4 (b). A comparison of the two averaged
predictions from the CE and SD model indicates a better and more robust segmentation when
using the SD model. For the given example this can be explained by a more even prediction
of the MYO and a more coherent prediction of the RV cavity throughout the folds. The final
segmentation for both the CE and the SD model is obtained by binarization with an argmax
function, which are used for evaluation. The segmentations presented in Figure 6.5 shows
similar structures for the two models, however, the SD is better at predicting the RV cavity.
The performance evaluation of geometrical results presented in Table 6.1 yields overall accept-
able scores for the cardiac structures. However, it should be noted that the RV in systolic
phase has very low scores compared to the other structures. This is a common finding from
previous literature as the outline of the structure is poorly defined in the short axis view [5].
Overall, the best results are obtained for the LV cavity in the diastolic phase where the tissue
contrast is high and the outline of the structure is clear. The 95% Hausdorff (HD95) values
are a relative distance measure for shape similarity. The mean values are deemed appropriate
with the highest values observed for RV indicating larger shape differences. Furthermore, the
variances of the HD95 are very high for the RV cavity indicating large differences in the predic-
tions of the RV shape. However, this can partly be explained by the much varying appearance
of the RV cavity in both size, shape, and location in the short axis view.
The Dice scores are visualized in boxplots in Figure 6.6 showing the difference between dias-
tolic and systolic data for both the CE and the SD model. An observed tendency for all three
cardiac structures is the similar pairwise median Dice scores for the CE and SD models. The
first quartile is higher for the SD models than observed for the CE models. However, it should
be stressed that the comparison of Dice scores for the two models are somewhat biased since
the SD models are trained with a Soft Dice loss, hence it is expected to achieve higher Dice
==PAGE:56==
6.1 Segmentation Network
47
scores. The figure shows that the segmentations for the diastolic data has higher Dice scores
than for systolic data, although they both have a large amount of deemed outliers indicating
the large differences in obtained Dice scores. It can be observed that all models produce at
least one segmentation with a Dice score of zero for all cardiac structures. Especially, the Dice
scores for the CE model segmentation of RV in the systolic data is interesting as the median
Dice score is 0.81, however, the interquartile range covers the entire obtainable range of the
Dice score between [0; 1].
In order to apply the segmentation to a clinical practice three clinical metrics are evaluated;
EF, EDV and ESV on a patient level for the LV cavity. The correlation between the volume of
the segmentation mask and the manual reference label showed high values for both the CE and
SD models, though slightly higher for the SD model. This indicates that the segmentation ob-
tained from e.g., the SD model could be argued as a substitute for manual segmentation when
estimating the ESV as these have a correlation of ρ = 0.986. However, further analysis was
made calculating the bias value which yielded a tendency of slight over-estimation of cardiac
volume especially for EDV, where the bias has a positive sign. Additionally, the measured std
of the biases show high values for all metrics indication large differences in volume estimations
between patients. Lastly, the MAE is calculated showing the overall volume estimation error
with largest difference observed for the EDV for both models.
An evaluation of anatomical errors is presented in Table 6.3 showing the number of errors in
each slice and patient. The three criteria indicating errors are based upon clinical prior knowl-
edge of cardiac structures and a clinically acceptable model should not include this type of
errors. From the table it is clear that both models produce segmentations with a large number
of anatomical errors in up to 95 % of all patients in the test set. However, differently from
the previous discussed metrics the CE model results in slightly better performance with fewer
errors than the SD model.
To understand the errors an example of each is presented in Figure 6.7, with the segmentations
in the first row, manual reference labels in the second row and the original cMRI in the last
row for spatial comparison. The first example to the left shows a segmentation where the LV
is not fully surrounded by the MYO, which is an anatomically impossible case. This typically
appears when the tissue outline is diffusely defined in the cMRI. Second image shows multiple
components for both the RV and the LV, which is again anatomically impossible. Third image
shows an example of a fragmented cardiac structure where the RV is divided. These types of
errors occur mainly in basal slices where the cardiac structure appears divided and may not be
manually annotated due to the clinical annotation protocol as it is the case for this example.
The image to the right shows an example of a good segmentation without anatomical errors,
most segmentations are of this type, hence the high Dice scores. However, the anatomically
impossible errors should be avoided to make all segmentations suitable for clinical practice.
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Segmentation Network
48
Figure 6.7: Examples of the three segmentation errors that are considered anatomically im-
possible and an example of a segmentation without any anatomical errors. The examples are
selected from different patients from the diastolic test set.
6.1.2
Anatomical error model
To reduce the amount of anatomical impossible errors a domain specific loss function is intro-
duced. The loss function is based on Soft Dice loss (LD) with added penalization terms as
shown in Equation 6.1 and the theory behind it is presented in Section 3.3.
LAE = LSD + αLC + βLN
(6.1)
The errors presented above in Figure 6.7 are considered anatomically impossible and should
be avoided in order to produce a clinically trustworthy segmentation. The first example of
an erroneous segmentation shows the case where MYO is fragmented and therefore not fully
surrounding the LV cavity.
This is penalized with the LN term in Equation 6.1.
Further
examination showed that the errors with multiple components and disconnected components
mostly arises from the segmentations of basal slices where the RV cavity appears divided on
the cMRI. Since the RV is typically not annotated manually for these slices, the LC term can
be used to reduce these types of errors.
==PAGE:58==
6.1 Segmentation Network
49
The segmentation model is trained with the anatomical error (AE) loss function with the same
hyperparameters as for the CE and SD models. The LC and LN terms are weighted by α and β,
where the values are initially set to 1. The 6 fold cross-validation was performed as previously
described yielding a total of 6 models which are averaged to a final ensemble prediction model.
The plot of the training and validation loss and accuracy for the resulting ensemble model is
shown in Figure 6.8. The values are presented as the mean and std of the 6 folds. The AE
loss used for evaluation is a summation of 3 terms LSD, LC, and LN and therefore this will
sum to more than 1.
Figure 6.8: First plot shows the training and validation loss for the ensemble AE model. The
second plot shows the computed accuracy for the model. The plotted values are the mean and
std over all 6 folds using the diastolic data set.
To evaluate the effect of the two penalization terms, results obtained from the SD model is
compared with the AE model since both are trained with the soft Dice loss function. The two
penalization terms LC and LN are aimed at two different cases of segmentation errors. First,
the LC penalization term is activated if the manual reference label is empty for either of the
three cardiac tissue classes (RV, MYO, or LV). An example of an empty reference label of
the RV cavity is presented in Figure 6.9 with the softmax probabilities for each fold from the
SD model in order to facilitate comparison with the AE model. The same slice example is
presented in Figure 6.10 with the softmax probabilities for each fold from the AE model. This
is a typical example of a basal slice where the RV appears as a split structure in the short axis
view and is therefore not annotated manually.
==PAGE:59==
6.1 Segmentation Network
50
Figure 6.9: Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the diastolic phase
predicted by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with the SD loss function.
The first row shows the binary manual ground truth label which is empty for the RV cavity.
==PAGE:60==
6.1 Segmentation Network
51
Figure 6.10: Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the diastolic phase
predicted by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with the AE loss function.
The first row shows the binary manual ground truth label which is empty for the RV cavity.
==PAGE:61==
6.1 Segmentation Network
52
The averaged softmax predictions are presented in Figure 6.11 for the SD model and the AE
model, respectively. The models are trained on diastolic data and the probabilities are shown
for the same slice for each of the four cardiac structures.
(a) Ensemble model trained with SD loss.
(b) Ensemble model trained with AE loss.
Figure 6.11: Softmax probabilities for the ensemble models trained with either SD or AE loss.
The predictions are binarized with the argmax function and the final segmentation for the
given slice are presented in Figure B.11, showing the original image, the segmentation from
the SD model, the AE model, and the manual reference label.
Figure 6.12: The final segmentation of a single slice for the SD model and the AE model. The
segmentations are shown together with the original cMRI and the manual segmentation used
as reference label.
The LN penalization term is a measure of the number of LV pixels neighboring either RV or
BGR pixels and this term is initially weighted with β = 1. An example of a segmentation
with this type of pixel-wise erroneous neighbors is presented in Figure 6.13 for the SD model
and the same slice for the AE model is presented in Figure 6.14. The figures show the manual
reference and the softmax probabilities for each of the 6 folds for the two models on diastolic
data.
==PAGE:62==
6.1 Segmentation Network
53
Figure 6.13: The top row shows the binary manual segmentation followed by the softmax
probabilities for each fold for a LN example trained with SD loss on diastolic data.
==PAGE:63==
6.1 Segmentation Network
54
Figure 6.14: The top row shows the binary manual segmentation followed by the softmax
probabilities for each fold for a LN example trained with AE loss on diastolic data.
==PAGE:64==
6.1 Segmentation Network
55
The softmax probabilities for the 6 folds are averaged for the SD model and the AE model,
respectively. The ensemble models are presented in Figure 6.15 for each of the tissue classes
for the diastolic phase. The averaged probabilities are shown for the same slice for the two
models in order to highlight the differences and the effect of the added penalization terms.
(a) Ensemble model trained with SD loss.
(b) Ensemble model trained with AE loss.
Figure 6.15: Softmax probabilities for the averaged SD and AE models.
The final segmentation for each tissue structure for the given slice is presented in Figure 6.16,
showing the original image, the segmentation of the SD model, the AE model and the manual
reference label for diastolic data.
Figure 6.16: The original cMRI and each of the segmentations from the ensemble models for
a LN example together with the manual reference segmentation of the four cardiac structures.
Performance evaluation
The performance of the model trained with the AE loss function
is evaluated using the same metrics as the CE and SD models described in the previous section.
Geometrical results for the AE model are presented in Table 6.4 for each cardiac structure
in the diastolic and systolic phase. The values provided are the mean over all slices and the
variance.
==PAGE:65==
6.1 Segmentation Network
56
Diastole
Systole
RV
MYO
LV
RV
MYO
LV
Dice AE ↑
0.854 ± 0.049
0.823 ± 0.014
0.933 ± 0.010
0.695 ± 0.107
0.843 ± 0.021
0.877 ± 0.031
HD95 AE ↓
4.27 ± 29.46
3.08 ± 21.41
3.09 ± 25.35
5.08 ± 38.96
3.28 ± 11.88
3.13 ± 18.43
Table 6.4: Geometrical results for the AE models.
The results are given for each cardiac
structure and for each of the two phases; diastole and systole. The numbers are given as the
mean over all slices ± the variance. Arrow indicating if the values should be maximized or
minimized.
The clinical results for the AE model are presented in Table 6.5 showing the correlation (ρ),
bias and std as well as the mean absolute error (MAE). The values are provided for the LV
cavity for EF, EDV and the ESV.
Ejection fraction (EF)
End-Diastolic Volume (EDV)
End-Systolic Volume (ESV)
Corr (ρ)
Bias ± std
MAE
Corr (ρ)
Bias ± std
MAE
Corr (ρ)
Bias ± std
MAE
AE
0.906
1.45 ± 7.77
5.08
0.905
5.45 ± 25.75
12.04
0.988
-0.651 ± 7.70
9.89
Table 6.5: Clinical results for the AE models. The results are given for LV cavity.
The results of the anatomical error metrics are presented in Table 6.6 for both the diastolic and
systolic data. The results are presented as a count of errors in all slices and on a patient level
with the corresponding percentage. The test data consists of 337 slices covering 40 patients.
AE Diastole
AE Systole
LV not fully surrounded by MYO
Pixels
772
856
Slices
36 (10.68 %)
49 (14.54 %)
Patients
14 (35.00 %)
28 (70.00 %)
Multiple RV, LV, MYO or BGR
Slices
71 (21.07 %)
79 (23.44 %)
components
Patients
30 (75.00 %)
31 (77.50 %)
Disconnected structures
Slices
16 (4.75 %)
28 (8.31 %)
Patients
12 (30.00 %)
18 (45.00 %)
Anatomical Errors
Slices
76 (22.55 %)
102 (30.27 %)
Patients
30 (75.00 %)
35 (87.50 %)
Table 6.6: Anatomical error results for the AE models. The results are given for each of the
three anatomical constraints and as a total count of anatomical errors. The values are given for
slices and patients with a percentage of errors. For the first constraint a pixel count is provided
indicating how many pixels in the test set contains this error. The values are provided for each
of the two phases; diastole and systole.
==PAGE:66==
6.1 Segmentation Network
57
Discussion
The anatomical error (AE) loss function aims to reduce two types of common
segmentation errors with anatomical implausible characteristics. The loss function and accu-
racy for the AE model shown in Figure 6.8 indicates an overall convergence at 100 epochs.
The overall training showed the same tendencies and progress as were observed for the CE and
SD models presented above, with a high accuracy score for both the training and validation set.
The predictions from the segmentation models using the SD and the AE loss function are com-
pared in order to evaluate the influence of the added penalization terms LC and LN. Figure
6.9 shows a slice for which the manual annotation of RV is empty, but RV structures were still
predicted in all 6 folds trained with the SD loss. When comparing with the predictions from
the AE model shown in Figure 6.10, it can be observed that RV structures are still predicted
in all 6 folds even though the model features the LC term. However, the number of pixels
predicted as RV seems reduced. This observation is further examined by averaging the 6 folds
into one final ensemble model shown in Figure 6.11. The averaged softmax probabilities show
a reduction in the number of pixels predicted as RV by the AE model compared to the SD
model. The final segmentations presented in Figure B.11 show a reduction of pixels labeled as
RV. Since the model still produces segmentations of RV the LC term should be weighted with
a higher α value in order to achieve a larger penalization of these erroneous segmentations.
Furthermore, the segmentation in the given example contains LV pixels neighboring RV pixels
which is another anatomical error not solved for this example.
The LN term aims to reduce the number of pixels with anatomically implausible neighbors.
An example of this type of erroneous prediction is produced by the SD model for which the
softmax probabilities for each fold is presented in Figure 6.13. The same slice is presented for
the predictions produced by the AE model in Figure 6.14. A notable difference between the
two models is the predictions of the LV structure. From the averaged softmax probabilities
for the two ensemble models in Figure 6.15, it is observed that both models do not predict
high probabilities around the edges of the cardiac structures. This is most pronounced for
the SD model, especially for predictions of the RV structure. The differences between the SD
and the AE model are clearly highlighted in the final segmentation from the ensemble models
presented in Figure 6.16, where it can be observed that the errors of neighboring pixels are
reduced, but not completely removed. This indicates a need for a higher penalization weight
for β in order to reduce this type of anatomical impossible error.
The performance of the AE model is evaluated with the same metrics as presented for the CE
and SD models. The geometrical results presented in Table 6.4 are within the same range of
the performance results for the CE and SD models. The RV structure in the systolic phase still
achieves the lowest Dice score. The same tendency of low mean values with large variances is
observed for the HD95 indicating poor shape similarity between the segmentation mask and
the manual reference label for some slices.
The clinical results presented in Table 6.5 are also very close to the results obtained with the
CE and SD models. The correlation values are slightly improved indicating higher agreement
between the volume of the segmentation mask and the manual reference label. The bias of
the ESV is negative indicating a small volume under-estimation, which is a change from the
baseline SD model which yielded a small over-estimation.
However, there is no noticeable
difference in the MAE values between the AE model and the two baseline models.
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Optimization of hyperparameters
58
Lastly, the results of anatomical errors are presented in Table 6.6 showing a slight reduction of
the overall count of anatomical errors. For the error of LV not being fully surrounded by MYO,
no or only little increments were observed both at the slice and patient level, however a large
increment were observed in the number of erroneous neighbor pixels. For the last two error
types describing multiple tissue components and disconnected structures, an improvement on
both diastolic and systolic data is observed on both the slice and patient level. However, the
obtained results from the AE model still contain anatomical impossible errors in more than
75.00 % of all patients in both the diastolic and systolic phase. To improve the segmentations
and reduce anatomical impossible errors the hyperparameters of the models as well as the α
and β weightings should be optimized.
6.2
Optimization of hyperparameters
The Optuna framework was applied to the SD and the AE models for both diastolic and
systolic data. The study was set to run 20 trials and used the hyperparameters defined in
Section 5.3. The Dice score was used as objective value which should be maximized in order to
select the best set of hyperparameters. The evaluation of the objective value for the 20 trials
is presented in Figure 6.17 for the AE model for the diastolic data, showing how the Dice score
evolves for each trial. The corresponding plots for the SD model and for the systolic data is
presented in Appendix C. The blue dots indicate the obtained objective value for each trial,
while the red line shows the history of the best Dice score obtained. It can be observed that
trial 13 had the best set of hyperparameters.
Figure 6.17: Optimization history of the objective value for each trial in the created study.
The relationship between a set of hyperparameters can be visualized using a 2D contour plot
of the response surface. An example of a contour plot showing the relationship between the
learning rate and the weight decay is presented in Figure 6.18. The black dots represent the
20 values sampled for each parameter for each trial set up by Optuna. A darker blue color
indicates a higher objective value for a set of hyperparameters. It should be noted that the
==PAGE:68==
6.2 Optimization of hyperparameters
59
chosen objective value is the Dice score which ranges between [0; 1]. Therefore, only unsampled
areas can be indicated with a value above this range.
Figure 6.18: Contour plot of the sampling of learning rate and weight decay for 20 trials for
the AE model trained on diastolic data.
For the AE model the two loss weightings α and β determining the penalization by LC and
LN are inspected. The relationship between the two parameters is shown in Figure C.7 with
the sampled values marked with blacks dots.
Figure 6.19: Contour plot of the sampling of α and β for 20 trials for the AE model trained
on diastolic data.
==PAGE:69==
6.2 Optimization of hyperparameters
60
The best trial for the AE model using diastolic data achieved a Dice score for the validation set
of 0.978 and an optimized set of hyperparameters were found. A study was likewise conducted
for the SD model on diastolic data as a baseline for comparison and achieved a Dice score of
0.977. Furthermore, the optimization was performed on the systolic data set for both models.
The corresponding sets of optimized hyperparameters are listed in Table 6.7 together with the
initial hyperparameters.
Initial Model
SD opt (Dia)
AE opt (Dia)
SD opt (Sys)
AE opt (Sys)
Dropout rate
0.1
0.23
0.15
0.08
0.02
Learning rate
1e−4
5.9e−3
4.4e−3
5.2e−3
6.7e−3
Weight Decay
1e−4
1.3e−3
1.7e−3
1.3e−3
3.3e−3
Epsilon
1e−4
7.4e−3
6.7e−3
4.9e−3
7.4e−3
α (LC )
1 (AE)
—
3.5
—
7.1
β (LN )
1 (AE)
—
7.2
—
6.4
Table 6.7: The initial hyperparameter settings along with the best set of hyperparameters for
the SD and the AE model in each of the cardiac phases; diastole and systole.
Discussion
The optimization history plot in Figure 6.17 shows how the parameter sampling
starts randomly but around trial 9 hits an area of promising results. The subsequent trials
obtain similar objective values as the framework focuses the sampling of values close to this
area. The contour plots in Figure 6.18 and C.7 confirms the observed sampling pattern, but
also shows that areas of higher objective value remain unsampled. It should be noted that
the 2D contour plots only shows the relationship between two of the hyperparameters. The
optimal set is a combination of all the selected hyperparameters and cannot be directly seen
from the provided contour plot. It could be argued that a better set of hyperparameters could
be obtained if more trials were run. However, due to the achieved Dice scores of 0.978 and
0.977 the conducted hyperparameter optimization was deemed reasonable.
The sets of optimized hyperparameters for the SD and the AE models presented in 6.7 falls
within the same range for both diastolic and systolic data. Dropout rates lower than the initial
value is observed for both models when optimized on systolic data and higher values when the
diastolic data is used. The optimized values for the learning rate, weight decay and epsilon
are all higher than the initial values for both models on both data sets. For the AE model the
values of α and β determine how heavy the penalization should be and is affected by how often
the specific error occurs and the magnitude of the resulting penalization value. The optimized
values of both α and β is higher than the initial value thereby penalizing both error types
heavier. Furthermore, the optimized value for the α weight is doubled for the systolic data
compared to the diastolic data. This is expected since the systolic data contains more slices
with empty manual reference labels of the RV cavity, hence making the penalized error type
more frequent. The value for β is relatively similar for both data sets indicating that this type
of error is equally represented in both data sets.
The segmentation network will be run for both models with the new set of hyperparameters
in order to achieve a better segmentation for further analysis.
==PAGE:70==
6.3 Optimized Segmentation
61
6.3
Optimized Segmentation
The segmentation networks using the SD and the AE loss functions are trained again with
the optimized sets of hyperparameters. The training was conducted in the same manner as
described in previous sections, with a 6 fold cross-validation and 150 epochs. The optimized
models will be denoted as SD opt and AE opt and their performances are evaluated using the
geometrical, clinical and anatomical error metrics. The geometrical results are presented in
Table 6.8 showing the results for the RV, MYO and LV in the diastolic and systolic phase.
Diastole
Systole
RV
MYO
LV
RV
MYO
LV
Dice SD opt ↑
0.891 ± 0.036
0.872 ± 0.006
0.955 ± 0.005
0.711 ± 0.116
0.874 ± 0.017
0.898 ± 0.028
Dice AE opt ↑
0.894 ± 0.034
0.874 ± 0.006
0.957 ± 0.005
0.731 ± 0.098
0.860 ± 0.019
0.897 ± 0.025
HD95 SD opt ↓
3.80 ± 31.55
2.11 ± 9.75
1.92 ± 7.80
3.92 ± 30.60
2.41 ± 3.77
2.22 ± 4.76
HD95 AE opt ↓
3.39 ± 21.53
1.88 ± 3.53
1.72 ± 2.40
5.52 ± 62.05
2.62 ± 3.91
2.31 ± 3.45
Table 6.8: Geometrical results for the optimized SD and AE models. The results are provided
for each cardiac structure (RV, MYO, and LV) and for both of the cardiac phases; diastole
and systole. The numbers are presented as the mean over all slices ± the variance. The arrows
indicate whether a high or low value is desirable for the given metric.
The clinical metrics are given in Table 6.9 for both optimized models trained with the SD and
the AE loss function, respectively.
Ejection fraction (EF)
End-Diastolic Volume (EDV)
End-Systolic Volume (ESV)
Corr (ρ)
Bias ± std
MAE
Corr (ρ)
Bias ± std
MAE
Corr (ρ)
Bias ± std
MAE
SD opt
0.939
0.079 ± 6.31
3.70
0.993
-1.83 ± 7.96
5.41
0.990
-1.42 ± 9.47
6.28
AE opt
0.968
0.584 ± 4.80
3.19
0.993
-2.08 ± 7.89
5.18
0.993
-2.93 ± 9.44
6.35
Table 6.9: Clinical results for the optimized SD and AE models. The results are calculated as
the mean for the LV cavity.
==PAGE:71==
6.3 Optimized Segmentation
62
The anatomical error results are presented in Table 6.10 for the optimized SD and AE models
for both the diastolic and systolic data.
The test data consists of 337 slices covering 40
patients.
SD opt Dia
SD opt Sys
AE opt Dia
AE opt Sys
LV not fully surrounded by MYO
Pixels
212
316
199
614
Slices
10 (2.97 %)
31 (9.20 %)
17 (5.04 %)
47 (13.95 %)
Patients
6 (15.00 %)
18 (45.00 %)
8 (20.00 %)
22 (55.00 %)
Multiple RV, LV, MYO or BGR
Slices
52 (15.43 %)
78 (23.15 %)
55 (16.31 %)
80 (23.74 %)
components
Patients
21 (52.50 %)
34 (85.00 %)
23 (67.50 %)
31 (77.50 %)
Disconnected structures
Slices
9 (2.67 %)
22 (6.53 %)
5 (1.48 %)
17 (5.04 %)
Patients
8 (20.00 %)
18 (45.00 %)
5 (12.50 %)
11 (27.50 %)
Anatomical Errors
Slices
54 (16.00 %)
83 (24.63 %)
59 (17.51 %)
95 (28.19 %)
Patients
22 (55.00 %)
35 (87.50 %)
24 (60.00 %)
32 (80.00 %)
Table 6.10: Anatomical error results for the optimized SD and AE models. The results are
given for each of the three anatomical constraints and as a total count of anatomical errors.
The values are given for slices and patients with a percentage of errors. For the first constraint
a pixel count is provided indicating how many pixels in the test set contains this error. The
values are provided for each of the two cardiac phases; diastole and systole.
To examine the progression of anatomically impossible segmentation errors throughout the
model development and optimization, three segmentation examples are shown in Figure 6.20.
The three examples are chosen as they are representative for characteristic errors and abnormal
features found within the data set and the resulting segmentations. The original image is shown
in the top row and the manual reference segmentation in the second row. The following rows
show the segmentations achieved by the baseline SD model, the optimized SD model, the AE
model and finally the optimized AE model.
==PAGE:72==
6.3 Optimized Segmentation
63
Figure 6.20: Examples of segmentations and the progression hereof related to loss function
and optimization. First row shows the original cMRI, while the second row is the manually
annotated reference. The subsequent rows show the segmentations for the SD and the AE
models after both the initial training and after optimization of the associated hyperparameters.
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Optimized Segmentation
64
Discussion
The models trained with the optimized hyperparameters were tested and evalu-
ated in the same manner as previously described. From the geometrical results presented in
Table 6.8 it can be observed that the Dice scores are improved for all structures, as expected
since this measure was used as the objective for the optimization. The same tendencies be-
tween structures are observed, with the best value obtained for the LV cavity in the diastolic
phase and the lowest Dice score observed for the RV cavity in systolic phase. Furthermore,
it should be noted that there is no large difference between the values of the SD opt and the
AE opt models. The variance of the HD95 is reduced for all structures indicating an improved
shape prediction for both models. However, the variance is still high for the RV cavity. The
highest variance was observed for the RV cavity in systolic phase when predicted by the AE
opt model. This indicates that the model still have problems with the shape of the RV cavity
for some patient volumes, which is not solved by the anatomical error loss or optimization.
The clinical metrics presented in Table 6.9 shows high correlation scores for all three clinical
indices. The bias is reduced for both models and for the EDV and ESV the models are now
underestimating the volumes which is opposite from most previous results. Furthermore, the
MAE is reduced for both models indicating an overall improved volume estimation.
The results for the anatomical errors presented in Table 6.10 showed a large improvement on all
four anatomical error metrics, both on slice- and patient volume level. For the optimized AE
model in the diastolic phase the number of pixels with erroneous neighbors was reduced with
74 % from 772 pixels to 199 pixels. For the systolic phase the number of pixels with erroneous
neighbors was reduced with only 28 % from 856 pixels to 614 pixels. This indicates that the
higher weightings of α and β reduces this type of error mostly for the diastolic phase. For the
error metrics measuring multiple components and disconnected structures the error count is
reduced on both a slice and patient level. Consequently, the overall count of anatomical errors
was reduced on both slice and patient level. The number of patient volumes containing any
anatomical error for the diastolic data was reduced from 75 % for the AE model to 60 % in
the optimized AE model. The systolic data showed an error in 87.50 % of all patients and this
was reduced to 80 %.
Examples of three different slices in the test set are presented in Figure 6.20, showing the cMRI,
manual reference and the segmentations from the initial SD and AE models as well as from the
optimized SD and AE models. From the first slice (34), it can be observed that the initial SD
model produced segmentations with anatomical errors, where the LV cavity is segmented as
two separate components. One of the segmented LV components is directly neighboring BGR
pixels and the other LV component is neighboring pixels segmented as RV. These observed
errors are not completely solved by the initial AE model, which still contains LV pixels neigh-
boring RV pixels. From the figure it can be observed that the optimized models both solve
this type of error with erroneous neighbors and the segmentation no longer violates the first
anatomical error metric. However, it should be noted that for both optimized models the RV
is segmented as three different components which violates the second anatomical error metric.
This is not targeted by the AE loss function, and it was therefore not expected that this type
of error was solved. Another example of an anatomical error was seen in the second slice (104),
where the RV is not annotated manually in the reference label. For this slice the initial SD
and AE models both produce segmentations violating all three anatomical constraints. Since
the RV should not be segmented at all in this image, the error is not completely solved with
the optimized AE model. However, the error is strongly reduced on a pixel-wise level. The last
==PAGE:74==
6.4 Detection Network
65
slice example (264) shows the biggest change between the initial SD and AE models and the
optimized models. The last segmentation from the optimized AE model is almost anatomically
correct, except a small overestimation of the RV cavity and a minor additional component of
the MYO. However, this is a type of error not targeted with the implemented AE loss function
and can therefore not be expected to be solved with this model.
The presented results indicate that the optimization of hyperparameters and the resulting bet-
ter training solved many of the observed anatomical errors. Furthermore, the implementation
of the AE loss function with optimized α and β weightings provided the best model when
considering the three examples in Figure 6.20. However, the overall count of anatomical errors
was slightly better for the SD opt model trained on diastolic data with errors in only 55 % of
all patient volumes. The AE opt model had anatomical errors in 60 % of the diastolic patient
volumes. For the systolic data set the picture is reversed and showed the least amount of
anatomical errors in 80 % of the patient volumes for the AE opt model compared to the 87.50
% patients for the SD opt model. This proves the importance of proper training of the models,
though it cannot completely solve all the anatomical errors, but lead to a substantial reduction
in the measured errors.
6.4
Detection Network
The segmentations and the observed unresolved errors were further evaluated by examining
the uncertainties within the segmentations. A detection network was subsequently applied to
spatially detect the errors that require correction. The analysis of uncertainties is based on
the assumption that segmentation outputs with low uncertainty are expected to be correctly
segmented, whereas it will be reasonable to expect areas with high uncertainty contain some
segmentation errors.
The detection network was trained and tested only on the data used as test set for the seg-
mentation network as described in Section 5.1.1. A total of 40 patient volumes was therefore
available and the detection network was trained on 30 patient volumes and tested on the
remaining 10 patient volumes.
Uncertainty estimation
The uncertainties of the segmentations produced by the optimized
model trained with the AE loss function were examined. The entropy was calculated for the
softmax probabilities and normalized within each slice such that the highest uncertainties
were given the value 1. An example of two different slices from the test set is presented in
Figure 6.21, showing the cMRI, the segmentation from the optimized AE model, the manual
reference label, and the uncertainty map (U-map). The top row shows a segmentation with
errors around the RV cavity, which is also covered by high uncertainties in the U-map. The
bottom row shows a segmentation without large errors and therefore only high uncertainties
around the boundaries of the cardiac structures.
==PAGE:75==
6.4 Detection Network
66
Figure 6.21: Examples of two different slices from the same patient volume. First column
shows the cMRI, then the segmentation from AE opt model, the manual reference label, and
the U-map. The top row shows a segmentation with errors around the RV, where the same
area is covered by high uncertainties in the U-map. The segmentation in the bottom row shows
high uncertainties only on the boundaries of the cardiac structures.
The uncertainties are evaluated against a naive representation of segmentation errors, which is
calculated as the absolute difference between the segmentation mask from the models trained
with the optimized SD or AE loss function and the manual reference label. The entropy values
are binarized with a threshold of 0.5 in order to compare areas with high uncertainties with
the naive segmentation errors. The three images presented in Figure 6.22 shows an example of
an original U-map, the binarized U-map and the naive segmentation errors calculated as the
absolute difference between the reference and the segmentation from the optimized AE model.
Figure 6.22: An example of an original U-map, the binarized U-map and the naive segmentation
errors calculated as the absolute difference between the segmentation and the reference.
==PAGE:76==
6.4 Detection Network
67
The overlap between the binarized uncertainties and the naive segmentation errors is evaluated
by the Dice score. The mean Dice score ± the variance is shown in Table 6.11 as well as the
minimum and maximum score obtained for the test set for the detection network for the
diastolic phase.
Minimum
Mean ± var
Maximum
Dice SD opt ↑
0.361
0.450 ± 0.001
0.544
Dice AE opt ↑
0.188
0.442 ± 0.002
0.542
Table 6.11: Mean Dice score with variance and the minimum and maximum values calculated
between the binarized U-map and the absolute difference between the segmentation mask
from the network and the manual reference label. The values are provided for the optimized
segmentation models trained with SD or AE loss function.
Detection Network
A detection network was implemented in order to perform additional
examination of the segmentation errors.
The network was trained as described in Section
5.4.2.2 with the cMRI, the segmentation, and the U-map used as inputs.
The loss of the
training and validation set is presented in Figure 6.23 showing the mean and the std for the 6
models from the cross-validation setup.
Figure 6.23: Loss curve for training and validation of the detection network.
The output of the network is a 16 × 16 pixel image, where each pixel corresponds to a patch
in the original image.
The output of the network is a softmax probability of each patch
containing a non-tolerated segmentation error.
The probabilities are binarized in order to
compare with the binary tj labels. The binarization threshold was examined with an AUC-
==PAGE:77==
6.4 Detection Network
68
ROC curve presented in Figure 6.24, showing the relationship between the true positive rate
(TPR) and the false positive rate (FPR). This curve is used to evaluate the network’s ability to
separate the two classes (error/no error) and how this changes when the binarization threshold
is adjusted.
Figure 6.24: AUC-ROC curve for different binarization thresholds describing the relation be-
tween TPR and FPR.
Figure 6.25 shows an example of the softmax probabilities from the ensemble detection model,
where a high score indicates a high probability of error in that patch. Additionally, the bina-
rized image using 0.2 as threshold is shown to the right.
Figure 6.25: Output from the detection network. The left image shows the softmax probabili-
ties for each patch and the right shows the binarized image using a threshold of 0.2.
==PAGE:78==
6.4 Detection Network
69
To compare with the segmentations and errors from the segmentation network, the output
from the detection network is upsampled by interpolation to match the original image size of
128 × 128 pixels. This is done for both the binary reference label tj and the predicted error
patch from the detection network. Three different examples are presented in Figure 6.26. The
left column shows the segmentation from the AE opt model on systolic data with the binary
error reference label tj. The middle column shows the same segmentation but with the detected
error patches. The last column shows the difference between the manual segmentation and
the segmentation from the U-Net with the detected error patches, which is provided to get an
understanding of the errors and to evaluate if a segmentation error was detected within the
patch.
Figure 6.26: Output from the detection network. The left column shows the segmentation
from the AE opt model on systolic data with the binary error reference label tj. The middle
column shows the same segmentation but with the detected error patches. The last column
shows the difference between the manual segmentation and the segmentation from the U-Net
with the detected error patches.
The Dice score was calculated between the error patch from the detection network and the
reference error label tj. This provided a mean and variance for the Dice score of 0.20 ± 0.14,
indicating a poor overlap between the error predictions and the reference labels.
==PAGE:79==
6.4 Detection Network
70
Discussion
The U-maps were used as a measure of uncertainties within the obtained seg-
mentations from the previously described segmentation models. For evaluation of the relation
between the segmentation errors and the uncertainties, an overlap measure (Dice score) was
calculated between the binarized U-map and the naive absolute difference between the segmen-
tation and the manual reference as shown in Figure 6.22. This was done in order to assess
the assumption of wrongly segmented areas yielding high uncertainties as it is known that
the boundaries of the cardiac structures also yields high uncertainties even though they are
segmented correctly. The mean Dice scores reported in Table 6.11 shows 0.450 for the SD opt
model and 0.442 for the AE opt model indicating some overlap between the binarized U-maps
and the calculated differences but not a lot. However, the observed variances of the mean Dice
scores over all 10 patient volumes (85 slices) were 0.001 and 0.002 for the two models, respec-
tively. This is a very low variance score and indicates that the amount of overlap between
wrongly segmented areas and areas with high uncertainties were somewhat similar for most
slices. It should be noted that these basic measures are influenced by the chosen binarization
threshold of 0.5 for the normalized entropy values in the U-map.
A direct implementation of the U-map would show errors at the boundaries of the cardiac
structures, which is not of interest for this project. Therefore, the detection network was im-
plemented aiming at detecting areas with segmentation errors. The training was done using
a 6 fold cross-validation which was averaged to one ensemble model. The produced loss curve
presented in Figure 6.23 covers 500 epochs and shows that both the training and validation
set follows the same trend. However, it should be noted that the loss for both the training and
validation set never gets below 0.5 when trained over 500 epochs. This indicates a stagnation
in the training where the feature learning of the model stops improving.
The output of the detection network is a softmax probability of each patch containing a non-
tolerated segmentation error. Different threshold values for the binarization of the probabili-
ties were evaluated using the AUC-ROC curve presented in Figure 6.24. From the AUC-ROC
curve it can be observed that the model shows poor performance in its ability to separate error
patches from non-error patches as the AUC < 0.5, which indicates no discrimination capacity.
However, it was concluded that the errors was best detected using a threshold of 0.2.
Upsamling of the output from the detection network was performed in order to get spatial
information about the errors. From Figure 6.26 the errors are presented for three different
slices. The first slice (10) shows large regions with labeled errors all around the borders of the
cardiac structures. The predicted error from the detection network is not close to any of the
manual references and there is no overlap for this slice. The difference between the manual
segmentation and the segmentation from the network shown in the right column shows that
all errors for this slice is on the borders of the tissue structures. The second slice (52) again
shows error patches placed on the tissue borders. For this slice the detection network predicts
three patches all overlapping the manual reference labels. However, many of the errors in the
reference label are not detected by the network. The last slice (57) shows a segmentation with
anatomical errors as the MYO is not fully surrounding the LV cavity. The detection network
predicts error patches on the edge of the cardiac structure and is not centered around the
anatomical error.
==PAGE:80==
6.4 Detection Network
71
The results indicate that the detection network is not a suitable model for detection of errors
in this data set. This can be explained by the limited amount of data available for training
and the varying features for the different errors. The errors are mainly located around the
edges of the cardiac structures and especially the RV cavity has many errors which was also
observed in previous sections. Consequently, the detection network is more prone to detect
errors in these areas. However, this project was focused on errors with anatomical impossible
characteristics, and these are not detected by the implemented detection network. The charac-
teristics highlighted for the anatomical errors are not directly considered by the method used
for generation of the SI error set which is used as reference label for training the detection
network. Therefore, the network cannot be expected to focus on these particular errors as they
can be deemed tolerated based on the distance transform map and cluster size constraint used
for the SI error set. It would require significant feature engineering in order to classify errors
within a SI error set without excluding any anatomical impossible errors and still account for
intra- and interobserver variability.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
7.1
Data challenges
The experiments conducted in this project aimed at producing the best performing segmen-
tation model while reducing the amount of segmentation errors with anatomical impossible
characteristics.
Different decisions were made prior to the data being fed to the network,
which all impact the output and performance of the model. Firstly, all the data were parti-
tioned into two data sets as the images of the diastolic and the systolic phase were deemed too
structurally different to enable proper feature learning. It was further observed that both the
performance, the clinical and the anatomical metrics for the systolic and the diastolic models
are quite different, indicating a difference in the two sets of training data. Secondly, the set of
hyperparameters obtained after optimization were different for the two data sets, supporting
the notion of great difference in the two sets of training data.
The data set consists of approximately 10 slices for each patient covering the heart from top
(basal) to bottom (apical). The apical slices were removed before training the network due to
their low tissue contrast and different structural characteristics compared to the remaining car-
diac slices. Moreover, it was observed that the most basal slices often produced errors within
the segmentations, especially for the RV cavity. This can possibly be explained by the visual
appearance of some slices of the RV cavity not corresponding to the remaining slices, since
RV can appear as split in the short axis view. Since the basal slice represents an area with
different cardiac structures such as the mitral valve and the pulmonary artery it can also be
expected that these structures are visible in this specific slice. Therefore, due to the manual
annotation protocol the RV cavity will not be annotated if it does not appear as one coherent
structure in the cMRI. It is, however, expected that the network will segment the RV anyway
and this would lead to segmentation errors and a poor performance score. Since the goal of
the segmentation network is to be suitable in clinical practice the same protocol should be
followed, and these errors are therefore not tolerated. A simple way to reduce this error is to
remove the basal slices as well, however, this was deemed inappropriate.
The data was cropped as part of the preprocessing step and this procedure substantially reduced
the amount of background pixels within each image. This facilitates the training process as
the smaller dimensions of the input images result in fewer pixels to be processed and predicted
by the network. However, background pixels still constitute approx. 80 % of the pixels in an
image after cropping. The cropping was done with respect to the manual reference, ensuring
no cropping of the relevant cardiac structures, though this approach is infeasible in clinical
practice. Another way to approach the cropping could be to implement a Region Based-CNN
to coarsely detect the cardiac region, which would lower the need for human interaction in the
overall process.
==PAGE:82==
7.2 Evaluation of methods
73
7.2
Evaluation of methods
7.2.1
Pipeline
The data set used in this project consists of 100 patient volumes, composed by five different
subgroups; one healthy subgroup and four with a different diagnosed cardio pathologies. The
data set was split on a patient level and in a stratified manner between subgroups ensuring
no patient overlap. Although, the anatomical features might be different for the subgroups,
an algorithm employed in clinical practice should be able to handle anatomical variation in
tissue structures as the performed segmentation is aiding diagnosis of patients similar to those
included in the subgroups. The impact of the different abnormal cardiac features within each
subgroup have been investigated in the literature showing no significant difference in perfor-
mance metrics [5].
The available data was used to train both the segmentation network and the detection network.
The segmentation network was trained on 60 % of the data, using 6 fold cross-validation and
the remaining 40 % was used for testing. This split was chosen in order not to mix the training
data used for the segmentation network with the training data used for the detection network.
Since the segmentations are used as input for the detection network, the segmentations of
data already used for training were deemed unfit for training of the detection network. The
data for the detection network was split into training (75%) and test (25%), using 6 fold cross-
validation. This ensures a reasonable amount of training data for each network, though it
could be argued that the harsh division between segmentation and detection will reduce the
overall performance of both models. However, it was deemed to be the most appropriate data
split for the data available.
7.2.2
Segmentation Network
For the task of medical image segmentation, the U-Net is a widely used architecture. The
standard approach in the literature is applying a 2D network and analyzing the 3D data slice
by slice. The networks using the 2D approach have proven to outperform the 3D models [5].
This can be explained by the fact that a 3D network requires much more training data than
the 2D networks, hence the data issue for this project would be even more pronounced if a 3D
network was chosen. Furthermore, border effects from the apical and basal slices could affect
the neighboring slices if the 3D information was included. To make the computational cost
of a 3D network manageable, substantial downsampling would be necessary which could lead
to an overall loss of information [50]. Therefore, a 2D U-Net architecture was chosen for the
segmentation network implemented in this project.
Furthermore, the choice of loss function, training process and the optimization of hyperparam-
eters was investigated in order to obtain the best segmentation model with the least amount of
segmentation errors. The effect of the chosen loss function was first examined with two baseline
models using the CE and the SD loss function and trained with an initial set of hyperparam-
eters.
Additionally, a new loss function AE with anatomical constraints was implemented
targeting typical segmentation errors. The optimization scheme was then implemented for the
SD and AE models since these showed the most promising results in this project. However,
==PAGE:83==
7.2 Evaluation of methods
74
it should be noted that both the SD and the AE loss functions include the soft Dice loss.
Since the Dice score was used as a metric for evaluating the performance it could be argued
that this is an unfair comparison favoring these models over the CE model. Furthermore, it
has been proven that even though the Dice score is the most popular choice of metric, it has
its limits. For segmentation tasks it can provide high performance scores even though the
segmentation contains multiple anatomical errors [5]. It was therefore deemed necessary to
introduce a new set of metrics to measure the number of errors with anatomical impossible
characteristics. For this project a set of metrics was proposed aiming at measuring three differ-
ent error types commonly observed in the segmentations. These metrics were implemented in
a naive fashion, including all errors regardless of size and location. It could be argued that a
filter should be added to reduce small components, however, for this project it was of interest
to estimate all possible errors with anatomical impossible characteristics. Even though the
components may be small they would still be a disturbance to the clinician analyzing the final
segmentation. Another way to reduce the error of multiple components could be to add a
post-processing step for choosing only one component. This selection could be based on the
largest connected component or by considering the spatial location of the components in the
adjacent slices. However, this would need additional spatial information to ensure the correct
anatomical choice.
7.2.2.1
Optimization
The proposed optimization scheme and the decisions made regarding the models, hyperparam-
eters and objective function will effect the final models. The Dice score was used as objective
function and the suitability of this choice can be argued as the drawbacks of the Dice score
have been highlighted many times during this project. Additionally, the amount of parameters
chosen for optimization together with the range of the corresponding intervals heavily impact
the amount of trials needed to be run by the framework. A total of 20 trials were performed
within a 30 hour kill time which yielded an objective value of 0.978 on the validation set. More
trials and a longer run time would not be expected to improve the Dice score much more.
The chosen intervals were centered around the initial values of the hyperparameters with large
intervals and are therefore expected to include the optimal values.
7.2.3
Detection Network
The task of detecting local segmentation errors is addressed with a detection network based on
the ResNet architecture. The chosen architecture consists of a feature extraction module and
a final classifier module. The feature extraction contains three residual blocks which should
enable the model to learn more complex features within the data, but without adding addi-
tional trainable parameters. The input used for the model was divided between three channels
representing the original cMRI, the cardiac segmentation and the corresponding U-map, which
was calculated as the entropy of the softmax probabilities. Previous literature has deemed the
entropy as a suitable measure of relative uncertainty in a neural network [51]. The training
of the detection network was performed on 252 images covering 30 different patient volumes
using the binary reference label for errors created with the SI error set. This was created in
order to distinguish between non-tolerated errors and errors that could also appear in manual
segmentation, due to the intra- and interobserver variability. From this set it was found that
==PAGE:84==
7.3 Evaluation of results
75
in the 252 images at least one segmentation error was present in 56 % of the images. The
application of size and location requirements for the SI error set was deemed necessary since
not all segmentation errors would be relevant in a post-processing correction set-up. Therefore,
only large errors or errors with large distance to the boundaries of the reference label were of
interest as these will provide the most disturbance in clinical practice.
The training of the model produced a loss curve which indicates an underfitted model as neither
training nor validation loss gets below 0.5. This could be explained by different properties of
both the network set-up, training process and the data available. It could be argued that
the proposed model is not complex enough to capture patterns and features in the training
data. Additional layers could be added to the network in order to increase model capacity
and complexity. Another explanation is that the training data is simply too simple and lacks
features for the network to learn and thereby make accurate predictions of the errors. However,
increasing the amount of data by simple augmentation of the already provided training data
would not solve this problem.
7.3
Evaluation of results
7.3.1
Segmentation results
The baseline models trained with the CE and the SD loss functions made acceptable seg-
mentations in terms of the Dice scores, HD95 and clinical metrics. In order to measure the
anatomical errors a new set of metrics was implemented based on characteristics of the most
common errors and corresponding anatomical constraints. These metrics showed that even
though the Dice scores reached the levels of the state-of-the-art models they still contained
errors in up to 95 % of the patients in the test data. This is of course not a model suitable for
clinical practice and this problem needs to be addressed.
To solve the anatomical errors a loss function was implemented targeting errors that was
deemed anatomically impossible. The initial AE model showed no great improvement in terms
of anatomical errors which indicated a need for further model development. Therefore, the
hyperparameters were optimized in order to achieve the best segmentation model in terms of
classical performance and segmentation errors. The final model yielding the best scores was
the optimized model using the AE loss function. A general observation was that the evaluated
models obtained the best results when segmenting structures in the diastolic data compared
to the systolic data. Additionally, the models reached the best performance on segmentation
of LV cavity and the worst performance scores for the RV cavity.
==PAGE:85==
7.4 Future work
76
The optimization of the SD and the AE model both achieved a large reduction in the calculated
number of anatomical errors. However, there were still anatomical errors present in more than
55 % of all patient volumes in the test data for the best performing model. The greatest
improvement was observed between the initial models and the optimized models regardless of
loss function. Since there are no large differences between the performance of the optimized SD
and AE models, it could be argued that the optimization of hyperparameters is more important
than the choice of loss function when performing segmentation of cardiac structures. Since the
implementation of the SD loss function is neither task specific nor scan-orientation dependent,
it could be argued that this is most suitable to be introduced in clinical practice.
7.3.2
Detection results
The uncertainties of the softmax probabilities showed that areas with known errors were covered
by high uncertainties. However, the calculated Dice scores between the naive errors and the
binarized uncertainties showed a mean Dice score of 0.450 with a variance of 0.001.
This
indicates a relatively poor overlap between the two, and therefore the U-maps cannot be used
directly to estimate the errors. The results of the detection network showed that this was not
an appropriate model to predict the errors and achieve information of the location of the errors.
This can partly be explained by the features of the errors being too simple. Most of the errors
lie on the edges of the segmented cardiac structures and the network will be prone to predict
areas of edges rather than areas of errors. Another explanation could be that the errors with
anatomical implausible characteristics is too different within each slice. Therefore, the model
is not able to learn the relevant features and patterns and thereby predict the errors correctly.
These results indicate that the network will not ease the segmentation of cardiac structures
since this will not provide any additional information regarding the location of the errors.
7.4
Future work
The work presented in this project was focused on the segmentation of cardiac structures using
the U-Net architecture. For future work it could be of interest to exploit different network
architectures such as the dilated CNN which allows a larger receptive field with the same com-
putation and memory costs while preserving resolution [52]. Furthermore, the implemented
AE loss function was aimed at two specific error types. Further analysis of the segmentation
errors showed that other types of errors often occurred, and it could be relevant to target these
to get more anatomically correct segmentations. The network could be expanded to utilize the
3D information available in the data in order to include tissue structural context and thereby
possibly improve the final segmentation. A way to increase the amount of data and thereby
enable the model to learn the necessary invariance is to apply classical data augmentation
techniques such as rotation and scaling.
The detection network was not suitable to detect the errors in this project and therefore
more work should be applied to this area to achieve relevant and useful output. This could
be solved by introducing a larger data set with more anatomically impossible errors.
The
proposed pipeline for this project was to only detect and not correct the errors, and it would
be necessary to find a suitable correction approach if this pipeline should be valuable in clinical
use.
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The aim of this project was to perform segmentation of cardiac structures with deep learning
techniques from cMRI data. Additionally, anatomically impossible errors occurring during the
segmentation were investigated as these are problematic for application in clinical practice.
The implemented segmentation network generated a label for the three cardiac structures;
right ventricle cavity, myocardium and left ventricle cavity.
The proposed pipeline strives to solve issues with anatomically impossible errors utilizing a
priori knowledge of cardiac structures. The implemented set of metrics for measuring anatom-
ical impossible errors clearly captured the large number of anatomical errors occurring in the
segmentations despite high performance scores. The final models achieved mean Dice scores
and mean HD95 well within the range of the best performing models of the ACDC challenge
[11]. The results showed that the number of anatomical errors was greatly reduced when the
hyperparameters were optimized. Furthermore, the choice of loss function did not affect the
overall performance of the segmentation model and could be chosen as either the SD or the AE
loss function. It should be noted that the calculated anatomical errors are still present in more
than 55 % of all patient volumes in the test data. Consequently, this indicates the importance
of proper training of the models, though it cannot completely solve all the anatomical errors,
but will lead to a substantial reduction in the measured errors. However, the measured errors
did not influence the clinical performance metrics considerably as high volumetric correlations
were achieved. The visual appearance of the anatomically impossible segmentations will still
cause distrust in clinical application, and this consequently makes them unsuitable for clinical
practice.
The detection network was introduced with the aim of highlighting the errors in the segmen-
tations. The scope of the proposed pipeline was to include manual intra- and interobserver
variability in the creation of the SI error set and then predict ROIs with potential errors. The
errors should then be corrected manually or by an additional network, however, this was not
implemented in this project. The proposed network did not detect the errors since the model
did not find adequate patterns and features relevant for proper error predictions. The features
of the observed errors might be too different to be generalized for feature learning with the
amount of labeled data available.
The results obtained and discussed throughout this project suggest that the task of resolv-
ing problematic segmentation errors is more promising than the task of building secondary
networks to detect already produced segmentation errors. There are still many issues to be
solved before neural networks can be employed in clinical practice for the task of cardiac tissue
segmentation, however, great advances have been made. No doubt that this is going to hap-
pen with current developments within in the field of medical image analysis as more labeled
training data becomes available.
==PAGE:87==
List of Figures
1.1
Example of a cMRI showing the cardiac structures and the corresponding manual
segmentation. The cardiac structures are marked with a red box and labels of the
cardiac structures are shown furthest to the right.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.1
Sketch of the heart anatomy with arrows indicating direction of blood flow [14]. . .
6
2.2
Sketch of the heart in systole and diastole with arrows indicating blood flow direction
[14] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Illustration of the three cardiac planes with respect to the heart anatomy. The heart
is marked in each cMRI with a green box. Modified from [18] . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Illustration of the cardiac structure with xyz-orientations. The three lines represent
the described cardiac slices. Modified from [21] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1
Illustration of a neural network with an input layer, two hidden layers and an output
layer. Image from [23] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Illustration of the input and output of the ReLU and the Leaky ReLU activation
function. For Leaky ReLU the value of k is fixed. Image from [27]. . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Illustration of a single residual block. Image from [29]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Illustration of the gradient descent algorithm. Image modified from [31]. . . . . . .
15
3.5
Illustration of under- and overfitting a model to training data. Image from [37]. . .
18
3.6
Illustration of a Neural Network with dropout added. Image modified from [38] . .
18
3.7
Illustration of the HD measurement. Image modified from [44]
. . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1
Example of a cMRI for a slice in a patient volume shown in the end-diastolic phase.
Left column is the original sized image and manual reference labels, while the right
column shows the cropped versions.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Example of cMRI for the same patient in the end-systolic phase. Left column is the
original sized image and manual reference labels. Cropped versions are shown to the
right. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1
Sketch of the overall method pipeline. The setup is divided into subsets each target-
ing a different element of the issue with anatomical impossible segmentations. . . .
25
5.2
Sketch of the data split structure used for the segmentation and detection networks.
The data is divided at patient level ensuring no overlap and all subgroups are repre-
sented equally in each split. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Patient example of a cMRI showing the 8 slices covering the cardiac structure starting
from the basal slice (Slice: 0) and moving down to the apical slice (Slice: 7) . . . .
27
5.4
Illustration of the U-Net architecture. Image modified from [47] . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.5
Example of a slice where the RV is not manually annotated. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.6
Sketched examples of the anatomical errors targeted with the anatomical metrics.
30
==PAGE:88==
List of Figures
79
5.7
Examples of the three inputs used for training the detection network. To the left is
the original cMRI, in the middle the resulting segmentation from the U-Net and the
corresponding U-map on the right. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.8
Sketch of the ResNet architecture where each arrow represents an operation in ac-
cordance with the provided description.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.9
Sketch of the pipeline of the detection network. Inputs for the network are shown on
the left together with the inputs used for creating the SI error set used as reference
labels.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.10 Example of the steps taken for the cluster selection in the SI error set. The first
image shows the segmentation from the U-Net and second image the manual reference
segmentation. The third image shows the computed difference between the two used
as the initial error.
The last image shows the pixels considered as non-tolerated
errors after applying the constraint of a minimum cluster size of 10 pixels. . . . . .
35
5.11 Top row shows the distance transform maps for each tissue class, where darker areas
indicate low pixel-wise distance values.
The second row shows the segmentation
difference filtered with minimum cluster size. The last row shows the resulting SI
error set with both the cluster size constraint and error margins applied. . . . . . .
36
5.12 Left: Binary error labels used as reference for training of the detection network.
Value of 1 (yellow) indicates the presences of error and value of 0 (purple) indicating
no error. Right: The error label upsampled from 16 × 16 pixels to 128 × 128 pixels
overlaid with the segmentation containing the errors included in the SI error set. The
cardiac structures shown in the segmentation are BGR (purple), RV (blue), MYO
(green), and LV (yellow).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.1
The plots in the top row show the training and validation losses for the two ensemble
models using either the CE or the SD loss function, while the plots in bottom row
show the accuracy for the two models. The std over all 6 folds are shown for all plots,
which are generated on the diastolic data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2
Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the diastolic phase pre-
dicted by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with CE loss. The
first row shows the manual ground truth annotation which is binary and used as
reference label for training the models. All plots are overlaid with the original cMRI
for structural context. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3
Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the diastolic phase pre-
dicted by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with SD loss. The
first row shows the manual ground truth annotation which is binary and used as
reference label for training the models. All plots are overlaid with the original cMRI
for structural context. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.4
Softmax probabilities for all tissue classes predicted by the ensemble model trained
on CE and SD, respectively. The shown slice is from the diastolic test data set. A
high probability close to 1 is indicated with a bright yellow color, whereas a dark
blue color indicates a low probability of the specific cardiac tissue class. . . . . . .
43
6.5
The final segmentation of a single slice for both the model trained with CE and SD
as loss functions on diastolic data. The segmentations are shown together with the
original cMRI used as input to the models and the manual segmentation used as
reference label. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
==PAGE:89==
List of Figures
80
6.6
Boxplots of Dice scores for each cardiac structure for both the CE and SD models.
Left plot shows the diastolic phase and right plot the systolic phase.
Median is
marked in red.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.7
Examples of the three segmentation errors that are considered anatomically impossi-
ble and an example of a segmentation without any anatomical errors. The examples
are selected from different patients from the diastolic test set. . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.8
First plot shows the training and validation loss for the ensemble AE model. The
second plot shows the computed accuracy for the model. The plotted values are the
mean and std over all 6 folds using the diastolic data set.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.9
Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the diastolic phase pre-
dicted by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with the SD loss
function. The first row shows the binary manual ground truth label which is empty
for the RV cavity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.10 Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the diastolic phase pre-
dicted by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with the AE loss
function. The first row shows the binary manual ground truth label which is empty
for the RV cavity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.11 Softmax probabilities for the ensemble models trained with either SD or AE loss. .
52
6.12 The final segmentation of a single slice for the SD model and the AE model. The seg-
mentations are shown together with the original cMRI and the manual segmentation
used as reference label. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.13 The top row shows the binary manual segmentation followed by the softmax proba-
bilities for each fold for a LN example trained with SD loss on diastolic data. . . .
53
6.14 The top row shows the binary manual segmentation followed by the softmax proba-
bilities for each fold for a LN example trained with AE loss on diastolic data. . . .
54
6.15 Softmax probabilities for the averaged SD and AE models.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.16 The original cMRI and each of the segmentations from the ensemble models for a
LN example together with the manual reference segmentation of the four cardiac
structures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.17 Optimization history of the objective value for each trial in the created study. . . .
58
6.18 Contour plot of the sampling of learning rate and weight decay for 20 trials for the
AE model trained on diastolic data.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.19 Contour plot of the sampling of α and β for 20 trials for the AE model trained on
diastolic data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.20 Examples of segmentations and the progression hereof related to loss function and op-
timization. First row shows the original cMRI, while the second row is the manually
annotated reference. The subsequent rows show the segmentations for the SD and
the AE models after both the initial training and after optimization of the associated
hyperparameters.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.21 Examples of two different slices from the same patient volume. First column shows
the cMRI, then the segmentation from AE opt model, the manual reference label, and
the U-map. The top row shows a segmentation with errors around the RV, where the
same area is covered by high uncertainties in the U-map. The segmentation in the
bottom row shows high uncertainties only on the boundaries of the cardiac structures. 66
6.22 An example of an original U-map, the binarized U-map and the naive segmentation
errors calculated as the absolute difference between the segmentation and the reference. 66
6.23 Loss curve for training and validation of the detection network. . . . . . . . . . . .
67
==PAGE:90==
List of Figures
81
6.24 AUC-ROC curve for different binarization thresholds describing the relation between
TPR and FPR. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.25 Output from the detection network. The left image shows the softmax probabilities
for each patch and the right shows the binarized image using a threshold of 0.2. . .
68
6.26 Output from the detection network. The left column shows the segmentation from
the AE opt model on systolic data with the binary error reference label tj. The
middle column shows the same segmentation but with the detected error patches.
The last column shows the difference between the manual segmentation and the
segmentation from the U-Net with the detected error patches.
. . . . . . . . . . .
69
B.1
The plots in the top row show the training and validation losses for the two ensemble
models using either the CE or SD loss function, while the plots in bottom row show
the accuracy for the two models. The std over all 6 folds are shown for all plots,
which are generated on the systolic data. For corresponding plot on diastolic data
see p.40. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
B.2
Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the systolic phase predicted
by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with CE loss. The first
row shows the manual ground truth annotation which is binary and used as reference
label for training of the models. All plots are shown as overlay with the original cMRI
for structural context. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.41. . . . . . .
87
B.3
Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the systolic phase predicted
by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with SD loss. The first
row shows the manual ground truth annotation which is binary and used as reference
label for training of the models. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.42.
88
B.4
Softmax probabilities for all tissue classes predicted by the averaged model trained
on CE and SD, respectively. The shown slice is from the systolic test data set. For
corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.43. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B.5
The final segmentation of a single slice for both the model trained with SD and CE
as loss functions on systolic data. The segmentations are shown together with the
original cMRI used as input to the models and the manual segmentation used as
reference label. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.43. . . . . . . . . . .
89
B.6
Examples of the three segmentations errors that are considered anatomically impossi-
ble and an example of a segmentation without any anatomical errors. The examples
are selected from different patients from the systolic test set showing slice 28, 34, 67,
and 56, respectively. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.48. . . . . . . .
90
B.7
The first plot shows the training and validation loss for the averaged ensemble model
using AE as loss functions. The second plot is showing the computed accuracy for
the ensemble model. The plotted values are the mean and std over all 6 folds using
the systolic data set. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.49. . . . . . . .
91
B.8
Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the systolic phase predicted
by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with the SD loss function.
The first row shows the manual ground truth label which is empty for the RV cavity.
For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.50. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
B.9
Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the systolic phase predicted
by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with the AE loss function.
The first row shows the manual ground truth label which is empty for the RV cavity.
For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.51. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
==PAGE:91==
List of Figures
82
B.10 Softmax probabilities for the averaged models trained with either SD or AE loss
trained on systolic data. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.52. . . . . .
94
B.11 The final segmentation of a single slice for the SD model and the AE model on
systolic data. The segmentations are shown together with the original cMRI and
the manual segmentation used as reference label. For corresponding plot on diastolic
data see p.52. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
B.12 Softmax probabilities for each fold for a LN example slice 34 trained with SD loss
on systolic data. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.53. . . . . . . . . .
95
B.13 Softmax probabilities for each fold for a LN example slice 34 trained with AE loss
on systolic data. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.54. . . . . . . . . .
96
B.14 Softmax probabilities for the averaged models trained with either SD or AE loss on
systolic data. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.55. . . . . . . . . . . .
97
B.15 The original cMRI and each of the segmentations from the ensemble models for a
LN example together with the manual reference segmentation of the four cardiac
structures in the systolic phase. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.55.
97
B.16 Examples of segmentations and the progression hereof related to loss function and
optimization for the systolic phase. First row shows the original cMRI, while the
second row is the manually annotated reference.
The subsequent rows show the
segmentations for the SD and the AE models after both the initial training and after
optimization of the associated hyperparameters. For corresponding plot on diastolic
data see p.63.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
C.1 Optimization history of the study created for the SD model on diastolic data. For
corresponding plot for AE model see p.58. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
C.2 Optimization history of the study created for the SD model on systolic data.
. . .
100
C.3 Optimization history of the study created for the AE model on systolic data. . . .
100
C.4 Contour plot of sampling of learning rate and weight decay for optimization of the
SD model on diastolic data. For corresponding plot for AE model see p.59.
. . . .
101
C.5 Contour plot of sampling of learning rate and weight decay for optimization of the
SD model on systolic data.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
C.6 Contour plot of sampling of learning rate and weight decay for optimization of the
AE model on systolic data. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.59. . . .
102
C.7 Contour plot of the sampling of α and β for 20 trials for the AE model trained on
systolic data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
==PAGE:92==
List of Tables
1.1
Overview of the three best performing models for LV cavity segmentation evaluated
by the ACDC from MICCAI 2017 [11]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
5.1
The initial hyperparameters and the suggested interval of hyperparameters used as
search space for optimization of the SD and the AE models. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.1
Geometrical results for the CE models and the SD models. The results are presented
as the mean over all slices ± the variance and these are provided for each cardiac
structure (RV, MYO, and LV) and for each of the two cardiac phases; diastole and
systole. The arrows indicate whether a high or low value is desirable for the given
metric. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2
Clinical results for the CE and SD models. The results are calculated on a patient
volume level as the mean for the LV cavity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.3
Anatomical error results for the CE and SD models. The results are given for each
of the three anatomical constraints and as a total count of anatomical errors. For
the first constraint a pixel count is provided indicating how many pixels in the test
set contains this error. The values are given for slices and patients with a percentage
of errors. The values are provided for each of the two cardiac phases; diastole and
systole.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.4
Geometrical results for the AE models. The results are given for each cardiac struc-
ture and for each of the two phases; diastole and systole. The numbers are given
as the mean over all slices ± the variance. Arrow indicating if the values should be
maximized or minimized.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.5
Clinical results for the AE models. The results are given for LV cavity. . . . . . . .
56
6.6
Anatomical error results for the AE models. The results are given for each of the
three anatomical constraints and as a total count of anatomical errors. The values
are given for slices and patients with a percentage of errors. For the first constraint
a pixel count is provided indicating how many pixels in the test set contains this
error. The values are provided for each of the two phases; diastole and systole.
. .
56
6.7
The initial hyperparameter settings along with the best set of hyperparameters for
the SD and the AE model in each of the cardiac phases; diastole and systole. . . .
60
6.8
Geometrical results for the optimized SD and AE models. The results are provided
for each cardiac structure (RV, MYO, and LV) and for both of the cardiac phases;
diastole and systole. The numbers are presented as the mean over all slices ± the
variance. The arrows indicate whether a high or low value is desirable for the given
metric. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.9
Clinical results for the optimized SD and AE models. The results are calculated as
the mean for the LV cavity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
==PAGE:93==
List of Tables
84
6.10 Anatomical error results for the optimized SD and AE models.
The results are
given for each of the three anatomical constraints and as a total count of anatomical
errors. The values are given for slices and patients with a percentage of errors. For
the first constraint a pixel count is provided indicating how many pixels in the test
set contains this error. The values are provided for each of the two cardiac phases;
diastole and systole. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.11 Mean Dice score with variance and the minimum and maximum values calculated
between the binarized U-map and the absolute difference between the segmentation
mask from the network and the manual reference label. The values are provided for
the optimized segmentation models trained with SD or AE loss function.
. . . . .
67
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIX A
Code repository
The code used for this project is available at: https://github.com/KatrineME/Speciale2021
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX B
Results for systolic data
Figure B.1: The plots in the top row show the training and validation losses for the two
ensemble models using either the CE or SD loss function, while the plots in bottom row show
the accuracy for the two models. The std over all 6 folds are shown for all plots, which are
generated on the systolic data. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.40.
==PAGE:96==
B Results for systolic data
87
Figure B.2: Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the systolic phase
predicted by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with CE loss. The first
row shows the manual ground truth annotation which is binary and used as reference label for
training of the models. All plots are shown as overlay with the original cMRI for structural
context. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.41.
==PAGE:97==
B Results for systolic data
88
Figure B.3: Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the systolic phase
predicted by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with SD loss. The first
row shows the manual ground truth annotation which is binary and used as reference label for
training of the models. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.42.
==PAGE:98==
B Results for systolic data
89
(a) Ensemble model trained with CE loss.
(b) Ensemble model trained with SD loss.
Figure B.4: Softmax probabilities for all tissue classes predicted by the averaged model trained
on CE and SD, respectively. The shown slice is from the systolic test data set. For correspond-
ing plot on diastolic data see p.43.
Figure B.5: The final segmentation of a single slice for both the model trained with SD and
CE as loss functions on systolic data. The segmentations are shown together with the original
cMRI used as input to the models and the manual segmentation used as reference label. For
corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.43.
==PAGE:99==
B Results for systolic data
90
Figure B.6: Examples of the three segmentations errors that are considered anatomically
impossible and an example of a segmentation without any anatomical errors. The examples
are selected from different patients from the systolic test set showing slice 28, 34, 67, and 56,
respectively. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.48.
==PAGE:100==
B Results for systolic data
91
Figure B.7: The first plot shows the training and validation loss for the averaged ensemble
model using AE as loss functions. The second plot is showing the computed accuracy for the
ensemble model. The plotted values are the mean and std over all 6 folds using the systolic
data set. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.49.
==PAGE:101==
B Results for systolic data
92
Figure B.8: Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the systolic phase
predicted by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with the SD loss function.
The first row shows the manual ground truth label which is empty for the RV cavity. For
corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.50.
==PAGE:102==
B Results for systolic data
93
Figure B.9: Softmax probabilities for each of the cardiac structures in the systolic phase
predicted by each of the models in the 6 fold cross-validation trained with the AE loss function.
The first row shows the manual ground truth label which is empty for the RV cavity. For
corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.51.
==PAGE:103==
B Results for systolic data
94
(a) Ensemble model trained with SD loss.
(b) Ensemble model trained with AE loss.
Figure B.10: Softmax probabilities for the averaged models trained with either SD or AE loss
trained on systolic data. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.52.
Figure B.11: The final segmentation of a single slice for the SD model and the AE model on
systolic data. The segmentations are shown together with the original cMRI and the manual
segmentation used as reference label. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.52.
==PAGE:104==
B Results for systolic data
95
Figure B.12: Softmax probabilities for each fold for a LN example slice 34 trained with SD
loss on systolic data. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.53.
==PAGE:105==
B Results for systolic data
96
Figure B.13: Softmax probabilities for each fold for a LN example slice 34 trained with AE
loss on systolic data. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.54.
==PAGE:106==
B Results for systolic data
97
(a) Ensemble model trained with SD loss.
(b) Ensemble model trained with AE loss.
Figure B.14: Softmax probabilities for the averaged models trained with either SD or AE loss
on systolic data. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.55.
Figure B.15: The original cMRI and each of the segmentations from the ensemble models for
a LN example together with the manual reference segmentation of the four cardiac structures
in the systolic phase. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.55.
==PAGE:107==
B Results for systolic data
98
Figure B.16: Examples of segmentations and the progression hereof related to loss function
and optimization for the systolic phase. First row shows the original cMRI, while the second
row is the manually annotated reference. The subsequent rows show the segmentations for the
SD and the AE models after both the initial training and after optimization of the associated
hyperparameters. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.63.
==PAGE:108==
APPENDIX C
Optimization of
segmentation models
Figure C.1: Optimization history of the study created for the SD model on diastolic data. For
corresponding plot for AE model see p.58.
==PAGE:109==
C Optimization of segmentation models
100
Figure C.2: Optimization history of the study created for the SD model on systolic data.
Figure C.3: Optimization history of the study created for the AE model on systolic data.
==PAGE:110==
C Optimization of segmentation models
101
Figure C.4: Contour plot of sampling of learning rate and weight decay for optimization of the
SD model on diastolic data. For corresponding plot for AE model see p.59.
Figure C.5: Contour plot of sampling of learning rate and weight decay for optimization of the
SD model on systolic data.
==PAGE:111==
C Optimization of segmentation models
102
Figure C.6: Contour plot of sampling of learning rate and weight decay for optimization of the
AE model on systolic data. For corresponding plot on diastolic data see p.59.
Figure C.7: Contour plot of the sampling of α and β for 20 trials for the AE model trained on
systolic data.
==PAGE:112==
Bibliography
(1)
WHO Cardiovascular Diseases:Overview https://www.who.int/health- topics/
cardiovascular-diseases#tab=tab_1, Retrieved March 12, 2021.
(2)
Kang, D.; Woo, J.; Slomka, P. J.; Dey, D.; Germano, G.; Jay Kuo, C.-C. Heart chambers
and whole heart segmentation techniques: review. Journal of Electronic Imaging Apr.
2012, 21, 010901.
(3)
Guo, F.; Ng, M.; Goubran, M.; Petersen, S. E.; Piechnik, S. K.; Neubauer, S.; Wright,
G. Improving cardiac MRI convolutional neural network segmentation on small training
datasets and dataset shift: A continuous kernel cut approach. Medical Image Analysis
2020, 61.
(4)
Chen, C.; Qin, C.; Qiu, H.; Tarroni, G.; Duan, J.; Bai, W.; Rueckert, D. Deep learning
for cardiac image segmentation: A review. Frontiers in cardiovascular medicine 2019, 7,
25.
(5)
Bernard, O. et al. Deep Learning Techniques for Automatic MRI Cardiac Multi-structures
Segmentation and Diagnosis: Is the Problem Solved? IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging 2018, 37, 2514–2525.
(6)
Sander, J.; de Vos, B. D.; Išgum, I. Automatic segmentation with detection of local
segmentation failures in cardiac MRI. Scientific Reports 2020, 10.
(7)
Simantiris, G.; Tziritas, G. Cardiac MRI Segmentation with a Dilated CNN Incorporat-
ing Domain-specific Constraints. IEEE Journal on Selected Topics in Signal Processing
2020.
(8)
Sultana, F.; Sufian, A.; Dutta, P. Evolution of Image Segmentation using Deep Con-
volutional Neural Network: A Survey. Knowledge-Based Systems Aug. 2020, 201-202,
106062.
(9)
Fukushima, K. Neocognitron: A self-organizing neural network model for a mechanism
of pattern recognition unaffected by shift in position. Biological Cybernetics Apr. 1980,
36, 193–202.
(10)
Ronneberger, O.; Fischer, P.; Brox, T. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
image segmentation. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 2015, 9351, 234–
241.
(11)
MICCAI 2017 ACDC challenge 2017 https://www.creatis.insa-lyon.fr/Challenge/
acdc/databases.html, Retrieved May 21, 2021.
(12)
Isensee, F.; Jaeger, P. F.; Full, P. M.; Wolf, I.; Engelhardt, S.; Maier-Hein, K. H. Au-
tomatic Cardiac Disease Assessment on cine-MRI via Time-Series Segmentation and
Domain Specific Features. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2018.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
104
(13)
Zotti, C.; Luo, Z.; Lalande, A.; Jodoin, P. M. Convolutional Neural Network with Shape
Prior Applied to Cardiac MRI Segmentation. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health
Informatics 2019, 23, 1119–1128.
(14)
WHO Queensland Cardiovascular Group | Anatomy of the Heart https://qcg.com.
au/patients/anatomy-heart, Retrieved March 1, 2021.
(15)
Jovin, I. S.; Ebisu, K.; Liu, Y. H.; Finta, L. A.; Oprea, A. D.; Brandt, C. A.; Dziura,
J.; Wackers, F. J. Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction and Left Ventricular End-Diastolic
Volume in Patients With Diastolic Dysfunction. Congestive Heart Failure May 2013,
19, 130–134.
(16)
Regan, J.; VanPutte, C.; Russo, A., Seeley’s Essentials of Anatomy and Physiology, 9th
Edition; McGraw-Hill Education: 2016.
(17)
American Heart Association Ejection Fraction Heart Failure Measurement https://
www.heart.org/en/health-topics/heart-failure/diagnosing-heart-failure/
ejection-fraction-heart-failure-measurement, Retrieved February 25, 2021.
(18)
Ginat, D. T.; Fong, M. W.; Tuttle, D. J.; Hobbs, S. K.; Vyas, R. C.; Dt, G.; Mw, F.;
Dj, T.; Sk, H.; Rc, V. Cardiac Imaging: Part 1, MR Pulse Sequences, Imaging Planes,
and Basic Anatomy. American Journal of Roentgenology 2011, 197, www.arrs.org.
(19)
Russo, V.; Lovato, L.; Ligabue, G. Cardiac MRI: Technical basis. Radiologia Medica
Nov. 2020, 125, 1040–1055.
(20)
Deng, F. and Knipe H. et al. Cardiac imaging planes https://radiopaedia.org/
articles/cardiac-imaging-planes, Retrieved March 21, 2021.
(21)
Elnakib, A. Developing Advanced Mathematical Models for Detecting Abnormalities in
2D/3D Medical Structures, Ph.D. Thesis, Dec. 2013, https://www.researchgate.net/
figure/CMRI-data-showing-the-cross-sections-of-the-heart-from-basal-to-
apical-Left-CE-CMRI_fig8_260124237.
(22)
Byrne, N.; Clough, J. R.; Montana, G.; King, A. P. A persistent homology-based topo-
logical loss function for multi-class CNN segmentation of cardiac MRI. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) Aug. 2020, 12592 LNCS, 3–13, http://arxiv.org/
abs/2008.09585.
(23)
F. Li, J. J.; Serena, Y. CS231n: Convolutional Neural Networks for Visual Recogni-
tion. Stanford University 2020, 1–9, https://cs231n.github.io/convolutional-
networks/.
(24)
Fumo, D. A Gentle Introduction To Neural Networks Series — Part 1 https://www.
creatis.insa-lyon.fr/Challenge/acdc/databases.html, Retrieved May 12, 2021.
(25)
IBM | What are Convolutional Neural Networks? https://www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/
convolutional-neural-networks, Retrieved June 21, 2021.
(26)
Christiansen, N. H.; Voie, P. E. T.; Winther, O. ; Høgsberg, J. B. Comparison of Neural
Network Error Measures for Simulation of Slender Marine Structures. Journal of Applied
Mathematics 2021, 759834.
(27)
Xu, J.; Li, Z.; Du, B.; Zhang, M.; Liu, J. Reluplex made more practical: Leaky ReLU.
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc. July 2020, 2020-July.
==PAGE:114==
Bibliography
105
(28)
Bishop, C. M., Pattern recognition and machine learning; Springer: 2009, pp 0–738.
(29)
He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Dec. 2016, 2016-December, 770–778.
(30)
Nielsen, M. A. Neural Networks and Deep Learning http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.
com, Retrieved June 21, 2021.
(31)
Divakar Kapil Stochastic vs Batch Gradient Descent https://medium.com/@divakar_
239/stochastic-vs-batch-gradient-descent-8820568eada1, Retrieved June 21,
2021.
(32)
Milletari, F.; Navab, N.; Ahmadi, S. A. V-Net: Fully convolutional neural networks for
volumetric medical image segmentation. Proceedings - 2016 4th International Conference
on 3D Vision, 3DV 2016 2016, 565–571.
(33)
Jordan, J. An overview of semantic image segmentation. https://www.jeremyjordan.
me/semantic-segmentation/#loss, Retrieved on May 4, 2021.
(34)
He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-
Level Performance on ImageNet Classification. 2015 IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV) 2015, 1026–1034.
(35)
Ruder, S. An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms. arXiv Sept. 2016.
(36)
Kingma, D. P.; Ba, J. L. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. 3rd International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 - Conference Track Proceedings
2015.
(37)
Anup Bhande What is underfitting and overfitting in machine learning and how to deal
with it. https://medium.com/greyatom/what-is-underfitting-and-overfitting-
in-machine-learning-and-how-to-deal-with-it-6803a989c76, Retrieved June 21,
2021.
(38)
Khalifa, A. B.; Frigui, H. Multiple Instance Fuzzy Inference Neural Networks. arXiv
2016.
(39)
Akiba, T.; Sano, S.; Yanase, T.; Ohta, T.; Koyama, M. Optuna: A Next-generation
Hyperparameter Optimization Framework. Proceedings of the Acm Sigkdd International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining July 2019, 2623–2631.
(40)
Bergstra, J.; Bardenet, R.; Bengio, Y.; Kégl, B. Algorithms for hyper-parameter opti-
mization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 24: 25th Annual Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Systems 2011, NIPS 2011 2011.
(41)
Aloïs Bissuel Hyper-parameter optimization algorithms: a short review https://medium.
com/criteo-engineering/hyper-parameter-optimization-algorithms-2fe447525903,
Retrieved May 28, 2021.
(42)
Dice, L. R. Measures of the Amount of Ecologic Association Between Species. Ecology
July 1945, 26, 297–302.
(43)
Taha, A. A.; Hanbury, A. Metrics for evaluating 3D medical image segmentation: Anal-
ysis, selection, and tool. BMC Medical Imaging Aug. 2015, 15.
(44)
Hausdorff distance - Wikipedia, https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Hausdorff _
distance.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
106
(45)
Huttenlocher, D. P.; Klanderman, G. A.; Rucklidge, W. J. Comparing Images Using the
Hausdorff Distance. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
1993, 15, 850–863.
(46)
Abdar, M.; Pourpanah, F.; Hussain, S.; Rezazadegan, D.; Liu, L.; Ghavamzadeh, M.;
Fieguth, P.; Cao, X.; Khosravi, A.; Acharya, U. R.; Makarenkov, V.; Nahavandi, S. A
Review of Uncertainty Quantification in Deep Learning: Techniques, Applications and
Challenges. Information Fusion 2021, 76, 243–297.
(47)
Lou, A.; Guan, S.; Loew, M. H. DC-UNet: rethinking the U-Net architecture with dual
channel eﬀicient CNN for medical image segmentation. SPIE-Intl Soc Optical Eng Feb.
2021, 98.
(48)
Miller, C. A.; Jordan, P.; Borg, A.; Argyle, R.; Clark, D.; Pearce, K.; Schmitt, M. Quan-
tification of left ventricular indices from SSFP cine imaging: Impact of real-world vari-
ability in analysis methodology and utility of geometric modeling. Journal of Magnetic
Resonance Imaging May 2013, 37, 1213–1222.
(49)
Frisken, S. F.; Perry, R. N.; Rockwood, A. P.; Jones, T. R. Adaptively Sampled Distance
Fields: A General Representation of Shape for Computer Graphics. ASSOC COMPUT-
ING MACHINERY 2000.
(50)
Baumgartner, C. F.; Koch, L. M.; Pollefeys, M.; Konukoglu, E. An Exploration of 2D
and 3D Deep Learning Techniques for Cardiac MR Image Segmentation. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 2018, 10663, 111–119.
(51)
Geifman, Y.; El-Yaniv, R. Selective Classification for Deep Neural Networks. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, 30.
(52)
Wolterink, J. M.; Leiner, T.; Viergever, M. A.; Išgum, I. Automatic Segmentation and
Disease Classification Using Cardiac Cine MR Images. Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics) 2018, 10663, 101–110.
==PAGE:116==
