==PAGE:1==
Active inference with predictive coding for
adaptive robot perception and control
Master Thesis
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
Master Thesis
August, 2021
By
Kristijonas Atkociunas
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering, Elektrovej, Building 326,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Automation and Control,
Department of Electrical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of robotics, control and
computer vision.
Kristijonas Atkociunas ­ s193145
Signature
Date
ii
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Robot process automation (RPA) is traditionally task specific in order to fulfill highly stan­
dardised process with no variation in the input data (Syed et al. 2020). Any variations in
the process or the input data leads to difficulties in system reconfiguration and downtime.
Adaptable RPA systems, which would be robust to dynamic production environments, are
in demand.
A novel framework for robot manipulator control and visual perception is proposed in this
paper based on predictive coding and active inference methods from neuroscientific lit­
erature. The approach aims to model proprioceptive and exteroceptive perception­action
loops found in biological systems and increase adaptive capability of RPA systems.
The proposed system design is implemented in simulated environment on a 7­DoF Panda
Emika industrial robot arm. The experimentation shows a easy to tune adaptable con­
troller which does not require modelling internal or external dynamics. The visual per­
ception part of the system is capable to learn the given scene features and accurately
represent the scene in future states.
Based on the evidence of the system functionality, I speculate that the suggested system
methods could be widely applied to RPA and provide benefits for industrial tasks where
conditions are dynamic, given that the requirements of computational capacity is fulfilled.
Codebase: https://github.com/kriatk/panda_sim
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Kristijonas Atkociunas, MSc Autonomous Systems student, DTU
Thesis author.
Silvia Tolu, Associate Professor, Department of Electrical Engineering, DTU
Project supervisor.
iv
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research goals and work implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature review
5
2.1
Predictive coding, active inference and the brain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Predictive visual processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Active inference control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Notable robotic applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
System Design
11
3.1
Visual predictor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Inference controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Methodology
21
4.1
Software Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Experimentation
25
5.1
Controller performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Visual prediction performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6
Discussion
31
7
Conclusion
35
Bibliography
37
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
With growing scale of industrial automation across variety of industries, the need arises
for adaptable robot systems which are easy to configure and can capably deal with dy­
namic tasks and environments. Among other factors, development in process automation
technology is driven by progress in connectivity, human­robot collaboration and need for
highly flexible production (Kopacek 2019). To accelerate adoption of automation tech­
nology, especially in rapidly changing and developing industries, robotic systems need to
be proposed which are easily reconfigurable, adaptable to changing manufacturing needs
and product variation. One of the biggest challenges when introducing Robot Process Au­
tomation (RPA) is the requirement of having highly standardised process and consistent
input data (Syed et al. 2020). Generally, RPA systems tend to only perform well in highly
specified tasks and manual labor is preferred where task conditions vary. Bridging this
gap between the efficiency of the RPA systems and adaptability of manual labor is nec­
essary for wider technology adoption. To do so, inspiration can be taken from biological
systems and available cognitive models to add adaptive capability to industrial robotics.
Specifically, probabilistic inference is investigated throughout this project, both on external
visual and internal joint sensory inputs using Predictive Coding (PC) mathematical mod­
eling and state­of­the­art deep neural network architectures. Predictive coding is one of
the leading theories in modelling the brain functions related to the probabilistic inference
(Spratling 2016). For a practical example of inspiration from a biological standpoint, let us
examine, in simplified terms, how humans visually perceive the environment. The brain
acquires visual information using the eyes about the light intensities and wavelengths in
the spatial environment (Warrant and Johnsen 2013, Delgado­Bonal and Martín­Torres
2016). How this sensory information is then processed by the brain to make sense of
the objects and other contextual foundation is still an undergoing research topic. PC the­
ory proposes that the brain generates its own mental image of the environment based
on the previous learned experience, recent past and currently perceived sensory input
(Spratling 2016). Consider the famous Adelson’s Checker­Shadow Illusion (Thomson
and Macpherson 2017). Even though the light intensity between the gray squares A and
B is the same, we perceive a shadow being cast on the B square even though it is not there
(figure 1.1). The brain is making a prediction of the environment based on prior knowl­
edge and currently perceived conditions, inferring shadow should be present. Although
this is an example of arguably undesired effects of active inference, generally these er­
rors resulting in illusion occur rarely. The many benefits of the active inference in visual
perception include, but not limited to, predicting object shapes, orientation and velocities
under motion – necessary qualities for an adaptive control system.
Similar techniques can also be utilized for sensorimotor control. An example implementa­
tion of this is an active inference controller (AIC). Assumption behind the active inference
in motor control is this: given a specific internal model of the environment, a set of sen­
sory inputs can characterize how that model could be generated (Pezzato, Ferrari, and
Corbato 2020). Therefore, the causes of sensory data can be inferred. Consider that the
environment acts on a human to produce sensory impression, then by taking some action,
a human is acting on the environment which in return will influence the sensory input. In
this view, the motor control can be summarized as fulfilment of a prior expectation about
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Adelson checker shadow illusion (©1995, Edward H. Adelson).
proprioceptive sensations (Pezzato, Ferrari, and Corbato 2020). Put in a practical con­
text, when we reach for an object without knowing its properties, such as weight, we still
make a guess of how much force we will need to apply to move it based on our internal
model of the world. If this expectation is not met during the attempt to move the object,
we responsively adjust how much force is applied. Essentially, this is what constitutes
adaptive nature of control which is highly desirable in robotic applications when dealing
with unknown object parameters and robot dynamics.
Active inference, predictive coding and predictive processing terms can sometimes be
used interchangeably in the neuroscientific theory (Ciria et al. 2021). For clarity in this
paper, predictive coding term is used when considering exteroceptive perception (visual
sensory input) and active inference term is used when dealing with proprioceptive per­
ception (manipulator sensory input). The main aim is to make an initial research to link
predictive coding (PC) methods for visual perception with a sensorimotor control based on
active inference controller (AIC). This link is achieved by utilizing the predicted contextual
information returned by the visual perception in order to initiate manipulator action.
1.2
Problem statement
Traditionally, industrial robotic system applications are task specific and offer little to no
adaptivity on runtime (Syed et al. 2020). To account for uncertainty in the task environ­
ment or manipulator dynamics, extensive efforts need to be committed in reconfiguration
leading to production downtime and high costs. It is desirable to achieve an adaptable
system architecture for robot arm manipulators which can deal with uncertain dynamics
which are not specifically modelled prior. Novel methods in neuroscience theory, such as
predictive coding and active inference, could potentially help to achieve this goal. How­
ever, much of neurorobotics research in this area focuses on humanoid robot representa­
tion in highly general and complex environments (J.­C. Park et al. 2012) or contrary, very
specific, low level research based applications (J. Park, D. Kim, and Nagai 2018; Zhong
et al. 2018). The goal of this paper is to address this problem in a narrower, industrial
scope where environments are dynamic to a known degree and required motor control
is accurate and efficient. To achieve this, predictive coding framework is proposed for
visual perception and motor control, both in the literature capable of representing visual
cortex (Srinivasan et al. 1982; Rao and Ballard 1999; Spratling 2016; Delgado­Bonal and
Martín­Torres 2016; Ciria et al. 2021) and motor functions (Pio­Lopez et al. 2016; J. Park,
D. Kim, and Nagai 2018; Friston 2010) of the human brain, respectively. The study will
aim to answer the following:
Research Question
2
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:11==
Can a robot arm manipulator successfully perform dynamic goal­oriented task, such as
picking moving object on a conveyor belt, when biologically inspired predictive methods
are applied for adaptive visual perception and motor control?
Research Hypothesis
Combining proprioception and exteroception, based on neuroscientific predictive coding
and active inference methods, will allow adaptable applications for robot arm manipulators
where goal­oriented task conditions are dynamic in nature.
The research question is industrial task specific defined in this paper and used for bench­
marking in an experimental setup. The hypothesis is aimed more at providing arguments
of general adaptive capability of the proposed architecture for implementation in industrial
context.
1.3
Research goals and work implementation
In the broadest sense, the goal of the project is to develop an adaptive robot manipula­
tor system architecture capable of dealing with dynamic industrial tasks. This is done by
applying state­of­the­art biologically inspired methods previously explored in the neuro­
scientific and neurorobotic research. Following the literature review, the aim is to propose
a novel perception­action system architecture for an industrial task. Moving to the imple­
mentation stage, experimental setup in a simulated environment based on Robot Oper­
ating System (ROS), needs to be developed. Then, implement and test the proposed
solution, gather relevant evidence related to the hypothesis for analysis. Document the
findings and provide insights on further development in the field. In summary:
1. Perform a literature study of specific topics relevant to the thesis work with emphasis
given to:
• Biological perception­action loops
• Predictive coding theory and application
• Adaptive controllers
2. Investigate cognitive methods for dynamic goal­oriented tasks and identify one or
more approaches that could be relevant for the thesis problem.
3. Design, develop and implement a simulation framework for a significant goal­oriented
task relevant for an industrial application.
4. Propose and implement an adaptive robot manipulator control solution exploiting a
bio­inspired control approach.
5. Test and validate the implemented solution in the simulated environment and com­
pare findings with the main hypothesis.
6. Draw conclusions about the potential of using the developed solution for adaptive
robot manipulator applications.
The described project goals are executed according to waterfall methodology supported
by the defined milestones in the Gantt chart. On the sub­level scale, especially for goals
related to software development, agile methodology could be employed for more efficient
prototyping and experimentation.
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature review
There is a number of algorithms presented in literature which can be described as predic­
tive coding (Spratling 2016). The early mathematical formulation appeared as Linear Pre­
dictive Coding (LPC) introducing time­series analysis in digital signal processing (Makhoul
1975), showing applications for signal approximation, restoration, compression and noise
reduction. Later, a modified LPC algorithm has been popularized to explain the function
of the retina (Srinivasan et al. 1982). Experimental results, showing efficient redundancy
elimination from the neural signals, led to an increased interest for predictive coding in the
neuroscientific research field, making it as one of the leading unified theories to explain
cortical function in the brain, be it related to visual, auditory or other sensory information.
Applications of predictive coding theory in recent literature, more specifically related to
the topic of this thesis, are reviewed in greater detail in this section.
2.1
Predictive coding, active inference and the brain
Figure 2.1: Cognitive model of active inference and predictive coding (Brown, Friston,
and Bestmann 2011). Superficial pyramid cells holds the function of forwarding bottom­
up prediction error to the deep pyramid cells in hierarchical levels above. The prediction
error is used to optimize high level representations which provide top down predictions in
the levels below. Representation is essentially a generative prediction of sensory stimulus
based on a model of how such sensory stimulus could have been generated.
Figure 2.1 attempts to explain visually the roles of active inference and predictive cod­
ing for exteroception, proprioception and motor function (Brown, Friston, and Bestmann
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
5
==PAGE:14==
2011). Active inference is observed in proprioception, using free­energy as a statistical
measure of surprise associated with the sensory input and generative model of the in­
put causes. Predictive coding on the other hand is related to the hierarchical structure
observed in the exteroception. The authors explored the the concepts of attention and
suggested that perception in the visual domain should also be conditioned based on in­
teroceptive inference. For the scope of this thesis, inspiration is taken from this research
to model the proprioception (predictive visual processing) and exteroception (active infer­
ence control) for perception­action loop of robot manipulator.
2.2
Predictive visual processing
A hierarchical model for predictive visual processing has been introduced by Rao and
Ballard 1999. The study was motivated by the property of end­stopping1 in the previous
neuroscientific literature. It was not completely clear why, or how, a neuron would stop
responding or perform a weaker response once the stimulus is outside the bounds of
classical receptive field (RF).
The authors suggested that neural networks learn statistical regularities from the natural
images to remove the predictable components of the input signal, thus eliminating re­
dundancy in the signal and neural activity. To emulate this cortical behaviour, authors
proposed a top­down hierarchical model based on predictive coding theory, where the
feedback connections from higher order cortical areas carry predictions down to the lower
layers of neural activities. The lower level neurons feedforward residual error between
the predictions based on internal model of natural images and input actual signal. Neu­
rons carrying residual errors has shown RF effects of end­stopping. It is suggested that
these effects result from predictive coding of previously learned images, removing the
predictable input signals. Even though the simulations in the paper focused on V1 are of
visual cortex, authors discussed that the hierarchical structure of predictive coding could
explain neural activity in different brain regions including cerebellar­like structures.
Building upon the hierarchical predictive coding structure, deep predictive coding network
for continuous video streams using modern deep learning methods has been demon­
strated ( Lotter, Kreiman, and Cox 2017). Framework named as ”PredNet” is capable of
learning, without supervision, to predict future frames for image sequences and shows
ability to predict movement of objects and extract contextual information about it, such
as pose estimation. The method requires significantly less training views than traditional
supervised learning based computer vision techniques. Furthermore, the PredNet is also
shown to perform well when subjected to complex environments of natural image streams,
which proved to be useful in estimating steering angle for car movements based on dash­
cam video feed. Overall results suggest, that the neuroscientific predictive coding theories
formulated as deep hierarchical neural network framework can be applied in a practical
setting to solve problems where inferring future state of the scene is necessary and could
potentially mimic how visual processing is performed in the brain.
2.3
Active inference control
Active inference controller (AIC) presents predictive robot sensorimotor control law which
shows promising results in dealing with unmodeled dynamics (Pezzato, Ferrari, and Cor­
1An area of the retina that when stimulated by a bar or an edge oriented at a particular angle causes a
neuron in the primary visual cortex (Area V1) to discharge a nerve impulse, but that elicits a weaker response
or no response from the neuron if the length of the stimulus exceeds a certain limit. A cortical neuron that
responds in this way is called an end­stopped neuron or end­stopped cell. (A Dictionary of Psychology (3
ed.), Andrew M. Colman)
6
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:15==
bato 2020). The authors attempted to mitigate the reliance on accurate modeling of the
plant which is a requirement in current state­of­the­art model based adaptive controllers,
such as model reference adaptive controller (MRAC). These type of controllers are sen­
sitive to noise in the signals and unexpected perturbations. An industrial robotic control
focused study has been made where predictive coding free energy principles were im­
plemented on a 7­DOF simulated and real Panda Robot. The study presented novel
active inference controller as an adaptive control framework in presence of unmodeled
dynamics, such as varying payload weight. The proposed controller was compared to
state­of­the­art MRAC in a pick and place operation. The authors concluded that the AIC
does not require any dynamic or kinematic model of the robot, less sensitive to unmod­
eled dynamics and is scalable to high DOFs. Furthermore, AIC provides easier tuning
and very little re­tuning when moving from simulation to real robot with inherently different
dynamics. Notably, the inference model has been based on joint velocity and position
sensory input. The results showed that this control method could potentially mimic pro­
prioception of biological systems related to inherit learning of limb kinematics based on
recurrent movements.
In another robot control study, active inference scheme was formulated for a 7­DOF robot
arm implemented in the simulated environment (Pio­Lopez et al. 2016). Active inference
terms were formalized under free­energy minimization and deep hierarchical generative
model. The formulated active inference scheme was then applied on the simulated robot
to reach a set target by raising the arm. The aim of the experimentation was to evaluate
how noise on the proprioception and exteroception input signal affected the robot con­
trol. The control quality was evaluated on 4 different scenarios: 1) no noise in the signals
2) noise in the proprioception 3) noise in the vision 4) noise in both proprioception and
vision. The results showed that control scheme worked very well at reaching a desired
goal in three dimensional space. It could still reach the goal when either proprioception
or vision signals were noisy, although not as optimally and noise in the proprioception
introduced greater divergence from optimal path. Under noise in both proprioception and
vision, control scheme failed to reach target. The results showed that the proof­of­concept
active inference scheme could be used for robot control of complex robots, introducing ad­
vantages over the classical methods relying on inverse dynamics formulations. However,
there were not enough evidence to support that such control scheme were technologically
better. The observed connection between proprioception and exteroception seemed in
line to neuroscientific research, where human subjects could still control target reaching
with impaired proprioceptive abilities, presenting potential for this control scheme for fur­
ther research and application in the field, such as modelling Parkinson’s disease (Friston,
Mattout, and Kilner 2011).
2.4
Notable robotic applications
AFA­PredNet (Action FormulAted Predictive­coding Network) is a hierarchical model de­
scribing the effects of action modulation on the inference of sensory inputs (Zhong et al.
2018). The study focused on the action selection to minimize the prediction error from
visual perception. The previously described PredNet, hierarchical neural network model
for predictive processing of image streams, was integrated with motor action units by a
multi­layer perceptron network (MLP). The action modulation was integrated as an addi­
tional signal on each level of representation in the hierarchical PredNet structure, making
action as key part in adjustment of generative model of visual perception to minimize the
prediction error. The neural network was trained with possible actions and object states
to encode the world model. The presented experimentation supports the hypothesis that
active action can have effects on generative units. When tested with line tracing mobile
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
7
==PAGE:16==
robot, the model was capable of predicting images based on action modulation in the
velocity of the wheels. The authors discussed that practical applications of such action­
perception loops is feasible when specific goals are predetermined and constitutes short
or mid­term planning, such as autonomous driving. However, it is worth mentioning that
the article was not published nor peer­reviewed. The experimentation results are lacking
in clarity and seem to fall short of conclusive evidence.
The predictive coding scheme has been utilized on a humanoid robot in an attempt to
recreate the concept of object permanence observed in infanthood (J.­C. Park et al. 2012).
Object permanence relates to the concept of physical objects still existing in the world even
though it can no longer be seen due to visual obstruction. This ability allows to perform
actuation on both physical objects which are actually perceived and objects which are
inferred to be present. The experiment was conducted based on Bayesian inference sys­
tem supplemented by predictive coding for finding best posterior probability for predicted
motion of the occluded object. The result showed that the predictive model could predict
object position better than just naive Bayesian predictor. With a map from object position
to robot state, the robot could follow the visually occluded object. Notably, this approach
did not use the hierarchical top down framework.
In a follow up study on goal­oriented imitation learning and cognitive development, the
authors adopted the hierarchical top­down PC structure using recurrent neural network
with parametric bias (RNNPB) method (J. Park, D. Kim, and Nagai 2018). Experiments
carried out on simulated 2­DOF robot arm reaching between one of the two different goal
positions. Three different movement configurations were defined for each goal with bias
in one case, and no bias in another. The study showed that the robot gradually increased
it’s ability to reproduce reference actions and more accurately reach the target position
by self organising parametric bias space to better represent reference actions.
2.5
Summary
Predictive coding theory has caught the imagination of many researchers around the
globe interested in cognitive science, regardless of if their research domain lies in psy­
chology(Spratling 2016;J.­C. Park et al. 2012), philosophy (Gładziejewski 2016; Wiese
and Metzinger 2017;Clark 2013), biology (Warrant and Johnsen 2013;Srinivasan et al.
1982;Rao and Ballard 1999;Friston 2010), computer science (Lotter, Kreiman, and Cox
2017; Zhong et al. 2018) or other domains in between (Pezzato, Ferrari, and Corbato
2020;Makhoul 1975;Pio­Lopez et al. 2016;J. Park, D. Kim, and Nagai 2018). This is per­
haps due to the fact that concept of predictive processing is empirically easy to relate
to based on how we understand and experience the world. Active inference is a second
nature to humans ­ after all, we do not think that car ceases to exists just because it disap­
peared behind the building, and we can almost meticulously predict when it will appear on
the other side. These concepts can be employed to not only solve technical problems, but
also deepen and shape our own understanding of world representation. What is evident
from the literature is how difficult it is to evaluate these concepts empirically. Not surpris­
ing, when generally speaking, predictive coding theory uniformly tries to mathematically
explain the functions of the brain ­ perhaps the most complex structure known to science.
I do not share the aim of trying to explain cognitive brain functions in this thesis, as it is
not the primary field of my study. It is my intention that supplemented literature in this
review can do this much better than I could. My approach is purely practical in engineer­
ing terms. I intend to break down the problem with a clear focus on an industrial task
and apply the discussed methods as needed to fulfill it. The literature featured in this
chapter has been highlighted related to predictive coding in visual perception and active
8
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:17==
inference in the robot control. There is evidence of predictive coding methods being valid
for both visual processing (Lotter, Kreiman, and Cox 2017;J.­C. Park et al. 2012) and
adaptive robot control (Pezzato, Ferrari, and Corbato 2020). Even though literature can
be found at the attempts to integrate the visual perception and action in predictive coding
architecture terms (Zhong et al. 2018;J.­C. Park et al. 2012;J. Park, D. Kim, and Nagai
2018), the aim has mainly been to use or influence visual perception predictions based
on some pre­defined action. In other words, no active inference in robot controller has
been applied. One case study stands out as notable exception (Pio­Lopez et al. 2016),
where active inference in proprioception is formulated as classical reflex arc. I aim to
expand the application in the field of robotics by modeling both exteroception (visual sen­
sory inputs) and proprioception (joint sensory inputs) using predictive coding and active
inference methods. The aim is to achieve improved robot perception capabilities when
dealing with dynamic conditions found in realistic industrial scenario.
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
9
==PAGE:18==
10
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:19==
3
System Design
3.1
Visual predictor
In this section, the concepts behind predictive neural network ’PredNet’ (Lotter, Kreiman,
and Cox 2017) are further explored as basis for visual processing module of the system.
3.1.1
Hierarchical model for predictive coding
Figure 3.1: Hierarchical model for predictive coding (Rao & Ballard 1999). Information
flow upwards (feedforward) can be observed in the arrows on the top, meanwhile arrows in
the bottom represent information flow backwards from the subsequent layers (feedback).
The hierarchical model can be visualised in figure 3.1. The first layer is the input signal. At
each of the network levels, a feedback prediction is being generated by the superseding
level and is compared to the actual input of the current level. The residual error is carried
over with feedforward connection to the predictive estimator. Predictive estimator uses
the feedforward error to correct the estimate of the input signal. The hierarchical structure
occurs where upper levels operate on larger scales, as with each level up on a hierarchy
the level influences several levels below.
To better understand the advantage hierarchically structure introduces to signal process­
ing, lets visualise a hypothetical scenario. An input image with simple square shape has
been generated and corresponding prediction with slight offset on both x and y axis at the
lowest level n (figure 3.2). Subtracting input from the prediction produces an error image
corresponding to the difference between the two. This way, the part of the signal which
is already estimated correctly is suppressed and only the relevant features of the signal
is passed forward as an input to the next level. Therefore the number of receptive fields
increases progressively with each layer in the hierarchy, and with it, the network’s ability
to map features from the input space to the output (Rao and Ballard 1999).
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.2: Signal propagation between hierarchical layers. Predictions act as signal
suppressors as only the error signal part is passed to the upper levels.
3.1.2
Deep predictive neural network
Figure 3.3: Information flow within a single layer and underlying deep NN methods within
the nodes
The Rao and Ballard 1999 hierarchical model has been formalized in modern deep neural
network terms (Lotter, Kreiman, and Cox 2017). The PredNet layer consists of 4 nodes:
representation, prediction, target and error (figure 3.3). The representation node is re­
sponsible for predicting the input for the following occurrence and is structured as gen­
erative de­convolutional network recurring locally at each level. The architecture of the
representation node is based on long short­term memory (LSTM) algorithm. The other
nodes for prediction, target and error are structured as deep convolutional neural net­
work. The unsupervised learning framework is achieved by using gradient decent with
12
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:21==
ReLU neuron activation function at the error node. The complete set of the update rules
for all the nodes of the network is summarised in equation 3.1:
At
l =
{ xt
if l = 0
MAXPOOL
(
RELU
(
CoNv
(
Et
l−1
)))
l > 0
ˆAt
l = RELU
(
CoNV
(
Rt
l
))
Et
l =
[
RELU
(
At
l −ˆAt
l
)
; RELU
(
ˆAt
l −At
l
)]
Rt
l = CoNvLSTM
(
Et−1
l
, Rt−1
l
, UPSAMPLE
(
Rt
l+1
))
Ltrain =
∑
t
λt
∑
l
λl
nl
∑
nl
Et
l
(3.1)
The xt denotes a sequence of images, and in the lowest layer target At
l = xt, whereas in
the following layers target is computed by convolution of error node from the layer below
Et
l−1, followed by ReLU activation and max­pooling. The prediction ˆAt
l is computed by
convolution from the input of the representation node Rt
l also followed by ReLU activation.
The representation node Rt
l is calculated according to convolutional LSTM algorithm by
passing up­sampled (nearest­neighbour) representation from the subsequent layer Rt
l+1.
Additionally, representation Rt−1
l
and error Et−1
l
from current layer from an iteration ago
is also accounted. Error is updated by computing both positive and negative terms (At
l −
ˆAt
l; ˆAt
l −At
l), followed once again by ReLU activation. Finally, the model can be trained
by the training loss function Ltrain, where λt, λl represents weight factors and nl is the
number of units in the corresponding layer. The model is trained to minimize weighted
sum of the error units.
3.1.3
Encoding
Convolutional Neural Network (CNNs) is a type of Artificial Neural Network (ANNs) and
is generally used for for pattern recognition in images (Albawi, Mohammed, and Al­Zawi
2017). That is due to the presence and functionality of convolutional layers in the net­
work. Traditionally, CNN architecture would include at least one convolutional layer for
pattern recognition and two fully­connected layers for image classification. However, in
this project the goal is to learn to generate images in the future using unlabeled data
(unsupervised learning), therefore traditional CNN architecture is not implemented. The
convolutional layers forms basis for the representation, prediction and target cells of the
PredNet architecture for it’s ability to learn and extract image features.
The convolutional layer uses kernels to map parts of an input image to a feature map. A
kernel applied to a region of an input space is also called a receptive field. The size of
the kernel (n x n) determines the size of the receptive field and are typically small (3 x 3),
however it convolves over the entirety of the input space to map features (3.4). The kernel
consists of some values and by taking dot product of the input values of the respective
receptive field produces activation value of a hidden neuron in the feature map. It is
possible to explicitly define kernel values to form a common filter, such as edge, corner
or circle detector among others. In this implementation, kernels are randomly initialized
and learning suitable parameter values to identify features associated to the input image
is basis for deep learning.
Feature map dimensions needs to be accounted when designing neural networks of con­
volutional layers. In order to retain consistent spacial dimension across the network nodes
within a layer, zero­padding is introduced for all of the convolutions. Note equation 3.1
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.4: 2D convolutional layer diagram. The kernel of size (3x3) moves through the
input image from left to right, top to bottom with stride = 1. Dot product between kernel
and input values of the corresponding receptive field provides activation values of hidden
neurons within the feature map.
that max­pooling is used during the target update ˆAt
l for all PredNet layers (l > 0), with an
exception of the input layer. The implementation supports max­pooling by magnitude of
2 or 4. max­pooling is essential in order to reduce the amount of computations, however
it comes at a cost of loosing input resolution. In addition, the depth of the network is in­
creased proportionally when acceding the hierarchy. It is generally accepted that narrow
and deep convolutional networks perform better (J. Kim, J. K. Lee, and K. M. Lee 2016;
Nichani, Radhakrishnan, and Uhler 2021) and that is reflected in the design of PredNet
layers.
A visualisation of input/output dimensions can be observed in figure 3.5. From the bottom,
an input frame is and RGB image with 3 channels of resolution 320x240 pixels is passed
to the target node at the input layer of the PredNet (layer 0). At the target, convolution
operations are performed and produces a feature map of the same dimensions. The
convolutions in representation, prediction and error nodes are set up to have the same
width, height and depth as the target node. Note that at the error node depth of the image
doubles because of processing both positive and negative terms (refer to equation 3.1).
Ascending to the layer 1, max­pooling with kernel of (2x2) and stride of 2 is performed
after the convolutions, effectively halving the input resolution. The channel size is arbitrary
chosen depending on the amount of features (4 in the given implementation) and just like
in the input layer, the remaining node dimensions are chosen accordingly, while error node
doubles the number of channels. Following layers scale accordingly.
Finally, non­linearity is introduced to the network by applying ReLU activation function on
target, prediction and error nodes. ReLU activation function works by converting all the
negative values of the feature map to 0, for all values x < 0 and leaving positive values to
remain. Applying non­linearity to the neural network increases it’s capability to distinguish
14
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:23==
between similar features which otherwise would appear linear (O’Shea and Nash 2015).
Figure 3.5: Input and output dimensions across 3 ­ layer PredNet implementation.
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
15
==PAGE:24==
3.1.4
Decoding
Convolutional networks are well regarded at encoding of spatial features. However, to
predict the future frames, temporal component also has to be considered. This requires
some past information to be preserved which is not possible with CNN structure where all
hidden neurons are directly connected to the input space. Since the introduction of recur­
rent neural networks (RNNs) and, in particular, long short­term memory (LSTM) variations
of it, RNNs has emerged as capable deep learning framework for processing signals which
has both spatial and temporal features, such as video streams, speech recognition and
weather forecasting (Yu et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2015).
Figure 3.6: Recurrent neural network in general form.
The RNN preserves the information of previous inputs by passing a copy of previous
hidden layer state to the next layer in time (figure 3.6). The x represents a vector of inputs,
y in turn, is a vector of outputs. In the case of this project, the input and output vectors are
a sequence of frames, which are spatially dimensional. Unlike in traditional feed­forward
neural networks as CNN where weights are updated for each layer, the input wx, output
wy and hidden state wy weights remain same for all re­occurrences and is updated via
back­propagation once after the sequence is complete. Hidden layer h combines the
information from immediate input and recent past via LSTM cell.
Figure 3.7: Long Short­term Memory Cell (Graves 2014).
16
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:25==
The LSTM cell control of the recurrent hidden layer output ht via the input it, output ot
and forget ft gates (figure 3.7). The input gate it decides which input xt information can
be stored in the cell state, output gate ot regulates which information is relevant to be
output based on the cell state ct. The forget gate ft plays crucial role from overloading
the algorithm by throwing away information which is no longer relevant. This way, the
network records long term events as weights, while short term events through the gates.
The convolutions variation of the LSTM comes in a form of transforming the image into
a 3D tensor, then stacking all the inputs x1, ..., xt, cell outputs c1, ..., ct, hidden states
h1, ..., ht and gates it, ft, ot vertically next to each other as vectors on a spacial grid (Shi
et al. 2015). Instead of connecting each input­to­state and state­to­state, the convolution
operation is performed across the grid where state of the cell is decided by the inputs and
past states of the local neighbors. The equations for updating convLSTM cell are:
it = σ(wxi ∗xt + whi ∗ht−1 + wci ◦ct−1 + bi)
ft = σ(wxf ∗xt + whf ∗ht−1 + wcf ◦ct−1 + bf)
ct = ft ◦ct−1 + it ◦tanh(wxc ∗xt + whc ∗ht−1 + bc)
ot = σ(wxo ∗xt + who ∗ht−1 + wco ◦ct + bo)
ht = ot ◦tanh(ct)
(3.2)
During the forward pass, the input moves from pixel space to more abstract features
deeper in the layers where generative representations of the input features are made
(figure 3.8). When convLSTM cell is put in a hierarchical PredNet in a downward pass, the
input is up­sampled and the output moves from the feature space back to the pixel space.
Note that a sequence of frames is fed to the network at once to satisfy the need of temporal
component for convLSTM cell. The size of the input frame sequence corresponds directly
to the generated frames.
Figure 3.8: Encoder/decoder network representation.
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
17
==PAGE:26==
3.2
Inference controller
In this section, active inference controller is summarized as first introduced by Pezzato,
Ferrari, and Corbato 2020. The overall AIC controller system diagram is presented in
figure 3.9. The following subsections will overview the control law and express it in math­
ematical formalization.
Figure 3.9: System diagram of active inference controller.
3.2.1
Free Energy
The active inference controller (AIC) is based on free­energy principle. The theory of free­
energy principle in neuroscience postulates that the motor control actions (and cognitive
functions as a whole) in the brain could be described by energy minimization (Friston 2010;
Brown, Friston, and Bestmann 2011). The free energy principle is formulated according
to Bayesian inference, however has been redefined for control of 7­dof robot arm.
The general idea behind free energy theory is that given an internal model representation
of how sensory data could have been generated, the cause of that sensory data can be
inferred (Pezzato, Ferrari, and Corbato 2020). Rephrased for robotic arm analogy, having
the knowledge of current sensory state and desired sensory state, a motor control signal
can be estimated to satisfy said sensory input. Firstly, generative models of state dynam­
ics need to be defined in terms of generalized motions. Generalized motions explains
the state dynamics of a system by applying higher order derivative states of the system
itself. It can be applied for both sensory inputs and motions. Since the only available
sensory inputs from the robot motor encoders are position and velocity, the system can
be constrained to second order derivatives of general motions and expressed as:
{
µ′ = f(µ) + w
µ′′ = ∂f
∂µµ′ + w′
{
yq = g(µ) + z
y ˙q = ∂g
∂µµ′ + z′
(3.3)
The functions for generative sensory model g(µ) and world dynamics f(µ) has to be de­
fined. The generative sensory model g(µ) maps the relationship between the joint states
and sensed values. In our case, the joint values provides direct relationship between joint
positions and the sensed values, therefore g(µ) = µ and ∂g
∂µ = 1. The world dynamics
generative model function is simply formulated as f(µ) = µd−µ, since it can be explained
by the difference of desired µd and current µ joint positions, which nudges a controller to
evolve the current state of the robot towards the desired pose. The desired state µd is a
vector of motor positions for each of the robot arm’s joints meaning it can reach a desired
pose defined in a joint space configuration. Given these definitions, second order general
motion definitions can simplify to:
{ µ′ = µd −µ + w
µ′′ = −µ′ + w′
{ yq = µ + z
y ˙q = µ′ + z′
(3.4)
18
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:27==
Where w and z are Gaussian noise. The noise is assumed to be uncorrelated, therefore
variance for beliefs about sensory inputs and robot states are modelled separately for
each instance:
Σy(0) = σqIn, Σy(1) = σ ˙qIn,
Σµ(0) = σµIn, Σµ(1) = σµ′In
(3.5)
At this point, free­energy becomes squared sum of sensory prediction errors:
F = 1
2
(
yq −µ
)⊤Σ−1
y(0)
(
yq −µ
)
+ 1
2
(
y ˙q −µ′)⊤Σ−1
y(1)
(
y ˙q −µ′)
+ 1
2
(
µ′ + µ −µd
)⊤Σ−1
µ′(0)
(
µ′ + µ −µd
)
+ 1
2
(
µ′′ + µ′)⊤Σ−1
µ(1)
(
µ′′ + µ′)
(3.6)
3.2.2
State estimation
States of the robot manipulator can be computed by applying gradient decent minimization
on the free­energy value of each associated generalised motion:
˙˜µ = d
dt ˜µ −κµ
∂F
∂˜µ
(3.7)
By substituting F with equation 3.6, the above equation 3.7 can be rewritten:
˙µ = µ′ + κµΣ−1
y(0) (yq −µ) −κµΣ−1
µ(0)
(
µ′ + µ −µd
)
˙µ′ = µ′′ + κµΣ−1
y(1)
(
y ˙q −µ′)
−κµΣ−1
µ(0)
(
µ′ + µ −µd
)
−κµΣ−1
µ(1)
(
µ′′ + µ′)
˙µ′′ = −κµΣ−1
µ(1)
(
µ′′ + µ′)
(3.8)
The constant κµ is a tuning parameter for the gradient of state update. The calculated
value ˙µ represents the change of position to be applied in order to minimize the error
between current and desired position, while the derivatives ˙µ′ and ˙µ′′ hint at change in
motion of position. When added to the current position reading µ, the internal belief about
predicted position at next time­step is updated.
3.2.3
Joint controller
˙u = −κa
[
CqΣ−1
y(0)
(
yq −µ
)
+ C ˙qΣ−1
y(1)
(
y ˙q −µ′)]
(3.9)
The arm manipulator pose is controlled by applying torques ˙u to each of it’s joints. Cq and
C ˙q are identity matrices, representing the relation between sensory input yq, y ˙q and control
action u. As discussed earlier, the joint position and sensory input is directly related, and
position is dependent on applied torque. Therefore, by applying positive torque, a positive
change will also be observed by a position sensor. By setting the relation matrices to
the identity, only the sign of the relation is declared and the controller can be tuned with
constant κa.
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
19
==PAGE:28==
3.3
Integration
Figure 3.10: Integrated system diagram.
Figure 3.10 presents complete system diagram when PredNet and AIC are working to­
gether in order to complete a task. The integration module consists of several support
nodes: image processing, trigger, set target. Camera node is just responsible for acquir­
ing images from simulated camera at 30fps.
The generated frames provided by the PredNet are predicted future states of the scene.
The context information about the object needs to be extracted in order to recognize and
localize it. Template matching is introduced for this purpose (figure 3.11). First, a template
has been defined of the object to be recognized. In simple terms, the algorithm works by
sliding the defined template across the generated image and calculating the associated
cost. Image patch where object features match the pixel difference provides smallest cost,
therefore the centre of the object is found in pixel coordinates and then can be bounded.
The final function of the image processing node is to transform the object position from
the pixel to world coordinates using pinhole camera model and rigid transformations.
The trigger node actively monitors the predicted position of the object. When within the
bounds of user defined robot workspace, a pick up motion is initialized by sending a new
target command to the controller.
(a) Template
(b) Costmap
(c) Loaclized object
Figure 3.11: Object localization using template matching.
20
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:29==
4
Methodology
4.1
Software Framework
As mentioned previously, the project has been implemented exclusively in a simulated en­
vironment. For that, robot operating system (ROS) with Gazebo simulator integration has
been selected. Despite the name, ROS is not a stand­alone operating system ­ the imple­
mentations exist in Ubuntu environment. Instead, ROS acts as a meta­operating system
providing functionality for different processes to communicate with each other (O’Kane
2013). This allows for system distribution and integration, especially when system soft­
ware consists of many processes which potentially exists across multiple devices.
Figure 4.1 highlights overall ROS interface structure with active nodes and topics. All
of the other system components are also ROS interfaced using topics, messages and
services but does not necessarily appear on the graph if it is not continuously subscribed,
such as the conveyor service or topics used for debugging.
Figure 4.1: Automatically generated ROS interface graph depicting main system nodes
and topics.
The software is designed with the idea that low level processes of robot control and sens­
ing, which are simulated with Gazebo, could be easily interchanged with the real robot.
Figure 4.2 provides system diagram for the Panda Emika control via ROS control library.
Upon launch of the simulation, controller manager is loaded with a controller for each of
the 7­DOF robot joint. ROS interface provides communication protocol for sending as well
as receiving information from the controller manager, such as setting desired joint position
and receiving updated joint states. The AIC controller is implemented on integrated effort
controller with joint command interface for controlling all joints simultaneously with torque
commands. Joint limits are enforced and effort transmissions are converted to the actu­
ator efforts before the URDF model of the Panda Emika robot is loaded into parameter
server and passed to the Gazebo simulator. The information then flows backwards from
the simulator, where joint encoder ticks are converted to position readings and published
thorough the joint state interface.
The conveyor is also considered a robot in the simulator, however implementation does
not follow the ROS control framework. Instead, it is implemented directly in the simulator
via Gazebo plugin interface, similarly how simulated camera device is. It is possible to
control the conveyor speed by sending the power command via ROS service interface.
However, if distributed on the real system, a separate conveyor belt controller should be
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.2: ROS control interface
considered and implemented in the ROS control. Same follows for the robot hand/gripper
or any other actuator. Even though the Panda gripper is loaded in the model, gripper
controller is not implemented in the simulator.
4.2
Experimental setup
Figure 4.3: Simulated experimental environment.
22
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:31==
PredNet
AIC
Layers
4
σq
1
Frames predicted
5
σ ˙q
1
Features
1
σµ
5
Scale
4
σµ′
10
Learning rate
0.01
κµ
11.67
κa
700
Table 4.1: Defined system variables used for experimentation.
The simulated experimental environment defined in Gazebo simulator can be visualised
in figure 4.3. The world is loaded with Panda Emika robot arm, conveyor belt moving at
a fixed speed, a cube object of 0.1x0.1x0.1 meter dimesnions and a camera hanging 1m
above the conveyor belt and constantly capturing 320x240 images at 30fps.
The user defined system variables are summarized in the table 4.1. The used PredNet
architecture consists of 4 hierarchical layers. There are 5 frames processed and predicted
in each step of the algorithm. The network looks for a single feature for each channel and
max­pools with a kernel size of 4x4. For training purposes, the initial learning rate is set
as 0.01 using Adam optimization.
In regards to AIC, there are only 6 tunable parameters to consider. The sensory input
is already noisy at the source, therefore are set to 1 and is not modeled. The variance
associated with robot states are set to 5 and 10. Finally, perhaps most important controller
parameters for learning rate of gradient decent κµ = 11.67 and controller constant κa =
700 are set.
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:33==
5
Experimentation
5.1
Controller performance
Four trials has been initiated with the robot arm reaching target location with different
payloads: 0.1, 2, 4 and 6 kilograms. The payload weight is modelled in terms of assigning
different masses to the last link of the robot, which is the gripper. Controller parameters
are tuned for optimal joint response performance with payload weight of 0.1 kg and no
re­tuning is attempted between trials. The joint position response is recorded through
the simulation from start to end to evaluate controller performance when subjected to
unforeseen dynamics.
The robot arm is loaded into the simulator with pose of stretching vertically upwards (figure
5.1a). From there, 3 motions are performed by the AIC controller: approach rest position
(5.1b), reach target position (5.1c), return to rest position (5.1b). Immediately at the start
of the simulation, the arm is sent to take the rest pose. At around 4s mark, the arm reaches
for the target and at the 8 second mark, the robot retracts back to the rest position. Note
that even though all 7 joints of the Panda Emika robot is controlled with AIC, only 4 joints
are actually actuated for the sake of convenience. The joint angles at the respective poses
are summarized in the table.
From the results (figure 5.2) it can be seen that the robot succeeds at executing motions
under all of the different loads. Joints q1, q4 and q6 shows shows slightly decreased per­
formance in response time with loads above 2kg. Joint q2, which is also known as the
shoulder joint of the robot, is affected the most by the change in the arm dynamics with
showing both decreased response time and high oscillations. Controller tends to over­
shoot the target position when subjected to higher loads. This could be explained by the
fact that shoulder joint is subjected to the highest load and the controller overcompensates
the joint efforts.
Joint
Pose (rad)
Intial
Rest
Target
q1
0.0
0.0
0.65
q2
0.0
0.2
0.3
q3
0.0
0.0
0.0
q4
0.0
­1.0
­2.0
q5
0.0
0.0
0.0
q6
0.0
1.2
2.3
q7
0.0
0.0
0.0
(a) Initial
(b) Rest
(c) Target
Figure 5.1: Panda Emika poses during task execution
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.2: Joint response under different loads and tuning parameters kµ = 11.67 and
ka = 700. Joints q3 = 0, q5 = 0, q7 = 0 are not actively actuated and therefore omitted
from the plots.
26
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:35==
5.2
Visual prediction performance
5.2.1
Training
The unsupervised training of the PredNet is performed on runtime. The conveyor is set to
a constant speed on which object is spawned outside the frame of the camera. Once the
object has traveled the whole distance observed by the camera, object is re­spawned. It
is ensured that there is sufficient amount of frames passed to the network where object is
not present in the scene as well as where it does appear in linear motion. The simulation
has been conducted twice with 2 and 4 hierarchical layers in order to compare training
performance.
Figure 5.3: Training loss: 4­layer vs 2­layer hierarchical network configurations.
In the figure 5.3, training loss is ploted from a 4­layer and 2­layer networks. Both of
the networks show good performance ­ it takes less than 100 iterations of unsupervised
learning for the network to deconstruct the scene and generate accurate representations.
It can be observed that 4­layer network is faster to converge, reaching errors close to zero
in about 30iterations. It takes 80 iterations for the 2­layer network to catch up. Training
for longer does not yield better results.
The generative predictions can be ploted and evaluated visually in order to verify expected
PredNet operation (figure 5.4). From the predicted pictures, it is clear to see that the scene
and object has been recreated to the extent where locating and bounding the object in the
predicted frames is possible. The object shows trend of linear motion as expected. Some
motion blur occurs around the edges of the moving object, but overall prediction image is
deemed sufficient.
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.4: Predicted frames. On the bottom, 5 latest frames supplied to the network
are shown, from left being the furthest in time. On the top, generated synthetic images
predicting 5 frames in the future are shown, from left being closest to present time.
5.2.2
Prediction accuracy
After training the PredNet module, the accuracy of tracking object position under varying
payload speeds is evaluated. The experiment starts by spawning an object outside of
the camera frame on the conveyor belt which is running at a constant speed. When in
range of the camera, it takes 5 frame iterations in order to produce reliable readings and
are disregarded as noise. Similarly, last 5 iterations are also disregarded as predictions
produce noisy values once reaching outside edge of the camera frame.
Through the simulation, each iterations i produces currently observed object position yi
and object position predictions ˆyi,n for 5 frame iterations in the future (n = 1, 2, .., 5). The
error is calculated for each each prediction:
MSEn = 1
N
N
∑
i=6
(yi −ˆyi−n,n)2
(5.1)
During the initial test, the network has been trained under constant baseline speed of
100% (figure 5.5). When subjected to the same speed during experimentation, the re­
sults show below 0.015m MSE accuracy for predicting up to 5 frames in the future. The
accuracy is highest for the first frame prediction, then error increases in a linear trend.
When subjected to higher speeds, the error increases and a similar trend is observed. At
125% speed compared to baseline, the maximum MSE at the furthest frame prediction
increases up to 0.035m and up to 0.097m at even higher speed of 150%. Notably, the
first frame prediction remains relatively high for all measured conditions.
Additionally, the initial model presented previously is further trained with increased con­
veyor speed of 125% in comparison to the baseline speed used in prior training. This is an
attempt to test model rigidity when subjected to adaptation of new information. After 15000
iterations of additional training, the test is repeated (figure 5.6). The results show greatly
improved performance for all conditions. The already trained baseline speed shows the
most of improvement, increasing the accuracy of the 5th frame prediction by 104%. When
considering the higher conveyor speeds, both scenarios receive accuracy improvement
of about 25%. This suggests that it is a beneficial strategy to train the model under al­
ternative conditions in order to improve original target accuracy. If the desired result is
to adjust the system to a new permanent state, it might be a faster strategy to re­train at
new target conveyor speed rather than teach a new behaviour over the old one.
28
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.5: Mean squared error for object location estimation in frame predictions. Model
initially trained at constant 100% speed.
Figure 5.6: Mean squared error for object location estimation in frame predictions. Model
additionally trained at constant 125% speed.
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:39==
6
Discussion
Throughout this thesis, term ’adaptive’ have been mentioned numerous times and is high­
lighted in the problem formulation. However, question ”what is an adaptive robot percep­
tion and control?” is not as straightforward to answer, and especially so to measure. When
exploring neuroscientific literature and models, which aim to mimic the behaviour of the
biological systems, inevitably it becomes compelling to compare adaptive robotic systems
to the biological counterparts. Naturally, creating humanoid robots with human­like be­
havioural capability remains the inspiration and goal for many researchers, and it is the
belief of the author that significant advances will be made in this are in the near future.
For the purpose of this thesis however, it is of the essence to de­generalize this adaptivity
term and specify it more closely to fit the context and the goals of this research. One
could argue that it should be clarified specifically enough from the beginning in the prob­
lem formulation, and one would be technically right. I choose to leave the broader term of
adaptivity at the beginning of this project as to also indicate my own personal approach
to the problem: think big picture, then specify to the needs. As the project progressed, it
became more clear what degree of adaptivity could be expected from the chosen meth­
ods.
When it comes to industrial robot control, it becomes increasingly difficult to manage RPA
implementation with the variety of tasks and hardware present on the shop floor. For
example, state of the art model reference adaptive controllers require accurate modeling
of the robot dynamics (Pezzato, Ferrari, and Corbato 2020), which makes it difficult to
implement across other devices. Tuning becomes costly and time consuming. The clear
advantage AIC over traditional controllers is the fact that dynamics of the system does
not need to be modelled at all, therefore it makes it easy to distribute from simulation to
real robot, as well as from one robot to the other regardless of the manipulator DoFs.
The tuning is done by adjusting only 4 parameters. Until this point, the parameters has
been tuned manually by trial and error. For the future, it would be also of interest to in­
vestigate hyperparameter tuning methods for self­optimization. Implementation of such
method could further ease the distribution of AIC controller. The benefits of the afore­
mentioned controller does not stop at implementation, but also directly translate to the
task dynamics. That is, when fitting the manipulator with different tools and payloads, the
re­tuning is performed using the same parameters. Therefore AIC presents itself as a
suitable controller choice for factory floor with wide hardware distribution and tasks where
payloads are changed frequently.
In this report I have presented the controller performance when dealing with unmodeled
dynamics, and verified the expected controller operation for the industrial task defined in
the simulator. However, the validation to confirm the discussed benefits of the controller is
lacking. The study could benefit from the real world application of the controller, potentially
on different manipulators as well as simulation to real world compatibility. Furthermore,
the performance of the AIC controller has been evaluated sufficient for the defined task
in this thesis, but comparison to other state of the art controllers has not been attempted.
Performance comparison could shed further light on weather the ease of adaptivity of the
controller comes at the expense of the controller performance.
In the case of visual perception, 2 types of performance needs to be addressed: compu­
tational performance and predictive performance. The predictive performance has been
evaluated and verified in the experiments. Result show good accuracy at predicting linear
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
31
==PAGE:40==
motion and rapid training ability. The accuracy falls in the longer term future state predic­
tions when subjected to conveyor speeds other than that of the training set, but several
strategies could be employed to deal with that. First is continuous training to adapt new
patterns. At the moment network is coded to either train or predict, but it could be possible
to continuously adjust network weights while the system is deployed and operational. The
second approach could be more control focused ­ even if the prediction far in the future is
not perfectly accurate, initial motion to approximate target location could still be made and
updated with more accurate predictions when approaching the final destination. Both of
these approaches does not rely on predefined set of instructions, specific task, scene, or
dynamic conditions. In fact, the full capability of the visual perception implemented in this
project is so much more than just linear motion predictor. One reading this paper could
question weather a multi­layer deep convolutional recurrent neural network is justified to
achieve a task which is essentially estimating object velocity when traditional computer
vision methods with Kalman filtering are fully capable. Strictly as linear motion estimator,
it would not be wise to recommend such an over­engineered solution as PredNet. What
visual perception presented here offers is framework adaptable to many complex scenar­
ios and dynamic conditions for predictive image generation which is then supplemented
with specific computer vision methods for further analysis.
Computational costs are perhaps the biggest factor when considering PredNet implemen­
tation in real­time systems. Running the system locally on my workstation, the algorithm
step iteration computes for 2 seconds under the system parameters described in the
experimental setup. It is highly recommended for further development to either compute
locally on CUDA capable workstation or explore options to compute on the cloud. The
most influential parameter for PredNet performance is the resolution of the image, fol­
lowed by the number of frames to be predicted, number of hierarchical layers, scale for
max­pooling and up­sampling. In order to increase performance, attempts were made
with both decreased image resolution from 320x240 to 160x120 and decrease layers
from four to only two. This effectively halved the time of processing. However the images
resolution were no longer sufficient for object detection and accurate localization, as the
object itself became only few pixels in size. Reducing the amount of hierarchical layers
have further reduced the computation time by about 25%, but at the expense of iterations
needed during training in order to reach comparable loss values as error converges. This
also confirms that PredNet is working as expected and draws a clear trend between the
number of hierarchical layers in PredNet and ability to learn associated context features
of the scene.
Some clarification should also be made in the training process. The loss is calculated by
the difference of input and estimated features at the lowest level. That is, the loss does
not directly indicate the networks ability to recreate the scene, but the features present
in the scene. This is an important distinction to make, as from the training loss plots it is
clear that main features are learned in a few dozen iterations. That being said, in terms of
the predicted image quality it takes another several thousand iterations of training before
the scene is recreated photo­realistically. The more abstract feature space hidden in the
higher and deeper levels of hierarchical PredNet network seem to have little effect on
more general features, but big implications on image recreation as a whole.
Lastly, the integration of the perception and control together is not highly developed. For
now, the communication is one way, the visual predictor passing down predicted posi­
tion to the controller so movement can be initiated. The current AIC implementation only
supports joint space control which means the motion target is predefined. Even though
though the integration is technically functioning, in order to consistently initiate the move­
32
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:41==
ment on time the predictions should be generated faster than it is possible on the machine
used for testing. This means that it was not possible to quantitatively validate the over­
all system operation when simulating the pick up task. Provided the test platform with
sufficient computing power validating task operation should not be of an issue.
Introducing adaptive proprioception and exteroception, as presented in this paper, is one
part of the big picture. Further work could be done to improve the system. Other related
neuroscientific research areas could be explored for perception­action integration, such
as models of cerebellar cortex for learning of motor function or spiking neural networks
for information coordination between the different nodes of the system.
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:43==
7
Conclusion
This thesis concludes a comprehensive study of predictive coding and active inference,
exploring advances in one of the most promising theories in the fast evolving field of
neuro­robotics (Clark 2013). The inspiration from this project stems from latest research,
with many of the reviewed papers with core concepts utilized in this project still in the pre­
print form and not throughout applied or documented. The methods has been applied in
a practical context for both robot visual perception and control. Suggested architecture
for the presented system provide novel approach for implementing robot manipulators for
task oriented application in dynamic contexts where system adaptability is required.
The conducted development work focuses on two main areas: active inference controller
and predictive deep neural network. The controller does not require modelling of the
manipulator dynamics, which provides clear advantage over traditional modelling based
methods. The controller performance is acceptable for goal­oriented task defined for ex­
perimentation and shows high degree of adaptability to different payloads. Furthermore,
the controller requires very few parameters for tuning suggesting its relevance for adapt­
ing to wide range of manipulators and tasks.
The visual perception part of the study constituted the bigger part of development efforts
due to the complexity of hierarchical deep network model and lengthy training process.
The results suggest multi­layer deep predictive network is very capable at learning to
deconstruct scene features in a stream of images and provide accurate representation of
the scene in future states. This however comes at the cost of high computational demands
and is not feasible on low performance systems.
The results suggest the system is both adaptable to uncertain internal and external dy­
namics associated with an industrial task defined in the experimentation. The proposed
system architecture is also not task dependant, and the respective control and visual per­
ception methods could be adapted to different manipulators and tasks. However, the
study lacks more evidence to validate robust operation and whether the approach per­
forms better than other adaptive solutions found in the industry today.
For future work, it is suggested to verify the design transferability from the simulation to
real world. Thus far, the perception part, both related to interoception and exteroception,
has been covered, but a lot more is left to be desired when considering processing the
received information and coordinating perception­action loops modelled by bio­inspired
methods. The integration and coordination of visual and control nodes could be improved,
potentially by applying other models from neuroscience literature, such as cerebellum
forward models (Wolpert, Miall, and Kawato 1998) or spiking neural networks (Hong et al.
2020), to name a few.
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
Syed, Rehan et al. (2020). “Robotic Process Automation: Contemporary themes and chal­
lenges”. In: Computers in Industry 115. ISSN: 0166­3615. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.compind.2019.103162.
Kopacek, P. (2019). “Trends in Production Automation”. In: IFAC­PapersOnLine 52.25.
19th IFAC Conference on Technology, Culture and International Stability TECIS 2019,
pp. 509–512. ISSN: 2405­8963. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2019.12.595.
Spratling, Michael (Jan. 2016). “A review of predictive coding algorithms”. In: Brain and
Cognition 112. DOI: 10.1016/j.bandc.2015.11.003.
Warrant, Eric J. and Sönke Johnsen (2013). “Vision and the light environment”. In: Current
Biology 23.22, R990–R994. ISSN: 0960­9822. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2013.
10.019.
Delgado­Bonal, Alfonso and Javier Martín­Torres (2016). “Human vision is determined
based on information theory”. In: Scientific Reports 6.1. DOI: 10.1038/srep36038.
Thomson, G. and F. Macpherson (July 2017). Adelson’s checker­shadow illusion. URL:
https://www.illusionsindex.org/ir/checkershadow.
Pezzato, C., R. Ferrari, and C. H. Corbato (2020). “A Novel Adaptive Controller for Robot
Manipulators Based on Active Inference”. In: IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters
5.2, pp. 2973–2980. DOI: 10.1109/LRA.2020.2974451.
Ciria, Alejandra et al. (Jan. 2021). Predictive Processing in Cognitive Robotics: a Review.
Park, Jun­Cheol et al. (2012). “Predictive Coding Strategies for Developmental Neuro­
robotics”. In: Frontiers in Psychology 3, p. 134. ISSN: 1664­1078. DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2012.00134.
Park, J., D. Kim, and Y. Nagai (2018). “Learning for Goal­Directed Actions Using RNNPB:
Developmental Change of “What to Imitate””. In: IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and
Developmental Systems 10.3, pp. 545–556. DOI: 10.1109/TCDS.2017.2679765.
Zhong, Junpei et al. (2018). AFA­PredNet: The action modulation within predictive coding.
arXiv: 1804.03826 [cs.RO].
Srinivasan, Mandyam Veerambudi et al. (1982). “Predictive coding: a fresh view of inhibi­
tion in the retina”. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B. Biological
Sciences 216.1205, pp. 427–459. DOI: 10.1098/rspb.1982.0085.
Rao, Rajesh P. and Dana H. Ballard (1999). “Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a
functional interpretation of some extra­classical receptive­field effects”. In: Nature Neu­
roscience 2.1, pp. 79–87. DOI: 10.1038/4580.
Pio­Lopez, Léo et al. (Sept. 2016). “Active inference and robot control: A case study”. In:
Journal of the Royal Society, Interface 13. DOI: 10.1098/rsif.2016.0616.
Friston, Karl (Feb. 2010). “The free­energy principle: a unified brain theory?” In: Nature
reviews. Neuroscience 11, pp. 127–138. DOI: 10.1038/nrn2787.
Makhoul, J. (1975). “Linear prediction: A tutorial review”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 63.4,
pp. 561–580. DOI: 10.1109/PROC.1975.9792.
Brown, Harriet, Karl Friston, and Sven Bestmann (2011). “Active Inference, Attention, and
Motor Preparation”. In: Frontiers in Psychology 2, p. 218. ISSN: 1664­1078. DOI: 10.
3389/fpsyg.2011.00218.
Lotter, William, Gabriel Kreiman, and David Cox (2017). “Deep Predictive Coding Net­
works for Video Prediction and Unsupervised Learning”. In: arXiv: 1605.08104 [cs.LG].
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
37
==PAGE:46==
Friston, Karl, Jeremie Mattout, and James Kilner (2011). “Action understanding and active
inference”. In: Biological Cybernetics 104, pp. 137–160. DOI: 10.1007/s00422-011-0424-
z.
Gładziejewski, Paweł (2016). “Predictive coding and representationalism”. In: Synthese
193.2, pp. 559–582.
Wiese, Wanja and Thomas Metzinger (2017). “Vanilla PP for Philosophers: A Primer on
Predictive Processing”. In: Philosophy and Predictive Processing. Ed. by Thomas Met­
zinger and Wanja Wiese.
Clark, Andy (2013). “Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of
cognitive science”. In: Behavioral and Brain Sciences 36.3, pp. 181–204. DOI: 10.1017/
S0140525X12000477.
Albawi, Saad, Tareq Abed Mohammed, and Saad Al­Zawi (2017). “Understanding of a
convolutional neural network”. In: 2017 International Conference on Engineering and
Technology (ICET), pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/ICEngTechnol.2017.8308186.
Kim, Jiwon, Jung Kwon Lee, and Kyoung Mu Lee (June 2016). “Accurate Image Super­
Resolution Using Very Deep Convolutional Networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Con­
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Nichani, Eshaan, Adityanarayanan Radhakrishnan, and Caroline Uhler (2021). Increasing
Depth Leads to U­Shaped Test Risk in Over­parameterized Convolutional Networks.
arXiv: 2010.09610 [cs.LG].
O’Shea, Keiron and Ryan Nash (2015). An Introduction to Convolutional Neural Networks.
arXiv: 1511.08458 [cs.NE].
Yu, Yong et al. (July 2019). “A Review of Recurrent Neural Networks: LSTM Cells and Net­
work Architectures”. In: Neural Computation 31.7, pp. 1235–1270. ISSN: 0899­7667.
DOI: 10.1162/neco_a_01199.
Shi, Xingjian et al. (June 2015). “Convolutional LSTM Network: A Machine Learning Ap­
proach for Precipitation Nowcasting”. In:
Graves, Alex (2014). Generating Sequences With Recurrent Neural Networks. arXiv:
1308.0850 [cs.NE].
O’Kane, Jason M. (Oct. 2013). A Gentle Introduction to ROS. Independently published.
ISBN: 978­1492143239.
Wolpert, Daniel M, R.Chris Miall, and Mitsuo Kawato (1998). “Internal models in the cere­
bellum”. In: Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2.9, pp. 338–347. ISSN: 1364­6613. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(98)01221-2.
Hong, Chaofei et al. (2020). “Training Spiking Neural Networks for Cognitive Tasks: A
Versatile Framework Compatible With Various Temporal Codes”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 31.4, pp. 1285–1296. DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.
2019.2919662.
38
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
==PAGE:47==
Active inference with predictive coding for adaptive robot perception and control
39
==PAGE:48==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 326
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.elektro.dtu.dk
