==PAGE:1==
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish
population characteristics and fish reproduc­
tion patterns in Lake Ormstrup before and af­
ter lake restoration by fish removal
Master’s Thesis
Pauline Elisabeth Buttard
Supervisor: Christian Skov
DTU Aqua
Section for Freshwater Fisheries and Ecology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish re­
production patterns in Lake Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish re­
moval
Master’s Thesis
September, 2021
By
Pauline Elisabeth Buttard
Supervised by Christian Skov, DTU Aqua Silkeborg
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Pauline Buttard, 2021
Published by:
DTU, Section for Freshwater Fisheries and Ecology, Vejlsøvej 39, 8600
Silkeborg Denmark
www.aqua.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over the course of six months at the Section for Freshwater
Fisheries and Ecology, DTU Aqua, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Aquatic Science and
Technology.
Pauline Elisabeth Buttard ­ s192326
22.09.2021
ii
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Lakes exist in two stable states, clear and turbid. In the past century, many lakes have
become eutrophic because of anthropogenic activities causing an excess amount of nutri­
ents to come in the system. Eutrophication had been identified as one of the major water
quality problems in the EU.
Several methods exist to restore a lake back to a clear status. One of most used restora­
tion methods in Europeis is biomanipulation by fish removal, which consists in removing as
much of the planktivorous and benthivorous­foraging fish biomass as possible. However,
the longevity of the positive effects of these fish removals are often short. Compensatory
mechanisms leading to rapid recovery of the biomass of planktivorous fish such as roach
following a biomanipulation are often used as an explanation as to why the lakes often
rapidly return to a turbid state. Still the exact mechanisms behind this, such as increased
survival and growth of 0+ planktivorous, have not often been well described.
The restoration by fish removal in Lake Ormstrup, a shallow Danish lake, started in 2020
and is set to be completed in 2022. The restoration is coupled to a close monitoring
program of multiple aspects of the lake. Here, I investigated the effects of the first fish
removals (Autumn 2020 and Spring 2021) on the fertility and recruitment patterns of the
planktivorous fish population (roach), of growth and of body condition of both planktivorous
and piscivorous fish, and analyzed compensatory mechanisms following biomanipulation.
I found that the biomanipulation caused an increase in roach fertility, or the density of
roach fry. Moreover, the larger roach were in better condition. As larger fish contribute
more to the fecundity of the population than small fish, they might thus have a higher
fecundity next spring (2022) which could introduce additional compensatory mechanisms
and ultimately undermine the biomanipulation efforts. The results also suggest that one
of the main compensatory mechanisms in Lake Ormstrup was increased roach fry growth
and survival, likely thanks to a higher food availability when the lake was clear. This
probably contributed to reducing the zooplankton biomass and increasing the turbidity of
the water during the clear water phase during summer 2021.
The results presented in this study thus further our understanding of the response of fish
communities to biomanipulation when restoring shallow eutrophic lakes, hopefully helping
improve future management of restoration projects.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Pauline Elisabeth Buttard, MSc Aquatic Science and Technology, DTU
First of all, I want to thank Christian Skov (DTU Aqua) for the opportunity to work on such
an exciting project and for his guidance all along. I am very thankful to have been able to
contribute on a topic I’ve been passionate about since I started at DTU.
I would also like to thank all the people from DTU Aqua Silkeborg with whom I was lucky
enough to work, especially Michael, Hans­Jørn, Martin and Jonas for teaching me all
about fieldwork and answering all my questions on the boat. Special thanks also goes to
Casper Gundelund Jørgensen for his invaluable help with the statistical analysis.
As this thesis marks the end of 6 years of study, I owe a big thank you to my whole family
for their continued support. Je remercie particulièrement mes parents et ma soeur de
votre soutien durant toutes ces années, à travers la prépa puis Centrale, et pour n’avoir
pas bronché quand j’ai dit que je partais étudier les poissons au Danemark.
iv Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Lake ecosystems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Lake eutrophication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Biomanipulation by fish removal as a tool to restore eutrophic lakes
. . . .
6
1.5
Estimating fish fertility and recruitment in lentic ecosystems . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Methods
13
2.1
Study site: Lake Ormstrup, Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2
Fish sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3
GSI and gonad processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.4
Other data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.5
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Results
21
3.1
Comparison of roach reproduction before and after the 2 first fish removals
21
3.2
Roach fry density and growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.3
Density, size distribution and condition of the fish in the lake before versus
after the removals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Discussion
35
4.1
The lake and its fish community before and after biomanipulation . . . . . . 35
4.2
Compensatory mechanisms following biomanipulation and consequences . 39
4.3
Methods and potential bias
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5
Conclusion
45
Bibliography
46
A Sampling of fish for gonads
53
A.1 Distribution of the sampled size in 2020 and 2021
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
A.2 Protocol for sampling, fish processing and gonads processing . . . . . . . . 53
B Protocol ­ Point abundance sampling by electrofishing (PASE)
57
C Correction for frozen roach
60
D Hoopnet fry sampling protocol
61
E
Length­Length regression: fork length based on total length
64
F
Maturity size of roach in 2020 and 2021
65
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Thesis objectives
In order to reverse the condition of eutrophicated lakes, various lake restoration measures
are available, including fish removals where biomass of planktivorous fish are significantly
reduced, e.g. by seining, and the lake is transformed to a clear water state. However, the
longevity of the positive effects of these fish removals are often short and we lack knowl­
edge on the mechanisms behind this. One theory is that the planktivorous fish populations
seems to recover fast after being reduced as a result of compensatory mechanisms, such
as increased fertility and recruitment. This project aims at exploring fertility and recruit­
ment patterns in a population of planktivorous roach before and after a fish removal in
Danish Lake Ormstrup. Lake Ormstrup is highly eutrophicated and in September 2020
an attempt to restore the lake into a clear water state was made, i.e. intense fish removals
were conducted. During the summer 2020 (before the fish removals), and again in sum­
mer 2021, multiple aspects of the ecosystem and the fish populations were monitored
in the field, allowing for a thorough before vs. after comparisons. This goal of this the­
sis is to investigate changes in population characteristics of planktivorous fish following a
biomanipulation and to analyze how the fish removal affected the fish populations in the
lake. Focus was on evaluating changes in species composition and their relative density,
growth and roach fecundity and recruitment. This will be the basis for a discussion evalu­
ating how the fish removal affected the fish population characteristics, how compensatory
mechanisms in Lake Ormstrup may affect the longevity of the fish removal measure and
give suggestions to how the longevity of the measure may be increased.
1.2
Lake ecosystems
Only 2.5% of the world’s volume of surface water is fresh. Not all of it is easily avail­
able as lakes, rivers, and wetlands make up around 0.6% of it, with the rest consisting of
groundwater and ice caps/glaciers. [73]. In spite of that, it is estimated that freshwater
habitats are necessary to the survival of over 140,000 described species. However, al­
most one­third of freshwater biodiversity faces extinction (IUCN) and it is estimated that
the rate of extinction of freshwater species is higher than that of marine and terrestrial
species. Climate change, habitat degradation and loss, pollution, over­harvesting and
invasive species are the main threats to these ecosystems. One of the main factor of
habitat degradation is anthropogenic. Lakes are particularly threatened by anthropogenic
causes of alteration. One of the consequences of anthropogenic activities is eutrophica­
tion, which happens when an excess amount of a previously limiting nutrient is put into a
surface water body.
Different areas in the lakes are defined based on physical location, thermal stratification,
and light availability criteria. In water, the intensity of light decreases exponentially with
depth, although some of the wavelengths (blue light) penetrate deeper than others (in­
frareds). The euphotic zone is defined as the depth under which the light intensity is less
than 1% of that of the surface. This coincides with the depth under which the respiration
of the primary producers consumes more oxygen than it produces, due to the limited light
availability. The zone above is called the photic zone, separated by the compensation
depth.
In the spring and the summer, the upper water layer absorbs most of the heat content
of light, causing the water temperature of the upper layer to rise. The density difference
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
1
==PAGE:10==
between the upper part and the bottom part of the lake becomes sufficient to resist mix­
ing, even when submitted to windy weather. A thermocline thus appears, characterized
by a steep temperature gradient. The thermocline is the separation between the warmer
epilimnion and the colder, denser hypolimnion. Whether or not the stratification occurs is
influenced by the depth, turbidity, surface area of the lake and by the climate conditions.
Lakes that are 2 ­ 11m deep may be either predominantly mixed, or stratified for a vari­
ous extent of the year, sometimes alternating between the phases (polymictic lakes) [44].
More shallow lakes are usually mixed and deeper lakes, stratified. In autumn, the decreas­
ing solar angle combined with the high heat evaporation results in a net heat loss in the
epilimnion, until it reaches the point where the density difference between the two layers
is not high enough to resist the mixing by the wind. This results in the autumn turnover,
at least in the areas of the Northern hemisphere, which also are the most studied type of
lake ecosystems.
1.3
Lake eutrophication
1.3.1
Mechanisms and causes of eutrophication
Eutrophication happens when an excess amount of a previously limiting nutrient is put
into a surface water body. Carpenter (2005) defines it as ”the overenrichment of aquatic
ecosystems with nutrients leading to algal blooms and anoxic events” [15]. Eutrophication
does happen naturally: the basin is gradually filled by sediment inputs, allowing macro­
phytes and eventually terrestrial vegetation to dominate. However, while human­induced
eutrophication happens on a short time scale (a few years), this process takes place on
a geological time scale. Anthropogenic eutrophication is usually caused by agricultural
runoffs from fertilized crops and/or unproperly treated urban sewage. The realization that
the phosphate in the detergents was a significant contributor to the eutrophication lead
to its ban in many areas, including the EU, with the goal of improving the state of wa­
ter bodies in order to comply with the WFD. Before that, regulations varied considerably
between countries, and the EU­wide law only came into effect recently (2014 for laundry
detergents, 2017 for dishwasher detergents). The regulation also limits the total phospho­
rus content, but not to a null value, meaning that the phosphorus input was not completely
cut.
Lake eutrophication gained increased focus during the XXth century, as lakes became
increasingly turbid in connection with urbanization and intensive agricultural practices.
Historically, it was once believed that lakes were carbon­limited. However, whole­lake
experiments showed that phosphorus (P) was the limiting factor [72]. The bottle experi­
ments that had been presented as proof for the carbon limitation were inaccurate because
they failed to reproduce the real­life lake turbulence, alkalinity and interactions with the
atmosphere. The phosphorus limitation was proved by an experiment for which whole
lakes section were fertilized using different nitrogen­to­phosphorus weight ratio [72]. They
found a that the mean annual total phosphorus was positively correlated to the amount of
chlorophyll­α, and thus phytoplankton growth, in both treated and untreated lakes. More­
over, the dominant algal community varied depending on this ratio. When the N:P ratio
was big enough, phytoplankton were dominated by algae species that are unable to fix
the nitrogen from the air. For the lakes where the ratio was lower, nitrogen­fixing blue
algae species dominated the lake. When fertilizer containing only phosphorus was added
to the lake, nitrogen fixers were found as periphyton. The phosphorus limitation found in
lakes can be explained by the existence of compensation strategies for Carbon and Nitro­
gen that correct the deficiencies in these nutriments, whereas phosphorus isn’t found as
a gas in the atmosphere. Common C:N:P ratio in lakes are 174:31:1. [72]. The former
idea according to which lakes may also be C or N limited might also have arisen from the
2
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:11==
fact that, when a lake receives a large input of P at once, it will look like it is C or N limited
as the chlorophyll levels won’t strictly follow those of P. However, long­term biological
mechanisms end up correcting the initial deficiency.
The eutrophic state of the lake happens as the result of a chain reaction that involves all the
trophic levels. The input of nutrients allows algae to grow rapidly and reach a high density.
Zooplankton biomass follows closely, allowing an increase in biomass of planktivorous fish
(e.g. roach). On the other hand, the high algal density makes the lake turbid. Despite the
amount of nutrients available, the submerged vegetation dies because the amount of light
that penetrates the water is not sufficient anymore. This causes a loss of hiding ground
for juvenile piscivorous fish (pike, perch). Instead of being able to thrive on increased
prey density, they become more vulnerable to predation ­ including cannibalism ­ and
their population decreases. Hence, the top­down control on planktivorous fish cannot be
exerted anymore, allowing them to proliferate. As a consequence, the grazing pressure
on zooplankton remains high, and the abundance and the size of zooplankton decreases,
then does the grazing on phytoplankton follows. The nutrient input to the lake is thus what
causes it to switch from a top­down controlled, clear state with submerged macrophytes, to
a turbid state dominated by algae and piscivorous fish. The state of the lake is a stochastic
process in regards to the nutrients concentration, i.e. there exist a nutrient concentration
range for which the lake may either be turbid or clear depending on its previous state [71].
The P concentration for which both states are possible is of 50 −130gP/L [38].
Most shallow lakes are fully mixed and do not show summer stratification. As a conse­
quence, the primary producers are also able to live at the bottom and are thus able to use
the nutrients released by the sediments into the photic zone. Moreover, the rate between
the surface of the bottom and the volume of the lake is higher than in deep lakes, meaning
that for the same release rate from the sediments, the concentration of nutrients in the
water will be higher, making them particularly vulnerable to eutrophication. In Denmark,
only 10% of the lakes have a mean depth > 5m. [80]. Besides, eutrophication induces
oxygen depletion. The night respiration of phytoplankton and the decomposition of both
algae and plants by bacteria when they die and sink to the bottom consume the dissolved
oxygen. As many lakes are stratified during summer, the lack of mixing contributes to
anoxic zones, also known as ”dead zones”. By increasing the turbidity, eutrophication of
a lake also strengthens this mechanism by making the lake switch from a polymictic to a
stratified state. [44]. Such zones are also found in coastal eutrophic areas and are one
of the most dramatic consequences of eutrophication.
Eutrophication in a lake is mostly undesirable for other reasons as well. The green, tur­
bid aspect of the water makes it lose aesthetic value. Health concerns often arise due
to the bloom of toxic cyanobacteria that thrive under high phosphorus conditions, which
also threatens the drinking water supply. [49] On top of that, it makes industrial and agri­
cultural uses impossible. Hence, eutrophication has a direct economic cost. The scale
of the consequences varies according to the area and the size of the lake. In China, the
eutrophication of the Lake Tai in 1998 lead to an estimated U.S. $6.5 billion loss in the
catchment area, as a result of the combined touristic, fisheries, and hindered investment
and economic development. [49]. In some part of the world, eutrophication not only leads
to ecosystem and water quality degradation, but also has large­scale adverse effects on
water resources, living conditions and socioeconomic development. In many cases, eu­
trophication also causes a loss of fish, macrophytes and plankton biodiversity in the lakes
[41][32][95] potentially leading to a loss of ecosystems functions eventually.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.1: Schematic representation of the piscivorous fish, planktivorous fish, zooplank­
ton and phyplankton relative communities in eutrophic and clear lakes
1.3.2
Restoration of eutrophic lakes
Managing nutrient loading
Cutting or curbing down the source of the excess nutrient input is a prerequisite to a suc­
cessful restoration project. An external load coming from a point source ­ urban sewage
for instance ­ is easier to manage than flux of phosphorus coming from agricultural runoff.
In the latter case, extra measures are often necessary to reverse the state of overfertilized
soils. In some cases, cutting the nutrient input ­ for example by sewage treatment or redi­
rection ­ is enough to push the system back into the clear state. However, in many cases,
further measures are necessary. One of the processes that prevents recovery even after
the source is cut is the internal loading of the lake. This loading is the result of a downward
flux of dead organisms and detritus sinking into the bottom, which accumulates nutrients
in the sediments and create a sediment pool [81]. The issue with internal loading is that
only a fraction of the phosphorus is permanently buried in the sediments, and that part
of the phosphorus in the sediment is stored in a mobile form that is susceptible to be re­
leased back in the water[81]. Recycling of nutrients from the sediments may be cause by
a mechanical action, for instance the foraging of benthivorous fish or mixing by the wind.
Anoxic conditions also favor the recycling of phosphorus from the sediments to the water
column. As eutrophication promotes anoxic conditions, the recycling of phosphorus from
the sediments contributes to stabilize the lake [15].
Active reduction of the internal loading
A straightforward method to reduce the internal loading of a lake is to perform sediment
dredging, namely removing the nutrient­rich sediments [65]. Dredging reduces the amount
of phosphorus in the water column but also increases the depth of the lake, reducing the
risk of resuspension [1]. Dredging can be done mechanically or using pneumatic methods.
A potential downside of dredging is the resuspension of sediments during the process.
This method also has a high cost.
Another possibility is to create a physical barrier between the sediments and the water
4
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:13==
using inert materials (sand, gravel), which reduces the influx of nutrients in the water.
[86].
The bioavailability of dissolved phosphorus in the lake can also be reduced by making
inactive, by fixating it with specific materials. This process, called adsorption, typically
consists in spraying the material evenly on the lake surface. The most frequently used
and efficient materials are aluminium sulphate (”alum”) and lanthanum­based products
(e.g. ”PhoslockTM”) [90]. The reaction of phosphorus with alum forms a stable form of
phosphorus that cannot be used by phytoplankton. Phosphorus may also be bound by
adding iron, but only in lakes where anoxic conditions are not encountered at the bottom
as iron­bound phosphorous may then be released. Likewise, alum form toxic ions when
the pH is < 6.5 and should be avoided if the water is too acid. [36]. Such treatments are
expensive and do not have an infinite longevity, depending on the conditions of the lake
(mixing, presence of benthivorous fish, etc) [1].
Hypolimnetic aeration, i.e. oxidation of the bottom water, is suitable for stratified lakes with
a depth > 15m. [13]. The goal is to prevent anoxic conditions at the bottom by maintaining
a concentration of dissolved oxygen at the bottom, avoiding the release of phosphorus
from the sediments into the water. Aeration is not a punctual fix and should be used on
an extended period of time.
Biomanipulation
Biomanipulation can be defined as ”the re­structuring of the biological community to achieve
a favourable response, usually reduction in algal biomass, attainment of clear water and
promotion of a diverse biological community.” [64]. Biomanipulation is one of the most
used restoration methods across the world.
Usually, biomanipulation targets the fish communities. Removal of planktivorous fish, nor­
mally in combination of removal of the benthivorous fish, has been applied on many shal­
low lakes in Europe, including in Denmark [11]. Biomanipulation by fish removal in de­
scribed in more details in the next section, but the main idea is to reduce the predation on
zooplankton so that grazing on algae in intensified. Another option is acting at the upper
trophic level by stocking piscivorous fish, which would predate on planktivorous fish and
push the lake back into a top­down­ controlled regime. Stocking with 0+ pike is however
not as effective and in many cases had a poor impact on the state of the lake, mostly due
to insufficient piscivory and avoidance tactics of preys [77].
Submerged macrophytes rooted in the sediments naturally fix the nutrients necessary to
their growth; repeated macrophytes harvesting is hence a way to remove some of the
phosphorus from the sediments. Macrophytes harvesting is particularly suitable when
invasive macrophytes species colonized a lake, in a ”two birds one stone” approach [14].
However, the cost of the method is high.
Conversely, as macrophyte cover is a key factor in maintaining stable clear water con­
ditions, re­establishment of macrophytes is an option as well [49]. However, planting
macrophytes should only be used when the water condition are already improved suffi­
ciently to allow their survival, and is therefore only a reinforcement to other restoration
measures [4].
Other biomanipulation approaches exist and can be implemented together. For instance,
a restoration project of a high­altitude lake in Japan combining stocking with piscivorous
rainbow trout and with Daphnia also proved successful, and was still clear after six years
[29].
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
5
==PAGE:14==
1.4
Biomanipulation by fish removal as a tool to restore
eutrophic lakes
1.4.1
Theory of biomanipulation by fish removal
In lakes, biomanipulation is used a tool to create a perturbation strong enough to switch
from a turbid, phytoplankton­dominated state to a clear state with submerged macro­
phytes. In turbid lakes, the abundance of nutrients causes an abundance of phytoplank­
ton, to the point that the system is bottom­up controlled instead of top­down controlled.
Biomanipulation relies on the idea that pushing one element of the trophic chain towards
the state it should have in clear conditions will trigger a cascade of reaction through the
trophic chain. Biomanipulation is thus fundamentally based on the bi­stability of shallow
lakes: instead of having a nutrient threshold under which the lake goes back to the clear
state, there is a nutrient concentration interval for which a shallow lake may be in two
states, either eutrophic or clear, following a hysteresis pattern [70]. Thus, biomanipula­
tion should only be used at appropriate nutrients concentrations.
One of the main advantages of biomanipulation by fish removal is that process has been
highly documented, having been used in many countries and lake types. In Denmark only,
fish removal has been implemented in more than 40 shallow lakes [11]. This helps de­
signing the procedure to optimize the outcome. Hosper and Meijer (1992) carried bioma­
nipulation in 9 shallow lakes and found that, if less than 75% of the fish was removed, no
response in transparency was triggered. This threshold is still used today as the target
removed weight for successful fish removal. Moreover, chances of success are higher
when a rapid, drastic reduction is performed instead of spreading the reduction on a long
period.
Biomanipulation by fish removal is, however, not suitable for every lake. Guidelines as
to which lakes are good candidates for restoration by fish removal were edited, based on
the experience from numerous case studies. First, biomanipulation by removal of plank­
tivorous fish is suitable when the turbidity is due to high algae concentrations and not only
resuspension. Smaller lakes are easier to biomanipulate and hence are more suitable
than large lakes [57]. Biomanipulation has a higher success rate in shallow lake com­
pared to stratified lakes, which is partly attributed to a better recolonisation potential of by
macrophytes [55]. The approximate external total phosphorus threshold for biomanipula­
tion efficiency is 0­6­2.0g TP/year for shallow lakes and lakes with low retention time, and
0.5g TP/year for stratified lakes [9][40]. If the total phosphorus is over this threshold, P
loading must be reduced before any biomanipulation attempt, for example via the rehabil­
itation of the catchment area. As for the total phosphorus in the lake, it is not certain that
biomanipulation alone will ensure long­term effects when the concentration is > 0.25mg
P/L in shallow lakes and 0.05mg P/L in deeper lakes. In such lakes, additional P removal
methods should be considered as well: sediment dredging, iron or alum treatment in shal­
low lakes, aeration of the bottom in deep lakes [40]. Besides, fish removal may only have
an impact on water clarity if the fish biomasss was high enough to have a significant im­
pact on water clarity to begin with, over 50­100 kg/ha [53][1]. Special attention should
also be payed to the biomass of benthivorous fish which cause sediments resuspension
and impair macrophyte cover. The morphology of the lake should also be evaluated to
ensure that fishing is possible.
Fish removal can be performed using different methods. The most common method of
fish removal is seining; using large nets is possible in larger water bodies. Trawling may
also be used in large, shallow lakes but is less effective than seining, making a rapid
reduction difficult [47]. In some cases, when the water body is small and connected to an
6
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:15==
appropriate drainage systems, lowering the water level concentrates the fish in a small
volume of water, making it easy to remove them [27]. A combination of active (seine,
electrofishing) and passive (gill nets) methods may also be effective if there are periods
where the fish gather in some places of the lake, locating them by echo­sounding [64].
Fish removal by fishing can only be partial and, apart from a few specific cases, will not
the bring the biomass of planktivorous fish to 0. Another way to remove the fish is to use
a poison (often rotenone) to kill all of the fish, followed by restocking with desired species
[85]. This is however only applicable in ponds.
1.4.2
Limitations of the methods
Although biomanipulation works in theory, in many cases the desired effects are not
reached or not long­term wise. In many of the cases where biomanipulation seems to
have failed come from poor planning, inadequate targets, poor understanding of the pro­
cess in the lake and improper assessment of the factors that are responsible for turbid
water [64]. Sufficient nutrient loading reduction is an essential prerequisite to the success­
ful restoration, but is not a guarantee of satisfactory results in itself. The main reasons
for failure, insufficient external nutrients loading excluded were identified in more than
70 lake restoration projects carried in Denmark and The Netherlands [82]. Among those
experiments, only half managed to increase the Secchi depth and decrease the chl­α
concentration. One cause of failure was that an insufficient amount of fish were removed
from the lake, thus failing to sufficiently reduce the predation pressure on zooplankton
and to increase the grazing on algae. For example, a case of failed biomanipulation at­
tempt due to insufficient removal was reported in subtropical lake in Florida [16] Another
cause of failure was a ”Rapid return of strong cohorts of zooplanktivorous fish”[82], i.e.,
improved recruitment and growth following biomanipulation. In some cases, the presence
of invertebrates predating on zooplankton was also quoted as a source of failure. High
resuspension rate of the sediments also caused a project to fail due to an increase of
turbidity and total P levels that stimulated the growth of algae. Internal loading was also
a cause of delayed lake recovery: when a lake is submitted to high nutrients loading for
a prolonged period, a pool accumulates in the sediments. Some of the phosphorus pool
has a mobile form and can be released again into the water column in the period following
the biomanipulation while the water and the sediments reach an phosphorus equilibrium.
Moreover, phosphorus from the internal pool may be released when anoxic conditions
happen at the bottom of the lake. [81]. Finally, the submerged macrophytes cover col­
lapses when the lake becomes turbid due to a lack of light. Sufficient macrophytes cover
favors the return to a clear state as they compete with algae for nutrients, offer protective
habitats against fish predation for phytoplankton grazers such as Daphnia, and help pre­
vented sediment resuspension thanks to their roots [71][39]. Low coverage of submerged
macrophytes was thus also identified as a factor for failed restoration. Another challeng­
ing aspect of biomanipulation by fish removal is that piscivorous fish is that non­target
species ­ breams, perch ­ also rely on zooplankton as food source at earlier stages of
their life.
1.4.3
Cost
Fish removal by seining or fyke fishing also happens to be one of the most cost­effective
restoration methods available in lakes, which explains its popularity. Based on the data
from 17 lakes, Søndergaard et al. (2007b) estimated the cost to be about 1750 euros/ha,
while lake oxygenation costs 2700 euros/ha, aluminium treatment 4450 euros/ha. Chem­
ical treatment with Phoslock (lanthanum­modified clay) is even more expensive: 883 eu­
ros/ton of sediment versus 45 euros/ton sediment based on data from Sweden [12]. The
cost may be lowered by using the seasonal patterns of the fish at advantage and fishing
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
7
==PAGE:16==
in areas where they gather, as observed in some lakes during the winter [59]. Further­
more, in some lakes, cyprinid species perform partial seasonal migration, aggregating in
the streams in winter [78]. It was thus proposed that electrofishing for planktivorous and
benthivorous fish directly in the inlets/outlets of the lake in winter could be a supplemen­
tary tool to perform cost­effective biomanipulation, with a cost estimated at 300 euros/ha
[79].
1.4.4
Longevity of the effects
In many cases, the lake reverts back to a turbid state after a few years, 5­10 years for
Danish lakes [83], while the first signs of instability may already be visible after 4­5 years
[56]. Theoretically, if a perturbation of the fish community of the lake can push it back
to a clear water state under the same external conditions, then it is still vulnerable to a
perturbation that would put it back to turbid state due to the hysteresis effect [71]. In­
creasing the effects of fish removal by combining multiple techniques sometimes proves
necessary, which increases the cost of the process. Especially, fish removal does not
remove nutrients from the sediments and they will continue to be transferred in the water
afterwards. In some cases, reducing the internal P loading of the lake is a prerequisite to
the success of the biomanipulation. A level of 0.05 mg/L total­phosphorus has also been
suggested as the threshold under which permanent effect can be obtained [41].
Fortunately, follow­up fish removals may not have to remove as much of the fish as the
initial one. In Lake Væng (Denmark), a removal of 30% less fish, 20 years after the first
removal, lead to the same strength in biological and chemical responses. Indeed, within
2 years the phytoplankton biomass had been reduced and the lake had come back to a
clear state, while submerged macrophytes cover was almost complete withing 3 years
[84]. The similar effect despite a lower removal was attributed to due the slow recovery of
the large benthivorous fish, of the increased abundance and size of piscivores compared
what it was prior to the first biomanipulation, and reduced internal loading [42].
1.4.5
Public perception of biomanipulation by fish removal
Uses of a lake may be multiple: recreational, commercial (fishing, tourism); users involved
in nature conservation are also stakeholders in the lake. Conflicts on the use of a lake
might also arise when fish removal is performed and it is important to ensure the support
of the users [47]. Although users of the lake are likely to agree that a clear lake is more
aesthetically pleasing than a green lake, the benefits of fish removal should be explained
clearly to the general public in order for them to support the initiative. In particular, remov­
ing the fish from a lake where recreational fishing is practiced may seem counter­intuitive.
For instance, improperly informed users may be tempted to throw the roach back into the
lake, when they could help increase the fishing effort on the piscivorous fish community
at not cost.
The public adhesion to the project also depends on the method used for fish removal. For
instance, removal of fish by fish poisoning in some forbidden in some countries; it is also
likely to be seen negatively by the public [47]. The benefits of stocking of piscivorous
fish, in comparison with fish removal, might also seem more intuitively profitable to recre­
ational fishers since species such as perch and pike are often considered more desirable
(as food or game fish) than ”coarse” species like roach [74]. When the lake is commer­
cially exploited, usage conflicts will arise if the removal affects some of the target species.
Likewise, lake restoration has sometimes be deemed ”too efficient” by commercial fishers,
with low fish growth attributed to low phytoplankton levels [46].
8
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:17==
1.4.6
Conclusion
In conclusion, proper assessment of the lake, of the causes of the nutrients loading and
of turbidity, and of fish communities in the lake is essential to maximize the chances for
efficiency and success of the restoration. Biomanipulation by fish removal is particularly
successful in shallow lakes, which are the most common type of lakes [40] and are par­
ticularly sensitive to anthropogenic perturbations. As one of the least costly methods, it
is particularly attractive, and can give satisfactory results when used after correct assess­
ment. However, lakes usually revert back to their initial state within 10 years, and multiple
fish removals should be expected to keep the lake clear.
1.5
Estimating fish fertility and recruitment in lentic
ecosystems
One of the factors affecting the longevity of effects of the fish removals is the fast recovery
of the targeted fish species post­biomanipulation [82]. This kind of compensatory mecha­
nism is often offered as a partial explanation for the lake staying or becoming turbid again,
yet the exact mechanisms behind this, such as increased fecundity and recruitment, are
not well known nor quantified. This project aims to explore fertility and recruitment pat­
terns in a population of planktivorous roach before and after a fish removal in Danish Lake
Ormstrup. I will hence give an overview of the fish fertility and recruitment and of the ways
to estimate them, with a focus on lentic systems.
1.5.1
Estimating fecundity
Roach (Rutilus rutilus) spawn once, in spring. Females produce many eggs, around 100
000 for the large ones [35]. The eggs are adhesive and attach to the submerged plants.
Males that are ready to spawn exhibit white tubercles on their skin. They form schools
that females enter before releasing their eggs to be fertilized.
Histological analysis
Fecundity is a measure of the reproductive capacity of an individual. In fish, it is thus
defined as the number of eggs that the fish can lay during the spawning season, while
the fertility is the number of viable offspring per spawning season. In fisheries biology, the
amount of offspring is more limited by the amount of eggs than by the sperm production
[34]. Differences exist between species in when the fecundity is determined relatively to
the time of spawning. In species with determinate fecundity, the potential fecundity of
the year is fixed before the spawning season, while species with indeterminate fecundity
the maturation of new oocytes continues during the spawning season. [24] Fish eggs
go through several development stages before being mature. Traditionally, a snapshot
approach is used to assess the development stages of the oocytes and their frequency at
a given time. Most often, that is to perform a histological analysis (see for example in [26]
[25]). A transverse section of gonadal tissue is dehydrated, cut and stained. The oocytes
maturation stages are then determined based on cell types found in tissues, identified
by comparison with references for size and visual aspects. In indeterminate species, the
snapshot approach is thus not as good an indication of the final fecundity of the fish.
Counting the eggs in the whole gonad after separating them from the conjunctive tissues
is straightforward method to get the fecundity of the fish at the time of capture [89] [75].
Gonado­Somatic Index
Histological analysis is time­consuming and requires prior knowledge of the maturation
stages of the oocytes (which are available for roach, see for example [25]).
The reproduction of fish takes some of their energetic resources, in various proportions.
Depending on the species, resources must be allocated to cover the cost of developing
secondary sexual characters (breeding colours, tubercules), of the reproductive behaviour
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
9
==PAGE:18==
(preparation of the spawning site, travel to the spawning ground, courtship, parental care
of the fertilized eggs), and of the gonads development. Instead of analysing the amount
of eggs at the tissues level, a method to estimate fecundity and fertility is to use the
GSI, defined as the ratio between the gonads weightt and the total body weight in %.
Roach do not provide any after­fertilization care to the eggs, nor do they exhibit significant
secondary sexual characters. A good part of the energy allocated to reproduction is thus
allocated to gonads. The GSI, however, does not necessarily represent accurately the
energy allocated by the fish to develop the gonads; it can however be assumed that
this index allows for intra­species comparison. Changes of GSI may result either from a
change in gonad size or in body size. In females, the change in GSI mostly reflects the
growth of oocytes as the yolk grows, as vitellogenesis takes place in the ovaries. Since
roach females shed all their eggs at once, the GSI is normally at its highest just before
spawning, then plummets. Instead of GSI, regression analysis between gonad and body
size is also an appropriate tool to investigate gonad growth relatively to body size.
1.5.2
Fertility
Fertility is the amount of viable offspring and thus differs from the fecundity. For instance,
a fish with a high fecundity (amount of mature oocytes), if isolated with no mating partner,
will have a null fertility. In normal conditions, fertility is related to fecundity.
Fertility estimation is often performed by artificially inseminating a known number of eggs
with semen, and then subsequently analyzing the ratio of fertilized eggs [60] [96][43] . The
fertilized eggs may also be obtained in tank experiments where spawning is hormonally
induced and eggs gathered thanks to spawning substrates. [93][61]. Using wild fish,
those techniques allow to estimate the fertility in natural conditions, which has for instance
been done with roach [91][25]. They have for instance been used in several occasions to
estimate the fertility of hybrids from lakes [61][93].
1.5.3
Estimating fish fry density
When detailed fertility estimates are out of the scope of the study, a qualitative study of
fertility ­ for instance inter­annual variations ­ can be done by analyzing the fry density
early in the season. However, unless the mortality rate is known, it might prove hard
to quantify the fertility in natural conditions. In roach, eggs hatch after 4­10 days. The
delay is temperature dependent, and has been found to correspond to approximately 160
degree­days for a Norwegian population. The eggs are 1­1.5mm wide, and the newly­
hatched fry 4­6mm long. [89]
Collection of fish fry in lakes
The impracticality of accessing the shore with boats was found to induce a bias in fry
assessments as taking samples only in one zone of the lake was found to be insufficient
to determinate many aspects of fish larvae ecology and in small, shallow and eutrophic
water bodies, it was shown that the number of species, their abundance and their mean
size was higher for samples done at the shore compared to those done offshore [50].
Exclusion of the shore zones may cause inaccurate recruitment estimation [50].
In Europe, a commonly used sampling approach for 0+ fish is point abundance sampling
by electrofishing (PASE). PASE was initially developed for 1+ fish, and the size selectivity
of the electrofishing gear had to be adapted for effectively capturing fish <20mm with a
smaller anode ring [18]. Since the 2000’s, PASE has been used in lakes and wetlands
systems to estimate relative abundance of species, and was found to provide more good
estimates in a more cost­efficient fashion, on top of being applicable to many freshwater
species. [19]. Continuous electrofishing along the shores of lake has also been used to
estimate 0+ fish abundance for walleye. The density was then defined as the number
10 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:19==
of walleye fry divided by the sampled shoreline length [7]. A faster alternative was also
developed to increase the number of sites without a high demand in hours; Based on a
Bayesian approach, they only require a unique timed sample at each site to be used for
absolute abundance estimation of the population, once inter­calibrated with a traditional
method, but density estimates were imprecise [20].
Finally, for species with known spawning grounds ­ such as salmon ­ quadrat or cylin­
der samplers may be set up in nursery areas, under the substrate, before the spawning,
and retrieved afterwards. This was done for rainbow trout in a stream, allowing the sites
associated to a female of known size to be sampled before the fry alevins left the redd
[21].
1.5.4
Estimation of recruitment from fry density
In fish stock assessment, recruitment is defined as the transition of the juvenile fish to
an larger, older ­ not necessarily mature ­ life stage. Due to a high mortality in early
life stages, the recruitment is lower than the fertility, i.e., the fry density decreases after
spawning and only a fraction survive to adult phase. Stock­recruitment forecasting is one
of the central tools in fisheries management. The Ricker model is one of the most com­
monly used models to estimate recruitment. It assumes that the density of individuals of
an age class is a function of the density of the previous size class [68]. Another commonly
used model is the Beverton–Holt model. It assumes that the mortality rate is a result of
competition between juveniles and is thus linearly dependent on the density of fish in the
cohort. Mortaliy is density­dependent in both model, i.e. increased stock size induce a
decrease in recruitment in both models. Thanks to modern methods of statistical analysis
and machine learning, recruitment may also be modeled with a high number of environ­
mental predictors. For instance, a random forest model was used to identify the relevant
environmental factors for predicting walleyed density in a lake, resulting in 4 predictor
variables out of more than 40 tested and a 80% accuracy [30].
Conclusion
The recruitment of the youngest size cohort into the adult biomass depends on the initial
fecundity of the population. Fertility determines the amount of viable offspring which will
be subject to density­ and environmental condition­dependent mortality, resulting in the
recruitment, i.e. the amount of fish that survive to the next stage. Estimating mature fish
fecundity and fry density provides information on all steps of the recruitment process.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
11
==PAGE:20==
12 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:21==
2
Methods
To investigate the fecundity of the roach, we collected a fish sample every week during the
spring and processed their gonads. Then, the recruitment ­ in the sense of the amount
of roach fry ­ was studied using the fry density as an indicator. Roach fry was collected
2 ways. On the one hand, every 10 days by electrofishing multiple points around the
lake (PASE fishing). On the other hand, by fishing at night using a hoop net standardized
survey; the transects fished with the hoop net were the same in 2020 and 2021. The
survey was carried at the same date in 2020 and 2021 (beginning of July). This was done
order to account for a potential shift in distribution at night. The growth of the fry was also
monitored by measuring a sample of the fish on every session. Finally, to get an over­
sight of the fish species distribution and population structure in the lake, a standardized
gillnet survey carried by a private company at the end of the summer in both 2020 and
2021. Other types of data such as the Secchi depth and the water temperature were also
collected as they are important to the understanding of the process at play in the lake.
2.1
Study site: Lake Ormstrup, Denmark
The Lake Ormstrup is located in Viborg, central Jutland. This is shallow lake (maximum
depth: 5m, mean depth: 2.3m) with a surface of 13 ha. It has a high retention period, with
outflow in a stream happening during a few short periods through the year. Due to these
physical characteristics, the lake has a dynamic mixing regime and alternates between
stratified period and mixing events, especially throughout the summer 2.1. Mixing events
promote oxygenation of the bottom but also the recycling of the nutrients between the
sediments, the plants and the water. The eutrophication of the lake started decades ago,
initially because of agricultural runoffs and previous discharges of water from the industrial
activity taking place on the grounds. A high density of ducks was also kept and on the lake
and was a major contribution to the deterioration of the state of the lake. Prior to biomanip­
ulation, the total P concentration is 800 µg/L, and only few submerged macrophytes are
found in the lake. The extremely high levels of phosphorus leads the lake to be N­limited
instead of P­limited and there is an influx of nitrates to the lake. The restoration of the
lake was an initiative of its current owner, in order to recover aesthetic and recreational
value. Biomanipulation by fish removal is a suitable restoration method for shallow lakes
and is a common restoration method in Denmark, having been employed on more than
40 lakes [11]. Sediments dredging is also considered in the future as a supplementary
tool to ensure the success of the restoration project.
The fish community structure in Lake Ormstrup is only made up of a few species. It is
dominated by roach. Pikes are found in a high density compared to other similar lakes
and perch are also present in the system. A few eels and tench were caught during the
sampling sessions but the community is dominated by the roach ­ perch ­ pike trio. The
removal of planktivorous fish was performed twice, in September 2020 and in April 2021.
It was done again in September 2021 (data not included in this work). The fish were re­
moved using seine nets. The planktivorous (roach) and benthivorous (tench) fish were
discarded, while pike and perch were released back into the lake. In total, 4.2 tons of fish
(mostly roach and a little tench) were removed in September 2020 and 0.5 tons in April
2021, amounting to 4.7 tons of fish removed ­ almost exclusively roach. A large amount
of roach were tagged right before the fish removal and around 70% were recaptured dur­
ing the fish removal. This is consistent with the estimate of the professional contractors
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.1: Depth temperature profile for the period July 1st­ August 5th 2020. The or­
ange/yellow vertical strips correspond to mixing events.
who performed the removal and estimated the total roach biomass to be around 5.7 tons,
corresponding to 390 kg/ha (Christian Skov, personal communication). This means that
around 74% would have been removed in September 2020 and more than 80% following
the iteration of April 2020. The amount of fish that was removed should thus have been
satisfying as it is over 75%, the threshold normally recommended to be removed in bioma­
nipulation [83]. Moreover, around 1.1 tons of roach were again removed in September
2021. It was proposed by [31] that biomanipulation by fish removal could be made more
effective by also targeting the streams connected to the lake, as they found that parts of
the bream and roach population migrated there in winter. In the case of the Lake Orm­
strup, there is only one outlet. PIT­tag readers were set up in the stream; only little activity
was measured, with a maximum of 18 tagged roach in March 2020, but less than 15 days
of activity for the combined 2020 and 2021 winters (data not shown). Besides, the number
of roach simultaneously detected in the outlet during the winter months was never above
5. All in all, this shows that only a few roach migrated to the outlet during winter, meaning
that implementing this method would not be worth the cost. In Lake Ormstrup, an attempt
to optimize the fish removal was made by using tracking data from acoustic­tagged roach.
2.2
Fish sampling
2.2.1
Gonad sampling
Fish sampling for gonads was done at least once a week, depending on how many
fish were caught and to ensure a sufficient sample size. The sampling took place from
17/04/20 to 15/05/20 and from 25/03/31 to 04/06/21. Roach were caught using a com­
bination of bait traps, gillnets, fyke nets and electrofishing. The bait traps were spread
around the lake, mainly along the banks but also in deeper areas of the lake. Some of the
fish was also captured during the fish removal in Spring 2021 (seine fishing). The details
on the gear used are given Appendix A.
2.2.2
Fry sampling
Electrofishing sampling (Point sampling)
To explore and compare the relative density of roach fry before and after biomanipulation,
a standardized fry survey was carried in both 2020 and 2021. It consists in electrofishing
80 points along the shore of the lake. Each point is fished for 15 seconds, while doing a
bottom­up movement with the net 3 times in order to move the stunned fish to the surface.
Once the 15 seconds are up, a S­shaped sweeping movement is made at the surface to
get the fish. Roach fry normally evolve in the vegetation, but as schools were also visible
14 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:23==
right outside, 1 point of 2 is fished approximately 1 meter away from the vegetation while
the other is fished inside. For each point the number of fish caught is written down along
with the vegetation type and water depth. Once all the points are fished, a subsample of
50­60 roach and perch fry is measured and conserved in ethanol. The survey was carried
every 10 days from 19/06 to 09/08 in 2020 and from 21/05 to 23/08 in 2021. A fry size
sample was also taken on 12/06/2020 but not as part of the standardized point fishing.
The protocol is explained in further details in Appendix B.
Night sampling ­ hoop net
In order to obtain an additional estimate of roach fry density a hoop net sampling was
conducted during night. A hoop net is a cylinder shaped net that is pushed in front of a
boat. The sampling was conducted in the beginning of July 2020 and 2021, on weeks 27
and 28 in 2020 and week 27 in 2021. Sampling took place during 3 nights in 2021 and 2
nights in 2020. The protocol was designed according to the guidelines preconised by [48].
A fry hoop net was mounted in front of the boat and 7 transects of the lake were fished
for maximum 60 seconds at a 5­7 km/h speed. The transects were the same in 2020 and
2021. The net was removed from the water immediately after the transect was done; any
fry was immediately retrieved and counted. A flowmeter is also installed in the opening
of the net, allowing the volume of water that crossed the net to be calculated. A sample
of 60 fish was measured and conserved in ethanol for potential future use. The detailed
protocol is available Appendix D.
2.2.3
Standardised gillnet survey
The purpose of the standardised gillnet surveys was to describe the size, density and
species composition of the fish stocks in the lake. The gillnet sampling in Lake Ormstrup
was conducted in 2020 and 2021 following guidelines for Danish lakes ([69]). The gillnet
surveys were performed on 18­19/08/20 and 24­25/08/21, i.e. in the recommended time
frame between 15/08 and 15/09. Following the protocol, 12 nets (6+6) were set between
16.00 and 18.00 on 2 consecutive days and retrieved between 6.00 and 8.00 the following
day, meaning they remained set in the water for 14 to 16 hours. Each gillnets follows the
NY­NORDISK­norm (”New Nordic norm”)[69]. The gillnets consist in 12 different mesh
sizes ranging from 5­55mm. They were either transparent or light green. Each net was
30m long and 1.5 large, each mesh size section being 2.5m long. Further details about
mesh line thickness, the arrangement of the sections and related are available in [69]. The
nets were placed in the water fully stretched both vertically and horizontally. The CPUE
was calculated with the adjusted water volume in accordance to the protocol [69].
2.3
GSI and gonad processing
2.3.1
Gonad extraction
Except for the fish that were frozen, the roach were processed either on the day of the
capture or on the following day, after being kept in a cool box. All the fish were weighed
to 0.1 g, measured to then nearest mm (fork and total length). The whole gonads were
extracted and weighed to 0.001g. The sex and the spawning status (not spawned/already
spawned) were determined by visual inspection of the gonads. In order to determine the
water content of the gonades and the dry weight, a subsample of the gonad was also put
aside and left to dry in the oven for 24­48h at 60° while the rest was frozen in case of
future analyses. Once dry, the subsample was then weighed again. For further details,
the reader is referred to Appendix A.
2.3.2
Frozen fish
Some roach had to be stored in the freezer, which is known to shrink them. In order to
estimate the difference, a sample of fish was frozen after measuring and weighing. They
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
15
==PAGE:24==
were defrosted approximately 2 months after (49 days) by putting them in a bucket of room­
temperature water for 20h. Subsequently, the fish were then measured and weighed
again, and the coefficients of the linear correlation between the pre­ and post­freezer
values were calculated. The lenght and weights of the roach that were processed after
staying in the freezer were then corrected according to the results. (see Appendix C).
2.4
Other data
2.4.1
Air and water temperature data
The air temperature data for Viborg, a city close to the lake, was downloaded from the
Danish Meteorological Institute Weather Archive (https://www.dmi.dk/vejrarkiv/), for the
period 01/2019 ­ 08/2021. The lake water temperature is measured by 20 sensors (0.5
­ 1.5m deep) evenly spread around the perimeter of the lake. The temperature is aver­
aged between all the hydrophones. Since the water temperature monitoring only started
in March 2020, earlier data had to be simulated from air temperature measurement, mod­
eling the relationship between air and water temperature from March 2020 and onwards.
Simulating the water temperature was done using air2water (v2.0.0) pipeline, with a mean
depth D = 2.3m. (see https://github.com/spiccolroaz/air2water for the files). air2water is
a model that predicts Lake Surface Temperature (LST) using air temperature [67]. This
method was chosen as it is widely used and was found to be better than many machine
learning approaches [33]. The daily average was used for predicting the average lake
temperature for the dates where it was missing. As the degree­days definition is based
on a different definition of the mean (cf section ”Degree­days”), the prediction were also
made using Tmax+Tmin
2
as the daily value used for the calibration. According to the guide­
lines expressed in [66], given that the lake is shallow and 1 year of data was available, the
4 parameters version was used. Due to the very short period of data available, the whole
dataset was used for calibration. Validation was done on the whole period for which air
temperature data was retrieved (2.6 years). Other parameters were left on their default
value.
2.4.2
Length­length regression : Total −→Fork length
As there were some inconsistency between years in the use of fork length and total length
when measuring the roach as relationship between the two was established. A length­
length regression was thus performed for perch and roach. The data from all the sampling
was gathered for the regression, resulting in nroach = 546 and nperch = 114. A linear re­
gression was performed with a null interception. The missing fork lengths in the data were
then calculated using the resulting regression coefficients and fork length was subsquently
used as the standard measurement unit in this work. The results of the regression are
available Appendix E.
2.4.3
Secchi depth
Secchi depth data was obtained crossing different sources. First, measurements were
regularly done on the field. The Secchi depth was measured in the middle of the lake, with
the sun behind the observer. Not all the readings were performed by the same observer
(data provided by Aarhus University)
2.5
Analysis
All analysis were performed using mostly R (v 3.6.1). Microsoft Excel (2019) was used in
few cases as well for simple linear regressions.
2.5.1
Degree­days
The sum of degree­days is a unit measuring the thermal accumulation over a period.
Degree­days are commonly used as they describe the development of organisms in re­
16 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:25==
sponse to daily temperatures more accurately than average temperatures. Development
from one life stage to another is associated to degree­days thresholds in many organisms,
from fish to insects. For instance, growth of gonad development does not happen below
a certain species­specific threshold, and spawning is triggered by a thermal accumulation
level, hence the relevance of degree­days instead on simple daily averages. The defi­
nition of the degree­days unit is somewhat ambiguous as potentially different definitions
coexist under the same name. It is normally defined as ”the difference between the mean
temperature and a lower temperature threshold”. The threshold is defined as ” the lower
temperature at which development stops” [92]. In many cases, this is translated as:
DD = ( Tmax+Tmin
2
) −T0
Which matches the ”max­min” definition, and is a version of the thermal integral, also
called Growing Degree­Days (GDD). GDD have been widely used for decades in agricul­
tural and entomological studies to explain growth . It should be noted that the definition of
degree­days is sometimes implicit [28, 62, 87]: what is designated by ”mean daily temper­
ature” usually is Tmax+Tmin
2
and might differ from the daily average. Besides, it should be
emphasized that the base temperature T0 used is not homogeneous among freshwater
fish growth studies ­ even for the same species ­ which complicates comparison. How­
ever, in their review Chezik et al. [17] found that the ability of degree­days to describe
within­population growth variations is robust to low values of T0 (up to 10 to 15°C) and
that the range of suitable T0 to explain fish growth is broad; for roach, the range of base
temperature used was 10.2­17.5°C. They thus suggest using base temperatures on par
with the standards in other fields: 0, 5, 10, 15 °C. If that is not suitable, they recommend
following published precedent or setting it to the minimum temperature for fish growth. In
the majority of the cases, the choice stems from the best fit of a growth model.
Replicating the methods of [28] for easy comparison, I used a threshold T0 = 3°C, 3°C
being the threshold for which they found highest correlation with the GSI, and October 1st
as the starting point for the cumulative sum.
2.5.2
Roach reproduction
Maturity size
I explored the maturity size of the roach population in Lake Ormstrup by performing a lo­
gistic regression predicting the maturity of the fish (0 = immature, 1 = mature) as a function
of the total length (continuous, unit: mm). The probability of an individual being mature
is assumed to follow a Bernoulli distribution. The fish used were all those collected for
gonad sampling in Spring 2020 and 2021. Fish were considered mature if it was possi­
ble to sex them upon inspection, i.e. if gonades were visible and identifiable. Any other
fish were labeled as immature. I performed separate logistic regressions for 2020 and
2021 to investigate any difference between the years, namely before/after biomanipula­
tion. Furthermore, as the maturity size is different between males and females, the logistic
regressions were performed separately between sexes. However, immature fish require
more than a visual inspection of the gonads to be sexed. In order to improve the accuracy
of the regression performed on males, I therefore removed all the immature fish that had a
larger length than the smallest mature female. The cutoff size was totallength = 113mm
for the 2021 data, and totallength = 108 for the 2020 data. By doing so, I assumed that,
as males are mature at a smaller size than females [35], any immature fish larger than
the cutoff size should be a female. The logistic function with one predictor is expressed
as:
P(mature) =
1
1 + e−(a+bL
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
17
==PAGE:26==
With a the intercept of the regression and bthe parameter of the model associated to the
predictor length. I calculated the length L associated to P(mature) = 0.5 and P(mature) =
0.9 in the predicted value of the logistic regression, deriving from the previous equation:
L = 1
b ∗(ln(
P
1 −P −a))
Gonado­Somatic Index
The Gonado­Somatic Index is the percentage of the fish weight made up by the gonads
[25]:
GSI =
Gonade weight
Total fish weight ∗100
The fish were weighed before being cut open. The GSI is broadly used in fish studies, and
the gonad weight used is often the ”wet” weight, i.e. straight out of the fish ­ although it is
generally implied and not explicitly stated. However, some of the gonad weight is owed
to the water content. To get an estimate of the dry weight of the gonades and a better
estimate of the amount of energy stored for reproduction a subsample of the gonades
were dried. This was performed by taking a small subsample of the gonad and putting
it into the oven at 60­80°C for 24h­48h. The subsample was weighed (0.001g precision)
prior and after being put into an oven, thus yielding the ratio between the so­called ”dry”
and ”wet” weight, from which the ”dry weight” of the complete gonad can be deduced.
Hence the definitions of ”dry GSI” and ”wet GSI”:
wet GSI = Wet gonade weight
fish weight
∗100 and dry GSI = Dry gonade weight
fish weight
∗100
A statistical analysus was conducted to explore the role of fish length and the change in
fish density (biomanipluation) on GSI. The statistical analysis was carried on the dry GSI,
as this is a more accurate representation of the energy allocated to gonads production,
the water not being taken into account into the weight. I carried a Gamma General Linear
Regression (glm) with a log link. The log link was used to ensure positive values. The
fixed covariates were the year (categorical, 2 levels) and the fork length (continuous, in
mm). The interaction term forklengthxyear was included as well. The sum of degree­
days was not included as an independent variable because it is co­linear with the year,
and they thus the covariate ”year” also encompasses the temperature variation. Indeed, in
2020 the fish were collected on a period ranging from 1094­1314 degree­days and in 2021
on a period corresponding to 546­871 degree­days, i.e. they do not overlap. Moreover
the analysis was conducted separately for males and females. The resulting model can
be expressed as:
Dry GSI~length + year + interaction(length, year)
The combination of the explanatory variables to be included in the model was then chosen
using a stepwise regression based on the AIC criterion. This enables to check whether
one of the initial variables should be dropped. Once the parameters were computed,
the validity of the model was checked using the analysis of Pearson’s residuals plotted
against the the independent variables and the model fitted values. When the model could
be validated, it was used to predict GSI values and 95% confidence intervals on the same
length range as the original data. Due to the log­link, the magnitude of change α for a 1
unit increase of the fork length is given by:
α = exp(βfork + year ∗βfork:year)
18 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:27==
Where βi is the coefficient associated to the covariate i and year = 0 for 2020 and year = 1
for 2021.
Determination of the spawning period
The spawning was considered to have started during the week between the first survey­
ing session where a spawned individual was found and the session before that one. I
considered that spawning had ended when no fish that hadn’t spawned were found any­
more. The temperatures at which the roach had supposedly spawned were compared
with values found in the literature to ensure consistency.
2.5.3
Roach fry: growth and density
Growth rate
To get an estimate of the size of fry over time, a random sample of 50 to 70 roach fry were
measured (when possible) on every point electro fishing session, i.e. circa every 10 days.
Following [68], the instant growth rate is:
gi = log(Mean sizei) −log(Mean sizei−1)
Datei −Datei−1
And the specific growth rate, G:
G = 100(eg −1)
Where Mean sizei is the mean size of the fry sample for the survey n°i (mm), and the date
difference is measured in days. Days on which less than 5 roach fry were caught were
excluded from the calculations. G is the % of length change/day. Further analysis of the
growth rate were carried using G and not g for easier interpretation.
Density
PASE sampling targeted 80 points for most of the sessions. In order to decrease the
variability of the data, the number of points was raised to 110 points in 2021. In cases
with 110 points I subsequently selected 80 points among these at random, randomly drawn
using R with set.seed(42) for reproducibility. The fry density is here defined as:
di = Total number of 0 + roach caught on date i
80
. I define the relative density of fry as:
Rdi =
di
max({di}year)
Rdi is thus simply the ratio between the fry density on day i and the maximum fry density
obtained by PASE fishing on this year. Rdi = 1 at the peak of the fry density.
For data obtained through the standardized hoop net fishing, the density of fry was calcu­
lated the same way as a concentration, i.e. in number of fry/ filtered volume. The density
was calculated separately for each transect.
Statistical analysis
42% of the density data from the hoop net sampling was null. Hence we carried a 0­inflated
regression analysis. This means that the model has two parts. The non­zeros value
are modeled using a Gamma glm model with an inverse link function; the independent
variable is the year (categorical, with 2 levels: 2020 and 2021). Then, a logistic model
was used for model the excess zeros independently with the covariate being year as well;
the dependent variable was the density, coded as 1 if > 0 and 0 otherwise. The fitted glm
was then used to predict the density for 2020 and 2021 and the 95% confidence interval
for the predicted density d was also calculated as dyear ± 1.96 ∗standard error.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
19
==PAGE:28==
To examine the difference of fry growth between the years, I modeled the ratio length/weekspost−
spawning as a a Gamma GLMM with a log link function, where weekspost −spawning is
the number of weeks since the start of spawning. The log link function ensures that the
fitted values are positive. The only independent variable is year (categorical with 2 levels:
2020 and 2021). The assumptions of the model were verified by plotting residuals versus
fitted values and versus each independent variable.
2.5.4
Comparison of the body condition of the fish before and after
biomanipulation
The increase of length and weight are both indicators of fish growth. The Weight­Length
relationship (WLR) is particularly used in stock assessment studies, as it it is a proxy to
estimate the biomass from the length frequency distribution. The WLR is calculated using
the equation:
W = aLb
Where L is the fork length (cm), W the weight of the fish (g), a is a constant and b is
the allometric coefficient. a and b are estimated by performing a linear regression on the
transformed equation:
log(W) = log(a) + b log(L)
So that a = exp(Intercept) and b = slope.
Here, the condition of the perch and roach was assessed by means of the Weight­Length
relationship. To ensure meaningful comparisons, only the fish caught during the gillnet
sampling sessions carried in August 2020 and 2021 were included in the data. Moreover,
since growth patterns are known to be different between juvenile and adult fish, 0+ fish
were excluded by filtering by fork length > 8cm. As the sessions were both conducted
in August, the spawning status of the fish was not relevant. First, I checked that the linear
relationship that is known to exist for log(weight)~log(length) (weight in g, fork length in
cm) was significant for both datasets. A linear model was fitted and subsequently used
to model the weight. The covariates are the length (continuous), year (categorical with 2
levels) and their interaction length x year:
log(weight) ~ log(length) + year + interaction(length, year).
The linearity of the relationship was checked by an analysis of the residuals VS predictors
plots. The normal distribution of the residuals was also checked with a QQplot. Weights
were predicted using the fitted model on the same length range as the experimental data
and plotted along with the original data. The rate of change 2021/2021 was calculated,
defined on the length range as:
ROC2021/2020 = Wp,2021−Wp,2020
Wp,2020
Wp,i is the predicted weight obtained using the parameters of the year i and is thus a
function of length. The rate of change measures the difference of weight between 2021
and 2020 for a given length and species. The 95% confidence interval was also calculated
as Wp,i ± 1.96 ∗standard error.
20 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:29==
3
Results
3.1
Comparison of roach reproduction before and after the 2
first fish removals
3.1.1
Spawning conditions
A delay in the sum of degree­days was accumulated during the winter 2021 compared to
2020 (Figure 3.1). According to the examination of the gonads, roach started to spawn 1 to
2 weeks later in 2021 than in 2020. Nonetheless, both the spawning temperature range
and the degree­days accumulated before spawning are noticeably lower than in 2020.
In 2020, water temperature ranged from 12.1 ­ 13.8°C in the period between the first
survey during which spawned fish were found and the survey previous to that one, when
they ranged from 7.5 ­ 8.7°C in 2021. The degree­days accumulated until the onset of
spawning were around 400 units lower in 2021 compared to 2020. Even when considering
only the degree­days accumulated in the 15 days leading to spawning, roach spawned at a
much lower thermal accumulation in 2021 (Table 3.1). The conclusions are the same when
looking at the sliding cumulative sum for the 15 days preceding the potential spawning
date. The value is within the range 125.9­145.9 degree­days in 2020 and only 70.9­83.7
in 2021.
Figure 3.1: Cumulative sum of degree­days over time during the winters 2019­2020 (red)
and 2020­2021 (blue). The sum of degree­days was calculated starting 01/10 and with
T0 = 3°C. The horizontal lines mark the threshold degree­days accumulation described
in [28] as the range of sum of degree­days that triggered spawning.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
21
==PAGE:30==
Year
2020
2021
Spawning start (week)
24/04 ­ 30/04 (W17­18)
27/04 ­ 06/05 (W18­19)
Spawning end (week)
after 15/05 (W20)
20/05 ­ 27/05 (W20­21)
Water T° range at the onset of the
spawning period
12.1 ­ 13.8°C
7.5 ­ 8.7°C (1)
Degree­days
accumulated
from
01/10 until spawning (2)
1094 ­ 1154
701 ­ 750 (1)
Degree­days accumulated in the 15
days before spawning (2)
125.9 ­ 145.85
70.9 ­ 83.7 (1)
Table 3.1:
Roach spawning start dates, temperature and sum of degree­days thresh­
olds in Lake Ormstrup in 2020 and 2021.
(1) Simulated temperature (2) Degree­days
calculated with a threshold temperature of 3°C.
3.1.2
Maturity and size
The share of female (F), male (M) and immature (IM) roach depend on the size class.
(Figure 3.2). The share of females increases with size, with the sex ratio being about
even in the 15­20cm size class (n°4).
The size of the smallest mature fish differed in 2020 and 2021. In 2020, no fish under 5
cm was processed, but all those examined in 2021 were immature. Furthermore, mature
roach below 10cm were found in 2021 only, the smallest one being a 75mm male. For
comparison, the smallest mature male reported in 2020 was 103mm. As for the females,
the smallest mature one was in 108mm long in 2021 and 113mm in 2020.
The logistic regressions that model the probability for a roach to be mature as a function of
its total length all yielded that length is indeed a significant predictor of the maturity status
of the fish (Figure 3.3, Appendix F). Roach from 2020 and 2021/males and females were
treated separately resulting in 4 regression equations. (significant at the 0.01 level, Tables
3.2 and Appendix F). The odds ratio measure the increase of the odds of being mature
for an increase of 1 mm of the total length of the fish. An odds­ratio over 1 thus means
that there is an increase of the probability that one fish is mature is higher if its length
is greater. Here, the odds­ratio associated to the length predictor were all over 1. The
odds­ratio were comparable for the female roach in 2020 and 2021, being of 1.21 and
1.28. The estimate of the odds ratio is 1.66 for the 2020 sample and 1.14 for the 2021
sample, i.e. the slope is steeper for the 2020 male roach. I also calculated the length
associated to a 50% and 90% probability of being mature (Table 3.3). Females threshold
sizes associated with both probabilities are larger for the 2021 roach. The length over
which the probability that a male is mature is ≥0.9 is the same in 2020 and 2021 male
roach, but the length for which more than 50% are mature is lower in 2021: 105.07 versus
92.46mm.
22 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.2: Share of male (M), female (F) and immature (IM) roach for each size class
in 2020 and 2021. Fish are divided in 5 cm size classes based on their total length (1: <
5cm; 2: 5­10; 3: 10­15; 4: 15­20; 5: ≥20). The fish included were all caught between
March­June.
Estimate
Odds ratio (95% confidence interval)
M, 2021
Intercept
­12.09214 *
NA
Total length
0.13078 *
1.14 (1.11­1.18)
Table 3.2: Parameter estimates from the logistic model for roach caught from March­June
2020 and 2021. * show significance at the 0.01 level.
p >0.5
p >0.9
F
2020
116.2
125.2
2021
120.1
131.47
M
2020
105.07
109.42
2021
92.46
109.26
Table 3.3: Total length (mm) for which more of 50% and 90% of the fish collected during
the FLASH sampling for gonads were mature (p >0.5 and p >0.9). ”F” indicates females
and ”M” males.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.3: Logistic regression ”mature = f(total length)” for the subset ”male roach 2021”.
Dots show the data, ”mature” being coded as 1 and ”immature” as 0. The total fish length
is expressed in mm. The red curve is the prediction from the fitted regression model. The
green (resp. blue) vertical line shows the length threshold over which more than 50%
(resp. 90%) of the male roaches are predicted to be mature by the model. The exact
threshold values are reported Table 3.3.
3.1.3
Comparison of roach fecundity
In total, 707 roach were sampled and processed to explore the GSI. 252 roach were
processed in 2020 and 455 in 2021. Table 3.4 shows the total number of immature roach
and mature roach of each sex. Among the mature roach caught in 2021, 58% were
male, and 64% in 2020. Only mature which were included in the GSI analysis. The
general evolution pattern of the GSI is the same for both sexes and years. In males, there
is a steady decrease followed by a drop when the population start spawning, whereas
the GSI of the females increases until there is drop. As indicated by the GSI, the dry
weight of ovaries grew from 2 to 5% of the fish weight during the month preceding the
spawning while the relative weight of the testes compared to the body weight decreased
from around 1% to less than 0.5%. The drop is a consequence of the fact that once the
fish is completely spawned, most of what remains of the gonads are the exterior tissues
and they thus weigh less. The drop is observed 1 to 2 weeks earlier in 2020 compared to
2021, which matches the spawning dates based on the first fish to spawn. For females,
the GSI peaks at around 4% (10­12% wet weight) (Figure 3.4) and for males, around
1% (6% wet weight) (Figure 3.5). The year, fork length and their interaction term were
found not significant predictors for GSI in females. Thus, there was not a difference in
female GSI between 2021 and 2020, no matter the length of the fish. However, all these 3
independent variables have a significant effect on the dry GSI of male roach. The analysis
of Pearson’s residuals, of the residuals plotted against the fitted values and against the
covariates indicated no problems for the validation of the model. The resulting parameters
give the following model (given that a log link function was used):
log(GSImale) =
{ 0.702 −0.011 ∗length
if year = 2020
−0.823 + 0.005 ∗length
if year = 2021.
The GSI of the male roach follows opposite patterns in 2020 and 2021. In 2020, the
predicted GSI decreases with fork length, while it increases with fork length in 2021. Using
24 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:33==
the coefficients of the regression, a 1mm­increase of fork length results in a 1.1% decrease
in GSI in 2020 whereas it increases by 0.5% in 2021. Moreover, the predicted GSI is
higher in 2021 for fish above 95 mm, i.e. on the size range gathering 80% of the mature
males. To conclude, males exhibit a higher fecundity in 2021 while female fecundity does
not show a significant difference between the years.
M
F
IM
NI
Total
2020
# fish
155
82
15
0
252
dry gonads
123
73
0
0
196
2021
# fish
178
129
145
3
455
dry gonads
176
129
29
3
337
Table 3.4: Number of male (M), female (F), immature (IM) and non­identified (NI) roach
sampled in Lake Ormstrup in 2020 and 2021 as part of the FLASH protocol and that were
processed for gonads examination. Remark: ”NI” fish were fish that had spawned and
which sex could not easily be determined. The total number of fish is reported in the lines
”# fish” while the ”dry gonads” subcategory shows the number of fish for which a gonad
subsample was dried.
Figure 3.4: GSI (% fish weight) of female roach over time in 2020 and 2021. (1: < 5cm;
2: 5­10; 3: 10­15; 4: 15­20; 5: ≥20).
Figure 3.5: GSI (% fish weight) of male roach over time in 2020 and 2021. (1: < 5cm; 2:
5­10; 3: 10­15; 4: 15­20; 5: ≥20).
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.6: Predicted and observed GSI (% fish weight) of male roach by fork length. The
GSI was calculated using the weight of the dried gonad. The solid line shows the GSI value
predicted by the glm fitted on the data: Dry GSI~length+year+interaction(length, year).
The shaded area shows the the 95% confidence interval of the predicted value. Dots mark
experimental data.
3.2
Roach fry density and growth
3.2.1
Fry density
In 2020 and 2021, the maximum fry density occurred shortly after the hatching. The peak
density in 2020 was much higher than in 2021, with 42 versus 7 fish/sampled point. The
density then decreased exponentially and reached a relatively stable level. Overall, the
density seemed higher in 2020 than 2021, although a comparison by t­test did not yield
a significant result (p = 0.16). In 2021, the sampling for fry started about 1 week after
spawning started, whereas it started later in 2020, 6 weeks after. The first 0+ roach were
caught 4 weeks after the spawning started in 2021. In 2021, there was one date (22/07)
where only 1 roach fry was caught, and this should be regarded as an outlier considering
that the density wasn’t null for the following sessions.
The type of habitat where the roach fry was found also varied during the summer. For both
years, roach fry was found inside and outside the vegetation along the shore of the lake,
in the shallower parts of the lake. At some periods, large schools were visible swimming
outside the reeds. In 2021, we observed at the end of July a switch in habitats, with over
80% of the roach fry caught on points inside the vegetation instead of being also found
outside the vegetation. The share of fry found on points inside and outside the vegetation
were then balanced during the two last sampling sessions. Overall, the habitat of fry
seemed to be variable and they were not only evolving in sheltered, shallow areas with
vegetation but also out in the open, 0.5 to 3 meters away from the vegetation with a depth
of 1­2m.
The night fishing by hoop net took place on weeks 27+28 (2020) and 27 (2021). The mean
roach fry concentration (or density) was of 7.11 fry/m3 water in 2020 and 0.26 fry/m3 water
in 2021. However, the apparently higher average of 2021 was dragged up by one transect
where circa 1300 0+ roach were caught. Many transects did not result in any catch for both
years (50% in 2021, 37% in 2020), clustered on the left Figure 3.9. The logit regression
on the presence/absence of fry with the year as an explanatory variable did not yield a
significant p­value for year, i.e. the probability of observing roach fry was not different
26 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:35==
in 2021 compared to 2021. This is coherent with the density observed during the PASE
sampling: on week 27/28, the values of the density of 0+ roach collected by electrofishing
are fairly close. The Gamma glm fitted on the hoop net densities > 0 did not find that year
had a significant effect on the intercept (p = 0.343). However, a backward elimination test
performed in R using the drop1 function based on a chi­square test produced a significant
value for ”year” (p < 0.05). There is thus a small significant effect of year, i.e. for the
transects where fry was caught, there was on average a higher density in 2020. On
the other hand, when the transect with the highest density is considered an outlier and
subsequently removed from the analysis, the effect of year as a predictor is not significant.
Hence, overall the hoop net sampling did not suggest difference in fry density between
years.
Figure 3.7: 0+ roach density (number of fish/point) found by PASE fishing in 2020 and
2021. The shaded areas show the spawning period determined by gonads examination
during the spring.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.8: Relative 0+ roach density captured by PASE compared to the peak of the
season in 2020 and 2021.
Figure 3.9: 0+ roach density captured by hoop net night sampling, in number of fish/m3
filtered water. The data was (log+0.001) transformed for visualisation purposes. The red
dots show the mean and the blue dots the median. The size range of the 0+ roach at the
time the sampling occurred is showed on the right.
3.2.2
Growth of 0+ roach
The first time fry was caught, the mean size was about identical in 2020 and 2021, re­
spectively 15.7 and 13.8. However, the growth of the fry was much better in 2021, e.g.
it took only 7 weeks for them to reach the size the roach fry had after 14 weeks in 2021.
The standard error is very low at the start, indicating these fry hatched at the same time
(Figure 3.10). The standard deviation increases as the weeks pass, which is consistent
with the size distribution spreading out (Figure 3.12). In 2020, multiple size cohorts can be
distinguished until 14 weeks after spawning, were the distribution is spread over 15mm.
Conversely, only one size cohort is visible in 2021 for the whole duration of the sampling.
As for 2020, the distribution peak flattens over time. 3.12)
28 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:37==
The size increase was stable in 2020 (Figure 3.10). In 2021, two phases stand out: a
steep size increase followed by a slower growth in August. The specific growth rate G
decreases over time. For both 2020 and 2021, the growth rate between the 2 first sam­
pling dates was in the range 4­4.5% length increase/day. It quickly dropped to less than
1%/day in 2020, while the decrease in growth rate was more gradual in 2021. Espe­
cially, the growth rate on the period from 7 to 14 weeks after spawning is much higher
in 2021. During this period, roach mean size went from 20 to 32mm in 2020 while it in­
creased from 30 to 57mm in 2021. Model validation of the Gamma regression performed
on the ratio size/numberofweekssincespawning using year as a covariate indicated no
problems. The t­test yielded a significant p­value for year as a predictor (p < 2e­16). The
adjusted parameters result in the presented Table 3.5. Assuming constant growth, the
estimated growth rate was 2.50 mm/week in 2020 and 4.00 mm/week in 2021, i.e. the
roach fry grew 1.6 times faster in 2021.
Estimate
Standard error
95% confidence interval
t value
year = 2020 (Intercept)
2.50
1.006
2.47 ­ 2.53
145.62
year = 2021
4.00
1.005
3.96 ­ 4.04
56.79
Table 3.5: Estimated growth rate for 0+ roach calculated as the ratio between the total
length (mm) and the time since spawning started (weeks), for 2020 and 2021, using a
Gamma glm regression with a log­link. Sample size: n = 864 (360 associated with the
level 2020, 504 with 2021).
Figure 3.10: Development of the mean size (mm) of 0+ roach captured by PASE in 2020
and 2021. The vertical intervals show the standard deviation of the size sample on each
date.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.11: Changes in specific growth (% increase/day) of 0+ roach captured by PASE
in 2020 and 2021.
Figure 3.12: Smoothed density estimates for the size distribution of 0+ roach caught by
PASE fishing in 2020 and 2021.
3.3
Density, size distribution and condition of the fish in the
lake before versus after the removals
Contribution: The results presented in this section were provided by C. Skov and are
integrated in this work as supporting material.
30 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:39==
3.3.1
CPUE and size distribution
In 2020 67.1 kg of fish were caught during the gillnet survey, versus 38.3 kg in 2021. The
estimated roach CPUE biomass from the 2021 standardized gillnet survey was around
55% of the 2020 roach biomass. Overall, the share of the weight that was made up of
roach stayed constant and they remain the dominant species. (Figure 3.13). Discrepan­
cies are observed depending on the species and the size class. The estimated biomass
of roach < 10 cm from the survey was dramatically reduced in 2021, from 1400 to 150
kg ­ even though 0+ roach were caught in 2021 and not in 2020. The CPUE weight of
bigger roach was reduced was 3000 to 2200 kg. When comparing the CPUE numbers
instead of the biomass, the pattern is identical (Figure 3.15), although the reduction of <
10 cm roach CPUE is less drastic. (Figure 3.14). There was a slight decline in the CPUE
biomass of perch and it is reduced by around 13%. Here as well, separating by size
classes shows that the CPUE biomass was proportionally further reduced when looking
at the perch <10 cm. (Figure 3.14). When looking at the CPUE in terms of number, there
is a marked reduction for perch > 10 cm ­ more than it is in terms of biomass ­ while the
reduction in numbers is similar for perch < 10 cm (Figure 3.15). Furthermore, while the
pike­to­roach biomass ratio remained stable, the proportion of perch biomass in relation
to roach biomass has almost doubled.
Additionally, a subsample of the fish caught during the gillnet survey was measured in
more details in 2020 (n = 7 pikes, 68 perch, 162 roach) and 2021 (n = 3 pikes, 104 perch,
142 roach). (Figure 3.16). The better growth of 0+ roach in 2021 compared to 2021 is
noticeable as this age cohort is not even represented in the 2020 data, meaning it could
not be targeted by the mesh size used. The length distribution suggests a good growth
1+ or older roach (> 8 cm) as well. Besides, the dramatic reduction in density of the
2 cohorts observed in 2020 is consistent with fishing pressure imposed by the 2 roach
removal processes (biomanipulation) that were conducted in the meantime. Moreover,
roach that were tagged in Spring 2021 and recaptured during the gillnet survey or the fish
removals by seining showed very good growth, having at least doubled their weight during
the summer (Christian Skov, unpublished data). In 2021, two age cohorts are visible on
the perch length distribution, as opposed to only one density peak in the distribution in
2020. This suggest a good growth of the young of the year as well. The density peak has
shifted by 6 to 7 cm. As a result, although the number of perch caught in each gillnet has
decreased, more perch above 15 cm are found.
Figure 3.13: Species composition (% of total biomass caught) from the gillnet survey in
2021 vs 2020.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.14: CPUE (kg) for roach and perch according to the 2020 and 2021 standardized
gillnet surveys.
Figure 3.15: CPUE (number of fish) for roach and perch according to the 2020 and 2021
standardized gillnet surveys.
3.3.2
Fish condition
The Weight­Length relationship was modeled by means of a Linear Model (lm) between
log(weight) and 3 predictors: year (2 levels), log(fork length) (continuous) and their
interaction.
The regression was performed separately for roach and pike.
For both
species, the overall regression is statistically significant (R2 = 0.9863, F(3, 157) = 3776,
p < 2.2e −16 for roach; R2 = 0.9929, F(3, 119) = 5508, p < 2.2e −16 for perch). In both
cases, all the predictors have a significant effect on the dependent variable log(weight)
as shown by the p­values in Tables 3.6 3.7. The relation between the dependent variable
and the predictors is:
Perch : log(weight) =
{ 4.12 + 2.94log(length)
if year = 2020
4.47 + 3.08log(length)
if year = 2021.
Roach : log(weight) =
{ 4.29 + 3.07log(length)
if year = 2020
5.0 + 3.33log(length)
if year = 2021.
The Weight­Length relationship is significantly different for 2021 and 2020. In both cases,
in 2021 the slope is larger and the intersect is lesser. This implies that fish at the lower
end of the length range weigh less in 2021 compared to 2020, while the bigger ones weigh
more. The interaction between year2021 and log(length) has a significant effect on the
32 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.16: Comparison of the length distribution in the 2020 and the 2021 standardized
gillnet surveys for roach and perch. Fish were grouped by 0.5 cm­wide size classes (total
length).
weight and the estimate is positive. This indicates a better body condition of the bigger
fish in 2021. As only the fish with a fork length > 8 cm, the regression does not give any
indication on the condition of 0+ roach. The Rate of Change (ROC) is calculated from the
predicted weight values. It is the ratio of the difference between the weight in 2021 and
2020 and the predicted weight in 2020, for a given length. The predicted values are calcu­
lated as a function of length and year using the fitted linear regression models presented
Tables 3.6 and 3.7. The results of both the prediction compared to the original data and of
the ROC are presented Figure 3.17. As inferred from the coefficients of the model, there
exist a size above which the fish weigh more in 2021 than in 2020, while the fish below
this size weigh less in 2021 than 2020. This size is 14.8cm for roach and 11.9cm for perch.
On the length range that was reported from the original data, the magnitude of the ROC in
the perch population is in the interval [­2.29, 1.57] (95% confidence interval: [­5.17, 3.17]).
The ROC of the roach population is in the interval [­5.39, 1.76] (95% confidence interval:
[­10.06, 3.25]). The magnitude of the difference between 2021 and 2020 is thus bigger
for roach, especially for the ones < 10 cm. All in all, the length distribution, the CPUE and
the fish condition show differences in 2021 compared to 2020.
Estimate
Std error
t value
P(>|t|)
Intercept
­4.2927
0.0908
­47.265
<2e­16 *
log(length)
3.0662
0.0346
88.606
<2e­16 *
year 2021
­0.6918
­0.2095
­3.303
0.00186 *
log(length) x year 2021
0.25706
0.07615
3.376
0.00929 *
Table 3.6: Estimated regression parameters, standard errors, t­values and P­values for
the linear regression of the Weight­Length relationship for roach caught in the gillnet sur­
vey. The coefficients are given for the weight in g and the fork length in cm. Year levels
are coded as such: 2020 = 0, 2021 = 1. * indicate statistically significant independent
predictor (p < 0.05).
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
33
==PAGE:42==
Estimate
Std error
t value
P(>|t|)
Intercept
­4.1251
0.1030
­40.046
<2e­16 *
log(length)
2.9436
0.0419
70.131
<2e­16 *
year 2021
­0.3524
­0.1265
­2.786
0.00621 *
log(length) x year 2021
0.1495
0.0510
2.841
0.00529 *
Table 3.7: Estimated regression parameters, standard errors, t­values and P­values for
the linear regression of the Weight­Length relationship for roach caught in the gillnet sur­
vey. The coefficients are given for the weight in g and the fork length in cm. Year levels
are coded as such: 2020 = 0, 2021 = 1. * indicate statistically significant independent
predictor (p < 0.05).
Figure 3.17: Weight­Length Relationship for roach (A) and perch (C). The line shows the
predicted relationship, from the estimated coefficients obtained with a multivariate linear
regression. The experimental data is included as dots. The ribbon area shows the 95%
confidence interval of the model prediction. Figures B and D show the ROC, ie the ratio
100 ∗Wp,2021−Wp,2020
Wp,2020
, as a function of the fork length (cm) for roach (B) and perch (D)
34 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:43==
4
Discussion
Aligned with the learning objectives for my master thesis project, I will start by discussing
how the fish removal affected fish population characteristics, including the patterns of
fecundity, recruitment and growth in the lake. I will then discuss which compensatory
mechanisms in Lake Ormstrup may affect the longevity of the fish removal measure, and
how, and give suggestions to how the longevity of the measure may be increased. I will
finally discuss the quality of the collected data.
4.1
The lake and its fish community before and after
biomanipulation
4.1.1
State of the lake following the restoration process
The combined amount of planktivorous fish removed from the lake in September 2020
and April 2021 was expected to have been sufficient to trigger the change of the state
of the lake from turbid to clear. This is indeed what happened in June 2021: the lake
reached a very clear state, with the Secchi depth maintaining over 1m for from 10/06 to
end of the month (Figure 4.2). Unfortunately, the water shifted back to turbid, with a peak
of blue­green algae at the beginning of July (Figure 4.1). At the end of the summer 2021
the lake was still green and turbid with a Secchi depth > 1m, meaning the lake has not
fully reverted to a clear state. This kind of event did not occur in 2020 and is in all logic
a consequence of the biomanipulation. However, the reasons that caused it to switch
back instead of being durably clear are to be understood. Interestingly, there also was a
peak in water clarity at the end of June in 2020, which was also followed by a decrease
in clarity. This suggests that in Lake Ormstrup the period at the end of June/beginning of
July is critical. The high turbidity in the lake since mid­July is evidence that the lake has
not switched back to a clear state following the 2 first fish removals.
4.1.2
Sexual maturity of roach
The characteristics of the share of mature fish, their size and the sex distribution are on
par with what is known on roach. The increase of the share of female roach as size
increases been reported in other studies [89][2][6]. This has been attributed to a better
growth of females [45][51]. In terms of size at maturity, males are mature at lower size
which is consistent with what is known about roach development; the sexual maturity sizes
match those mentioned in the literature: 8­11 cm for males, 10­13 cm for females ??[63].
The size at which more than 50% of the male roach was mature is 17mm lower in 2021
compared to 2020. As biomanipulation happened just before the winter and roach growth
is low in winter [51], we did not expect to see any change in sexual maturity size. This
sexual maturity size difference should however be put in perspective with the fact that the
distribution of the sampled roach is shifted towards shorter lengths in 2021 compared to
2020; the average size of the processed roach was 144.5mm in 2020 and 121.3mm in
2021. (see also the size distribution of the sampled size Appendix A.1). This shift stems
from the fact that on some occasions an insufficient amount of bigger roach (> 15 cm)
were caught during the weekly sampling sessions in 2021. However, more roach were
processed in 2021 (455 vs 252). The reason for that is from the combination of an effort
to include smaller size classes, the longer time period on which the sampling spanned as
well and the possibility to allocate more hours to fish processing. Overall, the conclusion
is that males are indeed mature at a smaller length as the probability that a male fish
over 109mm is over 90%, while females at that size have a probability < 50% of being
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.1: Chlorophyll­α (green) and phyocyanine, indicator of blue­green algae con­
centration (purple) trends in Lake Orsmtrup in 2020 and 2021. Note the different scales.
Remark: values are approximate. Source: Aarhus University, unpublished data.
mature; females from 125­130mm have at least a 90% probability of being mature. This
also implies that when an immature roach over 11cm is found, it is very likely to be female.
4.1.3
Spawning and fecundity of the roach
The presence of intersex roach in a water body has been linked to endocrine­disrupting
compounds from anthropogenic effluents, which imper reproduction[25]. In Lake Orm­
strup, the absence of intersex individuals support the claim that it can be assumed that
these perturbation sources are not present in the system[25]. The changes discussed
thereafter therefore reflect the natural environmental variability and the water quality con­
ditions of the lake.
In Denmark, roach is known to spawn when the water reaches 10 to 12 degrees (https://www.fiskepleje.dk/fiskeb
This is also consistent with what is described in the literature, although local variations ex­
ist (Table 4.1). In particular, roach have been described to spawn at lower temperatures
in colder countries.
In 2019­2020, Denmark had its warmest winter of the decade. On the contrary, in 2021
January and February were colder than average (Sammendrag af vinter 2020­2021, DMI);
many lakes developed a durable ice cover that year. On Lake Ormstrup, ice cover lasted
from 30­01­2021 to 25­02­2021. One of the consequences of the cold water conditions
is that the accumulation of degree­days is null for that period and it is very clear from
Figure 3.1 that this period caused a delay in degree­days accumulation. This can explain
why roach spawned 1 to 2 weeks later in 2021. Despite the delayed spawning, both the
spawning temperature range and the degree­days accumulated before spawning in 2021
are noticeably lower than in 2020. The degree­days accumulated from 01/10 until the
start of the spawning were also much lower than what had been seen in Lake Geneva
36 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.2: Secchi depth (m) in Lake Ormstrup in 2020 and 2021. Values were obtained
through direct measurements on site (Aarhus University, unpublished data)
[28]. That is especially apparent for the 2021 data. In 2021, using the same methods for
calculating the cumulative sum of degree­days, roach in the Lake Ormstrup apparently
spawned at half the value of the roach from Lake Geneva. In 2020, the upper range of the
estimated sum of degree­days accumulated before the roach spawning in Lake Ormstrup
barely overlaps the lower range in Lake Geneva. The conclusions are the same when
looking at the sliding cumulative sum for the 15 days preceding the potential spawning
date. Not only was the 2021 winter colder but the spring was as well, which explains the
discrepancy. As the method used for the calculations was the same this suggests local
adaptation to the colder climate of Denmark. Furthermore, the lake systems are very
different: the Lake Geneva is the biggest European lake and is located in Switzerland.
On top of the completely different hydrological conditions, the light conditions are thus
different and it is very likely that local roach populations have adapted, as what matters
the most is that the spawning is synchronized between all the individuals.
Thresholds for roach spawning also exhibit inter­annual variations in Lake Ormstrup. Al­
though the spawning of roach was delayed compared to 2020, the spawning threshold
were still considerably lower than in 2020. A potential bias for the difference in degree­
days accumulated at the time of spawning is that the very definition of degree­days un­
derestimates the contribution of days with lower temperatures. Besides, roach spawning
is also dictated by the photoperiod, as it has a long­term influence on gametogenesis [8].
Jafri (1989) also found that the exposure of roach to shorter photoperiod (8h light instead
of the necessary 16h) during their spawning season prevented the onset of spawning
and resulted in gonadal regression. The delayed spawning was thus caused by changes
in abiotic conditions, and not by the fish removal. Besides, it is likely that the spawning
spread over a longer period in 2020 than in 2021. Indeed, the size distribution of the roach
fry presents several peaks in 2020 (Figure 3.12). This suggests multiple hatching events
instead of one synchronized event, and potentially a spawning season more spread out
than in 2021. On the last sampling date, some fish still weren’t spawned and the ”end”
date for spawning in 2020 could like have occurred a week later than reported here. There
is thus a difference in spawning timing and length. As the main determinants for spawning
time in roach are thermal accumulation and photoperiod [8][28] and that it is not density­
dependent, it is likely to have been influenced by annual changes in abiotic conditions, i.e.
photoperiod and temperature, instead of by the biomanipulation.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
37
==PAGE:46==
Source
Area
Study
period
Spawning temperature
Gillet & Quétin, 2000
[28]
Lake Geneva, Switzer­
land
1983­2001
1150­1550
degree­
days(1); 190 ± 10dd in
the 15 previous days
Nõges
&
Järvet,
2005 [63]
Narva River basin, Es­
tonia
1951­1990
8.7°C
(range:
6.1­
11.4°C)
Vøllestad & L’Abée­
Lund, 1987 [89]
Lake Rungen, Norway
1980­1982
7.4­10.5°C
Mattheeuws
et
al.,
1981 [52]
River Meuse, Belgium
1976­1977
15°C
Table 4.1: Reported water temperatures that trigger roach spawning across various stud­
ies. (1): Degree­days calculated from 01/10 with a threshold temperature of 3°C.
4.1.4
Fry number, growth and survival
One of the reasons for failed restoration when using fish removal often is that the roach
population recovers fast, pushing the lake back into turbid state through trophic interac­
tions [82]. Recruitment, the transition of the juvenile fish to an larger, older ­ not neces­
sarily mature ­ life stage, results of the combination of the fry density, growth and survival.
Investigating the changes in these indicators after biomanipulation is thus a way to look at
the future population trends of roach. Ideally, to promote a clear state, recruitment should
be as low as possible either due to initially reduced fry density and/or then reduced fry
survival.
Passed the initial peak density, the absolute density of roach fry was not significantly differ­
ent in 2021 compared to 2020. There hence isn’t any clear evidence pointing to fry density
changes post­biomanipulation. As discussed, this could be a consequence of differences
in roach fertility. Besides, the water temperature to which the larvae was exposed at the
time of hatching was under 15 degrees in 2021, while the water temperature was already
above 15 degrees in 2020. Lower temperatures are linked to longer hatching time. Ini­
tial density was higher in 2020, which indicates that the the roach did spawn more eggs
before biomanipulation. However, final recruitment into the population depends on the
survival of the fry. As for this, I found that the fry density follows a pattern of exponential
decrease followed by a more stable trend. It is logical that the maximum fry density oc­
curs right after hatching. The number of 0+ roach then decreases due to normal mortality:
starvation and predation. The general patterns of density evolution are thus consistent
with our expectations. In 2020, the time interval between the start of spawning and the
start of the PASE sampling was longer. The peak of density could thus have been missed.
However, the size of the 0+ roach when caught for the first time were identical, which may
thus potentially be the lower bound of size that the electrofishing gear is able to sample.
(Figure 3.10). The sampling probably did not cover enough of the late summer period in
2020 to see a stabilization of the fry density development like seen in 2021 (Figure 3.8).
In 2021, the fry density became stable after week 29, suggesting that density­dependent
mortality wasn’t as high anymore. Hence, it is likely that the roach fry survival was better
in 2021 than 2020. The relative density was also higher in 2021 than 2020, meaning that
although the absolute value of the fry density was lower, a higher share survived after the
initial density peak (Figure 3.8).
The main cause of this better survival of 0+ roach could be linked to a better food avail­
38 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:47==
ability, resulting in better growth. Like for adults, a significant relationship exists between
the growth of the roach fry and the temperature [58].The improved growth roach seen in
2021, however, could not be attributed to temperature since only 525 degree­days were
accumulated from the end of May to the end of August, when 977.6 had been accumu­
lated in 2020 on an even shorter period. Differences in flow regime have also been linked
to fluctuations in roach fry growth [23], which could however not have been an influence
in Lake Ormstrup where the retention time of the water is very high. On the other hand, in
2021 the lake had a period of very low turbidity: the Secchi depth was over 1.5m during
3 weeks in June and July. When algae is the main source of turbidity in a shallow lake,
the Secchi depth is significantly correlated to the plankton density and is a good estima­
tor of it [3]. On the field, we also observed an extremely high density of zooplankton in
the lake during this period, that was not reached at any other point of the summer (own
observation).
This better growth likely also played a part in the better survival of the fry. Initial growth
may have been higher due to less competition, since the Secchi depth were similar (Fig­
ure 4.2), favouring escape from some of the size­driven predation. Better survival could
also come from a reduction in predation pressure linked to changes in the piscivorous
fish population. However, the biomanipulation process maintained the piscivorous fish
stock while decreasing the planktivorous fish biomass. It is thus unlikely for the predation
pressure to have been lower in 2021 than in 2020, especially since the perch sampled
at the gill net survey were in good condition, and likely to have been a main predator of
roach fry.
4.1.5
Fish condition
Although the growth of adult roach has been good in 2021, the condition of smaller roach
is not as good as in 2020. Conversely, the roach on the other end of the length range show
improved condition 3.17. This could result from differential allocation of energy: smaller
fish might allocate more energy into length increase, while mature fish potentially allocate
more energy to body volume growth to prepare for reproduction. Roach growth is mainly
promoted by temperature (as long as it remains in its thermal range) and food availability
[94]. The perch are piscivorous and predate on roach that are small enough compared
to their own body size. We found that the perch was in good condition, indicating a good
nutritional status. In addition, the biomass of perch relatively to roach doubled in 2021
owing to the fish removals that were performed. Especially, the absolute number of perch
over 15cm has increased compared to 2020. This is likely to have increased the predation
pressure on roach and especially 0+ roach. The perch population is thus likely to increase
their top­down control on the roach population in the years to come, which should have a
positive feedback for pushing towards a clear state.
4.2
Compensatory mechanisms following biomanipulation
and consequences
4.2.1
Roach fecundity changes
The patterns of temporal development of the GSI of the roach in the period that precedes
spawning were consistent with findings from the literature [25] [52]. Peak values were
identical to those found in the River Meuse (Belgium) [52]. After spawning, while testis
undergo a phase of quiescence during the summer, the development of the gonads of
the female roach start soon after spawning. In female roaches, a rapid increase of GSI
is observed at the end of the summer consequently to the development of vitellogenic
oocytes [25]. Gamete formation had thus already started before the first biomanipulation
procedure in September 2020. The energy that female roach were able to allocate for
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
39
==PAGE:48==
gonads growth was thus determined in conditions where the roach density had not been
decreased yet, or during the removal. We can thus hypothesize that the full magnitude
of the effects may not be seen the first year, and that the results of the samplings that
are to be conducted in 2022 should give a fuller picture of the effects of fish removal on
fish fecundity. [35]. During winter, gonad maturation is slowed or stops. When the envi­
ronmental conditions are difficult, oocytes may degenerate due to the use of their vitellus
and glycogen content as a substitute energy source [25]. Roach feeding is low in winter,
but there is still a possibility that the conversion of gonads is lower when competition for
food is reduced. This may be also be hard to measure in our data due to the very low
temperatures of the winter 2020­2021 compared to the winter 2019­2020, which is asso­
ciated with slower metabolism of the fish. I found significantly higher (dry) GSI in males in
2021 compared to 2020, while the females showed no difference in GSI between years. I
thus hypothesize that male roach may have been able to allocate more in energy in 2021
to gonads growth because it started at the same period as the fish removal was started,
whereas females had already started growing the eggs during the summer when competi­
tion for food was still higher. The data from 2022 should give us a better understanding of
the phenomena. Based on this reasoning, one may expect a higher GSI in both females
and males in spring 2022.
It should also be noted that GSI is not a perfect and direct indicator of the fish fecundity
nor of the energy allocated to gonad formation. Indeed, for a same number of eggs of the
same size, a smaller fish will have a higher GSI despite an identical potential offspring num­
ber. The variations of fish weight should also be taken into account when investigating the
variations of GSI. I thus checked whether the Fulton’s coefficient factor K =
weight
fork length3
remained stable in time for each size class in 2020 and 2021. K was stable for the size
classes 2 and 4 (ie. roach from 5­10 and 15­20 cm). for the size 3 roach, it decreased
in 2021 and was stable in 2020, and for the size class 5 roach it remained stable in 2020
while slightly increasing in 2021. A more precise way to estimate the fecundity would be
to perform histological assessment of the gonads and estimate the number of eggs per
female or per surface unit on the spawning grounds. The quality and size of the eggs
being an factor impacting the survival of the larvae, measuring the size of the eggs along
with their number would provide additional insight into the fertility patterns of roach prior
to and after biomanipulation. Since the part of the gonads that were not dried are stored
in freezers, the door remains open for performing this analysis in the future if deemed
necessary. The downsides are that this method is more time­consuming and that it does
not apply to males.
Furthermore, the influence of the female body size on the fecundity is commonly recog­
nised and have been found to be positive in numerous fish species, for example [5] [76]
[97] [88]. Besides, it was showed that larger females exhibit a disproportionately higher fe­
cundity than smaller females in marine fish [5]. Moreover, maternal age has been shown
to positively influence larvae survival and growth in black rockfish, a marine fish species
[10]. Larvae from older females showed increased starvation resistance and growth com­
pared to larvae from younger females. In walleye, a freshwater species, the strength of
maternal effect on egg size was positively correlated with the thermal conditions of the
environment, and they found that larger females were able to allocate more energy to
reproduction [22]. The reduction of the biomass of the larger roach is thus of the utmost
importance in order to reduce the recruitment and the magnitude of the compensatory
effects. Finally, the recruitment in the spawning stock biomass could, despite the initial
density being lower, be higher for the cohort born in 2021 due to improved growth and
survival.
40 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:49==
4.2.2
Improved roach growth following biomanipulation and implications
The hypothesis investigated in this study is that the removal of around 80% of the roach
biomass creates favorable conditions on the remaining roach. The good state of the
roach left in the lake then translates in increased fertility and recruitment, accelerating
the recovery of the population. In parallel, a strong roach population may increase the
predation pressure on zooplankton and weaken its control on algae.
The growth of the roach fry was significantly higher in 2021; at the end of the summer
2021 most of the 0+ roach were larger than the smallest roach were in the Spring 2020.
Increased 0+ roach size means increased predation pressure on zooplankton at the in­
dividual level, and that they were able to predate on bigger zooplankton. In particular,
a positive correlation between the length of the 0+ roach and the modal Daphnia length
was found [54], potentially inducing an increased predation on mature Daphnia and thus
hindering the reproductive capacity of the Daphnia population and their control on algae
through grazing.
Moreover, a rapid roach growth is likely to induce earlier maturation. We found mature
roach under 10cm; as the roach fry neared 7cm at the end of August, they could possibly
fall into the mature size range as soon as in Spring 2021. No mature female < 10 cm
was found however, and they are known to mature in general 1 year later than their male
counterparts [89]. The magnitude of the potential roach recruitment increase linked to
earlier recruitment into the spawning stock biomass in 2022 is thus hard to estimate as it
would increase the male:female ratio. As females release the eggs when surrounded by
males, this may not directly translate into an better recruitment.
As illustrated Figure 4.2, there was a period of high water clarity in June 2021 and a very
high zooplankton density in the water at that period (own observation). The water clarity
period matched week 4 to 7 after spawning in 2021. Roach fry apparently took advantage
of the abundant food supply. This period as a period of high growth for roach in 2021, albeit
their growth did not slow down abruptly once the water became turbid again. It is likely that
the grazing of 0+ roach and older roach on zooplankton caused the shift. Roach normally
shifts diet from zooplankton to benthic macroinverterbrates when it reaches a length of 14
to 16cm [37]. Yet, stomach content data (A. Berthelsen, DCE, unpublished yet) indicated
that some of the adult roach had also partly reverted to a zooplankton­based diet instead
of detritus and insects. Conditions of high food supply also fit the good condition and
growth that roach had during the summer 2021. The effects of biomanipulation were thus
visible but not long­lasting. The exceptional roach growth and the better survival of fry
acted as a compensatory mechanism. The lake however likely was close to the tipping
point; although substantial fish removals are still needed to obtain durable results on the
clarity of the water, our results tend to indicate that the effects should be improved in 2022.
Furthermore, adult roach also underwent a growth spurge during the summer 2021. As for
many fish species, the fecundity of the female roach (measured in number eggs/female)
increases linearly with length [89]. Size being correlated with age, fecundity also increases
with age. Vøllestad et al. (1987) found that females aged 8 or older have an mean age­
specific fecundity of circa 13.103 eggs/female while females from the age group 3+ had a
fecundity of around 2.103. A better growth of the roach during a year thus results in higher
fecundity and a higher recruitment the following year, which has an adverse effect on the
longevity of the effects of the fish removal efforts.
4.2.3
Suggestions for increasing the longevity of the method
The predation of 0+ and adult roach on zooplankton was identified as a factor limiting the
efficiency of the biomanipulation in Lake Ormstrup, not only through the direct reduction
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
41
==PAGE:50==
on zooplankton community but also because it leads to improved growth and fish condi­
tion, which then creates favorable condition for increased spawning. Identifying spawning
grounds and interfering with spawning could help reduce the amount of roach fry. Another
option would be to monitor the spawning behaviour of the roach and to subsequently tar­
get the spawning areas at the time of spawning. In Lake Ormstrup, analysing the spatial
movements of the acoustic­tagged roach at the time of spawning could give an indication
on which areas to target. I acknowledge, however, that this would not be applicable in the
majority of lakes, which are not as closely monitored as the Lake Ormstrup is. For logisti­
cal reasons, the fish removals also have to be scheduled well ahead. A possible way to
plan fish removals during the spawning but ahead of time would be to assess whether the
winter has been cold and if roach are likely to spawn at the same dates as in 2020 or as in
2021, or simply to schedule a fish removal during the week overlapped by the spawning
periods in both 2020 and 2021, which requires a priori information on the lake and could
not be done the first year.
4.3
Methods and potential bias
For each type of data collection, a standardized protocol for sampling had been estab­
lished before the start of the data collection in 2020. In some cases, adjustments were
made, for example adding points, sampling on a longer time period and alternating insid­
e/outside the vegetation for PASE fishing, as well calculating the dry weight of the gonads.
Most of these changes were made at the beginning of the sampling in 2020, and should
thus not affect the quality of the data. It, however, explains why some dates may miss
a type of data and why comparison and patterns exploration might prove difficult when
data is insufficient. For instance, due to the easiness of catching large roaches in suffi­
cient numbers, smaller roach (< 13 cm) may have been overlooked for gonads sampling
in 2020 (see the size distribution of the data Figure A.1). On the other hand, the required
sample size could not always be reached in 2021 even after increased effort, namely
putting more bait traps and trying out diverse strategies for catching adult roach. Despite
the standardized protocols, we also feel it is necessary to point out a potential operator
bias. Indeed, PASE and hoop net samplings, as well as gonads processing were not
carried by the same persons in 2020 and 2021.
The sampling was usually done at the same time of the day and lasted for 1.5 to 2.5 hours,
depending on the amount of fry and points. One of the potential bias in PASE fishing is
human: is may be tempting to aim for the school of fish or to put the electrode where fish
is visible. However, the person sailing the boat is the one who basically decides where
the next point will be. Following the in/out alternation also ensured that even though a
school of fry may have been spotted outside the reed in was not targeted when the point
was supposed to be inside. Furthermore, apart from when the fish were schooling, it was
usually impossible to see them before the were stunned, which also avoids the decision
bias. When fishing in a shallow are, materials such as detritus and aquatic insects are
resuspended from the benthic zone because of the upwelling caused by the electrode and
the net. In lentic systems, re­deposit will take some time to deposit again. 0+ fish may
thus be attracted to the point once it has been sampled, which is why it is advised to wait
a sufficient time before resampling [19]. Here, the points were sufficiently far apart not
to be disturbed one with another and we went around the lake progressively and did not
come back on previously sampled areas except on 1 occasion. When that happened, we
checked on the GPS that the chosen point was not close any previously sampled point,
and the data should thus not be affected. Moreover, as many as 5 different people carried
PASE fishing in 2021, all having different levels of experience in carrying such surveys.
Despite having read the protocol, it might for instance have been tempting to get all the
42 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:51==
fish that were visible; on the other hand, the dense reed areas in which fell some of the
PASE points made it impossible to do a sweeping movement at the end as described in
the protocol. Overall, particular attention was paid to clearly remind the protocols, along
with the explanations on the potential sources of bias, which should limit operator bias. In
the case of PASE fishing, the bias is mitigated by the obvious fact that the amount of fish
there is to catch at some point is anyways density dependent, i.e. the bias is limited by
the density itself; events such as a high peak or a low density are thus still an accurate
depiction of the 0+ roach density.
For the hoop net sampling, the decision was made to sample at the same dates in 2020
and 2021. However, the size range of the roach fry were already different at the dates of
the sampling: 20­28 mm in 2020, and 30­40 mm in 2021 (Figure D.1). The fry catchability
was thus potentially different as larger fish may be able to escape the net more easily,
potentially yielding a conservative estimate of the density in 2021. On the other hand, as
the spawning was delayed in 2021 compared to 2020, the hoop net sampling occurred
earlier relatively to spawning time in 2021. The fry had thus been subject to a lower
mortality at the time of the survey, which would potentially overestimate the fry density in
2021. In the light of two bias working in different directions, it is hard to estimate which one
could potentially dominate the other. Furthermore, the transects were done at a higher
speed in 2020, 9km/h on average versus 6.8 km/h in 2021, which would theoretically
reduce net avoidance and increase the catch. However, the transects that resulted in the
most catch were the ones done the slowest (6­8.5 km/h), and it is thus not certain that a
higher speed results in a better catch.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
43
==PAGE:52==
44 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:53==
5
Conclusion
This goal of this study was to to investigate changes in population characteristics of plank­
tivorous fish following a biomanipulation and to analyze how the fish removal affected the
fish populations in the lake. Focus was on evaluating changes in species composition
and their relative density, growth and roach fecundity and recruitment.
Although biomanipulation by fish removal is a standard measure in Europe to combat
eutrophication, very few lakes have been as closely and holistically monitored before,
during and after the process as Lake Ormstrup was and still is. The biomanipulation by
fish removal in Lake Ormstrup started in September 2020 and by spring 2021, 4.7 tons
of planktivorous roach was removed, estimated to be around 80% of the biomass. As a
result, the lake turned temporarily into a clear­water state during the summer 2021 but fell
back to the turbid state after a relative short period of time.
I explored whether compensatory mechanisms could have accelerated the recovery of
roach biomass after the biomanipulation (i.e. during the summer 2021), which subse­
quently could have played a role in the short longevity in the clear water state. I found
that the biomanipulation caused an increase in roach fertility, or the density of roach fry.
Moreover, the larger roach were in better condition. As larger fish contribute more to
the fecundity of the population than small fish, they might thus have a higher fecundity
next spring (2022) which could introduce additional compensatory mechanisms and ulti­
mately undermine the biomanipulation efforts. The results also suggest that one of the
main compensatory mechanisms in Lake Ormstrup was increased roach fry growth and
survival, likely thanks to a higher food availability when the lake was clear. This probably
contributed to reducing the zooplankton biomass and increasing the turbidity of the water
during the clear water phase during summer 2021.
The fish removal will be performed again at the Spring 2022. The same surveys as in
2020 and 2021 will be carried in 2022 and should further our knowledge of the compen­
satory mechanisms at play in the lake, potentially confirming the findings and hypothesis
we made after the first year or finding an evolution in fish population characteristics and
reproduction patterns.
The Lake Ormstrup is a small, shallow lake and as such is representative of many of
lakes in Denmark and in Europe. Compensatory mechanisms leading to rapid recovery
of the biomass of planktivorous fish, such as roach, following a biomanipulation, are often
used as an explanation as to why biomanipulated lakes often rapidly return to a turbid
state. Still the exact mechanisms behind this, such as increased survival and growth of
0+ planktivorous, have not often been well described. The results presented here can thus
hopefully further our understanding of the response of fish communities to biomanipulation
when restoring shallow eutrophic lakes and improve future management measures.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
45
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
Jonathan Abell. Shallow lakes restoration review: A literature review. Waikato Re­
gional Council, 2018.
[2]
A Adrović, R Škrijelj, and I Skenderović. “Ecological characteristics of the roach (Ru­
tilus rutilus L.) and bream (Abramis brama L.) in the reservoir of the Lake Modrac”.
In: Acta Agriculturae Serbica 14.27 (2009), pp. 23–33.
[3]
Guadiosa Almazan and Claude E Boyd. “An evaluation of Secchi disk visibility for
estimating plankton density in fish ponds”. In: Hydrobiologia 61.3 (1978), pp. 205–
208.
[4]
Elisabeth S Bakker et al. “Restoring macrophyte diversity in shallow temperate
lakes: biotic versus abiotic constraints”. In: Hydrobiologia 710.1 (2013), pp. 23–37.
[5]
Diego R Barneche et al. “Fish reproductive­energy output increases disproportion­
ately with body size”. In: Science 360.6389 (2018), pp. 642–645.
[6]
Sercan Başkurt et al. “The life­history traits of widespread freshwater fish species:
the case of Roach Rutilus rutilus (Linnaeus, 1758)(Pisces: Teleostei) in water bodies
at the southern limits of distribution”. In: Zoology in the Middle East 61.4 (2015),
pp. 339–348.
[7]
T Douglas Beard Jr, Michael J Hansen, and Stephen R Carpenter. “Development
of a regional stock–recruitment model for understanding factors affecting walleye
recruitment in northern Wisconsin lakes”. In: Transactions of the American Fisheries
Society 132.2 (2003), pp. 382–391.
[8]
Roger Beelen et al. “Etude comparative de la stratégie de reproduction du gardon
(Rutilus Rutilus L.) et du goujon (Gobio gobio L.) sous des conditions thermiques
contrôlées. Relation en tre la température et l’ovogenèse.” In: Boletim do Instituto
de Pesca 25.único (2018), pp. 31–43.
[9]
Jürgen Benndorf. “Food web manipulation without nutrient control: a useful strategy
in lake restoration?” In: Swiss journal of hydrology 49.2 (1987), pp. 237–248.
[10]
Steven A Berkeley, Colin Chapman, and Susan M Sogard. “Maternal age as a de­
terminant of larval growth and survival in a marine fish, Sebastes melanops”. In:
Ecology 85.5 (2004), pp. 1258–1264.
[11]
Claes Bernes et al. “What is the influence of a reduction of planktivorous and ben­
thivorous fish on water quality in temperate eutrophic lakes? A systematic review”.
In: Environmental Evidence 4.1 (2015). PII: 32. DOI: 10.1186/s13750-015-0032-9.
[12]
Natàlia Blázquez Pallı́. “A comparison of two methods to reduce internal phosphorus
cycling in lakes: Aluminium versus Phoslock”. In: (2015).
[13]
Myriam Bormans, Blahoslav Maršálek, and Daniel Jančula. “Controlling internal
phosphorus loading in lakes by physical methods to reduce cyanobacterial blooms:
a review”. In: Aquatic Ecology 50.3 (2016), pp. 407–422.
[14]
Noel Burns, John McIntosh, and Paul Scholes. “Managing the lakes of the Rotorua
district, New Zealand”. In: Lake and reservoir Management 25.3 (2009), pp. 284–
296.
[15]
Stephen R. Carpenter. “Eutrophication of aquatic ecosystems: bistability and soil
phosphorus”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 102.29 (2005), pp. 10002–10005. ISSN: 0027­8424. DOI: 10.
1073/pnas.0503959102. URL: https://www.pnas.org/content/102/29/10002.
46 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:55==
[16]
M. J. Catalano et al. “Evaluating short­term effects of omnivorous fish removal on
water quality and zooplankton at a subtropical lake”. In: Hydrobiologia 655.1 (2010).
PII: 418, pp. 159–169. ISSN: 0018­8158. DOI: 10.1007/s10750-010-0418-1.
[17]
Kyle A Chezik, Nigel P Lester, and Paul A Venturelli. “Fish growth and degree­days
I: selecting a base temperature for a within­population study”. In: Canadian Journal
of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 71.1 (2014), pp. 47–55.
[18]
GH Copp. “Electrofishing for fish larvae and 0+ juveniles: equipment modifications
for increased efficiency with short fishes”. In: Aquaculture Research 20.4 (1989),
pp. 453–462.
[19]
Gordon H Copp. “Patterns of diel activity and species richness in young and small
fishes of European streams: a review of 20 years of point abundance sampling by
electrofishing”. In: Fish and Fisheries 11.4 (2010), pp. 439–460.
[20]
Guillaume Dauphin et al. “A Bayesian approach to estimating Atlantic salmon fry
densities using a rapid sampling technique”. In: Fisheries Management and Ecology
16.5 (2009), pp. 399–408.
[21]
JM Elliott and Margaret Anne Hurley. “Predicting fluctuations in the size of newly
emerged sea­trout fry in a Lake District stream”. In: Journal of Fish Biology 53.5
(1998), pp. 1120–1133.
[22]
Zachary S Feiner et al. “Thermal environment and maternal effects shape egg size
in a freshwater fish”. In: Ecosphere 7.5 (2016), e01304.
[23]
PA Frear and IG Cowx. Factors Affecting Coarse Fish Recruitment: Phase II–Examination
and Analysis of Existing Environment Agency Data. Bristol: Environment Agency,
2003.
[24]
Kostas Ganias and Susan Lowerre­Barbieri. “Oocyte recruitment and fecundity type
in fishes: Refining terms to reflect underlying processes and drivers”. In: Fish and
Fisheries 19.3 (2018), pp. 562–572.
[25]
Perrine Geraudie et al. “Roach (Rutilus rutilus) reproductive cycle: a study of bio­
chemical and histological parameters in a low contaminated site”. In: Fish Physiol­
ogy and Biochemistry 36.3 (2010), pp. 767–777.
[26]
M Gerbron et al. “Evidence of altered fertility in female roach (Rutilus rutilus) from
the River Seine (France)”. In: Environmental pollution 191 (2014), pp. 58–62.
[27]
Nick Giles. Wildlife after gravel: twenty years of practical research by the Game
Conservancy and ARC. Game Conservancy Fordingbridge, UK, 1992.
[28]
Christian Gillet and Philippe Quetin. “Effect of temperature changes on the repro­
ductive cycle of roach in Lake Geneva from 1983 to 2001”. In: Journal of fish biology
69.2 (2006), pp. 518–534.
[29]
Jin­Yong Ha et al. “Lake restoration by biomanipulation using piscivore and Daphnia
stocking; results of the biomanipulation in Japan”. In: Limnology 14.1 (2013), pp. 19–
30.
[30]
Gretchen JA Hansen et al. “Predicting walleye recruitment as a tool for prioritizing
management actions”. In: Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 72.5
(2015), pp. 661–672.
[31]
Joan Holst Hansen. “Spatial ecology of lacustrine fishes: ecological effects and ap­
plied aspects”. In: (2018).
[32]
Yann Hautier, Pascal A Niklaus, and Andy Hector. “Competition for light causes
plant biodiversity loss after eutrophication”. In: Science 324.5927 (2009), pp. 636–
638.
[33]
Salim Heddam, Mariusz Ptak, and Senlin Zhu. “Modelling of daily lake surface wa­
ter temperature from air temperature: Extremely randomized trees (ERT) versus
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
47
==PAGE:56==
Air2Water, MARS, M5Tree, RF and MLPNN”. In: Journal of Hydrology 588 (2020),
p. 125130.
[34]
Gene Helfman et al. The diversity of fishes: biology, evolution, and ecology. John
Wiley & Sons, 2009.
[35]
JM Hellawell. “The growth, reproduction and food of the roach Rutilus rutilus (L.), of
the River Lugg, Herefordshire”. In: Journal of Fish Biology 4.4 (1972), pp. 469–486.
[36]
Christopher W Hickey and Max M Gibbs. “Lake sediment phosphorus release management—
decision support and risk assessment framework”. In: New Zealand Journal of Ma­
rine and Freshwater Research 43.3 (2009), pp. 819–856.
[37]
Joakim Hjelm, Gerco H van de Weerd, and Ferdinand A Sibbing. “Functional link
between foraging performance, functional morphology, and diet shift in roach (Ru­
tilus rutilus)”. In: Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 60.6 (2003),
pp. 700–709.
[38]
M Hupfer et al. “Lake restoration”. In: (2008).
[39]
E Jeppesen et al. “Fish manipulation as a lake restoration tool in shallow, eutrophic,
temperate lakes 2: threshold levels, long­term stability and conclusions”. In: Bioma­
nipulation Tool for Water Management. Springer, 1990, pp. 219–227.
[40]
ERIK JEPPESEN and ILKKA SAMMALKORPI. “13∙Lakes”. In: Handbook of eco­
logical restoration 2 (2002), p. 297.
[41]
Erik Jeppesen et al. “Trophic structure, species richness and biodiversity in Danish
lakes: changes along a phosphorus gradient”. In: Freshwater biology 45.2 (2000),
pp. 201–218.
[42]
Erik Jeppesen et al. “Biomanipulation as a restoration tool to combat eutrophication:
recent advances and future challenges”. In: Advances in ecological research 47
(2012), pp. 411–488.
[43]
Susan Jobling et al. “Wild intersex roach (Rutilus rutilus) have reduced fertility”. In:
Biology of reproduction 67.2 (2002), pp. 515–524.
[44]
G Kirillin and T Shatwell. “Generalized scaling of seasonal thermal stratification in
lakes”. In: Earth­Science Reviews 161 (2016), pp. 179–190.
[45]
Stavroula Kyritsi and Antonis K Kokkinakis. “Age, Growth, Reproduction and Fecun­
dity of Roach Rutilus rutilus from Volvi Lake, Northern Greece”. In: Turkish Journal
of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 20.10 (2020), pp. 717–726.
[46]
L’Essor Savoyard. L’eau du lac du Bourget jugée trop propre par les pêcheurs.
22/09/2021. URL: https://www.lessorsavoyard.fr/29508/article/2021- 08- 26/lac-
du-bourget-son-eau-jugee-trop-propre-par-les-pecheurs (visited on 09/22/2021).
[47]
Eddy HRR Lammens et al. “Consequences of biomanipulation for fish and fisheries”.
In: (2001).
[48]
TL Lauridsen et al. “Fiskeundersøgelse i søer: Methods for use i søare in the aquatic
environment”. In: (1998).
[49]
Chengfeng Le et al. “Eutrophication of lake waters in China: cost, causes, and con­
trol”. In: Environmental management 45.4 (2010), pp. 662–668.
[50]
JK Leslie and CA Timmins. “Enhancement of ecological studies of freshwater larval
fish: shore sampling”. In: Journal of applied ichthyology 8.1­4 (1992), pp. 214–221.
[51]
RHK Mann. “Observations on the age, growth, reproduction and food of the roach
Rutilus rutilus (L.) in two rivers in southern England”. In: Journal of Fish Biology 5.6
(1973), pp. 707–736.
[52]
A. Mattheeuws et al. “Etude de la reproduction du gardon (Rutilus rutilus) et des ef­
fets d’une élévation provoquée de la température en Meuse sur cette reproduction”.
In: Hydrobiologia 85.3 (1981). PII: BF00017615, pp. 271–282. ISSN: 0018­8158.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00017615.
48 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:57==
[53]
T Mehner et al. “How to link biomanipulation and sustainable fisheries management:
a step­by­step guideline for lakes of the European temperate zone”. In: Fisheries
Management and Ecology 11.3­4 (2004), pp. 261–275.
[54]
Thomas Mehner et al. “Is the midsummer decline of Daphnia really induced by age­
0 fish predation? Comparison of fish consumption and M Daphnia mortality and life
history parameters in a biomanipulated reservoir”. In: Journal of Plankton Research
20.9 (1998), pp. 1797–1811.
[55]
Thomas Mehner et al. “Biomanipulation of lake ecosystems: successful applications
and expanding complexity in the underlying science”. In: Freshwater Biology 47.12
(2002), pp. 2453–2465. ISSN: 00465070. DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2427.2002.01003.x.
[56]
M­L. Meijer et al. “Long­term responses to fish­stock reduction in small shallow
lakes: interpretation of five­year results of four biomanipulation cases in The Nether­
lands and Denmark”. In: Nutrient Dynamics and Biological Structure in Shallow
Freshwater and Brackish Lakes. Ed. by E. Mortensen et al. Dordrecht: Springer
Netherlands, 1994, pp. 457–466. ISBN: 978­90­481­4360­3. DOI: 10.1007/978-94-
017-2460-9_40.
[57]
Marie­Louise Meijer. Biomanipulation in the Netherlands: 15 years of experience.
2000.
[58]
CA Mills and RHK Mann. “Environmentally­induced fluctuations in year­class strength
and their implications for management”. In: Journal of Fish Biology 27 (1985), pp. 209–
226.
[59]
Brian Moss et al. “Progressive restoration of a shallow lake: a 12­year experiment
in isolation, sediment removal and biomanipulation”. In: Journal of applied Ecology
(1996), pp. 71–86.
[60]
J Nynca et al. “Effect of double freezing fish semen on sperm motility and fertility”.
In: Aquaculture 530 (2021), p. 735782.
[61]
Billy Nzau Matondo et al. “Fertility in first­generation hybrids of roach, Rutilus rutilus
(L.), and silver bream, Blicca bjoerkna (L.)” In: Journal of Applied Ichthyology 24.1
(2008), pp. 63–67.
[62]
Patrice Pawiroredjo et al. “Degree­days as a tool to determine the heating require­
ment for channel catfish spawning in earthen ponds”. In: North American Journal of
Aquaculture 70.3 (2008), pp. 328–337.
[63]
Peeter Nõges and Arvo Järvet. “Climate driven changes in the spawning of roach
(Rutilus rutilus (L.)) and bream (Abramis brama (L.)) in the Estonian part of the Narva
River basin”. In: Boreal Environment Research 10.1 (2005). ISSN: 1239­6095.
[64]
Martin R. Perrow et al. “Biomanipulation in shallow lakes: state of the art”. In: Shal­
low Lakes ’95. Ed. by Lech Kufel, Andrzej Prejs, and Jan Igor Rybak. Dordrecht:
Springer Netherlands, 1997, pp. 355–365. ISBN: 978­94­010­6382­1. DOI: 10.1007/
978-94-011-5648-6_37.
[65]
Spencer A Peterson. “Lake restoration by sediment removal 1”. In: JAWRA Journal
of the American Water Resources Association 18.3 (1982), pp. 423–436.
[66]
Sebastiano Piccolroaz. “Prediction of lake surface temperature using the air2water
model: guidelines, challenges, and future perspectives”. In: Advances in Oceanog­
raphy and Limnology 7.1 (2016).
[67]
Sebastiano Piccolroaz, Marco Toffolon, and Bruno Majone. “A simple lumped model
to convert air temperature into surface water temperature in lakes”. In: Hydrology
and earth system sciences 17.8 (2013), pp. 3323–3338.
[68]
William Edwin Ricker. “Computation and interpretation of biological statistics of fish
populations”. In: Bull. Fish. Res. Bd. Can. 191 (1975), pp. 1–382.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
49
==PAGE:58==
[69]
Liselotte Sander Johansson and Torben Linding Lauridsen. “Fiskeundersøgelse i
søer”. In: (2019).
[70]
Marten Scheffer et al. “Alternative equilibria in shallow lakes”. In: Trends in ecology
& evolution 8.8 (1993), pp. 275–279.
[71]
Marten Scheffer et al. “Catastrophic shifts in ecosystems”. In: Nature 413.6856
(2001), pp. 591–596.
[72]
D. W. Schindler. “Evolution of phosphorus limitation in lakes”. eng. In: Science
195.4275 (1977). Journal Article, pp. 260–262. ISSN: 1095­9203. DOI: 10.1126/
science.195.4275.260. eprint: 17787798. URL: https://science.sciencemag.org/content/
195/4275/260?ijkey=c1cf20d4297bb3dc0f6d1d3a81b1101d18ec3bf3&keytype2=tf_
ipsecsha.
[73]
N. A. Serediak, E. E. Prepas, and G. J. Putz. “11.8 ­ Eutrophication of Freshwa­
ter Systems”. In: Treatise on geochemistry. Ed. by Heinrich D. Holland and Karl
K. Turekian. Oxford: Elsevier, 2014, pp. 305–323. ISBN: 978­0­08­098300­4. DOI:
10.1016/B978-0-08-095975-7.00908-6. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780080959757009086.
[74]
Joseph Shapiro. “Biomanipulation: the next phase — making it stable”. In: Bioma­
nipulation Tool for Water Management. Ed. by Ramesh D. Gulati et al. Dordrecht:
Springer Netherlands, 1990, pp. 13–27. ISBN: 978­90­481­4074­9. DOI: 10.1007/
978-94-017-0924-8_2.
[75]
Arthur C Simpson. “The spawning of plaice in the North Sea”. In: Fish. Invest. Lond.
Ser. 2 (1959), pp. 1–111.
[76]
Jon Egil Skjæraasen et al. “Size­, energy­and stage­dependent fecundity and the
occurrence of atresia in the Northeast Arctic haddock Melanogrammus aeglefinus”.
In: Fisheries research 138 (2013), pp. 120–127.
[77]
Christian Skov et al. “Piscivory of 0+ pike (Esox lucius L.) in a small eutrophic lake
and its implication for biomanipulation”. In: Hydrobiologia 506.1 (2003), pp. 481–
487.
[78]
Christian Skov et al. “Influences of environmental cues, migration history, and habi­
tat familiarity on partial migration”. In: Behavioral Ecology 21.6 (2010), pp. 1140–
1146.
[79]
Christian Skov et al. “Biomanipulating streams: a supplementary tool in lake restora­
tion”. In: Hydrobiologia 829.1 (2019), pp. 205–216.
[80]
Martin Søndergaard. Nutrient Dynamics in Lakes:­with Emphasis on Phosphorus
Sediment and Lake Restoration. NERI, 2007.
[81]
Martin Søndergaard, Jens Peder Jensen, and Erik Jeppesen. “Role of sediment
and internal loading of phosphorus in shallow lakes”. In: Hydrobiologia 506.1 (2003),
pp. 135–145.
[82]
Martin Søndergaard et al. “Lake restoration: successes, failures and long­term ef­
fects”. In: Journal of Applied ecology 44.6 (2007), pp. 1095–1105.
[83]
Martin Søndergaard et al. “Lake restoration by fish removal: short­and long­term
effects in 36 Danish lakes”. In: Ecosystems 11.8 (2008), pp. 1291–1305.
[84]
Martin Søndergaard et al. “Repeated fish removal to restore lakes: case study of
Lake Væng, Denmark—two biomanipulations during 30 years of monitoring”. In:
Water 9.1 (2017), p. 43.
[85]
Craig Soupir et al. “BIOMANIPULATION OF SHALLOW WETLANDS IN SOUTH­
ERN MINNESOTA USING ROTENONE RECLAMATION: ROTENONE MAXIMUM
CONCENTRATION AND DEGRADATION”. In: ().
[86]
THOMAS L THEIS. “Physical and chemical treatment of lake sediments”. In: Lake
Restoration: Proceedings of a National Conference, August 22­24, 1978, Minneapo­
50 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:59==
lis, Minnesota. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water Planning and
Standards. 1979, p. 115.
[87]
DLa Trudgill et al. “Thermal time–concepts and utility”. In: Annals of Applied Biology
146.1 (2005), pp. 1–14.
[88]
Silva Uusi­Heikkilä et al. “Paternal body size affects reproductive success in laboratory­
held zebrafish (Danio rerio)”. In: Environmental Biology of Fishes 93.4 (2012), pp. 461–
474.
[89]
Leif Asbjørn Vøllestad and Jan Henning L’Abée­Lund. “Reproductive biology of
stream­spawning roach, Rutilus rutilus”. In: Environmental Biology of Fishes 18.3
(1987). PII: BF00000361, pp. 219–227. ISSN: 0378­1909. DOI: 10.1007/BF00000361.
[90]
Kenneth J Wagner. Preface: Advances in phosphorus inactivation. 2017.
[91]
Claus Wedekind. “Lek­like spawning behaviour and different female mate prefer­
ences in roach (Rutilus rutilus)”. In: Behaviour 133.9­10 (1996), pp. 681–695.
[92]
L Wilson, W Barnett, et al. “Degree­days: an aid in crop and pest management”. In:
California Agriculture 37.1 (1983), pp. 4–7.
[93]
AB Wood and DR Jordan. “Fertility of roach× bream hybrids, Rutilus rutilus (L.)×
Abramis brama (L.), and their identification”. In: Journal of Fish Biology 30.3 (1987),
pp. 249–261.
[94]
Robert J Wootton. Ecology of teleost fishes. Vol. 1. Springer Science & Business
Media, 2012.
[95]
P Xie et al. “Impacts of eutrophication on biodiversity of plankton community”. In:
Acta Hydrobiol. Sinica 20.suppl (1996), pp. 30–37.
[96]
Lanying Yang et al. “Rln3a is a prerequisite for spermatogenesis and fertility in male
fish”. In: The Journal of steroid biochemistry and molecular biology 197 (2020),
p. 105517.
[97]
Colleen E Zastrow, Edward D Houde, and Elizabeth H Saunders. “Quality of striped
bass (Morone saxatilis) eggs in relation to river source and female weight”. In: Rap­
ports et Proces­verbaux des Réunions du Conseil International pour l’Exploration
de la Mer 191 (1989), pp. 34–42.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
51
==PAGE:60==
52 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:61==
A
Sampling of fish for gonads
A.1
Distribution of the sampled size in 2020 and 2021
The aim is to get, per week, at least 12 fish from each size class (5­10cm, 10­15cm, 15­
20cm, 25+cm), and 20 to 25 fish if possible, so as to have a more representative sample.
Figure A.1: Distribution (in number) of the size of the roach processed as part of the
FLASH protocol for gonads. Bin size: 10 mm.
A.2
Protocol for sampling, fish processing and gonads
processing
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
53
==PAGE:62==
 
 
Protocol for FLASH sampling 
1. Sampling of fish  
What to sample 
Ideally, (at least) 12 fish of each size group should be sampled. The size groups are 5-10 cm, 
10-15cm, 15-20cm, 20-25cm, 25+ cm.  
Methods for sampling 
• 
Electrofishing 
• 
Gillnets (left overnight) 
• 
Bait traps. The bait is made by mixing breading, canned corn, oat flakes, vanilla extract, 
liquid bait flavour and water. (Left overnight) 
 
 
Bait trap similar to those used. 
• 
Fyke nets (Left overnight). 
The fish are conserved in a cool box until the following day. 
 
2. Fish processing 
 
• 
Measure the total length (1mm precision) 
• 
Measure the fork length (1mm precision) 
• 
Weight the fish (0.1g precision). 
• 
Take a picture of the fish on the checkered tray. The scale envelope with the fish ID 
should be visible on the picture. The ID is of the type Orm, sk-170420-1 (Orm= 
Ormstrup; sk=skalle (roach), 170420 =date; 1= incrementing number). 
• 
Take a scale, put in the envelope 
• 
Open the fish and take the gonads out. Weight the whole gonads with a 0.001g 
precision. 
• 
Take a small tray, it should be numbered with the number of the current fish. Weight the 
empty tray with a 0.001 precision 
• 
Cut 10-30% of the gonads (or circa 0.1 g), and weight it with the tray (no need to do the 
zero on the scale), with a 0.001g precision. 
• 
Put the rest of the gonad in a ziplock bag identified with the fish ID.  
• 
Put the gonads subsamples in the oven for 24 to 48h at 60°C, until they are dry.  
• 
Once they are dry, weight them again with their tray. (0.001g precision). 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
 
 
Camera setup 
 
 
 
Gonads subsamples on their numbered tray, on the oven tray. 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
 
 
Whole setup (for reference) 
==PAGE:65==
B
Protocol ­ Point abundance sampling
by electrofishing (PASE)
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
57
==PAGE:66==
Point fishing on the Lake Ormstrup 
 
Purpose: mapping the relative density and seasonal development of fish fry (roach, perch 
and pike) in the Lake Ormstrup. 
 
Procedure: 
Where to fish 
80 points are fished along the shore of the lake (i.e circa 1 point every 20 meters). One point 
of two is inside the vegetation, the other approximately 1m outside the vegetation. In 2021, 
110 points were fished for a good part of the sampling, with the intent of selecting 80 random 
points for the analysis. 
The points in the vegetation are placed as far as possible before the vegetation becomes too 
dense. The person operating the electrode should decide on the point for fishing before arriving 
on it, so that it is not biased by the presence or absence of fish.  
 
Information to take at each point 
• 
Measure the water depth using the net which handle is graduated every 10cm (once 
the fishing was done). 
• 
Take the waypoint on the GPS 
• 
Write down the vegetation type. 
 
Duration of the fishing 
Every point should be fished for 15 seconds. In the meantime, make three “blind nets” 
movements in front of the electrode, meaning they occur after approximately 2, 8 and 13 
seconds. A “blind net” movement consists in pulling the net from the bottom to the top, so that 
the individuals at greater depths are moved up. As soon as the 15 seconds are over, rotate 
the net at the surface doing a single S shape in order to sweep the area around the electrode. 
The net should thus not actively fish for individual fish that were stunned by the current - in 
order to be conducted in a standardized manner. 
 
Which fish to collect 
Everything that has landed in the net must be documented. After counting, bigger fish are put 
back in the lake, while a subsample of the fry is taken aside and stored in a bucket for later 
use. If larger individuals have been captured, these are scanned for PIT marks. In the case of 
a large perch or large roach (> 20 cm), this is stored for acoustic marking.   
• 
Pike fry: measure the length and write it down. Put it in ethanol, take it home. On the 
tube should be written the length, point number at which it was caught, and the 
standard ID of the fish (with incrementing number). 
• 
Perch fry: count them, write down, and store in a bucket. 
• 
Roach fry: count them, write down, and store in a bucket. 
==PAGE:67==
• 
Adult pikes: Measure, weigh, scan for PIT-tag before releasing. 
• 
Adult perch: Measure, scan for PIT-tag, discard. Perch > 20 cm may be put aside for 
acoustic tagging. 
• 
Adult roach: Measure, scan for PIT-tag (if >12cm). If it is tagged, release it. If not and 
it’s over 20 cm, may be put aside for acoustic tagging. If it is not tagged and too small, 
they are kept and taken home to be frozen. The total weight of removed roach is 
weighed.  
 
 
Once all the points are fished  
Measure a sample (50-60 fish) of the roach and the perch fry to the nearest mm, conserve 
them in ethanol-filled tubes. Write on each tube the date and the lake name. Measure the 
length and write it down. Put it in ethanol, take it home. On the tube should be written the 
length, point number at which it was caught, and the standard ID of the fish (with incrementing 
number). For each transect, take the starting and end waypoint on the GPS, write down the 
vegetation type and the depth range.  
 
==PAGE:68==
C
Correction for frozen roach
Figure C.1: Pre­ versus post­ freezer fish total length (mm), fork length (mm) and weight
(g). Regression lines and coefficients color match that of the data. Number of fish: n = 31.
Fork length range: 135­174mm (average: 155.7mm)
Measure
Correction coefficient post­freezer →pre­freezer
r2
Fork length (mm)
1.03
0.9995
Total length (mm)
1.02
0.9999
Weight (g)
1.04
0.9983
Table C.1: Correction coefficients to get the corrected value of roach that was stored in
the freezer
60 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:69==
D
Hoopnet fry sampling protocol
The protocol was designed following the guidelines provided in [48].
Figure D.1: Hoop net with the flowmeter visible in the center of the net opening.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
61
==PAGE:70==
Hoopnet fishery in Ormstrup Sø – protocol 
Goal: to gather knowledge about the relative/absolute density and composition of fry. 
Equipment: The fry net with opening ø40 is used. It is mounted in the Kegnæs-408 boat and 
fixed with the associated mounting equipment. In the middle of the opening of the fry net, a 
flow meter is mounted so that the filtered water volume can be calculated for each fishing. 
Location of the transects: Fishing takes place in nine transects divided into two sections 
(one at the western end which is fished twice (transects 1-3) and one at the eastern end which 
is fished once (transects 4-6)). For each of the two sections, a transect is placed along the 
bank vegetation, one from the vegetation and towards the center, as well as a pelagic transect 
in open water. The approximate location of the transects is shown in red in the figure below. 
In addition to transects 1-6, a short haul is fished over the shallow water at the northwestern 
end (transect 7). 
 
 
Transect 
start position 
end position 
1 
32 V 539282 6242623 
32 V 539427 6242597 
2 
32 V 539327 6242624 
32 V 539344 6242476 
3 
32 V 539307 6242541 
32 V 539458 6242573 
4 
32 V 539553 6242468 
32 V 539722 6242517 
5 
32 V 539697 6242506 
32 V 539658 6242659 
6 
32 V 539515 6242587 
32 V 539696 6242617 
7 
32 V 539249 6242626 
32 V 539256 6242569 
 
Procedure: Keep the net in front of the boat's bow immersed in the water, so that the center 
of the net is located approximately 50 cm below the surface. During fishing, the net is pushed 
through the water by motor boating. Each transect is fished for up to 1 min with a constant 
speed of approximately 1.5-2 m / s (5-7 km / h). Take the up immediately after a transect is 
done, ie. before the boat is stationary. The catch should be collected in a container with plenty 
of ethanol and marked with the date and catch sample ID. 
==PAGE:71==
 
Figure 1: Schematic representation of the boat with the operators and the fry net mounted on. 
(Source: Fiskeyngelundersøgelser i søer: Metoder til anvendelse i søer i vandmiljøplanens 
overvågningsprogram) 
 
 
Data collection: 
The following should be noted for each transect of the survey: 
- Date and time of sampling 
- Revolutions number on the flowmeter before the start 
- Sailing time (sec) 
- Revolutions number on the flowmeter after the start 
- Catch sample ID. 
- WP start 
- WP end 
- GPS track 
 
When: The survey happens at night between 00.00 and 03.00 in the start of July. 
Checklist: 
- 
Headlights 
- 
GPS 
- 
Reflective tape and glowsticks  
- 
Ethanol 
- 
Containers / pipes for catch collection (ex 1 l plastic glass - can hold catch + sufficient 
alcohol) 
- 
Kegnæs-408 + Motor 
- 
Fry net (incl. Iron pipes and fixing equipment) 
- 
Measuring cup/small bucket or similar to rinse the net with (the catch can "stick" to the 
nets) 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
E
Length­Length regression: fork length
based on total length
Figure E.1: Linear regression: fork length as a function of total length in perch. Fork
length range: 74­243mm, mean = 124.9mm
Figure E.2: Linear regression: fork length as a function of total length in perch. Fork
length range: 36­225mm, mean = 109.1mm
64 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:73==
F
Maturity size of roach in 2020 and 2021
Figure F.1: Logistic regression ”mature ~ total length” for female fish caught in 2020 and
2021. Dots show the data, ”mature” being coded as 1 and ”immature” as 0. The total fish
length is expressed in mm. The red curve is the prediction from the corresponding fitted
regression model. The green (resp. blue) vertical line shows the length threshold over
which more than 50% (resp. 90%) of the female roaches are predicted to be mature by
the model. The exact threshold values are reported Table 3.3.
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure F.2: Logistic regression ”mature ~ total length” for male roach caught in 2020. Dots
show the data, ”mature” being coded as 1 and ”immature” as 0. The total fish length is
expressed in mm. The red curve is the prediction from the corresponding fitted regression
model. The green (resp. blue) vertical line shows the length threshold over which more
than 50% (resp. 90%) of the female roaches are predicted to be mature by the model.
The exact threshold values are reported Table 3.3.
Estimate
Odds ratio (95% confidence interval)
F, 2021
Intercept
­23.25694 *
NA
Total length
0.19362 *
1.21 (1.15­1.33)
F, 2020
Intercept
­28.30893 *
NA
Total length
0.24362 *
1.28 (1.15­ 1.56)
M, 2020
Intercept
­53.1076 *
NA
Total length
0.5055 *
1.66 (1.28­2.77)
Table F.1: Parameter estimates from the logistic model for roach caught during the FLASH
protocol from March­June 2020 and 2021. * show significance at the 0.01 level.
66 Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
==PAGE:75==
Comparison of lake quality indicators, fish population characteristics and fish reproduction patterns in Lake
Ormstrup before and after lake restoration by fish removal
67
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
DTU Aqua
Vejlsøvej 39
8600 Silkeborg
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.aqua.dtu.dk/
