==PAGE:1==
Modelling of material extrusion additive
manufacturing
Master’s Thesis
Peter Lykkegaard Asveg
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
Master’s Thesis
September, 2021
By
Peter Lykkegaard Asveg
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Nils Koppels Allé, Building
404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over eight months at the Section of Manufacturing Engi­
neering, Department of Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of solid mechanics,
computational fluid mechanics, and thermo­mechanical modelling.
Supervisors
Jon Spangenberg
Mohamad Bayat
Ali Sarhadi
Raphaël Benjamin Comminal
Peter Lykkegaard Asveg ­ s185722
Signature
Date
ii
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Filament Deposition Modelling Additive Manufacturing (FDM) is a popular type of freeform
fabrication, as it enables fast and inexpensive production of prototypes or low quantity
products. A challenge for FDM is air gaps between the material strands causing weak­
ness and anisotropic behavior in the finished parts. Additionally, the extruded hot material
fusing with previously printed colder material (or the substrate) causes thermal stresses.
These stresses can cause warping or delamination in the part. The combined effects of
air gaps and thermal stresses cause 3D printed parts to show unpredictable mechanical
properties. In this study, a framework is created to couple a computational fluid dynam­
ics model with a computational thermo­mechanical model with element activation. This
produces a high­fidelity model of the FDM process. The results provide a good under­
standing of the model, and a prediction of how strand deflection is affected by production
parameters.
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Jon Spangenberg, Mohamad Bayat, Ali Sarhadi, and
Raphaël Benjamin Comminal for the opportunity to write this thesis on a topic, which is
both growing rapidly, and has a large potential for further research. Additional thanks for
the help, guidance, and understanding, which has been a great asset during this project.
Many thanks are extended to DTU and SDU, where I have studied for my Master’s degree
and Bachelor’s degree. Both institutions have promoted learning and curiosity, which has
motivated my studies.
I thank my friends from both universities for the fun we have had while also encouraging
each other’s academic advancement.
I would like to thank my family for always supporting my studies, and for pushing me to
perform to the best of my abilities.
A final large thank you goes to my girlfriend Hazal Özcan, whose love and support has
greatly helped me complete this project as well as my Master’s education.
iv
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Contents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
List of Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
List of Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Fluid dynamic modelling of FDM production
6
2.1
Theory of CFD modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Setup of the FLOW­3D model of the first strand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Setup of the FLOW­3D model of the second strand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Convergence study of CFD model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Study of the effect of production parameters on strand contours . . . . . . . 12
3
Thermo­mechanical modelling of FDM production
15
3.1
Theory of thermo­mechanical FEM modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Setup of Abaqus model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Convergence study of mesh size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.4
Convergence study of segment size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5
Study of FDM production parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Conclusion
30
4.1
Conclusions on the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2
Conclusions on the framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
Suggestions for future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.4
Possible long­term prospects for the approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.5
Final thoughts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Bibliography
32
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1.1
Sketch of the FDM process (Bellini and Güçeri 2003) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
FLOW­3D simulation setup of the FDM extrusion of the first strand. The
nozzle component is red, the substrate is blue, the initial fluid is light blue,
and the mesh planes are green.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Strands with and without constant cross sections. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
FLOW­3D simulation of the FDM extrusion of the second strand. The noz­
zle component is red, the substrate and first strand are blue, the initial fluid
is light blue, and the mesh planes are green.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Simulated strand contours with g = 0.24 mm and V = 15 mm/s and four
different mesh sizes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Simulation times for strand contours with g = 0.24 mm and V = 15 mm/s
and four different mesh sizes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Computed contours of the first and second strand with all selected gap
heights g and nozzle speeds V . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.1
Simple model for temperature dependent elastic modulus . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Correction for overlap between strand contours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Segments of the contours used the coarser definition. The accumulation
takes place towards the center. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Datapoints on original and coarsely defined contours . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.5
Assembly of both strands divided in five segments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.6
Interactions in Abaqus controlling the deactivation and reactivation of sets
with five cells per strand. The corresponding timesteps are shown in the top
row. A set is deactivated when the interaction is ‘Created’, and reactivated
when the interaction is ‘Modified’. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.7
Assembly of both strands seen from below. The red line marks the center­
line where deflection is monitored. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.8
The same strand contour meshed at three different mesh sizes. . . . . . . . 23
3.9
Calculated deflection with different mesh sizes and one segment in each
strand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.10 Calculated lengthwise strains on the top surface of the first strand, before
the second strand is activated.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.11 Calculated deflection with different mesh sizes and segment sizes. . . . . . 26
3.12 Previously and newly activated elements on the first strand. The color de­
notes the local von Mises stress in Pa. The deformation is amplified 20
times for visibility. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.13 Calculated deflection with different gap heights g and nozzle speeds V . . . 28
vi
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
2.1
Gap heights g and relative value to the nozzle diameter D . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2
Nozzle speeds V and relative value to the extrusion speed U . . . . . . . . 12
3.1
PLA material properties used in the thermo­mechanical simulation (Farah,
Anderson, and Langer 2016) (Simplify3D 2019) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2
Strains in central area on top of the first strand
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
This report will cover the Master’s project of Peter Lykkegaard Asveg. The project regards
simulation of the physical phenomena taking place in the production method FDM additive
manufacturing.
1.1
Background
Additive manufacturing covers a group of manufacturing methods, in which material is
continuously added to the product to produce complex shapes. Additive manufacturing
is a relatively new method gaining popularity, as it is rapidly evolving and the subject of
many studies.
The most comparable manufacturing method is subtractive manufacturing, also known as
machining, where material is cut from a block or rod of material.
An advantage to additive manufacturing over machining is that when machining complex
shapes, there can be a large amount of excess material to cut away, which is costly in both
materials and machining time. Additive manufacturing also gives the ability to produce
shapes, which are not possible with machining, where all surfaces must be accessible with
a cutting tool. For example, honeycomb sandwich structures are often used with additive
manufacturing to produce light components with minimal material usage and production
time. Finally, additive manufacturing tends to allow for low costs of one­off components,
as the setup costs are minimal.
One of the largest disadvantages to additive manufacturing is high production time and
cost of larger batches. Additionally, the gradual addition of the material can lead to poros­
ity, anisotropy, non­homogeneity, and poor surface finish. Additive manufacturing is also
limited to certain materials, as the material has to fuse properly during production.
Fused deposition modelling (FDM) is a common type of additive manufacturing. With
FDM, polymer filament is melted using electrical heaters. The material is then extruded
downwards through a nozzle by rollers or gears. The nozzle is moved relative to the
substrate below, in order to deposit strands of material in the desired shape. This can be
done by controlling either the nozzle or the substrate. The FDM process is illustrated in
Figure 1.1.
Advantages of FDM production include very fast and cheap production of one­off compo­
nents, and very low equipment costs. Because of these qualities, it is ideal for prototypes
and mock­ups, because an iterative design process will not be slowed down by the pro­
duction.
The largest disadvantages of FDM production are inherent to the deposition of the ma­
terial. Air gaps appear between the strands, causing a complex micro­structure, and
causing weaknesses in the parts. Additionally the fusing of hot and cold material causes
residual thermal stresses, which can lead to warping or separation between strands.
Due to the the complex effects of the deposition process, the behavior of the finished
parts is difficult to predict, and advanced simulation tools are needed to reach a good
understanding of the process. Many simulation studies have been performed on FDM as
well as other additive manufacturing processes, but there are still many areas, which are
only partially understood.
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
1
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.1: Sketch of the FDM process (Bellini and Güçeri 2003)
1.2
Literature review
Due to the increasing popularity and development of FDM production, numerous studies
have been and are being performed to better predict the behaviour of the process. These
studies investigate different aspects of the process, to provide a better understanding of
the specific physics. This section will cover a number of studies to provide an insight in
the history and current state of the science of FDM production.
1.2.1
Analysis of thermal and mechanical behaviour
Many of the studies within FDM production use mechanical simulation tools coupled with
a heat transfer study to simulate the thermal deformations and stresses occurring during
production. This allows for investigation of the thermal stresses and deformation taking
place during and after production.
In (Costa, Duarte, and Covas 2008) a semi­analytical tool is created to simulate cooling
of several strands of material. The strands are assumed to have elliptical cross­sections
with flat contacts, and the temperature in each strand to be uniform. Analytical models
are used to model the heat transfer between the strands and into the substrate, as well
as convection to the air.
(Costa, Duarte, and Covas 2015) expands on the model using Abaqus simulation soft­
ware. The strands are meshed into elements, and the extrusion is simulated by depositing
the strands in increments. The temperature field is computed, and experimental temper­
ature dependent material data is used to evaluate the deformation. Both elastic and vis­
coelastic material models are used. It is concluded that the weight of 200 strands does
not significantly affect the shape of the strands.
(Costa, Duarte, and Covas 2017) uses the model outside of Abaqus and without meshing
to predict the quality of the adhesion between strands. The relationship between adhesion
and strand temperatures is investigated experimentally, and is inserted into the model.
The study computes the zones with poor adhesion in a chosen geometry, and finds that
the temperature of the environment greatly affects the adhesion, with lower temperature
causing worse adhesion.
(Zhang and Chou 2006) describes a model created using the finite element method in
2
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:13==
ANSYS software. The strands are modelled as lines of cuboid elements, which are acti­
vated in sequence. The heat transfer and mechanical interactions between the elements
are computed, and the residual stresses and deflections are calculated with different pro­
duction sequences.
(J. Zhang et al. 2017) also uses ANSYS to create a model where the strands are mod­
elled as lines of cuboid elements. Deposition of one strand is simulated on top of a support
platform using ‘dead’ and ‘birth’ technology. The resulting temperature distributions are
computed and evaluated. It is concluded that variable thermal properties should be in­
cluded when simulating the FDM process, and that the latent heat from phase transition
can be treated as enthalpy.
(Yaqi Zhang and Shapiro 2018) presents a model created outside commercial simula­
tion software to compute the temperature field during FDM production. The strands are
modelled as lines of elements with octagonal cross­section. The dimensions of the cross
section is based on microphotographs of physical strands with one set of production pa­
rameters. The tool path from production of the chosen part is imported, and algorithms
are set up to calculate the area between elements. An ‘active body’ and ‘lazy update’ sim­
plification is set up to lessen the computational load by only calculating the temperature
in cells experiencing temperature changes. The model succeeds in computing the tem­
perature fields in very large and complex parts due to the ‘active body’ and ‘lazy update’
simplification.
1.2.2
Determination of strand geometry
The extrusion process in FDM production inherently causes air gaps between strands, as
mentioned in Section 1.1. To better predict the physical and mechanical properties of the
produced parts, the internal geometry is investigated in various studies.
(Rodriguez, Thomas, and Renaud 2000) is an early study in the mesostructure of FDM
produced parts.
Parts are produced with different production parameters, the cross­
sections are photographed, and the void densities and bond length densities of the parts
are calculated. The influences of gap height and flow rate on the densities are quantified.
(Comminal et al. 2018) presents a computational fluid dynamics (CFD) approach to de­
termine the cross section of a single strand extruded on a flat substrate. A nozzle and
a moving substrate are modelled in ANSYS Fluent software, and the flow of filament is
simulated. The cross­section of the strand is computed under various gap heights and
substrate speeds, and the strand heights, widths, aspect ratios, and compactnesses are
evaluated and compared to idealized strand shapes.
(Serdeczny et al. 2018) evaluates the model by comparing the computed cross sections
with photographs of physically produced strands. The model shows a high consistency
between the simulated and the experimental results.
(Serdeczny et al. 2019) expands on the model by simulating several layers of produced
strands. The material’s cross­section is computed with various gap heights and substrate
speeds. The porosities, bond line densities, and surface roughnesses of the material are
calculated and investigated.
1.2.3
Implementation of strand geometry in mechanical studies
Some studies have been performed, where the strand geometry is studies, and the mea­
sured geometries are used for mechanical simulations.
(Li et al. 2002) uses an assumption of elliptical cross­sections, which are corrected for
overlap. This is chosen based on a study of produced parts, as it very closely resembles
the produced profiles. Area void densities and linear void ratios are calculated based on
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
3
==PAGE:14==
the assumed cross­sections, and these are used to calculate orthotropic material con­
stants for the produced part. The calculated void densities, void ratios, and material prop­
erties are compared to the experimental values.
(Bellini and Güçeri 2003) expands on the study by not assuming parallel strands between
the layers, but instead using laminate theory and applying the orthotropic constants to
each layer. The mechanical study is performed using ANSYS software, and the results
are compared to mechanical tests of specimens produced with the appropriate tool paths.
(Rodriguez, Thomas, and Renaud 2003) uses the cross­sections analyzed in (Rodriguez,
Thomas, and Renaud 2000), and assumes the material to behave orthotropically, when
the strands are parallel. A non­commercial FEM approach is used to compute the stiff­
ness matrix of three different cross­sections. The calculated values are compared to
experimental data with good consistency.
1.3
Problem formulation
Numerous studies have been performed to predict the thermal and mechanical behaviour
of the FDM produciton process. Several of these studies assume the material strands to
be rectangular in cross­section. This allows for each strand to be modelled by only one
line of elements, which causes relatively low computational costs.
Alternatively, some mechanical studies have assumed an idealized cross­section of the
strands, and used analytical calculations to model the heat transfer between the strands
and segments. This still allows for single­element strands, and thus low computational
costs.
Parallel to thermo­mechanical studies, studies of the strand geometry have been con­
ducted. These studies use either photography or CFD tools to determine the geometry of
the produced strands.
Few studies have been performed attempting to couple these two approaches. In these
attempts, the studies in strand geometry are used to determine the cross­sections, which
can then be implemented in mechanical studies. In these studies referenced in Section
1.2.3, the mechanical models are analytical laminate theory models.
To the best of this author’s knowledge, no studies have linked a CFD tool determining the
geometry of FDM strands to an FEM tool simulating the thermo­mechanical behaviour.
Motivated by the lack of such a model, this project will be an attempt at linking a CFD and
FEM tool to model FDM production.
The goals of this project are:
• To set up CFD simulations to compute FDM strand profiles, which can be imported
into an FEM software.
• To build an thermo­mechanical FEM simulation around the strand profiles and model
the behaviour ot the material during production.
• To create a framework, which connects the CFD simulation with the FEM simulation.
The import of the profile and the setup of the FEM model should be automated. This
will make the framework useful for running a series of simulations to investigate the
effect of different production and simulation parameters.
• To evaluate the framework by running simulations under different conditions and
studying the results.
• To use the framework to study the effect of FDM production parameters.
4
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:15==
The main focus of the project is building and evaluating the framework for the combined
simulation. For this purpose, the thermo­mechanical simulation will be set up with a simple
material model and limited thermal effects. This is done to be able to investigate the
functioning of the model, and to understand the results. If too many physical models
are acting simultaneously, it will be difficult to understand, which models are causing the
occurring effects.
1.4
Thesis outline
This report will be divided into a chapter covering the CFD model, and a chapter covering
the thermo­mechanical model.
The CFD chapter (Chapter 2) will cover the basic theory and equations behind CFD simu­
lations, as well as the setup of the model in FLOW­3D simulation software. A convergence
study is performed to determine a suitable mesh size, and the model is used to study the
effects of different production parameters on the strand geometry.
The thermo­mechanical chapter (Chapter 3) will cover the theory behind both the heat
transfer model and the mechanical FEM model. The import of the strand geometry and
setup of the simulation in Abaqus software is done using a MATLAB script. Convergence
studies are performed to determine an appropriate mesh size and strand segment size,
and to investigate the behaviour of the model. The model will finally be used to study the
effect of production parameters using the cross­sections derived from the CFD model.
Conclusions (Chapter 4) will be drawn on the validity and usefulness of the model in its
current state. Possible improvements to the current model will be covered, as well as
future prospects for improvement and utilization of the simulation framework.
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
5
==PAGE:16==
2
Fluid dynamic modelling of FDM
production
The CFD model of the FDM production is set up in FLOW­3D 12.0. The main purpose of
the simulation in this project is to generate strand geometries, which can later be imported
into a thermo­mechanical model.
2.1
Theory of CFD modelling
The governing equations of the CFD simulation is the incompressible continuity equation
(Equation 2.1) and the Navier­Stokes equation describing the conservation of momentum
and conservation of mass (Equation 2.2).
∇· u = 0
(2.1)
ρ
[∂u
∂t + (u · ∇)u
]
= −∇p + µ∇2u
(2.2)
Here, u is the velocity vector, ρ is the density, t is the time, p is the pressure, and µ is the
dynamic viscosity. ∇is the del operator.
The Reynold’s number Re of a flow state is calculated using Equation 2.3.
Re = ρuL
µ
(2.3)
Here, u is the flow speed, and L is a characteristic linear dimension.
Due to the low flow speeds, small dimensions, and high viscosity in an FDM production,
the Reynold’s numbers are very low, Re ≪1. This condition is known as creeping flow.
This means the flow is so slow, that the inertial forces to be negligible compared to the
pressure forces and viscous forces. When this is true, the exact values of the density and
the viscosity do not significantly affect the flow. Based on this assumption, one model can
be created, which is representative for all liquid polymers used in FDM production.
2.2
Setup of the FLOW­3D model of the first strand
A simulation is set up in FLOW­3D, which simulates the flow of liquid polymer through
the nozzle and onto the substrate. The simulation is based on the simulations used in
(Comminal et al. 2018). Only half of the strand is modelled due to symmetry. The nozzle
is conical with a bore diameter D of 0.4 mm and a tip width of 10 mm. The extrusion length
L is set to 6 mm, and the simulation is run at various gap heights and nozzle speeds. The
simulation is illustrated in Figure 2.1. The illustration will be explained in the following
subsections.
6
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.1: FLOW­3D simulation setup of the FDM extrusion of the first strand. The nozzle
component is red, the substrate is blue, the initial fluid is light blue, and the mesh planes
are green.
The simulation is set up with an initial time step ∆t of 1e−s, but with no defined minimum
or maximum time step.
2.2.1
Included physics
In the ‘Physics’ tab in FLOW­3D, the relevant physical models are selected.
In the ‘Gravity and non­inertial reference’ group, gravity is included with the gravitational
acceleration of −9.81 m/s2. No non­inertial reference frame is active.
In the ‘Moving and simple deforming objects’ group, general moving objects model is
active, but collision model is not. Moving object/fluid coupling is set to explicit. In the
‘Simple deforming objects’ box, elastic membrane and wall model is deactivated, meaning
the solid objects are being modelled as stiff.
In the ‘Viscosity and turbulence’ group, viscous flow is activated, and laminar flow is cho­
sen under turbulence models, due to the low Reynold’s numbers of the model. The wall
shear boundary condition is set to no­slip or partial slip with the viscous friction coefficient
deactivated. Viscous heating is deactivated, as temperatures are not being modelled.
2.2.2
Fluid
In the ‘Fluids’ tab in FLOW­3D, all material properties of the included fluids can be entered.
In this simulation, the liquid polymer is the only fluid, as the effects of the air in a non­
thermal simulation are negligible. Due to the creeping flow assumption mentioned in
Section 2.1, the exact values of the values of the density and viscosity of the fluid should
not significantly affect the flow. A density ρ of 1000 kg/m3 and a viscosity µ of 1000 kg/m/s
are inserted, and the model is assumed to be representative of all liquid polymers. A
compressibility of 1e−10 Pa−1 is inserted. This causes the fluid to behave effectively as
imcompressible, but allows the model to run without singularities.
2.2.3
Mesh and boundary conditions
This subsection covers the ‘Mesh’ and ‘Boundary conditions’ tabs in FLOW­3D. The sim­
ulation is set up such that the initial position of the center of the nozzle exit is coinsiding
with the origin of the Cartesian coordinate system. The global mesh size ∆x = ∆y = ∆z
is set to 13.33 µm in all simulations after the convergence study in Section 2.4.
The nozzle will travel the extrusion length L of 6 mm, and to create a small margin in both
ends, the boundaries in the x­direction are set to −0.4 mm and 6.4 mm. Continuative
boundary conditions are applied to both boundaries, meaning excess fluid will flow out of
the simulated space.
Due to symmetry, only half of the strand is modelled. The boundaries in the y­direction
are set to 0 mm and 0.6 mm, except in few simulations, where the upper boundary is
increased to accommodate the width of the strand (see Section 2.5). The lower boundary
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
7
==PAGE:18==
condition is set to symmetry, meaning no flow passes through the boundary, but there is
no friction on the surface. The upper boundary condition is set to continuative.
Several mesh planes are inserted in the z­direction. This is done to ensure that a plane
coincides with horizontal geometrical surfaces, and to allow for the mesh to vary across
the z­dimension. The mesh planes are illustrated in green on Figure 2.1.
A plane is placed at the z = 0 mm plane, because this ensures that the bottom surface of
the nozzle is correctly modelled, and not changed by the mesh.
The second mesh plane is placed at negative of the gap height, z = −g, to ensure that
the top of the substrate is modelled correctly.
The third mesh plane is placed the double of the global mesh size ∆z below the second
mesh plane, at z = −g −2∆z. This is the lower boundary in the z­direction. A wall bound­
ary condition is applied, but due to the substrate part (see Section 2.2.4), the boundary
condition is not important.
The fourth mesh plane is placed at the z = 0.2 mm plane above the nozzle exit. Above
this plane the mesh size in the z­direction ∆z is set to gradually increase to 30µm. This is
done, because the upper part of the simulated space only serves to allow the flow in the
nozzle to develop a Poiseuille flow profile in the nozzle.
The fifth mesh plane is placed at the z = 0.74 mm plane, and ensures proper implementa­
tion of the bottom of the top plate (see Section 2.2.4). This plane is also where the gradual
increase in mesh size reaches 30 µm.
The sixth and final mesh plane is placed at the z = 0.8 mm plane, and is the upper bound­
ary of the simulation. A velocity boundary condition with a z­component of Uz = 20 mm/s
is applied to create the flow into the nozzle.
2.2.4
Solid objects
The ‘Geometry’ tab in FLOW­3D allows the user to create solid objects. The objects do
not need to be assigned material properties, as the selected physics (Section 2.2.1) do
not include deformation or heat transfer. Two objects are included in the simulation: the
substrate and the nozzle. The components are visible in Figure 2.1, and will be explained
in the following paragraphs.
The substrate is modeled as a flat box. It fills the the whole simulated space in the x­ and
y­directions, and fits between the two lowest mesh planes in the z­direction (see Section
2.2.3). The simulation is set up with a static substrate and moving nozzle, so no velocity
is applied to the substrate.
The nozzle is modelled as a collection of components, and a velocity equal to the desired
nozzle speed is applied in the x­direction, Vx = V .
The first component is the nozzle cone. It is placed such that it has a width of 1 mm at the
z = 0 mm level and expanding upwards at an angle of 45° to vertical.
The second component is the top plate, which covers the simulated area between the
two upper mesh planes (see Section 2.2.3). The plate ensures that the flow due to the
velocity boundary condition (see Section 2.2.3) only appears through the nozzle, and not
on the entire top plane of the simulation. The plate is modelled as a box, which covers
the entire y­direction, and fits between the top two mesh planes in the z­direction. The
plate reaches from x = −6.4 mm to x = 6.4 mm, so it covers the top during the entire
movement of the nozzle.
The third component is a vertical cylindrical hole cut through the nozzle cone and the top
plate. It has a diameter D of 0.4 mm, and is placed in the center of the nozzle.
The fourth and final component is a box, which cuts away the part of the nozzle cone
below the z = 0 mm plane.
8
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:19==
2.2.5
Initial state of the fluid
The tab ‘Initial’ in FLOW­3D is used to set the initial volumes and conditions of the fluid.
In this simulation, no conditions have to be applied, because the temperature is not being
modelled, and the initial pressure of an almost incompressible fluid will not have any
noticeable effect.
The initial volume of the flow is created as two components. The first is a cylinder with a
diameter D of 0.4 mm, which fills the nozzle, and the second is a half sphere with the same
diameter, which hangs at the exit of the nozzle. The initial fluid volumes are illustrated in
Figure 2.1.
2.2.6
Outputs and post­processing
In the ‘Output’ tab, fluid fraction, fluid velocities, and pressures are chosen as saved out­
puts from the simulation. Only the fluid fractions are used in further simulations, but the
fluid velocities and pressures are helpful for illustration and understanding of the model.
Ideally, the simulation should always reach a steady state, where the cross section is
extracted from the results. This has not been achievable in all cases with a strand length
L of 6 mm. This is illustrated in Figure 2.2. Due to time constraints, the simulations have
not been repeated with longer strand lengths.
(a) Strand with g = 0.40 mm and V = 20 mm/s
showing a clear constant cross section.
(b) Strand with g = 0.24 mm and V = 10 mm/s
showing no clear constant cross section.
Figure 2.2: Strands with and without constant cross sections.
The issue with non­constant strand shapes has the largest effect on strands with low gap
height g and low nozzle speed V , because the initial state of the fluid (described in Section
2.2.5) is further from the output at solid state and creates a ‘tail’. Additionally, the side flow
near the nozzle creates a more distinguishable ‘bulge’.
The ‘tail’ at the rear of the strand appears to generally be longer than ‘bulge’ at the front
of the strand. Thus, the cross section is extracted slightly past the middle, at x = 3.5 mm
on the 6 mm strand.
A text output file (.dat) is created for elements at the x = 3.5 mm plane, and the volume
fraction of fluid is chosen as the output. A MATLAB script “Extract_cross_section.m” is
used to define the contour of the cross section. The script loads the output file, manip­
ulates the data into an appropriate format, and uses the ‘contourc’ function to generate
arrays of y and z values on the contour. The arrays are saved in a .txt file, which can be
used as input to the thermo­mechanic part of this project. The Extract_cross_section.m
script is inherited directly from (Comminal et al. 2018), and has not been modified for this
project.
A consistent naming convention is used for the .dat files, so they can more easily be
loaded for the following parts of this project. The name is based on the gap height g, the
nozzle speed V and the x­position of the cross section. A contour with g = 0.24 mm,
V = 15 mm/s, and x = 3.50 mm would be named “g024_V15_x350.dat”.
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
9
==PAGE:20==
2.3
Setup of the FLOW­3D model of the second strand
The simulation of the second strand varies only slightly from the simulation of the first
strand. Therefore, only the changes made to the first strand’s simulation will be covered
in this section, to minimize repetition. The setup of the simulation of the second strand is
illustrated in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: FLOW­3D simulation of the FDM extrusion of the second strand. The nozzle
component is red, the substrate and first strand are blue, the initial fluid is light blue, and
the mesh planes are green.
2.3.1
Mesh and boundary conditions
The mesh of the simulation is extended to accommodate for the second strand. This is
done by moving the lowest mesh planes in the z­coordinate down by one gap height g, to
z = −2g and z = −2g −2∆z respectively. This is visible, when comparing Figure 2.3 to
Figure 2.1.
2.3.2
Solid objects
A 3D­model of the first strand must be introduced to the simulation in order to simulate the
second strand being extruded on top of it. The 3D­model is created as a .stl file using a
MATLAB script “Write_stl_file.m”. The contour .txt file from the simulation of the first strand
is loaded by the script. Two instances of contour are placed at selected x­coordinates, in
this case x = −0.4 mm and x = 6.4 mm, since these are the borders of the simulation.
Faces are generated between the contours to create the shell of the first strand. The
Write_stl_file.m script is inherited directly from (Comminal et al. 2018), and has not been
modified for this project.
The .stl file is imported as a component of the substrate object, directly on top of the
substrate plate.
2.3.3
Outputs and post­processing
For the naming convention, “_2nd” is added, to indicate the second strand. The second
strand contour with g = 0.24 mm, V = 15 mm/s, and x = 3.50 mm would be named
“g024_V15_x350_2nd.dat”.
2.4
Convergence study of CFD model
The simulations of both strands are run with global mesh sizes ∆x = ∆y = ∆z of 10 µm,
13.33 µm, 16 µm, and 20 µm. The parameters of the simulations are set to a gap height g
of 0.24 mm and a nozzle speed V of 15 mm/s.
2.4.1
Results
The resulting contours with different mesh sizes are illustrated in Figure 2.4.
10
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.4: Simulated strand contours with g = 0.24 mm and V = 15 mm/s and four
different mesh sizes.
The figure shows that larger mesh sizes cause more pronounced concave sections in the
lower corners of the strands. It can also be observed how the material withheld from the
concave corners is pushed further into the upper corners with larger mesh sizes.
Figure 2.5: Simulation times for strand contours with g = 0.24 mm and V = 15 mm/s and
four different mesh sizes.
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
11
==PAGE:22==
To evaluate the costs against the benefits of a finer mesh, the computational times t of
the four simulations running on the DTU cluster are plotted in Figure 2.5.
As can be seen in Figure 2.5, the computational time increases steadily when refining the
mesh size between 20 µm and 13.33 µm, but there is a dramatic increase, when refining
the mesh size to 10 µm.
2.4.2
Discussion
The mesh dependent concave sections visible in Figure 2.4 may be because the no­slip
condition on the substrate or strand below is more effectively holding the sideways flow
back with larger mesh sizes. If the mesh size goes towards 0, the contour may go towards
a shape without concave corners.
Interestingly, the second strands simulated with mesh sizes 10 µm and 20 µm are narrower
at the base, than the ones simulated with mesh sizes 13.33 µm and 16 µm. Additionally,
the second strand with mesh size 10 µm appears more wavy on top. These two trends
do not appear to follow a clear convergence.
Due to the large increase in computational time between the simulations with 13.33 µm
and 10 µm, but relatively little difference between the contours, 13.33 µm is chosen as the
global mesh size for the following studies of the project.
2.5
Study of the effect of production parameters on strand
contours
Studies are run with the global mesh size of 13.33 µm determined in Section 2.4. 15
simulations of the strands are run with a selection of gap heights and nozzle speeds. The
gap heights and the nozzle speeds noted in Tables 2.1 and 2.2, respectively, as well as
their relative values.
Table 2.1: Gap heights g and relative value to the nozzle diameter D
Gap height g
Relative gap height g/D
0.16 mm
0.4
0.24 mm
0.6
0.32 mm
0.8
0.40 mm
1.0
0.48 mm
1.2
Table 2.2: Nozzle speeds V and relative value to the extrusion speed U
Nozzle speed V
Relative relative nozzle speed V /U
10 mm
0.5
15 mm
0.75
20 mm
1.0
In the simulations with g = 0.16 mm and V = 15 mm/s, and with g = 0.24 mm and V =
10 mm/s the upper boundary in the y­direction is increased to 0.8 mm. In the simulation
with g = 0.16 mm and V = 10 mm/s it is increased to 1 mm. This is done to accommodate
the width of the strands.
12
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:23==
2.5.1
Results
The computed contours with all combinations of gap heights and speeds are plotted in
Figure 2.6.
(a) g = 0.16 mm,
V = 10 mm/s
(b) g = 0.16 mm,
V = 15 mm/s
(c) g = 0.16 mm,
V = 20 mm/s
(d) g = 0.24 mm,
V = 10 mm/s
(e) g = 0.24 mm,
V = 15 mm/s
(f) g = 0.24 mm,
V = 20 mm/s
(g) g = 0.32 mm,
V = 10 mm/s
(h) g = 0.32 mm,
V = 15 mm/s
(i) g = 0.32 mm,
V = 20 mm/s
(j) g = 0.40 mm,
V = 10 mm/s
(k) g = 0.40 mm,
V = 15 mm/s
(l) g = 0.40 mm,
V = 20 mm/s
(m) g = 0.48 mm,
V = 10 mm/s
(n) g = 0.48 mm,
V = 15 mm/s
(o) g = 0.48 mm,
V = 20 mm/s
Figure 2.6: Computed contours of the first and second strand with all selected gap heights
g and nozzle speeds V .
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
13
==PAGE:24==
2.5.2
Discussion
It can be seen from the results, how a small gap height will cause the polymer to flow far
sideways and upwards at the sides, while a high gap height causes more round strands.
This is not surprising, as the high gap height allows for the filament to be almost dropped
down, while the low gap height does not.
Additionally, a lower nozzle speed causes wider strands, because with the same extrusion
speed and strand length, more material is deposited with a lower nozzle speed.
In all the plots an overlap can be seen between the first and second strands, and the
interface between them is more coarsely defined on the second strand than on the first
strand. This is a consequence of how FLOW­3D imports the .stl files generated from the
contour of the first strand. When the file is imported as a solid object, it is adapted to only
being defined by the grid line intersections which are fully confined within the solid. This
is opposed to the fluid contour, which is defined by every place the fluid intersects a grid
line. When the second strand is deposited on top, it takes the shape of the less accurate
definition of the first strand.
14
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:25==
3
Thermo­mechanical modelling of FDM
production
The thermo­mechanical model is set up in Abaqus CAE 2021. Since the strand profiles
from the fluid dynamics simulations are saved as data in a .txt file, a system in needed
to import them into Abaqus. Additionally, to make the framework more practical, it should
be possible to import material data and other simulation properties from outside Abaqus.
This creates a way to automate the simulation setup, so a wider range of parameters can
be experimented with.
This section will cover the theory behind thermo­mechanical Finite Element Method (FEM)
modelling, the setup of the thermo­mechanical model, and the studies which are carried
out with it.
3.1
Theory of thermo­mechanical FEM modelling
The thermo­mechanical simulation consists of a heat transfer (thermal) simulation and an
FEM (mechanical) simulation, which are run explicitly. Both parts of the simulation will be
covered in this section.
The governing equation of the heat transfer simulation is the transient heat transfer equa­
tion, Equation 3.1. This is solved for the simulated volume to obtain the temperatures in
the next time step.
ρ · ∂h
∂t = ∇· (k · ∇T)
(3.1)
Here, ρ is the density, k is the thermal conductivity, t is the time, T is the temperature,
and h is the enthalpy, which is the sum of the internal energy. Since solidification is not
being modelled in this study, the enthalpy only includes the thermal energy. ∇is the del
operator.
Boundary conditions are applied to the heat transfer model. In this study, only a fixed tem­
perature boundary condition is used at the bottom of the strand. Other types of boundary
conditions can also be implemented, such as a temperature dependent heat flux on the
surface. This can be used to simulate convection and radiation, which are not included in
this study.
The governing equations for the mechanical model are the partial differential stress equi­
librium equations. They are written in tensor notation in Equation 3.2.
σij,j = 0
(3.2)
Here, σij is the stress tensor, and i and j refer to the axes of the coordinate system.
The coupling between displacement and stresses is driven by Hooke’s law, which is writ­
ten in tensor form in Equation 3.3.
σij =
E
1 + ν
[1
2 (δikδjl + δilδjk) +
ν
1 −2ν δijδkl
]
εel
kl
(3.3)
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
15
==PAGE:26==
Here, E is the elastic modulus, ν is the Poisson’s ratio, εel
ij is the elastic strain tensor. δij
is the Kronecker delta, which is 1 when i = j, and 0 when i ̸= j.
The coupling between the heat transfer model and the mechanical model is performed by
calculating the thermal strain based on the change in temperature from its original value,
as shown in Equation 3.4.
εth
ij = αδij∆T
(3.4)
Here, εth
ij is the thermal strain tensor, ∆T is the change in temperature, and α is the
thermal expansion coefficient.
The total strain tensor εij, which is used to couple the thermal and mechanical loads with
the deformation, is calculated as the sum of the thermal and elastic strains.
εij = εel
ij + εth
ij
(3.5)
Because plasticity is not included in the model, the strain does not need to be calculated
incrementally.
3.2
Setup of Abaqus model
In Abaqus CAE software, models are saved as .cae files. Being a commercial software,
the .cae file format is proprietary to Abaqus CAE. As it requires the suitable software, the
files cannot be edited externally. However, a second file is also created in .jnl (journal)
format, when saving an Abaqus model. The journal file is a Phyton code containing every
input the user supplies to the program in the creation of the model. The full file or parts of
the file can be run into Abaqus to recreate the model or parts of the model.
The code in the journal file is readable and can be edited manually in order to change
the simulation. In this project, a MATLAB script is created to generate a journal file with
the desired parameters. This script is the backbone of the simulation framework, as it is
used for the import of geometry, which connects the CFD and FEM models, as well as for
defining key simulation properties.
The MATLAB script is created by initially creating a model in Abaqus with approximate
geometry and assumed parameters. The journal file of the initial model can then be anal­
ysed to understand the necessary inputs, and loops can be used in the MATLAB script
to create more complex models, and to create several similar models. This process is
highly iterative, as each component of the model must be understood, both in terms of its
significance to the simulation, and how it is recorded in the journal file.
The journal file is saved as Python file (.py) and is named based on the chosen pa­
rameters. For example, a simulation with the gap height g = 0.24 mm, nozzle speed
V = 15 mm/s, extrusion length L = 10 mm, 5 segments per strand, and mesh size
∆x = ∆y = ∆z = 0.05 mm would be named “jnl_g024_V15_L10_s5_m005.py”.
The following subsections will cover the setup of the simulation, which is implemented
through the MATLAB script.
3.2.1
Materials and material models
In this study, only a linearly elastic material model is used. This is chosen to make it
possible to distinguish the effects of different factors in the simulation. Element activation,
16
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:27==
thermal conduction, and atypical geometries may all affect the results in unpredicted ways.
If plasticity, temperature dependent material properties, latent heat, and other relevant
physical models are all included in the simulation initially, it will be very difficult to determine
how each model is affecting the results, and whether the models are working as intended.
After the behavior of the simulation has been investigated using only the linearly elastic
material model, more complex models can be included.
The MATLAB script is set up to create a material with a chosen name. The following
material properties are added to the material: Density, elastic modulus, Poisson’s ratio,
thermal expansion coefficient, thermal conductivity, and specific heat capacity.
If an elastic­plastic model with linear hardening is used, the yield stress and stress at a
defined plastic strain must be added. The stress at a set plastic strain can be calculated
based on the plastic modulus using the equation:
σ = σy + Epεp
(3.6)
Where σ is the stress, σy is the yield stress, Ep is the plastic modulus, and εp is the plastic
strain.
If a temperature dependent model is used, reference temperatures are inserted for several
values of the elastic modulus. The simplest model for this is inserting a low value (e.g.
1­5% of the elastic modulus) at the melting temperature, and the full elastic modulus at
the glass transition temperature. This will cause the elastic modulus to be constant above
the melting point and below the glass transition, and linearly dependent on temperature
between the two. See Figure 3.1 for illustration of the relationship between and elastic
modulus E and temperature T. Here is used a glass transition temperature of 60 °C, a
melting temperature of 130 °C, a solid elastic modulus E of 3.5 GPa, and a liquid elastic
modulus of 5% · E.
Figure 3.1: Simple model for temperature dependent elastic modulus
A model with both linear hardening plasticity and temperature dependent material proper­
ties can also be implemented. In this case, the yield stress and the stress at a prescribed
plastic strain should also be dependent on temperature, similarly to the elastic modulus.
In Abaqus, ‘sections’ are used for assigning material properties. A section named “Section­
1” is created and can later be assigned to the parts in the simulation.
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
17
==PAGE:28==
3.2.2
Import and adjustment of geometry
Using the naming convention of the contour files (described in Sections 2.2.6 and 2.3.3),
the contours of the two strands are imported into the MATLAB workspace.
The default axis notation is different in Abaqus and FLOW­3D. In order to ease the import
of the geometry, and for the strands to be displayed correctly on the screen, the notation
is changed to match the Abaqus default. In this section, the x­dimension is the width of
the strand, the y­dimension is the height, and the z­dimension is lengthwise.
The FLOW­3D model tends to return results, where the bottom of the first strand is not
exactly touching the substrate, but instead is only very close. The gap does not signif­
icantly affect the contour, but it creates an issue for boundary conditions in the thermo­
mechanical simulation, because the surface is not perfectly flat. To correct this, all coor­
dinates where y < 1e−6 mm is set to y = 0. Additionally, only the points with the highest
and the lowest x­coordinates on the bottom face are kept. The points in between are
removed, as they are superfluous.
As shown in Section 2.5, there is an overlap between the contours of the strands, because
of how the first strand is implemented, when simulating the extrusion of the second strand.
To align the interface between the strands, the intersections of the contours with the high­
est and the lowest x­coordinates are saved and inserted into the contours. Between the
two intersections, the profile of the second strand is changed to follow the profile of the
first strand so the profiles match. The profile of the first strand is used for the intersection,
because it is the one, which is not changed by FLOW­3D to be implemented as a solid
object. The correction of the overlap between the contours is illustrated in Figure 3.2.
(a) Strand contours with overlap
(b) Strand contours corrected for overlap
Figure 3.2: Correction for overlap between strand contours
The resolution of the contours is very finely and irregularly defined by FLOW­3D. This is
a problem for the thermo­mechanical simulation, because the length of the segments in
the contours define the maximum size of the elements on the surface of the strands. In
order to avoid limitations on the element size, an algorithm is set up to define the contours
more coarsely. The definition of the coarse contour is based on the selected mesh size.
The algorithm follows the contour and accumulates the lengths of the sections. When the
accumulated length exceeds the chosen mesh size, the next point is added to the coarse
contour, and the accumulation is reset. This is done individually for the first strand, the
second strand, and the interface between them. Additionally, each side of each section
18
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:29==
is handled separately, instead of working all the way from one side to the other. This
means, that if a symmetric contour is treated, the coarse definition of the contour will also
be symmetric. The segments of the contours are illustrated in Figure 3.3. An example of
the original contour and the course one is illustrated in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.3: Segments of the contours used the coarser definition. The accumulation takes
place towards the center.
Figure 3.4: Datapoints on original and coarsely defined contours
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
19
==PAGE:30==
The coarse definition of the strand can be toggled on and off. It will be active in all studies
in this project.
3.2.3
Creation of strand parts
In this part of the script, the first and second material strands are created as parts in the
simulation.
The cross section of the first strand is entered using the adjusted contour. A sketch is
created, and each line segment is the contour is added to the sketch. The first strand is
created as “Part­1” by extruding the sketch to the desired length. “Section­1” is assigned
to the part to apply the selected material properties.
In order to implement the element activation, the strand part must be divided into the
selected number of segments. In Abaqus the segments are referred to as ‘cells’. Datum
planes are created where the cells will intersect, and the part is partitioned using each of
those planes.
For the interaction between the parts, the faces in the intersection between the strands in
all the cells are defined as a surface named “Master­Surf”. This is because it will be used
as the master surface in the interaction between the strands.
The second strand is created in the same way as the first. It is saved as “Part­2”. The
interface surface is saved as “Slave­Surf”, as it will be used as the slave surface in the
interaction.
Both parts are placed in the assembly. This is shown in Figure 3.5. Because the cross
sections are defined based on the same origin, no translation or rotation of the parts in
the assembly is necessary.
Figure 3.5: Assembly of both strands divided in five segments
3.2.4
Timesteps
The “Initial” timestep is by default added in the simulation. Additional steps are created
for each of the segments in the first and second strand. The steps are named with the
number of the segment starting with “Step­1”. The length of the steps is calculated by
dividing the length of the segments with the speed of the nozzle.
Additional cooling steps are added to the simlation. One is added after extrusion of the first
and one after extrusion of the second strand. The cooling steps are named “Cooling­1”
and “Cooling­2”. The length of these steps can be chosen manually.
Finally a step named “Detachment” is added after the last cooling step. This step will be
used for simulating the strands being detached from the heat bed. The list of steps in a
simulation with five cells in each strand can be seen in the top row in Figure 3.6.
20
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:31==
3.2.5
Element activation
‘Sets’ of geometrical features are used in Abaqus to apply several types of interactions,
e.g. element activation. Sets are added to the simulation, each containing one segment
of the strands. The sets are named based on the number of the segment, starting with
“Set­1”.
Model change interactions are created which deactivate all the sets in the Step­1 timestep
and reactivate them in the timestep matching the set. This causes the segments to be
activated in order and at the times dictated by the speed of the nozzle. No interaction is
created for Set­1, as it would have to be both deactivated and reactivated in Step­1. The
interactions are named based on the set, which they activate, starting with “Int­2”. The
table of deactivation and reactivation of sets is illustrated in Figure 3.6. Here, the strands
are divided in five cells.
Figure 3.6: Interactions in Abaqus controlling the deactivation and reactivation of sets
with five cells per strand. The corresponding timesteps are shown in the top row. A set
is deactivated when the interaction is ‘Created’, and reactivated when the interaction is
‘Modified’.
3.2.6
Constraints, initial conditions and boundary conditions
A ‘tie’ constraint is made between the interface surfaces of the first and second strands.
The Master­Surf surface of the first strand is used as the master, and the Slave­Surf
surface of the second strand is used as the slave. With the tie constraint, the strands are
modelled like they were one part. Thus, there is no additional thermal resistance between
the strands.
The initial condition is set by assigning a temperature to both strands in the Initial timestep.
The nozzle temperature can be entered into the MATLAB script.
To apply boundary conditions, a set of features is defined, containing all the faces on the
first strand, which are touching the substrate. Since the strand has been divided into sev­
eral segments, these are several faces. The set is named ‘´BC­bottom”.
The temperature of the substrate is set by applying a temperature boundary condition
named “BC­temp” to the BC­bottom set with the selected temperature.
The displacement boundary condition “BC­disp” is set by applying an ‘Encastre’ boundary
condition to the BC­bottom set. This locks the bottom surface in all degrees of freedom,
including rotations.
Both boundary conditions are set to be deactivated in the Detachment timestep, to simu­
late the strands being detached from the substrate.
In order to prevent the strands from moving freely when detached, some boundary con­
ditions must still be in place. These are placed in three corners of the bottom surface
previously in contact with the substrate.
The corner where x < 0 and z = 0 is locked from displacement in the x­, y­, and z­
directions. This boundary condition locks the translative position of the model and is
named “BC­detach­pos”.
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
21
==PAGE:32==
The corner where x < 0 and z > 0 is locked in the x­ and y­directions. It locks the rotation
of the model around the x­ and y­axes and is named “BC­detach­xy­rot”.
The corner where x > 0 and z = 0 is locked in the y­direction. It locks the rotation of the
model around the z­axis and is named “BC­detach­z­rot”.
The detachment boundary conditions are active in all timesteps, despite only being rele­
vant in the detachment step. This is because when the BC­disp condition is active, the
detachment conditions are redundant, and do not affect the model.
3.2.7
Element type and mesh generation
The element type C3D8T is applied to each cell in both strands. It is referred to in Abaqus
as “an 8­node thermally coupled brick, trilinear displacement and temperature”.
Both strands are selected and seeded for meshing with the selected mesh size. Finally
the strands are selected again, and the mesh is generated. If the coarse definition is
selected in the geometry calculations, this returns a rather uniform mesh.
3.2.8
Input data
For this project, polylactic acid (PLA) is used as the simulated material, as it is commonly
used in FDM production. The material properties used in the studies can be seen in Table
3.1.
Table 3.1: PLA material properties used in the thermo­mechanical simulation (Farah, An­
derson, and Langer 2016) (Simplify3D 2019)
Property
Symbol
Value
Density
ρ
1.252 kg/m3
Elastic modulus
E
3.5 GPa
Poisson’s ratio
ν
0.36
Thermal expansion coefficient
α
6.8e­6 °C−1
Thermal conductivity
k
0.197 W/(m°C)
Specific heat capacity
cp
1955 J/(kg°C)
The temperature of the substrate, and thus the temperature boundary condition, is set to
60 °C, as this is a common temperature to use in FDM production of PLA products.
The initial temperature of the material is set to 130 °C, even though the common practice
would be a nozzle temperature closer to 200 °C. 130 °C is chosen, because this is the
lower end of the range of melting points of PLA (Farah, Anderson, and Langer 2016).
Since only a linearly elastic material model is used with no temperature dependence, the
liquid state of the material cannot be simulated. Allowing temperatures over the melting
point would cause unreasonably high thermal strains. The lower initial temperature affects
the accuracy of the simulation, because the segments will cool further down, before the
next one is activated. However, with either initial temperature, the segments cool almost
down to the to the substrate temperature (within few degrees) during the time step, so
the effect of this inaccuracy is minor. If a material model with plasticity and temperature
dependence is implemented, the initial temperature should be changed to represent the
nozzle temperature.
3.2.9
Postprocessing
After running the simulation, the results must be quantified in a way, which is comparable
between different cases. The most interesting result is the deflection of the combined
strands after they are detached from the substrate. The deflection will be defined as the
22
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:33==
vertical displacement, U2, along the centerline of the bottom surface of the strands, which
is illustrated in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Assembly of both strands seen from below. The red line marks the centerline
where deflection is monitored.
A field output report is generated as a .csv file with the original position and vertical dis­
placement of every node in the system. A MATLAB script is set up to read the .csv file and
extract the data from the nodes at the selected centerline. If a line of nodes is not directly
on the centerline, the value is interpolated between the nearest two nodes. The resulting
deflections are relative to the boundary conditions in the detachment step, which are in
the corners of the bottom surface (see Section 3.2.6), and are thus affected by lengthwise
curling of the strands. To prevent this, the deflections are corrected by the value at z = 0.
This way the deflection is 0 at z = 0.
(a) 0.1 mm mesh
(b) 0.05 mm mesh
(c) 0.02 mm mesh
Figure 3.8: The same strand contour meshed at three different mesh sizes.
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
23
==PAGE:34==
3.3
Convergence study of mesh size
To better understand the model, and to determine a suitable mesh size, a convergence
study is performed. Simulations are set up using the strand profile with gap height g =
0.24 mm and nozzle speed V = 15 mm/s from Section 2.5. The extrusion length is set
to L = 10 mm, and the strands are not divided into segments. The simulation is run with
mesh sizes ∆x = ∆y = ∆z of 0.1 mm, 0.05 mm, and 0.02 mm. Cross­sections of the
generated meshes are shown in Figure 3.8.
3.3.1
Results
The calculated deflections of the strands are shown in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: Calculated deflection with different mesh sizes and one segment in each
strand.
Two clear trends can be observed from the deflections of the strands in Figure 3.9: Up­
wards curvatures at the ends of the strands regardless of mesh size, and a downwards
curvature in the middle of the strands heavily dependent on mesh size.
3.3.2
Discussion
The upwards curvature at the ends of the strands is understandable because of how the
thermal deformation interacts between the strands. When the first strand is cooling, it
is subjected to negative thermal expansion. Because the bottom is fixed in place with
boundary conditions, the central areas cannot contract lengthwise. Instead, the stresses
increase due to the linearly elastic material model. At the ends the model is free to con­
tract, and does not store stresses. There is a gradual transition between the ends and
the central area. The lengthwise strain causing the contraction of the ends of the strand
is illustrated in Figure 3.10.
24
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.10: Calculated lengthwise strains on the top surface of the first strand, before
the second strand is activated.
When the the second strand is deposited and cools down, contraction causes the stresses
in the center to match the ones in the first strand. At the ends, where the first strand is
stress free and contracted, the cooling causes relative compression if the first strand and
tension in the second strand. This causes the upwards curvature.
The mesh dependent downwards curvature in the middle of the strands has a more com­
plex explanation. The results show a positive lengthwise strain on the top surface of the
first strand, before the second strand is activated. This is visible in Figure 3.10. This strain
explains the downwards curvature, as the strain will cause tension in the first strand and
compression in the second strand after the second strand cools. The strain in the first
strand is also dependent on mesh size. The maximum and minimum strains found in the
central areas are noted in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Strains in central area on top of the first strand
Minimum strain
Maximum strain
0.1 mm mesh
10e−5
45e−5
0.05 mm mesh
2.1e−5
23e−5
0.02 mm mesh
1.3e−5
14e−5
Because the positive strain and subsequent deflection are heavily dependent on mesh
size, and there is no good physical explanation for them, they are assumed to be the
result of a numerical error in the model.
3.4
Convergence study of segment size
In addition to the element size, the size of the individually activated segments determines
the resolution of the simulation. A study is conducted to determine the effect of the number
of segments in each strand. The strand profile with gap height g = 0.24mm and nozzle
speed V = 15 mm/s from Section 2.5 is used, and the extrusion length is set to L =
10 mm. The simulation is run with the strands divided into 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 segments.
Additionally, it is performed with the mesh size ∆x = ∆y = ∆z of 0.1mm, 0.05mm, and
0.02 mm to investigate how the effects of of mesh size and segment size are interrelated.
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
25
==PAGE:36==
3.4.1
Results
The calculated deflections of the strands with different mesh sizes and segment sizes are
illustrated in Figure 3.11.
(a) 0.1 mm mesh
(b) 0.05 mm mesh
(c) 0.02 mm mesh
Figure 3.11: Calculated deflection with different mesh sizes and segment sizes.
It can be seen across all results, that the first segments produced (closest to z = 0)
are deflecting upwards as in the simulations with only one segment in Section 3.3. The
subsequent sections are, however, deflecting downwards, and there is a clear upwards
kink between each section.
3.4.2
Discussion
The downwards deflection in subsequent segments and the kink between the segments
can both be explained by the way the activated elements are implemented in Abaqus.
When elements are activated, which are attached to other elements that already have
displacement, the current displacement of the nodes in the interface is defined as no
displacement in regards to the newly activated elements. In this simulation, it means
that the newly activated elements are effectively expanded to match the contraction of
the previous elements. The connection between previous and newly activated elements
is shown in Figure 3.12. It can be noticed, how the leftmost newly activated cells are
deformed to match the previous elements, despite being almost stress free.
26
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.12: Previously and newly activated elements on the first strand. The color de­
notes the local von Mises stress in Pa. The deformation is amplified 20 times for visibility.
The expansion of the newly activated elements is what causes the kinks between seg­
ments in the resulting deflections. Because of the connection to the substrate, no material
is added at the bottom of the strand. Thus a wedge of material is effectively being inserted
into the strand. This applies to both strands.
The downwards deflection in the segments can also be explained by the added material.
Because of the inserted wedge, the tension is lower on the top of the first strand, than
it would otherwise be. When the second strand is added, the tensions no longer match,
and the deflection happens.
With small elements, the effect of the kinks appears to be stronger than the effect of the
downwards deflection, causing the strands to deflect upwards. With larger elements, the
opposite applies. This may be because the downwards deflection is dependent on the
deformation on the free top surface, which is not highly affected by the mesh size. The
kinks, however, are dependent on the deformation of the vertical surface between the
cells, which is shown in Figure 3.12. With a finer mesh, the deflection of the surface will
appear more curved, and allow for more material to be added.
To overcome the issues the model must be changed, so rather than matching the defor­
mation when activating new segments, the original positions of the nodes are maintained.
Thus, the newly added elements will not be stress free. With the linearly elastic material
model, this should cause the simulations to give the same results regardless of the num­
ber of segments, because the stresses will balance out elastically. When an elastic­plastic
material model is implemented, however, the results should be affected by the number of
segments. This will not be attempted in this project.
3.5
Study of FDM production parameters
Based on the segment size study in Section 3.4, it is clear that the segment­wise activa­
tion of the strands introduces more error than value to the simulation. Thus the study of
production parameters will be carried out with only one segment in each strand.
In the element size study in Section 3.3, it is concluded that the erroneous upwards de­
flection in the middle of the strands is significantly dependent on element size. Therefore,
the finest grid with 0.02 mm mesh size will be used. The simulation is run using all 15
contours from Section 2.5, meaning all combinations of gap height and nozzle speed.
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
27
==PAGE:38==
3.5.1
Results
The deflections calculated based on all contours from Section 2.5 are illustrated in Figure
3.13.
(a) g = 0.16 mm
(b) g = 0.24 mm
(c) g = 0.32 mm
(d) g = 0.40 mm
(e) g = 0.48 mm
Figure 3.13: Calculated deflection with different gap heights g and nozzle speeds V .
It appears from the results, that the upwards defection in the middle of the strand is very
strong in some some of the cases, while it is not in others. There does not appear to be
any constancy in which cross­sections have the upwards deflection.
28
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:39==
Disregarding the upwards deflection, it can be seen across all the graphs in Figure 3.13,
that a lower nozzle speed V leads to a higher deflection with the same gap height g.
Additionally, when comparing the different graphs, it can be noted, that a higher gap height
g causes higher deflection with the same nozzle speed V .
3.5.2
Discussion
When evaluating the strand contours in Figure 2.6, it is apparent, that a lower nozzle speed
leads to taller strands, because more material is extruded. With high gap height, material
is free to fall down, and additional material will stack, creating a taller strand. With low
gap heights, additional material is pushed upwards beside the nozzle. Additionally, it can
be seen, how contours with lower nozzle speeds in many cases have wider intersections
between strands relative to the width of the strands.
The taller strands and wider intersections are likely the causes of the larger deflections at
lower nozzle speeds. Taller strands allow for larger deformation at the top of the strands,
which is what causes the deflection. Wider intersections will increase the area, on which
the thermal strains act, thus increasing the thermal forces.
Higher gap heights also cause taller strands, which explains the correlation between gap
height and deflection.
The upwards deflection in the middle of the strands appears to have no correlation with
gap height or nozzle speed. When comparing the deflections to the relevant contours in
Figure 2.6, there also does not appear to be any correlation between the shape of the
strands and the upwards deflection. Strand heights, widths, and shapes are considered,
but no clear correlation is visible. Because of this and the high mesh dependence found
in Section 3.3, the deflection will still be assumed to be the product of a numerical differ­
entiation error.
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
29
==PAGE:40==
4
Conclusion
This chapter will cover the conclusions, which can be drawn on the studies performed
in this project. It will cover the current CFD and thermo­mechanical modes, as well as
the framework connecting the two, and suggestions for future improvements will be pre­
sented. Finally, the possible uses for this approach will be discussed.
4.1
Conclusions on the model
The CFD model presented in Chapter 2 is based on the model used in (Comminal 2019),
and is working as intended. The convergence study shows predominantly predictable
behaviour, and the study in production parameters has provided cross­sections which
conform to what would be expected.
The thermo­mechanical model explained in Chapter 3 in its current iteration does not
meaningfully simulate the behaviour of FDM production.
The linearly elastic material
model is not accurate due to both the high stress and high temperatures taking place
in the process. Additionally, due to the issues with added material between activated
segments, the gradual activation of the strands does not work as intended. The conver­
gence studies provided important knowledge of the model, which may have been missed,
if a more accurate material model had been included from the beginning.
4.2
Conclusions on the framework
The framework used to connect the CFD model and the mechanical model is working
as intended. The import of CFD generated strand profiles into the thermo­mechanical
simulations creates a more accurate representation of the strands than the assumed ge­
ometries, which are used in many other studies.
Creating Abaqus journal files using the MATLAB script allows for creating multiple simu­
lations with similar inputs. This is helpful for both convergence studies and for studying
production parameters.
4.3
Suggestions for future work
If further development of this modelling framework is desired, the interface between seg­
ments in the same strand must be reconfigured, to eliminate the issue with added material
in the intersections. This will allow the model to work as intended. Additionally, a study
into the upwards deflection, which appears in the middle of the strands in some simula­
tions, would provide valuable insight into the behaviour of the model.
In order to accurately model the behaviour of the extruded strands, a more accurate
material model must be implemented instead of the linearly elastic model. Linear hard­
ening plasticity and temperature dependent material properties can be implemented as
described in Section 3.2.1. Alternatively, the material can also be modelled using a vis­
coplactic model. While not as important as the material model, modelling the contacts
between strands and to the substrate as imperfect with regards to heat transfer will also
improve the accuracy.
The setup of the thermo­mechanical model is fully automized using the MATLAB script.
This is advantageous, if multiple similar simulations are run. The CFD model, however,
is set up entirely manually, which is time consuming and can cause human errors, when
30
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:41==
running many cases. The simulation framework can be improved, if a system is created
to set up the CFD simulation automatically. Depending on the goals of the specific study,
nozzle geometry, strand length, gap height, nozzle flow, nozzle speed, and properties of
the fluid can all be applied as input variables to the automatic setup.
4.4
Possible long­term prospects for the approach
Due to the definition of the contour, the thermo­mechanical model is dependent on a
very fine mesh, when comparing to the models referred to in Section 1.2, which all use
single­element strand cross­sections. This causes the model of this study to be very
computationally heavy in comparison, and makes it impractical for part­level simulations.
While this framework is not viable to set up part­level models, is can still be a helpful tool.
For instance, it can be used as a higher fidelity model to verify a part­level simulation, by
simulating few strands with both models and comparing the results.
Alternatively, it can be used to determine correction factors to a lower fidelity model. By
applying appropriate correction factors, the thermal and mechanical accuracy of a lower
fidelity simulation could be improved.
4.5
Final thoughts
The framework created for this project and described in this report provides a novel
method of simulating FDM production. The current model is limited in its viability, but
the framework provides the possibility of very high fidelity model, which can be used to
improve accuracy of other models. Further improvement and study of the model are nec­
essary to determine the full application of the method.
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
31
==PAGE:42==
Bibliography
Bellini, Anna and Selçuk Güçeri (Oct. 2003). “Mechanical characterization of parts fabri­
cated using fused deposition modeling”. In: Rapid Prototyping Journal 9, pp. 252–264.
DOI: 10.1108/13552540310489631.
Costa, S.F., F.M. Duarte, and J.A. Covas (2008). “Towards modelling of Free Form Extru­
sion: analytical solution of transient heat transfer”. In: International Journal of Material
Forming 1.S1, pp. 703–706. DOI: 10.1007/s12289-008-0312-9.
– (2015). “Thermal conditions affecting heat transfer in FDM/FFE: a contribution towards
the numerical modelling of the process”. In: Virtual and Physical Prototyping 10.1, pp. 35–
46. DOI: 10.1080/17452759.2014.984042.
– (2017). “Estimation of filament temperature and adhesion development in fused depo­
sition techniques”. In: Journal of Materials Processing Technology 245, pp. 167–179.
ISSN: 0924­0136. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmatprotec . 2017 . 02 . 026. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0924013617300791.
Zhang, Y and Y K Chou (2006). “Three­dimensional finite element analysis simulations of
the fused deposition modelling process”. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical
Engineers, Part B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture 220.10, pp. 1663–1671. DOI:
10.1243/09544054JEM572.
Zhang, Jie et al. (2017). “Numerical investigation of the influence of process conditions
on the temperature variation in fused deposition modeling”. In: Materials Design 130,
pp. 59–68. ISSN: 0264­1275. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2017.05.040. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S026412751730521X.
Zhang, Yaqi and Vadim Shapiro (Apr. 2018). “Linear­Time Thermal Simulation of As­
Manufactured Fused Deposition Modeling Components”. In: Journal of Manufacturing
Science and Engineering 140.7. 071002. ISSN: 1087­1357. DOI: 10.1115/1.4039556.
eprint: https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/manufacturingscience/article-pdf/140/7/
071002/6406259/manu\_140\_07\_071002.pdf.
Rodriguez, Jose, James Thomas, and John Renaud (Sept. 2000). “Characterization of the
mesostructure of fused­deposition acrylonitrile­butadiene­styrene materials”. In: Rapid
Prototyping Journal 6, p. 175. DOI: 10.1108/13552540010337056.
Comminal, Raphaël et al. (2018). “Numerical modeling of the strand deposition flow in
extrusion­based additive manufacturing”. In: Additive Manufacturing 20, pp. 68–76.
ISSN: 2214­8604. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2017.12.013. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214860417305079.
Serdeczny, Marcin P. et al. (2018). “Experimental validation of a numerical model for the
strand shape in material extrusion additive manufacturing”. In: Additive Manufacturing
24, pp. 145–153. ISSN: 2214­8604. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2018.09.022.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214860418304585.
– (2019). “Numerical simulations of the mesostructure formation in material extrusion ad­
ditive manufacturing”. In: Additive Manufacturing 28, pp. 419–429. ISSN: 2214­8604.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2019.05.024. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2214860418309217.
Li, L. et al. (2002). “Composite Modeling and Analysis for Fabrication of FDM Proto­
types with Locally Controlled Properties”. In: Journal of Manufacturing Processes 4.2,
pp. 129–141. ISSN: 1526­6125. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1526-6125(02)70139-4.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1526612502701394.
32
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
==PAGE:43==
Rodriguez, Jose, James Thomas, and John Renaud (Oct. 2003). “Mechanical behavior
of acrylonitrile butadiene styrene fused deposition materials modeling”. In: Rapid Pro­
totyping Journal 9, pp. 219–230. DOI: 10.1108/13552540310489604.
Farah, Shady, Daniel G. Anderson, and Robert Langer (2016). “Physical and mechani­
cal properties of PLA, and their functions in widespread applications — A comprehen­
sive review”. In: Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 107. PLA biodegradable polymers,
pp. 367–392. ISSN: 0169­409X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2016.06.012. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169409X16302058.
Simplify3D (May 2019). Properties table. URL: https://www.simplify3d.com/support/
materials-guide/properties-table/.
Modelling of material extrusion additive manufacturing
33
==PAGE:44==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.mek.dtu.dk
