==PAGE:1==
Mergeable Dictionaries with Shifts
Rasmus Isager Kruuse
September 26, 2021
Version: Final Version
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Computer Science
Mergeable Dictionaries with Shifts
Rasmus Isager Kruuse
Supervisor
Inge Li Gørtz
Dep. of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
September 26, 2021
==PAGE:4==
Rasmus Isager Kruuse
Mergeable Dictionaries with Shifts
Computer Science, September 26, 2021
Supervisors: Inge Li Gørtz
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Anker Engelunds Vej 1 Bygning 101A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby and Copenhagen
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
One of the foundations of computer science is dictionaries for which a variety of
problems have been studied. In this thesis the focus is on mergeable dictionar-
ies, speciﬁcally mergeable dictionaries with shifts (MDWS). Existing algorithms
addressing the issue are examined and their bounds described.
The aim is to investigate if the theoretical log(U) can be experimentally veriﬁed.
Moreover, it is to establish whether there is a performance difference between the
older log2(n) algorithm, and the newer log(U). Additionally, to examined if a new
weighting scheme can improve performance over the existing weighting scheme.
To answer this, two existing algorithms were implemented in C++, tested in two
test cases and compared. The comparison included different tasks ranging from
searching Lempel-Ziv compressed text, random sequences of MDWS commands to
merging of increasingly large arbitrarily interleaved sets.
The analysis demonstrates that Biased Segment Merge outperforms Segment Merge
in merge performance but that Segment Merge performs better at searching Lempel-
Ziv compressed text. Furthermore, it illustrates that weighted Biased Segment
Merges perform better at a merge size of 32 and above compared to unweighted
ones performing better in smaller merges. Different theories discussing the test
results are presented.
Finally, challenges regarding the implemented test cases are identiﬁed and a new
heuristic that potentially improves Biased Segment Merge performance on LZ77
is suggested. Furthermore, novel optimizations to existing work on mergeable
dictionaries with shift algorithms, that simplify analysis, is provided.
The thesis concludes, that further research into why Biased Segment Merge fails to
improve lempel-ziv searching performance is needed.
v
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
The Problem and Its Applications
3
2.1
Mergeable Dictionaries with Shift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The Mergeable Dictionary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Comparisons to dictionary problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.2
An easy log(n) bound on mergeable dictionaries . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.3
Known bound on Mergeable Dictionaries . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.4
An accounting proof of the log2(b) bound
. . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Applications of MDWS: searching Lempel-Ziv compressed text . . . .
8
2.3.1
Searching compressed ﬁles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
LZ77 outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.3
Learning the ﬁrst character covered by each phrase . . . . . .
10
2.3.4
Winding back to learn more . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.5
Saving space and time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Algorithms for MDWS
15
3.1
Segment Merge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
The Segment Merge Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Biased Segment Merge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
Biased 2-b trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
The Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.3
Biased Segment Merge complexity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.4
Supporting non-disjoint set
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.5
A conjectured log(n) weighting scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Implementation
27
4.1
Test Bench . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Algorithms — Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.1
Segment Merge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.2
Biased Segment Merge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Lempel-Ziv implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
vii
==PAGE:8==
5
Methods
33
5.1
Test scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.1
Searching Lempel-Ziv Compressed Text . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.2
Test Case: Merge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Data-set and study limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Results
37
6.1
Merge — results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Lempel-Ziv — results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Discussion
43
8
Conclusion
47
Bibliography
49
viii
==PAGE:9==
Introduction
1
The dictionary is a foundational data structure in computer science. Many variants
on the dictionary problem exists, and one of those is mergeable dictionaries. Iacono
and Özkan [I2] provided the ﬁrst amortized O(log(U)) mergeable dictionary ten
years ago, and conjectured that a shiftable implementation would knock a log(U)
factor off an existing algorithm for searching Lempel-Ziv compressed text. More
recent work by Bille et al. [BEG19] describes a log(U) mergeable dictionary with shift
which should be able to experimentally verify this the claim of improved compressed
matching performance.
In this thesis I study the problem of mergeable dictionaries with shift, and evaluate
whether the conjectured improved performance is theoretical or actual. I start
by describing the problem of mergeable dictionaries with shift, the known lower
bounds, and the known application of compressed pattern matching for Lempel-Ziv
compressed text. Algorithms for the problems are evaluated, implemented and
ﬁnally tested.
1
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
The Problem and Its
Applications
2
In this section, I describe the problem of Mergeable Dictionaries with Shifts (abbre-
viated as MDWS) and its relation to the more general mergeable dictionary.
2.1 Mergeable Dictionaries with Shift
In the MERGEABLE DICTIONARY WITH SHIFT problem [BEG19], a collection of sets
S = {S1, S2, . . .} is maintained. The set members are drawn from a totally ordered
universe U = {1, 2, . . . , |U|}. Initially each set starts as a singleton, i.e. contain-
ing only one element. The goal is to support the following operations fast and
efﬁciently:
• makeSet(j): Create a new set containing the element j and add it to S.
• search(S,j): Return the largest element of S that is at most j, if such an element
exists.
• split(S,j): Split S into two sets D and E. A containing all elements smaller than
or equal to j, and B the elements larger than j.
• merge(A,B): Remove A and B from S and insert a set C = A ∪B.
• shift(S,j): shift all element in S by j, i.e. G = g + j|g ∈G
MDWS must be able to handle non-disjoint sets, since elements might be shifted on
top of each other. Additionally, the function join to aid analysis later, is introduced, .
It is a special case of merge.
• join(A,B) Merge the sets A, B where max(A) < min(B)
MDWS is an extension of general mergeable dictionaries. A Mergeable Dictionary
maintains a collection as above, and supports all operations except shift. Depending
on algorithm choice, the sets might have to be disjointed.
In tree structures, shift can be supported by each node carrying satellite information
on how much it has been shifted. When navigating the tree, we can consider the
shift. If a node is to be deleted, it can pass its shift on to its children. Thus, a leaf’s
3
==PAGE:12==
true value can always be found by considering the value plus the total shift from
root to leaf.
Searchtree-based structures that support O(log(n))1 search, split, join, and O(1)
makeset and shift have also existed for a long time [AHU74]. Thus, like mergeable
dictionaries, the main MDWS nut to crack is supporting fast merges. For the same
reason any fast mergeable dictionary is a good MDWS candidate.
2.2 The Mergeable Dictionary
The dictionary problem[MS08, p.81-83] is a common, and classic computer science
problem. Here we maintain a dictionary of keys with values, and want to be able to
add, remove, and ﬁnd keys. Find(key) returns the key if it is in the dictionary, and
null if not.
2.2.1 Comparisons to dictionary problem
In analysis we see that the mergeable and non-mergeable dictionary, are very differ-
ent problems, and in these differences we ﬁnd the requirement for any sub-linear
solution to the MDWS problem. Dictionary keys can be stored unordered. Mergeable
dictionary elements must be stored ordered, since search() ﬁnds a predecessor. The
dictionary problem only deals with single key operations. Both, merge and split
can affect any number of elements in a set. Therefore, the algorithm must allow a
superlinear number of elements to be manipulated over a linear series of steps in
the algorithm.
It can be observed that mergeable dictionaries easily perform the dictionary opera-
tions in a constant number of operations, but not the other way around. Inserting
a key in a dictionary translates into making a new set with the key’s number, and
inserting it into a set. To delete a key, we split the set either side of the key, and join
the non-key trees. Find, is a search that returns null if search(x) does not return x.
Making any mergeable dictionary operation in a dictionary quickly devolves into
checking all |U| possible keys. For example, search could be done in a dictionary
as follows. Find(x), if null x=x-1, repeat until a value is found or x = 0. This is
technically equivalent to a search, but worst case requires |U| ﬁnds.
1Throughout the thesis I use log(x) to mean log2(x)
4
Chapter 2
The Problem and Its Applications
==PAGE:13==
Even if we imagine predecessor queries could be done, splitting still would require
deleting every element in a dictionary individually, which again would lead to a
worstcase time of |U|.
Hash tables are commonly used for dictionaries. They provide expected constant
time on all dictionaries operations. However, they are ill suited as mergeable
dictionaries since they are unordered and provide no way to manipulate multiple
elements. Trees and tree-like structures are better because one can manipulate many
elements by adjusting a single node.
2.2.2 An easy log(n) bound on mergeable dictionaries
An intuitive bound can be achieved by reducing mergeable dictionaries to comparison
based sorting.
If given a list β = {α1, α1, . . . , αn}, let each of the n item in the list be a singleton
set in MDWS. Then merge all n sets with the ﬁrst set S1. §1 now contains all n items
in sorted order. The order can be retrieved using search() operations. Search for ∞
to get max(β), search for max(β) −1 to get predecessor(max(β)) and so on. Repeat
n times to get the n items in reverse sorted order.
There are n merges and n searches. Thus, if a sub log(n) runtime in MDWS is
possible, comparison based sorting can be done in less than n log(n) worstcase time,
which is below the known lower bound[LSX19].
2.2.3 Known bound on Mergeable Dictionaries
As noted by Iacono and Özkan [I2], several authors have shown that a log2(n) bound
exists on the amortized merge costs. Here n is the sum of the sizes of the sets. In the
granddaddy original paper on amortized analysis — "Amortized Computational Com-
plexity" by Tarjan[Tar85] — two techniques for amortized analysis were introduced.
The physicist view, in which the potential of a data structure is tracked over time,
also called potential function analysis, and the bankers view, also called accounting,
in which we are given a certain number of credits to pay for computation. To date,
each author has used either potential function analysis to prove the amortized upper
bound. I want to prove the bound by using the accounting method, both because I
think it is more intuitive and conceptually less complex. To my knowledge this is the
ﬁrst accounting style proof of the amortized log2(n) bound.
2.2
The Mergeable Dictionary
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2.4 An accounting proof of the log2(b) bound
Let us imagine a case where the operations search, and split can be done to a set S
in log(|S|) time and make set takes constant time. Each set starts as a singleton, and
the sets are totally ordered, and we say an element b is between a and c if a < b < c
in the order. For example, 5 is between 3 and 6 in the set {2, 3, 5, 6} and 3 is next to
5. If a set contains more than one element, it is called a compound set.
Let us also imagine that two sets A and B can be merged to form a set C = A ∪B
with the following cost: until both sets are empty, we take the smallest element
of A ∪B and add to C. Every time, we add an element m from one set next to
a member of the other, m must pay a set membership fee of of log(|C|). Adding
another member from m’s set next to the paid for element is free. This case is
equivalent to the 2-3 tree algorithm by Farach-Colton and Thorup [FCT98].
In the bankers view of amortization, for each operation in the sequence of commands
one gets a number of credits to pay for computation. In this case I will use 2log2(n)
credits. We have an amortized cost if we can bound the number of credits needed
over a series of commands. Let us assume the sets are disjoint and lift that assumption
later.
Supporting Merge
When merging two sets, again called A and B, to form a set C, the following rules
are used. If A and B are singleton sets, use 2 credits to pay membership for A
and B and and give each (log(n) −1) ∗log(n) credits. If A is singleton, and B is
compound, spend 2log(|C|) credits to pay membership for B and the member from
A inserted right after B. Then, give B (log(n) −1) ∗log(n) credits. If both A and B
are compounds, the sets members must pay for their own set membership in C.
Clearly log(|C|) ≤log(n) for any merge, since we cannot create a set with more
members than n. Thus, when a set member is given (log(n) −1) ∗log(n) credits, it
always has credits to buy set membership in log(n) −1 sets.
Because the sets start are singletons, we need to build some compound sets if we
want an expensive merge. We cannot build an expensive compound with singleton
sets, since any operation with singleton sets give a surplus of credits in the collection.
To build expensive compound sets we need to do a series of merges of compound
sets. Notice that a singleton is always given credits when it becomes member of a
compound set.
6
Chapter 2
The Problem and Its Applications
==PAGE:15==
It is possible to create merges where every set member must pay membership. For
example, A = {1, 3, 5} and B = {2, 4}. Such a merge cost at most log(n) ∗|C|,
and we will call such a merge a most expensive merge of size 5. Notice that it is
impossible to increase merge cost without adding more members that must pay
membership. For example, if A = {1, 3, 5, . . . , (n −2)} then |C| is still less than or
equal to n and still only 5 members pay membership. Thus, a non most-expensive-
merge, has the same cost as a smaller most expensive merge. Intuitively, if we want
to maximize the cost of operations, we must only use most expensive merges to
build a compound set.
Whenever we do a most expensive merge on two sets, the resulting set is twice as
large. Otherwise, each member did not have to pay membership in C. Thus, to
build a compound set S using only most-expensive-merges each member can have
paid membership in log(|S|) −1 sets. The -1 is because membership is paid for
singletons when they are ﬁrst merged with another set. Thus, each singleton is given
log(n) ∗log(n −1) credits and we are able to build the compound set N containing
all n elements using only most expensive merges, and all n elements can pay for
their membership in the required sets. Thus, we can support an amortized run time
of O(log2(n)) for merge.
Supporting the other operations
search does not require additional credits and can be done in logarithmic time
make set does not require additional credits and can be done in constant time
split: Let a and b be two elements from a set A that are next to each other and let us
consider b’s perspective.
At the moment there are a number of elements that go between a and b, and that b
might have to pay set membership to merge with, these will be called f(b). There
can be one from every set, if two members from a set S2 were between a and b, b
would still only need to pay for merging with the element closest to it. When S2 is
split into Sl (left of split) and Sr (right of split), b might now also have to pay set
membership costs in one more set. Potentially b would need extra log(n) credits for
each of the f(b) sets that are split.
When split is called we save 2 log(n) credits, which can be used to pay for these
extra set memberships.
2.2
The Mergeable Dictionary
7
==PAGE:16==
From b’s perspective, b always had the credits to pay for merging with Sr so only
Sl is the problem. If A is merged with Sl then l will pay for b. If Sl is merged with
any of the sets containing the f(b) elements, the elements l will be paying for itself
and the f(b) element in the set. Thus with O(log2(n)) credits we can support all the
mergeable dictionary.
Allowing non disjoint sets
To allow non disjoint sets, a simple modiﬁcation to our merge algorithm will work. If
during merging, the smallest element of both sets at some point is the same, split A
on the smallest element, and discard the left set which contains min(A). In this case,
we do not need to allocate credits, since f(min(B)) is unchanged. Furthermore,
min(A) has, by the proof above, at least log(n) credits left. It can pay for its own
termination.
Furthermore, removing duplicates is actually better than having an extra element in
the set. It removes elements from the collection of sets and as such reduces n. As a
result, subsequent operations might be cheaper.
2.3 Applications of MDWS: searching Lempel-Ziv
compressed text
The MDWS problem is a specialised version of a more well known problem. As one
would expect this also means that it has relatively few known use cases. Bille et al.
[BEG19] suggest the union-ﬁnd-split problem and the mergeable trees problem.
However, I argue that MDWS is only related to those problems because it is a
mergeable dictionary, since there is no obvious advantage in being able to shift sets,
in these problems.
An often cited use of MDWS is searching Lempel-Ziv compressed data[BEG19; I2;
Kar16] which this section covers. It would not be wrong to call the MDWS problem
a problem in search for applications. We have only been able to get running time
approach log(n) on mergeable dictionaries for 11 years and MDWS for around 2
years meaning that more research is needed in order to discover more uses.
8
Chapter 2
The Problem and Its Applications
==PAGE:17==
2.3.1 Searching compressed ﬁles
In the COMPRESSED MATCHING PROBLEM, we are given a compressed string Z,
representing the original ﬁle T and a pattern P. The problem is to ﬁnd out if
P occurs in T. Farach-Colton and Thorup [FCT98] provided the ﬁrst non trivial
algorithm for searching LZ77 (Lempel-Ziv 77) compressed text. The article describes
a 2-3 tree data structure use to achieve its bounds, but the algorithm can easily be
generalized to MDWS. Based on that it can be expected that better MDWS-algorithms
should result in faster search times.
Decompressing LZ77 takes O(|N|) time, so the naive approach is simply to decom-
press and scan N using traditional pattern matching. This is optimal when the
compression ratio is a constant factor. However, since it is assumed that the applied
compression works, one can consider the case where |Z| ≪|T|. In this situation
it might be favourable to have an algorithm bound by the size of Z, even if that
algorithm does not run in linear time. Intuitively, compression works by getting rid
of repetition. Searching compressed data is therefore searching a more information-
dense space. This is what Farach and company provided, and their algorithm uses
the structure of LZ77.
2.3.2 LZ77 outline
Lempel-Ziv 77 compression is based on references to earlier parts of the sequence.
For example, let us imagine we have processed T up the sequence T[i : i +
13] ="halleluja half". If halleluja occurred earlier in the text (at T[j]), we could
replace "halleluja " with a reference to index j, and a number to tell how many
characters to copy after that index. More formally, we can say that we can replace a
sequence of characters E = {T[a], . . . , T[b]} with a reference to the longest preﬁx in
the sufﬁx tree of T, that occurs before the index a.
Normally for LZ77, instead of referring to an index T[i], we store how far to go
back from the current index. This is because we need log(length(T)) bits to store a
reference to an index in T, but only need log(Longest backwards jump) bits to store
a backwards jump. Phrases can be encoded with fewer bits this way.
But, the next character "f" might not occur in T before now. If we take an alphabet
containing all character that occur in T and prepend it to T, everytime we encounter
a new charater, such as "f", we can always reference it in the alphabet. Thus,
"halleluja half", can be replaces with the phrases (i-j,9)(i-j,2)(-3,0). Here the ﬁrst
number of the phrase indicates how far to go back when copying and negative
2.3
Applications of MDWS: searching Lempel-Ziv compressed text
9
==PAGE:18==
indexes refer to the prepended alphabet. The last number represent how many
additional indices to take from that index and copy to the current place.
We will say that a phrase (j,9) starting at index i covers the indexes i to i + 9,
meaning that it encodes the data in T[i, i + 9]. We will call the ﬁrst index a phrase
cover I(phrase).
2.3.3 Learning the ﬁrst character covered by each phrase
Because the phrases refer back in T, we can use them to search the tree. To learn the
ﬁrst character T[i] that a phrase p1 encodes, all we have to do is go back to the part
of the text that the character was copied from. This part was covered by another
phrase p2, and is the third character of the phrase. That is okay. We can just go to the
part that p2’s third character was copied from. We can repeat this process until we
eventually are referred into the alphabet before the start of T. We have now learned
the ﬁrst character covered by p1. To learn the remaining characters we repeat the
process above, but starting at T[i + 1]. Then again at T[i + 2], . . . , T[i + length(p)],
until we know all characters covered by the phrase.
The above algorithm works for learning the content of a phrase, but is obviously
horrendous at searching. Even if T contains the pattern, we don’t know which
phrases to start the backwards search from.
The mentioned process, following the references until they refer to the prepended
alphabet, is called "winding an informer back". An informer here is a number that
represent the index in T, it wants to learn. By using MDWS we can wind an informer
back. We represent the informer i as a singleton set S with the single value being
i.
For each phrase p = (i, j), we split S at I(p) to get Sl and Sr(all elements >
(I(p) −1)), shift Sr by −i, and merge the right and left side of the split.
There are |Z| phrases, so this approach costs in worstcase O(|Z| ∗M(1)), where
M(1) is the runtime of mergeable dictionaries with shift containing one set. What is
even better, by using the above method one can actually wind back the ﬁrst index of
all phrases at the same time.
With the list of phrases {p1 = (i1, j1), p2 = (i2, j2), . . .}, we create the initial singleton
sets S = {S1 = I(p1), S2 = I(p2), S3 = 1 + j1 + j2 = I(p3), . . .}. Initially, shift the
last set by −j|Z|. Then for the second to last phrase (iZ−1, jZ−1), merge(SZ−1, SZ)
10
Chapter 2
The Problem and Its Applications
==PAGE:19==
split the set at I(pZ−1 −1), shift the right side by −jZ−1 and join the two sides.
Repeat for the third to last, fourth to last and all the way until the ﬁrst phrase.
When a phrase x = (i, j) has been processed as above there are no elements in
any set larger than I(x). Every informer between I(x) and I(x) + length(x) has
been shifted back by −i. Thus, every informer has been wound back. There is one
informer for the ﬁrst index in every phrase, thus |Z| informers, meaning it takes
|Z| ∗M(|Z|) time to learn the ﬁrst character of every phrase.
2.3.4 Winding back to learn more
We can actually learn even more. When two sets are merged, and both contain the
element e it is deleted from one of them. If we keep track of these deletions we can
unwind the informers by reversing the commands from above, and restoring e at
the appropriate time. In the following let, us imagine that the searched pattern P is
P = ”peach”.
When winding back we maintain the invariant that the informer for each phrase
must know the longest preﬁx that the phrase covers, which is a sufﬁx of the pattern.
If a phrase encodes "each to th" then after being unwound the informer must know
"each". We can access this preﬁx using pre(). Initially, all informers are shifted
into the alphabet, and pre(x) contains the character x ﬁnished winding to, if the
character is in P.
There are |Z| unwinding steps. In unwinding step number x we return an informer
ix to its original position, this might require copying an existing informer y and
shifting it up. pre(ix) cannot be longer than the phrase that created the informer x,
if it is, the end will be removed. For example, if the phrase referred to (phrase y)
covered "eachother" then pre(y) = "each". If the phrase that spawned x covers "ea"
the preﬁx is too long and we shorten pre(x) to "ea".
With x’s preﬁx now the correct length, we check if there are any informer that
cover I(i) −1. Let us say one does and it is called j, we make its preﬁx pre(j) =
longest-preﬁx-of-a-sufﬁx( pre(j) + pre(i) ). We do this for each informer that covers
I(i)−1. More concretely, when x is shifted up, two informers cover I(i)−1, informer
i1 right now represent "with p" and thus pre(i1) = none, the other informer i2 covers
"p" which mean its preﬁx is pre(i2) = "p". After adjusting the preﬁxes pre(i1) is still
none, and pre(i2) = "pea". This would break the invariant, so in this case we keep
"p" as the preﬁx, but any time i2 is copied during the unwinding we copy it with the
preﬁx "pea".
2.3
Applications of MDWS: searching Lempel-Ziv compressed text
11
==PAGE:20==
Using this approach we actually learn from the informers — and let us call them
phrase informers — if any phrases cover "peach". However, this is not enough to
answer the compressed matching problem. The ﬁrst time any two character strings,
for example "example", occurs in T it will take at least two phrases to compress it. If
it only took one phrase then "example" must have occurred somewhere earlier in T
since we are able to reference a continuous substring of T that contains it.
A new set of informers is needed for each phrase p that knows the longest sufﬁx
of T[0, I(p) + length(p)] which is a preﬁx of the pattern. These will be called
backinformers, and their sufﬁx can be acquired through suf(). Let us imagine that
"peach" is encoded as three phrases p1 = "...p", p2 = "ea" and p3 = "ch...". then
p1 + p2 + p3 = "...peach...". We can check if T contains P, by checking the phrase-
and back informers belonging to each phrase once unwinding is done. Let a1, and
b1 be the respective phrase and back informers of phrase p1. If for any phrase pi,
suf(bi−1) + pre(ai) = P, then T contains the pattern. In the above example, doing
this for p2 yields "pea", and doing it for p3 yields "peach" and we have found a
match.
To get these back informer we do the following: after winding and unwinding as
shown above, instantiate a new set of informers, this time at the last index that each
phrase covers, and wind them back as above. Initially, set the sufﬁx to the letter, if it
is in P. When unwinding phrase pi and we copy a back-informer b to move up, we
ensure that |suf(b)| is not longer than the phrase it represents(length(p)). We then
check if any back informer covers I(pi) −1, if one does we concatenat their sufﬁxes
and ﬁnd bi’s new sufﬁx in the concatenation.
The full algorithm is as follows. Wind the phrase informers back, and unwind them
to learn the preﬁx of the phrase that is a sufﬁx of P covered from the ﬁrst index
of each phrase. Wind the back informers back, and unwind to learn the relevant
sufﬁx that is preﬁx of the pattern. Then compare the suf() and pre() of each phrase
informer and the last phrase’s back informer until a match is found. If no match is
found the pattern is not in T.
2.3.5 Saving space and time
The last section’s algorithm requires two winds, and two unwinds. The winding
themselves take O(|Z| ∗M(|Z|)), however maintaining the pre- and sufﬁxes will
in the worst case require O(|T|) time. If we instead store two numbers that give
the start and end of the string in P, we now only need constant space and time per
informer affected by a phrase unwind, and the total run time is O(|Z| ∗M(|Z|)).
12
Chapter 2
The Problem and Its Applications
==PAGE:21==
The bound can be improved further. Fix f = ⌈|T|
|Z|⌉, and create B = ⌈|T|
f ⌉buckets.
Bucket 1 covers the indices 0 to |B| −1 and other bucket bi covers |B| ∗i to
|B|∗(i+1)−1. A phrase p = (a, b) goes in bucket Bi if I(p) is covered by the bucket.
If the phrase is longer than f, and no longer covered by the bucket at index end(Bi)
we split it into two phrase. Phrase one is (i,end(bi) - I(p)), and phrase two is (i, B -
end(bi) - I(p)) and we set I(phrase two) = start(Bi+1), insert phrase one into Bi+1.
There are now no phrases longer than f.
If any phrases are going to be shifted, they are covered by two buckets, we split that
phrase in a way similar to above. We deal with the buckets as sets. At the beginning
we merge all the sets into their bucket. This takes log(f) MDWS operations at most
per bucket. For all buckets that becomes |T|
|T |
|Z|
∗log( |T|
|Z|) = O(|Z| ∗log( |T|
|Z|)) MDWS
operations.
When winding back, we now can do operations on the buckets. For a phrase p, split
the bucket Bp that covers the phrase at I(p) −1, shift the right side of the split back,
and merge it with the bucket that covers it now.
Since operations now happen on set of at most size f, and we only increased the
number of phrases by a at most a constant factor, the run time is now O(|Z|∗M(f)) =
O(|Z| ∗M(|T|
|U|)).
2.3
Applications of MDWS: searching Lempel-Ziv compressed text
13
==PAGE:22==
==PAGE:23==
Algorithms for MDWS
3
This chapter describes algorithms that solve the mergeable dictionaries with shift
problem, and their runtimes. The ﬁrst section describes the amortized log2(n) data
structure and algorithm developed by Farach-Colton and Thorup [FCT98] to search
compressed text. The next section covers the work of Iacono and Özkan [I2],
who developed the ﬁrst amortized log(U) mergeable dictionary. Next, the MDWS
algorithm developed by Bille et al. [BEG19], which solves the problem in log(U)
amortized time, is covered.
3.1 Segment Merge
In their work on searching LZ-77 compressed text (see section 2.3) the authors
needed a data structure that could split, merge and shift sets.
Their solution
was implemented using 2-b trees. We shall call this algorithm the Segment Merge
algorithm.
Assuming that the reader is familiar with 2-b trees, and referring to Aho et al.
[AHU74, p.129-163] for details about 2-b trees. However, the most important
properties are outlined here.
2-b trees operate are search trees, similarly to binary search trees, with leaves
ordered in increasing order based on their keys. In a 2-b tree each non-leaf node
has between two and b children, and all leaves are at the same level from the root.
2-b trees store keys in their leaves, meaning internal "routing" nodes do not store
keys. As a consequence, a search for an element in the tree takes Θ(log(n)), because
it always terminates at a leaf.
Since every node has between 2 and b siblings, it is possible to delete nodes or
insert a 2-b tree into another. Aho et al. [AHU74] calls that insertion processed
grafting. Let trees T1 and T2 have the corresponding heights h1 and h2. If the trees
are equally tall, create a new node r to serve as root and T1 and T2 children of r. If
the trees are different heights — let us assume T1 is tallest — search for any value
from T2 in T1, but stop the search when it hits a node nh with a height of h2 + 1.
15
==PAGE:24==
Add T2 as a child of nh. If nh has too many children, create a sibling node and give
it half of nh’s children. Then add the sibling as a child of nh parent (this might cause
the parent to split, and the process is repeated). If a split node is the root, then
create a new node before splitting to serve as its parent. After this all leaves will
be the same height, and all parents will have at least 2 children, thus the 2-b tree
invariants are preserved. Time wise, we search h1 −h2 nodes meaning the time is
tightly bound by the height difference, note that grafting might ruin the order of the
leaves. Note that splitting a parent when it has too many nodes causes a 2-b tree to
be self balancing.
To delete a node we remove it as child of its parent p. If the parent now has 1 child,
there are two cases. One, p’s siblings have more than 2 children. In this case that
sibling gives p one of its children, the right sibling gives its leftmost child or the left
sibling gives its rightmost child. Two, no sibling has more than two children, p gives
its child to a sibling, and deletes itself. Since each non-leaf node has 2-b children
p will always have at least one sibling to receive children from or pass children to.
Thus, deleting a node in a 2-b tree takes Θ(1) time.
Finally, 2-b trees can be split such that all elements larger than a value k are put in
one tree and the remainder go in another tree. Let the left and right tree after the
split be t1 and t2. Find the successor of k+1 in the tree and add the successor c to
T2. For each node on the path c ; r from c to the root, graft the nodes children
left of the path c ; r together and graft the combined children to the left tree, also
graft the children right of the path together and graft them to the right tree. When
grafting children together, start with the rightmost and end with the leftmost such
that only the order of children is preserved.
Time wise, search take log(n) time. For each node on the path c ; r there can
be at most b-1 children on one side of the path, when grafting children together.
Since the children are the same height grafting costs O(b) = O(1). For the left and
the right tree at most log(n) combined children are grafted into them in increasing
height, thus at most log(n) time is spent grafting. Since no step takes more than
Theta(log(n)) a split can be done in Θ(log(n)) time.
We will say that 2-b tree covers the area between min(T) and max(T). Since it is used
a lot in this chapter it might be a good idea to refresh the readers memory on the join
operation. A join is a merge between two trees A and B, where max(A) < min(B),
i.e. all elements in one set are larger than all elements in the other. In a 2-b tree, a
join can be implemented by grafting. This means that we can safely join two trees
so long as they don’t cover any overlapping area.
16
Chapter 3
Algorithms for MDWS
==PAGE:25==
3.1.1 The Segment Merge Algorithm
Join is unhelpful for merging, what is called in the following, interleaved sets. That
are sets where at least one element in the union of the sets is covered by both trees.
However, we can prevent interleaved sets by creating a series of smaller sets such
that each element is covered exclusively by one subset and joining those subsets
together.
To do this the sets are transformed into a number of segments from A {A1, . . . , Ak},
and segments from B {B1, . . . , Bk}, where Ai ⊆A and Bi ⊆B. Following that
max(Ai) < min(Bi) ≤max(Bi < min(Ai+1). This will clearly be the minimal
number of segments that can be made since including anymore elements in an A
segment will mean elements from B are covered by the segment. Notice that this
deﬁnition does not allow duplicate elements, so they must be dealt with before
merging.
The segment merge algorithm goes as follows.
Algorithm 1 The Segment Merge algorithm
When merging two trees T1 and T2, where min(T1) < min(T2) to form a merged
tree T3 do the following:
T3 is initially empty
for i = 1,2,3,4,. . . ,k-1 do
a ←split(T1, min(T2))
b ←split(T2, min(T1))
T3 ←join(T3, a)
T3 ←join(T3, b)
end for
If min(T1) > min(T2) we swap the arguments, such that min(T1) < min(T2)
remains true.
Supporting disjoint sets To support disjoint sets a simple modiﬁcation can be made. Af-
ter splitting T1 to get a, we check if min(T1) = min(T2), and if it is we split(T1, min(T1))
to get rid of the duplicate node. The case b in T2 is symmetric.
3.2 Biased Segment Merge
The algorithm of Bille et al. [BEG19] extends the Segment Merge algorithm to be
able to achieve a O(log(U)) time. This improvement is achieved through two factors.
3.2
Biased Segment Merge
17
==PAGE:26==
Using biased 2-b trees as the data structure and not starting the search for each
segment from the root.
3.2.1 Biased 2-b trees
Like 2-b trees, biased 2-b trees maintain a set of keys, in increasing order, in the
leaves and each internal node has 2-b children. Unlike 2-b trees each leaf is not the
same distance from the root. The motivation of Bent et al. [BST85] when designing
the data structure was to optimize search times but still support splits and joins.
If the number of searches for all nodes in a tree is known, it would be good if the
highly searched nodes were closer. More formally, for a tree of n nodes we would
like to minimize the mean access time Pn
a=1(#accesses(a)*access_time(a)+1). The
authors deﬁne optimal access time for a node a in a tree as O(log(#accesses(a)
P
#access )).
This is done through weighting nodes such that heavier nodes are closer to the root.
Each node has a weight w() and a rank r(). If the node n is a leaf, its weight is
w(n) = #accesses(n) and if the node is internal its weight is the sum of its children’s
weights. By these rules the root will have a weight of Pn
a=1(#accesses(a)). The
rank of an leaf is r(n) = ⌊log(w(n))⌋and the rank of an internal node is the highest
rank amongst its children plus 1. A child c of parent p is considered a major child if
r(c) + 1 = r(p) and minor otherwise. The rank of a tree r(T) is the rank of it’s root,
and the root is considered a major child.
A 2-b tree exhibits local bias if any neighbouring sibling of a minor node is a major
leaf. This local bias guarantees the following properties.
LEMMA 1: For any node n 2r(n)−1 ≤w(n). This follows from the deﬁnition of
rank. Clearly this is true if node n is a leaf where 2r(n) ≤w(x) ≤2r(n)+1. If n
is an internal node and has a minor child, then by local bias it also has at least
one major leaf child l. r(l) + 1 = r(n), thus 2r(n)−1 ≤w(l). If n has no minor
children, it has at least two major children x and y, then they have the same rank
thus, w(n) = w(x) + w(y) ≥2r(x)−1 + 2r(y)−1.
This leads to a second lemma.
LEMMA 2: If n is a leaf with a depth d and x is the root, d < log(w(r)/w(x)) + 2.
The rank increases by at least one in every level of the tree. Thus, the distance
between two nodes is at most the difference in rank d ≤r(x) −r(n). By lemma 1
log(w(x)) ≥r(x) −1 and log(w(n)) ≤r(n) + 1. Combining the deﬁnitions gives us
lemma 2.
18
Chapter 3
Algorithms for MDWS
==PAGE:27==
Notice that by lemma 2 biased 2-b trees have optimal access time for all elements.
Like 2-b trees, biased trees can be joined and split. However, because extra computa-
tion is required to keep local bias the runtime becomes amortized. To aid in analysis
we introduce the credit invariant that each node n to a parent must p must have
r(r(p) −r(n) −1) credits, meaning that major children have 0 credits. We say that a
2-b biased tree must satisfy the credit invariant before and after any operation.
The joining algorithm for merging two trees where all element in one is larger than
all elements in the other is recursive.
When joining two trees with the roots T1 and T2 to create a new tree T3, where
w.l.o.g assume r(T1) < ge r(T2), there are two cases.
Case 1: r(T1) = r(T2) or T1 is a leaf: Create a new node T3, and make T1 and T2
children of T3.
Case 2: r(T1) > r(T2) or T2 is not a leaf: Let c be the right child of T1. Remove c as
a child of T1, and recursively join T2 and c to produce a tree with root j.
—Subcase 2a: r(j) ≤r(T1)-1: Make j the right child of T1.
—Subcase 2b: r(j) = r(T1): Then j has exactly two children. Add these
children to T1 and destroy j. If T1 now has more than b children, create
two children nodes l and r and give each half of T1’s children, l gets the
left children and r gets the right children.
Finally rename T1 to T3
The algorithm assumes that min(T2) > max(T1) and therefore joins happen on the
right side of T1. The case where min(T1) > max(T2) is symmetric.
Proof of correctness: Clearly a join algorithm produces a tree whose rank is the same
or one higher. For the algorithm to be correct each of the cases 1,2a and 2b must
produce local bias at the nodes being joined. In case 1, if both trees have the same
rank they will both be major nodes. If T1 is a leaf, then T1 will be a major leaf in T3
and T2 will be a minor internal mode. Thus, case 1 maintains local bias.
In subcase 2a, if c was minor in the old tree it can have had a rank of at most
r(T1) −2, thus after being joined with T2 the resulting tree j can at most be the
same rank as T1’s major children. If c was major in T1 either its rank remained the
same, in which case local biased is maintained, or its rank increased to r(T1), in
which case subcase 2b would have occurred instead.
3.2
Biased Segment Merge
19
==PAGE:28==
In subcase 2b, j has two children. If j’s left child is minor, then its right child is a leaf,
which can only happen if the children of j are c and T2 and the latter is a leaf. If the
left child of c in the old tree is minor, u is a leaf of rank r(c)- 1, and in this case also
the children of j are u and T1. It follows that the tree existing after T1 gains a child
but being split, it is locally biased. Splitting preserves local bias, which means that
the ﬁnal tree is locally biased.
Now to prove that the credit invariant is maintained. We will prove that if one
allocates r(T1)−r(T2)+ 1 credits to a join operation, the variant can be maintained
for each case. We assume that the tree starts with the invariant satisﬁed.
Case 1: One credit is used to make the new root. If r(T1) = r(T2) both children are
major in the new tree and need no credits. If T1 is a leaf, then we give r(T1) −r(T2)
credits to T2.
Case 2: We take r(T1)−r(c) credits from c when it is split from T1 giving us a total of
2r(T1)−r(T2)−r(c) credits. We need at most max(r(c), r(T2))−min(r(c), r(T2))+1,
i.e. the biggest rank of the trees, credits to recursively merge the trees.
Subcase 2a: We need one credit to build the new tree j. We place r(T1) −r(j) −1
credits on j such that it satisﬁes the invariant. If r(T2) ≥r(c) we can pay these
credits with the r(T1) −r(T2) we got at the start, and pay the recursion cost with
the credits taken from c. If r(T2) < r(c), we can pay the credits to j using the one
taken from c, and use starting credits to pay for recursion.
Subcase 2b: We need one credit to build the new tree. Given that j has the same
rank as T1, the children of j satisfy the credit invariant with respect to T1. Since the
nodes l and r both are major children of T3, they need no credits. Thus, we use at
most 2r(T1) −r(T2) −r(c) credits, by the argument of case 2a.
Given that the algorithm maintains local bias and the credit invariant two 2-b biased
trees can be joined in r(T1) −r(T2) amortized time. Note that two trees of equal
height can be joined in amortized O(1) time.
A biased 2-b tree T can be split at a value k in a manner similar to normal 2-b trees.
The search takes at most r(T) time to ﬁnd a node c, similarly the path from c to root
is now at most r(T) < log(w(T)) long. Given that one can join equal rank nodes in
constant time, the split can proceed as in the 2-b tree version. It is also possible to
start the split from an internal node ni, and split on the path c ; ni, but this would
remove all subtrees of ni from the tree. This gives the last two Lemmas.
LEMMA 3 A join between two 2-b trees T1 and T2 takes r(|T1 −T2|) time.
20
Chapter 3
Algorithms for MDWS
==PAGE:29==
LEMMA 4 a tree T can be split at a value k in O(log(r(T)) amortized time. The sub
tree of an internal node ni can be split in r(ni) amortized time
3.2.2 The Algorithm
The Segment Merge algorithm found a minimal number of segments by repeatedly
splitting both trees. This gave log(n) time per segment since split search started
from the root. Biased Segment Merge deviates from this strategy of sequential and
instead ﬁnds all segments before merging them. An important note is that the search
for segment Ai begins from max(Ai−1), rather than from the root.
The version presented here deviates from the original algorithm of Bille et al.
[BEG19] in two areas. One, it uses segment descriptors and splits rather than the
Construct Segment Tree algorithm given in the original paper. Two, it re-weights
the segments at a different time. Both of these simplify analysis. We will initially
assume the sets are disjoint and lift that assumption later.
In the following assume that two trees A and B are being merged to form a tree
C.
min(A) < min(A) and the sets have the segments A = {A1, . . . , Ak} and
B = {B1, . . . , Bk}. The algorithm has three distinct steps. One, ﬁnding the segments
descriptor. Two, constructing the segments. Three, joining the segments.
Data structure: The sets are stored as biased 2-b trees where each node stores the
key of the maximum and minimum child in its sub-trees. Rather than the number of
accesses, which is unknown for MDWS, the weight of a leaf l is g+(l) + g−(l). g−(l)
denotes the gap to l’s successor, deﬁned as l −pred(l) if l has a predecessor in S and
1 otherwise. g+(l) denotes the gap to l’s successor and is deﬁned as succ(l) −l if l
has a successor in S and 1 otherwise. This weighting means that if there is a large
gap between two elements those elements will be closer to the root.
Finding segment descriptor: The segment descriptor of a segment Ai consist of
references to three nodes. min(Ai), max(Ai) and lca(min(Ai), max(Ai)) which
is the lowest common ancestor of min(Ai) and max(Ai). We will call this third
reference lca(Ai), i.e. the lowest common ancestor of the segment. Using these
three references the segment taken out of the tree. Let pl, be the ﬁrst node on
the simple path lca(Ai) ; min(Ai) and pr be the ﬁrst node on the simple path
lca(Ai) ; max(Ai). To recover the segment do a split between min(Ai) and pl but
only adding nodes to the right split tree Tr, then do a split between max(Ai) and
pr and only add nodes to the left split tree left tree Tl. When splitting in this way,
do not destroy nodes on the path to lca(Ai). lca(Ai) joins all children between pl
3.2
Biased Segment Merge
21
==PAGE:30==
together to give a middle tree Tm. To complete the segment, join Tr to Tm then join
Tl to Tm.
To ﬁnd the segments the algorithm given by Bille et al. [BEG19] is used.
Algorithm 2 Finding proﬁles
Find the leaves min(A1) and min(B1) by walking from the root to the leftmost
leaf in each tree
for i = 1,2,3,4,...,k-1 do
Find the leaf max(Ai) by searching for the predecessor of min(Bi) in A the
search is done by walking from min(Ai).
From max(Ai) ﬁnd the leaf min(Ai+1), which is the successor of max(Ai).
Find the leaf max(Bi) by searching for the predecessor of min(Ai+1) in B the
search is done by walking from min(Bi).
From max(Bi) ﬁnd the leaf min(Bi+1), which is the successor of max(Bi).
end for
The only modiﬁcation made to the ﬁnding proﬁles algorithm is that when searching
for the rightmost node, the max, of a segment we save a reference to the tallest node
encountered. Thus, we can ﬁnd the lowest common ancestor of each segment.
Extracting the segments: Before constructing the segment trees, we re-weigh the
corners of each segment, min(Ai) being the left corner and max(Ai) being the right.
By the deﬁnition of a segment we know which segments, Ai and Ai+1, that a segment
Bi will be inserted between and can calculate the weight adjustment needed. This
will break local bias at the corners. However, any node that is a segment corner
will become a singleton during the join, thus after the split local bias is maintained.
Once reweighing is done, extract the segments as shown above.
Joining segments: In the ﬁnal tree the segments will have an order of {A1, B1, A2, . . . , Ak, Bk}
and thus the neighbours of Bi is Ai and Ai+1. To form the ﬁnal set we continuously
join the minimal rank tree with its minimal rank neighbour.
Proof of correctness: The ﬁnding proﬁles algorithm clearly ﬁnds a minimum number
of proﬁles given the sets are disjoint. One segment extraction can not destroy the
path to a lowest common ancestor in any other segment, thus the segments can all
be extracted. Local bias is maintained since only operations that maintain local bias
in the ﬁnal tree are used. Finally, the segments are joined to their neighbours such
that their order in C is correct.
22
Chapter 3
Algorithms for MDWS
==PAGE:31==
3.2.3 Biased Segment Merge complexity
The cost of Biased Segment Merge is the cost of ﬁnding segment descriptors, extract-
ing segments, and joining the segments together.
The cost ﬁnding segments descriptors: The distance from any node in lca(Ai)’s sub-tree
to lca(Ai) is by deﬁnition at most r(lca(Ai)). Thus, we can visit at most 2∗r(lca(Ai))
vertices during the search. By lemma one this is at most 2 ∗log(w(lca(Ai))). Since
there is k segments the cost becomes O(Pk
i=1(log(Ak) + log(Bk)))
The cost of extracting Reweighing the segment corner takes constant time per corner
since we have a direct reference to them. However, corners might have a new lower
rank which needs to be paid during the ﬁrst join that happens when extracting
segments. A node n will need r(n) −r′(n) credits, where r′() is its new rank. This
extra cost will be the sum of rank changes R and will later be paid for using potential
function analysis.
With this extra cost paid, each split visits at most r(lca(Ai)) nodes, thus at most
2r(lca(Ai)) nodes are visited. lca(Ai) has at most b-2 children that are joined to-
gether. The difference in rank amongst lca(Ai)’s children can at most be r(lca(Ai)).
Thus, the total cost of extracting the segments is O(Pk
i=1(log(Ak) + log(Bk)) + R).
The cost of joining segments: Let us consider the ﬁnal tree. Clearly it has a height
of max{A, B}. The tree was formed from merging the segments and there is k
segments.
The ﬁnal cost: By the deﬁnition of a biased tree we can simplify the cost w(A1) +
w(A1) + . . . + w(Ak) = w(A) since all nodes in the segments were children of A.
as such O(Pk
i=1(log(Ak))) reduces to O(log(w(A))). A symmetric case applies to B.
Thus the cost of joining the segments and ﬁnding the segments descriptors reduces
to O(log(w(A)) + log(w(B))), and the cost of extracting the segments becomes
O(log(w(A)) + log(w(B)) + R). This gives an amortized cost of:
O(log(w(A)) + log(w(B)) + R)
A ﬁnal step is to pay for the reweighing of corner nodes which sums to R. Let the
potential of the collection of set be: Φ(S) = P
S∈S(φ(S)). And let the potential of a
set be φ(S) = P
n∈S(log(g+) + log(g−)). The potential of an empty data structure is
0, and it clearly remains non-zero. When merging two sets A and B only the potential
of the sets is affected, and only the corner node of each segment is affected.
3.2
Biased Segment Merge
23
==PAGE:32==
When inserting a segment B between two segments A and C, the right corner of
A and the left corner of B changes weight. Let Ar be A’s right corner and Al be A’s
left corner. Ar weight is lowered by −(Cl −Bl), this will cause its rank to fall by
at most log(−(Cl −Bl)). Ar’s contribution to the potential of the data structure
will also drop. From the potential function we can see that the new potential
Φ′(S) = Φ′(S) −log(−(Cl −Bl)). Thus, the fall in rank is mirrored by the fall
in potential in the data structure. In other words, for every segment in a merge
there is always potential in S to pay the reweighing cost R, and thus the amortized
performance of biased segment merge is:
log(w(A) + w(B)) ≤log(w(C))
For the remaining operations: shift does not change the data structure potential
and can be implemented in O(1) time. Make set only increases the potential by a
constant 2, and can be implemented in O(1) time. Search does not change the data
structure and can be implemented in O(log(U)) time. Split takes worst case log(U)
time amortized time by lemma 4.
3.2.4 Supporting non-disjoint set
Supporting non disjoint set can be achieved through similarly to segment merge,
i.e. by checking if two segment beginnings have point to the same element, if that
is the case, say that min(A4) = min(B4) we can delete min(B4) and search for
successor(min(B4)) from min(B4)’s parent.
3.2.5 A conjectured log(n) weighting scheme
The cost of reweighting dominates the cost of biased segment mergeBille et al.
[BEG19] and that this is the reason why one must use a potential function. The
potential function then in turn causes the weighting scheme, which is required in
biased 2-b trees, to limit the analysis to the size of the universe. However, if we
consider another weighting scheme, which I am going to call unweighted, where
leaves have a weight of 1, and their weight never change. We can still analyse the
segments in terms of their weight (which now is counts the number of sub trees)
and the same bounds apply, however we get rid of the pesky re weighting operation
and thus do not need to really on a potential function. At the same time given that
weight is a counter of elements in sub-trees the ﬁnal amortized runtime becomes:
24
Chapter 3
Algorithms for MDWS
==PAGE:33==
O(log(w(A)) + log((B))) = O(log(w(C))) = O(log(n))
However I leaves this as a conjectured result. It might however be interesting
investigate how the performance differs between the weighted and unweighted
version of the biased segment merge, especially in comparison to segment merge.
This would be relevant both for the MDWS problem, but would also have implications
for searching Lempel-Ziv compressed text.
3.2
Biased Segment Merge
25
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
Implementation
4
In the previous chapter algorithms for the MDWS problem were examined. It was
concluded that a number of things are worth testing in practice.
• The performance difference between the older log2(n) algorithm by Farach-
Colton and Thorup [FCT98], and the newer log(U) algorithm provided by
Bille et al. [BEG19].
• If the weighting scheme results in signiﬁcant performance gain over biased
segment merge on a non-weighted tree.
To answer the above the a testing bench for MDWS algorithms, an implemented
Segment Merge and Biased Segment Merge, as well as the Lempel-Ziv 77 com-
pression scheme was implemented. This chapter documents my implementation
process reﬂecting mostly on implementations decisions and their consequences. The
ﬁrst sections document how test ﬁles are processed, timed and saved. The middle
sections documents the algorithms.
c++ was used to implement the testing bench, algorithms, and lempel-ziv. The c++
ﬁles were complied with g++ 10.3.0 for c++17. Python was used to generate the
non-Lempel-Ziv based ﬁles.
4.1 Test Bench
The test bench is responsible for processing the test ﬁles, instantiating the correct
algorithms with the selected parameters, executing and timing the commands,
checking the results, and saving the data for each correct run.
The MDWS class: MDWS is implemented in a way analogous to an abstract class
in java. It is a class that contains only virtual functions. Virtual functions are
placeholder functions that are meant to be overwritten by inheriting classes. The
MDWS class contains the MDWS functions, a few extra ones for debugging and
initial building.
27
==PAGE:36==
MDWS algorithms are made by inheriting from this class. Because of inheritance, all
the variations can then be referred to by a MDWS pointer, and the test bench can
treat the algorithms as black boxes. At the same time debuging is easy. This algorithm
agnostic approach gives great freedom in implementation, for example whether to
store nodes in vector, arrays, or simply by reference is up to the implementation. The
algorithm is also required to be able to free it’s space through the cleanUp() function
to prevent memory leak. In practice I have found running time to be identical
between approaches.
Testﬁle format: The test ﬁles are expected in the following layout:
1,4,6,9,10,11,3010
set 2
...
* Commands
search(3,45)
merge(5,4)
makeset(7)
shift(17,-300)
split(17,423)
...
*results
1,4,6,3010
set 2
...
The ﬁle is split into three sections, each section is preceded by a ’*’ character on
it’s own line. In the ﬁrst sections the initial conﬁguration of sets is given. Second
list the commands, Third section list the intended conﬁguration of the once all
commands are executed. The format was created to be human readable. It should
be relatively easy to make new small test ﬁles. For the same reason I have chosen to
allow non-singleton as initial set conﬁguration, even though MDWS assumes only
singleton sets at the beginning.
Timing: To time the duration of operations on small sets high resolution time stamps
are needed. Initially I used QueryPerformanceCounter (QPC)1 which provided
timestamp resolution down to 100 ns. If available QPC will use the Time Stamp
Counter (TSC). One could access the TSC directly through something like RDTSCP2,
and get higher resolution time stamps. On my 3.2 GHz system I get 10 ns resolution,
which is obviously better. But since any crystal oscillator is never 100% exactly
correct, both approaches require calibration using another timing source. Windows
will do this automatically for QPS on start up, so I avoided wasting time calibrating,
1microsoft documentation on QPC
2microsoft documentation on RDTSCP
28
Chapter 4
Implementation
==PAGE:37==
or having to save a calibration ﬁle. I have also found that the lower precision will
equal out over 10+ runs.
The test bench does not time how long building the initial set conﬁguration takes,
but times each command in the second section of the test ﬁles. It also times how
long the cleanUp() takes.
4.2 Algorithms — Implementation
In this section a high level overview of the algorithm implementation is given, as
well as cover design choices in the data structure and their implications explained.
4.2.1 Segment Merge
The segment merge algorithm is implemented as described in the original literature,
with no major changes to the operations.
The trees are constructed from the
following node class:
1
class
SBTnode{
2
struct
SBTnode{ //the node used to build the tree
3
std::list <SBTnode*> children;
4
std::list <int > lc; // the
largest
child in each
subtree
5
SBTnode* parent = nullptr;
6
int val =
-1; // value
contained in the node , if non -leaf is
-1
7
int shift = 0; // initially
the shift is 0
8
};
Listing 4.1: The Segment Merge Node
The implementation is a 2-b tree, meaning we can set the maximum degree. On
instantiation, a variable called "maxNodeChildren" is set to b and at any point a node
has more than b children it is split. The intention was that I would test how varying
the maximum degree affected performance. The results are not worth presenting
but b=5 was always fastest.
It should be noted that I made, what in hindsight, could be described as an interesting
choice tree implementation. The node maintains a list of it’s children, but at the
same time it maintains a list of the largest child lc in each of the children’s subtree.
The thinking was that this would make adding children to a node quicker. If we do
not ﬁnd a larger child when iterating through lc add the new child at the end it at
the end of the list of children.
4.2
Algorithms — Implementation
29
==PAGE:38==
Each node has it’s value, which is set to -1 for non leaf nodes, and the amount that
the node has been shifted. Both of these methods are quiet redundant, which I
corrected in the later algorithms.
Since joining two trees requires grafting the smaller into the taller tree, a tree must
know it’s height. Therefore a treetop class is used to represent sets. The treetop class
contains the height of the tree, a pointer to the root, and a Boolean that describes if
the set exists (set to false if the set is deleted). In hindsight I believe having each
node keep track of it’s own height would be a simpler but equally fast solution. For
example, when splitting a tree, each subtree on either side of the splitting path
requires a new top. This is wasteful since the resulting subtrees immediately are
joined. While treetops are still fast to make and do not affect the running time,
they do make it more cumbersome to code, and provide a questionable potential
performance boost. It also makes many manipulations longer.
Finally, I experimented with different approaches to node storage. In one version I
used pointers and allocated memory through new(). In another I stored the nodes
in a vector. Doubling would be quiet expensive given the size of the vector, but it
is possible to reserve enough space when building the sets. Given that each level
of a tree away from a leaf is exponentially smaller that the previous we can bound
the number of nodes needed for a given problem at 2n. This is, of course, assuming
no makeset operations. However, the test ﬁles rarely use makeset, since there is no
doubt about it being constant time.
4.2.2 Biased Segment Merge
Biased Segment Merge is implemented as described, but with the optimization to
reweighing described in the algorithms chapter. The node class now looks more
traditional, with no more B-tree like list of largest children.
1
struct
Node{
2
std::list <Node*> children;
3
int rank = 1;
4
int weight = 0;
5
int
minChild = INT32_MAX;
6
int
maxChild = 0;
7
Node* parent = nullptr;
8
bool
isLeaf = false;
9
int shift = 0;
10
};
Listing 4.2: The Biased Segment Merge Node
30
Chapter 4
Implementation
==PAGE:39==
Instead of storing a value and a shift variable, each node is now interpreted as 0
shifted by an amount, thus no need to store two variables. When stored this way, it
also makes considering shift easy. Before we visit each non-leaf node during search
we push down it’s shift. Thus, we can search without adjusting our search target.
4.3 Lempel-Ziv implementation
As mentioned in section 2.3 the Lempel-Ziv algorithm is equivalent to ﬁnding the
longest preﬁx of a sufﬁx occurring before the current encoding index that still is in
the sliding window. However, since nearly 100% of the computation is done when
building the tree I have decided to allow the an inﬁnitely long window.
The tree is represented as a compressed trie over the sufﬁxes, meaning that non
branching paths are compressed. When adding a new sufﬁx to the tree, we match
the sufﬁx in the tree until a match no longer exists. Then we insert a new node
containing the ﬁrst unmatched character, a pointer to where in the original string
we can ﬁnd that unmatched character and the sufﬁx’s number. Since the tries are
compressed, this might require splitting an existing node.
In this case we will be unable to match the sequence covered by a child of the node
n. The child is called c and represent the text between T[cs] and T[ce], assuming we
were able to match c until index s|cs < s < ce. What we do is creating a new node
nc that encodes T[ce : s −1]. nc replaces c as a child of n. c becomes a child of nc
and is now set to cover T[s, ce]. Finally, we make the new sufﬁx node a child of nc.
This algorithm is quiet simple and has a bad worst case running time of O(n2), and
faster algorithms exist. The worstcase example is a string of one character. For
example, "aaaa....aaa". The ﬁrst sufﬁx is inserted into the tree. When the next sufﬁx
is inserted we can match the sufﬁx tree all the way to the end of T (-1 since the
next sufﬁx is one shorter). Thus, adding a sufﬁx will take O(n) time and there are n
sufﬁxes. The bad worst-case time is no concern since I am controlling what becomes
test ﬁles and the test strings just need to be compressed once.
Two ways to turn a LZ77 encoded ﬁle into a test ﬁle were created. One version
useing the log(|N|
|Z| ) optimization described by farach, and one which does not.
4.3
Lempel-Ziv implementation
31
==PAGE:40==
==PAGE:41==
Methods
5
In this chapter the testing setup, how the tests were run, and what test ﬁles were
used is described. I will provide the reasoning behind the choice of test ﬁles and
what algorithms were run on which ﬁles, as well as what I was hoping to learn from
each series of tests.
5.1 Test scenarios
The test ﬁles are a series of tests from two scenarios.
• Lempel-Ziv — Winding back informers as part of searching Lempel-Ziv Com-
pressed text
• Merges — A series of Merges with varying degree of interleavedness
The intention is that the Merges test will establish how the three algorithms variation’s
merge speed is affected by the size of the union. If any algorithm is faster at merging,
or one algorithm is faster at a certain union size, the test should discover it.
In contrast, the Lempel-Ziv test should measure real world performance in an algor-
tihmically relevant area. The tests come from my Lempel-Ziv implementation and as
such performance on this test case should be a good indicator of performance on
Lempel-Ziv in general.
5.1.1 Searching Lempel-Ziv Compressed Text
There are six cases, three are artiﬁcial and three are real. There is one low, mid, and
high compression ratio ﬁle for each category. Two real ones come from the pizza and
chilli corpus (http://pizzachili.dcc.uchile.cl/repcorpus.html) the "world_leaders.txt"
and "einsten.de.txt" cases. The last real case is the ﬁrst Harry Potter book (Harry
Potter GitHub). The artiﬁcial ﬁles consist of "gattaca" a 1000000 character long
string of random g, a, t, and c’s. And two ﬁles made by taking an initial string
and appending random sub-strings, from the initial string, of random length in
front of it, these are "test" and "rng_repeat". All test ﬁles are compressed with the
33
==PAGE:42==
Lempel-Ziv implementation I made, and come in two versions. LZ1, which contains
the log2(U/|Z|) optimization, and LZ1 which does not.
The outcomes of interest are:
• Does the log(U) algorithm perform better than the log2(n)? algorithm as one
would expect?
• How does the weighting scheme affect biased segment merge performance as
compared to an unweighted version? Given that nodes are more likely to be
inserted between nodes with a high weight, one would imagine the weighted
version would perform better.
5.1.2 Test Case: Merge
The more segments a merge has the more expensive it is, and this is where I would
expect biased segment merge to perform signiﬁcantly better than segment merge.
This case is to see if the log(u) bound on biased segment merge holds. By creating
2⌊log(U)⌋) singleton sets and merging them in different ways.
The cases consist of a series of merges. n/2 merges of size two, n/4 merges of
size 4, up to 1 merge of size n. The case has 5 variants. "MEM", most expensive
merge in which we create the largest number of segments possible. "REM", randomly
expensive merge where we create half as many segments. "L4M" which has half
as many segments again, "L8M" which has the least segments. "LEM" is a series fo
joins.
The outcomes of interest are:
• The performance of biased segment merge compared the unweighted version
and segment merge.
• Whether biased segment achieves something approaching log(n) runtime,
given that problem size is bound to the size of the universe.
5.2 Data-set and study limitations
Naturally, this thesis and the performed tests have their limitations and might not
capture all possible outcomes. Chieﬂy, one of the algorithm implementations failed
to compile at optimization levels above "-O0" and thus the times achieved cannot
be compared to other implementations. I did test the other two algorithms and
34
Chapter 5
Methods
==PAGE:43==
they seem to be ranking wise equivalent, meaning that they retained their relative
ranking on the test set across optimization -O1 to -O3. Additionally there might
be some hidden context that the merge case fails to capture given that it is just a
general test of merging speed and not related to any concrete task.
5.2
Data-set and study limitations
35
==PAGE:44==
==PAGE:45==
Results
6
This chapter illustrates the results of the tests on algorithm performance. There were
three algorithms tested, Segment Merge, Biased Segment Merge, and weightless
Biased Segment Merge. The ﬁrst section covers the Merge test case (see chapter 5
for details on the test cases). The second section covers the Lempel-Ziv test case.
6.1 Merge — results
The graph of merge size against time can be seen in ﬁgure 6.1. An outcome of
interest was if Biased Segment Merge out-performed Segment Merge. On the graph
below it is very clear that Biased Segment Merge is faster. Indeed, for all test
cases that is true. The intended order of the test variants is also kept, which is
MEM>REM>L4M>L8M>LEM. It is also evident that LEM, which consists of only
joins, takes constant time per operation as one would expect when the trees are of
equal height.
Fig. 6.1: Time in nanoseconds against the size of a merge. The size of a merge between
two sets is the sum of their cardinality. Segment Merge is colored blue, and Biased
Segment Merge is colored orange.
37
==PAGE:46==
The Second outcome of interest was whether Biased Segment Merge approaches
log(n) amortized runtime, when |U| is polynomial bounded in the size of the sets.
Given that there n/2 merges of size 2, n/4 merges of size 4, and so on, there are
in total n commands. So for the log(n) bound an equal amount of time should be
spent on merges of each size.
Fig. 6.2: The sum time spent on merges of a given size for Biased Segment Merge(Orange)
and Segment Merge(Blue). The error bars show the range of runtimes caused by
the 5 test variants with differing amounts of segments. The least expensive merges
were left out since they are a special case of merge
This is very much the case. In ﬁgure 6.2, the graph shows how much time the two
algorithms spent on merges of each size, and one can see that Biased Segment Merge
seems to spend an equal amount of time on each size merge. We can contrast this
to a log2(n) algorithm in Segment Merge, where a linear increase in time spent for
each doubling of merge size is seen.
The ﬁnal outcome of interest was how weighting affects Biased Segment Merge
performance. Figure 6.3 shows the time spent on merges of differing sizes for the
weighted and unweighted version. It is evident that the weighted ones perform
better at a merge size of 32 and above, while the unweighted ones performs better in
smaller merges. However it is unclear if this leads to a deviation from log(n) time.
Therefore, I have ﬁtted a line to the time over the merge size, as seen in ﬁgure 6.4. It
seems that they perform equally well, except in the case where there are a maximum
number of segments, where they start to deviate at merges of size 128. However
without even larger merge sizes it is unknown if the trend continues.
38
Chapter 6
Results
==PAGE:47==
Fig. 6.3: The sum time spent on merges of a given size for Biased Segment Merge for
weighted(Orange) and unweighted versions Segment Merge(Blue). The error bars
show the range of runtimes caused by the 5 test variants with differing amounts
of segments. The least expensive merges were left out since they are a special case
of merge
Fig. 6.4: The time spent on merges of different sizes. The different patterns are caused by
different variants. (Upper) all the 5 variants, (LOWER) only the MEM variant
6.1
Merge — results
39
==PAGE:48==
It can be seen that the unweighted merge is more affected by the number of segments
in a merge. The error bars (which are caused by some variant having more or fewer
segments) are relatively larger for the unweighted version.
6.2 Lempel-Ziv — results
After compression the ﬁles had the following compression ratios.
Tab. 6.1: Test ﬁle compression ratios
Test Name
hp1
Gattaca
world_leaders
test
rng_repeat
einstein
Comp. ratio
8
9
267
465
1131
2672
The performance on the test set for each algorithm can be seen in ﬁgure 6.5. Unlike
what theory suggests, Segment Merge performs signiﬁcantly better in each test
case (p ≪0.001, two-sided dependant t-test), compared to Biased Segment Merge
weighted or unweighted. This difference might be due to the added complexity of
managing weights.
Fig. 6.5: The time taken by each algorithm on for test case, y-axis is time in nanoseconds,
for each ﬁle there is a LZ1 version which uses optimizations, and LZ0 which does
not. Test ﬁles are presented in order of compression ratio
40
Chapter 6
Results
==PAGE:49==
One would imagine that at higher compression factors, each merge can have more
segments such that Biased Segment Merge performance would outperform Segment
Merge. In ﬁgure 6.6, the performance of each algorithm for each test ﬁle is given.
Performance on a test for an algorithm is the mean time of the test divided by the
algorithm’s time. The graph indicates that the relative difference in performance
between Biased Segment Merge and Segment Merge shrinks as compression ratio
increases. However, without more data points and even higher compression ratio
ﬁles to test, it is difﬁcult to draw conclusions.
Fig. 6.6: The relative performance of each algorithm on each test ﬁle. The algorithms are
Biased Segment Merge in a weighted (Green) and unweighted (Blue) version and
Segment Merge (Orange). The x-axis depicts the compression ratio of on the test
ﬁle
A more clear conclusion is that performance difference becomes smaller when the
optimization is applied. This suggest that the difference is caused by merges with
large segments since there are fewer of those in the optimized version.
6.2
Lempel-Ziv — results
41
==PAGE:50==
==PAGE:51==
Discussion
7
There are a number of conclusions that can be drawn from the tests. Firstly, Biased
Segment Merge has an amortized runtime of log(n) given the bound on the universe.
Thus, Bille et al. [BEG19] has provided the ﬁrst fully described MDWS algorithm with
logarithmic amortized time. The weighting schema does seem to affect performance
in general merging, and weighted Biased Segment Merge performed notably worse.
However, given that less code is being executed in the unweighted version, which
does not need to reweigh nodes, the difference in performance might be expected.
Additionally, this might be explained by the conjectured log(n) performance of the
unweighted version.
Furthermore, it can be concluded that the weighting schema is beneﬁcial for the
merge test case, especially due to its ability to reduce the time required for high
segment merges.
I would call all conclusions above "the expected" result. However, a more puzzling
result comes from the Lempel-Ziv test case. However, at this point the exact reason
for the performance difference between Biased Segment Merge and Segment Merge
is unclear. Nonetheless, I would like to cautiously suggest the following: The perfor-
mance difference between Segment Merge and Biased Segment Merge comes from
two factors, the ﬁrst being the weighting scheme and second the implementation.
The sum of time spent on each operation in the Einstein case can be seen in table
7.1. Clear performance differences can be observed between the weighted and
unweighted versions, even though they are running nearly the same algorithm.
In all operations, unweighted is faster, except shift (where I made uWT push the
shift down from the root just to test if the differences could be caught). The only
difference is that unweighted never adjusts weights, concluding that the weighting
scheme must be detrimental.
Perhaps, the weighting scheme is good for merging in general, but it slows down
performance in the LZ77 case where duplicates are very common. If two sets
containing the same elements are merged, the number of segments will be the size
of one set after pruning. Each of these segments then needs to be re-weighted.
However, in practice there are no new elements in the set, meaning each element
43
==PAGE:52==
Tab. 7.1: The sum of time spent on each operation for the algorithms on the Einstein test
ﬁle, Merge 1 join the current phrases informer to the combined set, then split,
shift, and merge two joins the split to the combined set
operation
merge1
merge2
shift
split
SBT
410380400
1001049400
1177800
532695900
WT
1379598800
2222962000
1568400
1347939900
uWT
680322900
1565533800
2794000
453180100
could have kept its old weight. Computationally, the time spent adjusting weight on
duplicates is wasted, and for high segment merges this becomes an overhead that
might balance out its expected superior performance.
Another effect of the weighting schema is that a tree becomes bigger where weighted
leaves are closer to the root. This is good if the leaves weight is correlated with their
likely hood of being accessed. But this might not be the case in Lempel-Ziv.
However, even if the weighted Biased Segment Merge was as fast as the unweighted
it would still be slower than Segment Merge. I have three theories for why.
One, given the amount of duplicates approaches 100% of merge size all the segment
trees will be the same height. At this point, the segment tree join requirement of
"lowest rank tree to lowest rank neighbour" might result in increased overhead. I
have implemented this so it runs in O(segments) which becomes O(merge size) as
the winding proceeds. This might then become a size of merge sized overhead on
each merge operation, similarly to reweighing but not as computationally demand-
ing given the time difference between weighted and unweighted Biased Segment
Merge.
Two, the Segment Merge implementation might be more memory friendly. The
segment merge node stores a list of its largest children. Therefore, it never has
to check the value of children. It does need to iterate the lists largest children
which, at least analytically, is equivalent to checking a list of children, this might
pollute the then higher levels of the cache since there is room for more integers than
nodes.However, in my opinion this theory seems less likely.
Three, it might be more simple. Biased Segment Merge performs slightly worse than
both alternatives when the merge is small. Maybe, LZ77 does not produce as many
big segments as one would expect, and therefore performance on small merges is
more important. This is supported by the fact that performance differences shrink
with compression ratio, and thereby merge sizes increase. Nevertheless, one could
counter by saying performance differences are bigger in the not optimized LZ0 cases,
which have bigger merges.
44
Chapter 7
Discussion
==PAGE:53==
One thing that can be concluded is, that the differences in performance seem to be
be bounded by some constant factor, meaning that the algorithms asymptotically
perform the same.
Finally, I suggest the following heuristic, which should speed up biased segment
merge, based on the test results. During a merge between A and B, when ﬁnding
segments we try to keep a maximum number of segments from one set. Every time
the duplicate d is discovered in the minimum element in both A and B delete it from
B then ﬁnd its successor in B, s = succ(d,B) . Then search for predecessor(s,A)
in A, but adjusting the nodes in the proﬁle so that it is the simple path from D to
succ(d,B). This heuristic will help in the cases with massively duplicated merges
since the number of segments will be smaller, thus improving performance on
Lempel-Ziv.
45
==PAGE:54==
==PAGE:55==
Conclusion
8
In this thesis I have studied, implemented and tested algorithms for the Mergeable
Dictionaries with Shift problem, which is an extension of mergeable dictionaries to
allow all members of one set to be shifted by a speciﬁed amount. The main known
applications of mergeable dictionaries with shift is searching Lempel-Ziv compressed
text.
Two fully documented algorithms for the problem exists, the original by Farach and
Thorup which has an amortized runtime of log2(U), and more recent work by Bille
et al. which achieves log(U) amortized runtime, and conditionally log(n) amortized
runtime. Additionally a conjectured result of the thesis is that a weighting scheme
exist that will provide O(log(n)) unconditional amortized runtime.
In the section on algortihms, it was concluded that interesting implementation
questions for this algorithm were if the theoretical log(U) bound of Bille et al’s
algorithm, called Biased Segment Merge, could be experimentally veriﬁed, as well
as how it compared to the older Segment Merge algorithm.
The algorithms were implemented in C++ and tested in two test cases. One, a series
of increasingly large merges with varying degree of interleavedness, the second being
the winding step of Farach and Thorup’s searching algorithm on various compressed
text.
The main ﬁnding was that the lower log(U) bound was veriﬁed but surprisingly did
not lead to better performance when searching compressed text theory would sug-
gest. The results were discussed and several theories were presented. Additionally,
doubts can be raised as to the validity of the results given the inability to apply
optimization. Finally, a new heuristic that might improved Biased Segment Merge
performance on LZ77 was suggested.
Future work could investigate why biased segment merge fails to improve lempel-ziv
searching performance as well as if an unconditional amortized log(n) time can be
achieved.
47
==PAGE:56==
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[AHU74] A. Aho, J. Hopcroft, and J. Ullman. “The Design and Analysis of Computer Algo-
rithms”. In: 1974 (cit. on pp. 4, 15).
[BST85] S. W. Bent, D. Sleator, and R. Tarjan. “Biased Search Trees”. In: SIAM J. Comput.
14 (1985), pp. 545–568 (cit. on p. 18).
[BEG19] Philip Bille, Mikko Berggren Ettienne, and Inge Li Gørtz. “Mergeable Dictionaries
With Shifts”. In: CoRR abs/1901.00718 (2019). arXiv: 1901.00718 (cit. on pp. 1,
3, 8, 15, 17, 21, 22, 24, 27, 43).
[FCT98] Martin Farach-Colton and Mikkel Thorup. “String Matching in Lempel—Ziv Com-
pressed Strings”. In: Algorithmica 20 (Jan. 1998), pp. 388–404 (cit. on pp. 6, 9,
15, 27).
[I2]
John Iacono and Özgür Özkan. Mergeable Dictionaries. 2012. arXiv: 1002.4248
[cs.DS] (cit. on pp. 1, 5, 8, 15).
[Kar16]
Adam Karczmarz. “A Simple Mergeable Dictionary”. In: 15th Scandinavian Sym-
posium and Workshops on Algorithm Theory (SWAT 2016). Ed. by Rasmus Pagh.
Vol. 53. Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs). Dagstuhl, Ger-
many: Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2016, 7:1–7:13 (cit. on
p. 8).
[LSX19] Wei-Kai Lin, Elaine Shi, and Tiancheng Xie. “Can We Overcome the n log n Barrier
for Oblivious Sorting?” In: Jan. 2019, pp. 2419–2438 (cit. on p. 5).
[MS08]
Kurt Mehlhorn and Peter Sanders. “Algorithms and Data Structures: The Basic
Toolbox”. In: Algorithms and Data Structures: The Basic Toolbox (Jan. 2008) (cit. on
p. 4).
[Tar85]
Robert Endre Tarjan. “Amortized Computational Complexity”. In: SIAM Journal on
Algebraic Discrete Methods 6.2 (1985), pp. 306–318. eprint: https://doi.org/
10.1137/0606031 (cit. on p. 5).
49
==PAGE:58==
List of Figures
6.1
Time in nanoseconds against the size of a merge. The size of a merge
between two sets is the sum of their cardinality. Segment Merge is
colored blue, and Biased Segment Merge is colored orange.
. . . . . .
37
6.2
The sum time spent on merges of a given size for Biased Segment
Merge(Orange) and Segment Merge(Blue). The error bars show the
range of runtimes caused by the 5 test variants with differing amounts
of segments. The least expensive merges were left out since they are a
special case of merge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
The sum time spent on merges of a given size for Biased Segment Merge
for weighted(Orange) and unweighted versions Segment Merge(Blue).
The error bars show the range of runtimes caused by the 5 test variants
with differing amounts of segments. The least expensive merges were
left out since they are a special case of merge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
The time spent on merges of different sizes. The different patterns are
caused by different variants. (Upper) all the 5 variants, (LOWER) only
the MEM variant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.5
The time taken by each algorithm on for test case, y-axis is time in
nanoseconds, for each ﬁle there is a LZ1 version which uses optimiza-
tions, and LZ0 which does not. Test ﬁles are presented in order of
compression ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.6
The relative performance of each algorithm on each test ﬁle. The
algorithms are Biased Segment Merge in a weighted (Green) and un-
weighted (Blue) version and Segment Merge (Orange). The x-axis
depicts the compression ratio of on the test ﬁle
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
50
==PAGE:59==
List of Tables
6.1
Test ﬁle compression ratios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.1
The sum of time spent on each operation for the algorithms on the
Einstein test ﬁle, Merge 1 join the current phrases informer to the
combined set, then split, shift, and merge two joins the split to the
combined set
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
List of Tables
51
