==PAGE:1==
FEM analyses for the numerical
modeling of reinforced concrete slab
author
Chenyang Xu - s192170
supervisor
Luisa Giuliani
2021-11-02
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis
Contents
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Object and aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Keywords
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theoretical Background
2
2.1
Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.1
Compressive Behaviour of Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.2
Reinforced concrete structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Features of reinforced concrete structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.4
ANSYS modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.5
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Dynamic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Natural frequency analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Damping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
Linear elastic dynamic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.4
Nonlinear elastic dynamic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.5
Materials Nonlinear dynamic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.6
Full nonlinear dynamic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.7
Implicit vs exclipit time integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Case Study
12
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Homogeneous Steel Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.1
1D Element in 2D Space - Elastic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.2
2D Element in 2D Space - Elastic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.3
1D Element in 2D Space - Plastic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.4
2D Element in 2D Space - Plastic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Concrete modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.1
Compression analysis of the concrete beam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.2
Bending Analysis of Reinforced Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Dynamic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.1
Dynamic analysis for 1D element
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4.2
Dynamic analysis for 2D element
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4.3
Dynamic Analysis of Reinforced Concrete Structure Modeling
. . . .
36
References
40
i
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and motivation
The FE modeling of the nonlinear static or dynamic response of concrete structure is
particularly diﬃcult, due to cracking and softening of the concrete., which are responsible of
convergence problems as well as lack of objectivity of the solutions and strain localization for
certain mesh sizes. Further mesh limitations of the FEM model are due to the interaction
between steel and concrete, as well as the dynamic algorithm, as a consequence of the
dynamic impulse that needs to be modeled and the eigen-frequency of the structure. For
all these reasons, the modeling of the response of a single concrete element, such a slab in
bending, is not easy and requires careful validation. bench-marking and calibration of the
model.
1.2
Object and aim
Aim of this project is to show a methodology to build a reliable and benchmarked FEM
of a concrete slab loaded in bending, with particular focus on the modeling of the static
pushover analysis and of the dynamic response.
1.3
Keywords
Concrete modelling, ANSYS, Nonlinear dynamic analysis.
Page 1 of 40
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis
2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Concrete
Nowadays, the consumption of concrete in civil engineering and building industry is
extremely huge as a result of several advantages of concrete structures. First of all, concrete
is a perfectly water-proof construction material which can be used in marine structures,
tunnel, bridge structures and so on. Moreover, concrete is a very cheap material compared
to other construction materials such as steel. Because the major components of concrete are
portland cement, sand, crushed rock and water which are inexpensive and are available in
many areas of the world.
2.1.1
Compressive Behaviour of Concrete
The ability of concrete to bear the applied force is very important and will be taken
into account in practical application. Then a stress-strain curve is used to illustrate the
performance of concrete under various loads. The stress-strain relationships in materials are
generally expressed in terms of strength, elastic modulus, ductility, and toughness.[1]
For many materials, such as steel, the stress-strain behavior when a specimen is sub-
jected to incremental loads can be divided into two parts as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Stress-strain behavior of a steel specimen subjected to incremental loads.
As illustrated in Figure 1, the strain is proportional to the applied stress at the begin-
ning, which is called the elastic strain. Then when the stress increases up to a high level,
the strain no longer remains proportional to the applied stress, and also becomes permanent
Page 2 of 40
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis
2.1
Concrete
which is called the plastic or inelastic strain. During the elastic part, the ratio between the
stress and strain is deﬁned as elasticity modulus E, which also inﬂuences the rigidity of a
design. In the plastic part, the amount of inelastic strain that can occur before failure is a
measure of the ductility of the material. Moreover, the energy required to break the material
is represented by the area under the stress-strain curve. The term toughness is used as a
measure of this energy.
The stress-strain curve of concrete under compression, as illustrated in Figure 32, shows
a linear-elastic behavior in the beginning. After the linear-elastic part, the curve increases
slowly, then it bends sharply and, ﬁnally, descends until the specimen is fractured. This
model given by Eurocode2 illustrates three stage of a concrete specimen under compression
graphically. The ﬁrst part is the elastic part which ends until 40 per cent of the ultimate
compressive strength of the concrete. Then, the concrete starts hardening until the ultimate
compressive strength is reached. After the peak point, concrete stats softening until the
specimen is fractured.
Figure 2: Stress-strain behavior of concrete with hardening and softening[2]
The relation between stress σc and strain ϵc illustrated in Figure 32 for short term
uniaxial loading is expressed by Equation 1,
σc
fcm
=
kη −η2
1 + (k −2)η
(1)
Page 3 of 40
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis
2.1
Concrete
Where
η = ϵc
ϵc1
(2)
k = 1.05Ecm × |ϵc1|
fcm
(3)
Additionally, ϵc1 is the strain at peak stress and Ecm is modulus of elasticity.
For concrete, the relationship between stress and strain is dependent of the loading time.
If there is long-term load performing on a concrete specimen, the specimen will exhibit plas-
tic strain. The phenomenon of gradual increase in strain with time under a constant stress
is called creep.
2.1.2
Reinforced concrete structure
Reinforced concrete structure refers to a structure made of concrete reinforced with steel
bars. The main load-bearing component is a structure constructed of reinforced concrete. It
mainly includes thin-shell structures, large formwork cast-in-place structures and buildings
using slipforms and rising slabs. A structure made of steel and concrete. The steel bars
are under tension, and the concrete is under pressure. It has the advantages of sturdiness,
durability, good ﬁre resistance, saving steel material and lower cost than steel structure.
The two materials with diﬀerent properties of steel bar and concrete can work together eﬀec-
tively, because the bonding force between the concrete and the steel bar is produced after the
concrete is hardened. It is composed of three parts: molecular force (gluing force), frictional
resistance and mechanical bite force. Among them, the decisive role is the mechanical bite
force. The end of the smooth steel bar is made into a hook, and the steel bar is welded into
a steel frame and mesh, which can enhance the bonding force between the steel bar and the
concrete. It accounts for more than half of the total adhesive force. In order to ensure the
reliable bonding between the steel bar and the concrete and prevent the steel bar from being
corroded, there must be a certain thickness of concrete protective layer around the steel bar.
If the structure is in an environment with aggressive media, the thickness of the protective
layer should be increased. This should be emphatically considered in the structure model
setting.
Almost all problems in engineering are non-linear, especially those related to reinforced
concrete structures.
In addition, the research of some very classic mechanics theories is
based on the simpliﬁcation of some assumptions of actual problems, such as the assump-
tion of small deformation, the assumption of constant boundary conditions, the assumption
of linear elasticity, etc., but if any of these assumptions are not satisﬁed , Will produce a
non-linear phenomenon. The above three types respectively correspond to geometric non-
linearity, boundary nonlinearity and material nonlinearity. If the above-mentioned multiple
assumptions are not satisﬁed at the same time, multiple nonlinearities will occur. With the
development of electronic computers, modern numerical calculation methods are more and
more used in engineering analysis, and they are also very useful in the analysis of reinforced
concrete structures. Finite element analysis methods can be eﬀective for reinforced concrete
Page 4 of 40
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis
2.1
Concrete
structures. Gives the whole process of structural internal force and deformation develop-
ment, and can also describe the formation and expansion of cracks as well as the failure
process and form of the structure, evaluate the load-bearing capacity and reliability of the
structure, and reveal the weak parts and links of the structure. To achieve the function
of optimizing structural design, it is widely used in various structural types and diﬀerent
stress conditions and environments. Therefore, ANASYS software is of great signiﬁcance to
nonlinear analysis theory, and in this software, the analysis and research of nonlinear theory
has also made great progress.
Nonlinear ﬁnite element analysis actually refers to the ﬁnite element analysis that considers
the material or structure under non-linear changes. The problems of structural mechanics
are essentially non-linear problems. The linear assumption is only a simpliﬁcation of actual
engineering problems. . It is inevitable to make proper simpliﬁcations in any practical prob-
lems, such as elastoplastic dynamic response of structures under earthquake action, wind
resistance of high-rise buildings, dynamic stability of large-span reticulated shell structures,
form-ﬁnding load and cut analysis of cable-membrane structures , Wind-induced vibration of
large bridges and other aspects. However, the study of linear problems is not enough. There-
fore, nonlinear analysis of various engineering structures is indispensable and increasingly
important. For nonlinear problems in structural mechanics, the ﬁnite element method is the
most eﬀective numerical analysis method. Structural testing plays an inestimable role in the
birth and development of "concrete structure theory". However, structural tests, especially
large-scale structural tests, often require a lot of manpower and ﬁnancial resources. It is
diﬃcult to repeat the same test many times, and the scaled model test has a "distortion"
eﬀect. Under this circumstance, computer simulation analysis technology is becoming more
and more mature, and new achievements in the ﬁeld of structural engineering continue to
emerge. Reinforced concrete structure is the most widely used structure in civil engineering.
However, the mechanical properties of reinforced concrete are not yet fully grasped, espe-
cially concrete. Traditional analytical methods can only solve some very simple structural
and component calculation problems when analyzing the nonlinear problems of reinforced
concrete structures. For a large number of analysis problems of reinforced concrete struc-
tures, only numerical methods can be used to solve them. The ﬁnite element analysis method
of reinforced concrete can give the whole process of structural internal force and deformation
development; can describe the formation and development of cracks, as well as the failure
process and form of the structure; can evaluate the ultimate bearing capacity and reliability
of the structure; can Reveal the weak links of the structure in order to optimize the structure
design. At the same time, it can be widely applied to various structure types and diﬀerent
stress conditions and environments. Starting from the development of nonlinear analysis, this
article introduces the application of ﬁnite element software ANSYS in reinforced concrete
structures in more detail, gradually analyzes the ﬁnite element analysis technology of rein-
forced concrete structures, and uses commercial ﬁnite element analysis software to analyze
the most concrete structures. The performance of the two important types of members-
beams and columns are compared and analyzed. Through the query, sorting and analysis of
the existing literature, this article has carried out the following main tasks: 1. Summarize
the current ﬁnite element simulation analysis methods, and systematically introduce the ap-
plication of the ﬁnite element software ANSYS in reinforced concrete composite structures.
Page 5 of 40
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis
2.1
Concrete
2. A systematic introduction to the material properties of reinforced concrete components
and the main mathematical models for nonlinear analysis of reinforced concrete. 3. Use
ANSYS software to compare and simulate the reinforced concrete structural members. 4.
Using ANSYS analysis software to carry out simulation test research of reinforced concrete,
the research shows that the existence of steel bars greatly enhances the ductility of concrete.
5. Using ANSYS analysis software, the simulation experiment of reinforced concrete ﬂex-
ural members was carried out. The study shows that the deformation of the square steel
tube and the steel frame can be considered to be coordinated during the bending process
of the specimen. 6. Using ANSYS analysis software, the seismic performance of reinforced
concrete construction was studied. Studies have shown that the new composite column has
better ductility and higher collapse resistance than ordinary reinforced concrete and square
reinforced concrete due to the core formed by the steel bars and the concrete poured into
the mixed body.
2.1.3
Features of reinforced concrete structure
Concrete is the main material of cement, sand, stone and water, and admixtures and
additives, admixtures, etc., and are mixed in a certain proportion. After solidiﬁcation, the
hardness and compressive capacity are good, but the tensile capacity is poor, and it is easy
to break due to tension. In order to solve this contradiction and give full play to the com-
pressive capacity of concrete, a certain amount of steel bars are often added to the concrete
tension area or corresponding parts to bond the two materials into a whole and jointly bear
the external force. This kind of reinforced concrete is called reinforced concrete.
The design methods adopted in the design of reinforced concrete structures in various coun-
tries are based on the allowable stress design method, the failure strength design method
and the limit state design method. When reinforced concrete emerged relatively early, many
of them adopted the allowable stress design method based on the theory of elasticity. How-
ever, in the late 1930s, the Soviet Union began to adopt the failure strength design method
considering the plasticity of the reinforced concrete failure stage; in 1950, in order to further
improve the limit state design method, the advantages of the previous two design methods
were combined, and the use stage was checked the allowable stress, allowable crack width
and deﬂection, and the bearing capacity of the failure stage are also checked. The concept is
clear and the consideration is more comprehensive. It has been adopted by the design codes
of many countries and international organizations.
In 1967, Ngo and Scordelis applied the ﬁnite element method to the analysis of reinforced
concrete beams. With the rapid development of computers, the nonlinear ﬁnite element
method has also been widely used in reinforced concrete structures, and not only For or-
dinary building components, there are also complex structures such as beams, slabs, and
shear walls. For the whole process analysis of structure and construction, nonlinear ﬁnite el-
ement methods are needed to get more reasonable conclusions, and nonlinear ﬁnite element
analysis is of great signiﬁcance for reducing the number of experiments and reducing the
labor force of experiments. Currently, the most widely used software is ANASYS modeling
software. Rebar and concrete are materials with diﬀerent mechanical properties, and con-
crete materials are complex and have various components. There are still many problems
Page 6 of 40
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis
2.1
Concrete
in their constitutive relationship that are worth studying. In the process of general load
application, due to the low ultimate tensile strain value of concrete and the shrinkage of
concrete, cracks are prone to appear in the tensile area of the component under the condi-
tions of use load, and in most cases it is working with cracks. Therefore, in order to avoid
concrete cracking and reduce the width of the crack, the method of pre-stressing can be
used; pressure is applied to the concrete in advance (see pre-stressed concrete structure).
Practice has proved that under normal conditions, cracks with a width of less than 0.3 mm
will not reduce the bearing capacity and durability of reinforced concrete. Pay special atten-
tion to this feature during the modeling process. The characteristics of concrete shrinkage
and creep (creep) are of great signiﬁcance to reinforced concrete structures. Because steel
bars hinder the free shrinkage of concrete when it hardens, tensile stresses are caused in
the concrete and compressive stresses are generated in the steel bars. The creep of concrete
will cause redistribution of stress between steel bar and concrete in compression members,
increase of deﬂection in bending members, and redistribution of internal forces in statically
indeterminate structures. Therefore, these characteristics of concrete must be considered
when designing reinforced concrete structures.
2.1.4
ANSYS modeling
ANSYS software is a large-scale ﬁnite element analysis software developed by the Amer-
ican company ANSYS. It is the fastest growing software in the world to use computers as
engineering aids. It can interface with many computer engineering aids such as CAD and
computer Aided design. To achieve data sharing and exchange. It has a wide range of ap-
plications in the ﬁelds of nuclear industry, railways, petrochemicals, aerospace, machinery
manufacturing, energy, automobile transportation, national defense and military industry,
electronics, civil engineering, shipbuilding, biomedicine, light industry, geology and min-
ing, water conservancy, household appliances, etc. .[3] A large-scale general-purpose ﬁnite
element analysis software integrating ﬂuid, electric ﬁeld, magnetic ﬁeld, and sound ﬁeld anal-
ysis. ANSYS is powerful and easy to operate. It has now become the most popular ﬁnite
element analysis software in the world.
ANSYS ﬁnite element software package is a multi-purpose ﬁnite element method computer
design program that can be used to solve many problems in structure, ﬂuids, electricity,
electromagnetic ﬁelds, and collisions.[4] Therefore, it can be used in the following industrial
ﬁelds: aerospace, automotive industry, biomedicine, bridges, construction, electronic prod-
ucts, heavy machinery, micro-electromechanical systems, sports equipment, etc. Structural
nonlinearity causes the response of the structure or component to change disproportionately
with the external load. ANSYS program can solve static and transient nonlinear problems,
including material nonlinearity, geometric nonlinearity and element nonlinearity. The dy-
namic analysis of ANSYS program can analyze the motion of large three-dimensional ﬂexible
body. When the cumulative inﬂuence of motion plays a major role, these functions can be
used to analyze the motion characteristics of complex structures in space and determine
the resulting stress, strain, and deformation in the structure. Structural dynamics studies
the response of a structure under time-varying loads.[5] The main diﬀerence between it and
static analysis is that dynamic analysis needs to consider the inﬂuence of inertial force and
Page 7 of 40
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis
2.1
Concrete
motion resistance. The dynamic analysis mainly includes the following 5 parts: Modal anal-
ysis: used to calculate the natural frequency and mode of the structure. Harmonic analysis
(harmonic response analysis): used to determine the response of the structure under a si-
nusoidally varying load over time. Transient dynamic analysis: It is used to calculate the
response of the structure under the load that changes arbitrarily with time, and can involve
all the nonlinear properties in the static analysis mentioned above. Spectrum analysis: It is
the application extension of modal analysis, which is used to calculate the stress and strain
caused by response spectrum or PSD input (random vibration). Explicit dynamic analysis:
ANSYS/LS-DYNA can be used to calculate highly nonlinear dynamics and complex contact
problems.
Generally, the ﬁnite element analysis elements of reinforced concrete structures are mainly
divided into two levels: bar element and solid element. The bar system unit focuses on
analyzing the relationship between element force (including force and bending moment) and
displacement (including displacement and rotation angle), and the solid element focuses on
analyzing the element’s stress-strain relationship. The type of unit used should take into
account many factors such as the scale of calculation and the accuracy of the material model.
For the larger scale of the whole structure, the structure can be discretized into rod system
units for analysis. For complex areas such as beam-column nodes or important components,
the forces and displacements calculated by the bar system structure can be applied to the
solid element model to analyze local stress and strain. The three-dimensional solid element
model should be used in the structural analysis, the purpose is to simulate the actual struc-
tural components to the greatest extent. In the ﬁnite element analysis of reinforced concrete
structures, the reinforced concrete structure is diﬀerent from general homogeneous materi-
als. It is composed of two materials: steel and concrete. Generally, steel is surrounded by
concrete and has relatively small volume, so the structure is established The ﬁnite element
model needs to consider these characteristics.
There are three main types of ﬁnite element models for reinforced concrete structures: sep-
arate models, which treat concrete and steel bars as diﬀerent units, that is, concrete and
steel bars are each divided into suﬃciently small units.[6] Considering that the steel bar
is a relatively slender material, its transverse shear strength can generally be ignored. In
this way, the reinforcement can be treated as a linear element (link8 element in ANSYS).
Concrete can use solid elements such as tetrahedral elements (solid65 elements in ANSYS).
And in this model, a connection element is inserted between the steel bar and the concrete
to simulate the bond and slip between the steel bar and the concrete. If the bond between
the steel bar and the concrete is good, there will be no relative slip. The connection element
problem can be ignored, and it can be regarded as a rigid connection. Reinforced concrete
has cracks (the main reason why steel bars play a role). The cracks will inevitably lead
to the inconsistent deformation of steel and concrete, that is to say, there must be bond
failure and slippage. Therefore, this model is widely used. The derivation of the element
stiﬀness matrix is the same as the general ﬁnite element. Monolithic model, the monolithic
model assumes that the steel bars are distributed throughout the unit, and treats the unit
as a continuous uniform material (solid 65 units such as tetrahedrons in ANSYS are used as
concrete materials), and adopts the constitutive relationship of concrete-rebar compound.
Combine the contributions of concrete and steel bars to obtain a comprehensive element stiﬀ-
Page 8 of 40
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis
2.2
Dynamic Analysis
ness matrix at one time. The common point of the latter two models is that their element
stiﬀness matrices all reﬂect the comprehensive stiﬀness of reinforced concrete. Combined
model, the combined model assumes that the steel bars are distributed in the entire unit
at a certain angle, and that there is a good bond between the concrete and the steel bars,
and that there is no slip between the two. It is divided into layered combination mode and
reinforced membrane mode. In the derivation of the element stiﬀness matrix, the respective
element stiﬀnesses are calculated and then combined.
The ﬁnite element method is used to conduct a nonlinear analysis of the reinforced concrete
plane structure under the load.[7] In view of the shortcomings of the existing numerical
methods, several sections divided by beams or columns are used as the smallest elements,
and the variable stiﬀness rods are transformed into several Equal stiﬀness bar, so as to con-
vert the nonlinear problem of reinforced concrete into a series of linear problems of equal
stiﬀness bar. At the same time, the simpliﬁed BNM relationship can greatly simplify the
calculation of this problem, and it can be appropriately used in the structural design of this
article.
2.1.5
Conclusion
In this paper, the original general structural analysis program software ANSYS is mod-
iﬁed and expanded to form a nonlinear ﬁnite element analysis method for reinforced con-
crete members under incremental loads. This method uses nonlinear orthogonal elements
for concrete, and takes into account the concrete characteristics of tensile cracking, tensile
strengthening, shear force transmission on the crack surface, and compressive strain yield in
the material model; elastic-plastic connecting rod elements are used for steel bars; A three-
way nonlinear connection element is introduced to simulate the interaction between steel
bars and concrete. The numerical calculation adopts the initial stiﬀness incremental itera-
tion method; the redistribution of unbalanced force is taken into account when the material
fails. The calculation results and test results of this method Good compliance indicates the
availability of the program (also modiﬁed and supplemented based on the analysis of speciﬁc
test models).
2.2
Dynamic Analysis
2.2.1
Natural frequency analysis
Frequency analysis is also called harmonic response analysis in the ANSYS software. It is
a technique used to determine the steady-state response of a linear structure when subjected
to a load that changes in a sinusoidal (simple harmonic) law over time. The purpose of
analysis is to calculate the response at several frequencies in the calculated structure and
get some response value versus frequency curve. This analysis technique is used to calculate
the steady-state forced vibration of reinforced concrete structures, without considering the
transient vibration of the structure at the beginning of the excitation. Harmonic response
analysis can predict the continuous dynamic characteristics of reinforced concrete structures,
thereby verifying whether the design of reinforced concrete structures can overcome the
Page 9 of 40
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
2.2
Dynamic Analysis
harmful eﬀects of fatigue, resonance, and other forced vibrations. It is a linear analysis.
2.2.2
Damping
In many structural systems, damping exists, and damping must be deﬁned in dynamic
analysis. In ANSYS, there are various forms of damping, including Rayleigh damping, mate-
rial damping, material constant damping, coeﬃcient constant damping, and speciﬁc modal
damping element damping. In ANSYS software, only constant damping ratio and modal
damping ratio are available. In a model, multiple types of damping can be deﬁned. After
diﬀerent forms of damping are integrated, the ANSYS software will form a damping matrix
(C). Generally, the material constant damping coeﬃcient can only be applied to complete
harmonic response analysis and modal harmonic response analysis.
2.2.3
Linear elastic dynamic analysis
In the ANSYS ﬁnite element analysis method, the linear elastic ﬁnite element is based
on the ideal elastic body, and the deformation that needs to be considered is based on the
assumption of small deformation. In the structural research carried out in this article, the
stress and strain of the material are linear, which satisﬁes the generalized Hooke’s law; the
stress and strain are also linear. The linear elastic problem can be reduced to solving the lin-
ear equation problem, so less calculation time is required. . If an eﬃcient method of solving
algebraic equations is used, it will also help reduce the time of ﬁnite element analysis. This
article mainly studies the linear elastic dynamics analysis of the linear elastic ﬁnite element.
2.2.4
Nonlinear elastic dynamic analysis
The main diﬀerence between nonlinear elastic problems and linear elastic problems is
that the equations of nonlinear problems are nonlinear and generally need to be solved it-
eratively; the principle of superposition cannot be used for nonlinear problems; nonlinear
problems do not always have uniform solutions, sometimes even without solutions.
The process of solving nonlinear problems is more complicated, more expensive and more
unpredictable than linear elastic problems. Non-linear elastic problems mainly include geo-
metric nonlinear analysis and material nonlinear analysis.
2.2.5
Materials Nonlinear dynamic analysis
Material nonlinear elastic analysis is that the nonlinear eﬀect is only caused by the
nonlinearity of the stress-strain relationship, and the displacement component is still assumed
to be inﬁnitely small. Therefore, it can be described by engineering stress and engineering
strain, which is called material nonlinearity. The stress-strain relationship of nonlinear elastic
analysis is a common cause of structural nonlinearity. Many factors can aﬀect the stress-
strain properties of materials, including loading history (such as in elastoplastic response
Page 10 of 40
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis
2.2
Dynamic Analysis
conditions), environmental conditions (such as temperature), and loading time Total amount
(such as under creep response conditions), etc.
2.2.6
Full nonlinear dynamic analysis
The complete method is to use the complete system matrix to calculate the transient
response (without matrix reduction). It is a highly functional dynamic analysis method, and
allows various nonlinear characteristics (plasticity, large deformation, large strain, etc.) to
be included. Moreover, the advantages of the complete method are that it is easier to use,
without considering the choice of main degrees of freedom or mode shape; various types of
nonlinear characteristics are allowed; the complete matrix is used, and the mass matrix ap-
proximation is not involved; all of them can be obtained in one analysis. Displacement and
stress; all types of loads are allowed; nodal force, applied non-zero displacement and element
load pressure, temperature, and also allow the table boundary conditions to be speciﬁed by
TARIE array parameters; loads that are allowed to be applied to the solid model.
The complete transient dynamics analysis process consists of several steps: building model,
establishing initial conditions, setting solution control, setting other solution options, ap-
plying load, storing the load setting of the current load step, repeating the solution control
setting, and setting other solutions Options, apply load, store the load settings of the current
load step, deﬁne each other load step, backup the database,start transient analysis, exit the
solver, and observe the results.
2.2.7
Implicit vs exclipit time integration
The implicit time integral solution method does not consider the inertial eﬀect of the
structure. For linear problems, unconditionally stable, large time steps can be used. For
nonlinear problems, it is solved by a series of linear approximations Newton-Raphson (in-
troduced above); the nonlinear stiﬀness matrix is required to be transposed, and a small
time step is required for convergence. For highly nonlinear problems, convergence cannot
be guaranteed. Implicit time integration solution is generally used for linear analysis and
nonlinear static and dynamic analysis of structures, including the calculation of natural fre-
quencies and mode shapes of structures.
The display time integral solution method is mainly used to analyze large deformations,
transient problems, nonlinear dynamics problems, etc. For nonlinear dynamic analysis, it is
shown that the time integral solution method has some basic characteristics. For example,
the block mass matrix needs simple transposition; the equations are not coupled and can be
solved directly; there is no need to transpose the stiﬀness matrix, and all nonlinear problems
are Included in the internal force vector; internal force calculation is the main part of the
calculation; invalid convergence check; a small time step is required to save the stable state.
Page 11 of 40
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
3
Case Study
3.1
Introduction
3.2
Homogeneous Steel Analysis
In this analysis, a 1 m long simply supported steel beam is used in a plastic analysis.
This beam has a rectangular cross section, Figure 4, with a width B of 100 mm and a
height H of 40 mm. For the material properties of the steel beam, the yield strength of
the beam equals to 235 MPa and Young’s modulus is 210 GPa. During the analysis, there
is a uniformly distributed pressure P that equals to 100 kN/m performing on the top of
steel beam, as shown in Figure 3. This steel beam model will be used in the following four
analysis.
Figure 3: Steel beam in this analysis
Figure 4: cross section of steel beam
Then, cross sectional parameters of this section are calculated here. The area of this
section Ac is shown below,
Ac = B × H = 100mm × 40mm = 4000mm2
(4)
The section moment of inertia around y-axis is
Iy = B × H3
12
= 100mm × 403mm3
12
= 5.33 × 105mm4
(5)
Page 12 of 40
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
3.2
Homogeneous Steel Analysis
3.2.1
1D Element in 2D Space - Elastic Analysis
The ﬁrst analysis is an elastic analysis by using 1D element to model the beam. During
the numerical analysis, the ﬁrst step is to select the type of element in order to model a steel
beam. Then, as shown in Figure 5, the beam element with 2 nodes is selected in this analysis.
Figure 5: 1D Element for modelling in Ansys
The element Beam188 is a 2-node element with six dofs on each node, as shown in
Figure 6.
Figure 6: Pictorial of Beam 188
As illustrated graphically in Figure 7, the model is consist of two key-points and a
straight line, and the uniformly distributed load performs on the top of the beam. Moreover,
the ﬁrst keypoint is constrained in the direction of Ux and Uy, and then the second node is
only constrained in Uy.
Figure 7: Steel beam model in Ansys
Page 13 of 40
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
3.2
Homogeneous Steel Analysis
Figure 8: deformed shape after applying load
Figure 9: stress distributed of the steel beam
After the calculation by ANSYS, the displacement in the middle of the beam is 11.664
mm. The deformed shape of the steel beam after applying load is illustrated in Figure 8,
which is a parabolic curve. After that, the analytical solution of this analysis is shown in
Equation 12,
Uy =
5
384
ql4
EI =
5
384
100KN/m × 1m4
210GPa × 5.33 × 105mm4 = 11.6mm
(6)
Where q is the pressure that equals to P=100KN/m, l is the length of the steel beam, E is the
Young’s modulus and I represents section moment of inertia around y-axis. The comparison
result is shown in Table 1 and the diﬀerence between them is extremely small.
Table 1: Comparison between analytical solution and Ansys calculated
Page 14 of 40
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis
3.2
Homogeneous Steel Analysis
3.2.2
2D Element in 2D Space - Elastic Analysis
Then, a 2D element which is called SHELL181 in ANSYS was selected to model the
beam. SHELL181 is suitable for analyzing thin to moderately-thick shell structures which
can be considered as a four-node element with six degrees of freedom at each node. More-
over, this element is also usually applied in large strain nonlinear analysis.
Figure 10: Element for 2D plastic analysis
The geometry of the cross section is shown in Figure 11. Moreover in this analysis, the
number of integration points was 7.
Figure 11: Beam section
The size of element edge was set as 20 mm in this analysis when meshing the beam, as
illustrated in Figure 12.
Page 15 of 40
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
3.2
Homogeneous Steel Analysis
Figure 12: Mesh the beam for 2D elastic analysis
Figure 13 illustrates the deformed shape of the steel beam after applying load and the
deﬂection in the middle of the beam that calculated by Ansys is 11.695mm.
Figure 13: Deformation of the beam after applying load
Table 2 shows the comparison between analytical solution and numerical results. Both
the results obtained by using 1D element and 2D element are very close to the analytical
solution.
Table 2: Comparison between analytical solution and Ansys calculated
3.2.3
1D Element in 2D Space - Plastic Analysis
For the plastic analysis, there are several plastic models which can be selected in ANSYS
such as Bilinear. A bilinear model,Figure 14, assumes two slopes which represent the elastic
slope and plastic slope respectively. Moreover, the application of the bilinear model can
reduce the run-time of the ﬁnite element software and obtain the solution quickly. Thus, a
bilinear model is used in this analysis. Additionally, there is no hardening here in order to
compare the numerical results with the analytical solution. Here, the yield strength of the
beam equals to 235 MPa and Young’s modulus is 210 GPa.
Page 16 of 40
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis
3.2
Homogeneous Steel Analysis
Figure 14: Bilinear model
Figure 15 shows the bilinear model in Ansys.
Figure 15: Bilinear model in Ansys
An imposed force method was applied in Ansys to analyse the response of the structure,
as shown in Figure 16. The load will be performed on the beam through load steps until the
ultimate load is reached. The number of substeps is 20 which means Ansys will set the initial
substep to 1/20th of the total load. In addition, setting a maximum number of substeps of
1000 will stop the program if the solution does not converge after 1000 steps.
Page 17 of 40
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
3.2
Homogeneous Steel Analysis
Figure 16: Load step method in Ansys
After the calculation in Ansys, the graph of Deﬂection versus Load can be obtained as
illustrated in Figure 17.
Page 18 of 40
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis
3.2
Homogeneous Steel Analysis
Figure 17: The relationship between Load and Deﬂection
Table 3: Comparison of the pressure obtained in Ansys with hand calculations through
imposed load.
Table 4: Comparison of the displacement obtained in Ansys with hand calculations through
imposed load.
Page 19 of 40
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
3.2
Homogeneous Steel Analysis
3.2.4
2D Element in 2D Space - Plastic Analysis
In this analysis, the same simply suported steel beam is used and Shell181 element is
applied to model the beam. Meanwhile, a Bilinear model,as shown inFigure 15, is used here
to model the steel. And the yield strength of the beam equals to 235 MPa and Young’s
modulus is 210 GPa. Then, a uniformly distributed pressure P that equals to 100 kN/m
performing on the top of steel beam.
Figure 18 shows the non-linear set in this plastic analysis. The number of substeps is 20 and
the maximum number of substeps is set as 1000.
Figure 18: nonlinear set for 2D plastic analysis
The stress distribution of the steel beam after the plastic analysis is shown in Figure 19.
Page 20 of 40
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis
3.2
Homogeneous Steel Analysis
Figure 19: stress distribution of the steel beam
Figure 20 illustrates the load-displacement curve of steel beam after the analysis. The
grey plot represents the analytical solution and the red one is the numerical results. As seen
in this ﬁgure, the elastic part of these two plot are almost the same. Then, after the yielding
of the steel beam, the numerical result is smaller than the analytical solution. Overall, these
two plots are very close to each other.
Figure 20: The load-displacement curve of steel beam by using 2D elements
Page 21 of 40
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
3.2
Homogeneous Steel Analysis
Table 5: Comparison of the force obtained in ANSYS with hand calculations through im-
posed load.
Table 6: Comparison of the displacement obtained in ANSYS with hand calculations through
imposed load.
As observed in the tables above, both the ultimate loads and displacement obtained by
Ansys are very similar to the analytical solution values.
Figure 21: Comparison between 1D and 2D Elements
Page 22 of 40
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
3.3
Concrete modelling
3.3
Concrete modelling
3.3.1
Compression analysis of the concrete beam
In this analysis, a 2000 mm long concrete beam is used in a plastic analysis. This beam
has a rectangular cross section with a width of 100 mm and a height of 200mm. During the
plastic analysis, there is a uniformly distributed load P=40MPa performing on the right end
of the beam. In addition, the compressive strength of the concrete is fcm=38 MPa and the
tensile strength is 3 MPa.
Figure 22: concrete beam
Figure 23 shows the cross section of the concrete beam,
Figure 23: cross section of concrete beam
Then, as shown in Figure 24, the concrete beam is modelled in Ansys. The size of
element edge was set as 40 mm in this analysis when meshing the model and the right end
of the beam is fully ﬁxed.
Page 23 of 40
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
3.3
Concrete modelling
Figure 24: concrete beam model in Ansys
During the analysis, element solid 65 is applied to model the concrete in Ansys. Solid
65as shown in ,Figure 25, is usually used in 3-D modelling, which obtains eight nodes.
Meanwhile, there are three degrees of freedom at each node which are translations in the
nodal x, y, and z directions.
Figure 25: geometry of solid65
Then, the multi-linear kinematic model is applied to model the concrete model in Eu-
rocode2, as shown inFigure 26. Here, the cpmpression strength fcm equals to 38 MPa. The
elastic modulus and poisson’s ratio of this concrete model are 33700 MPa and 0.2 respec-
tively.
Page 24 of 40
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis
3.3
Concrete modelling
Figure 26: Stress-strain behavior of concrete with hardening and softening[2]
After the analysis, the stress and strain of the node located in the middle of the beam
are used to plot the stress-strain curve, which is shown in Figure 27.
Figure 27: stress-strain curve
Page 25 of 40
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
3.3
Concrete modelling
3.3.2
Bending Analysis of Reinforced Concrete
In this analysis, a simply supported reinforced concrete beam, Figure 30, is used in a
plastic analysis. This beam has a rectangular cross section, Figure 29, with a width of 200
mm and a height of 400mm. During the plastic analysis, there is a uniformly distributed
load P = 1200KN/m2 performing on the beam. In addition, there are two longitude steel
bar located in the lower part of the beam as shown in Figure 29. The compressive strength of
the concrete fcm equals to 38 MPa and the tensile strength is 3 MPa. Then, the yield stress
of the steel is set as 360 MPa. Meanwhile, element solid 65 is used to model the concrete
and element link 180 is used here to model the steel.
Figure 28: Reinforced concrete beam
Figure 29: Cross section of reinforced concrete beam
Page 26 of 40
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis
3.3
Concrete modelling
Figure 30: Reinforced concrete beam modeled in Ansys
The material model of concrete and steel is shown below. The multilinear kinematic
model is used to model the concrete and the bilinear model is applied to model the steel. The
elastic modulus and poisson’s ratio of this concrete model are 33700 MPa and 0.2 respectively.
The elastic modulus and poisson’s ratio of steel bars are 210GPa and 0.3. Then, the steel
and concrete are meshed separately. Both the element size of concrete and teel are 50mm
when meshing the model. All the nodes of the steel are set to have the same displacement
as its corresponding nodes of concrete during the analysis.
Figure 31: Stress-strain behavior of concrete with hardening and softening[2]
Page 27 of 40
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
3.3
Concrete modelling
Figure 32: Idealised and design stress-strain diagrams for reinforcing steel in tension and
compression[2]
After the analysis, the load-displacement curve is plotted below, Figure 33. The green
line and blue line represent the results obtained by using arc-length method and Newton
Raphson method respectively. Moreover, the red plot in ﬁgure is analytical solution which
is obtained as 1.3689MPa. It is obviously observed in Figure 33 that the numerical results
calculated by two diﬀerent methods are highly overlapped. However, both of them stop
increasing before reaching the ultimate bearing capacity.
Figure 33: Load-displacement curve
Page 28 of 40
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis
3.3
Concrete modelling
Figure 34: Load-displacement curve by using Arc-length method
Figure 35: Load-displacement curve by using Newthon method
The results obtained by Ansys are compared with the analytical solution in Table 7.
Page 29 of 40
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
3.3
Concrete modelling
Table 7: Comparison between Analytical solution and numerical results
Then, a Von Mise stress distribution is shown in Figure 36
Figure 36: Von Mise stress distribution
Page 30 of 40
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis
3.4
Dynamic analysis
3.4
Dynamic analysis
In this analysis, a 1m long simply supported steel beam with a rectangle cross section is
used, as seen in Figure 37. The height and width of the cross section is 40mm and 100mm.
The steel beam is fully elastic and Young’s modulus of the beam is 210 GPa. The yield
strength is 355MPa ans possion’s ratio equals to 0.3. In addition, an impulse load P=10KN
will be performed in the middle of the beam.
Figure 37: steel beam
Figure 38: cross section of steel beam
Then the load curve used in this analysis is shown below
Figure 39: Load curve in this analysis
Page 31 of 40
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
3.4
Dynamic analysis
3.4.1
Dynamic analysis for 1D element
Then, a 1D element which is called Beam188 in ANSYS was selected to model the beam,
which is suitable for analyzing thin to moderately-thick beam structures. The element is a
linear, quadratic, or cubic two-node beam element in 3-D. Moreover, BEAM188 has six or
seven degrees of freedom at each node.
Figure 40: Geometry of Beam188
The material model is shown in Figure 41.
Figure 41: Material model
Some parameters that will be used is calculated here.
The total mass m is
Page 32 of 40
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
3.4
Dynamic analysis
m = ρAl
2
= 7800kg/m3 × 0.004m2 × 1m
2
= 15.6kg
(7)
The stiﬀness is
k = 48EIy
l3
= 48 × 210000MPa × 5.33 × 104mm4
1 × 109mm3
= 5372.64N/mm
(8)
Then the Eigen frequency is obtained by:
ω =
r
k
m = 586.9rad/s
(9)
f = ω
2π = 93.41
s
(10)
The corresponding period is
T = 1
f = 0.0107s = 10.7ms
(11)
A modal analysis is performed in ANSYS in order to obtain the lowest Eigen frequencies
and the corresponding Eigen modes. The results from the ﬁrst 5 modes are listed in Table 8.
Table 8: Eigen frequency results for beam mode
As seen, the fourth eigen mode with eigen period=10.53ms is very close to eigen period
of analytical solution that equals to 10.7ms.
After the analysis, the displacement curve is illustrated in Figure 42. the result of static
analysis is shown in Equation 12,
Uy =
5
384
ql4
EI =
5
384
100KN/m × 1m4
210GPa × 5.33 × 105mm4 = 11.6mm
(12)
Where q is the pressure that equals to P=100KN/m, l is the length of the steel beam,
E is the Young’s modulus and I represents section moment of inertia around y-axis. The
result of dynamic analysis is found in Figure 42 which equals to 11.672mm.
Page 33 of 40
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis
3.4
Dynamic analysis
Figure 42: Deﬂection for linear dynamic analysis versus a linear static analysis
Figure 43: Displacement for 1D linear dynamic analysis
Page 34 of 40
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis
3.4
Dynamic analysis
Figure 44: Displacement for 1D nonlinear dynamic analysis
3.4.2
Dynamic analysis for 2D element
Here, a 2D element which is called Shell 181 in ANSYS was selected to model the beam.
The largest deﬂection is 40.06mm in this analysis.
Figure 45: Displacement for 2D linear dynamic analysis
Page 35 of 40
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis
3.4
Dynamic analysis
Figure 46: Displacement for 2D nonlinear dynamic analysis
3.4.3
Dynamic Analysis of Reinforced Concrete Structure Modeling
The analysis models used in ANSYS software are mainly discretemodell and smeared-
model. In the separated model, diﬀerent unit division methods are selected. For example,
in this article, the reinforcement unit is used instead of link8, but the convergence of this
model often has problems. For the distributed model, SOLID65 can consider three kinds of
steel materials, which are enough for use in actual structural analysis. This model is easier
to obtain a convergent solution (the convergence here refers to the solution when the failure
has not been reached. It is normal that it cannot converge when the structure is broken).
Of course, SOLID65 is not just considering steel bars, but "reinforced materials", which can
be steel bars, bamboo, FRP, etc., that is, SOLID65 can be used for the analysis of various
composite materials. This article mainly refers to steel bars.
Transient dynamic analysis is also called time history analysis, which is a method used to
determine the dynamic response of arbitrary and time-varying loads. This transient dynam-
ics analysis method can be used to determine the displacement, strain, stress, and force that
change with time under the arbitrary combination of the steady-state load, transient load,
and numbered spectrum load of the structure. And if inertial force and damping are not
important, static analysis can be used instead of transient analysis, because the correlation
between load and time makes inertial force and damping more important. When performing
transient dynamics analysis, due to the complexity of the process, several preparatory work
should be done to understand the physical meaning of some problems in advance. 1. First,
some relatively simple models should be analyzed. By creating a model composed of beams,
mass bodies and springs, we can gain in-depth understanding of dynamics in a minimal
way. A simple model is helpful for a comprehensive understanding of all dynamic responses.
Page 36 of 40
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis
3.4
Dynamic analysis
Next, if the analysis includes nonlinear characteristics, ﬁrst of all, it is necessary to use statics
analysis to grasp the inﬂuence of nonlinear structure characteristics on structural response.
Although in some cases, it is not necessary to include nonlinear characteristics in dynamic
analysis. To master the dynamic characteristics of the structure, it is necessary to calculate
the natural frequency and mode shape of the structure through modal analysis, which can
be used to understand the response state of the structure when these modes are activated.
Moreover, the natural frequency is very useful for calculating the correct integration time
step. For nonlinear problems, consider sub-structuring the linear part of the model to reduce
the work required for analysis.
In this analysis, a 1m long simply supported reinforced concrete beam with a rectangle
cross section is used, as seen in Figure 37. The height and width of the cross section,Figure 48,
is 200mm and 100mm respectively. The concrete beam is plastic. In addition, an uniformly
distributed impulse load P=1.5MPa will be performed on the top surface of the beam. In
addition, the compressive strength of the concrete is fcm=38 MPa and the tensile strength
is 3 MPa. The elastic modulus and poisson’s ratio of this concrete model are 33700 MPa
and 0.2 respectively.
Figure 47: concrete beam
As shown in Figure 48, the diameter of the steel bar is 12mm. Moreover, the distance
between the center of the steel and the bottom of this section is 40mm. The yield stress of
the steel is 360 MPa and the elastic modulus here is 210 GPa.
Figure 48: cross section of reinforced concrete beam
Page 37 of 40
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis
3.4
Dynamic analysis
Rayleigh damping model is used in this analysis,
C = αM + βK
(13)
Where C is the damping matrix, M is the mass matrix, K is the stiﬀness matrix, α = 0.5 is
the mass coeﬃcient and β = 3 × 10−5 is the stiﬀness coeﬃcient.
Then, Figure 49 illustrates the load curve in this analysis.
As shown, the peak load is
1.5MPa.
Figure 49: Impulse load
In this analysis, a simply supported reinforced concrete beam, Figure 30, is used. After
the analysis, a load-displacement curve is obtained in ??. It can be seen that the beam has
a large deﬂection in the beginning and the value of the deﬂection is 2.68mm. After the large
deﬂection, the plot decreases dramatically and oscillate around -0.5mm. Then, the beam
gets a permanent deﬂection after the response.
Page 38 of 40
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis
3.4
Dynamic analysis
Figure 50: Dynamic response of Reinforced concrete beam
Page 39 of 40
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis
References
References
[1] P. K. M. . P. J. M. Monteiro, Concrete - Microstructure, properties and materials. 2013.
[2] European Standard,DS/EN 1992-1-2 + AC. 2013.
[3] V. G.N., Thirty years of modem structural optimizationAdvances in Engineering Soft-
ware. 1993.
[4] N. Y. M. D. L. V. Dmitriev, A., Calibration and Validation of the Menetrey-Willam
Constitutive Model for Concrete. 2020.
[5] K. V. Magne Bratland *, Dag Bjerketvedt, Structural response analysis of explosions in
hydrogen-air mixtures in tunnel-like geometries. 2020.
[6] Z. H. Shang Xiaojiang, Qiu Feng, ANSYS Structural Finite Element Advanced Analysis
Method and Code Application (Second Edition). 2008.
[7] H. Wenhua, ANSYS civil engineering application examples. 2005.
Page 40 of 40
