==PAGE:1==
Theoretical and experimental investigations
of ground source heat exchangers
Master Thesis
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Savings
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
Master Thesis
November, 2021
By
Feres Hamrouni
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
By Costazzurra at Shutterstock, https://www.shutterstock.com/g/costazzurra
Published by:
DTU, Department of Energy Savings, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Solar Heating Group, Department
of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Feres Hamrouni ­ s192469
Signature
Date
ii
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
15/11/2021
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The aim of this paper is to present an overview of the experimental solar assisted ground
source heat pump (SAGSHP) system that can be found at the Technical University of
Denmark, by analysing the summer period of 2021. Further experimental investigation
will be presented to gain a deeper understanding of the heat transfer inside the soil be­
tween ground source heat exchangers. Different soil samples were observed under vary­
ing temperature, and moisture content condition, in order to evaluate their thermal prop­
erties. Finally an experimental box located in the laboratory of building 118, had been
investigated. It was found that during the summer period, the SAGSHP systems is able
to cover thermal needs, with relatively high performance factors. The analyse concluded
that high solar radiation will reduce the consumption of the heat pump. Furthermore that
the Seasonal Performance Factor (SPF) will increase with space heating (SH) demand
present in the summer period. The thermal investigation of the soil samples has shown,
that the thermal conductivity will increase at higher saturation levels. Further experiments
has proven, that the mulch has a better volumetric specific heat capacity at higher sat­
uration levels, at is has grown by a rate of 109% compared to dry state. Results of this
paper has indicated that the control system of the measurement box performs better with
PID control, instead of PI.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Feres Hamrouni, MSc Energy Savings, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Elsabet Nomonde Noma Nielsen, Senior Researcher, Department of Civil Engineering,
DTU
Supervisor of this thesis.
Simon Furbo, Associate Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, DTU
Supervisor of this thesis.
iv
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:7==
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
v
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
α
thermal diffusivity [mm2/s]
∆T
temperature difference K
κr
dielectric constant [­]
λ
thermal conduction [W/mK]
µr
relative magnetic permeability [­]
∇T
temperature gradient [K/m]
Ψ
height of water column [mm]
ρ
specific density [kg/m3]
ρb
bulk density [
g
cm3 ]
ρω
density of water [kg/m3]
c0
velocity of light [ m
s )]
ce
velocity of the electromagnetic pulse [ m
s ]
cH
Hazel constant [­]
Cp
volumetric specific heat capacity [MJ/m3K]
cp
specific heat capacity [J/kgK]
COPsys overall coefficient of performance of the system [­]
D10
effective size [mm]
g
gravitational acceleration [ m
s2 ]
K
permeability [cm/s]
Mdry
dry soil weight [kg]
Mwet
wet soil weight [kg]
Pel
overall power consumption from the different components [kWh]
Qt
heat flow produced [W]
Qt
heat flow produced
QDHW thermal heat produced for domestic hot water [W]
Qhd
required heating demand [kWh]
Qloss
thermal heat loss [W]
Qsc
thermal heat produced by solar collector [W]
QSH
thermal heat produced for space heating [W]
s
suction [kPa]
Vcompressed volume of the compressed dry soil samples [cm3
vi
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
AI Artificial Intelligence. 50
COP coefficient of performance. 5, 7, 50
DHW domestic hot water. 2, 3, 7, 9, 10, 12, 15, 16, 50
GSHP ground source heat pump. 3, 4, 19, 23
GWC gravimetric water content. 21, 27, 30–37
HP heat pump. 3, 5–7, 9, 11, 15, 16, 50
ipa isopropyl alcohol. 12
NZEB Nearly Zero Energy Building. 2, 3
PCM phase change material. 50
PID Proportional Integral Derivative. 44, 47
PVT photovoltaic thermal hybrid solar collector. 5, 50
RF renewable factor. 17
SAGSHP solar assisted ground source heat pump. iii, 7, 9, 10, 12, 15–17, 39, 49, 50
SAHP solar assisted heat pump. 5, 6
SF solar fraction. 5, 7, 16, 17
SH space heating. iii, 2, 3, 7, 9, 10, 12, 15–17, 50
SOM soil organic content. 23
SPF Seasonal Performance Factor. iii, 5, 15, 17
TA1 temperature in solar collector. 12, 13
TA2 temperature in combi­storage tank. 12, 13
TA3 temperature in the ground. 12, 13
TC thermal conductivity. 7, 19, 20, 22, 23
TD thermal diffusivity. 20, 23, 26, 35–37
TDR time domain reflectometry technique. 22, 37
VHC volumetric heat capacity. 7, 20, 23
VSHC volumetric specific heat capacity. 26, 35–37
VWC volmetric water content. 30, 32, 37, 38
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
vii
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature research on ground source and solar assisted heat pump systems
3
2.1
Ground source heat pump systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Solar assisted heat pump systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Solar assisted ground source heat pump systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Experimental test facility
9
3.1
Description of the experimental test facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Operation and control of the experimental test facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Measurements at the experimental test facility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Results of experimental test facility measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Literature review on heat transfer in soils and their effect on ground source
heat pump systems
19
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Basic definitions of heat transfer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Tools to asses the thermal properties of soil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4
Water movement in soil
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.5
Relevant experiments carried out to determine heat transfer in soil . . . . . 22
4.6
Conclusions from the literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Measurements of the heat transfer in soil
25
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Measuring device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.3
Method used for measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.4
Results of heat transfer measurements in soil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Experimental investigation on heat transfer in soils and their effect on ground
source heat pump systems
39
6.1
Description of the experimental measurement box
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.2
Improvements made to the measurement box . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.3
Results of the box measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
7
Discussion and outlook
49
Bibliography
51
A Appendix
53
A.1 SM150T sensor calculations to determine VWC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
viii
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
We are living in a fast changing world, where in less than a century the population has
grown nearly by four times. (Worldometers­info 2021) With the growing number of people
on Earth, the demand for energy is also increasing. Not only the demand but also the
energy intensity per capita has increased during this period resulting in nearly 10 times
more of global energy consumption than 100 years ago. The energy consumption and
population can be related by the fact that electricity is a major component in the social­
economic development for our society (Ahmad and D. Zhang 2020).
Figure 1.1: Growing energy demand (Insights n.d.)
This significant growth has resulted in a rising urge in our society to tackle global warm­
ing by reducing the primary energy consumption, and increasing the share of renewable
technologies in the energy mix.
According to an estimation suggested by (Lidicker 2020) the population will reach 10 billion
by 2050, thus the residential sector is expecting a steady growth in demand. This will have
an impact on the energy mix due to the fact that in the EU, the building energy sector is
responsible for 26.3% of the final energy consumption. As we can see on Figure 1.2,
households have the second largest share after the transportation.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
1
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.2: Final energy consumption by
sector in EU 2019 (Eurostat n.d.(a))
Figure 1.3: Final energy consumption in the
residential sector by use in EU, (Eurostat
n.d.(b))
Figure 1.3 indicates that space heating (SH) takes up to 63.6% of the final energy con­
sumption, thus increasing the renewable energy share in this field will lead to a significant
amount of carbon footprint reduction in the residential sector. To reduce the dependency
of natural gas for SH and domestic hot water (DHW) generation, EU directives are being
continuously made. In 2010 the Energy Performance of Buildings directive was created
with the aims:
• To improve excising building stock through renovation strategies
• To ensure that energy performance certificates are provided during sale or renting
of an apartment
• From 31 December 2020 all new built buildings must be nearly Nearly Zero Energy
Building (NZEB)
These directives are put into practise through national and EN standards, provided by the
European Committee for Standardization. EN 15603 standard is responsible to improve
the energy performance of buildings, by assessment of ventilation, heating, and cooling
systems (European­Commission n.d.).
2
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature research on ground source
and solar assisted heat pump systems
There is an important decarbonisation potential in the SH and DHW production in the
building energy sector. Innovation and research has been made in order to increase
the renewable technologies in this area. Due to the constrains of cooling and heating
demands of each region, during design phase the availability of these renewable tech­
nologies must be considered.
Implementing solar energy through solar collectors is a reliable solution, due to the low
investment, and maintenance costs. However it is dependent on solar radiation, thus it is
not sufficient to cover the heating demand by it self. Geothermal source heating is also
an option for SH, and DHW production, and contrarily to solar collectors, it can provide a
constant temperature throughout the year. Photovoltaic panels can be installed to provide
electricity for electric heating, although SH is most commonly realized by circulating hot
water in radiators, of floor heating loops. Another viable solution to meet the conditions for
a NZEB are heat pump (HP) systems. A HP uses a lower temperature as a heat sunk, to
produce higher temperatures with the aid of a compressor. Different HP systems can be
categorized such as air source HP, water source HP, ground source HP, or solar assisted
HP. The latter two HP systems will be in focus in the upcoming sections (Alessandro, Nic­
colao, Fabrizio, et al. 2021).
2.1
Ground source heat pump systems
Due to the design of ground source heat pump (GSHP), they are more reliable in regions
with colder environment. This was demonstrated by researchers Xinru W. & Liang who
found that compared to air source heat pump systems, GSHP system do not require de­
frosting, thus the auxiliary energy consumed for this purpose for this can be saved (X.
Wang et al. 2020). The two system further differ in investment cost, as the GSHP is more
complex resulting in a more significant expenditure capital.
As mentioned before, upon reaching a certain depth in the soil, the temperature becomes
constant, therefore geothermal technologies use the warmth of the soil to heat in the win­
ter, and during the summer the soil becomes a heat sink for cooling purposes. Research
conducted in 2008 (Omer 2008) found that GSHP systems produce three to four times
more heat energy, as they self consume for operation and maintenance purposes.
Ground source heat pump systems can be classified into three different different config­
urations:(Omer 2008)
• Open groundwater systems, where the heat pump uses directly the water for heat
transfer. This system relies on a simple design with low operation costs. It can also
be combined with potable water supply for domestic use. The disadvantage of this
system are the strict regulations and codes enforced by local, and national clean
water standards, thus maintenance costs can be high. An other disadvantage to
this technology, is that it requires a natural water source close to the installation
site.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
3
==PAGE:14==
• Horizontal GSHP systems have a closed loop. Their advantage is that due to their
proximity to the surface, the solar radiation recharges thermally the soil. Although
this proximity has some negative consequences, as the whole system becomes
more sensible to the weather conditions.
• Vertical systems, or so called boreholes are a viable solution if the available land
space is limited. It uses U shaped coaxial tubes, or pairs of pipe, that can reach
a depth of 23 to 150 m (Reda 2017). Due to the depth of the system, boreholes
are less sensible to seasonal temperature fluctuation. These buried pipes must
have a minimum of 5 m between them in order to avoid heat transfer amid pipes
reducing the overall efficiency. The disadvantage of this system is the major capital
expenditure required for installation considering drilling costs.
Figure 2.1: Different installation possibilities for ground source heat pump (GSHP) sys­
tems (BASIX n.d., illustration reworked)
It can also be stated, that these systems need anti­freezing solution for their refrigerants,
resulting in a decrease of heat transfer. Upon using anti­freezing solution, the HP con­
sumes more energy due to the increased viscosity of the heat transfer fluid. Precautions
must be made during the design, as the anti­freezing solution is a pollution risk to the
environment (Reda 2017).
4
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Solar assisted heat pump systems
As mentioned before, solar thermal energy is dependent on the geographical location. In
higher latitudes, during the winter period, solar collectors are not sufficient for meeting the
heating demand without an auxiliary heat source. Coupling solar thermal with heat pump
systems is a promising solution, as the HP performance depend on the temperature differ­
ence between the high and low energy sources. The recovered heat from solar collectors
can further improve the system efficiency (Alessandro, Niccolao, Fabrizio, et al. 2021).
According to a study conducted by Raghad S., coupling solar collectors with HP system,
not only results in a higher evaporation temperature, with lower electricity consumption
of the compressor, but also increases the amount of heat output from the solar collector
it self (Kamel, Fung, and Dash 2015). The research also found that photovoltaic thermal
hybrid solar collector (PVT) systems must be further investigated, as the can both cover
the electricity and heating demand when coupled with a HP.
Heat pumps can be categorized into, absorption and compression based technologies.
The latter uses mechanical force to compress vapour, while the absorption based technol­
ogy uses thermal energy as its force. A study made at the Politecnico di Milano, has found
that using compression HP are more beneficial to meet the heating demand for buildings
(Scoccia et al. 2018). They have also found that by using variable speed compressors in
HP, the operation difficulties caused the changing weather conditions can be improved.
In order to compare different solar assisted heat pump (SAHP) systems such as thermal
photoviltaic or photovoltaic thermal hybrid solar collector (PVT) solutions, performance
indicators must be used (X. Wang et al. 2020): The coefficient of performance (COP)
indicates the heat flow rate produced, divided by the electricity consumption. In order to
gain the overall COP, the following equation must be applied:
COPsys = Qt
Pel
(2.1)
Where COPsys is the overall coefficient of performance of the system, Qt is the heat flow
produced, and Pel is the power consumption from the different components.
Another performance indicator is the Seasonal Performance Factor (SPF), that defines
the overall thermal energy supplied to the electric energy consumed during the heating
season.
SPF = QSH + QDHW
Pel
(2.2)
QSH indicates the amount of heat for space heating, while QDHW is the amount of heat
for domestic hot water use (X. Wang et al. 2020). The contribution of the solar thermal
system compared to the overall energy required, is defined by solar fraction (SF):
SF = Qsc −Qloss
Qhd
(2.3)
Where Qsc represents the thermal energy provided by the solar collector, Qloss is the heat
loss of the thermal heating system, and Qhd is required heating demand (Yang et al. 2021).
An investigation by Yang, Li Wei and Xu has found that solar fraction (SF) and COP has
a nearly linear improvement, as the collector area is increased and more solar energy is
captured by the collectors. It was also shown with implementing solar collectors the HP
performance will grow, but the overall COP will decrease. This is due to the additional
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
5
==PAGE:16==
consumption of the components. In an experiment they conducted on a SAHP, it was
shown that the COP of the HP increased from 3.3 to 3.8, but the overall COPsys defined
in Equation 2.3 has decreased to 2.9 from 3.2 (Yang et al. 2021).
Solar assisted heat pumps (SAHP) can be further divided into direct and indirect expan­
sion based technologies. The direct ­ SAHP has a connected loop with the solar collector,
meaning that the HP uses directly the solar collector to evaporate. In the indirect system,
a heat exchanger is responsible for the heat transfer between the solar collector and the
heat pump.
Figure 2.2: Direct solar assisted heat pump system (Yang et al. 2021, Fig 4.)
Figure 2.3: Indirect solar assisted heat pump system with storage unit (Yang et al. 2021,
Fig 11.)
6
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:17==
For both systems the COP is ranging between 2.5 and 3.5, although with the indirect
application there is a possibility to align parallel compressors. By creating a two stage
compression cycle, that reaches higher temperatures, it is possible to further increase
the COP by 15.3% (Yang et al. 2021).
On Figure 2.3 it can be seen, thermal energy storage through a buffer is possible. This
expansion of the system has many advantages. Firstly it reduces the noise pollution
created by the HP shutting down and turning on. Secondly it facilitates to synchronize
the constantly changing difference between demand and supply (Yang et al. 2021). It
was also proven that the system efficiency can be further improved by around 20%, with
using thermal stratification instead of a fully mixed tank (Li et al. 2021).Solar assisted
indirect expansion heat pump systems can be coupled with ground source energy storage
solutions, as it will be presented in the following section.
2.3
Solar assisted ground source heat pump systems
Solar assisted ground source (SAGSHP) systems have been a focus of innovation of
research, with growing number of publication each year. In 2011 it was demonstrated,
that SAGSHP systems can prevent 234 tons of CO2 emission by producing a renewable
source of 2.08 TJ of energy per year (Q. Wang and Huang 2011). These systems can
both use the solar thermal energy to increase the temperature of the evaporation in the
HP, or store this thermal energy in the ground. A simulation study has been conducted in
Korea, where they examined a solar ­ geothermal hybrid heat pump system with different
operation conditions. It was found that regenerating the soil with thermal energy has a
positive effect on the overall coefficient of performance of the system. By regenerating
the soil with excess thermal energy from the solar collectors, the heating capacity has in­
creased by 4.7% from 11.5kW to 12.2kW resulting in a COP increase of 19% (Kang et al.
n.d.).
There are several parameters that can influence a SAGSHP system. Chwieduk stated
that the soil moisture content can influence the storage capacity, as during the operation
the water movement caused by natural convection reduces the storage efficiency. The
study has concluded that the thermal conductivity (TC) and the volumetric heat capac­
ity (VHC) of the soils is another important parameter to estimate the storage potential of
the ground (Chwieduk 2012). Weather conditions can also influence the operation of the
system, such as heavy raining or snowing. A soil covered with snow will reflect the solar
irradiation on the ground, thus less thermal energy will be absorbed.
Adding a storage tank with good stratification, will better distribute the solar thermal sur­
plus and store it for SH or DHW use (Reda 2017). According to a study by Nouri, solar
fraction (SF) has a significant impact on SAGSHP system, as by increasing the SF to
a maximal value resulted in an increase of the COP from 2.74 to 3.27 (Nouri, Noorol­
lahi, and Yousefi 2019). In 2015 in Naples, a SAGSHP was integrated with Rankin cycle
(ORC), creating tri­generation system. This system was built into a hotel providing heating
and cooling, while also covering some of the electricity demand. According to the techno­
economic calculations conducted, this system had a payback time of 5 years (Buonomano
et al. 2015).
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
7
==PAGE:18==
8
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:19==
3
Experimental test facility
3.1
Description of the experimental test facility
The experimental test facility is a solar assisted ground source heat pump (SAGSHP)
system, that is located at the campus of the Technical University of Denmark, in Lyngby
(latitude 56°N).
3.1.1
Components of the experimental test facility
As Figure 3.3 indicates, the system consists of:
• evacuated tubular collector on roof
• horizontal ground source heat exchanger
• tank in tank combi­storage tabk
• water to water heat pump (HP) system
• five pumps to circulate the system
• uninsulated buffer tank simulating space heating (SH) and domestic hot water (DHW)
demand
• measurement and control sensors
Name
Type
Function
P1
NMT PLUS 25/80180, Imppumps
collector fluid circulation
P2
UPS 2540180, Grundfos
collector to tank
P3
UPS 2560180, Grundfos
collector to soil
P5
Alfa 12560180, Grundfos
heat pump circulation
P6
Magna 2560180, Grundfos
heat pump circulation
Table 3.1: List of heat pumps in the system(Kara 2021)
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
9
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.1: Schematic illustration of the SAGSHP system (C. Zhang et al. 2021)
3.1.2
Solar collector
The installed solar collectors have a total gross area of 12.5 m2, facing south on the roof
with the tilt of 45°. The installed solar collector type is Thermomax HP 450, which is an
evacuated tubular collector produced by Kingspan. A heat exchanger is connecting the
solar collector to the combi­storage unit. This heat exchanger has a heat transfer area
of 0.5 m2 and 9 kW capacity. Pump (P1) is responsible for circulating the collector fluid,
which has a mixture of propylene glycol(35%) and water(65%) (C. Zhang et al. 2021).
3.1.3
Tank in tank combi­storage
By applying the tank in tank solution, the heat loss can be significantly reduced compared
to a two tank alternative, that separates the DHW and SH needs. The inner tank (175
l) is supplying the DHW demand, while the outer tank (550 l) is for SH purposes. It can
be observed on Figure 3.3, that there are four pipes supplying heat at different heights
inside the combi­storage tank. This is necessary to guarantee the thermal stratification.
While DHW is realized on the top part of the tank, the SH is around the middle section.
These pipes also include a heat trap, to prevent thermosyphoning. Further heat loss is
prevented by insulating the combi­storage unit with mineral whool and aluminium foil.
10
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:21==
3.1.4
Heat pump
The heat pump (HP) is water to water technology, that has a capacity of 3­12 kW, depend­
ing on the modulating mode of the frequency compressor (30 Hz ­ 70 Hz). The nominal
compressor frequency is 50 Hz.
Figure 3.2: Tank in tank combi­storage, tubular evacuated solar collector, heat pump
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
11
==PAGE:22==
3.1.5
Horizontal heat exchanger
The horizontal heat exchanger has 2 loops buried approximately 1 m deep with a length
of 120 m respectively. The total area of the ground heat exchanger unit is 255 m2. A heat
exchanger identical to the one used for the solar collector is supplying the vertical ground
heat exchanger with solar thermal heat. Pump (P3) is circulating the loop with a mixture
of isopropyl alcohol (ipa) and water. (Andersen and Perers 2017)
3.1.6
Uninsulated buffer tank
This buffer tank was included in order to simulate the SH and DHW demand of a single
family house. The annual SH is 2800 kWh while the DHW is 1825 kWh. The difference
between the two demands is the tapping profile. While the DHW tapping is identical every
day, the SH tapping depends on the month of the heating season.
Figure 3.3: Uninsulated buffer tank
3.2
Operation and control of the experimental test facility
The control system is using temperature sensors, and motorized valves to switch between
operation modes (Andersen and Perers 2017).
During control, circulation pumps, (P1), (P2), and (P3) decide weather the combi­storage
tank or the ground should be charged. For this they rely on the following temperature
sensors:
• temperature in solar collector (TA1)
• temperature in combi­storage tank (TA2)
• temperature in the ground (TA3)
The three main operation modes of the SAGSHP system are the following:
3.2.1
Solar collector to combi­storage tank
As demonstrated in the literature review in Chapter 2, directly using solar thermal energy
for SH and DHW is the best way to increase efficiency, thus it has a priority over any other
operation modes.
12
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:23==
The control system adjusts the motorized valves (M7) and (M2) to activate circulation
pumps (P1) and (P2) if the following conditions are met:
• There is a temperature difference(∆T) of 8 K between TA1 and TA2. This operation
stops if ∆T falls below 2 K.
• TA1 has a temperature higher than 20 °C
• TA2 has a temperature lower than 70°C
In order avoid damage by overheating in both the tank and the solar collector the following
controls have been implemented:
• TA1 has a temperature higher than 130 °C (stopped until it falls below 110 °C)
• TA2 has a temperature lower than 75°C
3.2.2
Solar collector to ground (regeneration mode)
If the temperature in the combi­storage tank is already high, or there is a thermal surplus
in the solar collector, than it is being transfered to the ground. Th is is beneficial, as in
Chapter 2 it was stated that by recharging the ground the COP can increase up to 19%.
In this operation mode, the control activates circulation pumps (P1) and (P3), by adjusting
motorized valve (M7). The regeneration starts, if there is a temperature difference (∆T)
of 8 K between TA1 and TA3. When ∆T falls below 4 K the operation mode switches
off. A similar safety control is functioning here to stop the solar collector, when it reaches
the overheating temperature of 130 °C. The (M7) motorized valve can either feed thermal
energy to the ground or to the combi­tank storage, but not simultaneously. The combi­tank
storage has a priority ensured by the control system.
3.2.3
Heat pump to tank
For the control system of the heat pump, temperature sensors (T3) and (T6) are in use.
Motorized valve (M6) can switch between DHW and SH modes. DHW temperature is
measured by (T3) sensor, ensuring that heat pump activates when the temperature is out
the range of 47°C ­ 51 °C. SH activates in the range of 26 °C ­ 31°C, using (M6) and (M4)
motorized valves. DHW has a priority over SH by the control system.
3.3
Measurements at the experimental test facility
As it was seen in the previous section, temperature sensors can be found inside the
collector, the tank and the ground. Figure 3.4 indicates the placement of the sensors in
the ground heat exchanger. Temperature sensors are placed on both loops, half a meter
above and below the pipes. In order to measure the temperature of the undisturbed soil,
further sensors are placed every meter until reaching 10 m depth.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
13
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.4: Schematic illustration of the measurement sensor placement
All these temperature sensors are copper/constantan thermocouples, with an accuracy of
0.5 K. The moisture content of the soil is also being monitored near the ground source heat
exchanger. A climate station is responsible for measuring ambient air temperature and
total solar radiation. Further sensors can be found on loops measuring volume flow rate,
and the electricity consumption of each component. The DATA logger records measure­
ment data every 60 seconds. Table 3.2 represents the used measurement equipment:
Device
Type
Location
Accuracy
Weather station
CMP11 pyranometer
roof
±2%
Temperature sensor
Type TT Thermocouple
system
±0.5K
Moisture sensor
SMT150T
ground heat exchanger loop
±2%
Energy meter
Malmbergs/Kamstrup
different loop
±0.5%
Flow sensor
Brunata HGQ1R0
between solar and storage
±2%
Flow sensor
Brunata HGS5R4
ground heat exchanger loop
±1%
Flow sensor
Brunata HGQ1R3
heat pump loop
±2%
Flow sensor
Brunata HGQ1R0
space heating loop
±2%
Flow sensor
Clorius Combimeter
domestic hot water loop
±2%
Table 3.2: Equipment used for measurements
14
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:25==
3.4
Results of experimental test facility measurements
The solar assisted ground source heat pump (SAGSHP) system was analysed for the
year 2021 in the summer period. As during August maintenance was done, only May,
June and July will be observed. In order to be able to compare previous results of the
system, the same methodology has been used. This can be found is Section 3.4 of (Kara
2021).
In the month of May, the DHW consumption was around 140 kWh, while the SH was
higher, around 555 kWh. Compared to May, 2020, this year the ambient temperature
was lower, thus there was need for space heating throughout the month. Out of the three
months only May had demand.
Figure 3.5: Thermal energy consumption profile of May 2021
Figure (3.6) represents the electricity consumption of the HP for May. The results are
represented from 17th of May, as the HP was not in operation before. The Seasonal Per­
formance Factor (SPF) of the HP for this month was 7.5. This value is almost the double
of the value from 2020. The significant growth in the SPF of the HP can be explained
by the fact, that in 2021 May, there was both solar radiation available, with a high SH
demand. It can be further observed that in the period of 28. to 31. the solar radiation had
a higher value, thus the HP electricity consumption has decreased.
Figure 3.6: Electricity consumption of heat pump (HP) in May
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
15
==PAGE:26==
The different operations of the SAGSHP system was analysed for the summer period on
Figure (3.7). It was found that the operation depends on the average ambient temperature
significantly. During May there was more solar thermal energy charged into the tank, as
there was stil a SH demand. The solar thermal energy transferred to the tank is similar in
June and July, as the DHW demand is also identical. Figure (3.7) further indicates, that
the solar thermal energy was not sufficient in May to meet the consumption, thus the HP
was operating.
Figure 3.7: The distribution of energy flows in the summer period
As it was expected in the summer period, the ground source heat exchanger will operate
mainly on regeneration mode. In may the energy flow into the ground was around 100
kWh, although in June and July this value was between up to 600 ­ 800 kWh. As presented
in the literature study recharging the soil has positive effect on the performance factors,
such as the solar fraction (SF). The discharge of energy towards the HP from the ground
heat exchanger was not significant. It ranged between 4 kWh to 14 kWh.
16
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.8: Accumulated energy in the ground during the summer period
To further analyse the performance factors of the solar assisted ground source heat pump
(SAGSHP) system Figure (3.9) indicates the Seasonal Performance Factor (SPF), solar
fraction (SF), and renewable factor. It can be seen that the solar radiation affected the
solar fraction, as it a higher value in June and July. The SPF is dependent on the ambient
temperature, therefore due to the SH it had the highest value in May. The renewable
factor (RF) describes all the energy sources used in the system to meet the demand. It
was shown on Figure (3.7) that the HP contributed to the demand only in May, thus the
RF has the highest value in this month.
Figure 3.9: Performance factors of the system (SPF, SF, RF
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
17
==PAGE:28==
18
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:29==
4
Literature review on heat transfer in
soils and their effect on ground source
heat pump systems
4.1
Introduction
In order to design a ground source heat pump (GSHP) system several factors must be
considered, such as the material and the depth of the pipes in the ground, and the corre­
sponding heat pump. The practice in the industry during the dimensioning of the system
is to oversize in order to guarantee the DHW and the heating/cooling demand and avoid
freezing damage to the pipes. This practice has led to unnecessarily high investment
costs, and during the systems lifetime, a higher operation. The main difficulty about esti­
mating the operation conditions of the GSHP is the seasonally changing energy content
of the soil, due to the changing ambient temperature. Further influencing factors are the
geographical location of the system, the depth of the buried pipes, and the soil type. By
examining the heat transfer of the soil, an accurate estimation can be obtained for both the
dimensioning and the design of the cost effective system.(Marcotte and Pasquier 2008)
4.2
Basic definitions of heat transfer
4.2.1
Conduction
Thermal conductivity is the transfer of internal energy caused by the collisions of particles,
and the movement of electrons, from warmer to colder state. This phenomenon takes
place in all phases (solid, liquid, gas), thus if the soil has been dried out, the thermal
conduction takes place between neighboring grains, through air filled gaps. On the other
hand, if the soil has water content, these gaps get filled up with water that becomes the
conducting medium. A higher water content will completely surround the grains, and
increase the TC. This is due to the characteristics of water that has a TC of 0.6 W/mK,
while the TC of air is 0.025 W/mK. The TC is described by the Fourier law:
Q = −λ ∇T = −λ gradT
(4.1)
where Q(W/m2) is the heat flow vector, λ( ) is the TC, ∇T(K) is the temperature gradi­
ent(K/m).(Hermansson et al. 2009)
4.2.2
Radiation
Thermal radiation occurs when energy (movement of the heat) is converted into electro­
magnetic radiation. Its amount is directly proportional to the grains increase of tempera­
ture. Due to the fact that higher temperature grains radiate more heat, there is a general
transfer of energy towards the lower temperature grains. Generally the radiation does not
take a big portion of the energy transfer unless the soils is dry, where it can take up to
10­20%.(Hermansson et al. 2009)
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
19
==PAGE:30==
4.2.3
Diffusion
Diffusion is the net movement between higher and lower water concentration regions. In
case of soils vapour diffusion occurs, when the water evaporates into unsaturated air,
and condensates at temperatures below dew point, resulting in a latent heat transfer from
warmer to colder parts of the soil. The vapour diffusion is more significant in soils with
higher relative humidity.(Hermansson et al. 2009)
4.2.4
Convection
Convection is the energy transfer of liquid or gas particles as a result of force ( density
gradient, gravity, pressure difference). Typically in soils this force is due to the heat trans­
port of water molecules that carry low or high energy with them.(Hermansson et al. 2009)
The density of water changes depending on its temperature, which results in a density
gradient. Soils that have higher water content, are exposed to free natural convection
due to the temperature gradients.
4.2.5
Heat transfer at different temperatures
• Temperatures below 0°C – At this state the most dominant heat transfer in the soils
is caused by conduction. Due to the cryo­suction effect, there is a small amount of
water moving between the grains, thus resulting in a slight convection. Cyro­suction
occurs when pressures are negative in the freezing soil, thus the water migrates due
to capillary forces.
• Temperatures from 0°C to 25°C – The heat transfer depends on the soils perme­
ability. In more soil that has a low water content the conduction is still dominant,
although for soils with higher saturation level, free convection occurs.
• Temperatures above 25 °C – Around 25°C thermal conduction will be still mostly
responsible for the heat transfer. In soils with relatively low moisture content at
higher temperatures, vapour diffusion, free convection will occur. Radiation will also
influence in the heat transfer in dry soil samples.
4.3
Tools to asses the thermal properties of soil
The most important factors to determine the thermal properties of the soils is the thermal
conductivity (TC), volumetric heat capacity (VHC), and thermal diffusivity (TD). The TC
can be defined as the quantity of heat that flows through a unit area with a unit temperature
gradient, while the VHC is the change of soils heat storage that produces a unit change in
its temperature. The TD of the soils refers to the rate of heat change of the specific soil.
It can be calculated dividing the TC be the VHC.
α =
λ
cp × ρ
(4.2)
Where α is the TD (mm2/s), cp is the specific heat capacity (J/kg*K), ρ is the density
(kg/m3). Therefore the λ value is a key parameter to understand the heat transfer of the
specific soil.(H. He, D. He, et al. 2020)
20
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:31==
4.4
Water movement in soil
There are three factors that influence the movement of water in saturated and unsaturated
soils: soil permeability, soil suction and water content. These phenomenons must be
taken into consideration during the calculations of the heat transfer in soil:
4.4.1
Soil permeability
It defines the rate of water that flows through a material due to hydraulic gradient in the soil.
The permeability depends on a number of factors such as void ratio, soil texture, density,
water temperature, and grading (Cedergren Harry 1977). An equation was proposed to
quantify the soil permeability (Pap and Mahler 2019):
K = cH × D2
10
(4.3)
where K is the permeability (cm/s), D10 is the effective size (mm) and cH is the Hazel
constant between 1­1.5. Effective size of soil refers to the average size and weight of
the particles inside the soil. This equation show a direct linear relationship between the
permeability and the grain size.
4.4.2
Soil suction
Suction occurs in soil when the water pressure is lower than the atmospheric pressure.
This capillary force is defined as soil suction. In case the water pressure is higher than
the atmospheric pressure, ground water appears on the surface of the soil. Adding wa­
ter to an unsaturated soil, firstly the water will be absorbed on the surface of the grains.
Further increasement of the water content will fill in the gaps between the contact points
of the grains. The capillary forces will appear due to the air bubbles still present between
the grains, making the water move into the smallest pores, before reaching full satura­
tion.(Erlingsson, Brenčič, and Dawson 2009) The soil suction can be defined using these
equations:
Ψ =
S
ρω × g
(4.4)
where Ψ (mm), is height of water column that could be included by suction to the soils, s
is the suction (kPa), ρω is the density of water, and the gravitational acceleration is g ( m
s2 ).
The s value can be defined in this equation by the pressure difference between air and
water pressure. (Erlingsson, Brenčič, and Dawson 2009)
4.4.3
Water content
Determining the water content of a soil can be determined using a measuring device on
site, or by taking samples and post measure in laboratory conditions. There are multiples
methods for measuring water content in soils, both non­destructive, and destructive, such
as the gravimetric method, where soil samples are weighted both before and after drying
them in an oven for 24 hours at 105 °C. The gravimetric water content (GWC) of the soil
is calculated from the mass difference of the wet and dry soil samples:
GWC = Mwet −Mdry
Mdry
(4.5)
where Mwet (kg) is the wet soil weight and Mdry (kg) is the weight of the dried soil. This
method is referred to as a destructive, due to the fact that samples must be taken at a
certain depth form the ground and its density must be reproduced in laboratory conditions.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
21
==PAGE:32==
Non­destructive ways of measuring water content allows to collect data in real time from
the site. The most common methods known to be used in the industry is the neutron
scattering method, and the time domain reflectometry technique (TDR).
In the first method a radioactive source is used to emit high energy neutrons, that col­
lide with hydrogen atoms, detecting water content. The measuring device consist of a
radioactive source and a detector.
The TDR method uses a probe that has a transmitter generating a pulse that travels
through a long metal conductor. This metal rod has a sensor at the end of it, that mea­
sures this generated frequency and uses its transit time to calculate the velocity of the
electromagnetic pulse:
ce = 2L
t
(4.6)
Where ce ( m
s ) indicates the velocity of the electromagnetic pulse, L (m) is the length of the
probe, and t (s) is the transit time. Ce value can be calculated using this equation:
ce =
c0
√κr × µr
(4.7)
Where c0 (m
s ) is the velocity of light, µr is the relative magnetic permeability, and κr is the
dielectric constant. This constant is around 6 for dry soils, while 82 for water. (Erlingsson,
Baltzer, et al. 2009)
4.5
Relevant experiments carried out to determine heat
transfer in soil
A TC investigation has been carried out by the university of Aarhus where nine different
soils where examined in different regions of Denmark. The samples were taken in different
depth from 5 ­ 85 cm, consisted of varying clay content ranging from 0.03 ­ 0.35 kg/kg,
and different water saturation levels for the soils between 0.01 to 0.98. The samples
at different sites where taken aiming to acquire minimally disturbed 250 cm3 soil cores.
Different cylinders pushed vertically into the soils depending on the chosen depth. These
samples were transported to the laboratory using plastic lids and were kept at 2 °C to
preserve their original characteristics. Furthermore, these different soil samples were
weighted, then capillary wetted (from ­50 hPa to ­900hPa) depending on their excavation
depth. At each suction potential conductivity was measured. As a last step the samples
were dried at 105 °C and the dry thermal conductivity was measured again. For measuring
the TC single probe was used that had a constant voltage of 3 V, and a heating wire having
approximately 30 Ωelectrical resistance. Two different probes were used for onsite and
laboratory measurement of the TC. The onsite needle was 100 mm long while the one
used in the laboratory was 60 mm. For the onsite measurement the soil was insulated
overnight in order to minimize the ambient temperature influencing the TC. The obtained
results were used to calculate the organic matter in soil, bulk density, and the saturation
degree of water(Schjønning 2021), as it can be seen on Figure 4.1:
22
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.1: Results of soil heat transfer characteristics at different saturation points
(Schjønning 2021, Table 2.) *SOM represents the soil organic content.
An experiment was carried out on the heat transfer of soils with different moisture con­
tent to understand its effects on a ground source heat pump (R. Wang et al. 2020). The
measurement had a sandbox connected to an auxiliary water system, and a data log­
ger device. The heat generation inside the sandbox was achieved using an electrical
heating rod, which was controlled by a voltage regulator. In order to minimize heat loss
a polystyrene board was used for insulation, coupled with an aluminum foil on top. A
seepage was achieved using 150 mm wide cavities, where a nylon cloth was instead in
the inner part to avoid the soil entering. The auxiliary heating system is responsible for
achieving the required temperature. Inside the sandbox temperature and moisture sen­
sors were placed that recorded the water content, and the temperature change over time.
During the experiments four soil states were measured: dry, unsaturated, saturated, and
seepage. The results of the experiments have indicated, that moisture content influence
significantly the heat transfer for GSHP system. If the moisture content is well chosen for
the soil it can lead to better energy dissipation and ameliorate the long term operation (R.
Wang et al. 2020).
4.6
Conclusions from the literature review
From the literature research on heat transfer on soils it could be concluded that:
• The most important factors to determine the thermal properties of the soils is the
TC, VHC, and TD.
• With the increase of soil saturation, an increasing convex shaped function can be
observed for the TC.
• The TC has a negative impact on a certain saturation point.
• The dry soil’s TC increased with more water content, and decreased with grains that
have smaller effective size.
• Disturbance in the soil’s structure creates deviation for the TC measurements.
• Heat transfer in soil is highly influenced by water content. Higher saturation in soils
result in better heat dissipation capacity.
• Thermal conduction is the most dominant heat transfer in dry, and moist soil sam­
ples.
• GSHP system operate better on the long run, if the system is installed in a soil that
has some moisture content, but does not cause natural convection in the soil.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
23
==PAGE:34==
24
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:35==
5
Measurements of the heat transfer in
soil
5.1
Introduction
The thermal conductivity for soil, can be either measured using different measurement
devices, or it can be calculated with available soil information. Eighty­four models have
been created to estimate the soil thermal conductivity. These formulas have a good accu­
rate estimate only if the soil samples are completely dry (H. He, Liu, et al. 2021). In order
to have a more accurate representation of the water movement and the effects of differ­
ent saturation levels in the soil, the thermal conductivity, and volumetric heat capacity will
be measured. A transient line heat source based device called TEMPOS, will determine
these values.
5.2
Measuring device
5.2.1
Theory behind TEMPOS (Meter Group) device
The TEMPOS uses a heater and a temperature sensor either in one needle, or sepa­
rated. To generate heat current passes through the needle and the temperature sensor
monitors it over time, determining the thermal conductivity. Theoretically the ideal sen­
sor has a 100 times bigger length than diameter, although this application would make
the needle very fragile. The challenges facing this measuring device are generally the
changing ambient temperature, and the water movement inside the materials, that can
result in free convection. In order to avoid this effect, the heating times are kept very
brief, thus the movement of water is minimal. The reading will only start after the rate of
temperature drift falls below ±0.001 °K. Instead of using infinite line heat source equa­
tions TEMPOS uses algorithms converted from the Laplace domain. These algorithms
were tested against materials with known thermal properties, and proven to function with
relatively short heating times (TEMPOS 2021).
5.2.2
Dual needle solution
The two needles are divided into a monitoring needle, and a heating one. The distance
between them is 6 mm, allowing the cooling and heating period to be measured. The
device collects data for at least 30 seconds, then shuts downs, and keeps monitoring for
drift change for another 30 seconds. This temperature drift is subtracted from the initial
one giving the ∆T value used in this equation:
∆T = ( q
4πλ) × Ei(−r2
4αt )
(5.1)
∆T = ( q
πλ) × {Ei[
−r2
4α(t −th)] −Ei[−r2
4αt ]}
(5.2)
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
25
==PAGE:36==
Where: (TEMPOS 2021)
• ∆T is the temperature rise at the measuring needle (K)
• q is the heat input at the heated needle (W/m)
• λ is the thermal conductivity (W/mK)
• r is the distance from the heated needle to the measuring needle (m)
• α is the thermal diffusivity (m2/s)
• t is time (s)
• th is the heating time (s)
• Ei is the exponential integral and is approximated using polynomials (Abramowitz
and Stegun 1972)
Equation (5.1) is applied when t ≤th, while equation (5.2) is to be used if t > th.
The algorithm for the dual needles uses a square problem as a last step to determine
the volumetric specific heat capacity (VSHC). A value is chosen for thermal diffusivity
(TD), that minimizes the squared differences between the modeled, and the measured
temperature.
ρCp = (λ
λ)
(5.3)
In Equation 5.3 knowing the values for λ and α, the Cp is the volumetric specific heat
capacity (VSHC) (MJ/m3K) can be obtained.
5.2.3
Single needle
In contrast with the dual needle, the algorithm of the monitoring time is longer. This can
be explained by examining equation (5.1) where the exponential integral would lead to
infinite series. Using only 30 seconds would lead to significant errors for the results as
the temperature hardly changes.Using a 1 minute reading time will have a more accurate
result, as the first 16 seconds of temperature data is ignored to eliminate the infinite series
with low temperature drift:
∆T = ( q
πλ) × ln(t + to) + C
(5.4)
Where the time offset (t0), λ, C values are determined using linear square calculations.
26
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.1: TR­3 single needle (to the left), and SH­3 dual needle(to the right) (TEMPOS
2021, illustration)
Volumetric specific heat capacity (VSHC) will be measured using the SH­3 dual needle.
The TR­3 needle will be used to determine the thermal conductivity of dry, and wet soil,
as it has a more accurate algorithm on a longer time period, than the dual needle. The
accuracy of each measurement can be verified by observing the Sxy value. A low good­
ness of fit measure indicates that the results are close to the theoretical heating curve
measured.
5.3
Method used for measurements
5.3.1
Preparation of samples
Step 1
Soil samples in Lyngby, from the experimental test facility site were taken, for two different
soil types, mulch and gravel.
Step 2
Using 120 ml containers both the mulch and the gravel’s weight was measured. Following
the procedure from the literature research, samples were dried out on 105 °C for 24 hours.
The water content of the samples were calculated using Equation (4.5)
Soil type
GWC [%]
Mulch sample
22
Gravel sample
7
Table 5.1: GWC of soils from the testing facility site
Step 3
Soil samples were distributed into different glass pots and remeasured. This was nec­
essary in order to determine each separated pot’s weight for adding the right amount of
water into each pot creating soil samples that has GWC of 0%, 20%, 40%, 60%, and
100%.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.2: Creating soil samples with GWC ranging from 0­100%
Step 4
The mulch and the clay samples with varying saturation levels were covered with a plastic
foil as it can be seen on Figure (5.2). This was necessary to avoid the moisture escaping
the samples. It can be seen on Figure (5.3) that after a certain amount of time, the different
soils have absorbed the moisture reaching the saturation point.
Figure 5.3: Mulch and gravel at 100% GWC.
Step 5
The thermal conductivity, and volumetric heat capacity of the soil samples will be exam­
ined not only with different moisture content levels, but for a temperature ranging from 5
­ 55°C, with a ∆T of 10 K. To replicate similar conditions for the soil samples as on site, a
standard compression of the soil was necessary. A compressing piston was used for this
28
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:39==
purpose, that consisted of a metal weighing 500 g and 50 cm long trajectory to compress
via its potential energy (see Figure 5.4).
Figure 5.4: Preparing soil samples using compressing piston
The different mulch and gravel soil samples were placed in 120 ml pots during the proce­
dure. Table (5.2) describes the number of impacts necessary to replicate the same soil
rigidity conditions:
Number
of layers
Impact
at ml
Number
of impacts
1
24
2
2
48
4
3
72
8
4
96
16
5
120
32
Table 5.2: Standard piston procedure for creating samples.
For soil samples above 40% GWC a thin layer of water will appear after the compres­
sion. The recommendation is to reseal the 120 ml and place it down upside down, so the
moisture can be reabsorbed into the soil sample.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
29
==PAGE:40==
5.3.2
Converting GWC to VWC, using bulk density
Using the compressed mulch and gravel samples the bulk density can be calculated, in
order to convert the GWC, into VWC using the following equations:
ρb =
mdry
Vcompressed
(5.5)
V WC = ρb × GWC
(5.6)
Where ρb is the bulk density (
g
cm3 ), and Vcompressed is the volume of the compressed dry
soil samples.
5.3.3
Measuring thermal conductivity, and volumetric specific heat
capacity
To create a steady state temperature for the soils samples a thermal oven was used
respectively for temperatures at 35°C, 45°C and 55°C. The 25 °C condition was reached
using the ambient temperature of the laboratory. A refrigerator was used with adjustable
power in order to create conditions ideal for 5°C and 15°C.
It is important to note that samples were only used if they fully absorbed their moisture
content. Table (5.3) indicates that gravel samples above 20% GWC and mulch samples
above 60% GWC were not examined.
GWC
[%]
Mulch
sample
Gravel
sample
0
absorbed
absorbed
20
absorbed
absorbed
40
absorbed
saturated
60
absorbed
saturated
80
saturated
saturated
100
saturated
saturated
Table 5.3: Soil samples that were examined during the measurements
The literature study in Chapter 4 has indicated that for soils with higher moisture content
free convection might occur at raising temperatures. The measurements had a much
higher sxy value at 45°C and 55°C, thus some of them had to be repeated for GWC
higher than 20%.
Figure (5.5) is a recommendation for reducing the error margin, and limiting natural free
convection that causes temperature drifts.
30
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.5: Recommendation to avoid natural convection from soil at high temperatures
This double plastic layer solution is only necessary while using the SH­3 dual needle, as
for the TR­3 single needle, this was resolved by drilling a hole through the top container
cap, and plastic layer.
5.3.4
Follow up investigation of gravimetric water content (GWC)
Upon finishing all the measurements using TEMPOS device, another GWC analysis is
recommended on both the plastic containers, and the glass ones that contains the soils
with the wide range of water content. The second measurement will indicate the real
water content of the tested samples, and how much water has escaped due to natural
convection. It also shows how much humidity has been captured by dry samples through
the plastic layer.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
31
==PAGE:42==
5.4
Results of heat transfer measurements in soil
5.4.1
Gravimetric and volumetric water content of soil
Using Equation (5.5) the bulk density of gravel and mulch was calculated:
Bulk density
(g/cm3)
Gravel
1.66
Mulch
0.96
Table 5.4: Bulk density of gravel and mulch
It can be seen that the gravel has a higher value, meaning that for a given GWC there will
be a higher VWC. Figure (4.1) indicated that the bulk density of the compressed samples
are in the range of the results that has been calculated in a nearby region.
Equation (5.6) converts the GWC into VWC, represented on Figure (5.6):
Figure 5.6: Gravimetric and volumetric water content of soil
The effective grain size determines the densities of the different soil. This property has
resulted in a faster ability to reach saturation point for the gravel, at 60% GWC. For the
mulch the VWC is only slightly lower than the GWC. This conversion explains Figure (5.3)
where a significant amount of unabsorbed water can be seen above the soil samples.
The unabsorbed water for the mulch is due to the suction of the soil.
32
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:43==
Original containers
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Gravel
0.14%
9.7%
10.7%
11%
11.1%
12.5%
Mulch
3%
14.4%
19.3%
28.1%
30.2%
30.8%
Compressed soil samples in 120 ml pots used in the measurement
Gravel
0.13%
8%
­
­
­
­
Mulch
5%
20.7%
26.6%
33.6%
­
­
Table 5.5: Results of gravimetric water content (GWC) of soil samples after measure­
ments
Table (5.5) indicates the GWC of the soil samples after the measurements. Soil at dry state
has absorbed some water content for both the uncompressed and compressed samples.
The compressed mulch soil samples have absorbed 5% of moisture content, while the
gravel only absorbed a minimal amount. The compressed soil samples had a higher
GWC due to higher soil suction compared to the original soil stored in glass (see Figure
(5.3).
5.4.2
Measurement results of the thermal conductivity in soil
Thermal conductivity for gravel and mulch were measured at different temperatures, and
saturation points. As discussed in the conclusion part of Chapter 4, the thermal conduc­
tivity increased with increasing moisture content. This phenomenon can be observed for
both the mulch and the gravel. Figures (5.6), (5.7), and (5.8) indicate, that gravel had a
higher thermal conductivity than mulch at saturation point, considering that its effective
size is also higher than the mulch.
The thermal conductivity of dry mulch on average was 0.134 W/mK while the dry gravel
had a slightly higher value of 0.22 W/mK. At a saturated state, the TC of the different soils
has increased respectively to 1.28 W/mK for the mulch, and 2.3 W/mK for the gravel.
It was found that both soil types had a value ten times higher at 100% GWC, than for dry
conditions.
Figure 5.7: Thermal conductivity at increasing moisture content for the following temper­
atures: 5°C, 15°C
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.8: Thermal conductivity at increasing moisture content for the following temper­
atures: 25°C, 35°C
Figure 5.9: Thermal conductivity at increasing moisture content for the following temper­
atures: 45°C, 55°C
The rising profile of the TC for the mulch is similar for the temperatures 5°C, 15°C and
25°C. The increase of TC is not steady, as it was found in the literature review, that a cer­
tain moisture content can have a negative effect on the thermal conductivity (Schjønning
2021) causing a concave shape function. For this case 40% of GWC seems to be the
case.
For the remaining temperature this profile seems to be distorted. This can be explained
with the water movement in the samples, triggered by the higher temperatures. On Figure
(5.9) a concave function replaces the increasing profile. During the experiment at tem­
peratures of 45°C and 55°C a thin layer of water appeared on the top of the 120 ml plastic
pots due to water movement, and some pressure was released upon opening the plastic
lid. This water migration caused by the temperature gradient has altered the results of
the measurement.
Both the SH­3 dual needle and the TR­3 single needle is equipped with TC measuring
ability, although the manual for TEMPOS recommends using the single needle for TC
measurements in dry, and wet soils samples. This can be seen comparing equation (5.1)
and (5.4). Nevertheless the TC values obtained by using the dual needle has served as
verification for the results presented on Figures (5.7) to (5.9).
34
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.10: TC verification for temperatures 15°C and 25°C
As Figure (5.10) indicates the TC profile of the dual needle measurements have a concave
property. These verification values have a higher error margin close to saturation point.
A decreasing function of TC around 40% GWC, at lower temperatures such as 15°C and
25°C indicate, that it is necessary to separate the measurement of TC from VSHC and
TD.
For better understanding the TC of soils, it is necessary to analyse them as a function of
growing temperature:
Figure 5.11: Comparison of TC of soil, as a function of temperature
As mentioned before, the soil’s TC has less measurement noise in a dry state. Measure­
ments at saturated level are influenced by a minimal amount of natural convection. There­
fore at higher temperatures there is a significant decrease of TC for the mulch. These
measurement inaccuracies can be further explained by that at temperatures around 45°C
& 55°C the moisture tend to escape towards the lid, leaving the bottom in a less saturated
state.
5.4.3
Measurement results of the volumetric specific heat capacity and
thermal diffusivity in soil
Thermal diffusivity
Figure (5.12) reveal, that similarly to the TC, the TD increases at higher saturation levels
in the soil. It can also be seen that the TD of the dry mulch is higher than for dry gravel.
The reason behind this can be concluded examining Equation (4.2), as the density is in
the denominator, resulting in a higher TD for soil types that are less dense.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.12: Comparison of TD of soil, as a function of temperature
It can also be stated that the dry gravel has less fluctuation at an increasing temperature.
This can be deducted from Table (5.5 where it is shown that the dry mulch has absorbed
more moisture content (≈5%) than the dry gravel (≈0.1%) resulting in an increased
measurement noise.
As mentioned in Subsection 4.6, these measurement deviations at rising temperatures
can also be explained by disturbance in the soil structure caused by the repeated insertion
of the SH­3 measuring device. Demonstrated by Figure (5.12), a slight change in the
density of soil has a significant result on the TD measurements.
Despite the fact that dry mulch had a better TD than dry gravel, the latter has a better
TD property than the mulch. As it can be seen of (5.12)., the distance between the two
functions is greater for the gravel, meaning that on average the mulch has increased by
220% (from 0.26 mm2/s to 0.57 mm2/s) in saturated state, while the gravel by 436% (from
0.22 mm2/s to 1.17 mm2/s).
Volumetric specific heat capacity
Similarly to TC in Figure (5.7 to 5.9), the VSHC increases with growing GWC, being that
the water’s specifc heat capacity is around 4.2 kJ/kgK, while the ambient air is around 1
kJ/kgK.
Figure 5.13: VSHC of soil at temperatures of 25°C and 35°C
It can be observed from Figure (5.13) that the gravel initially has a higher VSHC at both
dry, and 20% GWC. However the mulch has a better absorbance capacity thus, it reaches
a higher value of around 3 MJ/m3K VSHC at a saturated state.
As a reference to verify the obtained VSHC results, Table (5.6 presents a comparison with
a previous measurement of dry and wet soil samples: (Kara 2021)
36
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:47==
Soil Types
Previous
results
New
results
Deviation
(%)
Volumetric Specific Heat Capacity (MJ/m3K)
Gravel dry
1.5
1.15
18%
Mulch dry
1
1.07
4%
Soil samples compared at a specific GWC
Gravel
(8% GWC)
2.5
1.93
29%
Mulch
(26% GWC)
2.9
2.24
33%
Table 5.6: Comparison of VSHC results with previous measurements
The deviation is lower at a dry state, being that the GWC for both results is an approxi­
mation, thus the moisture content difference generates a higher variance. It can be also
observed that the VSHC of the previous results are higher, since in the compression of
the sample was more significant in the previous measurement .
Figure 5.14: Comparison of VSHC of soil, as a function of temperature
Similarly to TC and TD, the VSHC has a lesser deviation at dry state, due to water
movement, as it can be observed on Figure (5.14). However in contrast with TD, where
gravel had a better ability to transfer heat, the mulch has a better heat capacity property.
Gravel only has a 68% growth from dry to saturated state in VSHC (1.15 MJ/m3K to 1.92
MJ/m3K), while mulch is higher at 109% (1.07 MJ/m3K to 2.24 MJ/m3K)
5.4.4
Results of the comparison of VWC content on site and in laboratory
conditions
In order to monitor the VWC of the soil on site, SMT150T measuring device was placed
underground. This sensor uses a TDR technology to measure the dielectric properties of
the soil and determine the moisture content, as it was described in Subsection 4.4.3. The
calculation applied to determine the VWC can be found in Appendix A1.
The bulk density range chosen for the onsite calculations are between 0.2 ­ 0.7 (g/cm3)
(SM150T. 2016). As it was seen in Table (5.4 both for the gravel and mulch the bulk
density is higher.
Figure (5.15) represents the VWC measurement for May 2021:
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.15: Decreasing VWC by setting BD values measured in laboratory conditions
Upon using a similar BD it was found that the VWC has decreased from ≈70% to ≈50%.
5.4.5
Soil sample size distribution
In previous measurements (Kara 2021) of soil taken from the site, the soil sample size
distribution has been conducted, thus it is being used as a reference for this assessment:
The analyse was done using different 10 gap sized sieves ranging from 0.04 mm to 16
mm. The effective grain size distribution of mulch and gravel can be seen on Figure (5.16):
Figure 5.16: The distribution of the effective size for mulch and gravel grains. (Kara 2021,
Figure 5.15)
It can be observed that the gravel has a more linear function meaning that the distribution
of the effective size was more homogeneous. For the mulch the function has a concave
shape, thus smaller and larger particles are more scarce in the soil sample.
38
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:49==
6
Experimental investigation on heat
transfer in soils and their effect on
ground source heat pump systems
6.1
Description of the experimental measurement box
For a deeper understanding of the experimental test facility, a measurement box was set
up at the Technical University of Denmark, in the test laboratory. The aim for this test
equipment built, is to gain deeper insight into the heat transfer process happening in the
experimental SAGSHP system on site. The measurement box is cube shaped with 1 m
long sides. In order to simulate similar conditions, a 1 m long pipe was placed in the
middle of the box, that has the same material and dimensions, as in in the ground source
heat exchanger loop. Around this pipe in a 20 cm radius, mulch was placed, while the
remaining space was filled up with gravel. These soil samples were taken near the ex­
perimental SAGSHP site. The material of the box is wood, and around the box a 20 cm
rockwool insulation was placed, with an additional plastic layer outside, to reduce the heat
loss from the box.
To replicate thermal processes, two radiators were built into the box, one on the top and
another one on the bottom. To ensure thermal contact between the soil and the top ra­
diator, a thin layer of sand was used. The top radiator can also be used to simulate the
thermal gains from solar radiation to the soil. Winter conditions in the soil, can be simu­
lated in the box by using cooling energy from the central cooling system of the laboratory.
The cooling process during measurements are realized via voltage control of the throttle
valve. To simulate a soil regeneration conditions inside the measurement box, a heating
unit of 3 ­27 kW thermal capacity is used. As it can be seen on Figure (6.1), three­way
valves are being used to regulate whether the conditioned water can enter the pipe in­
serted in the middle, or the radiators.
The schematic indicates, that there are two manifolds, both on the cooling, and heating
side of the system. For each inlet and outlet to the box, three­way valves were placed. A
pipe connects these valves creating a by­pass loop, so that the system can condition the
temperature of the water to reach a stable state, before entering the box measurement.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.1: Schematic illustration of the box measurement arrangement(Kara 2021)
Figure 6.2: Piping system with safety equipment(Kara 2021). The heating unit can be
found on the right side
Safety equipment has been placed around the system, such as air escape valves at the
highest points, 6­bar safety valves, an expansion vessel, and filters to protect from sedi­
ment in the loops, as it can bee seen on Figure (6.2).
To measure the results inside the box, 29 Type TT thermocouples has been placed inside
the box creating a semicircle. It is assumed that the heat transfer is symmetrical around
the pipe, thus temperature is only measured on one side of the box. The inlet and outlet
pipes, of the radiators, and central pipe, has been equipped with temperature sensors, as
it can be seen on Figure (6.3).
40
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:51==
Device
Type
Location
Accuracy
Flow sensor
Brunata HGQ1R3
heating loop
cooling loop
± 2 %
Temperature sensor
Type TT Thermocouple
Inlet/outlet of the box
Inside the box (semicircle)
± 0.5 K
Table 6.1: Measuring equipment used for box measurement
Figure 6.3: Arrangement of temperature sensors inside the box
6.2
Improvements made to the measurement box
Previous measurements made on the box, has led to some suggestions regarding the
improvement of the measurement box (Kara 2021). The previous measurement has had
inaccuracies due to heat loss from the box, and difficulties to set the right cooling tem­
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
41
==PAGE:52==
perature. The following section will present the recent advancements effectuated to the
measurement box:
6.2.1
Temperature calibration
It is recommended to do a temperature calibration on all the Type TT thermocouples
located in the inlets and outlets of the radiators, and the central pipe. These sensors are
easy to access thus, they can be calibrated without opening the measurement box itself.
Calibration of these thermocouples will lead to a more accurate conditioning of the water,
therefore significantly reduces the error margin.
For calibration, the measuring device JOFRACAL AMATEK was used. This measuring
device has a temperature range of ­100 °C to 700°C , with an accuracy of 0.005 K at
thermal stability. The sensors that will be calibrated, must be inserted into the pit that is
located on the top of the measuring device. Inside this pit, the temperature will increase
or decrease until reaching a manually selected set point temperature. In order to verify
whether the pit has reached thermal stability, and the calibration can start, an external
reference sensor will measure the temperature inside the box. To avoid inaccuracies due
to heat loss, the top of the pit is covered by insulation.
Figure 6.4: JOFRACAL AMATEK calibration device
The device uses a data logger connected via USB­port, that records the temperatures
every 10 seconds. Upon reaching thermal stability the device gives a signal. Accuracy
was further decreased by waiting 10 minutes after stability to start the calibration process,
as the manual indicates that the accuracy might be slightly lower in the first few minutes
after reaching stability (AMATEK 2017).
42
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:53==
Reference sensor (°C)
Measured values (°C)
Values after calibration (°C)
5
3.93
5.00
15
14.24
15.02
25
24.51
24.99
35
34.81
34.98
45
45.12
45.00
55
55.44
55.02
Table 6.2: Inlet pipe thermocouple results after temperature calibration
Five set point temperatures were chosen to calibrate the thermocouples, ranging from
5 °C to 55°C, with a step of 10 K between them. Due to the similarity of the results, the
temperature sensors located in the inlet and outlet of the central pipe will be presented.
Figure 6.5: Representation of the measured, and calibrated data
Using the equation obtained from the trend line, the gain and offset can be acquired. They
will serve to adjust the difference between the reference and the measured values. As
Table (6.2) presents, the values after calibration has led to an accuracy of 0.1 K.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
43
==PAGE:54==
6.2.2
Modifications in the piping system of the measurement box
On the inlet and outlet of the cooling pipes coming from the DTU central cooling system,
the condensing water can freeze causing ice, thus both pipes has been insulated.
The flow rate of the water inside the pipes was adjusted using butterfly valves. For the
central pipe, a low flow rate is necessary so the heat exchange between the soil and the
pipe can be observed for a longer period. Using the butterfly valves to set in low flow rates
was very difficult, thus they have all been switched to globe valves.
Figure 6.6: Butterfly valve to the left, globe valve to the right
6.2.3
Modifications to the control system of the temperature
Experience from previous measurements have shown, that during the simulation of soil
regeneration, due to the changing temperature of the cooling supply, the control system
takes a very long time to reach a stable temperature. Installing a buffer tank in the cold
loop would tackle the problem, although it would still make the conditioning of the water
to a stable temperature a long process.
The cooling loop is controlled by a voltage signal directly sent by LabView software to the
throttle valve. This valve regulates the cooling supply pipes, and by receiving the voltage
signal. Upon receiving this signal it either moves up increasing the flow rate, or moves
down decreasing the flow rate arriving to the manifold. Similarly to the cold side, during
the conditioning of the water to a higher temperatures, reaching a constant temperature
was a slow process.
The main problem with the previous control system was the long period required to reach
stability, due to oscillations. As Figure (6.8) indicates a Proportional Integral Derivative
(PID) controller was used in LabView, but as the gain for for the derivative (D) was set to
zero, the control system became a simplified Proportional­Integral (PI) one.
44
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.7: Representation of oscillations on previous control system
The difference between the set point and the measured value creates an offset. Both
PI, and PID controllers have a closed loop, thus with feedback control, the integral gains
will eliminate the offset error. In order to increase the response time of the controller and
reduce the oscillation, a derivative gain (Kd) was set up.
Figure 6.8: Schematic representation of the PID control system in LabView
By defining a value for the gain of the derivative controller, not only magnitude of the error
was measured, but its rate of change as well. As the measured value approaches the set
point, the proportional(P) gain will contribute less, reducing the oscillations. In order to
eliminate minor offsets from slightly opening and closing the throttle valve, a lower/upper
band was introduced manually. As this restriction is in the inaccuracy range of the TT
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
45
==PAGE:56==
Type Thermocouples (± 0.5 K), it will not influence the measurements. The proportional
(P) gain can be also set in manually, thus in case the system will switch from thermal
conditioning to regeneration mode, the control system can immediately send a maximal
voltage signal to the valve.
To further accelerate the temperature reaching the set point, flushing the pipes before
conditioning the soil is recommended. To do so, the volume flow rate must be increased
maximally, thus the thermal energy stored in the pipes will have a quicker heat loss pro­
cess.
6.3
Results of the box measurements
The aim of this analyse was to repeat the measurements done in Section 5.4 of (Kara
2021). In order to have comparable results, an identical methodology was used. This can
be found in Section 5.3 in (Kara 2021).
To reduce measurement uncertainties, the same flow rate has been set in by the globe
valves inside the central pipe, as in the previous measurement (0.25 l/min). To further min­
imise measurement errors, a low temperature difference of 10 K is used for heat transfer
between the soil and central pipe.
The following measurements have been repeated:
• 5 °C water inlet with 15 °C soil temperature
• 10 °C water inlet with 20 °C soil temperature
• 30 °C water inlet with 20 °C soil temperature
• 35 °C water inlet with 25 °C soil temperature
Figure (6.9) represents semi circles, with different sensor arrangement around the central
pipe.
Figure 6.9: Representation of temperature sensors in the box. (Reworked from (Kara
2021, Fig.5.16)
46
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:57==
6.3.1
10 °C water inlet with 20 °C soil temperature
Figure (6.10) indicates that the temperature in the soil has been reduced. The results are
correlating with previous measurements, as similarly, the most prominent temperature
change occurred in the first semi circle. This rate of change can be explained by the
proximity of the pipe compared to sensors in the second and third semi circles. It can also
be observed that the temperature sensors at 3, 9 and 16 have decreased even further.
This has been noted in the previous measurement, as it is assumed that the weight of the
soil has affected the 20 cm radius of mulch around the pipe. The previous circle shape of
the mulch is assumed to be more like an ellipsoid with mulch­gravel mixture around the
central pipe. As it was shown in Chapter 5, that gravel has a higher thermal conductivity,
thus these sensors have measured lower temperatures in the first semi circle. In the
second and third circles the temperature change was around 1 K.
Figure 6.10: Change of soil temperature with 10 °C water & 20 °C initial soil temperature
It is important to mention that with the new PID control system there was a more signif­
icant temperature difference, compared to the first measurement. While during the first
conditioning, in the first semi circle ∆T was between 1.5 ­ 3 K. As it can be seen on Fig­
ure (6.11) the ∆T as increased to 2.5 ­ 5 K. By having a more stable control system, the
conditioning of the soil becomes more accurate, thus the results have changed slightly.
6.3.2
30 °C water inlet with 20 °C soil temperature
Similar consequences can be drawn drawn from Figure (6.11), than the previous mea­
surement:
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
47
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.11: Change of soil temperature with 30 °C water & 20 °C initial soil temperature
Comparing the inlet and outlet temperatures of the central pipe for both measurements,
it can be observed that for the first measurement there is a significant oscillation around
10 °C.
Figure 6.12: Temperature change inside the central pipe (left 1. experiment, right 2.
experiment)
In order to avoid the minor oscillations due to the throttle valve constantly opening and
closing, a lower/upper band 0.5 K is recommended. It can be seen on Figure (6.12) that
for the second measurement there is a more stable temperature inside the central pipe.
48
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:59==
7
Discussion and outlook
Overall the solar assisted ground source heat pump (SAGSHP) systems highly contribute
to the decarbonisation of the building energy sector, by introducing a variety of renew­
able energy sources in the power production. Combining the solar collector with the heat
pump technology, further increased the system performance. The ground source heat
exchanger introduced to the system made it possible to utilise the excess solar thermal
energy, while exploiting the geothermal energy. The experimental SAGSHP system had
high performance factors, meaning that the combination of these renewable technologies
are matching the surrounding climate. For a deeper understanding, the experimental
SAGSHP system could be installed in other climate regions, with different ambient tem­
perature, and solar irradiation conditions. By further researching the heat transfer in the
soil, the operation of the system will be more predictable. The techno­economical calcu­
lations therefore will become reliable enough to persuade more customers to install the
system in their family house.
There has been a surge of relevance surrounding the solar assisted ground source heat
pump (SAGSHP) systems, as Figure (7.1) indicates with the growing number of scientific
articles.
Figure 7.1: Growing number of articles surrounding SAGSHP technology (Yang et al.
2021 , Fig.26)
Heat pump systems, solar collectors, and ground source heat exchnagers, are all shaped
by a compelling amount of innovation and development in the recent decades. It is further
expected therefore, that these components of the SAGSHP system will continue increase
in performance, increasing the combined systems efficiency as well.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
49
==PAGE:60==
In the recent years, promising research and development (R&D) have been made for the
SAGSHP systems (Yang et al. 2021& Nouri, Noorollahi, and Yousefi 2019). These finding
could be considered for the existing experimental test facility:
• Growing interesting in implementing a PVT system instead of a solar collector, as it
can also produce electricity for the HP, while meeting the heating demands.
• Artificial Intelligence (AI) is being applied in some of the systems for the control
system to better meet the SH and DHW demand. The AI analyses the weather data
from past years then, it creates an estimation of available renewable sources. By
predicting the available thermal energy of the SAGSHP system, the control system
is adjusted by to meet the demand in the most efficient way.
• Some applications indicate that by using PCM to enhance the ground source heat
exchanger or the tank storage, the COP of the system can be further improved.
50
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
Worldometers­info (2021). “Changement in Population throught history”. In: SM150T.,
2016 1, p. 10.
Ahmad, Tanveer and Dongdong Zhang (2020). “A critical review of comparative global
historical energy consumption and future demand: The story told so far”. In: Energy
Reports 6, pp. 1973–1991.
Insights, McKinsey Energy (n.d.). Global Energy Perspective 2021 (2020). Energy land­
scape. McKinsey.
Lidicker, William Z (2020). “A Scientist’s Warning to humanity on human population growth”.
In: Global ecology and conservation, e01232.
Eurostat (n.d.[a]). Final energy consumption by sector EU 2019.
– (n.d.[b]). Final energy consumption in the residential sector by use, EU, 2019.
European­Commission (n.d.). Energy performance of buildings directive.
Alessandro, Miglioli, Aste Niccolao, Leonforte Fabrizio, et al. (2021). “Photovoltaic­thermal
solar­assisted heat pump systems for building applications: Integration and design meth­
ods”. In: Energy and Built Environment.
Wang, Xinru et al. (2020). “A systematic review of recent air source heat pump (ASHP)
systems assisted by solar thermal, photovoltaic and photovoltaic/thermal sources”. In:
Renewable Energy 146, pp. 2472–2487.
Omer, Abdeen Mustafa (2008). “Ground­source heat pumps systems and applications”.
In: Renewable and sustainable energy reviews 12.2, pp. 344–371.
Reda, Francesco (2017). Solar Assisted Ground Source Heat Pump Solutions: Effective
Energy Flows Climate Management. Springer.
BASIX (n.d.). Illustration of different ground source heat pump systems.
Kamel, Raghad S, Alan S Fung, and Peter RH Dash (2015). “Solar systems and their
integration with heat pumps: A review”. In: Energy and buildings 87, pp. 395–412.
Scoccia, Rossano et al. (2018). “Absorption and compression heat pump systems for
space heating and DHW in European buildings: Energy, environmental and economic
analysis”. In: Journal of Building Engineering 16, pp. 94–105.
Yang, Li Wei et al. (2021). “Review of the advances in solar­assisted air source heat
pumps for the domestic sector”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 247, p. 114710.
Li, Qiong et al. (2021). “Thermal stratification in a solar hot water storage tank with mantle
heat exchanger”. In: Renewable Energy 173, pp. 1–11.
Wang, Qiankun and Qian Huang (2011). “Research on integrated solar and geothermal
energy engineering design in hot summer and cold winter area”. In: Procedia Engineer­
ing 21, pp. 648–655.
Kang, Byun et al. (n.d.). “SIMULATION STUDY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF SOLAR
AND GEOTHERMAL HYBRID R22 HEAT PUMP”. In: ().
Chwieduk, DA (2012). “Solar­assisted heat pumps”. In:
Nouri, Giti, Younes Noorollahi, and Hossein Yousefi (2019). “Solar assisted ground source
heat pump systems–A review”. In: Applied Thermal Engineering 163, p. 114351.
Buonomano, Annamaria et al. (2015). “Energy and economic analysis of geothermal–
solar trigeneration systems: A case study for a hotel building in Ischia”. In: Applied
Energy 138, pp. 224–241.
Kara, Ákos László (2021). “Investigations of solar heating/heat pump systems”. In: Ákos
K., 2021 1, p. 100.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
51
==PAGE:62==
Zhang, Changxing et al. (2021). “Experimental investigation on a combined solar and
ground source heat pump system for a single­family house: Energy flow analysis and
performance assessment”. In: Energy and Buildings 241, p. 110958.
Andersen, Elsa and Bengt Perers (2017). “Experimental investigations on solar heat­
ing/heat pump systems for single family houses”. In:
Marcotte, D and P Pasquier (2008). “On the estimation of thermal resistance in borehole
thermal conductivity test”. In: Renewable energy 33.11, pp. 2407–2415.
Hermansson, Åke et al. (2009). “Heat transfer in soils”. In: Water in Road Structures.
Springer, pp. 69–79.
He, Hailong, Dong He, et al. (2020). “Room for improvement: A review and evaluation of
24 soil thermal conductivity parameterization schemes commonly used in land­surface,
hydrological, and soil­vegetation­atmosphere transfer models”. In: Earth­Science Re­
views, p. 103419.
Cedergren Harry, R (1977). “Seepage”. In: Drainage, and Flow Nets. 2nd John Wiley &
Sons, New York.
Pap, Miklós and András Mahler (2019). “Comparison of Different Empirical Correlations
to Estimate Permeability Coefficient of Quaternary Danube Soils”. In: Periodica Poly­
technica Civil Engineering 63.1, pp. 25–29.
Erlingsson, Sigurður, Mihael Brenčič, and Andrew Dawson (2009). “Water flow theory for
saturated and unsaturated pavement material”. In: Water in Road Structures. Springer,
pp. 23–44.
Erlingsson, Sigurður, Susanne Baltzer, et al. (2009). “Measurement techniques for water
flow”. In: Water in road structures. Springer, pp. 45–67.
Schjønning, Per (2021). “Thermal conductivity of undisturbed soil–Measurements and
predictions”. In: Geoderma 402, p. 115188.
Wang, Rong et al. (2020). “Experimental study on heat transfer of soil with different mois­
ture contents and seepage for ground source heat pump”. In: Indoor and Built Environ­
ment 29.9, pp. 1238–1248.
He, Hailong, Lanmin Liu, et al. (2021). “Modelling dry soil thermal conductivity”. In: Soil
and Tillage Research 213, p. 105093.
TEMPOS (2021). “TEMPOS(Meter Group) Manual”. In: TEMPOS Manual 1, p. 48.
Abramowitz, Milton and Irene A Stegun (1972). Handbook of mathematical functions with
formulas, graphs, and mathematical tables. Vol. 55. US Government printing office.
SM150T., 2016 Delta­T Devices Ltd (2016). “User manual for SM150T sensor”. In: SM150T.,
2016 1, p. 57.
AMATEK (2017). “JOFRACAL(AMATEK) Manual”. In: AMATEK Manual 1, p. 82.
52
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix
A.1
SM150T sensor calculations to determine VWC
The following calculations can be found in more detail with the data sheets in the user
manual (SM150T. 2016)
1. Converting measured voltage(V) to the soil reflective index ( √ϵ ) using the following
equation:
√ϵ = 1 + 14.4396V −31.2587V 2 + 49.0575V 3 −36.5575V 4 + 10.7117V 5
(A.1)
2. The obtained √ϵ value can be converted into VWC using the following equation:
V WC = (√ϵ −a0)
a1
(A.2)
Where a0 and a1 are constants refering to the bulk density.
These constants can be chosen using the following data sheet:
a0
a1
Mineral
1.6
8.4
Organic
1.3
7.7
Peat mix
1.16
7.09
Coir
1.16
7.41
Min. Wool
1.04
7.58
Perlite
1.06
6.53
Table A.1: SM150T sensor data sheet for VWC calculations
The organic values were chosen for the onsite calculation procedure.
Theoretical and experimental investigations of ground source heat exchangers
53
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
