==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
A Multi-Objective Optimization Model for
configuring electric public transport alter-
natives in Kathmandu
A masterвҖҷs thesis by:
Caroline Dyrby Andersen
Supervisors:
Associate Professor Michael Bruhn
Barfod & Senior Researcher George
Panagakos
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby,
Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Today, most problems faced in both public and private sectors are complex and consist of
many - often conflicting - criteria.
New branches of research areas have evolved to assist
decision-makers in understanding the problems they face and finding satisfactory solutions.
Many problems containing multiple objectives are often solved using either Multi-Criteria
Decision Making or Multi-Objective Optimization methods. However, when the number of
objectives becomes too large and the context of the problems may become too complex most
of todayвҖҷs methods have shortcomings. To solve Many-Objective Optimization problems, a
new generation of methods needs to be established.
This masterвҖҷs thesis investigates the use of Multi-Criteria Decision Making in combination with
Multi-Objective Optimization. Based on the findings, a framework is developed that can be
used to configure a good combination of electric public transport alternatives in Kathmandu.
The framework for handling the Many-Objective Optimization Problem proposed in this thesis
follows a five-step procedure. In this framework, the model characteristics are defined, and
then the problem is converted into a single-objective optimization problem. A heuristic is then
developed to solve any feasible solution. In order to decrease complexity and computational
cost, the dimensions of the model are reduced. Hence, creating a model with fewer objectives.
The model is then optimized using an Evolutionary Algorithm, and the best solution is found
within the final population of the algorithm.
By following the proposed framework, an optimal solution configuration can be found for
Many-Objective Optimization Problems with discontinuous objective functions and predefined
preferences.
==PAGE:4==
Abbreviations
AHP
Analytic Hierarchy Process
DM
Decision-maker
EA
Evolutionary Algorithm
EV
Electric Vehicle
MaOEA
Many-Objective Evolutionary Algorithm
MaOP
Many-Objective Optimization Problem
MAUT
Multi-Attribute Utility Theory
MAVT
Multi-Attribute Value Theory
MCDA
Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis
MCDM
Multi-Criteria Decision Making
MOEA
Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithms
NPV
Net Present Value
PCA
Principal Component Analysis
PC
Principal Component
SA
Simulated Annealing
SOP
Single-Objective Optimization Problem
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Abbreviations
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Structure of masterвҖҷs thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Socio-economic analysis and Multi-Criteria Decision Making . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
What is Multi-Objective Optimization?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.1
Concepts used when solving Multi-Objective Optimization Problems . .
4
3
Review of existing methods
6
3.1
Methods for Multi-Criteria Decision Making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.1
Aggregation-based Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.2
Synthesizing Criterion-based Approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.3
Advantages and disadvantages of MCDM methods . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Multi-Objective Optimization methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2.1
Known and unknown preferences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2.2
Classical techniques: Approaches that use aggregating functions
. . . .
8
3.2.3
Intelligent Techniques: Pareto-Based Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.4
Advantages and disadvantages of methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.5
Constraint handling techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.6
Many objective optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Combining MOP and MCDM methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Case introduction
17
4.1
SOLUTIONSplus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
e-mobility in Kathmandu
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Multi-Criteria Decision Making used in the case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Modelling approach
20
5.1
Methods best suited for configuring electric public transport alternatives in Kath-
mandu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Development of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2.1
Assumptions and constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2.2
Construction of value functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2.3
Heuristic for total score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2.4
Objective Dimensionality Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2.5
The reduced model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Optimization of solution alternative
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3.1
Optimization of solution using Simulated Annealing
. . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3.2
Optimization of solution using an Evolutionary Algorithm . . . . . . . .
37
5.3.3
Comparison of metaheuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:6==
Contents
iv
5.4
Results and model improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4.1
Investigation of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4.2
Making the model Interactive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Proposed framework
48
6.1
Evaluation of framework and improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.2
Second iteration of procedure of the proposed framework . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Uncertainties and model improvements
54
8
Summary, further works, and conclusions
60
Appendices
62
A
Overview of literature review
63
B
SOLUTIONSplus attribute tree
67
C
Value function overview
69
D
Value function illustrations
77
E
Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
82
F
Code for functions used in the Simulated Annealing
98
G
Code for functions used in the Evolutionary Algorithm
100
H
Reduced SOLUTIONSplus attribute tree
104
Bibliography
105
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Throughout the years, one intellectual challenge that is constantly faced in science and engi-
neering is the process of how to make optimal decisions. Furthermore, as the complexity of
the problems faced in most industries has only increased, the diп¬Җiculty of this challenge has
also increased. (Evangelos 2000)
When finding solutions to societyвҖҷs challenges, it is necessary to prioritize different initiatives,
as we do not have unlimited resources. In order to help decision makers (DMs), socio-economic
analysis is used to support decisions within many industries and areas. The analysis can help
systematically evaluate and identify the alternatives where the societyвҖҷs resources are used the
best. This type of analysis can also be used to gain insights into how the benefits and costs
are distributed (Barfod and Leleur 2021). However, the analysis is limited to evaluating a set
of predefined alternatives that might be sub-optimal.
Multi-Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) covers many methods within the category of Socio-
economic analysis. These methods are used when a wide range of impacts - which may not all
be monetary - are evaluated. The possibilities and versatility of MCDM have only increased
as scientific disciplines such as Operations Research, Management Science, Computer Science,
and Statistics have grown together with the possibility of solving problems with higher com-
putational complexity (Sekizaki, Nishizaki, and Hayashida 2019). However, some challenges
related to the size of the problem and the optimally of the alternatives remain.
Another branch of science that has evolved parallel to MCDM is Multi-Objective Optimization.
In Multi-Objective Optimization Problems (MOPs), the focus is on building a mathematical
model that can solve a problem to optimality. However, as for MCDM, this community faces
diп¬Җiculties with the complexity of the large problems as well as the decision-makersвҖҷ involve-
ment. (ibidem)
In many years methods within the MOP community have been developed mainly independently
from the MCDM community. However, in recent decades, the MOP and MCDM communities
have recognized that the two communities have a lot to offer each other and have begun to grow
together (Branke 2016). By combining methods used in MOP with methods used in MCDM,
it has been sought to counteract some of the challenges one may experience when solving large
complex problems with conflicting objectives. These challenges relate to diп¬Җiculties in han-
dling too many objectives, providing precise preferences for all objectives, and understanding
correlations and conflicts between objectives. (Sekizaki, Nishizaki, and Hayashida 2019)
This masterвҖҷs thesis is done in relation to Task 1.3 (Impact assessment, data collection, and eval-
uation) of WP1 (Toolbox and evaluation) in the SOLUTIONSplus project, Kathmandu. The
purpose of the SOLUTIONSplus project is to provide a bankable up-scaled project promoting
innovative and integrated e-mobility solutions in the urban transport of each demonstration
city. In Task 1.3, an MCDM method is intended to be used to compare alternative up-scaled
project designs and select the one that meets user needs in a way that maximizes the value to
the local stakeholders given their set of preferences and priorities.
==PAGE:8==
1.1 Structure of masterвҖҷs thesis
2
Based on the above, this masterвҖҷs thesis seeks to answer the question of how a framework con-
sisting of methods within Multi-Criteria Decision Making and Multi-Objective Optimization
can be developed to configure a good combination of electric public transport alternatives in
Kathmandu?
1.1
Structure of masterвҖҷs thesis
Throughout this masterвҖҷs thesis, the above research question is sought to be answered. In
Chapter 2 concepts relevant for understanding the context and background for this thesis
will be introduced. In Chapter 3 relevant literature within the areas of Multi-Criteria Deci-
sion Making and Multi-Objective optimization will be reviewed and summarized. Knowledge
gained through the literature review will be applied to the case introduced in Chapter 4. The
modeling and optimization of the problem presented in the case will be carried out in Chapter
5, resulting in a proposed framework for configuring a good combination of electric public
transport alternatives in Kathmandu in Chapter 6. Uncertainties related to the model and
model improvements are discussed in Chapter 7. In Chapter 8 the characteristic of the pro-
posed framework will be described in relation to other frameworks identified in the literature
review. Moreover, further work to the framework will be discussed, and the research question
will be answered.
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This section holds information that are useful in order to understand the context and back-
ground for this thesis. Relevant concepts and principles will be described to aid readers with
limited prior knowledge of Multi-Criteria Decision Making or Multi-Objective Optimization.
2.1
Socio-economic analysis and Multi-Criteria
Decision Making
Socio-economic analysis is widely used to support decisions within many industries and areas.
Among these areas, socio-economic analysis is especially used when making political decisions.
The analysis can help systematically evaluate and identify alternatives where the societyвҖҷs
resources are used the best. A socio-economic analysis can also be used to gain insights into
how the benefits and costs are distributed. In a socio-economic analysis, an alternativeвҖҷs value
is estimated and then compared to other alternatives. This type of analysis is important as
society does not have unlimited resources, and it is necessary to prioritize different initiatives
- especially within the public sector. (Barfod and Leleur 2021)
Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) or Multi-Criteria Decision Making cover a range of
methods complimenting the Socio-economic analysis. These methods are used when a wide
range of impacts, which may not all be monetary, are evaluated.
Multi-Criteria Decision Making seeks to answer the following: Given a set of alternatives and
decision criteria, what is the best alternative? Across most MCDM methods, the following
three steps are seen (Evangelos 2000):
1. Relevant criteria and alternatives are identified.
2. The numerical value of impact of the alternative on each criteria is assessed.
3. The numerical value is processed to determine the ranking of the alternatives.
When using MDCM as a decision support tool, the decision makerвҖҷs satisfaction with the
decision process will improve as well as the quality of the decision itself, compared to not using
an MCDM method. In addition to this, it is often seen that the productivity of the DM also
increases. (Barfod and Leleur 2021)
2.2
What is Multi-Objective Optimization?
Most real-life problems are complex and have multiple, often conflicting, objectives. These
problems are well suited to be modeled using Multi-Objective Optimization.
A Multi-Objective Optimization problem can be formulated mathematically as follows:
==PAGE:10==
2.2 What is Multi-Objective Optimization?
4
min
xвҲҲв„ҰF(x) = {f1(x), ..., fM(x)},
(2.1)
where M is the number of objectives, x is an N-dimensional decision vector, and в„Ұdenotes the
feasible region (Wang, Olhofer, and Jin 2017).
When solving Multi-Objective Optimization Problems (MOPs), some methods propose artifi-
cially converting the problem into a single-objective optimization problem (SOP) where only
one optimal solution is found. Other methods give rise to finding a set of Pareto-optimal solu-
tions. A Pareto-optimal set is a set of solutions that contain a trade-off between the objectives.
The main difference between single-objective optimization and Multi-Objective Optimization
is the cardinality in the optimal set (Deb 2014). Furthermore, from the decision-makerвҖҷs per-
spective, often only one solution is needed. This poses the question of which methods are best
suited to evaluate the Multi-Objective Optimization problem and provide the decision-maker
with the most optimal solution in the end.
2.2.1
Concepts used when solving Multi-Objective Optimization
Problems
For solving MOPs, many methods have been proposed over the years.
Some of the most
common methods are described in Chapter 3.
Some of the key terms and definitions for
understanding the characteristics of exciting methods are described in the section below.
Pareto optimality
A solution xвҲ—вҲҲв„Ұis said to be optimal if there exists no other solution x вҲҲв„Ұthat dominates
it. E.g. for two arbitrary solution x1, x2 вҲҲв„Ұthen x1 is said to dominate x2 if fj(x1) вүӨfj(x2)
for any j = 1...M, and F(x1) Мё= F(x2). This solution is also known as the Pareto optimal
solution (Wang, Olhofer, and Jin 2017).
For MOPs, there exists a set of Pareto optimal solutions, also referred to as the Pareto set,
and their objective vectors F(xвҲ—) are called the Pareto Front.
Meta-heuristics
In the last two decades, advances in computational power and the development of new and
more appropriate algorithms for finding good solutions have led to advances within the area
of meta-heuristics - a tool highly relevant and used when solving MOPs.
A heuristic is a procedure that finds a good feasible solution to a complex problem, while a meta-
heuristic draws additional concepts from other disciplines in order to solve the problem. Today,
the most used meta-heuristics for single- and Multi-Objective Optimization are Evolutionary
Algorithms/Genetic Algorithms and Simulated Annealing.
When using meta-heuristics to solve MOPs, the primary goal is to find a set of eп¬Җicient solutions
within a reasonable amount of time. As meta-heuristics are methods well suited for finding
good solutions to a problem rather than optimal solutions, the use of them should be considered.
If, e.g., the problem is simple, other more traditional methods might be preferred when seeking
optimality. (Jones, Mirrazavi, and Tamiz 2002)
==PAGE:11==
2.2 What is Multi-Objective Optimization?
5
Clustering
Clustering is most often seen in the context of unsupervised machine learning, where the goal
is to identify meaningful patterns in the data. In clustering, it is sought to categorize the
data into sets based on that data pointвҖҷs characteristics. Some of the most used methods for
clustering are Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and k-means clustering (Dmitriy 2019).
In PCA, the dimensions of the data are reduced to a set of Principals Components (PC) that
is created based on the direction in which the data has the highest variance. The data points
are then projected onto the PC, and the clusters can be found via visual investigation or by
using another clustering method.
In k-means clustering, the data points are placed in one of K clusters in such a way that the
total distance from any data point to the center of its cluster is minimized (Gandhi 2021).
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 3
Review of existing methods
In this review, knowledge about existing methods for handling problems with multiple criteria/
objectives is obtained.
First, methods for MCDM were reviewed in Section 3.1. This part of the review is mainly
based on a compendium made by Michael Bruhn Barfod and Steen Leleur for the course
Decision Support and Strategic Assessment at the Technical University of Denmark. Additional
literature is found by searching for key terms in the databases: DTU Findit, Google Scholar,
and Science Direct. In this review, an additional article and book were used published in 2000
and 2013.
Secondly, MOP methods are reviewed in Section 3.2.
This is done by a review of journal
articles, conference papers, and books. The search is based on the key terms Multi objective
optimization and Many objective optimization in the databases: DTU Findit, Google Scholar,
and Science Direct.
Furthermore, the reference section of each article is reviewed to find
additional articles. This process uncovered 18 articles published from 1995-2019.
Thirdly, cases where MCDM methods were used in combination with MOP methods are re-
viewed. The search is based on the key term Multi objective optimization in combination with
Many objective optimization in the databases: DTU Findit, Google Scholar, and Science Di-
rect. Articles are first reviewed by reading the abstract, and then relevant articles describing
a practical application of an MCDM-MOP-hybrid method are reviewed further. This process
uncovered 8 articles published from 2009-2021.
An overview of all reviewed articles can be found in Appendix A.
3.1
Methods for Multi-Criteria Decision Making
Throughout the years, one of the most consistent intellectual challenges faced in science and en-
gineering is the process of how to make optimal decisions. Some of the earliest documented ob-
servations of MCDM dates back to the 1700s and earlier (Evangelos 2000). MCDM has evolved,
and new types of applications have been found as the methods have been refined. Throughout
this process, many different variations of MCDM methods have been developed, creating new
branches of research. The possibilities and versatility of MCDM have only increased as other
scientific disciplines have grown together with the computational power. (Velasquez and Hester
2013)
In traditional MCDM, the methods used are non-evolutionary and assume that the DM under-
stands the problem and can express their preferences. Here only parts of the non-dominated
solutions are found (Wang, Olhofer, and Jin 2017). Traditional MCDM methods can be divided
into two categories: aggregation-based and synthesizing criterion-based approaches. These cat-
egories are also sometimes referred to as the American and French schools or normative and
constructive approaches. (Barfod and Leleur 2021)
==PAGE:13==
3.1 Methods for Multi-Criteria Decision Making
7
3.1.1
Aggregation-based Approaches
For the aggregation-based approach in traditional MCDM, weights are used to assess the
alternatives. It is assumed that the DM can express their preferences on all aspects of the
problem, thereby having a complete preference system.
Within this category of MCDM, lies the multi-attribute value theory (MAVT) and the multi-
attribute utility theory (MAUT). MAVT seeks to find the DMвҖҷs value functions of the criteria.
The Simple Multi-Attribute Rating Technique (SMART) is one of the most known and used
MAVT methods.
MAUT is essentially an extension of MAVT, where risk preferences and
uncertainties are incorporated into the problem. MAUT is used when the best course of action
is sought. This method provides decision support to a problem by assigning a utility to every
possible consequence and calculating the best possible utility.
Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) is another widely used MCDM method. One of the signifi-
cant differences between the AHP and MAVT/MAUT is that AHP uses pairwise comparisons
to estimate both the criteria weights and the scores of the alternatives within each criterion.
(Velasquez and Hester 2013) (Barfod and Leleur 2021)
3.1.2
Synthesizing Criterion-based Approaches
In contrast to the aggregation-based approaches, the synthesizing criterion-based approaches
do not require the DM to express a preference vector; instead, the methods are based on im-
plicit rules like outranking (Wang, Olhofer, and Jin 2017). Here no value is found for each
alternative within each criterion, but outranking relations are found between the set of al-
ternatives. Within this category of MCDM, the most promoted methods are the ELECTRE
and PROMETHEE families. The effort needed to use these methods is significantly less than
the aggregation-based approaches, but these methods do not always guarantee that conclu-
sions can be drawn. However, these methods provide insights into the outranking relations of
the alternatives. Based on these findings, other MCDM methods can be used on top of the
aggregation-based approach. ELECTRE is a common example of a family of methods used
to gain insights into the outranking relations and discard alternatives from the problems that
perform poorly. Another MCDM method is then used to assess the remaining alternatives.
(Barfod and Leleur 2021)
3.1.3
Advantages and disadvantages of MCDM methods
When choosing an appropriate MCDM method, no single method fits all problems. The method
should be chosen based on the characteristics of the problem and the resources available.
A general challenge that is faced within the MCDM community is the incompatibility of meth-
ods. This is mainly due to the high variation of assumptions, problem definitions, and value
measurements. (Velasquez and Hester 2013)
Another challenge seen in most MCDM methods is a cognitive limit as to how many criteria a
DM can comprehend. Based on numerous studies, it has been found that, as a rule of thump,
a DM cannot handle more than seven criteria Вұ2 at a time (Duro et al. 2014). This limits the
size of the problems that can be solved using the traditional MCDM methods.
An additional challenge is related to not having well-defined criteria or alternatives, or the
related data may not be suп¬Җicient, making the problem impossible to solve accurately.
Other limitations relate to reliability and consistency in the decision-making process as the DM
may change their preferences depending on when and how they are asked. Also, if multiple
DMs are involved, they may not be consistent in their preferences.
==PAGE:14==
3.2 Multi-Objective Optimization methods
8
When finding the DMвҖҷs preferences and evaluating the solution alternatives, most MCDM
methods focus on the вҖқperceived state of natureвҖқ and not the вҖқtrue state of nature.вҖқ This
means that a best objective solution cannot be attained. (Duro et al. 2014)
Though there are many challenges related to MCDM methods, insights gained when an analysis
is carried out correctly are significant. By using MDCM as a decision support tool, the DMвҖҷs
satisfaction with the decision process will improve as well as the quality of the decision itself,
compared to not using an MCDM method. (Barfod and Leleur 2021)
3.2
Multi-Objective Optimization methods
When solving Multi-Objective Optimization problems, there are generally two approaches:
One, where objectives are combined into a single objective using aggregation-based techniques,
and one where a Pareto-optimal set is found.
Generally the aggregation-based techniques
can also be referred to as classical techniques while the Pareto-Based Approaches is called
intelligent techniques. (Ngatchou, Zarei, and El-Sharkawi 2005)
Commonly, MOPs requires high participation of the DM as their preferences are key to iden-
tifying the best solution.
3.2.1
Known and unknown preferences
The best-suited method for solving a MOP depends on the case and when information is
known.
For methods with a priori articulation of preferences, the DMs preferences can be made known,
and a set that best reflects the DMвҖҷs preferences can be found. In methods for a posteriori
articulation of preference, the DM may have diп¬Җiculties expressing their preferences, and it may
be helpful to provide the DM with a set of trade-off optimal solutions - the Pareto optimal set.
(Marler and Arora 2004)
In the case of a posteriori articulation of preference, or when the preferences of the DM are
known late in the process, methods that find the Pareto-optimal set may be useful as these allow
systems engineers to find trade-off optimal solutions considering all objectives to be equally
important. After which, the trade-off solutions are presented to the DM that can assess the
solutions on a higher level. (Deb 2014) The Pareto optimal set is also sought if there are weak
assumptions about the DMвҖҷs preferences.
A posteriori methods have become significantly more popular than a priori methods, but it
may not be fitting to use these methods when the number of objectives increases (Sekizaki,
Nishizaki, and Hayashida 2019). This will be elaborated further in the following sections.
3.2.2
Classical techniques: Approaches that use aggregating
functions
If the preferences of the DM are known, there might not be a need for methods that finds
the Pareto-optimal set, but a more straightforward composite objective function may be used
instead. (Deb 2014)
Weighted sum
The weighted sum approach is also referred to as the a priori approach, as the DM has to
provide their preferred vector.
==PAGE:15==
3.2 Multi-Objective Optimization methods
9
Here weighs are assigned to each normalized objective function fвҖІ
m(x). The objectve functions,
with thier respective weigths, are then aggregated to form one objetive function. By doing this
the Multi-Objective Optimization problem is converted into a single-objective minimization
problem with the following objective function:
min
xвҲҲв„ҰF(x) =
M
вҲ‘
m=1
wmfвҖІ
m(x),
(3.1)
where M is the number of objectives, x is an N-dimensional decision vector, в„Ұdenotes the feasi-
ble region, wm вүҘ0 ,вҲ‘wm = 1, and fвҖІ
m(x) is the normalized objective function of fm(x).(Coello
Coello 1999)
This method is easiest to implement when the DMвҖҷs preferences have been made known. If
this is not the case and multiple solutions are sought, the problems must be solved multiple
times with different preference vectors. (Konak, Coit, and Smith 2006)
Goal Programming
Another classical technique is Goal Programming. Here prespecified goals has been formulated
and the diffrence between the goal Tj and fвҖІ
j(x) is sought to be minimized. The formulation
for this is as follows:
min
xвҲҲв„ҰF(x) =
M
вҲ‘
m=1
wm|fвҖІ
m(x) вҲ’Tm|,
(3.2)
where M is the number of objectives, x is an N-dimensional decision vector, в„Ұdenotes the
feasible region, Tm represents a goal or target value set by the DM for the mвҖҷth objective,
while wm still denotes the preferences. (Ngatchou, Zarei, and El-Sharkawi 2005)(Coello Coello
1999)
As for the Weighed sum approach, this method is based on a priori information about the
targets and weights.
Пө-Constraint
The Пө-Constraint method finds the Pareto optimal solution based on one objective at a time.
This method does not guarantee that the solutions found in each iteration are globally non-
dominated - only locally dominated (Ngatchou, Zarei, and El-Sharkawi 2005). The formulation
for one iteration of this method is as follows:
min
xвҲҲв„ҰF(x) = fm(x)
(3.3)
subject to
fj(x) вүӨПөj,
вҲҖj, j Мё= k,
(3.4)
where x is an N-dimensional decision vector, в„Ұdenotes the feasible region, j = 1...M, and m
is the objective sought to be minimized. (Coello Coello 1999)
3.2.3
Intelligent Techniques: Pareto-Based Approaches
The majority of approaches used to solve MOPs are aimed at approximating the true Pareto
front (Konak, Coit, and Smith 2006), thereby finding a set of non-dominated individuals in
the population.
==PAGE:16==
3.2 Multi-Objective Optimization methods
10
A challenge connected to using Pareto-Based Approaches is that the size of the Pareto-optimal
set often increases as the number of objectives increases (Konak, Coit, and Smith 2006). To
counteract this challenge the best-known Pareto set can be found instead. This set represents
the Pareto optimal set the bests as possible using meta-heuristics. The primary meta-heuristics
for solving MOPs are Evolutionary algorithms and Simulated Annealing (Jones, Mirrazavi, and
Tamiz 2002).
Evolutionary algorithm
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) are one of the most used meta-heuristics when it comes to
solving MOPs. Though EA can be useful for approaches that use aggregating functions, in
most cases, it is used to find the best-known Pareto set. When finding the best-known Pareto
set, the following conditions should be fulfilled (Konak, Coit, and Smith 2006):
вҖў The best-known Pareto set should be as close to the true Pareto front as possible.
вҖў Solutions found should be uniformly distributed and diverse.
вҖў The best-known Pareto set should cover the whole spectrum of the Pareto front.
EAs were developed throughout the 1960s and 1970s and are based on the concepts of evo-
lutionist theory. Weak species cease to exist through natural selection, and strong ones can
pass their genes to future generations. Thus, over time the mots fit species will become the
dominant one. In EAs, fitter solutions will over time dominate the population until the solu-
tion eventually converges on a single optimal solution. Mutations can be made to the solution
alternatives represented as random changes. These changes may provide additional advantages
and may be carried onto the next generation. Mutations ensures that the solution does not
get stuck on a local extreme point.
EAs have been a popular tool to solve MOPs as it is well suited for finding diverse solutions to
complex problems and does not require user preferences for objectives. When an EA is used
on a MOP, it is called a Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithms (MOEA). Most MOEA
approaches are a posteriori.
In general, the different MOEAs differ based on their procedure for assigning fitness and en-
suring diversity. However, though many state-of-the-art MOEA exist, most researchers choose
to adapt the MOEA algorithm to fit the specific problem, thereby designing a customized
algorithm that fits the specific problem. (ibidem)
Simulated Annealing
Of the intelligent techniques based on meta-heuristics for solving single and Multi-Objective
Optimization problems, Simulated Annealing (SA) is the second most used procedure after
Evolutionary Algorithms. (Jones, Mirrazavi, and Tamiz 2002)
Simulated Annealing is based on an analogy of metal annealing where after a high temperature
is reached, the temperature is decreased until particles arrange themselves in a solid-state. A
solid-state is only obtained if the temperature has been suп¬Җiciently high and the cooling is
slow. Based on this analogy, the max temperature and cooling rate are used as parameters to
guide the solution. For each iteration, the solution changes to an adjacent solution based on
the neighborhood function. If the adjacent solution is better, this solution alternative becomes
the new arrangement of the solution (Czyzak and Jaszkiewicz 1998). In SA, an acceptance
probability is used to accept solutions that may not be a fitter solution. By doing this, it is
easier to escape local extreme points.
==PAGE:17==
3.2 Multi-Objective Optimization methods
11
The procedure for SA in MOPs is very similar to SOPs, with the main difference of the
acceptance probability being modified. How the acceptance probability should be modified
depends on the problem. The main drawback of using simulated Annealing for MOPs is the
increase in complexity, and the time required to run the procedure increases as the number of
objectives increase.
Interactive methods
Interactive methods include multiple phases alternating between computational and decision
phases (Czyzak and Jaszkiewicz 1998), where the DMвҖҷs preferences are explored and exploited
throughout the procedure.
Here the DM can fine-tune their preferences according to the
solutions presented to them (Wang, Olhofer, and Jin 2017). However, interactive methods can
only be used if the time required for the computational phase is acceptable to the DM.
CzyЕјak and Jaszkiewicz (1998) suggest an interactive meta-heuristic method called Pareto
Simulated Annealing for MOPs. There the goal of the procedure is to generate the best-known
Pareto set. This set can then be presented to the DM to explore.
3.2.4
Advantages and disadvantages of methods
The main advantage of the classical techniques for handling MOP is that they are seemingly
straightforward - especially if the preference vector is already known and only one solution
is sought. However, one of the drawbacks of these methods is when the MOP is converted
into an SOP. Here it may become diп¬Җicult to evaluate the trade-off solutions (Ngatchou, Zarei,
and El-Sharkawi 2005). Furthermore, the preference vector used to assign weights is often not
easily obtained, and the knowledge of the DM may be limited (Nguyen, Bui, and Tran 2020).
One of the main advantages of intelligent techniques is that optimization can be performed
without prior knowledge about the DMвҖҷs preferences. When solving a MOP using an intelligent
Pareto-based approach, the goal is to identify solutions in the Pareto optimal set. However,
in practice, this may be challenging as the size of the Pareto-optimal set often increase as
the number of objectives increases (Konak, Coit, and Smith 2006). A high number of non-
dominated solutions may also make it diп¬Җicult for the DM to understand the trade-off solutions
and make it more challenging to identify the preferred solution alternative.
When handling a large number of objectives, the dimensionality of the Pareto front increase,
and the computational cost and the visualization become increasingly diп¬Җicult.
Furthermore, a general issue explicitly related to MOEA methods is that as the number of ob-
jectives increases, it gets increasingly diп¬Җicult to maintain good population diversity (Sekizaki,
Nishizaki, and Hayashida 2019).
For the interactive methods, the most considerable drawback is the considerable effort required
by the DM.
3.2.5
Constraint handling techniques
In most real-world optimization problems, there are constraints related to the problem that
provides bounds to the feasible region of the solution space. In single-objective EAs, constraints
are often handled the following ways (Coello Coello 1999):
1. Discarding infeasible solutions,
2. Reducing fitness of infeasible solutions (often using penalty functions),
==PAGE:18==
3.2 Multi-Objective Optimization methods
12
3. Creating genetic operators that always produce feasible solutions,
4. Transforming infeasible solutions to be feasible.
When it comes to MOEAs, this area has not been researched much (Konak, Coit, and Smith
2006), and the problems most often presented are without constraints.
The methods for
handling constraints for SOPs can be adapted to fit MOPs, but the most used method is the
implantation of penalty fictions related to item no. 2.
3.2.6
Many objective optimization
It is found that most systems engineers, designers, and DMs prefer to have all the criteria of
a problem presented as objectives rather than constraints (Deb and Saxena 2005) (Brockhoff
and Zitzler 2006). Unfortunately, this often results in MOPs with a large number of objectives,
making the DMвҖҷs choice for the best trade-off solution nearly impossible, as the number of
solutions presented and the objectives to consider are too high.
The overwhelming majority of MOP studies conducted only use two objectives. Some studies
use 3-9 objectives, and only very few studies include problems with ten or more objectives.
MOPs, where the number of objectives is above 3, is called Many Objective Optimization
Problems (MaOPs). When dealing with MaOPs, the computational complexity is often higher
than problems with вүӨ3 objectives.
The solution alternatives of the problem also become
increasingly diп¬Җicult to illustrate as the number of dimensions increase.
(Deb and Saxena
2005).
As discussed previously, the classical techniques can also be used to find a Pareto-optimal
set by modifying the aggregation parameters and repeating the optimization. However, this
results in the optimization being executed independently of each other, thereby losing the
parallel search ability that is often sought when solving complex problems as this reduces
the computational cost. If the Pareto-optimal set is sought, most commonly used intelligent
techniques show diп¬Җiculties in identifying the set within a reasonable time when the number
of objectives increases. No single algorithm is found to outperform others, thereby motivating
researchers to look at the problem differently. Instead of identifying the Pareto-optimal set,
the goal of the algorithms is to concentrate on a specific region of the Pareto-front that may
contain the best trade-off solutions (ibidem). This involves including the DM early in the
process.
MOEA is often used to solve MaOP as very few assumptions about the problem are made.
This makes MOEA a versatile and powerful tool for most MaOP (Branke 2016).
Kalyanmoy Deb and Dhish Kumar Saxena suggest that instead of finding a specific solution
based on the DMs preferences by converting the MOP to an SOP, to use an Evolutionary
Multi-Objective Optimization method to find a set of solutions in the preferred region of the
Pareto-front (Deb and Saxena 2005). This suggested procedure reduces the computational
cost related to searching for a solution in the entire solution space and provides the DM with
multiple trade-off solutions to choose from.
More recent studies show that the challenges associated with MaOP are still current issues,
and though several many-objective evolutionary algorithms (MaOEAs) have been proposed to
tackle MaOPs, the issues faced when the number of objectives increase is still there.
Current approaches for MaOP can be divided into two groups: preference ordering approaches
and objective reduction approaches.
For preference ordering, it is assumed that no objectives are redundant, and the MaOP is then
modified. Some of the commonly known modifications are:
==PAGE:19==
3.3 Combining MOP and MCDM methods
13
вҖў Modification/relaxation of Pareto dominance approach
reduces the portion of
non-dominated solutions while maintaining the diversity and uniform distribution of the
solutions.
вҖў Aggregating functions
is used to decompose the MaOP into many single-objective
sub-problems that are optimized simultaneously using information from its neighboring
sub-problems.
The objective reduction approaches assume that a subset of the objectives generates the same
optimal solution to the problem as the entire set of objectives. This concept is explored further
in the below section. (Nguyen, Bui, and Tran 2020)
Objective Dimensionality Reduction
As stated previously, the increase in complexity of the problem as the number of objectives
increases might cause a high computational cost and visualization issues. To counteract this,
it should be investigated if the dimensionality of the problem can be reduced.
It is observed that most real-world MaOPs contain redundant objectives that are not essential
to describe the Pareto-optimal front. Dimensionality reduction has been carried out for MOEAs
in numerous studies, but the impact on MaOEAs is still a young research field. (ibidem)
Most methods for reducing dimensionality are linked to the issue of conflicting and non-
conflicting objectives and introduce the idea of finding a minimum subset of objectives without
losing information (Brockhoff and Zitzler 2007).
Conflicting objectives are seen when the
performance of one objective increases the other objectives performance is deteriorating (Flem-
ing, Purshouse, and Lygoe 2005). An objective could be redundant if it is non-conflicting or
correlated with some other objectives (Saxena et al. 2013).
Sometimes the problem may consist of non-conflicting objectives. The nature of these may
not always be intuitive to the DM, and the correlation between the objectives may not be
intentional. The existence of these non-conflicting objectives in a problem may indicate that
a dimensionality reduction is possible.
Information about correlations between objectives can be used to group the objectives and
simplify what is presented to the DM. This may be useful as it is assumed that humans cannot
handle more than seven criteria. (Wang, Olhofer, and Jin 2017)
Deb and Saxena 2005 propose an MOEA where Principal Component Analysis is used. PCA
is a statistical tool used for multi-variate analysis where the dimensions of the problem are
reduced by constructing linear combinations of the initial dimensions while keeping as much
of the variation of the dataset in the model as possible. In this process, the original objectives
are transformed into a new uncorrelated set of objectives called Principal Components. (Deb
and Saxena 2005)
If the number of objectives could be reduced to three or less, the MaOP can be solved using
methods for MOPs.
3.3
Combining MOP and MCDM methods
In many years methods within the MOP community have been developed mainly independently
from the classical MCDM community.
However, in recent decades, the MOP and MCDM
communities have recognized that the two communities have a lot to offer each other and have
begun to grow together. (Branke 2016)
==PAGE:20==
3.3 Combining MOP and MCDM methods
14
By combining methods used in MOP (specifically methods used to solve MaOP) with pro-
cedures used in MCDM, it has been sought to counteract some of the challenges the DM
may experience when solving MaOPs. These challenges relate to diп¬Җiculties in handling too
many objectives, providing precise preferences for all objectives, and understanding correla-
tions and conflicts between objectives (Sekizaki, Nishizaki, and Hayashida 2019). However,
when developing MOP-MCDM-hybrid techniques, the aforementioned challenges may not be
fixed completely as within the MCDM community, many real-world empirical studies show
that MCDM methods also find it challenging for the DM to handle problems with many and
conflicting objectives (Zhang et al. 2021).
Hybrid techniques can, like MOPs, be divided into a priori and a posteriori decision-making ap-
proaches. Hybrid methods using a priori information share many of the same advantages and
disadvantages as a priori MOP approaches, e.g., the challenges related to the comprehensive-
ness of finding good preference vectors. It has been found that a posteriori hybrid approaches
are often used on MOPs with вүӨ3 objectives, as a good approximation of the Pareto optimal
front can be obtained and presented to the DM. However, when the problem is a MaOP, the a
posteriori decision-making approach becomes less effective (Purshouse et al. 2014). Like MOPs,
hybrid methods can alternatively use interactive methods to find the most optimal solution.
In the research of this thesis, it has been found that the MOP techniques used the most for
MOP-MCDM-hybrids are based on the intelligent techniques and not the classical techniques
where aggregating functions are used. No single MOP-MCDM-hybrid method has been found
to be suited for all MaOP, and most application cases develop a hybrid method especially
suited for the problem at hand. An overview of the MOP-MCDM-hybrid methods uncovered
in the literature review for this thesis can be seen in Table 3.1. Furthermore, the size of the
problems investigated in the articles found can be seen to be fairly limited, with the biggest
problem containing only 11 objectives.
Some of the most promising techniques that combine intelligent techniques from MOP with
MCDM includes:
вҖў Use predefined preferences extracted using an MCDM method to guide the search of the
MOP and thereby limit the search to the most interesting region of the Pareto front for
the DM. (Branke 2016)
вҖў Generating the best-known Pareto set and then using an MCDM method to guide the
DM in selecting the best solution from the set. (Ridha et al. 2021) (Malekmohammadi,
Zahraie, and Kerachian 2011)
вҖў Use an interactive method where the techniques from MOP and MCDM are interleaving.
(Branke 2016)
вҖў Firstly, reduce the dimensionality of the problem, then extract the DMвҖҷs preference
vector, and then solve the problem using an EA. This method can be referred to as
simplify and solve (Sinha et al. 2013).
вҖў Use a machine-learning-based framework that learns the underlying DMвҖҷs preference
structure based on the Pareto set found (Duro et al. 2014).
Most research in MOP-MCDM-hybrid techniques for solving MaOP is based on MOEA, as
MOEAs are most often used to solve MaOP. The MOEA community has historically focused on
searching for a single solution in the Pareto optimal set, where assumptions and simplifications
are made to the DMвҖҷs performances. In the MCDM community, the focus has, on the other
hand, been more on the modeling and interpretation of the DMs preferences (Purshouse et al.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Combining MOP and MCDM methods
15
2014). When using MOEA in a hybrid solution, one should be cautious about the application
as experiments show that if M > 12, 100% of the population becomes non-dominated within
a few generations (Duro et al. 2014), and the run time increases significantly.
Purshouse (2014) argues that to fully exploit the advantages of both MOEA (and MOPs
generally) and MCDM methods, the decision-making process should incorporate the DMs
preferences a priori or interactively.
Within the area of hybrid methods, some challenges arise in the implementation and measure of
effectiveness. Generally, there is a lack of techniques that can be used to provide a performance
measure of how well solutions using different approaches meet the DMвҖҷs needs. Also, there
is a need for methods that allow different DMs to express their preferences differently for the
same problem as not all DMs may feel comfortable expressing their preferences in a certain
way. (Purshouse et al. 2014)
==PAGE:22==
3.3 Combining MOP and MCDM methods
16
Table 3.1: Overview of most relevant MCDM-MOP-hybrid methods identified in literature review.
Authors
Title
Case
Methods used
Recap of proposed method
Shinya Sekizaki,
Ichiro Nishizaki,
Tomohiro Hayashida
A many-objective evolutionary
algorithm incorporating decision
makerвҖҷs preference and its
application to management of
the electricity distribution network
Reconfiguration problem
of distribution networks
in an electric power system.
M=5
- Build on both priori, interactive,
and posteriori methods.
- The many-objective evolutionary
algorithm based on NSGA-III.
The proposed method consists of five steps:
(1) The entire Pareto front with high dimensions is roughly
approximated by a small set of nondominated solutions.
(2) On the basis of the approximated Pareto front, the
decision-maker specifies a preference.
(3) Reference points are distributed through part of the
objective space using the preference information.
(4) The approximation accuracy of the Pareto front in the
region of interest is improved by local search using the
reference points.
(5) The most preferred solution from a set of the
nondominated solutions is chosen.
Y. De Smet,
B. Mareschal,
C. Verly
Extending the PROMETHEE II
method to continuous and
combinatorial multi-objective
optimization problems:
a first model.
Financial portfolio management.
M=3
PROMETHEE II and
Genetic Algorithm
The proposed model is inspired by genetic algorithms. The
underlying idea is at first to generate random solutions and then
to evaluate them using the PROMETHEE II scores.
Kai Zhang,
Chaonan Shen,
Juanjuan He,
Gary G. Yen
Knee based multimodal multi-
objective evolutionary algorithm
for decision making
M=2
Multiple Pareto-optimal
knee solutions
The proposed method consists of a novel knee based evolutionary
algorithm, named MMO-EvoKnee, which incorporates MCDM
strategy into solving Multimodal Multi-Objective Optimization
Problems (MMOPs)
JoГЈo A. Duro,
Dhish Kumar Saxen,
Kalyanmoy Deb,
Qingfu Zhang
Machine learning based
decision support for many-
objective optimization problems
Radar waveform optimization
problem.
M=9
Machine learning-based
decision support framework
The proposed method consists of a machine learning based
framework that operates on the objective vectors of the non-
dominated solutions obtained from an MOEA for the given
problem-model; learns the preference structure of the objective
functions by preserving the correlation-structure of the solutions;
and provides the decision support
Ankur Sinha,
Dhish Kumar Saxena,
Kalyanmoy Deb,
Ashutosh Tiwari
Using objective reduction and
interactive procedure to handle
many-objective optimization
problems
M=5 and M=11
- Objective reduction
- Pareto optimality
The proposed method is called the simplify and solve a
methodology where a given problem is simplified by
identification and elimination of the redundant objectives,
before interactively engaging the decision-maker to converge
to the most preferred solution on the Pareto-optimal front.
Usman Safder,
Pouya Ifaei,
ChangKyoo Yoo
Multi-scale smart management
of integrated energy systems,
Part 2: Weighted multi-objective
optimization, multi-criteria
decision making, and multi-scale
management (3M) methodology
Performance evaluation of
integrated energy conversion
systems.
- Multi-objective genetic algorithm
- fuzzy-TOPSIS
- NSGA-II
- Goal-programming approach
The proposed method consists of four steps:
(1) exergoeconomic, exergorisk, and exergoenvironmental
analyses were conducted,
(2) the systems were optimized using a hybrid weighted multi-
objective genetic algorithm using exergoeconomic, exergorisk,
and exergoenvironmental analyses in three different management
scenarios.
(3) the deterministic results of the globally optimal systems were
obtained using an MCDM approach
(4) an optimal system based multi-scale management method was
proposed using the results of fuzzy-TOPSIS to form a smart
holistic management strategy
Bahram Malekmohammadi,
Banafsheh Zahraie,
Reza Kerachian
Ranking solutions of multi-
objective reservoir operation
optimization models using multi-
criteria decision analysis
Cascade system of the Dez
and Bakhtiari reservoirs in the
southwest of Iran
M=2
- NSGA-II
- ELECTRE-TRI
The proposed method selects the most practical solution among
the optimal solutions of Non-dominate Sorting Genetic
Algorithm-II (NSGA-II), which is addressed using ELECTRE-
TRI method
Hussein Mohammed Ridha,
Chandima Gomes,
Hashim Hizam,
Masoud Ahmadipour,
Ali Asghar Heidari,
Huiling Chen
Multi-Objective Optimization and
multi-criteria decision-making
methods for optimal design of
standalone photovoltaic system:
A comprehensive review
Standalone photovoltaic (SAPV)
system
- Pareto optimality
The proposed method consists of two steps:
(1) eп¬Җiciently obtaining a set of optimal Pareto front (PF) solutions
(2) ordering this set of the PF solutions is required by utilizing
Multi-Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) methods considering
the priority of each objective
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4
Case introduction
In the following chapters, the insights gained through the literature review will be applied to
a specific case in order to test how an MCDA-MOP-hybrid solution can benefit a real-life case.
The case in focus will be the SOLUTIONSplus project in Kathmandu.
4.1
SOLUTIONSplus
The SOLUTIONSplus is a project funded by the European UnionвҖҷs Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program aiming to integrate urban electric mobility solutions in the context of the
Paris Agreement, the Sustainable Development Goals, and the New Urban Agenda. In order to
do so, the project will boost the availability of Electric Vehicles (EVs) for the public, support
the integration of different types of EVs, and help foster the eп¬Җiciency of the operations of the
solutions implemented. This will be done within large urban areas in Europe, Asia, Africa,
and Latin America with a focus on meeting user needs and considering local conditions. (Lah
and Mejia 2020) SOLUTIONSplus operates with the five pillars presented in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: The five pillars of SOLUTIONSplus (SOLUTIONSplus 2021c)
==PAGE:24==
4.2 e-mobility in Kathmandu
18
Different city-level demonstration actions will be carried out to test different types of e-
mobility solutions in Hanoi (Vietnam), Pasig (Philippines), Lalitpur/Kathmandu (Nepal), Ki-
gali (Rwanda), Dar es Salaam (Tanzania), Quito (Ecuador), Montevideo (Uruguay), Madrid
(Spain), Nanjing (China) and Hamburg (Germany).
The SOLUTIONSplus project aims to comprise a toolbox for advanced implementation, man-
agement, and operation strategies, along with the data and observations from the demonstra-
tion actions. This toolbox will span across multiple work packages and will contain (Lah and
Mejia 2020):
вҖў Impact assessment tools,
вҖў Capacity building material,
вҖў Summaries of business plans and models,
вҖў Summaries of e-mobility innovations tested in the demonstration actions,
вҖў Design, operations, and management tools for different e-mobility solutions,
вҖў Provide information financing institutions and funding options.
The findings of this thesis may be relevant for the impact assessment part of the toolbox,
as it may bring a new perspective on how to evaluate the impact of the solutions in the
demonstration city holistically.
4.2
e-mobility in Kathmandu
The demonstration city in focus for this masterвҖҷs thesis is Kathmandu (Nepal). Kathmandu is a
growing city, and due to urbanization and higher incomes, the demand for vehicles is increasing
- especially private vehicles. In 2019 вүҲ76% of the vehicles registered were motorcycles. Though
there has been a growth in the number of busses in Kathmandu, they only constitute for вүҲ3%
of the total number of the vehicle fleet. (Solutions Plus 2019a)
In Kathmandu Valley, EVs have been used since 1975 where trolleybuses were introduced, and
in 1995 a fleet of battery-powered 3-wheelers (named Safa Tempo) was introduced to the city.
To date, some of these Safa Tempos are still used in the city, but the number is declining as
micro-buses are taking over the market due to higher levels of comfort and speed. EVs are
not used widely in Kathmandu today, and the city lacks local capacity for EV manufacturing,
operation, and maintenance.
SOLUTIONSplus aims to create an ecosystem for electric mobility in Kathmandu. This is done
by demonstrating different EVs to enhance public transport, charging solutions, and related
services. SOLUTIONSplus focus on four main demonstration activities that include (Solutions
Plus 2019b):
вҖў E-bus conversion:
One old diesel bus will be converted into an e-bus. This is done by mainly replacing the
drive system. As the chairing infrastructure for such solutions is poor, suitable chairing
options will be needed.
вҖў E-3 wheelers:
Up to 6 e-3 wheelers with Li-ion batteries will be equipped with a fast-charging system.
In addition to this, a business plan for the battery leasing/pay-per-use model will be
provided.
==PAGE:25==
4.3 Multi-Criteria Decision Making used in the case
19
вҖў E-shuttle van:
One e-shuttle van will be developed.
вҖў E-microbus:
One electric modular concept of a microbus will be developed in collaboration with local
manufacturers.
4.3
Multi-Criteria Decision Making used in the case
In Task 1.3 within the SOLUTIONSplus project, a multi-criteria decision analysis method is
intended to be used in order to compare alternative up-scaled project designs and select the
one that meets user needs in such a way that maximizes the value to the local stakeholders
given their set of preferences and priorities. An MCDA method is preferred due to its ability
to consider aspects not easily monetized. The impacts of different solution alternatives will be
assessed and evaluated from both an economic, social, and environmental perspectives. The
impact assessment will be carried out both ex-ante and ex-post, meaning that the impact will
be asses before the point of intervention and after. The local up-scaled projects will then be
based on the results of the demonstration project in the cities. In order to address the ex-ante
impact assessment, a baseline scenario has been defined. The baseline scenario is defined as a
situation where no intervention has occurred. The base year for the baseline scenario is 2019,
with two target years: 2025 and 2030. (SOLUTIONSplus 2021a)
In the SOLUTIONSplus project, it has already been determined that the impact of different al-
ternative solutions will be evaluated using Simple MultiвҖҗAttribute Rating Technique (SMART).
It was the preferred MCDA method as it is easily comprehensible by most DMs and suitable
for problems with many criteria. (ibidem)
The criteria used to evaluate the up-scaled projects have been determined and cover 36 third-
level criteria organized in 6 first-level groups: effect on project finances, effect on the institu-
tional framework, effect on climate, effect on the environment, and effect on society, effect on
the wider economy.. The attribute tree can be found in Appendix B. The impact of a specific
criterion at the target year will be assessed relative to the baseline scenario. In the Kathmandu
case, the weights of the criteria mentioned above were determined through organized interviews
with 13 stakeholders/DMs representing eighth stakeholder groups. As different DMs may not
provide the same weight for a given criterion, the mean value of all the inputs provided by the
DMs was found. The DMs were then presented to the mean value and asked if they would like
to reconsider original statements. If so, the mean value was adjusted, and the DM was asked
the same question again. This was done until a consensus was reached or none of the DMs
wished to change their statement. (ibidem)
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 5
Modelling approach
Based on the finding in the previous sections, a framework will be developed to configure a
good combination of electric public transport alternatives in Kathmandu so that user needs are
met in a way that maximizes value for the local stakeholders. This framework will be based on
principles from classical MCDA methods and MOP, making it a MOP-MCDA-hybrid method.
5.1
Methods best suited for configuring electric public
transport alternatives in Kathmandu
It is found that no single existing method is superior to others for all MOPs. The best fit
for a single problem highly depends on the DMвҖҷs preferences, the solution requirements, and
the software available (Marler and Arora 2004). In a case where the information is a priori,
the weighted sum approach can be effective, but the quality of the solution found is highly
dependent on the preference weights provided by the DM. On the other hand, an interactive
method might be preferred if the DM has limited knowledge about the problem or the weights
cannot be correctly captured. Here the DM has the possibility to further learn about the
problem and modify their preferences during the optimization process (Sekizaki, Nishizaki,
and Hayashida 2019). Principles from the simplify and solve method will be used.
The proposed framework for this case will use predefined preferences extracted using organized
interviews to guide the search in the MOP. The optimization model will be modeled to mimic a
well-known MCDM method making it a MOP-MCDM-hybrid method. Furthermore, MCDM
methods will be used interactively to improve the solution further.
MCDM methods using pairwise comparisons are not suited for problems with many alternatives
as the problem size increases significantly for each alternative added (De Smet, Mareschal, and
Verly 2009).
5.2
Development of model
In the case investigated in this thesis, information about the DMsвҖҷ preferences has already
been extracted.
Due to the information being a priori and the existing knowledge of the
MCDM method called Simple MultiвҖҗAttribute Rating Technique (SMART), an SOP model
will be developed to find the best configuration of electric public transport alternatives in
Kathmandu.
The decision variable of the model will be xn where n вҲҲN of size 4x1 denoting the number of
units of each component n (E-busses, E-3 wheelers, E-shuttle van, and E-micro-busses) in the
solution alternative.
Note that in this section objectives, criteria, and KPI are used interchangeably.
==PAGE:27==
5.2 Development of model
21
5.2.1
Assumptions and constraints
The base year for the baseline scenario is 2019, and in this model, the target year will be 2030,
which means that this model, the solution alternative, will only be benchmarked against a 2030
baseline scenario where no intervention occurred. Meaning this model will estimate the impact
of the ex-ante assessment of the up-scaled projects in Kathmandu. The solution alternatives
that will be evaluated are composed of four activities presented in Section 4.2. Each unit added
to the transport system in the proposed solution is assumed to replace an existing equivalent
diesel vehicle. The upper limit for the number of units of each component in the alternative
solution is min(demand, electricity supply, budget). The most binding of these is the budget,
constraining the solution alternatives to вҲ‘N
n=1 Knxn вүӨbudget where Kn is the investment cost
of component n.
5.2.2
Construction of value functions
The criteria used to evaluate the up-scaled projects have been determined and cover 36 third-
level criteria organized in 6 first-level groups. The attribute tree can be found in Appendix B.
The value functions have been based on the KPI definitions specified by the SOLUTIONSplus
project team. An in-depth description of the criteria and value functions can be found in the
document KPI definitions document (SOLUTIONSplus 2021b).
Due to limited data and time, some simplifications have been made to the value functions, e.g.,
assuming linearity. This can be seen in the first criterion, where the solutionвҖҷs net present
value (NPV) is assessed. In reality, one could expect the NPV to follow a sigmoid function,
where the number of units added needs to hit a critical mass before a significant increase in
NPV is seen. Furthermore, crude assumptions have been made regarding many other aspects
of the alternatives. An overview can be found in Appendix C. Likewise, some assumptions
have been made about the values of the parameter inputs. The parameter inputs have been
chosen in collaboration with George Panagakos. The exact values used in the model can also
be found in Appendix C. Illustrations of the value functions can be found in Appendix D and
the Julia code in Appendix E.
Three steps have been used to create the value functions for all criteria. The procedure is as
follows:
1. Input parameters are estimated based on crude assumptions. These values are to be
reevaluated if an accurate estimation of the best configuration of the transport alternative
is sought.
2. The score of alternative Sm(x) is then found using one of the ten methods for evaluation
presented below.
3. A value function is defined to transform Sm(x) into a 5-point scale as required by the
evaluation framework defined by the SOLUTIONSplus project team.
The ten evaluation methods used in step 2 can be seen below. For the calculations of some of
the value functions, a weighted average based on the fraction of the total investment is used.
The weights for the four components are found by:
fn =
Knxn
вҲ‘N
j=1 Kjxj
(5.1)
The julia code used to quantify the criteria scores can be found in valueFunctions.jl and
findScores.jl or in Appendix E.
==PAGE:28==
5.2 Development of model
22
Sum of functions
This method is used for criteria where the independent variable xn is multiplied with a rate
an. The interception of the y-axis is expressed as the constant term bn. In cases where bn = 0,
this part of the equation has been omitted. The linear function for each of the components of
the alternative is summed in order to obtain the total score Sm(x) that is to be converted into
a 5-point scale. The equation used to find Sm(x) is:
Sm(x) =
N
вҲ‘
n=1
(anxn + bn)
(5.2)
This method is used for the following criteria:
вҖў c1 - Net Present Value,
вҖў c13 - Access to jobs, opportunities, and services (personal travel),
вҖў c35 - Job creation,
вҖў c34 - Other imports affected.
Piecewise functions
This method is used for criteria where multiple sub-criteria are evaluated within the criterion.
The score of these sub-criteria is expressed in a binary vector indicating if the sub-criterion is
fulfilled or not. sm,n(x) is a vector of size N that contains the score of each component solution
from 1 to 5. Sm(x) is the weighted average of the score vector sm,n(x). sm,n(x) is obtained by
a piecewise function:
sm,n =
пЈұ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈІ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈі
1
statement no.1 = true
2
statement no.2 = true
3
statement no.3 = true
4
statement no.4 = true
5
statement no.5 = true
(5.3)
The equation used to find Sm(x) is:
Sm(x) =
N
вҲ‘
n=1
fnsm,n
(5.4)
Sm(x) is then converted into a 5-point scale. This method is used for the following criteria:
вҖў c4 вҖ“ Availability of external funding,
вҖў c5 - Coherence with national plans and development goals,
вҖў c7 - Ease of implementation (in terms of administrative barriers),
вҖў c12 - Effect on recycled resources.
==PAGE:29==
5.2 Development of model
23
Percentage change
This method is used for criteria where the percentage change is assessed.
A is base level.
The numerator contains the difference/savings found by implementing the alternative solution.
The denominator contains B, which is the total amount found in the baseline scenario. The
equation used to find Sm(x) is:
Sm(x) = A +
вҲ‘N
n=1 anxn
B
(5.5)
Sm(x) is then converted into a 5-point scale. This method is used for the following criteria:
вҖў c8 - Impact on GHG emissions,
вҖў c9 - NOx emissions abated,
вҖў c10 - PM2.5 emissions abated,
вҖў c15 - Affordability of e-mobility services,
вҖў c16 - Change in travel times due to e-mobility services (personal travel),
вҖў c17 - Change in travel times due to e-mobility services (freight),
вҖў c32 - Impact on national/local budget,
вҖў c33 - Fossil fuel imports abated.
Weighted average of vector elements
This method is used for criteria where one or multiple sub-criteria are evaluated within the
criterion using direct rating. For these types of criteria, the average of the vector elements in
all components of the alternative is found. Then the weighted average of the components of
the alternative is found. The equation used to find Sm(x) is:
Sm(x) =
N
вҲ‘
n=1
fn
вҲ‘I
i=1 an, i
I
(5.6)
where I is the number of sub-criteria.
Sm(x) is then converted into a 5-point scale.
This
method is used for the following criteria:
вҖў c11 - Impact on noise,
вҖў c14 - Access to pick-up/delivery locations (freight),
вҖў c18 - Road accidents with fatalities/serious injuries,
вҖў c19 - Road accidents with minor injuries/material damage,
вҖў c20 - Road accidents involving vulnerable road users (VRUs),
вҖў c24 - Suitability for adverse weather conditions,
вҖў c25 - Perceived comfort,
вҖў c26 - Perceived drivability (professional drivers),
вҖў c27 - Perceived drivability (end users),
==PAGE:30==
5.2 Development of model
24
вҖў c28 - Perceived chargeability,
вҖў c29 - Perceived safety,
вҖў c30 - Perceived personal security,
вҖў c31 - Continuity of journey chains, including transshipment to other modes.
Risk functions
This method is used for criteria where the risk is assessed. Firstly, the risk probability rj,n is
calculated as xnpn and converted into a scale from 0 to 4. The weighted average of the sum
product of the impact in,j and risk probability rn,j across all j categories is found and. rn,j is
optained by:
rn,j =
пЈұ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈІ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈі
0
probability within range no. 1 = true
1
probability within range no. 2 = true
2
probability within range no. 3 = true
3
probability within range no. 4 = true
4
probability within range no. 5 = true
(5.7)
The equation used to find Sm(x) is:
Sm(x) =
N
вҲ‘
n=1
(fn
J
вҲ‘
j=1
(in,jrn,j))
(5.8)
Sm(x) is then converted into a 5-point scale. This method is used for the following criteria:
вҖў c21 - Impact on charging safety,
вҖў c22 - Impact on security.
Internal rate of return
This method is only used for c2 - Internal Rate of Return. For this evaluation, the investment
cost per unit Kn and the IRR kn are needed. The equation used to find Sm(x) is:
Sm(x) =
вҲ‘N
n=1 xnKnkn
вҲ‘N
n=1 xnKn
(5.9)
Sm(x) is then converted into a 5-point scale.
Payback period
This method is only used for c3 - Payback period. The investment cost per unit Kn and the
payback period pn are needed for this evaluation. The equation used to find Sm(x) is:
Sm(x) =
вҲ‘N
n=1 xnKnpn
вҲ‘N
n=1 xnKn
(5.10)
Sm(x) is then converted into a 5-point scale.
==PAGE:31==
5.2 Development of model
25
Compliance
This method is only used for criterion c6 - Alignment with supra-national/national/city leg-
islation
regulations. A binary vector complyn indicates if a components complies with the
legislation and regulations. If any component does not comply, then Sm = 0. The number of
uncertainties will be subtracted from 5 for each component and the weighted average is found.
If the component complies but there are more than 3 uncertainties the score is 2.
sm,n =
{
2
an > 3
5 вҲ’an
otherwise
(5.11)
Sm(x) = min
nвҲҲN(complyn)
N
вҲ‘
n=1
fns6,n
(5.12)
Sm(x) is then converted into a 5-point scale.
Active travelling
This method is only used for criterion c23 - Impact on well-being due to active traveling. A
linear function is defined for each mode i вҲҲI of active travelling. Sm(x) is the active traveling
activity (in walking-equivalent km) and is defined by the SOLUTIONSplus project team as:
Sm(x) =
I
вҲ‘
i=1
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
1
22
50
4.5
503
50
пЈ№
пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
N
вҲ‘
n=1
(ai,nxn + bi,n)
(5.13)
Sm(x) is then converted into a 5-point scale.
Technical skill required
This method is only used for criterion c36 - Expected impact on technical skills requirements.
The required quantities of people with the skill j вҲҲ{A, B, C} is calculated using the linear
function an,jxn + bn,j. Sm(x) is defined by the SOLUTIONSplus project team as:
Sm(x) =
N
вҲ‘
n=1
(an,Axn + bn,A) + 1.3
N
вҲ‘
n=1
(an,Bxn + bn,B) + 1.8
N
вҲ‘
n=1
(an,Cxn + bn,C)
(5.14)
Sm(x) is then converted into a 5-point scale.
5.2.3
Heuristic for total score
A heuristic is a method that finds an immediate result that is not guaranteed to be optimal,
thereby finding a satisfactory solution. The total score of the MaOP for the solution alternative
x is, in this case, found by using the Weighted Sum methodology that is identical to the MCDM
method SMART.
Here weights are multiplied with the score of each criterion in the objective function fвҖІ
m(x).
In this case, all the value functions are set up so that all criteria scores are on the same
scale [1; 5] meaning that no further normalization is needed as fm(x) = fвҖІ
m(x). The Multi-
Objective Optimization problem is converted into a single-objective optimization problem with
the following objective function:
max
xвҲҲв„ҰF(x) =
M
вҲ‘
m=1
wmfвҖІ
m(x)
(5.15)
==PAGE:32==
5.2 Development of model
26
where M is the number of objectives, x is an N-dimensional decision vector, в„Ұdenotes the
feasible region, wm вүҘ0 ,вҲ‘wm = 1.
The constrains of the MaOP are:
N
вҲ‘
n=1
xnKn вүӨbudget
(5.16)
N
вҲ‘
n=1
xn > 0
(5.17)
xn вүҘ0, вҲҖn вҲҲN
(5.18)
xn вҲҲZ, вҲҖn вҲҲN
(5.19)
where Kn is the investment cost of component n. The first constraint (5.16) ensures that the
budget is not exceeded, setting an upper limit for the problem. The second constraint (5.17)
ensures that the solution cannot be x = [0, 0, 0, 0]. This constraint is included as many of
the value functions use the weighed average showed in equation (5.1). For these, a solution
alternative x = [0, 0, 0, 0] would result in the denominator being zero, making the fraction
undefined.
The third constraint (5.18) ensures that any xn cannot be negative.
The last
constraint (5.19) ensures that x is an integer value.
For this MaOP, the method for handling constraints is the first technique proposed by Coello
1999 showed in Section 3.2.5. In this technique, infeasible solutions are discarded.
5.2.4
Objective Dimensionality Reduction
As this MaOP contains 36 objectives, the solution is challenging to visualize in an intuitive
way that can be presented to the DMs. In addition to this, the computational power needed to
estimate the scores of all 36 criteria is higher than if only a subset of these were used. Based
on this, a minimum subset of objectives is sought. This subset should be smaller than M but
not leave out any crucial information. In order to do this, the variance of each criterion and
the correlation between criteria are investigated.
No state-of-the-art method for dimensionality reduction fit for this case has been identified.
Therefore a more experimental approach will be carried out. The methods used and general
observations are described further in the following sections.
Simulation process
When generating different solution alternatives, 0 вүӨxn вүӨbudget
Kn
is chosen randomly, and the
feasibility of the solution is checked. Only feasible solutions that comply with the constraints
(5.16) - (5.19) defined in the above section are used.
The simulation of the scores is carried out 10.000 times. This number of simulations was chosen
as the computational power and memory used is reasonable while still having a broad range
of different solution alternatives within the data set. The Julia code for this can be found in
simulateCriteriaScores.jl and the solution alternatives generated from this along with all the
criteria scores, can be found in the attached excel file Data Appendix.xlsx under the sheet 5.
Simulation data. The data set found in this simulation is used throughout the section. From
Figure 5.1 it can be seen that x is uniformly distributed for all the simulated instances and
that the budget does not exceed 50,000,000вӮ¬, making the solutions feasible.
==PAGE:33==
5.2 Development of model
27
Figure 5.1: Distribution of the total budget used for each simulated instance.
In order to gain further insights into how the number of each unit of each component affects
the total score of the solution alternative, the relationship has been illustrated in Figure 5.2.
From this, it can be seen that the highest scores are located where a moderate number of all
components is present. The total score is not at its highest when one component becomes
too dominant, indicating that the solution may not be optimal when most of the budget is
dedicated to only one component type.
Figure 5.2: Relationship between number of units of each component and the total score of
the solution alternative.
Finally, the relationship between the total amount invested in the solution alternative and the
total score is investigated. From the slope of the tendency line in Figure 5.3 it can be seen
that generally, a higher investment leads to a higher total score.
==PAGE:34==
5.2 Development of model
28
Figure 5.3: Relationship between the total investment and the total score of the solution
alternative.
Variance in dataset
The variance and correlations of criteria are assessed to gain insights into the mechanics of
each criterion.
Box-plots of the criteria scores and the weighted criteria scores can be seen in Figure 5.4 and
Figure 5.5. In the box-plots, the median of the data set for each criterion is depicted as an
X. The colored boxes cover the data within the 25th and 75th quantile. The vertical lines
(also called the whiskers) illustrate the minimum and maximum value span, excluding the
outliers. Outliers are depicted as dots. From these plots, it can be seen that the variance of
each criterion is not uniform, indicating that most of the variation in the solutions is covered
in a subset of M. Figure 5.5 hold the same data as Figure 5.4 but the criteria weights have
been added. When comparing Figure 5.4 and Figure 5.5 it can be seen that by adding the
weights, the overall value of the variance decrease as the weight is a number between 0 and 1.
But it can also be seen that if a criterion has a high variance in Figure 5.4 but a low weight,
the relative variance decreases. The opposite is true if the weight is higher.
The variance of criteria scores is now further investigated. The reason for doing this is that
if any criterion does not impact the total variance of the model, then it can be omitted.
Figure 5.6 is a histogram of the percentage of the variation of model related to each criterion.
Furthermore, it shows how the light blue line, illustrating the percentage of the total variance
for each criterion added, converges as the most important criteria are added. As the number
of criteria increases, the slope of the light blue line decreases. This histogram confirms our
notion that there exists a subset of criteria smaller than M that can be used without any
loss of information. The same information can be seen in Table 5.1 where different variance
cut-off values have been tested. Here it was found that by omitting all criteria with a variance
below 0.001, the number of criteria can be reduced from 36 to 18 while still covering вүҲ99.86%
of the variance in the model. Furthermore, it was found that by omitting all criteria with a
variance below 0.03, the number of criteria can be reduced from 36 to 7, which is believed to be
approximately the maximum limit of criteria that DMs can comprehend (Wang, Olhofer, and
Jin 2017). By doing this вүҲ90.50% of the variance of the model is explained by the criteria.
==PAGE:35==
5.2 Development of model
29
Figure 5.4: Box-plot of the scores for all 36 criteria.
Figure 5.5: Box-plot of the weighted scores for all 36 criteria.
Table 5.1: Number of criteria included and percentage of variance in model dependent on the
variance cut-off value.
Variance cut-off value
No. of criteria
Percentage of variance
вүҘ0
36
вүҲ100%
вүҘ0.001
18
вүҲ99.86%
вүҘ0.01
12
вүҲ97.75%
вүҘ0.03
7
вүҲ90, 50%
вүҘ0.1
3
вүҲ76.66%
==PAGE:36==
5.2 Development of model
30
Figure 5.6: Histogram of the percentage of the variation of model related to each criteria.
Correlations between criteria
This thesis recommends that the correlation between the criteria to be assessed to determine
if the problem consists of non-conflicting objectives. If non-conflicting objectives exist, this is
a further indication that some criteria can be omitted. But for this case, a lot of uncertainty
is related to the development of the value function, and few actual conclusions can be drawn
from looking into the correlation matrix.
When the value functions have been refined, it is recommended to use the correlation matrix
to see if there exist significant correlations where the correlation ПҒ вүҘ0.05. If this is the case
in some of the criteria, it may be an indication that they are non-conflicting and should be
excluded or revised.
Principal Component Analysis
It is investigated if the number of criteria can be reduced using the dimensionality-reduction
method Principal Component Analysis. Here the dimensions of the problem are reduced to a
smaller set that still contains most of the information of the model. The code used to create
the PCA can be found in PCASim.jl. The model is trained in the first 9,900 instances of the
10,000 simulated weighed criteria scores. The last 100 instances are dedicated for statistical
tests and plots.
It is found that the dimensions of the model can be reduced using PCA while still maintaining
most of the information in the model. In Table 5.2 the principal ratio can be seen for different
sizes of dimensions. E.g., it was found that the number of dimensions could be reduced from
36 dimensions to 12 with a principal ratio of 0.9908, meaning that 99.08% of the information
is kept in the model. Figure 5.7 is a histogram of the percentage of the variation of model
related to each criterion. One thing to note is when carrying out this PCA, the number of
dimensions does not exceed 12, meaning we cannot explain more than 99.08% of the variation
in the data.
Table 5.2: Number of criteria included and percentage of variance in PCA model.
No. of criteria
principal ratio
12
вүҲ99.08%
7
вүҲ95.84%
3
вүҲ86.01%
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Development of model
31
Figure 5.7: Histogram of the percentage of the variation of model related to each principal
component
Though this reduced model solves some of the issues related to the high dimensionality of
the MaOP, a new challenge arises.
As the principal components are constructed as linear
combinations of the initial criteria, the model becomes less interpretable. This means that
when presenting a solution and its score to the DMs, individual criteria scores cannot be
explained using any of the original criteria set up. (Zakaria Jaadi 2021) One way to handle
this could be by reconstructing the solution going from its PCA scores back to the original 36
criteria.
Model with reduced dimensions
Based on the above sections, a dimensionality reduction is deemed feasible. At this time, there
are still many uncertainties related to the specific input parameters of the value functions.
Therefore, correlations between criteria are not taken into account when deciding which criteria
to keep. The variance of the data in each criterion is, on the other hand, deemed relevant as
these reflect more of the structure of the construction of the value functions and not only the
inputs. Furthermore, the PCA may prove to be too comprehensive and intangible to the DM
to be a fit method for dimensionality reduction in this case.
In order to provide as much transparency in the model and reduce complexity, the dimension-
ality reduction will be carried out based on the variance of each criterion.
To determine the subset of criteria to bring to the next modeling steps, one could use a variance-
cut-off value, a target number of criteria, or a minimum limit for the percentage of the variance
in the model explained. In this thesis, it is proposed that Figure 5.6 is used to assess what
criteria should be included in the subset as well as the following:
вҖў The convergence of the line describing the accumulated percentage of the variance that
the criteria explain.
вҖў The total percentage of the variance that the subset of criteria covers.
вҖў The DM cannot comprehend too many objectives.
==PAGE:38==
5.2 Development of model
32
Based on the above it is determined to create a subset of the 7 criteria with the most variance.
This subset of criteria covers вүҲ90.50% of the variance in the model and contain the following
criteria:
вҖў c1 - Net Present Value,
вҖў c2 - Internal Rate of Return,
вҖў c6 - Alignment with supra-national/national/city legislation regulations,
вҖў c8 - Impact on GHG emissions,
вҖў c12 - Effect on recycled resources,
вҖў c15 - Affordability of e-mobility services,
вҖў c32 - Impact on national/local budget.
One could argue that it would be better to include more criteria so that вүҘ95% or вүҘ99% of
the variance was covered, but when considering the decision context and the DM, a subset of
7 criteria covering вүҲ90.50% is deemed a good compromise between limiting the number of
criteria to a size that the DM can comprehend while covering the majority of the variance in
the original model.
5.2.5
The reduced model
Before looking at the optimization of the model, further insights into the reduced model are
needed. Here it is especially interesting to look at the relations between the subset of criteria
and weights.
In Appendix B the attribute tree containing the weights for all criteria can be seen. From this
figure, the seven criteria c1, c2, c6, c8, c12, c15, and c32 can be seen to span over all first-level
categories: effect on project finances, effect on the institutional framework, effect on climate,
effect on the environment, and effect on society, effect on the wider economy. In general, all 36
third-level weighs range between [0.23;14.81] and the seven criteria in the reduced model range
between [2.37;14.81], indicating some of the most important criteria for the DM is also the
ones we choose to carry on in the reduced model. Still, not all the criteria with high weights
have a high enough variance to be included in the reduced model. E.g., c4 - ease of raising
external funding, has a weight of 9.63 but is not included in the reduced model as the variance
for this criteria was below 0.03.
In the following section, the reduced model containing the seven most important criteria will
be used. As some criteria have been omitted from this model, the sum of the weights is no
longer 100, but вүҲ41, meaning the total score cannot exceed вүҲ2.05. In order to have the total
score of the reduced model span over the 5-point scale, the weights have been normalized, so
they sum to 100. The new attribute tree with weights can be seen in Figure 5.8. The format
of the original attribute tree (seen in Appendix B) has been maintained. This tree shows that
level 1 and level 2 are identical, and one of the levels can be remodeled, so the new attribute
tree only contains two unique levels.
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Development of model
33
Figure 5.8: The SOLUTIONSplus reduced attribute tree with weights.
==PAGE:40==
5.3 Optimization of solution alternative
34
5.3
Optimization of solution alternative
As this problem is non-linear and the objective function is discontinuous, it has not been
possible to find an existing solver that can be used to optimize the solution alternative. Due
to this, a metaheuristic will be used to find a good solution.
When using metaheuristics for solving single-and Multi-Objective Optimization problems, the
most used procedure is Evolutionary Algorithms, followed by Simulated Annealing (Jones,
Mirrazavi, and Tamiz 2002). Both metaheuristics can be highly effective and fit a wide range
of problems. In this thesis, we will test both the SA and EA to optimize the solution in order
to find the best configuring electric public transport alternatives in Kathmandu.
The model used to optimize the solution alternative is the normalized reduced model shown
in Figure 5.8 in the previous section. In both metaheuristics, the heuristic for the total score
presented in Section 5.2.3 will be used but only using the seven criteria from the reduced model.
This means that for any feasible solution, the following must be true:
N
вҲ‘
n=1
xnKn вүӨbudget
N
вҲ‘
n=1
xn > 0
xn вүҘ0, вҲҖn вҲҲN
xn вҲҲZ, вҲҖn вҲҲN
5.3.1
Optimization of solution using Simulated Annealing
Simulated annealing is based on an analogy of metal annealing where after a high temperature
is reached, the temperature is decreased until particles arrange themselves in a solid-state. A
solid-state is only obtained if the temperature has been suп¬Җiciently high and the cooling is slow.
Based on this analogy, the max temperature and cooling rate are used as parameters to guide
the solution. For each iteration, the solution changes to an adjacent solution based on the
neighborhood function. If the adjacent solution is better, this becomes the new arrangement
of the solution (Czyzak and Jaszkiewicz 1998). In SA, an acceptance probability is used to
accept solutions that may not improve the solution. By doing this, it is easier to escape a local
minimum.
The metaheuristic seeks to maximize the total score by testing different configurations of the
transport alternatives: converted E-buses, E-3 wheelers, E-shuttle van, E-microbus.
The Julia code for the functions used can be found in Appendix F or in SA.jl.
Generating neighboring solutions
A neighboring solution is an adjacent solution close to the current solution. In this model, a
neighboring solution is found by randomly choosing one of the components of the solution and
changing the number of units used. The change is found by adding a random amount within
the range [вҲ’10; 10] to the component. Note that only a feasible neighboring solution is taken
into account, meaning that a neighboring solution y вҲҲN(x) is y вҲҲв„Ұ. An example of finding a
neighboring solution can be seen in Figure 5.9. Here the number of E-shuttle vans is changed
from 80 to 85. The range [вҲ’10; 10] was chosen as it creates enough diversity in the solution to
sometimes change the total score while it is still close in the neighborhood.
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Optimization of solution alternative
35
Figure 5.9: Example of neighbouring solution
Pseudo-code
The code for Simulated Annealing can be found in SA.jl The parameters and variables used
are:
вҖў kMax > 0: The maximum number of iterations.
вҖў k > 0: The current iteration number.
вҖў T > 0: The starting temperature.
вҖў t: Temperature of iteration.
вҖў 0 < Оұ < 1: A scale determining the decrease in temperature for each iteration.
вҖў x: Chosen solution for iteration.
вҖў y: Neighbouring solution generated in iteration .
вҖў Оҙ: Difference in score of x and y.
вҖў О·: Random float between 0 and 1.
вҖў w: Weights of criteria.
вҖў cost: Investment cost of components.
вҖў budget: Total budget for solution.
вҖў xBest: The best solution found.
вҖў xBestScore: The score of the best solution found.
The pseudo-code for Simulated Annealing can be seen in Algorithm 1.
This code generates an initial feasible solution x and calculates the score using the heuristic
totalScoreReducedModel in findScores.jl. Then a feasible neighbouring solution y is found us-
ing the function neighboringSolution in SA.jl. If the neighboring solution is better or if the
acceptance probability is true, then x = y. The temperate t is then lowered. A new feasible
neighboring to x solution is then found and the process repeats until t вүӨ0 or k > kMax.
Throughout this procedure, the current best x and the corresponding score are saved. In the
end, the algorithm returns the best solution and score found.
==PAGE:42==
5.3 Optimization of solution alternative
36
Algorithm 1 Simulated Annealing metaheuristic
Input: w, cost, budget, T, alpha, kMax
Output: xBest, xBestScore
INITIALIZE x вҲҲв„Ұ
k вҶҗ1
t вҶҗT
GENERATE xScore
xBest вҶҗx
xBestScore вҶҗxScore
while t > 0 and k вүӨkMax do
GENERATE y вҲҲN(x)
Оҙ вҶҗf(x) вҲ’f(y)
if Оҙ < 0 or exp(вҲ’Оҙ
t ) > О· then
x вҶҗy
end if
IDENTIFY xBest, xBestScore
t вҶҗt В· Оұ
k вҶҗk + 1
end while
Parameter tuning
The parameters can be tuned to guide the search. In general, the following can be said about
the meaning of the two parameters: as T вҲ’вҶ’вҲһthe algorithm does a Random walk where it
does not exploit the local information but accepts many different solutions. When T вҲ’вҶ’0 the
algorithm acts more like the Hill Climber where it is easy to get stuck in a local minimum, but
local information is used to a higher extend.
Manual parameter tuning is performed to guide the search in case. Parameter tuning is per-
formed by testing different combinations of T and alpha. kMax is set, so the run time of this
number of iterations is reasonable on most computers but still provide the algorithm enough
iterations to do a thorough search and converge at the best-known solution.
After testing T = [100; 5000], Оұ = [0.8; 0.99], and kMax = [500, 000; 2, 000, 000] it was found
that when T = 1000, Оұ = 0.95, and kMax = 1, 000, 000 the best known score of 4.5448 was
consistently found within a reasonable time limit (< 5 minutes). This combination of T and Оұ
allowed the algorithm to test many different combinations of components in many iterations
and gradually include more local information.
This allowed the algorithm to escape local
minima while still using the information in the previous solution.
Convergence, results, and performance
After running the Simulated Annealing, the best-known score was found to be 4.5448. As the
functions for calculating the criteria scores are discontinuous, this score can be reached with
multiple different combinations of transport alternatives. E.g., the solution x = [45, 2132, 125, 404]
and x = [66, 2767, 173, 280] both have a total score of 4.5448 but the investment cost of the two
alternatives solutions is 42, 710, 000вӮ¬ and 47, 690, 000вӮ¬ respectively. This poses an opportunity
to limit the investment cost while still having an optimal - or good - solution, if that is what
the DM wishes. Here all the solutions that have a total score of 4.5448 can be interpreted as
Pareto optimal. Note that here вҖқoptimalвҖқ is used in the sense that no better feasible solution
was found at any point.
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Optimization of solution alternative
37
Figure 5.10: Score for each iteration of one instance of the Simulated Annealing where T = 1000
and Оұ = 0.95
Figure 5.11: The best score found at each iteration of one instance of the Simulated Annealing
where T = 1000 and Оұ = 0.95
Figure 5.10 shows the scores for each iteration of one instance of the Simulated Annealing where
T = 1000 and Оұ = 0.95 in a scatter plot. Here, the algorithm uses local information to climb to
a solution with higher scores while escaping local extreme points and exploring other solution
alternatives. It can be seen that the algorithm reaches 4.5448 on multiple occasions. Figure
5.11 shows the best score found in the same instance of the Simulated Annealing. Here it can
be seen that the solution converges at 4.5448 after around 850,000 iterations. This will not be
the case each time the algorithm is run, and it is recommended to keep kMax = 1, 000, 000.
5.3.2
Optimization of solution using an Evolutionary Algorithm
Evolutionary algorithms are one of the most used meta-heuristics when it comes to solving
MOPs. EAs were developed throughout the 1960s and 1970s and are based on the concepts
of evolutionist theory. Weak species cease to exist through natural selection, and strong ones
can pass their genes to future generations. Thus, over time the mots fit species will become
the dominant one (Konak, Coit, and Smith 2006). EAs are built on these principles. Fitter
solutions will dominate the population P over time until the solution eventually converges
on a single optimal solution. Mutations can be made to the solutions represented as random
changes. These changes may provide additional advantages and may be carried onto the next
generation. These mutations often help ensure that the solution does not get stuck on a local
extreme point.
==PAGE:44==
5.3 Optimization of solution alternative
38
There exist many different versions of EAs, and the characteristics of the algorithm should be fit
for the case. For the selection of the best configuration of the transport alternatives: converted
E-buses, E-3 wheelers, E-shuttle van, E-microbus in Kathmandu, the below modeling choices
were made. Generally, simpler methods were chosen to ensure easier interpretability for the
DM. The procedure can also be seen illustrated in Figure 5.12
1. Initialization: The initial population P is created based on randomly generated feasible
solutions. This is done to ensure a diverse gene pool in the firsts iterations.
2. Selection: Tournament selection was chosen for this EA. Here four random individuals
are chosen from the population. The individuals are then compared two and two, and
the best performing alternative of each separate tournament becomes the two parent
solutions. Tournament selection was chosen as this is a simple and intuitive selection
method. Furthermore, it helps avoid premature convergence and slow finishing.
3. Crossover: One-point crossover is used. Here the two parent solutions are combined to
create two children contain half their genes from each parent.
4. Mutation: One-point mutation is used to mutate the child solutions similarly to how
neighboring solutions were found in the SA. Here a random number in the range [вҲ’10; 10]
is added to a randomly selected component.
5. Replacement: The replacement is carried out similarly to the first step: selection.
Through tournament selection, four random individuals were chosen from the population.
The individuals are then compared two and two, and the child solutions replace the worst-
performing alternative of each separate tournament.
Figure 5.12: Description of procedure steps in EA used
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Optimization of solution alternative
39
Pseudo-code
The code for the Evolutionary Algorithm can be found in EA.jl The parameters and variables
used are:
вҖў kMax > 0: The maximum number of iterations.
вҖў k > 0: The current iteration number.
вҖў P: Array containing the current population.
вҖў PSize: The size of P.
вҖў p1, p2: Parent solutions.
вҖў c1, c2: Child solutions.
вҖў feasibilityCheck: true or false operator indicating if the child solutions generated is
feasible.
вҖў cm1, cm2: Mutated child solutions.
вҖў w1, w2: Solutions in the population that are to be replaced.
вҖў w: Weights of criteria.
вҖў cost: Investment cost of components.
вҖў budget: Total budget for solution.
вҖў xBest: The best solution found.
вҖў xBestScore: The score of the best solution found.
The pseudo-code the Evolutionary Algorithm can be seen in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Evolutionary Algorithm with tournament selection
Input: w, cost, budget, PSize, kMax
Output: xBest, xBestScore
INITIALIZE P
k вҶҗ1
while k вүӨkMax do
feasibilityCheck вҶҗtrue
CHOOSE p1, p2
GENERATE c1, c2
if feasibilityCheck = true then
GENERATE cm1, cm2
REPLACE w1, w2 WITH c1m, c2m
k вҶҗk + 1
end if
end while
IDENTIFY xBest
The Julia code for the functions used can be found in Appendix G or in EA.jl.
==PAGE:46==
5.3 Optimization of solution alternative
40
Parameter tuning
As in the SA, a manual parameter tuning has been carried out. In the EA, the main parameter
that can be tuned is the population size PSize. As the size of P decreases, the collective gene
pool of the population decides, and new genes are only introduced via mutations. When P вҲ’вҶ’вҲһ
on the other hand, the computational power and memory required increase. kMax is set so
the run time of this number of iterations is reasonable on most computers but still provides the
algorithm enough iterations to do a thorough search and converge at the best-known solution.
After testing PSize = [10; 500] and kMax = [10; 1, 000, 000] It was found that when pSize = 50
and kMax = 100 the best known score of 4.5448 was found consistently ( widthin 1 minute).
Convergence, results, and performance
After running the Simulated Annealing, the best-known score was found to be 4.5448. As the
functions for calculating the criteria scores are discontinuous, this score can be reached with
multiple different combinations of transport alternatives.
Figure 5.13 shows the best score in the population after running the algorithm. From this it
can be seen that the solution converge after around 20 iterations at the best known solution.
Figure 5.13: The best score found in population at each iteration of one instance of the
Evolutionary Algorithm
5.3.3
Comparison of metaheuristics
When comparing the performance of the two metaheuristics, it was found that both the SA
and EA found the same best score. Additionally, it was found that multiple solutions have
this score.
One of the main advantages of the SA is the simple structure of the code and the universality
of the procedure. Here, the search can be guided, but changing the parameters can be abstract
and diп¬Җicult to tune to fit the case. Furthermore, it was found that many iterations were
required before the solution converged at the best-known solution consistently. Suppose it is
of interest to illustrate how the solution develops for each iteration. In that case, it is relatively
simple to illustrate, but the size of output files becomes rather significant if all iterations are
investigated.
The EA used in this case was developed with simplicity in mind. EAs can quickly become
complex as different methods for initialization, selection, mutation, and replacement are used,
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Results and model improvements
41
which is one of the main disadvantages of choosing this metaheuristic. But because of this, the
algorithm can also be tailored to perform well for a specific problem. Furthermore, another
drawback is that it can be diп¬Җicult to illustrate how the solution develops and converges.
This thesis found that the EA designed for this case performed better than the SA, as good
solutions are found quicker.
Though the process of developing the metaheuristic is more
complex than the SA, it is determined that the quality of the solution, quick convergence,
and easy-to-understand analogy linked to Evolutionary Theory makes the EA a fit method
for searching for optimal solutions in this case. Furthermore, as it was found that multiple
solution alternatives reach the same score, the final population may be of use in future steps.
5.4
Results and model improvements
In the previous section, it was found that the EA developed for this case was preferred as to
the SA. When searching for the best score, multiple different solutions had the same score of
4.5448. In addition to this, it was found that each time the EA was run the solutions found
having this score varied. Sometimes the solution converged at the best found solution after a
few iterations, while more iterations were needed at other times. This indicates that the initial
population has a high effect on when the best solution is found. If the size of P was increased,
the chance of having an individual in the solution that has a score of 4.5448 increases.
5.4.1
Investigation of results
When running the EA with pSize = 50 and kMax = 100 in one instance, it was found that
18 individuals in the final population had a score of 4.5448 which corresponds to a total score
of 4.2870 in the original model with 36 criteria. These solutions can be seen in Table 5.3.
From this table, it can be seen how some solutions are very similar, with only a few units of
a component alternative making them different, while other solutions are more distinct and
different from others.
In this section, we wish to gain insights into the characteristics of the solutions that get the best-
found score. To do this the EA is run again but with a pSize = 10, 000 and kMax = 1, 000, 000
to get a final population with more individuals with a final score of 4.5448. In an instance
where the above is true, it was found that 9984 unique individuals in the population had a
score of 4.5448. An overview of the maximum, minimum, and average value of x1, x2, x3, x4
for this instance can be seen in Table 5.4.
Table 5.4: Overview of maximum, minimum, and average of x1, x2, x3, x4 for an instance of
the EA where pSize = 10, 000 and kMax = 1, 000, 000.
x1
x2
x3
x4
Maximum
173
2,755
129
457
Minimum
24
2,431
0
279
Average
97
2,573
43
365
Clustering of solutions
To further investigate potential groups/categories of solution alternatives, clustering is used.
When clustering, different similar solutions will be in the same cluster. In this section the
instance of the EA where pSize = 10, 000 and kMax = 1, 000, 000 is used to generate the data
points that are to be investigated further.
==PAGE:48==
5.4 Results and model improvements
42
Table 5.3: Individuals in population that have a score of 4.5448 after running an instance of
the EA where pSize = 50 and kMax = 100.
x1
x2
x3
x4
136
2.597
20
436
103
2.200
58
345
101
2.370
12
335
104
2.370
57
335
104
2.366
58
335
103
2.370
14
335
104
2.370
58
335
104
2.590
40
249
101
2.370
62
335
104
2.591
40
233
104
2.595
40
249
142
2.370
14
436
105
2.597
47
332
55
2.597
40
332
55
2.361
208
332
104
2.370
20
436
104
2.591
40
242
63
2.135
14
439
As this problem has four decision variables [x1, x2, x3, x4], the data points/solutions cannot be
plotted in one graph containing all four dimensions. Two or three dimensions can be plotted
into one chart, but the insights gained from this are limited as this does not provide the whole
picture. E.g., from Figure 5.14 it can be seen how most data points seem to be in one or two
clusters - but if the other two dimensions x3, x4 is included, the conclusion might be different.
Figure 5.14: Scatter plot of solution alternatives plotted over x1 and x2.
In order to cluster the data, the k-means clustering method will be used. k-means algorithm
is a famous clustering algorithm that is ubiquitously used (Gandhi 2021). The procedure is as
follows:
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Results and model improvements
43
1. The number of clusters K is chosen, and the data points are obtained.
2. Centrodids c1, c2, ..., cK are randomly placed.
3. For each data point in the data set, the nearest centroid is identified, and the point is
assigned to the cluster.
4. A new placement of each centroid is determined as the mean of all points assigned to it
Steps 3 and 4 are repeated until a maximum number of iterations are reached or the centroid
placement converges onto one spot. In the k-means algorithm solves the following minimization
problem:
min
N
вҲ‘
i=1
||xi вҲ’czi||2
(5.20)
where ck is the center of the kth cluster and zi is an index of the cluster for the ith point xi (Julia
20 November 2021). N is the total number of data points. This essentially means that the
total distance between all the data points in cluster k and the centroid ck is minimized across
all clusters. The Julia code for the k-means algorithm can be found in kMeansClustering.jl.
The value of equation (5.20) will vary depending on the total number of clusters K. One way
of identifying the best K is to use the Elbow method. Here the k-means algorithm is run
multiple times, testing different values of K. The Elbow point is then identified as the point
that resembles an elbow joint in the graph (Gandhi 2021). From Figure 5.15 it can be seen
that the Elbow point for this model is K = 16. When K вүҘ16 the objective value of the
k-means algorithm does not improve significantly.
Figure 5.15: Elbow method determining the best number of clusters.
Figure 5.16 contains a scatter plot of solution alternatives in cluster 1, 2, and 3 plotted over
x1 and x2. When comparing this to Figure 5.14 it can be seen how the data points now is
clustered. An overview of cluster characteristics and mean data point within each cluster can
be found in Table 5.5. In this case all the mean data points is feasible solutions with the same
total score as the solutions within the cluster. If this is not the case a data point included in
the cluster closest to the center could be used.
==PAGE:50==
5.4 Results and model improvements
44
Figure 5.16: Scatter plot of solution alternatives in cluster 1, 2, and 3 plotted over x1 and x2.
Table 5.5: Overview of cluster no., size, and mean data point within each cluster.
Cluster no.
Cluster size
avg. x1
avg. x2
avg. x3
avg. x4
1
639
122
2.579
61
369
2
720
89
2.549
67
394
3
390
105
2.487
38
347
4
787
111
2.586
23
343
5
643
86
2.614
65
389
6
464
92
2.493
51
388
7
244
99
2.706
46
364
8
520
104
2.622
68
341
9
533
113
2.641
29
383
10
793
77
2.576
55
347
11
767
101
2.539
70
346
12
616
83
2.631
26
350
13
684
122
2.542
28
381
14
713
79
2.541
23
382
15
771
95
2.541
24
337
16
700
91
2.591
23
391
All the solution alternatives included in the clustering analysis had the same total score and cri-
teria scores both for the reduced model and original model. For the reduced model, all solution
alternatives had the criteria scores [5, 4, 5, 5, 2, 5, 5] and a total score of 4.5448. For the original
model with 36 criteria the criteria scores were [5, 4, 3, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 2, 1, 4, 5, 1, 1, 3, 2, 2, 1, 3,
1, 2, 5, 4, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 5, 3, 5, 5, 3] with a total score of 4.2870. This solution is represented in Fig-
ure 5.17. From this figure, it can be seen that some of the criteria scores are low, which may
lead to one thinking this solution is far from optimal. Still, when comparing this figure to
Figure 5.5 illustrating the Box-plots of the weighted scores for all 36 criteria, it can be seen
that the criteria where the best-found solution performs poorly are also criteria where the
variation is small, indicating that few feasible solutions would improve these criteria scores.
This is a result of the construction of the value functions, and the parameter inputs are chosen
in each criterion. E.g., most feasible solution alternatives are performing badly on c12 - Effect
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Results and model improvements
45
Figure 5.17: Criteria score of the best found solutions.
on recycled resources. This criterion was constructed using piecewise functions as described
in Section 5.2.2. The parameter inputs and the intervals for the value function can be seen in
Appendix C. Here a binary vector an,i is used to indicate if component n fulfills sub-criteria
i. The decision variable of this model is xn (the number of units of component n) is used
to find a weighted average of the score of the criteria based on the investment. As the score
of the criteria is limited by the binary vector an,i if any component does not perform well, a
high scoring solution is not feasible. A solution only consing of bus conversions will, in this
case, have a score of 3, while a solution only consing of mini-busses or mini-vans will, in this
case, only have a score of 1. meaning that the score of this criteria never will be >4. This
indicates how important it is to ensure the correct parameter values and intervals for the value
functions. The model is only as good as the quality of these numbers. Suppose the parameter
values and value function do not correctly reflect reality or the value for the DMs. In that case,
the insights gained from this model are limited and come with great uncertainty.
5.4.2
Making the model Interactive
As multiple solution alternatives were found to have the same score, this creates an opportu-
nity to involve the DMs again, making the method interactive. By involving the DM again
the most fit solution alternative can be selected by investigating marginal changes in the dif-
ferent alternatives. This also allows the DMs to refine their preferences. As different solution
alternatives is presented to the DM they may feel a slight preference to solutions performing
in a certain way even though they have the same total score.
It is suggested that the 16 points defined previously as the midpoints of each cluster is used
in this step. As these solution alternatives have the same criteria scores it is suggested to go
a step further back looking at Sm for the most important criteria. Sm was the score of the
criteria before it was converted into a 5-point scale.
This step in the proposed procedure can be tailored to fit the circumstances of the case. It
may be relevant to go over the highest weighed criteria again in collaboration with the DM.
Maybe it would be better to do an investigation of the best found solutions and evaluate which
ones seem fit, or maybe simply pick a random solution within the set to be the final solution.
Alternatively the set could chosen simply by choosing the cheapest option or by ranking the
set on other criteria or factors not included in the model.
The for SOLUTINSplus project this thesis proposes the following.
==PAGE:52==
5.4 Results and model improvements
46
Selecting the best solution alternative
One way to carry out this investigation in collaboration with the DM could be to compare the
Sm of the most important criteria for the 16 solution alternatives. Here the third level weights
for the criteria illustrated in Appendix B can be used. The reason that the reduced attribute
tree is not used in this case has to do with the construction of this tree. The selection of criteria
to go into the reduced attribute tree was primarily based on the variation of the criteria scores
(on the 5-point scale), but for the 16 solution alternatives that are to be investigated, the
variation of the criteria scores is 0.
This step can be carried out in multiple ways, and the method should be selected based on the
DMs. In a case where there are only a few DMs, it may be insightful to do a detailed evaluation
of the different solution alternatives across many criteria. This process may help the DMs learn
more about their preferences as the solutions alternatives now can be exemplified. This method
is not recommended if more than 7 Вұ 2 alternatives or criteria are to be investigated (Sinha
et al. 2013).
While in a case like this, where there are many different DMs and вүҘ7Вұ2 solution alternatives,
a more crude approach may be needed as the resources needed to get inputs from all DMs
would be significantly higher than if inputs are only needed by a selected few.
This thesis proposes the following procedure for this step:
1. Identify the criteria with the highest 3rd level weights that have not yet been investigated.
2. Select the best performing half of the solutions alternatives based on Sm.
3. Repeat steps 1 and 2 until only one solution alternative is left.
By following the above procedure, a solution alternative that performers well (relative to the
other alternatives) across some of the most important criteria will be selected. In this case,
where 16 solution alternatives are to be compared, the procedure would be done after four
iterations. In a case where more clusters were identified and therefore more solutions needed
to be compared, the number of iterations would still be limited. E.g., if 64 solutions were to
be compared, this could be done after six iterations.
Figure 5.18 Illustrated the performance of the 16 solution alternatives over the most important
criteria where the variation of Sm across all 16 solution alternatives are different. Note that the
most important criteria are the criteria with the highest 3rd level scores in the attribute tree in
Appendix B. In Figure 5.18 the performance of each alternative within a criterion is evaluated
relative to the other alternatives by normalizing Sm. The figure shows how the solutions have
a trade-off where no single solution outranks the others across all criteria.
Out of the 16 solution alternatives, the 8 best performing solutions within c8 - Impact on GHG
emissions are related to cluster no. 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 13. From this set, the 4 best-performing
solution alternatives within c7 - Ease of implementation are the ones related to cluster no. 5,
2, 6, 11. The size of this set is reduced to the two best performing solutions alternates with
c6 - Alignment with supra-national/national/city legislation regulations, which are related to
cluster no. 5 and 11. Finally, the best-performing solution of this set within criterion c32 -
Impact on national/local budget is the one representing cluster no. 5. Meaning that the final
solution is chosen to be x1 = 86, x2 = 2614, x3 = 65, x4 = 389.
==PAGE:53==
5.4 Results and model improvements
47
Figure 5.18: Normalized score of Sm for the most 6 highest weighed (3-level) criteria where
V ar(Sm) > 0.
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 6
Proposed framework
The framework developed in Chapter 5 was created based on stepwise choices. Meaning that
after a modeling or calculation step was done, a choice of the appropriate next step was
considered. This helped tailor the framework to the case and the actual results found after
each step in the framework. But this also makes it diп¬Җicult to make a holistic evaluation of
what methods to use in each step of the framework to ensure the best results. Meaning that
a choice made early in the process may seem optimal for the following step but may lead to a
non-optimal procedure considering the entire problem and final solution.
In this section, the framework which was presented in Chapter 5, will be summarized, and
possible improvements will be proposed.
The purpose of this thesis was to investigate the use of Multi-Criteria Decision Making meth-
ods in combination with Multi-Objective Optimization and, based on the findings, build a
framework that can be used to configure a good combination of electric public transport al-
ternatives in Kathmandu in a way that maximizes value to the local stakeholders given their
set of preferences. By following the developed framework, a MOP-MCDM-hybrid procedure
is proposed. The main process flow of the framework can be seen in Figure 6.1 and is fur-
ther described in the following text. In Figure 6.1 the colored areas with the labels вҖқMCDMвҖқ
and вҖқMOPвҖқ indicate within which community the majority of the methods used originated,
highlighting how the framework is an interactive MOP-MCDM-hybrid procedure.
Figure 6.1: Illustration of flow of the proposed framework including area from here the main
methods used originates.
==PAGE:55==
6 Proposed framework
49
The proposed framework includes the following steps:
1. Define model characteristics:
The characteristics of the model have a high affect on the effectiveness of this method as
it was tailored to a specific case.
In this case, the problem is defined as a MaOP as it has >3 criteria. Some work had
already been done to extract the DMsвҖҷ preferences as the SMART was intended to be
used, making this model a priori. This information combined, makes the case fit for
converting the MaOP to an SOP by using the Weighted Sum method by aggregating the
objectives of the problem into one. The decision variables, in this case, is the number
of units of each transport alternatives considered. In this case, the objective function
is discontinuous as the value functions convert the scores Sm into integer values in the
range [1; 5].
The above means that the proposed framework is made of a priori MaOPs with discon-
tinuous value functions.
2. Develop SOP heuristic:
The SOP heuristic should be able to solve any feasible instance of the problem.
Preference weighs are multiplied with the score of each criteria in the objective function
fвҖІ
m(x). The single-objective optimization problem has the following objective function:
max
xвҲҲв„ҰF(x) =
M
вҲ‘
m=1
wmfвҖІ
m(x)
where M is the number of objectives, x is an N-dimensional decision vector, в„Ұdenotes
the feasible region, wm вүҘ0 ,вҲ‘wm = 1.
3. Reduce objective dimensionality:
The objective dimensionality reduction is carried out based on several simulations of
different feasible solutions alternatives. Here the criteria scores are investigated based
on variation and correlation. The dimensionality of the reduced model is determined in
an evaluation of the variance and correlation of all criteria, while keeping in mind DMs
cannot handle too many objectives else the problem becomes incomprehensible for them.
The weights of the reduced model is normalized so that the weights sum to 100% and
the reduced attribute tree is constructed to help illustrate for the DM which criteria is
kept in the model.
4. Optimize solution:
The best solution(s) is found using an Evolutionary Algorithm with Tournament selection,
One-Point Crossover, and One-Point Mutation. The parameters are tuned to get a well-
performing algorithm. The final population is saved for the next step.
5. Select the best solution alternative:
The population from the previous step is investigated using k-means clustering to identify
a set of diverse best solutions. These solutions have the same objective value, though the
values of the decision variables are different. The set of best solutions is evaluated using
a heuristic/procedure that is deemed fitting for the case characteristics and resources
available.
==PAGE:56==
6.1 Evaluation of framework and improvement
50
6.1
Evaluation of framework and improvement
As stated earlier, the framework used so far was created based on stepwise choices. Meaning
that after a modeling or calculation step, a choice of the appropriate next step was considered.
This helped tailor the framework to the case and the actual results found after each step in the
framework. But this also made it diп¬Җicult to make a holistic evaluation of what methods to use
in which steps to ensure the best results. Meaning that a choice made early in the process may
seem optimal for the following step, but may lead to a non-optimal procedure considering the
entire problem and final solution. This was seen in the best score found after the optimization
step. Here, the best score was found to be 4.2870 in the original model containing all 36 criteria.
But when looking at the simulated solutions in Section 5.2.4 a solution was found to have a
score of 4.2999. This indicates that the dimensionality of the problem was reduced to much,
leaving out too much of the original information.
In order to improve on the above points a second iteration of the procedure in the proposed
framework is carried out.
6.2
Second iteration of procedure of the proposed
framework
For the second iteration of the procedure of the framework developed in this thesis, the main
alteration will be to the number of dimensions included in the reduced model in step 3 Reduce
objective dimensionality and the parameter tuning in step 4 Optimize solution.
1. Define model characteristics:
No changes made.
2. Develop SOP heuristic:
No changes made.
3. Reduce objective dimensionality:
In the first iteration, 7 criteria cover вүҲ90.50% of the variance in the simulated dataset.
The model with the reduced dimensions was then used in the optimization part of the
framework to identify a set of good performing solutions. It was later found that the
best solution alternatives were good solutions, but better scoring solution alternatives had
been found in the simulation. This poses an interesting trade-off decision that needs to
be taken into account when modeling: a trade-off between reducing the model complexity
while keeping important information.
In this iteration of the framework we seek to keep more of the original information in
the model. Therefor when constructing the reduced model the variance cut-off value is
вүҘ0.001, and the number of criteria is reduced from 36 to 18 while maintaining вүҲ99.82%
of the variance in the model. The reduced attribute tree can be fund in Appendix H.
The reduced model contain the following dimensions:
вҖў c1 - Net Present Value,
вҖў c2 - Internal Rate of Return,
вҖў c3 - Payback period,
вҖў c6 - Alignment with supra-national/national/city legislation regulations,
вҖў c7 - Ease of implementation (in terms of administrative barriers)
==PAGE:57==
6.2 Second iteration of procedure of the proposed framework
51
вҖў c8 - Impact on GHG emissions,
вҖў c9 - NOx emissions abated
вҖў c10 - PM2.5 emissions abated
вҖў c11 - Impact on noise
вҖў c12 - Effect on recycled resources,
вҖў c14 - Access to pick-up/delivery locations (freight)
вҖў c15 - Affordability of e-mobility services,
вҖў c21 - Impact on charging safety
вҖў c22 - Impact on security
вҖў c32 - Impact on national/local budget.
вҖў c33 - Fossil fuel imports abated
вҖў c34 - Other imports affected
вҖў c35 - Job creation
4. Optimize solution:
When optimizing this model using the EA, the best score for any solution alternative
was found to be 4.2999 with the 36 criteria scores being [5, 4, 3, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 2, 1,
4, 5, 1, 1, 3, 2, 2, 1, 4, 1, 2, 5, 4, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 5, 3, 5, 5, 3]. These scores can be seen illustrated
in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Criteria score of the best found solutions for the second iteration of the proposed
framework.
When comparing the criteria scores of the solution alternatives found in the first iteration
with the ones in the second iteration the only difference is the score of c22 - Impact on
security. This increase in c22 leads to an increase of вүҲ0.3% in the total score of the
solution.
Due to the increased size of the model, the run time of the EA where kMax = 100
and PSize = 50 is increased from вүҲ8sec. in the first reduced model with 7 criteria
to вүҲ20sec. in the second reduced model with 18 criteria. This difference in run time
may not seem to be much, but relative to each other, it is a significant increase in time
required when running the EA on the reduced model with 7 criteria compared to the
reduced model with 18. The same trend is seen when the population size and number of
iterations are increased in order to get a bigger set of good solution alternatives. Here
the difference in run time is not second but hours.
==PAGE:58==
6.2 Second iteration of procedure of the proposed framework
52
kMax and PSize may need to be adjusted to the resources available and the preferred
size and quality of the population.
Here it is up to the DM or systems engineer to
determine what the preferred scenario is.
The trade-off is between having a diverse
population covering a big area of the solution space while tuning the parameters so that
the run time does not exceed the time available for the task.
When running the EA to get a bigger population size in the second iteration of the
framework kMax = 100, 000 and PSize = 1, 000. This is fewer iterations and a smaller
population size than used in the first iteration.
These numbers have been decreased
in order to get a good population within 3 hours. Here it was found that 998 unique
individuals in the population had a total score of 4.2999. An overview of the maximum,
minimum, and average value of x1, x2, x3, and x4 for this instance can be seen in Table
6.1.
Table 6.1: Overview of maximum, minimum, and average of x1, x2, x3, x4 for an instance of
the EA where pSize = 1, 000 and kMax = 100, 000.
x1
x2
x3
x4
Maximum
183
2,449
136
358
Minimum
104
2,268
40
255
Average
144
2,359
78
303
5. Select the best solution alternative:
A k-means clustering was carried out as in the first iteration. This resulted in 12 clusters,
meaning that 12 solution alternatives are evaluated in the final step of the proposed
framework. An overview of the 12 clusterвҖҷs characteristics and mean data points can be
found in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2: Overview of cluster no., size, and mean data point within each cluster for the second
iteration of the proposed framework.
Cluster no.
Cluster size
avg. x1
avg. x2
avg. x3
avg. x4
1
97
161
2381
74
298
2
78
152
2345
86
316
3
79
146
2309
67
318
4
88
143
2403
76
326
5
95
134
2379
73
283
6
97
148
2310
72
287
7
83
137
2366
66
314
8
89
139
2381
101
307
9
64
137
2336
86
281
10
86
143
2427
74
296
11
62
143
2338
62
293
12
80
139
2314
95
312
In the end, the best solution is found by using the procedure suggested in Section 5.4.2.
Here [143, 2403, 76, 326] was chosen as the best solution alternative.
When investigating the criteria scores of this solution, it is found that for the criteria
where the solution alternative scores badly (score of 1 or 2), non of the simulated feasible
solutions (presented en Section 5.2.4) performs any better - except for in c21.
This
indicates that due to the parameter input values and construction of the value functions,
it will not be possible to get a feasible solution that also performs well within all criteria
with the four components of this problem.
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Second iteration of procedure of the proposed framework
53
In Section 5.2.4 it was found that generally, there was an upward trend for the total score
as the total number of transport units increased. But for criteria as c21 - Impact on
charging safety, an increase in the number of units will decrease the score of the criterion.
This highlights how the best solutions are trade-off solutions where a compromise is
found between the criteria based on the preferences of the DMs.
It also illustrates
the importance of ensuring that the parameter input values and intervals for the value
functions are correct. The model is only as good as the quality of these numbers. Suppose
the parameter values and value function do not correctly reflect reality or the value for
the DMs. In that case, the insights gained from this model are limited and come with
great uncertainty.
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 7
Uncertainties and model
improvements
In this section some of the uncertainties related to the specific framework developed and the
case, will be discussed. Furthermore, possible improvements will be suggested.
Defining the problem and creating the value functions
How the problem is defined creates a basis for all following steps of the framework. If the
objective function and constraints do not reflect the preferences of the DM, the insights gained
from the analysis are limited, and the results are inaccurate.
In the SOLUTIONSplus-case the decision variables x1, x2, x3, and x4 are assumed to be
independent, in order to simplify the model. However, in reality, the number of units for each
solution component might affect how the other components perform within a criterion. One
way of implementing this dependence could be to add a reward or penalty in the objective
function if the sum or product of given components is within a given range.
In this thesis, the constraints of the model presented in Section 5.2.3 have not been discussed
much, as they were assumed to be fixed and given. However, if the budget constraint changed,
allowing for more or fewer units, the best-found solution would in all likelihood also change.
In this case, it was assumed that the budget was the tightest constraint, ensuring an upper
bound for the solution. However, it should be investigated if other constants, such as demand
or electricity supply, are more binding.
A modeling choice made in the early steps of the framework was to make the value functions
discontinuous. The effects of this choice were especially seen after the optimization step. In
this step of the framework, it was found that multiple solution alternatives could have the
same total score. For these solution alternatives, marginal changes in the number of units of
each component did not affect the overall score across any criteria. If the value functions were
continuous, this would not be the case, and one optimal solution could have been identified.
The procedure of the framework could then be stopped after step 4 Optimize Solution.
Multiple methods could be used to convert the 5-point scaled discontinuous value functions
to continuous value fictions. One could use the Bisection method where the halfway point is
identified for the criteria score between two predefined endpoints. Then the mid-points between
the endpoint and the previously found mid-point are identified. Alternatively, the Difference
method can be used. Here Sm is divided into equal intervals, and the increase in value for each
intervals is evaluated. (Barfod and Leleur 2021)
For both the Bisection and Difference method it is helpful to know the endpoints of the scale.
However, this is not the case for the value functions of all 36 criteria. In order to convert the
discontinuous value functions to continuous value fictions, it may be reasonable to convert the
scales from scales ranging from ] вҲ’вҲһ; вҲһ] to local scales with defined endpoints. Alternatively,
one could set a realistic endpoint for the scale, and then if Sm is below or above these endpoints,
==PAGE:61==
7 Uncertainties and model improvements
55
the criteria score is set to 1 or 5, respectively. Figure 7.1 (b) and (c) illustrates how the value
function for c8 - Impact on GHG emissions may have looked if the Bisection and Difference
method was used compared to the original discontinuous value function for c8.
(a) Value function for c8 - Impact on GHG emissions as defined in Section 5.2.2.
(b) Example of value function for c8 - Impact on GHG emissions using the Bisection method.
(c) Example of value function for c8 - Impact on GHG emissions using the Difference method.
Figure 7.1: Alliterative ways of constructing the value function for criterion 8.
==PAGE:62==
7 Uncertainties and model improvements
56
On multiple occasions in this thesis, it has been stated that a significant uncertainty in the
model is related to the construction of the value functions, as the input parameters and value
function intervals are currently not reflecting reality or the value to the DMs. Due to limited
data and time, some simplifications had been made to the value functions, and many of the
parameter inputs were chosen arbitrarily. To illustrate the impact of the input parametersвҖҷ
value on the criteria scores, a crude sensitivity analysis has been carried out in c8 - Impact on
GHG emissions. When evaluating the score of c8 the percentage change method presented in
Section 5.2.2 and in Appendix C is used to find Sm.
This crude sensitivity analysis investigates the impact on the criterion score as different values
of the input parameters an and B are tested on the best found solution. Figure 7.2 shows the
value of Sm based on the values of an and B, and Figure 7.3 shows the corresponding criteria
score. The output values Sm and score are shown in the colored areas of the tables. The
yellow color indicates a small or no change to the output value, while the red indicates that
the score has decreased, and the green indicates that the score has increased. From Figure
7.2 and Figure 7.3 it can be seen that if the values of the elements in vector a are increased,
Sm also increases, while the criteria score remains at 5. As 5 is the best score on the value
functionвҖҷs scale, no higher score can be obtained. If a, on the other hand, decreases, then Sm
and the score of the criteria also decreases.
The sensitivity analysis highlights the importance of estimating the parameter inputs of the
value function correctly. A too optimistic or pessimistic assessment of these parameters will
affect the total score of the solution and ultimately what solution alternative is chosen at the
end of the framework.
If the resources does not allow for a elaborate review of the value functions, this thesis suggest
focusing in the most important highest weighed criteria.
Figure 7.2: Value of S8 if an and/or B increase or decrease.
Figure 7.3: Score of c8 if an and/or B increase or decrease.
In addition to reviewing the parameter inputs for all criteria, the value function intervals
determining the criteria scores should also be reviewed. When reviewing the distribution of
the c8 criterion score of the simulated solution alternatives in Section 5.2.4, it can be seen
==PAGE:63==
7 Uncertainties and model improvements
57
that most feasible solutions score 5. Assuming that a and B are correct, the value functionвҖҷs
intervals may be reconsidered to get a more uniform distribution of scores. Figure 7.4 (a) shows
a histogram of the current distribution of the 10.000 simulated solutionsвҖҷ scores within c8. If
the intervals of the value function was increased by 3 (as seen in Figure 7.5) the distribution
would resemble the histogram in Figure 7.4 (b).
(a) Current value function.
(b) Value function with 3x as big intervals.
Figure 7.4: Histograms of score for criterion 8 depending on size of the value functions intervals.
Figure 7.5: Reviewed value function for c8 - Impact on GHG emissions with 3 times as big
intervals.
In order to use the full 5-point scale, this thesis recommends that when the SOLUTIONSplus
have determined the correct input parameters, the intervals of the value functions are reviewed.
This can be done by investigating the distribution of the criteria scores for randomly simulated
feasible solutions. If the majority of the solutionsвҖҷ scores are identical, the intervals should
be adjusted. This will ensure that more marginal improvements in solution alternatives are
rewarded. E.g., with the current value function most feasible solutions within c8 get a score
of 5, making it diп¬Җicult to distinguish good performing solutions from excellent ones.
Dimensionality reduction and optimization
In the proposed framework, the modeling choices made in each step influence the following sec-
tionsвҖҷ results. When reducing the dimensions of the problem to a set of dimensions lower than
36, information is removed from the model. Some of this information may not significantly
==PAGE:64==
7 Uncertainties and model improvements
58
affect the total score of the solutions alternatives, e.g. if the variance of a specific dimension/cri-
teria is close to 0. However, other information may be crucial to distinguish good-performing
solutions from the best performing solutions. One could choose not to reduce the dimensions
of the problem to ensure that all information is kept within the model. Nevertheless, this will
increase the complexity of the model, both regarding comprehension and computational cost.
Therefore, the DMs should be involved when determining the dimensionality of the model that
is to be optimized and what criteria should be included. Together with the DM, a reasonable
trade-off between the model dimensions and resources available should be found.
In this thesis, the variation within each criterion was used when determining what dimension-
s/criteria to keep in the model. However, it is recommended by this thesis to also look into
correlations between the criteria when the data inputs and value functions have been refined.
Non-conflicting (uncorrelated) criteria should be investigated and possibly removed. The pro-
cess of going over the correlation matrix may provide further insights into the relationships
between criteria that may not have been obvious when the criteria and value functions were
constructed.
Instead of basing the dimensionality reduction on the variance in the model, a PCA could also
be used. However, this will require further investigation into how the objective function should
be adjusted to fit the new dimensions.
For the optimization step, different metaheuristics may be used. In this thesis, the SA and
an EA were used. It was found that the EA was converging quicker than the SA. In addition
to this, the EA benefited from creating a population that could be used at later steps in
the framework.
In the EA, choices were made regarding which methods for the selection,
crossover, mutation, and replacement were used. The choice of these methods highly affects
the algorithmвҖҷs performance, and it may benefit the performance to change some of these
methods. In this thesis, simplicity and interpretability were highly regarded when choosing
the methods for the selection, crossover, mutation, and replacement. An improvement to the
EA could be to enhance diversity in the populations when doing the crossover.
In the optimization step, the parameters PSize and KMax should be tuned to fit the case. If
only a single or few good-performing solution alternatives are sought, these values can be kept
relatively low (in this case around PSize = 50 and KMax = 100), but if a bigger population
is sought, PSize can be increased. If most of the populationвҖҷs solution alternatives are sought
to be good-performing solutions, then KMax should also be increased.
Suppose the run time of the metaheuristic and the complexity of the problem does not matter.
In that case, one could omit these steps of the framework and run the simulation in Section
5.2.4 for a longer time, increasing the chance of creating a solution alternative that performers
optimally.
Finding the best solution
In step 5 of the proposed framework, the best solution alternative is found. This step in the
framework may be tailored to fit the circumstances of the case. It may be relevant to go over
the highest weighed criteria again in collaboration with the DM. Maybe it would be better to
investigate the best-found solutions and evaluate which ones seem fit, or maybe pick a random
solution within the set to be the final solution. Alternatively, the best set could be found by
choosing the cheapest option or by ranking the set on other criteria not included in the model.
If the objective function of the problem is continuous, the final step may be omitted as one
unique best-performing solution can be identified in the optimization step. But it may still be
helpful to keep step 5, as further insights into the solution may be gained (Sinha et al. 2013).
E.g., the PSize and kMax can be tuned to create a big population with good-performing
==PAGE:65==
7 Uncertainties and model improvements
59
individuals. In that case, even though one solution alternative performs better than the rest,
through clustering, the DM may gain insights into what types of solution alternatives generally
perform well. They may also have the chance to choose another good (but not optimal) solution
based on other criteria not included in the model. The DM may also wish to make a pairwise
comparison between a set of good-performing solutions and use the proposed method as an
elaborate screening analysis.
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 8
Summary, further works,
and conclusions
In many years methods within the MOP community has been developed mainly independently
from the MCDM community. However, in recent decades, the MOP and MCDM communities
have recognized that the two communities have a lot to offer each other and have begun to
grow together (Branke 2016). Combining methods used in MOP (specifically methods used
to solve MaOP) with methods used within MCDM has been sought to counteract some of the
challenges one may experience when solving MaOPs. These challenges relate to diп¬Җiculties in
handling too many objectives, providing precise preferences for all objectives, understanding
correlations and conflicts between objectives, and more. (Sekizaki, Nishizaki, and Hayashida
2019)
In Section 3.3 existing MOP-MCDM-hybrid methods were reviewed. It was found that most
of the articles reviewed focused on posteriori methods and finding the Pareto front. Because
the Pareto front was sought and intelligent MOP techniques were used, many of the methods
used Synthesizing Criterion-based MCDM Approaches where outranking relations are used.
The size of the cases was limited, with the biggest consisting of 11 objectives. In the literature
review it was found that no single state-of-the-art hybrid method has been established, and
the methods are designed for specific uses. However, some of the most promising frameworks
that combine techniques from MOP with MCDM included:
вҖў Use predefined preferences extracted using an MCDM method to guide the search of the
MOP and thereby limit the search to the most interesting region of the Pareto front for
the DM. (Branke 2016)
вҖў Generating the best-known Pareto set and then using an MCDM method to guide the
DM in selecting the best solution from the set. (Ridha et al. 2021) (Malekmohammadi,
Zahraie, and Kerachian 2011)
вҖў Use an interactive method where the techniques from MOP and MCDM are interleaving.
(Branke 2016)
вҖў First, reduce the dimensionality of the problem, then extract the DMвҖҷs preference vector,
and then solve the problem using an EA. This method is referred to as simplify and solve.
(Sinha et al. 2013)
вҖў Use a machine-learning-based framework that learns the underlying DMвҖҷs preference-
structure based on the Pareto set found. (Duro et al. 2014)
In this thesis, the use of Multi-Criteria Decision Making in combination with Multi-Objective
Optimization was investigated. Based on the findings, a framework was developed to configure
a good combination of electric public transport alternatives in Kathmandu. The framework
follows a five-step procedure. First, the model characteristics are defined, and the problem is
==PAGE:67==
8 Summary, further works, and conclusions
61
converted into a single-objective optimization problem. A heuristic is then developed to solve
any feasible solution. In order to decrease complexity and computational cost, the dimensions
of the model are reduced. Hence, creating a model with fewer objectives. An EA is used
to optimize the solution alternatives, and a set of good-performing solutions within the final
population of the algorithm is found by k-means clustering. The best solution alternative is
then identified.
The proposed framework combines some of the techniques identified in the literature review. In
this framework, predefined preference was extracted using an MCDM method. Then a MaOP
was developed to find a set of optimal solutions, and an additional MCDM method was used
to evaluate and identify the best solution alternative - making the hybrid model interactive.
The proposed framework combines MOP and MCDM in such a way that allows the DM to
learn about the problem and solution alternatives throughout the process of refining the model
and optimizing the solution. The insights gained by using this framework may not only be
related to identifying one single optimal solution but also gaining a better understanding of
the problem itself.
By following the proposed framework, the best configuration of electric public transport alter-
natives in Kathmandu was found to be 143 e-busses, 2403 e-3 wheelers, 72 e-shuttle vans, and
326 e-micro buses. However, due to uncertainties related to the modelвҖҷs input parameters and
the construction of the value functions, this thesis recommends that these aspects are reviewed
to ensure that the best solution alternatives found are optimal and reflect the values of the
decision-makers.
The initial results of the proposed framework indicate a potential for the framework being
eп¬Җicient at reducing the complexity of the problem while ensuring a high quality of the chosen
solution alternative, as the DM is allowed to be included interactively in the modelling steps
of the framework.
Further work should be done to identify the best methods used within the framework. E.g.,
how to best reduce the problemвҖҷs dimensionality while keeping as much important information
in the model as possible, or how the EA could be refined, so more diverse solution alternatives
are generated in the cross-over.
Due to the problemвҖҷs characteristics, the proposed framework is tailored to cases where the
objective function is discontinuous, and the problem is addressed a priori. However, by fol-
lowing the proposed framework, an optimal solution configuration of other Many-Objective
Optimization Problems might also be found, and further modifications can be made to the
framework to allow for other types of problems.
==PAGE:68==
Appendices
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A
Overview of literature
review
==PAGE:70==
Authors
Title
Publication 
year
Type
Approx. No. 
Citations
Purpose
Carlos A. Coello 
Coello
A comprehensive survey of 
evolutionary-based 
multiobjective optimization 
techniques
1999 Journal article
1945 Critical review of the most important 
evolutionary-based multiobjective optimization 
techniques developed over the years.
Oliver Cuate, Adriana 
Lara, Oliver Schutze
A local exploration tool for 
linear many objective 
optimization problems
2016 Conference 
paper
5 Presents a tool, Pareto Explorer, specifically 
adapted for a preference-based local 
exploration of solutions, to deal with linear 
many objective optimization problems.
Handing Wang, 
Markus Olhofer, 
Yaochu Jin
A mini-review on preference 
modelling and articulation in 
multi-objective optimization: 
current status and challenges
2017 Article
41 Provides a concise review on preference-based 
multi-objective optimization, including various 
preference modelling methods and existing 
preference-based optimization methods, as 
well as a brief discussion of the main future 
challenges.
Carlos A. Coello 
Coello
A survey of constraint 
handling techniques used with 
evolutionary algorithms
1999 Article
165 The main goal of this paper is to provide a 
detailed and comprehensive survey of the 
many constraint handling approaches that have 
been proposed for evolutionary algorithms.
Shinya Sekizaki, Ichiro 
Nishizaki, Tomohiro 
Hayashida
A many-objective evolutionary 
algorithm incorporating 
decision maker's preference 
and its application to 
management of the electricity 
distribution network
2019 Journal article
1 This paper proposes a step-by-step decision 
making approach that incorporates preferences 
of a decision maker into a many-objective 
evolutionary algorithm.
Dimo Brockhoff, 
Eckart Zitzler
Are all objectives necessary? 
On dimensionality reduction in 
evolutionary multiobjective 
optimization
2006 Journal article
254 Under which conditions an objective reduction 
is feasible, and how a minimum set of 
objectives can be computed.
Dimo Brockhoff , 
Eckart Zitzler
Dimensionality Reduction in 
Multiobjective Optimization: 
The Minimum Objective 
Subset Problem
2006 Article
63 Whether all objectives are actually necessary 
and whether some of the objectives may be 
omitted
Xuan Hung Nguyen, 
Lam Thu Bui, Cao 
Truong Tran
Improving many objective 
optimisation algorithms using 
objective dimensionality 
reduction
2019 Article
3 This paper studies the interdependence of 
objective reduction algorithms on MaOEAs. 
Experimental results show that combining an 
objective reduction algorithm with an MOEA 
can only successfully remove redundant 
objectives when the total number of objectives 
is small.
JГјrgen Branke, 
Kalyanmoy Deb
Integrating User Preferences 
into Evolutionary Multi-
Objective Optimization
2004 Book chapter
238 It is argue that preference knowledge should be 
used to focus the search on the most 
interesting (from a userвҖҷs perspective) areas of 
the Pareto-optimal front.
Peter J. Fleming, 
Robin C. Purshouse, 
Robert J. Lygoe
Many-Objective Optimization: 
An Engineering Design 
Perspective
2005 Book chapter
402 Show design approaches for Many Objective 
Optimization, and highlight issues with 
scalability 
Robin Purshouse,  
Kalyanmoy Deb, 
Maszatul Mansor,  
Sanaz Mostaghim, Rui 
Wang
A Review of Hybrid 
Evolutionary Multiple Criteria 
Decision Making Methods
2014 Conference 
paper
104 This paper reviews techniques which have 
combined evolutionary multi-objective 
optimization and multiple criteria decision 
making. 
==PAGE:71==
Mark Velasquez, 
Patrick T. Hester
An Analysis of Multi-Criteria 
Decision Making Methods
2013 Review article
1322 Performs a literature review of common Multi-
Criteria Decision Making methods, examines 
the advantages and disadvantages of the 
identified methods
D.F Jones, S. K 
Mirrazavi, M Tamiz
Multi-objective meta-
heuristics: An overview of the 
current state-of-the-art
2002 Journal article
738 Overview of meta-heuristics methods utilized 
within the paradigm of multi-objective 
programming.
Kalyanmoy Deb
Multi-objective Optimization
2014 Book chapter
1717 Discuss the fundamental principles of multi-
objective optimization, the differences 
between multi-objective optimization and 
single-objective optimization, and describe a 
few well-known classical and evolutionary 
algorithms for multi-objective optimization
Abdullah Konak, 
David W. Coit, Alice E. 
Smith
Multi-objective optimization 
using genetic algorithms: A 
tutorial
2006 Book chapter
3344 An overview and tutorial is presented 
describing genetic algorithms (GA) developed 
specifically for problems with multiple 
objectives. 
Dhish Kumar Saxena, 
Joao A. Duro, 
Ashutosh Tiwari, 
Kalyanmoy Deb, 
Qingfu Zhang
Objective reduction in many-
objective optimization: linear 
and nonlinear algorithms
2013 Journal article
262 This paper presents frameworks for linear and 
nonlinear objective reduction algorithms.
Kalyanmoy Deb, Dhish 
Kumar Saxena
On finding Pareto-optimal 
solutions through 
dimensionality reduction for 
certain large-dimensional 
multi-objective optimization 
problems
2014 Article
207 Propose an EMO procedure for solving those 
large-objective (M) problems, which 
degenerate to possess a lower- dimensional 
Pareto-optimal front (lower than M).
Per J. Agrell
On redundancy in multi 
criteria decision making
1995 Article
30 Analogies with  Multi   Criteria Decision Making 
(MCDM) are indicated and it  is argued that the 
redundancy concept should be used as a  
regular feature  in conditioning and analysis of 
Multi  Criteria Programs.
Patrick Ngatchou, 
Anahita Zarei, M. A. El-
Sharkawi 
Pareto Multi Objective 
Optimization
2005 Conference 
paper
512 Give fundamental Knowledge on solving multi-
objective optimization problems. The focus is 
on
techniques for efficient generation of the 
Pareto frontier.
Y. De Smet, B. 
Mareschal, C. Verly
Extending the PROMETHEE II 
method to continuous and 
combinatorial multi-objective 
optimization problems: a first 
model.
2009 Journal article
6 The aim of this paper is to present an approach 
inspired by genetic algorithms that allows to 
overcome these difficulties with cases involving 
many alternatives
Piotr Czyzak, Andrzej 
Jaszkiewicz
Pareto Simulated Annealing - 
A Metaheuristic Technique for 
Multiple-Objective 
Combinatorial Optimization
1998 Journal article
905 The paper presents a multiple-objective 
metaheuristic procedure - Pareto simulated 
annealing. The goal of the procedure is to find 
in a relatively short time a good approximation 
of the set of efficient solutions of a multiple 
objective combinatorial optimization problem.
R.T. Marler, J.S. Arora Survey of multi-objective 
optimization methods for 
engineering
2004 Review article
4473 A survey of current continuous non-linear multi-
objective optimization concepts and methods
Kai Zhang, Chaonan 
Shen, Juanjuan He, 
Gary G. Yen
Knee based multimodal multi-
objective evolutionary 
algorithm for decision making
2021 Journal article
3 In this paper proposes a knee based 
evolutionary algorithm, named MMO-EvoKnee, 
which incorporates MCDM strategy into solving 
MMOPs.
==PAGE:72==
JoГЈo A. Duro, Dhish 
Kumar Saxen, 
Kalyanmoy Deb, 
Qingfu Zhang 
Machine learning based 
decision support for many-
objective optimization 
problems
2014 Journal article
19 This paper proposes a machine
learning based framework to counter the 
limitations often related to solving MaOPs
Juergen Branke
MCDA and Multiobjective 
Evolutionary Algorithms
2016 Book chapter
30 Surveys the state of the art of using preference 
information
within evolutionary multiobjective optimization
E. Triantaphyllou
Multi-Criteria Decision Making 
Methods
2000 Book chapter
3147 Description of MCDM methods: WSM, WPM, 
AHP, revised AHP, ELECTRE, and TOPSIS 
Hussein Mohammed 
Ridha, Chandima 
Gomes, Hashim 
Hizam, Masoud 
Ahmadipour,
Ali Asghar Heidari, 
Huiling Chen
Multi-objective optimization 
and multi-criteria decision-
making methods for optimal 
design of standalone 
photovoltaic system: A 
comprehensive review
2021 Journal article
24 The goals of this paper are to presents a 
comprehensive
review of the recent development in designing 
SAPV systems based on multi-objective 
optimization and multi-criteria decision-making 
methodologies
Usman Safder, Pouya 
Ifaei, ChangKyoo Yoo
Multi-scale smart 
management of integrated 
energy systems, Part 2: 
Weighted multi-objective 
optimization, multi-criteria 
decision making, and multi-
scale management (3M) 
methodology
2019 Journal article
14 A novel smart management approach is 
proposed for optimization, management, and 
analysis of integrated energy systems 
considering contemporary economic, safety, 
and environmental policies referred to as 3M 
methodology.
Donald E. Grierson 
Pareto multi-criteria decision 
making 
2008 Article
102 A multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) 
strategy is proposed that employs a trade-off-
analysis technique to identify compromise 
designs for which the competing criteria are 
mutually satisfied in a Pareto-optimal sense
Bahram 
Malekmohammadi, 
Banafsheh Zahraie, 
Reza Kerachian
Ranking solutions of multi-
objective reservoir operation 
optimization models using 
multi-criteria decision analysis
2011 Journal article
93 In this paper, ELECTRE-TRI method has been 
used for ranking the optimal solutions of Non-
dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm-II (NSGA-
II) which has been developed for multi-
objective operation optimization of a cascade 
system of reservoirs
Ankur Sinha, Dhish 
Kumar Saxena, 
Kalyanmoy Deb, 
Ashutosh Tiwari
Using objective reduction and 
interactive procedure to 
handle many-objective 
optimization problems
2013 Journal article
37 This paper presents a simplify and solve 
framework for handling many-objective 
optimization problems. In that, a given problem 
is simplified by identification and elimination of 
the redundant objectives, before interactively 
engaging the decision maker to converge to the 
most preferred solution on the Pareto-optimal 
front. 
Michael Bruhn Barfod 
and Steen Leleur
Decision Support and Strategic 
Assessment
2021 Course 
Compendium
- The compendium consists of three main parts 
about cost-benefit analysis (CBA) and risk 
analysis, multi-criteria decision analysis 
(MCDA), sustainability, and robustness in 
decision support and strategic assessment
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX B
SOLUTIONSplus attribute
tree
Figure B.1: The SOLUTIONSplus attribute tree (SOLUTIONSplus 2021a) width weights
==PAGE:74==
B SOLUTIONSplus attribute tree
68
Figure B.2: The SOLUTIONSplus attribute tree (SOLUTIONSplus 2021a) width weights
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX C
Value function overview
The following table contains all input parameters and equations used to generate the scores of
each criteria.
==PAGE:76==
Criteria 
Input parameters 
Method for evaluation 
Conversion to 5-ponit scale 
Note/assumptions 
c1 - Net Present 
Value 
 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘Ғрқ‘ғрқ‘үрқ‘ӣ: Net present value in вӮ¬ 
рқ‘Ғрқ‘ғрқ‘ү1 = 3000вӮ¬ 
рқ‘Ғрқ‘ғрқ‘ү2 = 1000вӮ¬ 
рқ‘Ғрқ‘ғрқ‘ү3 = 800вӮ¬ 
рқ‘Ғрқ‘ғрқ‘ү4 = 700вӮ¬ 
рқ‘Ҷ1 = вҲ‘рқ‘Ғрқ‘ғрқ‘үрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ1 =] вҲ’вҲһ; вҲ’2,000,000] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ1 =] вҲ’
2,000,000;вҲ’500,000] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ1 =] вҲ’500,000; 500,000] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ1 =]500,000;2,000,000] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ1 =]2,000,000; вҲһ] 
Solutions that can 
transport many people 
may be more beneficial 
than vehicles that 
cannot. 
 
c2 - Internal Rate of Return 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣ: investment in вӮ¬ 
рқ‘ҳрқ‘ӣ: IRR in % 
рқҗҫ1 = 50,000вӮ¬ 
рқҗҫ2 = 10,000вӮ¬ 
рқҗҫ3 = 40,000вӮ¬ 
рқҗҫ4 = 35,000вӮ¬ 
рқ‘ҳ1 = 0.03 
рқ‘ҳ2 = 0.04 
рқ‘ҳ3 = 0.03 
рқ‘ҳ4 = 0.01 
рқ‘Ҷ2 = вҲ‘
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘ҳрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
вҲ‘
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқҗҫрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ2 = ]вҲ’вҲһ; 0] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ2 =]0; 0.03] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ2 =]0.03; 0.05] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ2 =]0.05; 0.1] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ2 =]0.1; вҲһ] 
Bigger vehicles have a 
higher investment cost 
than smaller vehicles. 
Multi-purpose vehicles 
may have a higher IRR 
than singe purpose 
vehicles. 
c3 - Payback period 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣ: investment in вӮ¬ 
рқ‘ҳрқ‘ӣ: IRR in % 
рқ‘қрқ‘ӣ: Payback period in years 
 
рқ‘қ1 = 5 
рқ‘қ2 = 2 
рқ‘қ3 = 6 
рқ‘қ4 = 7 
рқ‘Ҷ3 = вҲ‘
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘қрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
вҲ‘
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқҗҫрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ3 = ]10; вҲһ] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ3 =]6; 10] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ3 =]3; 6] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ3 =]1; 3] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ3 = ]вҲ’вҲһ; 1] 
 
c4 вҖ“ Availability of external 
funding 
 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,рқ‘–: binary vector indicating 
whether or not the sub-criterion i 
is fulfilled 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = (1,1,1) 
рқ‘Һ2 = (1,1,1) 
рқ‘Һ3 = (1,1,1) 
рқ‘Һ4 = (1,1,1) 
рқ‘ 4,рқ‘ӣ=
{
 
 
 
 1
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 0
2
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 + рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = 1 вҲ§рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 0
3
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = 1 вҲ§рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 0
4
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = 0 вҲ§рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 1
5
(рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 = 1 вҲЁрқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = 1) вҲ§рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 1
 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ4
= {
1
рқ‘ 4,рқ‘ӣ= 1 вҲ§рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ> 0, вҲҖрқ‘ӣвҲҲрқ‘Ғ
вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘ 4,рқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
рқ‘Ӯрқ‘Ўв„Һрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘Өрқ‘–рқ‘ рқ‘’
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ4 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]1; 2.83] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]2.83; 3.66] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]3.66; 4.49] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]4.49; вҲһ] 
Solutions including local 
manufacturers increase 
the chance of getting 
government funding. 
c5 - Coherence with national 
plans and development 
goals 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,рқ‘–: binary vector indicating 
whether or not the sub-criterion i  
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = (1,1,1,1) 
рқ‘Һ2 = (1,1,1,1) 
рқ‘Һ3 = (1,1,1,1) 
рқ‘Һ4 = (1,1,1,1) 
рқ‘ 5,рқ‘ӣ=
{
 
 
 
 1
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,4 = 0
2
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 + рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 + рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 + рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,4 = 1
3
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 + рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 + рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 + рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,4 = 2
4
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 + рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 + рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 + рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,4 = 3
5
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,4 = 1
 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ5 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘ 5,рқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ4 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1.8] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]1.8; 2.6] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]2.6; 3.4] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]3.4; 4.2] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]4.2; вҲһ] 
 
==PAGE:77==
c6 - Alignment with supra-
national/national/city legislation & 
regulations 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: instances of uncertainties 
рқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ҡрқ‘қрқ‘ҷрқ‘Ұрқ‘ӣ: Binary variable 
describing if the component 
complies. 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ҡрқ‘қрқ‘ҷрқ‘Ұ1 = 1 
рқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ҡрқ‘қрқ‘ҷрқ‘Ұ2 = 1 
рқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ҡрқ‘қрқ‘ҷрқ‘Ұ3 = 1 
рқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ҡрқ‘қрқ‘ҷрқ‘Ұ4 = 1 
рқ‘Һ1 = 1 
рқ‘Һ2 = 0 
рқ‘Һ3 = 1 
рқ‘Һ4 = 1 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘ 6,рқ‘ӣ= {
2
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ> 3
5 вҲ’рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘ңрқ‘Ўв„Һрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘Өрқ‘–рқ‘ рқ‘’ 
рқ‘Ҷ6 = min
рқ‘ӣвҲҲрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ҡрқ‘қрқ‘ҷрқ‘Ұрқ‘ӣ) вӢ…вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘ 6,рқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ6 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ6 =]1; 2.49] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ6 =]2.49: 3.49] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ6 =]3.49; 4.49] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ6 =]4.49; вҲһ] 
Vehicle conversion is still 
not legally accepted. 
The business plan needs 
to comply with business 
regulations. 
Modularity may cause 
issues with regulations. 
c7 - Ease of 
implementation (in terms 
of administrative barriers) 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,рқ‘–: binary vector indicating 
whether or not the sub-criterion i 
is fulfilled 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = (0,0,1) 
рқ‘Һ2 = (1,0,1) 
рқ‘Һ3 = (1,0,1) 
рқ‘Һ4 = (1,0,1) 
рқ‘ 7,рқ‘ӣ=
{
 
 
 
 1
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 0
2
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 + рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = 1 вҲ§рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 0
3
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = 1 вҲ§рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 0
4
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = 0 вҲ§рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 1
5
(рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 = 1 вҲЁрқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = 1) вҲ§рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 1
 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ7 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘ 7,рқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ4 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1.8] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]1.8; 2.6] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]2.6; 3.4] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]3.4; 4.2] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]4.2; вҲһ] 
Vehicle conversion is still 
not legally accepted. 
Political and institutional 
bodies are needed for 
supporting the 
implementation of the 
project. 
c8 - Impact on GHG 
emissions 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: absolute mass of GHG 
emissions saved per unit added 
in tons 
B: Total emissions of baseline in 
tons 
рқ‘Һ1 = 44.2 
рқ‘Һ2 = 0 
рқ‘Һ3 = 35 
рқ‘Һ4 = 35 
рқҗө= 4500000 tons 
рқ‘Ҷ8 = вҲ‘
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
рқҗө
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ8 = ] вҲ’вҲһ; 0] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ8 =]0; 0.001] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ8 =]0.001; 0.002] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ8 =]0.002; 0.003] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ8 =]0.003; вҲһ] 
EVs have lower 
emissions than existing 
equivalent diesel 
vehicles. 
Transporting many 
people, and recycling 
materials result in a 
lower impact. 
c9 - NOx emissions abated 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: absolute mass of NOx 
emissions saved per unit added 
in tons 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
B: Total emissions of baseline in 
tons 
рқ‘Һ1 = 5 
рқ‘Һ2 = 1 
рқ‘Һ3 = 3 
рқ‘Һ4 = 3 
рқҗө= 500000 tons 
рқ‘Ҷ9 = вҲ‘
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
рқҗө
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ9 = ] вҲ’вҲһ; 0] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ9 =]0; 0.001] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ9 =]0.001; 0.002] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ9 =]0.002; 0.003] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ9 =]0.003; вҲһ] 
EVs have lower 
emissions than existing 
equivalent diesel 
vehicles. 
Transporting many 
people, and recycling 
materials result in a 
lower impact. 
c10 - PM2.5 emissions abated 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: absolute mass of NOx 
emissions saved per unit added 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
B: Total emissions of baseline in 
tons 
рқ‘Һ1 = 4 
рқ‘Һ2 = 0.5 
рқ‘Һ3 = 2 
рқ‘Һ4 = 2 
рқҗө= 300000 tons 
рқ‘Ҷ10 = вҲ‘
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
рқҗө
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ10 = ] вҲ’вҲһ; 0] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ10 =]0; 0.001] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ10 =]0.001; 0.002] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ10 =]0.002; 0.003] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ10 =]0.003; вҲһ] 
EVs have lower 
emissions than existing 
equivalent diesel 
vehicles. 
Transporting many 
people, and recycling 
materials result in a 
lower impact. 
c11 - Impact on noise 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,рқ‘–: Vector indicating score [1;5] 
of sub-criterion i  
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = (5,4) 
рқ‘Һ2 = (4,4) 
рқ‘Һ3 = (5,4) 
рқ‘Һ4 = (5,4) 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ11 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…вҲ‘
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,рқ‘–
рқҗј
рқ‘–=1
рқҗј
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ11 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1.8] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ11 =]1.8; 2.6] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ11 =]2.6; 3.4] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ11 =]3.4; 4.2] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ11 =]4.2; вҲһ] 
The perceived noise for 
the uses is lower in 
bigger units. 
EVs are both perceived 
and measured to have a 
lower noise impact than 
an equivalent diesel 
vehicle. 
==PAGE:78==
c12 - Effect on recycled 
resources 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,рқ‘–: binary vector indicating 
whether or not the sub-criterion i 
is fulfilled 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = (0,0,1) 
рқ‘Һ2 = (0,1,0) 
рқ‘Һ3 = (0,0,0) 
рқ‘Һ4 = (0,0,0) 
рқ‘ 12,рқ‘ӣ
=
{
 
 
 
 1
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 0
2
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 = 1 вҲ§рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 0
3
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = 1 вҲ§рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 0
4
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 1 вҲЁ(рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 0 вҲ§рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 + рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = 1)
5
(рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,1 = 1 вҲЁрқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,2 = 1) вҲ§рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,3 = 1
 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
 
рқ‘Ҷ12 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘ 12,рқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ4 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1.8] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]1.8; 2.6] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]2.6; 3.4] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]3.4; 4.2] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ4 =]4.2; вҲһ] 
 
c13 - Access to jobs, 
opportunities, and services 
(personal travel) 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: rate of percentage change in 
the proportion of the population 
that has convenient access to 
public transport. 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘Һ1 = 0 
рқ‘Һ2 = 0 
рқ‘Һ3 = 0 
рқ‘Һ4 = 0 
рқ‘Ҷ8 = вҲ‘рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ8 = ] вҲ’вҲһ; 0.01] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ8 =]0.01; 0.02] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ8 =]0.02; 0.03] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ8 =]0.03; 0.04] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ8 =]0.04; вҲһ] 
No components affect 
the criterion. 
c14 - Access to pick-
up/delivery locations 
(freight) 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: impact of the e-mobility 
solutions [1;5] 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = 3 
рқ‘Һ2 = 4 
рқ‘Һ3 = 3 
рқ‘Һ4 = 3 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ14 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ14 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1.8] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ14 =]1.8; 2.6] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ14 =]2.6; 3.4] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ14 =]3.4; 4.2] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ14 =]4.2; вҲһ] 
Only e 3-wheelers can be 
used for freight. 
c15 - Affordability of e-mobility 
services 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: expected savings in the 
average price 
B: average price in the baseline 
scenario 
A: base level. 
рқ‘Һ1 = 0.03 
рқ‘Һ2 = 0.01 
рқ‘Һ3 = вҲ’0.02 
рқ‘Һ4 = вҲ’0.02 
рқҗө= 150рқ‘Ғрқ‘…рқ‘ғ 
рқҗҙ= 0 
рқ‘Ҷ15 = рқҗҙ+ вҲ‘
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
рқҗө
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ15 = ] вҲ’вҲһ; 0] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ15 =]0; 0.01] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ15 =]0.01; 0.02] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ15 =]0.02; 0.03] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ15 =]0.03; вҲһ] 
 
c16 - Change in travel times due to e-
mobility services (personal travel) 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: reduction in average travel 
time 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
B: average travel time in minutes 
for the baseline scenario 
A: base level. 
рқ‘Һ1 = 0 
рқ‘Һ2 = 0 
рқ‘Һ3 = 0 
рқ‘Һ4 = 0 
рқҗө= 40 
рқҗҙ= 0 
рқ‘Ҷ16 = рқҗҙ+ вҲ‘
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
рқҗө
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ16 = ] вҲ’вҲһ; 0] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ16 =]0; 0.01] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ16 =]0.01; 0.02] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ16 =]0.02; 0.03] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ16 =]0.03; вҲһ] 
No alternatives affect 
the criterion. 
==PAGE:79==
c17 - Change in travel times due to e-
mobility services (freight) 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: reduction in average travel 
time 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
B: average travel time in minutes 
for the baseline scenario 
A: base level. 
рқ‘Һ1 = 0 
рқ‘Һ2 = 0 
рқ‘Һ3 = 0 
рқ‘Һ4 = 0 
рқҗө= 60 
рқҗҙ= 0 
рқ‘Ҷ17 = рқҗҙ+ вҲ‘
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
рқҗө
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ17 = ] вҲ’вҲһ; 0] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ17 =]0; 0.01] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ17 =]0.01; 0.02] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ17 =]0.02; 0.03] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ17 =]0.03; вҲһ] 
No alternatives affect 
the criterion. 
c18 - Road accidents with 
fatalities/serious injuries 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: impact of the number of road 
accidents with fatalities/serious 
injuries [1;7] 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = 4 
рқ‘Һ2 = 4 
рқ‘Һ3 = 5 
рқ‘Һ4 = 5 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ18 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ18 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 2.2] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ18 =]2.2; 3.4] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ18 =]3.4; 4.6] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ18 =]4.6; 5.8] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ18 =]5.8; вҲһ] 
Assuming that new or 
big vehicles are safer 
than old or small 
vehicles.   
c19 - Road accidents with minor 
injuries/material damage 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: impact of the number of road 
accidents with minor injury or 
resulted in property loss [1;7] 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = 3 
рқ‘Һ2 = 3 
рқ‘Һ3 = 3 
рқ‘Һ4 = 3 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ19 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ19 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 2.2] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ19 =]2.2; 3.4] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ19 =]3.4; 4.6] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ19 =]4.6; 5.8] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ19 =]5.8; вҲһ] 
No change from the 
baseline scenario. 
c20 - Road accidents involving 
vulnerable road users (VRUs) 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: impact of the number of road 
accidents with any pedestrians, 
cyclists, or riders of powered-
two-wheelers [1;7] 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = 3 
рқ‘Һ2 = 3 
рқ‘Һ3 = 3 
рқ‘Һ4 = 3 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ20 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ20 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 2.2] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ20 =]2.2; 3.4] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ20 =]3.4; 4.6] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ20 =]4.6; 5.8] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ20 =]5.8; вҲһ] 
No change from the 
baseline scenario. 
c21 - Impact on charging safety 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘–рқ‘ӣ,рқ‘—: impact of occurrence 
рқ‘қрқ‘ӣ,рқ‘—: the probability of 
occurrence 
рқ‘–1,рқ‘—= [4,3,3] 
рқ‘–2,рқ‘—= [4,3,3] 
рқ‘–3,рқ‘—= [4,3,3] 
рқ‘–4,рқ‘—= [4,3,3] 
рқ‘қ1,рқ‘—= [
1
3000,
1
6000 , 1
500] 
рқ‘қ2,рқ‘—= [
1
1000 ,
1
4000,
1
2000] 
рқ‘қ3,рқ‘—= [
1
2500 ,
1
5000,
1
1000 ] 
рқ‘қ4,рқ‘—= [
1
2500 ,
1
5000,
1
1000] 
 
рқ‘ҹрқ‘ӣ,рқ‘—=
{
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0
рқ‘қрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ=] вҲ’вҲһ; 1
10 ]
1
рқ‘қрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ=] 1
10 ; 1
5 ]
2
рқ‘қрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ=] 1
5 ; 1 ]
3
рқ‘қрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ=]1; 1
1
12
 ]
4
рқ‘қрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ=] 1
1
12
; вҲһ ]
 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ21 = вҲ‘(рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвҲ‘(рқ‘–рқ‘ӣ,рқ‘—рқ‘ҹрқ‘ӣ,рқ‘—)
рқҗҪ
рқ‘—=1
)
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ21 = ]12.8; вҲһ] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ21 =]9.6; 12.8] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ21 =]6.4; 9.6] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ21 =]3.2; 6.4] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ21 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 3.2] 
The tree hazards 
categories have been 
combined into one. 
If batteries are charged 
away from the vehicle, it 
is seen as safer. 
==PAGE:80==
c22 - Impact on security 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘–рқ‘ӣ: impact of occurrence 
рқ‘қрқ‘ӣ: the probability of occurrence 
рқ‘–1,рқ‘—= [2,4,3,3] 
рқ‘–2,рқ‘—= [2,4,3,3] 
рқ‘–3,рқ‘—= [2,4,3,3] 
рқ‘–4,рқ‘—= [2,4,3,3] 
рқ‘қ1,рқ‘—
= [
1
3000,
1
5000 ,
1
4000,
1
3000] 
рқ‘қ2,рқ‘—
= [
1
1000,
1
3000 ,
1
2000,
1
2000] 
рқ‘қ3,рқ‘—
= [
1
3000,
1
1000 ,
1
4000,
1
5000 ] 
рқ‘қ4,рқ‘—= [ 1
800 , 1
500 , 1
700 , 1
600] 
 
рқ‘ҹрқ‘ӣ,рқ‘—=
{
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0
рқ‘қрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ=] вҲ’вҲһ; 1
10 ]
1
рқ‘қрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ=] 1
10 ; 1
5 ]
2
рқ‘қрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ=] 1
5 ; 1 ]
3
рқ‘қрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ=]1; 1
1
12
 ]
4
рқ‘қрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ=] 1
1
12
; вҲһ ]
 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ22 = вҲ‘(рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвҲ‘(рқ‘–рқ‘ӣ,рқ‘—рқ‘ҹрқ‘ӣ,рқ‘—)
рқҗҪ
рқ‘—=1
)
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ22 = ]48; вҲһ] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ22 =]36; 48] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ22 =]24; 36] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ22 =]12; 24] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ22 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 12] 
The four security 
performance standards 
have been combined 
into one. 
c23 - Impact on well-
being due to active 
traveling 
рқ‘Һрқ‘–,рқ‘ӣ: km walking, cycling, on 
scooter, or in car for each 
component n added.  
рқ‘Ҹрқ‘–,рқ‘ӣ: constant term /intercept 
рқ‘Һрқ‘–,рқ‘ӣ= 0, вҲҖрқ‘–вҲҲрқҗј 
, рқ‘ӣвҲҲрқ‘Ғ 
рқ‘Ҹрқ‘–,рқ‘ӣ= 0, вҲҖрқ‘–вҲҲрқҗј 
, рқ‘ӣвҲҲрқ‘Ғ 
 
рқ‘Ҷ23 = вҲ‘
[
 
 
 
 
 
 1
22
50
4.5
50
3
50]
 
 
 
 
 
 
рқҗј
рқ‘–=1
вҲ‘(рқ‘Һрқ‘–,рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ+ рқ‘Ҹрқ‘–,рқ‘ӣ)
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ23 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 0]  
2: рқ‘Ҷ23 =]0; 10] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ23 =]10; 20] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ23 =]20; 30] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ23 =]30; вҲһ] 
No alternatives affect 
the criterion. 
c24 - Suitability for 
adverse weather 
conditions 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: impact rating [1;5] 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = 2 
рқ‘Һ2 = 2 
рқ‘Һ3 = 2 
рқ‘Һ4 = 2 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ24 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ24 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1.8] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ24 =]1.8; 2.6] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ24 =]2.6; 3.4] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ24 =]3.4; 4.2] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ24 =]4.2; вҲһ] 
It is assumed that EVs 
are more sensitive to 
extreme weather as the 
power supply is more 
sensitive to this 
compared to diesel 
supply. 
c25 - Perceived comfort 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: impact rating [1;5] 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = 4 
рқ‘Һ2 = 4 
рқ‘Һ3 = 5 
рқ‘Һ4 = 5 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ25 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ25 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1.8] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ25 =]1.8; 2.6] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ25 =]2.6; 3.4] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ25 =]3.4; 4.2] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ25 =]4.2; вҲһ] 
Newer or bigger vehicles 
are perceived as more 
comfortable.  
c26 - Perceived drivability 
(professional drivers) 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: impact rating [1;5] 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to component 
рқ‘Һ1 = 4 
рқ‘Һ2 = 3 
рқ‘Һ3 = 4 
рқ‘Һ4 = 4 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ26 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ26 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1.8] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ26 =]1.8; 2.6] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ26 =]2.6; 3.4] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ26 =]3.4; 4.2] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ26 =]4.2; вҲһ] 
Electric cars don't 
require multi-speed 
transmissions. This may 
increase drivability 
slightly. 
c27 - Perceived drivability 
(end users) 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: impact rating [1;5] 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = 3 
рқ‘Һ2 = 3 
рқ‘Һ3 = 3 
рқ‘Һ4 = 3 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ27 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ27 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1.8] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ27 =]1.8; 2.6] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ27 =]2.6; 3.4] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ27 =]3.4; 4.2] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ27 =]4.2; вҲһ] 
Electric cars don't 
require multi-speed 
transmissions. This may 
increase drivability 
slightly. 
==PAGE:81==
c28 - Perceived 
chargeability 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: impact rating [1;5] 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = 3 
рқ‘Һ2 = 4 
рқ‘Һ3 = 2 
рқ‘Һ4 = 2 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ28 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ28 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1.8] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ28 =]1.8; 2.6] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ28 =]2.6; 3.4] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ28 =]3.4; 4.2] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ28 =]4.2; вҲһ] 
When there are few 
units, it may be difficult 
to find convenient 
charging stations. 
Vehicles that can drive 
for a longer period 
without charging are 
found more convenient 
than those that cannot. 
c29 - Perceived safety 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: impact rating [1;5] 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = 3 
рқ‘Һ2 = 3 
рқ‘Һ3 = 3 
рқ‘Һ4 = 3 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ29 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ29 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1.8] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ29 =]1.8; 2.6] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ29 =]2.6; 3.4] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ29 =]3.4; 4.2] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ29 =]4.2; вҲһ] 
Unchanged from the 
baseline scenario. 
c30 - Perceived personal 
security 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: impact rating [1;5] 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component 
рқ‘Һ1 = 3 
рқ‘Һ2 = 3 
рқ‘Һ3 = 3 
рқ‘Һ4 = 3 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ30 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ30 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1.8] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ30 =]1.8; 2.6] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ30 =]2.6; 3.4] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ30 =]3.4; 4.2] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ30 =]4.2; вҲһ] 
Unchanged from the 
baseline scenario. 
c31 - Continuity of journey 
chains, including 
transshipment to other 
modes 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: impact rating [1;5] 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative. 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ: fraction of investment related 
to the component. 
рқ‘Һ1 = 3 
рқ‘Һ2 = 3 
рқ‘Һ3 = 3 
рқ‘Һ4 = 3 
рқ‘“рқ‘ӣ=
рқҗҫрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
рқҗҫрқ‘—вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘—=1
 
рқ‘Ҷ31 = вҲ‘рқ‘“рқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1:рқ‘Ҷ31 =] вҲ’вҲһ; 1.8] 
2:рқ‘Ҷ31 =]1.8; 2.6] 
3:рқ‘Ҷ31 =]2.6; 3.4] 
4:рқ‘Ҷ31 =]3.4; 4.2] 
5:рқ‘Ҷ31 =]4.2; вҲһ] 
Unchanged from the 
baseline scenario. 
c32 - Impact on national/local 
budget 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: abated amount in the 
relevant public (national/local) 
budget. 
B: Total budget of baseline in MвӮ¬. 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative. 
рқ‘Һ1 = 2500вӮ¬ 
рқ‘Һ2 = 500вӮ¬ 
рқ‘Һ3 = 1000вӮ¬ 
рқ‘Һ4 = 1750вӮ¬ 
рқҗө= 50000рқ‘ҖвӮ¬ 
рқ‘Ҷ32 = вҲ‘
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
рқҗө
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ32 = ] вҲ’вҲһ; 10] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ32 =]10; 20] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ32 =]20; 30] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ32 =]30; 40] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ32 =]40; вҲһ] 
In general, EVs are 
assumed to be more 
costly than their non-EV 
counterpart. 
c33 - Fossil fuel imports abated 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: fossil fuel imports abated per 
unit added 
B: Total fossil fuel imports of 
baseline in M tons. 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ: number of units added for 
each component of the 
alternative. 
рқ‘Һ1 = 0.009 
рқ‘Һ2 = 0.001 
рқ‘Һ3 = 0.007 
рқ‘Һ4 = 0.007 
рқҗө=500 
рқ‘Ҷ33 = вҲ‘
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
рқҗө
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ33 = ] вҲ’вҲһ; 0] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ33 =]0; 0.01] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ33 =]0.01; 0.02] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ33 =]0.02; 0.03] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ33 =]0.03; вҲһ] 
EVs have lower fuel 
consumption than 
existing equivalent diesel 
vehicles. 
 
c34 - Other 
imports 
affected 
рқӣјрқ‘ӣ: rate of change in other 
imports per unit added. 
рқ‘Һ1 = вҲ’0.004 
рқ‘Һ2 = 0 
рқ‘Һ3 = вҲ’0.002 
рқ‘Һ4 = вҲ’0.002 
рқ‘Ҷ34 = вҲ‘рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ34 =  ] вҲ’0.2; вҲһ] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ34 =] вҲ’0.4; вҲ’0.2] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ34 =] вҲ’0.6; вҲ’0.4] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ34 =] вҲ’0.8; вҲ’0.6] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ34 =] вҲ’вҲһ, вҲ’0.8] 
Some components are 
locally manufactured. 
==PAGE:82==
c35 - Job creation 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: rate of change in jobs created 
per unit added 
рқ‘Ҹрқ‘ӣ: constant term /intercept. 
рқ‘Ҹ1 = 5 
рқ‘Ҹ2 = 3 
рқ‘Ҹ3 = 8 
рқ‘Ҹ4 = 8 
рқ‘Һ1 = 0.15 
рқ‘Һ2 = 0.3 
рқ‘Һ3 = 0.2 
рқ‘Һ4 = 0.2 
рқ‘Ҷ35 = вҲ‘(рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ+ рқ‘Ҹрқ‘ӣ)
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ35 = ] вҲ’вҲһ; 20] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ35 =]20; 50] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ35 =]50; 100] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ35 =]100; 250] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ35 =]250; вҲһ] 
Components that are 
locally manufactured 
have a higher rating. 
Components that require 
additional and new jobs 
in the use phase have a 
higher rating. 
c36 - Expected impact on technical skills requirements 
рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ: rate of change in jobs created 
per unit added 
рқ‘Ҹрқ‘ӣ: constant term /intercept 
рқ‘Ҹрқ‘ӣ,рқҗҙ= 0, вҲҖрқ‘ӣвҲҲрқ‘Ғ 
рқ‘Ҹ1,рқҗө= 2 
рқ‘Ҹ2,рқҗө= 1 
рқ‘Ҹ3,рқҗө= 3 
рқ‘Ҹ4,рқҗө= 3 
рқ‘Ҹрқ‘ӣ,рқҗ¶= 0, вҲҖрқ‘ӣвҲҲрқ‘Ғ 
рқ‘Һ1,рқҗҙ= 0.002 
рқ‘Һ2,рқҗҙ= 0.0005 
рқ‘Һ3,рқҗҙ= 0.008 
рқ‘Һ4,рқҗҙ= 0.007 
рқ‘Һ1,рқҗө= 0.0003 
рқ‘Һ2,рқҗө= 0.00008 
рқ‘Һ3,рқҗө= 0.0009 
рқ‘Һ4,рқҗө= 0.00095 
рқ‘Һ1,рқҗ¶= 0.0001 
рқ‘Һ2,рқҗ¶= 0.00006 
рқ‘Һ3,рқҗ¶= 0.0007 
рқ‘Һ4,рқҗ¶= 0.0008 
рқ‘Ҷ36 = вҲ‘(рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,рқҗҙвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ+ рқ‘Ҹрқ‘ӣ,рқҗҙ
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
) 
+1.3 вӢ…вҲ‘(рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,рқҗөвӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ+ рқ‘Ҹрқ‘ӣ,рқҗө
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
) 
+1.8 вӢ…вҲ‘(рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ,рқҗ¶вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ӣ+ рқ‘Ҹрқ‘ӣ,рқҗ¶)
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘ӣ=1
 
1: рқ‘Ҷ36 = ] вҲ’вҲһ; 5] 
2: рқ‘Ҷ36 =]5; 10] 
3: рқ‘Ҷ36 =]10; 30] 
4: рқ‘Ҷ36 =]30; 80] 
5: рқ‘Ҷ36 =]80; вҲһ] 
The development of new 
vehicles requires a high 
level of technical skills 
 
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX D
Value function illustrations
Figure D.1: Illustrations of value functions for criteria 1-6.
==PAGE:84==
D Value function illustrations
78
Figure D.2: Illustrations of value functions for criteria 7-14.
==PAGE:85==
D Value function illustrations
79
Figure D.3: Illustrations of value functions for criteria 15-22.
==PAGE:86==
D Value function illustrations
80
Figure D.4: Illustrations of value functions for criteria 23-30.
==PAGE:87==
D Value function illustrations
81
Figure D.5: Illustrations of value functions for criteria 31-36.
==PAGE:88==
APPENDIX E
Code for functions for
calculating criteria scores
1 function fractionOfInvestment(x,K)
2
N = length(x)
3
f = zeros(N)
4
for n = 1:N
5
f[n] = (x[n]*K[n]) / sum(x[j]*K[j] for j=1:N)
6
end
7
return f
8 end
Listing E.1: Function for finding the fraction of the investment
1 function SumOfFunctions(x,a,b)
2
N = length(x)
3
S = sum(a[n]*x[n]+b[n] for n=1:N) # Summarizes functions for all alternatives in
solution
4
return S
5 end
Listing E.2: Function that finds Sm based on the sum of functions method
1 function piecewiseVector(s,K,x)
2
N = length(s) # Number of components in alternative
3
f = fractionOfInvestment(x,K)
4
S = sum(f[n]*s[n] for n=1:N)
5
return
S
6 end
Listing E.3: Function that finds Sm based on piecewise functions
1 function percentageChange(x,a,B)
2
N = length(x)
3
S = sum(a[n]*x[n] for n=1:N)/B # Summarizes functions for all alternatives in
solution
4
return S
5 end
Listing E.4: Function that finds Sm based on percentage change
1 function weighedAverage(x,a,K)
2
N = size(a)[1] # Number of components
3
f = fractionOfInvestment(x,K)
4
if length(a) != size(a)[1]
5
I = size(a)[2] # Number of sub-criteria
6
S = sum(f[n] * (sum(a[n,i] for i=1:I) / I) for n=1:N)
7
else
8
S = sum(f[n] * a[n] for n=1:N)
9
end
==PAGE:89==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
83
10
return S
11 end
Listing E.5: Function that finds Sm based on the weighed average of vector elements
1 function riskFunction(x,i,p,riskIntervals ,K)
2
N = size(i)[1] # Number of components
3
J = size(i)[2]
4
M = size(riskIntervals)[1]
5
r = zeros(N,J)
6
for n=1:N
7
for j=1:J
8
for m=1:M
9
if (p[n,j]*x[n] > riskIntervals[m,1] && p[n,j]*x[n] <= riskIntervals[
m,2]) # Identifies if score is within given range
10
r[n,j] = m-1
11
end
12
end
13
end
14
end
15
f = fractionOfInvestment(x,K)
16
S = sum(f[n] * sum(i[n,j]*r[n,j] for j=1:J) for n=1:N)
17
return S
18 end
Listing E.6: Function that finds Sm based on risk functions
1 function IRR(x,K,k)
2
N = length(x) # Number of components
3
S = sum(x[n]*K[n]*k[n] for n=1:N) / sum(x[n]*K[n] for n=1:N)
4
return S
5 end
Listing E.7: Function that finds Sm based on the interal rate of return
1 function paybackPeriod(x,K,p)
2
N = length(x) # Number of components
3
S = sum(x[n]*K[n]*p[n] for n=1:N) / sum(x[n]*K[n] for n=1:N)
4
return S
5 end
Listing E.8: Function that finds Sm based on the payback period
1 function compliance(a,comply,x,K)
2
N = length(a)
3
f = fractionOfInvestment(x,K)
4
s = zeros(N)
5
for n=1:N
6
if a[n] > 3
7
s[n] = 2
8
else
9
s[n] = 5-a[n]
10
end
11
end
12
S = minimum(comply)*sum(f[n]*s[n] for n=1:N)
13
return S
14 end
Listing E.9: Function that finds Sm based on compliance
==PAGE:90==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
84
1 function activeTraveling(x, a, b)
2
N = size(a)[2] # Number of components
3
I = size(a)[1]
4
k = [1;22/50;4.5/50;3/50]
5
S = sum( k[i] * sum(a[i,n]*x[n]+b[i,n] for n=1:N) for i=1:I)
6
return S
7 end
Listing E.10: Function that finds Sm based on active travelling
1 function technicalSkills(x, alpha, beta)
2
N = length(x) # Number of components
3
S = sum(alpha[n,1]*x[n]+beta[n,1] for n=1:N) + 1.3*sum(alpha[n,2]*x[n]+beta[n,2]
for n=1:N)+ 1.8*sum(alpha[n,3]*x[n]+beta[n,3] for n=1:N)
4
return S
5 end
Listing E.11: Function that finds Sm based on the technical skills required
1 function intervalConversion(S,intervals)
2
M = size(intervals)[1]
3
for m=1:M
4
if (S > intervals[m,1] && S <= intervals[m,2]) # Identifies if score is
within given range
5
return m
6
end
7
end
8 end
Listing E.12: Function defining the value functions converting Sm to the 5-point criteria score
based on predefined intervals
1 function c1(x)
2
# Inputs
3
a = [3000,1000,800,700]
4
b = [0,0,0,0]
5
intervals = [
6
-Inf -2000000;
7
-2000000 -500000;
8
-500000 500000;
9
500000 2000000;
10
2000000 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = SumOfFunctions(x,a,b)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.13: Functions that calculates the c1 score based on x
1 function c2(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
k = [0.03,0.04,0.03,0.1]
5
intervals = [
6
-Inf 0;
7
0 0.03;
8
0.03 0.05;
9
0.05 0.1;
10
1 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
==PAGE:91==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
85
12
S = IRR(x,K,k)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.14: Functions that calculates the c2 score based on x
1 function c3(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
k = [0.03,0.04,0.03,0.1]
5
p = [5,2,6,7]
6
intervals = [
7
10 Inf;
8
6 10;
9
3 6;
10
1 3;
11
-Inf 1]
12
# Calculating score
13
S = paybackPeriod(x,K,p)
14
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
15
return score
16 end
Listing E.15: Functions that calculates the c3 score based on x
1 function c4(x)
2
# Inputs
3
N = length(x)
4
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
5
a = [
6
1 1 1;
7
1 1 1;
8
1 1 1;
9
1 1 1]
10
intervals = [
11
-Inf 1;
12
1 2.83;
13
2.83 3.66;
14
3.66 4.49;
15
4.49 Inf]
16
s = zeros(N)
17
for n=1:N
18
if a[n,1]==a[n,2]==a[n,3]==0
19
s[n] = 1
20
elseif a[n,1]+a[n,2]==1 && a[n,3]==0
21
s[n] = 2
22
elseif a[n,1]==a[n,2]==1 && a[n,3]==0
23
s[n] = 3
24
elseif a[n,1]==a[n,2]==0 && a[n,3]==1
25
s[n] = 4
26
elseif (a[n,1]==1 || a[n,2]==1) && a[n,3]==1
27
s[n] = 5
28
end
29
end
30
# Calculating score
31
S = piecewiseVector(s,K,x)
32
for n=1:N
33
if s[n] == 1
34
S = 1
35
end
36
end
37
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
==PAGE:92==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
86
38
return score
39 end
Listing E.16: Functions that calculates the c4 score based on x
1 function c5(x)
2
# Inputs
3
N = length(x)
4
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
5
a = [
6
1 1 1 1;
7
1 1 1 1;
8
1 1 1 1;
9
1 1 1 1]
10
intervals = [
11
-Inf 1.8;
12
1.8 2.6;
13
2.6 3.4;
14
3.4 4.2;
15
4.2 Inf]
16
s = zeros(N)
17
for n=1:N
18
if a[n,1]==a[n,2]==a[n,3]==a[n,4]==0
19
s[n] = 1
20
elseif a[n,1]+a[n,2]+a[n,3]+a[n,4]==1
21
s[n] = 2
22
elseif a[n,1]+a[n,2]+a[n,3]+a[n,4]==2
23
s[n] = 3
24
elseif a[n,1]+a[n,2]+a[n,3]+a[n,4]==3
25
s[n] = 4
26
elseif a[n,1]==a[n,2]==a[n,3]==a[n,4]==1
27
s[n] = 5
28
end
29
end
30
# Calculating score
31
S = piecewiseVector(s,K,x)
32
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
33
return score
34 end
Listing E.17: Functions that calculates the c5 score based on x
1 function c6(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
comply = [1,1,1,1]
5
a = [1,0,1,1]
6
intervals = [
7
-Inf 1;
8
1 2.49;
9
2.49 3.49;
10
3.49 4.49;
11
4.49 Inf]
12
# Calculating score
13
S = compliance(a,comply,x,K)
14
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
15
return score
16 end
Listing E.18: Functions that calculates the c6 score based on x
1 function c7(x)
==PAGE:93==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
87
2
# Inputs
3
N = length(x)
4
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
5
a = [
6
0 0 1;
7
1 0 1;
8
1 0 1;
9
1 0 1]
10
intervals = [
11
-Inf 1.8;
12
1.8 2.6;
13
2.6 3.4;
14
3.4 4.2;
15
4.2 Inf]
16
s = zeros(N)
17
for n=1:N
18
if a[n,1]==a[n,2]==a[n,3]==0
19
s[n] = 1
20
elseif a[n,1]+a[n,2]==1 && a[n,3]==0
21
s[n] = 2
22
elseif a[n,1]==a[n,2]==1 && a[n,3]==0
23
s[n] = 3
24
elseif a[n,1]==a[n,2]==0 && a[n,3]==1
25
s[n] = 4
26
elseif (a[n,1]==1 || a[n,2]==1) && a[n,3]==1
27
s[n] = 5
28
end
29
end
30
# Calculating score
31
S = piecewiseVector(s,K,x)
32
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
33
return score
34 end
Listing E.19: Functions that calculates the c7 score based on x
1 function c8(x)
2
# Inputs
3
a = [44.2,0,35,35]
4
B = 4500000
5
intervals = [
6
-Inf 0;
7
0 0.001;
8
0.001 0.002;
9
0.002 0.003;
10
0.003 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = percentageChange(x,a,B)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.20: Functions that calculates the c8 score based on x
1 function c9(x)
2
# Inputs
3
a = [5,1,3,3]
4
B = 500000
5
intervals = [
6
-Inf 0;
7
0 0.001;
8
0.001 0.002;
9
0.002 0.003;
==PAGE:94==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
88
10
0.003 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = percentageChange(x,a,B)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.21: Functions that calculates the c9 score based on x
1 function c10(x)
2
# Inputs
3
a = [4,0.5,2,2]
4
B = 300000
5
intervals = [
6
-Inf 0;
7
0 0.001;
8
0.001 0.002;
9
0.002 0.003;
10
0.003 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = percentageChange(x,a,B)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.22: Functions that calculates the c10 score based on x
1 function c11(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
a = [
5
5 4;
6
4 4;
7
5 4;
8
5 4]
9
intervals =[
10
-Inf 1.8;
11
1.8 2.6;
12
2.6 3.4;
13
3.4 4.2;
14
4.2 Inf]
15
# Calculating score
16
S = weightedAverage(x,a,K)
17
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
18
return score
19 end
Listing E.23: Functions that calculates the c11 score based on x
1 function c12(x)
2
# Inputs
3
N = length(x)
4
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
5
a = [
6
0 0 1;
7
0 1 0;
8
0 0 0;
9
0 0 0]
10
intervals = [
11
-Inf 1.8;
12
1.8 2.6;
13
2.6 3.4;
==PAGE:95==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
89
14
3.4 4.2;
15
4.2 Inf]
16
s = zeros(N)
17
for n=1:N
18
if a[n,1]==a[n,2]==a[n,3]==0
19
s[n] = 1
20
elseif a[n,1]==1 && a[n,2]==a[n,3]==0
21
s[n] = 2
22
elseif a[n,2]==1 && a[n,1]==a[n,3]==0
23
s[n] = 3
24
elseif a[n,1]==1 || (a[n,3]==0 && a[n,1]+a[n,2]==1)
25
s[n] = 4
26
elseif (a[n,1]==1 || a[n,2]==1) && a[n,3]==1
27
s[n] = 5
28
end
29
end
30
# Calculating score
31
S = piecewiseVector(s,K,x)
32
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
33
return score
34 end
Listing E.24: Functions that calculates the c12 score based on x
1 function c13(x)
2
# Inputs
3
alpha = [0,0,0,0]
4
beta = [0,0,0,0]
5
intervals = [
6
-Inf 0.01;
7
0.01 0.02;
8
0.02 0.03;
9
0.03 0.04;
10
0.04 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = SumOfFunctions(x,alpha,beta)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.25: Functions that calculates the c13 score based on x
1 function c14(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
a = [
5
3;
6
4;
7
3;
8
3]
9
intervals =[
10
-Inf 1.8;
11
1.8 2.6;
12
2.6 3.4;
13
3.4 4.2;
14
4.2 Inf]
15
# Calculating score
16
S = weightedAverage(x,a,K)
17
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
18
return score
19 end
Listing E.26: Functions that calculates the c14 score based on x
==PAGE:96==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
90
1 function c15(x)
2
# Inputs
3
a = [0.03,0.01,-0.02,-0.02]
4
B = 150
5
A = 0
6
intervals = [
7
-Inf 0;
8
0 0.01;
9
0.01 0.02;
10
0.02 0.03;
11
0.03 Inf]
12
# Calculating score
13
S = A + percentageChange(x,a,B)
14
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
15
return score
16 end
Listing E.27: Functions that calculates the c15 score based on x
1 function c16(x)
2
# Inputs
3
a = [0,0,0,0]
4
B = 40
5
A = 0
6
intervals = [
7
-Inf 0;
8
0 0.01;
9
0.01 0.02;
10
0.02 0.03;
11
0.03 Inf]
12
# Calculating score
13
S = A + percentageChange(x,a,B)
14
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
15
return score
16 end
Listing E.28: Functions that calculates the c16 score based on x
1 function c17(x)
2
# Inputs
3
a = [0,0,0,0]
4
B = 60
5
A = 0
6
intervals = [
7
-Inf 0;
8
0 0.01;
9
0.01 0.02;
10
0.02 0.03;
11
0.03 Inf]
12
# Calculating score
13
S = A + percentageChange(x,a,B)
14
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
15
return score
16 end
Listing E.29: Functions that calculates the c17 score based on x
1 function c18(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
a = [4;4;5;5]
5
intervals =[
==PAGE:97==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
91
6
-Inf 2.2;
7
2.2 3.4;
8
3.4 4.6;
9
4.6 5.8;
10
5.8 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = weightedAverage(x,a,K)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.30: Functions that calculates the c18 score based on x
1 function c19(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
a = [3;3;3;3]
5
intervals =[
6
-Inf 2.2;
7
2.2 3.4;
8
3.4 4.6;
9
4.6 5.8;
10
5.8 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = weightedAverage(x,a,K)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.31: Functions that calculates the c19 score based on x
1 function c20(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
a = [3;3;3;3]
5
intervals =[
6
-Inf 2.2;
7
2.2 3.4;
8
3.4 4.6;
9
4.6 5.8;
10
5.8 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = weightedAverage(x,a,K)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.32: Functions that calculates the c20 score based on x
1 function c21(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
i = [
5
4 3 3;
6
4 3 3;
7
4 3 3;
8
4 3 3]
9
p = [
10
1/3000 1/6000 1/500;
11
1/1000 1/4000 1/2000;
12
1/2500 1/5000 1/1000;
13
1/2500 1/5000 1/1000]
==PAGE:98==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
92
14
riskIntervals = [
15
-Inf 1/10;
16
1/10 1/5;
17
1/5 1;
18
1 1/(1/12);
19
1/(1/12) Inf]
20
intervals =[
21
12.8 Inf;
22
9.6 12.8;
23
6.4 9.6;
24
3.2 6.4;
25
-Inf 3.2]
26
# Calculating score
27
S = riskFunction(x,i,p,riskIntervals ,K)
28
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
29
return score
30 end
Listing E.33: Functions that calculates the c21 score based on x
1 function c22(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
i = [
5
2 4 3 3;
6
2 4 3 3;
7
2 4 3 3;
8
2 4 3 3]
9
p = [
10
1/3000 1/5000 1/4000 1/3000;
11
1/1000 1/3000 1/2000 1/2000;
12
1/3000 1/1000 1/4000 1/5000;
13
1/800 1/500 1/700 1/600]
14
riskIntervals = [
15
-Inf 1/10;
16
1/10 1/5;
17
1/5 1;
18
1 1/(1/12);
19
1/(1/12) Inf]
20
intervals =[
21
48 Inf;
22
36 48;
23
24 36;
24
12 24;
25
-Inf 12]
26
# Calculating score
27
S = riskFunction(x,i,p,riskIntervals ,K)
28
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
29
return score
30 end
Listing E.34: Functions that calculates the c22 score based on x
1 function c23(x)
2
# Inputs
3
a = [
4
0 0 0 0;
5
0 0 0 0;
6
0 0 0 0;
7
0 0 0 0]
8
b = [
9
0 0 0 0;
10
0 0 0 0;
==PAGE:99==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
93
11
0 0 0 0;
12
0 0 0 0]
13
intervals = [
14
-Inf 0;
15
0 10;
16
10 20;
17
20 30;
18
30 Inf]
19
# Calculating score
20
S = activeTraveling(x, a, b)
21
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
22
return score
23 end
Listing E.35: Functions that calculates the c23 score based on x
1 function c24(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
a = [2;2;2;2]
5
intervals =[
6
-Inf 1.8;
7
1.8 2.6;
8
2.6 3.4;
9
3.4 4.2;
10
4.2 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = weightedAverage(x,a,K)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.36: Functions that calculates the c24 score based on x
1 function c25(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
a = [4;4;5;5]
5
intervals =[
6
-Inf 1.8;
7
1.8 2.6;
8
2.6 3.4;
9
3.4 4.2;
10
4.2 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = weightedAverage(x,a,K)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.37: Functions that calculates the c25 score based on x
1 function c26(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
a = [4;3;4;4]
5
intervals =[
6
-Inf 1.8;
7
1.8 2.6;
8
2.6 3.4;
9
3.4 4.2;
10
4.2 Inf]
==PAGE:100==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
94
11
# Calculating score
12
S = weightedAverage(x,a,K)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.38: Functions that calculates the c26 score based on x
1 function c27(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
a = [3;3;3;3]
5
intervals =[
6
-Inf 1.8;
7
1.8 2.6;
8
2.6 3.4;
9
3.4 4.2;
10
4.2 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = weightedAverage(x,a,K)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.39: Functions that calculates the c27 score based on x
1 function c28(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
a = [3;4;2;2]
5
intervals =[
6
-Inf 1.8;
7
1.8 2.6;
8
2.6 3.4;
9
3.4 4.2;
10
4.2 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = weightedAverage(x,a,K)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.40: Functions that calculates the c28 score based on x
1 function c29(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
a = [3;3;3;3]
5
intervals =[
6
-Inf 1.8;
7
1.8 2.6;
8
2.6 3.4;
9
3.4 4.2;
10
4.2 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = weightedAverage(x,a,K)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.41: Functions that calculates the c29 score based on x
==PAGE:101==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
95
1 function c30(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
a = [3;3;3;3]
5
intervals =[
6
-Inf 1.8;
7
1.8 2.6;
8
2.6 3.4;
9
3.4 4.2;
10
4.2 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = weightedAverage(x,a,K)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.42: Functions that calculates the c30 score based on x
1 function c31(x)
2
# Inputs
3
K = [50000,10000,40000,35000]
4
a = [3;3;3;3]
5
intervals =[
6
-Inf 1.8;
7
1.8 2.6;
8
2.6 3.4;
9
3.4 4.2;
10
4.2 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = weightedAverage(x,a,K)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.43: Functions that calculates the c31 score based on x
1 function c32(x)
2
# Inputs
3
a = [2500,500,1000,1750]
4
B = 50000
5
intervals = [
6
-Inf 10;
7
10 20;
8
20 30;
9
30 40;
10
40 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = percentageChange(x,a,B)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.44: Functions that calculates the c32 score based on x
1 function c33(x)
2
# Inputs
3
a = [0.009,0.001,0.007,0.007]
4
B = 500
5
intervals = [
6
-Inf 0;
7
0 0.01;
8
0.01 0.02;
==PAGE:102==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
96
9
0.02 0.03;
10
0.03 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = percentageChange(x,a,B)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.45: Functions that calculates the c33 score based on x
1 function c34(x)
2
# Inputs
3
alpha = [-0.004,0,-0.002,-0.002]
4
beta = [0,0,0,0]
5
intervals = [
6
-0.2 Inf;
7
-0.4 -0.2;
8
-0.6 -0.4;
9
-0.8 -0.6;
10
-Inf -0.8]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = SumOfFunctions(x,alpha,beta)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.46: Functions that calculates the c34 score based on x
1 function c35(x)
2
# Inputs
3
alpha = [0.15,0.3,0.2,0.2]
4
beta = [5,3,8,8]
5
intervals = [
6
-Inf 20;
7
20 50;
8
50 100;
9
100 250;
10
250 Inf]
11
# Calculating score
12
S = SumOfFunctions(x,alpha,beta)
13
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
14
return score
15 end
Listing E.47: Functions that calculates the c35 score based on x
1 function c36(x)
2
# Inputs
3
alpha = [
4
0.002 0.0003 0.0001;
5
0.0005 0.00008 0.00006;
6
0.008 0.0009 0.0007;
7
0.007 0.00095 0.0008]
8
beta = [
9
0 2 0;
10
0 1 0;
11
0 3 0;
12
0 3 0]
13
intervals = [
14
-Inf 5;
15
5 10;
16
10 30;
==PAGE:103==
E Code for functions for calculating criteria scores
97
17
30 80;
18
80 Inf]
19
# Calculating score
20
S = technicalSkills(x, alpha, beta)
21
score = intervalConversion(S,intervals)
22
return score
23 end
Listing E.48: Functions that calculates the c36 score based on x
==PAGE:104==
APPENDIX F
Code for functions used in
the Simulated Annealing
1 function simulatedAnnealing(w,cost,budget,T,alpha,kMax)
2
k = 1
3
t = T
4
x = newFeasebleXSA(budget,cost) # initial feaseble solution
5
xScore = totalScoreReducedModel(x,w)
6
xBest = copy(x) # Saves the best solution
7
xBestScore = copy(xScore) # Saves the best score
8
while t > 0 && k <= kMax
9
y = neighboringSolution(x,cost,budget) # Finds neighbouring solution y
10
yScore = totalScoreReducedModel(y,w) # Finds score of neighboring solution y
11
delta = xScore - yScore # Difference between x and y
12
if delta < 0 || exp(-delta / t) > rand() # If generated solution is better
that last solution or if probability is higher that random number between
0 and 1 is true
13
x = copy(y)
14
xScore = copy(yScore)
15
end
16
if xScore >= xBestScore # Notes the best solution visited so far
17
xBest = copy(x) # Saves the best solution
18
xBestScore = copy(xScore) # Saves the best score
19
end
20
k = k+1
21
t = alpha + t
22
end
23
return xBest, xBestScore
24 end
Listing F.1: Script for Simulated Annealing
1 function newFeasebleXSA(budget,cost) #Function to generate feasible x vector
2
N = 4
3
x = [0 0 0 0]
4
for n=1:N
5
x[n] = rand(0:round(Int,budget/cost[n]))
6
end
7
if sum(x[n]*cost[n] for n=1:N) > budget || sum(x[n] for n=1:N) < 0
8
x = newFeasebleXSA(budget,cost)
9
else
10
return x
11
end
12 end
Listing F.2: Function that finds a feasible solution
1 function neighboringSolution(x,cost,budget)
2
N = length(x)
3
y = copy(x)
4
i = rand(1:N)
==PAGE:105==
F Code for functions used in the Simulated Annealing
99
5
range = 10
6
y[i] = x[i] + rand(-range:range)
7
if y[i] < 0 || sum(y[n]*cost[n] for n=1:N) > budget || sum(y[n] for n=1:N) < 0
8
y = neighboringSolution(x,cost,budget) # Fix stac overflow
9
end
10
return y
11 end
Listing F.3: Neighbourhood function for SA
==PAGE:106==
APPENDIX G
Code for functions used in
the Evolutionary Algorithm
1 function evolutionaryAlgorithms(w,cost,budget,PSize,kMax)
2
k = 1
3
############# Initialization #############
4
P = []
5
for i=1:PSize
6
newX = newFeasebleXEA(budget,cost)
7
push!(P,copy(newX)) # Fills population with feaseble solutions
8
end
9
while k <= kMax
10
feasibilityCheck = true
11
############# Selection #############
12
p1, p2 = tournamentSelectionBest(P)
13
############# Crossover
14
c1, c2, feasibilityCheck
= onePointCrossover(p1, p2, budget ,cost)
15
if feasibilityCheck == true # Only on feaseble solutions
16
############# Mutation #############
17
c1m = onePointMutation(c1,cost,budget)
18
c2m = onePointMutation(c2,cost,budget)
19
############# Replacement #############
20
w1i, w2i = tournamentSelectionWorst(P)
21
P[Int(w1i)] = copy(c1m)
22
P[Int(w2i)] = copy(c2m)
23
k = k+1
24
end
25
end
26
############# Scores in population #############
27
PScores = zeros(PSize)
28
for i=1:PSize
29
PScores[i] = totalScoreReducedModel(P[i],w)
30
end
31
xBestScore , xBestIndex = findmax(PScores)
32
xBest = P[xBestIndex]
33
return xBest, xBestScore , P, PScores
34 end
Listing G.1: Script for Evolutionary Algorithm
1 function newFeasebleXEA(budget,cost) #Function to generate feaseble x vector
2
N = 4
3
x = [0 0 0 0]
4
for n=1:N
5
x[n] = rand(0:round(Int,budget/cost[n]))
6
end
7
if sum(x[n]*cost[n] for n=1:N) > budget || sum(x[n] for n=1:N) < 0
8
x = newFeasebleXEA(budget,cost)
9
else
10
return x
11
end
12 end
==PAGE:107==
G Code for functions used in the Evolutionary Algorithm
101
Listing G.2: Function that finds feasible solution
1 function select4Random(P)
2
PSize = length(P)
3
i = zeros(4)
4
for n = 1:4
5
i[n] = rand(1:PSize)
6
end
7
return i
8 end
Listing G.3: Function that seclects four random indeviduals in the population
1 function tournamentSelectionBest(P)
2
p1=[]
3
p2=[]
4
i = select4Random(P)
5
if length(unique(i)) != 4
6
i = select4Random(P)
7
end
8
x1 = P[Int(i[1])]
9
x2 = P[Int(i[2])]
10
x3 = P[Int(i[3])]
11
x4 = P[Int(i[4])]
12
x1Score = totalScoreReducedModel(x1,w)
13
x2Score = totalScoreReducedModel(x2,w)
14
x3Score = totalScoreReducedModel(x3,w)
15
x4Score = totalScoreReducedModel(x4,w)
16
if x1Score > x2Score # Finds first parent
17
p1 = copy(x1)
18
else
19
p1 = copy(x2)
20
end
21
if x3Score > x4Score # Finds second parent
22
p2 = copy(x3)
23
else
24
p2 = copy(x4)
25
end
26
return p1, p2
27 end
Listing G.4: Function for tournament selection that finds the best of four individuals
1 function onePointCrossover(x1,x2,budget,cost)
2
N = 4
3
i1 = rand(1:4)
4
i2 = rand(1:4)
5
c1 = copy(x1)
6
c2 = copy(x2)
7
feasibilityCheck = true
8
if i1 == i2
9
c1, c2, feasibilityCheck = onePointCrossover(x1,x2,budget ,cost)
10
else
11
c1[i1] = x2[i1]
12
c1[i2] = x2[i2]
13
c2[i1] = x1[i1]
14
c2[i2] = x1[i2]
15
end
16
if sum(c1[n]*cost[n] for n=1:N) > budget || sum(c1[n] for n=1:N) < 0 || sum(c2[n
]*cost[n] for n=1:N) > budget || sum(c2[n] for n=1:N) < 0
17
feasibilityCheck = false # identical to parrent if not feaseble
==PAGE:108==
G Code for functions used in the Evolutionary Algorithm
102
18
end
19
return c1, c2, feasibilityCheck
20 end
Listing G.5: Function for one-point crossover
1 function onePointMutation(c,cost,budget)
2
N = 4
3
cm = copy(c)
4
i = rand(1:N)
5
range = 10
6
cm[i] = c[i] + rand(-range:range)
7
if cm[i] < 0 || sum(cm[n]*cost[n] for n=1:N) > budget || sum(cm[n] for n=1:N) < 0
8
cm = onePointMutation(c,cost,budget)
9
end
10
return cm
11 end
Listing G.6: Function for one-point mutation
1 function tournamentSelectionWorst(P)
2
w1=[]
3
w2=[]
4
i = select4Random(P)
5
if length(unique(i)) != 4
6
i = select4Random(P)
7
end
8
x1 = P[Int(i[1])]
9
x2 = P[Int(i[2])]
10
x3 = P[Int(i[3])]
11
x4 = P[Int(i[4])]
12
x1Score = totalScoreReducedModel(x1,w)
13
x2Score = totalScoreReducedModel(x2,w)
14
x3Score = totalScoreReducedModel(x3,w)
15
x4Score = totalScoreReducedModel(x4,w)
16
if x1Score < x2Score # Finds first parent
17
w1i = i[1]
18
else
19
w1i = i[2]
20
end
21
if x3Score < x4Score # Finds second parent
22
w2i = i[3]
23
else
24
w2i = i[4]
25
end
26
return w1i, w2i
27 end
Listing G.7: Function for tournament selection that finds the worst of four individuals
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX H
Reduced SOLUTIONSplus
attribute tree
==PAGE:110==
H Reduced SOLUTIONSplus attribute tree
104
 
 
Level 1 
Level 2 
Level 3 
 
 
E-mobility project assessed  
  
  
  
Net Present Value 
  
  
Financial viability 
4,91 
  
10,05 
 
  
Financial indicators 
  
  
Internal Rate of Return 
14,28 
  
5,14 
  
 
 
  
  
Availability of finance 
  
Payback period 
  
4,23 
4,23 
 
 
  
  
Alignment with legislation & regulations 
  
Alignment with legislation & regulations 
  
Institutional/political indicators 
7,70 
7,70 
15,78 
 
 
  
  
Ease of implementation 
  
Ease of implementation 
  
8,08 
8,08 
 
 
  
Climate-related indicators 
  
Impact on GHG emissions 
  
Impact on GHG emissions 
19,97 
19,97 
19,97 
 
 
  
  
  
NOx emissions abated 
  
  
Impact on air pollutants 
4,18 
  
9,09 
 
  
  
  
PM2.5 emissions abated 
  
Environmental indicators 
  
4,91 
22,59 
 
 
  
  
Impact on noise 
  
Impact on noise 
  
6,84 
6,836 
  
 
 
  
  
Effect on recycled resources 
  
Effect on recycled resources 
  
6,66 
6,66 
 
 
  
  
Impact on accessibility 
  
Access to pick-up/delivery locations (freight) 
  
1,15 
1,15 
  
 
 
  
  
Affordability of e-mobility services 
  
Affordability of e-mobility services 
  
Social indicators 
3,20 
3,20 
8,58 
 
 
  
  
Impact on charging safety 
  
Impact on charging safety 
  
2,49 
2,49 
  
 
 
  
  
Impact on security 
  
Impact on security 
  
1,74 
1,74 
 
 
  
  
Impact on national/local budget 
  
Impact on national/local budget 
  
7,60 
7,60 
  
 
 
  
  
  
Fossil fuel imports abated 
  
Wider economic indicators 
  
Impact on external trade 
4,06 
18,80 
7,07 
 
  
  
  
Other imports affected 
  
  
3,01 
  
 
 
  
  
Impact on employment 
  
Job creation 
  
4,14 
4,14 
Figure H.1: Reduced SOLUTIONSplus attribute tree width weights.
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
Barfod, Michael Bruhn and Steen Leleur (2021). вҖңDecision Support and Strategic Assessment
DTU Management Compendium.вҖқ In:
Branke, Juergen (2016). вҖңMCDA and multiobjective evolutionary algorithms.вҖқ In: International
Series in Operations Research and Management Science 233, pages 977вҖ“1008.
Brockhoff, Dimo and Eckart Zitzler (2006). вҖңAre all objectives necessary? On dimensional-
ity reduction in evolutionary multiobjective optimization.вҖқ In: Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics). Volume 4193 LNCS. Springer Verlag, pages 533вҖ“542.
вҖ” (2007). вҖңDimensionality Reduction in Multiobjective Optimization: The Minimum Objec-
tive Subset Problem.вҖқ In: Operations Research Proceedings 2006, pages 423вҖ“429.
Coello Coello, Carlos A. (1999). вҖңA survey of constraint handling techniques used with evolu-
tionary algorithms.вҖқ In: Lania-RI-99-04, Laboratorio Nacional de вҖҰ, pages 1вҖ“33.
Czyzak, Piotr and Andrezej Jaszkiewicz (1998). вҖңPareto Simulated Annealing - A Metaheuris-
tic Technique for Multiple-Objective Combinatorial Optimization.вҖқ In: 7.February 1997,
pages 34вҖ“47.
De Smet, Y., B. Mareschal, and C. Verly (2009). вҖңExtending the PROMETHEE II method
to continuous and combinatorial multi-objective optimization problems: A first model.вҖқ In:
IEEM 2009 - IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering
Management, pages 1608вҖ“1611.
Deb, Kalyanmoy (January 2014). вҖңMulti-objective optimization.вҖқ In: Search Methodologies:
Introductory Tutorials in Optimization and Decision Support Techniques, Second Edition.
Springer US, pages 403вҖ“450.
Deb, Kalyanmoy and Dhish Kumar Saxena (2005). вҖңOn Finding Pareto-Optimal Solutions
Through Dimensionality Reduction for Certain Large-Dimensional Multi-Objective Opti-
mization Problems EMO for Many Objectives.вҖқ In: Kangal report 2005011.2005011, pages 3353вҖ“
3360.
Dmitriy (February 2019). Principal Component Analysis and k-means Clustering to Visualize a
High Dimensional Dataset. url: https://medium.com/@dmitriy.kavyazin/principal-
component-analysis-and-k-means-clustering-to-visualize-a-high-dimensional-
dataset-577b2a7a5fe2 (visited on 26 October 2021).
Duro, JoГЈo A. et al. (2014). вҖңMachine learning based decision support for many-objective
optimization problems.вҖқ In: Neurocomputing 146, pages 30вҖ“47. url: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.neucom.2014.06.076.
Evangelos, Triantaphyllou (2000). Multi-Criteria Decision Making Methods: A Comparative
Study. SPRINGER-SCIENCE+BUSINESS MEDIA B.V.
Fleming, Peter J., Robin C. Purshouse, and Robert J. Lygoe (2005). вҖңMany-objective op-
timization: An engineering design perspective.вҖқ In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Volume 3410. Springer Verlag, pages 14вҖ“32.
Gandhi, Rohith (2021). K-Means Clustering вҖ” Introduction to Machine Learning Algorithms.
url: https://towardsdatascience.com/k- means- clustering- introduction- to-
machine-learning-algorithms-c96bf0d5d57a (visited on 2021).
==PAGE:112==
Bibliography
106
Jones, D. F., S. K. Mirrazavi, and M. Tamiz (2002). вҖңMulti-objective meta-heuristics - An
overview of the current.вҖқ In: 137.
Julia (20 November 2021). Clustering.jl package - K-means. url: https://juliastats.org/
Clustering.jl/dev/kmeans.html (visited on 20 November 2021).
Konak, Abdullah, David W. Coit, and Alice E. Smith (2006). вҖңMulti-objective optimization
using genetic algorithms: A tutorial.вҖқ In: Reliability Engineering and System Safety 91.9,
pages 992вҖ“1007.
Lah, Oliver and Alvin Mejia (2020). вҖңSOLUTIONSplus Integrating Urban Electric Mobility
Solutions in the Context of the Paris Agreement , the Sustainable Development Goals , and
the New Urban Agenda.вҖқ In:
Malekmohammadi, Bahram, Banafsheh Zahraie, and Reza Kerachian (2011). вҖңRanking solu-
tions of multi-objective reservoir operation optimization models using multi-criteria deci-
sion analysis.вҖқ In: Expert Systems with Applications 38.6, pages 7851вҖ“7863. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2010.12.119.
Marler, R. T. and J. S. Arora (2004). вҖңSurvey of multi-objective optimization methods for
engineering.вҖқ In: Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 26.6, pages 369вҖ“395.
Ngatchou, Patrick, Anahita Zarei, and M. A. El-Sharkawi (2005). вҖңPareto multi objective
optimization.вҖқ In: Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Intelligent Systems
Application to Power Systems, ISAPвҖҷ05 2005, pages 84вҖ“91.
Nguyen, Xuan Hung, Lam Thu Bui, and Cao Truong Tran (2020). вҖңImproving many objec-
tive optimisation algorithms using objective dimensionality reduction.вҖқ In: Evolutionary
Intelligence 13.3, pages 365вҖ“380.
Purshouse, Robin C. et al. (2014). вҖңA review of hybrid evolutionary multiple criteria decision
making methods.вҖқ In: Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation,
CEC 2014, pages 1147вҖ“1154.
Ridha, Hussein Mohammed et al. (2021). вҖңMulti-objective optimization and multi-criteria
decision-making methods for optimal design of standalone photovoltaic system: A compre-
hensive review.вҖқ In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 135.August 2020, page 110202.
Saxena, Dhish Kumar et al. (2013). вҖңObjective reduction in many-objective optimization: Lin-
ear and nonlinear algorithms.вҖқ In: IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 17.1,
pages 77вҖ“99.
Sekizaki, Shinya, Ichiro Nishizaki, and Tomohiro Hayashida (2019). вҖңA many-objective evo-
lutionary algorithm incorporating decision makerвҖҷs preference and its application to man-
agement of the electricity distribution network.вҖқ In: Journal of Multi-Criteria Decision
Analysis 26.3-4, pages 165вҖ“186.
Sinha, Ankur et al. (2013). вҖңUsing objective reduction and interactive procedure to handle
many-objective optimization problems.вҖқ In: Applied Soft Computing Journal 13.1, pages 415вҖ“
427. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2012.08.030.
Solutions Plus (2019a). вҖңBackground Kathmandu.вҖқ In: page 14. url: http://www.solutionsplus.
eu/uploads/4/8/9/5/48950199/factsheet%7B%5C_%7Dkathmandu%7B%5C_%7Dbackground.
pdf.
вҖ” (2019b). вҖңFactsheet Kathmandu.вҖқ In: url: http://www.solutionsplus.eu/uploads/4/
8/9/5/48950199/factsheet%7B%5C_%7Dkathmandu%7B%5C_%7Dbackground.pdf.
SOLUTIONSplus (2021a). вҖңD1 . 6 Impact assessment results ( Part A ): Baseline scenario &
ex вҖҗ ante assessment.вҖқ In: May 2021.
вҖ” (2021b). вҖңKPI definition.вҖқ
вҖ” (2021c). SOLUTIONSplus Objectives - SOLUTIONSplus Project. url: http://www.solutionsplus.
eu/solutionsplus.html (visited on 2021).
Velasquez, Mark and Patrick Hester (2013). вҖңAn analysis of multi-criteria decision making
methods.вҖқ In: International Journal of Operations Research 10.2, pages 56вҖ“66.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
107
Wang, Handing, Markus Olhofer, and Yaochu Jin (2017). вҖңA mini-review on preference mod-
eling and articulation in multi-objective optimization: current status and challenges.вҖқ In:
Complex & Intelligent Systems 3.4, pages 233вҖ“245.
Zakaria Jaadi (2021). A Step-by-Step Explanation of Principal Component Analysis (PCA).
url: https://builtin.com/data- science/step- step- explanation- principal-
component-analysis (visited on 26 October 2021).
Zhang, Kai et al. (2021). вҖңKnee based multimodal multi-objective evolutionary algorithm for
decision making.вҖқ In: Information Sciences 544, pages 39вҖ“55. url: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ins.2020.07.057.
==PAGE:114==
