==PAGE:1==
The outlook for smart drainage systems
Assessment of data and methods for data-driven urban
drainage forecasts in Reykjavik, Iceland
Master Thesis
DTU Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
The outlook for smart drainage systems
Assessment of data and methods for data-driven urban drainage forecasts in Reykjavik,
Iceland
Study programme
MSc Eng in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
Master Thesis
December, 2021
Written by
Sverrir Heiðar Davíðsson(s200147)
Supervisors
Luca Vezzaro, Associate Professor at DTU Environment
Jonas Wied Pedersen, PhD, Postdoc at DTU Environment
Michael Riis Andersen, Associate Professor at DTU Compute
Hlöðver Stefán Þorgeirsson, Waste Water R&D Lead at Veitur
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Rainfall-runoff modelling in urban hydrology is a widely studied problem that has mainly
been approached with physical and conceptual models. Data-driven models are becoming
more widely used in many fields due to increased data and computing power.
Many
applications of rainfall-runoff modelling require high-quality input data with high temporal
and spatial resolution. The Icelandic wastewater utility company Veitur is in the first
stages of modernizing its wastewater system and, until now, have primarily used data
for monitoring purposes. Three neural network layers were tested in four combinations
with three different rainfall data sources for drainage flow simulation and forecasting.
These layers were a temporal convolutional layer, a long short-term memory layer, and a
fully-connected linear layer. Several rainfall estimates were made using radar data. The
accuracy of the radar estimated rainfall and NWP are evaluated using rain-gauges. The
difference between pumping station inflow and outflow is analyzed using high-resolution
flow and water level data. The thesis results found that the estimates of rainfall produced
at a lower altitude can be better but also more sensitive to interference from the ground.
Models using rain gauge data and NWP data outperformed those using radar-estimated
rainfall as input to drainage flow models. The temporal convolutional layer outperforms
all other models, and performance is almost always improved with longer sequences of past
observations. It was found that the main application possible with these models, current
data and limited control mechanisms available to Veitur is early warning systems based on
prediction thresholds. With investments to better control mechanisms, improvements to
the drainage flow data and better radar estimated rainfall, further applications of drainage
flow forecasts would likely become possible.
ii
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared a the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng and accounts for 35 ECTS.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and
machine learning.
The code used in this project can be found at https://github.com/SverrirH/ThesisCode
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my four supervisors who each helped me in dif-
ferent ways: Jonas for introducing me to the fields of urban hydrology, weather radar
and numerical weather predictions and always pointing me in the right direction; Luca for
helping me stay on track and reminding me of things like the sad but necessary lesson of
killing one’s darlings, without which I would probably still be trying to perfect my radar
nowcast; Michael for helping me stay grounded with my ambitious and usually unrealistic
modelling ideas; Hlöðver for helping me get to know and appreciate wastewater systems
and jumping at every opportunity to help.
I also want to thank the various people at Veitur for their great support throughout
this thesis and the other projects I have done with them. I would also like to thank the
people at the Icelandic Meteorological Oﬀice for giving their valuable time, letting me use
their data and helping me get to know the field of meteorology.
Last but not least, my girlfriend, her parents and my mom who supported me in many
ways throughout the pandemic that gave me the space I needed to focus on my studies.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature review
3
2.1
Rainfall-runoff modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Radar data in urban drainage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Data driven models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Case study
7
3.1
Reykjavík drainage and wastewater system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Weather data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Applications for the Reykjavík wastewater system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Methods
15
4.1
System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Data processing and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Drainage flow simulation and forecasts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Results and discussion
39
5.1
Data evaluation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Experiment results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Conclusions
57
Bibliography
59
The outlook for smart drainage systems
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Urban hydrology is a subfield of hydrology, which is the study of water’s distribution,
movement, and interactions with the natural and man-made environment. Urban hydrol-
ogy looks specifically at these processes in the context of urbanised territory. The systems
responsible for the safe handling of rainwater are called drainage systems, and the systems
responsible for other wastewater, such as sewage, are known as wastewater systems. Both
systems are an integral part of a city’s infrastructure.
These systems are divided into two categories: combined or separated sewer systems,
depending on whether they handle runoff and sewage together or separately. In combined
systems, a failure to handle rainfall-runoff can result in what is known as combined sewer
overflow (CSO) discharges. CSO discharges happen when the combined sewage and runoff
overwhelms the system, resulting in a release of untreated sewage to the environment.
CSO discharges are undesirable but are used as a last resort to prevent flooding, property
loss, increased risk of disease, and potential risk to other infrastructure such as domestic
water sources.
In hydrology, a drainage basin, also called a catchment area, refers to land from which
surface runoff, i.e. the water that runs off the surface after rainfall, drains into a com-
mon stream or outlet. Rainfall-runoff models try to predict the flow of water within a
catchment or from the common outlet of the catchment using rainfall observations. An
urban drainage flow forecast is a specialised case of a rainfall-runoff forecast, and there
are many operational strategies for urban drainage systems that require or would benefit
significantly from having a drainage flow forecast.
There are many approaches to rainfall-runoff modelling, but data-driven models have
gained popularity in many fields due to the increasing availability of data and greater com-
putational power. The conventional approach of rainfall-runoff modelling uses simplified
equations based on domain knowledge and experience in hydrology, but the data-driven
approach lacks a connection to the physical system. Instead, these models use general
equations to simulate the system’s processes. One versatile class of data-driven models are
called artificial neural networks (ANN) and many variations of these, like long short-term
memory (LSTM) and convolutional neural networks (CNN), are especially well suited for
modelling Spatio-temporal processes like rainfall-runoff. Like all data-driven models, these
models depend on the abundance and quality of the data to make accurate predictions.
Weather radar and rain gauges are the two most commonly used rainfall data sources
in urban hydrology. Both methods have some benefits and drawbacks, but the two comple-
ment each other well. Rain gauges are usually considered the most reliable measurement
of rainfall and are often used as ’ground truth’ data in hydrological research, despite their
shortcomings. Weather radar transmits electromagnetic waves and uses an antenna to
measure the waves reflected off clouds to estimate their densities. Radar data contains
much more spatial information than rain gauge data but has many problems of its own.
Radar data suffers from uncertainty in rainfall estimates and has a problem with erroneous
data like clutter, which is the unwanted reflectivity from static objects or geographical
features, such as mountains, that obstruct or reflect the radar beams. Rainfall can be
estimated from radar reflectivity, but this estimate is subject to uncertainty. Neither rain
gauge data nor radar data are enough to predict rainfall in the future, which is required
to forecast drainage flow.
The two most common forms of precipitation forecasts are numerical weather predic-
tions (NWP) and radar nowcasts, also known as radar extrapolation. NWPs are made
with mathematical models of the atmosphere and oceans, which are used to forecast pre-
The outlook for smart drainage systems
1
==PAGE:10==
cipitation and many more aspects of weather. Radar nowcasting is a particular type of
short-term forecast where a sequence of recent radar observations are used with data-driven
models or algorithms to extrapolate the future positions and intensities of clouds which
can then be used to predict rainfall. In order to compare the two methods, a different
data source is required, one that provides rainfall observations instead of forecasts.
In many countries, the urban drainage and wastewater systems still in use today
were designed many decades ago when utility companies did not have access to the vast
amount of data, computing power and computational methods that have since come into
widespread use. The utility company Veitur is responsible for the operation and devel-
opment of the drainage and wastewater system in Iceland’s capital Reykjavík. Veitur is
in the process of modernising many of its utilities, including the wastewater utility. To-
day, the company does not use any form of simulation or forecasting models in its system
but has been taking steps in recent years to bring its wastewater system up to date with
current technologies.
1.1
Research objectives
This thesis is about the design, implementation and evaluation of a simple data-driven
drainage flow model for use in the Reykjavík wastewater and drainage system, as well as an
assessment of the data available for this task. The model will be designed so that it can be
used both for simulation and forecasting. A special emphasis is placed on evaluating radar
data and numerical weather predictions as they are the main candidates for rainfall input
into the model. The goal of the evaluations in this paper is to show if certain applications
are possible or give practical recommendations for how to improve the systems. The thesis
will address the following questions:
1. How accurately can urban flow be simulated and forecasted in Reykjavík, Iceland,
with currently available data and simple machine learning methods.
2. How can simple data-driven simulations and forecasts be used to improve operations
of the wastewater system in Reykjavík with currently available data?
3. What are the main improvements to the data or methods that would be required
for better performance and additional applications of the simulations and forecasts?
1.2
Thesis outline
Chapter 2 looks at the existing literature on the topics of this thesis. The wastewa-
ter system and the available data are introduced in chapter 3. Chapter 4 describes the
approaches used to process and evaluate the data as well as the design, implementation
and evaluation of the models used for drainage simulations and forecasting. The results
of the experiments and evaluations described in chapter 4 are presented and discussed in
chapter 5. Then the conclusions can be found in chapter 6.
2
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature review
The purpose of this literature review is to give an overview of the current literature relating
to the problem of data-driven simulation and forecasting of urban drainage flow.
The literature review will begin by looking into rainfall-runoff models used in urban
hydrology; this will include the use of rain gauges, radar and radar nowcasts for simulating
and forecasting rainfall-runoff and numerical weather prediction for the same objective.
2.1
Rainfall-runoff modelling
A drainage basin is the area from which surface runoff drains into a common stream (Bri-
tannica, 2020). Rainfall-runoff models try to predict the flow of water within a catchment
using estimated rainfall on that catchment. An urban drainage flow forecast is a special-
ized type of rainfall-runoff forecast, and there are many operational strategies for urban
drainage systems that require or would benefit significantly from having a drainage flow
forecast (Thorndahl et al., 2017). Rainfall-runoff models have a long history, dating back
at least 170 years when an Irish engineer named Thomas James Mulvaney published a
paper with an attempt to model the peak runoff flow in response to rainfall with a simple
equation(Dingman, 2015). Since then, thanks to advances in hydrology, more data and
greater computational power, much progress has been made in rainfall-runoff modelling.
Rainfall-runoff models can be grouped roughly into three categories: physical, con-
ceptual, and empirical. Physical models use physical laws and equations based on known
hydrological responses to estimate the runoff. These can incorporate spatial and temporal
variability to a very fine scale and require the calibration of many parameters specific to
each catchment. Conceptual models use simplified equations that represent water storage
in a catchment and are much easier to calibrate, but these lack the consideration for spatial
variability within the catchment. Empirical models take a different approach to the prob-
lem, avoiding the need for specialized equations with inherent limitations and instead use
more general models that try to describe the relationship between the input, i.e. rainfall
data and other relevant measurements, and the output, the stream-flow (Sitterson et al.,
2018).
The main requirement for practical drainage flow forecasting is a precipitation forecast,
and the two main types of precipitation forecast used in urban hydrology are NWP and
radar nowcasts. The former has a considerably lower spatial and temporal resolution but
a larger forecast horizon than the latter. Therefore, radar nowcasts are often considered
the better choice for applications such as real-time control, which require at most very
short-term but precise forecasts. Although, as (Pedersen, 2021) notes, the better option
of the two is going to depend on the application in question and its temporal and spatial
scale.
2.1.1
Applications of rainfall-runoff forecasts
(Thorndahl et al., 2017) splits applications for radar estimated rainfall in urban hydrology
into two categories: online, meaning they must be computed in real-time and updated
continuously as new data becomes available, and offline, meaning they may be done at
any time using historical data. An example of an offline application is gathering general
statistical characteristics of the system, such as evaluating the distributions of rainfall
events in terms of extremes to estimate how likely a rainfall event of a given size is to
occur. Another type of offline application is the analysis of events after they occur for
things like insurance claims, analysis of the system during certain events or modelling for
risk assessments. Examples of online applications are warning systems for severe rainfall
The outlook for smart drainage systems
3
==PAGE:12==
that is likely to cause flooding and modelling of scenarios from rainfall forecasts that can
be used to evaluate different control strategies for reservoirs or pumping stations.
(AghaKouchak & Habib, 2010) maps out the resolution and temporal requirements
for many applications of radar estimated rainfall. In figure 2.1 this map is shown, but
other authors suggest some of these applications may be possible with a lower temporal
resolution like that of NWP. The figure places control of reservoirs at just below the 15
minutes of temporal resolution, but this of course, will depend greatly on the size of the
reservoir.
Figure 2.1: Resolution requirements radar for different urban hydrological applications
using radar estimated rainfall (AghaKouchak & Habib, 2010)
(Pedersen, 2021) notes that publications on the topic of applications of NWP in urban
drainage and wastewater purposes is limited and may be broadly categorized into four
topics: Generic rain and flow forecasting, urban pluvial flood forecasting, real-time control
and post-processing. The approach used by (Courdent et al., 2018) to distinguish high
and low flow domains using NWPs demonstrates a few possible applications of NWPs in
urban drainage despite their low temporal and spatial resolution.
2.2
Radar data in urban drainage
Many authors emphasize the value of radar data in urban hydrology, but they have also
highlighted the importance of processing the radar data and the need to adjust the radar
data with more reliable rainfall estimates.
Radar reflectivity (Z) can be converted to rain rates (R), but this conversion is subject
to uncertainty in the relationship between reflectivity and rainfall intensity, known as the
Z-R relationship because the distribution of raindrop sizes affects the relationship and
is usually not known (Beven, 2011).
The Z-R relationship is an exponential equation
Z = aRb, where a and b are adjustable parameters that can vary greatly over time and
between events. The particular combination of a = 200 and b = 1.6 is called the Marshall–
Palmer relation.
4
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:13==
In order to evaluate the coeﬀicients of the Z-R relationship for reliable precipitation
estimates, rain gauges or other ground observations of rainfall are required. These ground
observations can be used to adjust the radar estimated rainfall (Ochoa‐Rodriguez et al.,
2019; Thorndahl et al., 2017). This technique is known as radar rainfall adjustment or
radar-rain gauge merging. The two main categories of radar rainfall adjustment are static
and real-time adjustments. Static adjustments use a single set of coeﬀicients for the Z-
R relationship across the whole data set, while real-time adjustments require constant
evaluation and updating of these coeﬀicients. notes that real-time adjustment should be
made with caution due to its sensitive nature. (Löwe et al., 2014) found a single optimal
adjustment to improve the quality of a model more than a real-time adjusted estimate
for a model that used radar rainfall to predict runoff. More authors (Vallabhaneni et al.,
n.d.) suggest caution for real-time adjustment of radar due to its sensitive nature. Some
authors also suggest specific combinations of coeﬀicients of the Z-R relationship depending
on the type of rainfall event, e.g. tropical storms (Einfalt et al., 2004).
(Germann & Joss, 2004) state that high-quality rain-gauge data from a relatively dense
rain-gauge network, 1 per 10 −30km2 is a prerequisite to radar-rain gauge merging. This
statement is also supported by (Einfalt et al., 2004) and (Thorndahl et al., 2017). Some
note that the required network density for successful adjustment is rarely found (Beven,
2011; Cole & Moore, 2008). In addition to the rarity of these ideal conditions for radar
rain gauge merging, rain gauge data is also frequently observed having shortcomings like
missing data and erroneous data caused by clogged gauges, evaporation, underestimation
of rainfall due to high wind speed, etc. (Goudenhoofdt & Delobbe, 2009; Stránský et al.,
2007; Thorndahl et al., 2017).
2.3
Data driven models
One versatile class of data-driven models is called artificial neural networks (ANN). One
of the key attributes of neural networks is their modular nature. Conventional ANNs are
comprised of units called layers or hidden layers, and each layer contains one or more
neurons or nodes (Hopfield, 1982). The nodes are connected in a structured way where
the output of the nodes in one layer is connected to the nodes’ input in the next layer.
Due to these desirable properties, multiple authors have used neural network-based
rainfall-runoff models (Abou Rjeily et al., 2017; Bruen & Yang, 2006; She & You, 2019).
One notable study used LSTMs in a rainfall-runoff model and was able to show that the
LSTM had learned latent representation of snow accumulation which indicated that the
architecture could model rainfall-runoff while including snowmelt (Kratzert et al., 2018).
Other types of neural network architectures have also been used more broadly in time
series forecasting called convolutional neural networks. These networks exhibit a property
called shift-invariance, where weights in the network are applied equally to all-time steps,
which can be used to reduce the dimensionality of a sequence of inputs. A 1-dimensional
variation of these can be applied to temporal data. These are sometimes called time-delay
neural networks (Waibel et al., 1989).
The outlook for smart drainage systems
5
==PAGE:14==
6
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:15==
3
Case study
The main purpose of this section is to inform the reader about the state of affairs in the
context of the Reykjavík drainage and wastewater system, the relevant data available from
the Icelandic Meteorological Oﬀice (IMO) and Veitur. This utility company manages the
drainage and wastewater system in Reykjavík.
3.1
Reykjavík drainage and wastewater system
The drainage and wastewater system in Reykjavík, Iceland, is made up of two smaller
systems, Sundaveita and Skerjafjarðaveita, each one with a wastewater treatment facility,
Hreinsistöð Klettagörðum and Hreinsistöð Ánanaustum, respectively. Figure 3.1 shows the
two systems, the locations of main wastewater treatment facilities, the various pumping
stations that pump wastewater to the water treatment facilities. The two main pumping
stations used for the analysis and the positions of the rain gauges are mentioned later
in this paper, Boðagrandi and Gelgjutangi.
Boðagrandi is on the north-western coast
of Reykjavík within the Skerjafjarðaveita system. Gelgjutangi is close to the centre of
Sundaveita and is the larger of the two.
Figure 3.1: The two main systems in the Reykjavík Urban Drainage system, along with
some of the main assets of interest in this project
Wastewater systems are generally split into two main categories depending on if they
separate sewage from rainwater or combine them in a single pipe. The wastewater system
in Reykjavík has both combined and separated sewers. Most combined sewers belong to
older parts of the system in the downtown area of Reykjavík. An overview of the types is
found in figure 3.2 where green lines represent combined sewer pipes while blue and red
lines represent separate runoff and sewage pipes, respectively.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
7
==PAGE:16==
The main challenge of combined sewers is the increased risk of the system being unable
to cope with the added flow due to rainfall, compared to separate systems. The combined
sewage must pass through a wastewater treatment facility for safe disposal.
The two
pumping stations highlighted on figures 3.1 and 3.2 have a substantial proportion of their
inputs coming from rainfall-runoff.
Figure 3.2: An overview of the types of wastewater pipes in the Reykjavík wastweater
system. Green lines: combined sewer pipes. Red lines: Sewage pipes. Blue lines: Rainfall-
runoff pipes.
3.1.1
Drainage flow data
The drainage data available for this study consists of hourly flow averages from two
drainage flow sensors. These sensors belong to separate pumping stations known as Boða-
grandi and Gelgjutangi. Gelgjutangi is notable because it is the oldest pumping station
still in use in Reykjavík and gets its wastewater from the south-eastern catchment of the
two catchments drawn in figure 3.3. This system collects a high proportion of the rainfall-
runoff within its catchment and is thus considered a good candidate. The other pumping
station, Boðagrandi, is located on the north-eastern tip of Reykjavík and a large portion
of the catchment is inside Seltjarnarnes, a neighbouring municipality of Reykjavík.
8
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.3: A rough outline of the two catchments of the pumping stations studied in
this paper. The north-western and smaller of the two catchments is the one that leads
to the Boðagrandi pumping station. The bigger catchment is the one that leads to the
Gelgjutangi pumping station.
Both of these pumping stations are wet well pumping stations (see figure 4.10), meaning
that inside them is a chamber known as a wet well that can hold wastewater temporarily
before it gets pumped out. The water level within the chamber is measured, and hourly
averages of this value are stored. Due to this chamber, there is often a slight difference in
the inflow and outflow from these pumping stations. Section 4.2.3 describes this problem
in more detail, as well as a description of the methods used to analyze this difference.
3.1.2
Hot water utility and district heating
Most buildings in Reykjavík are heated using a geothermal district heating system (Gunnlaugs-
son, 2004). Unlike many other district heating systems, Reykjavík uses a mostly open-loop
system where, once the water has passed though a radiator or floor heating, it leaves the
system, usually into a combined wastewater system or other drainage solution. Thus pre-
dicting the use of district heating becomes a part of the drainage flow forecasting problem.
Flow observations in the district heating system are available for many regions of Reyk-
javík but the wastewater system and drainage systems are not divided in the same way
and flow measurements cannot always be directly assigned to a single pumping station.
As is further discussed in section 4.1.2, the variable used to account for the inflow of the
district heating water in the wastewater system is the outside temperature which, in ad-
dition to temperature forecasts, is used by Veitur currently to forecast hot water usage
with good results.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
9
==PAGE:18==
3.2
Weather data
3.2.1
Radar data
The radar data used in this project contains radar echo data over a 6 year period starting
at the beginning of 2015 to the end of 2020 collected and supplied by the Icelandic Me-
teorological Oﬀice. The radar in question is the ISKEF radar in the Southern Peninsula
Region. The radar data has many possible applications in urban hydrology. The main
applications come from the ability to estimate rainfall using radar data. More detailed
description of the radar data is given in section 4.2.1, where the processing steps to turn
the raw data into rainfall estimates is also described.
As is described in the literature review, there is significant uncertainty in radar es-
timated rainfall and in order to get more accurate estimates, ground observations are
required to adjust the radar data. Using ground observations of rainfall to adjust rdara
data is called radar-rain gauge merging, and without it, many applications that require
relatively high resolution and high accuracy rainfall estimates will not be possible. The
application of short-term precipitation forecasts using radar data, called radar nowcasts,
was also described in the literature review. These short-term forecasts could allow for
high resolution and high accuracy drainage flow forecasts, which are the basis for several
applications such as real-time control (RTC) for pumping stations and reservoirs. Cur-
rently, the Icelandic Meteorological Oﬀice does not perform any radar-rain gauge merging
or radar nowcasting, and so all applications that require these cannot be considered by
Veitur for the time being.
3.2.2
Rain gauge data
Within reykjavík multiple rain gauges have recently been added, but only one has enough
historical data to be used in the analyses later in this paper. Some rain gauges outside
Reykjavík could be used for applications within Reykjavík. Three main rain gauges are
considered in this report, see table 3.1, these gauges are also shown in multiple figures in
this paper, for example see figures 3.1, 3.4 and 4.7. In figure 4.8 these gauges are also
show with their respective IDs. These rain gauges have enough historical data to compare
them with the NWP and radar data. The rain gauges are treated as ’ground truth’ for
rainfall observations when evaluating the accuracy of the NWP forecasts and the radar
estimated rainfall, but these are of course, not estimates of the same thing. The radar is a
volume-based estimate of rainfall, and the NWP are estimates of rainfall over 2x2km area
while the rain gauges are effectively point-estimates of rainfall.
As mentioned in the literature review, both the quality and density of rain gauge
networks are prerequisites for merging radar and rain gauge data. The three gauges in
table 3.1 are each of a slightly different type. According to specialists at the IMO, gauge
1475 is considered the most reliable of the three and the most suited to Icelandic weather
conditions and gauge 1473 is considered to be the least reliable since it is both unheated,
meaning that measurements of snow will often be erroneous, and is known to underestimate
rainfall in certain wind conditions. The data from these gauges is stored in a time series
with a 10-minute resolution. The gauges with ’yes’ in the ’manually reviewed’ column in
table 3.1 were also available as hourly values that had been reviewed and processed by
staff at IMO.
In the literature review, the density of one gauge per 10 −30km2 is considered good
enough for radar rain gauge adjustment. The shortest distance between these gauges is
about 10km, the distance between gauge 1475 and 1473. If we assume each gauge covers
an area in a circle with a radius equal to half the distance to the closest gauge, then each
gauge has to cover an area of roughly 80km2, and so the density of these gauges falls wide
of the mark. Although, as previously mentioned, there have recently been some additions
10
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:19==
to the gauges within and around Reykjavík, so future applications that require radar-rain
gauge merging might be possible.
Table 3.1: The three main rain gauges used in this study. The only rain gauge used for
rainfall runoff modelling is gauge 1475 since it is located nearest to both catchments
ID
Location
GPS
Type
manually reviewed
1475
Reykjavík
64.1274, -21.9024
Heated weighing bucket
Yes
1473
Straumsvík
64.0438 , -22.0404
Unheated tipping bucket
Yes
1481
Hólmsheiði
64.1085, -21.6864
Heated tipping bucket
No
3.2.3
Numerical weather prediction data
The numerical weather prediction (NWP) data used in these experiments was also provided
by the Icelandic Meteorological oﬀice and comes from the HARMONIE - numerical weather
prediction model, which has been in use since 2011 (Íslands, n.d.). The data comes in the
form of cumulative rainfall from the initial time step and has a forecast horizon of 66
hours, temporal resolution of 1 hour and spatial resolution of 2x2km and is updated every
6 hours. In figure 3.4 the positions and sizes of the NWP pixels, which are 2x2km in area
can be seen over and around the Reykjavík area. The forecast values at these pixels are
used as input for the drainage forecast models in chapter 4. For a comparison of scale
with radar estimated rainfall pixels, see figure 4.7.
Figure 3.4: 10x10 grid of NWP pixels shown to scale in relation to capital area and
the two main rainfall sensors: the radar by Keflavík and the primary rain-gauge by the
Meteorological Oﬀice in Reykjavík and the two other rain gauge used to evaluate the radar
and NWP data.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
11
==PAGE:20==
3.2.4
Temperature forecast data
To perform forecast using a model that depends on the temperature, it is necessary to
use temperature forecasts instead of temperature observations to get a realistic view of
the performance that would be seen when forecasting. The temperature forecast data
used in this project originates from the same NWP model as the precipitation forecast
data but is specifically estimated for at the location of the 1475 weather station where the
temperature observations are also made.
3.3
Applications for the Reykjavík wastewater system
Applications of a drainage flow forecast are limited by the observations’ quality, even for
those categorized as ’offline’ applications. Some offline applications may be ruled out until
a better radar estimated rainfall becomes available like those relating to insurance claims
and other analyses relating to extreme rainfall events, since they may be limited by the
resolution of the drainage flow data as well as the quality of rainfall estimates. Some
applications may only require a long history of data rather than high quality data, such
as those relating to useful statistics about the system that may be used as a basis for
design decisions in the future. An example of such a statistic is the frequency of overflow
events, which may be used to justify investment costs into improved systems and provide
a baseline of performance for future changes to the system to evaluate their worth.
The more challenging category of applications given the current constraints of the sys-
tem and the available data are ’online’ applications. The wastewater system in Reykjavík
has very few control mechanisms that can be used to take preemptive measures if the risk
of heavy rainfall is high. Currently, most pumping stations are equipped with pumps that
can only be set to ’on’ and ’off’ states, and these states are controlled by the water level
inside the wet well of the pumping stations. Applications of drainage flow forecasts are
mainly relevant for combined sewer systems, and thus, since a large part of Reykjavík has
separate sewers, only some of the pumping stations in Reykjavík could make use of such
a forecast.
The wet wells inside the pumping stations serve as a relatively small buffer. Here the
buffer is considered small because the ratio of ’well volume’ over ’total pumping capacity
is relatively short. For example, the useable capacity of the Boðagrandi wet well is less
than 90′000 litres, and the well has three sewage pumps, each capable of 180 litres per
second and 3 CSO pumps each with about 370 litres per second capacity. Just the sewage
pumps can empty the wet well in less than 3 minutes, and with the rainwater pumps, it
can be emptied in about 55 seconds. Since the duration of rainfall events can be much
longer than this time, the wet wells have relatively small buffers for applications relating to
rainfall forecasts. To reduce combined sewer overflow with drainage forecasts, the capacity
of storage assets would need to be considerably greater than the current wet wells.
Since the only currently available rainfall forecast is the NWP, online applications are
limited to those that do not require high spatial or temporal resolution. In addition to
the limited control mechanisms, this limitation rules out the possibility of most or all real-
time-control applications for small reservoirs and pumping stations. One way to utilize
NWP precipitation forecasts is with a similar approach as the one used in (Courdent
et al., 2018), where NWP forecasts were not explicitly used to predict the drainage flow
but rather distinguish between so-called flow domains. These flow domains are ranges of
flow that may have different operational implications that can be used to prepare or send
out a warning of increased risk of flooding or CSO discharges. The distinction between
flow domains is based on flow thresholds that are used to generate binary outputs, e.g.
”greater than 500 l/s” or ”less than or equal to 500 l/s”. A similar flow threshold-based
approach will be used in section 4.3 to evaluate the performance of the different drainage
12
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:21==
flow simulation and forecast models.
Figure 3.5: A drawing of the Boðagrandi pumping station the water levels relevant to the
pump control system. The red lines represent the height that triggers the system to turn
the pumps on or off. The highest line is marked at 3.35m and the rest are 3.0m, 0.8m,
and 0.5m.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
13
==PAGE:22==
14
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:23==
4
Methods
This chapter describes the methods and details the approaches applied in this thesis to
assess the data and appropriate methods for drainage forecasting in Reykjavík.
The
chapter starts with section 4.1 which gives context to the experiments and data in the
following sections.
Next, section 4.2 describes how the raw radar data was processed
and turned into rainfall estimates, as well as how the quality of the radar rainfall and
NWP forecasts are evaluated with rain gauges. It also describes an approach to evaluate
potential errors and uncertainty in the drainage flow data. Lastly, section 4.3 starts by
describing the drainage flow simulation and forecasting models, how the model training
was performed and how the best models were selected and evaluated.
4.1
System
This section will describe a simplified version of the wastewater system in Reykjavík as
well as give context to the most relevant data available for analysis.
All parts of the wastewater system in Reykjavík get input from one or more of the
following sources, also seen in figure 4.1: water used for district heating, sewage, cold
water (also called drinking water/potable water), wastewater, and rainfall-runoff. Since
the inputs to the system are mostly known, it is possible to examine each source separately
and what data is necessary to forecast them. This approach is used to select the input
data for the models to simulate and forecast the drainage flow.
Figure 4.1: The primary inputs into drainage system: hot water, cold water and precipi-
tation, as well as some of the most relevant data sources available within the system. The
flow sensors used in this paper measure the outflow from the pumping stations rather than
the inflow.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
15
==PAGE:24==
4.1.1
Cold water
Cold water, also known as drinking water and potable water, is used for drinking, toilets,
showers and many other household applications. The main data source for the drinking
water utility is flow meters in different neighbourhoods. This flow data is not used in the
experiments in section 4.3 both because the data has too many problems for convenient
modelling purposes and because the modelling approach requires that only data with an
accompanying forecast be used so that the simulations and forecast get equivalent data.
Some examples of these data problems include non-stationary trends, not representative of
the water entering the sewage system caused by leakages and constructions. When water
is rerouted through temporary connections due to construction work, it often affects the
flow measurements in ways that would indicate increased or decreased usage while, in fact,
the amount of water entering the sewage system remains unchanged.
In order to predict cold water usage, the time of day is considered to be the best input
variable. Experts at Veitur shared their experience on the subject and noted that cold
water is likely the most consistent of all inputs to the sewer system and that it has only
slight seasonal variation in some neighbourhoods but is almost completely determined
by the time of day and the day of the week. Figure 4.2 demonstrates this consistency
across an entire year, indicating that daily and weekly patterns of water usage are the
most significant factor in cold-water usage. In order to turn the time of day into a usable
variable for the drainage flow models, it is represented by a one-hot encoded representation.
One-hot encoding is a commonly used machine learning technique that transforms
categorical variables into numerical variables to make them compatible with regression
and classification models.
This encoding works by assigning a new variable to all the
unique values of the old variable. Since the drainage flow data is hourly, the relevant,
unique values are the 24 hours of the day. In one-hot encoded format, the hours of the
day look as follows:
hour :[One-hot encoded hour]
0 −1 :[1, 0, 0, ..., 0, 0]
1 −2 :[0, 1, 0, ..., 0, 0]
2 −3 :[0, 0, 1, ..., 0, 0]
· · ·
22 −23 :[0, 0, 0, ..., 1, 0]
23 −0 :[0, 0, 0, ..., 0, 1]
16
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.2: (Top) A year of cold water time series data for sensor ’K-RVK-002-RS908’, just
one of many cold water sensors in Reykjavík. (Middle) A zoomed-in view of the highlighted
month from the top graph shows a consistent and repeating daily pattern of cold water
usage.(Bottom) Six consecutive weeks superimposed to demonstrate the consistency of
cold water usage in Reykjavík, dependent almost exclusively on the time of day
4.1.2
District heating
The district heating in Iceland is geothermally powered and, in contrary to most district
heating systems, is an open-loop system that often ends in combined sewers. According to
district heating experts at Veitur, they currently employ a data-driven model to forecast
district heating flow that uses a sequence of past temperature observations with a sequence
of forecasts appended. They combine this forecast with the most recent observations with
an auto-regressive model, which is a model that assumes that the output variable is a
The outlook for smart drainage systems
17
==PAGE:26==
function of its own previous values plus some stochastic term, which is an imperfectly
predictable term (Shumway et al., 2000).
The district heating usage does not depend directly on the current temperature but
rather the need for heating in houses. Other weather variables may also be relevant such
as wind speed, moisture and solar radiation but, for simplification purposes and because
Veitur has had good results by using just the outside temperature, only the temperature
will be used in the models. The models used by Veitur use an exponentially weighted sum
of a two-week long sequence of hourly temperature observations in their model, so this
model will also contain more than just a single temperature prediction.
For the simulations, only past observations will be used in the sequence included in
the input. The forecasts will substitute past observations with forecasted temperature.
For example, if a model requires a sequence of 24 temperature observations, the model
will use the 24 most recent observations to predict the current output but will use only 12
observations and 12 forecasted values to predict the output 12 hours into the future. This
processing is often referred to as a sliding window view of the data. See figure 4.3 for a
visual demonstration.
Figure 4.3: A demonstration of a sliding window view applied to a vector with three
observations and two forecasts appended. The top row shows all the data in the sequence.
The first vector from the sliding window view will include only past observations in the
sequence, while the next will include a single forecasted value since the sliding window
shifts by a single time step with each consecutive view created.
4.1.3
Rainfall-runoff
Rainfall-runoff modelling in both hydrology and urban hydrology is faced with some of
the same problems like a need for accurate rainfall measurements. Urban hydrology faces
additional challenges due to the smaller catchments and the different surface characteristics
within cities than out in nature. Rainfall within a city runs off streets, sidewalks, houses
and other surfaces into the sewer much more quickly than rainfall out in nature can run
into streams and rivers. Urban catchments may also be small enough that the closest rain
gauge might be too far away in some cases to measure rainfall within the catchment. The
two most relevant data sources for simulating rainfall-runoff are:
• Radar
18
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:27==
• Rain gauges
The most significant obstacle for using radar data in rainfall-runoff modelling is pro-
cessing raw radar echo data into usable rainfall estimates and adjusting the rainfall es-
timates with ground observations like rain gauges. This adjustment is called radar-rain
gauge merging. The Icelandic Met. oﬀice does not supply any adjusted radar rainfall esti-
mates, and the rain gauges within and around the greater capital region, until now, have
been too sparse and some of them of too low quality to use for radar-rain gauge merging,
so radar-rain gauge merging will not be performed or explored much more in this paper.
Radar-rainfall estimates without adjustments are considered a considerably worse source
of rainfall data than rain gauges, but they might still be the best rainfall estimates in
regions far from any rain gauge. In section 4.2.1 the steps used to transform the raw
radar data into rainfall estimates are described. The best available observational data for
rainfall for this study is from rain gauges, and so it will also be used in the experiments
later in this chapter to predict rainfall-runoff. One limitation of rain-gauges is that they
cannot be used to forecast. The two most commonly studied data precipitation forecasts
for use in hydrology and urban hydrology are:
• Numerical weather predictions
• Radar nowcasts
Radar nowcasts are described briefly in the literature review bit since the Icelandic Mete-
orological Oﬀice does not have a radar nowcast, these will not be considered more in this
report. However, due to the possibility of future applications requiring the use of radar
nowcasts, it is helpful to consider the experiments described in this chapter as setting a
baseline of performance for radar nowcasts. The accuracy of a radar nowcast will likely
be worse than that of radar observations. The only precipitation forecasts used in this
paper are from numerical weather predictions. The data used in this study is described
in chapter 3. Section 4.2.2 describes how the accuracy of the radar data and NWP are
evaluated using rain gauges. Although these cannot be compared directly since they are
not evaluated on the same subset of rain-gauge data and since the resolution of the radar
estimated rainfall is different from the NWP resolution.
4.2
Data processing and evaluation
4.2.1
Radar processing
The main objective of the radar data processing described in this section is to turn the
raw radar data into a 2D distribution of rainfall over the area of interest. Initially, the
radar data in this particular data set comes in a sequence of 420 by 120 matrices of 8-bit
unsigned integer values with accompanying metadata. The metadata includes the radar
scanning strategy, the timestamp of the scan, and the radar’s location.
A radar scanning strategy is composed of the instructions the radar follows like an-
gles above ground (elevation angles) and angles around its spin axis (azimuth angle) and
characteristics of the radar beam like the width of the beam, maximum distance and res-
olution along its length. With all these values, it is possible to calculate the coordinates
and altitude that each pixel of the radar image represents. The two most common radar
strategies used during the six-year period from which the data was gathered can be seen in
figures 4.4 and 4.5, which were generated with functions from the python library Wradlib
(Heistermann et al., 2013).
The outlook for smart drainage systems
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.4: Radar strategy 1. This strategy was the primary radar strategy used from the
start of 2015 and to the end of 2017. This strategy allowed for a 15 minute frequency of
complete scans.
Figure 4.5: Radar strategy 2. This radar strategy was the primary radar strategy used
from the start of 2018 to the end of 2020. It has much fewer elevation angles and was thus
able to complete each complete scan more quickly, one every 5 minutes
Usually, the data from different strategies would not be compatible with the same
model since there might be different numbers of elevation angles and more layers of radar
data but also because the elevation angles might not be the same, and so the layers
would not contain estimates of the same volume. This incompatibility can be overcome
by computing a Constant altitude plan position indicator (CAPPI). The CAPPI involves
first computing the position of all the measured volumes in space and then interpolating or
using the closest value to some constant altitude. The CAPPI can be computed regardless
of the radar strategy. It allows for the generation of a single continuous data set that can
be used with the same model. Figure 4.6 gives a good visual description of how the CAPPI
and pCAPPI are computed. A slight variation of CAPPI called pseudo-CAPPI or pCAPPI
will use the lowest and highest available layers in the ’blind spots’ of the radar, below and
above the radars scanned volumes. Conventional CAPPI would otherwise remove or ignore
20
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:29==
these blind spots. The implementation of the pseudo-CAPPI used in this paper came from
the python library wradlib (Heistermann et al., 2013).
Figure 4.6: (Uijlenhoet et al., 2006) Visualization of how CAPPI is computed at 1 km
above the radar. The construction uses 14 elevation angles. The dashed line represents
the constant altitude for which the pCAPPI is calculated. In this case, it is 1km above
the radar. The solid bold line represents the closest beam centres to the selected height
at a given distance from the radar
The pCAPPI images have a resolution of 600x600 and cover a radius of 250km. Two
pCAPPI data sets were used. One at 2km, the elevation used by IMO, and 1.25km, which
is halfway between 2km and 500m, the lower end of the altitude at which nimbostratus
clouds appear (Goodson & Kopnitsky, n.d.). Pixels derived from the data cover a roughly
0.8x0.8km area each. Figure 4.7 shows these pixels along with the position of the weather
radar and the three rain gauges used to evaluate the radar estimated rainfall. In order to
use the different resolutions and match the resolution to the manually reviewed rain gauge
data, the pCAPPI values were first converted to rainfall and then aggregated to hourly
mean values of rainfall.
The radar reflectivity is stored in units of decibel relative to Z (dBZ). To convert the
radar reflectivity to rainfall estimates you first convert the decibel relative to Z to just Z
with the equation f(x) = 10
x
10 and then to turn Z to rainfall (R), the equation f(z) = ( x
a)
1
b
is used. The particular values of a and b will vary depending on droplet size distribution,
but the combination of a = 200 and b = 1.6 is called the Marshall–Palmer relation and is
often used as a default. The Marshall-Palmer relation is used, but the values for a and b
are also computed to minimize the mean-squared error between the rain-gauge values and
the radar rainfall estimates closest to the rain gauges. This is described in more detail in
the next section.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.7: Radar and primary rain gauge positions and the pCAPPI pixels overlaid on
a map. The 20x20 grid of orange squares that represent the pixels that are fed into the
models described in section 4.3. The blue pixels represent the pCAPPI pixels specifically
generated added to perform the evaluation described in the next section
4.2.2
Radar and NWP evaluation
Since one of the research objectives is to evaluate the quality of the data available and
suggest improvements to the data or data processing, it is important to evaluate one of
the primary inputs into the models, rainfall observations and forecasts. The three types
of rainfall data used in this paper are rain gauges, radar estimated rainfall, and numerical
weather predictions (NWP). Rain gauges are often treated as ’ground truth’ for rainfall
observations in hydrological research, and so in this section, they will be treated as such.
One important thing to note is that rain-gauges don’t estimate the same thing as radar
and numerical weather predictions. Radar data is volumetric in origin, and NWP estimate
rainfall over large areas, so even if all three data sources were perfectly accurate, they could
still give different values for rainfall in a particular location.
The three rain gauges introduced in chapter 3 will be used for evaluation. The data
used for these evaluations is from 2015 to 2020. January and September of 2015 are not
included because changes were made to the model and its forecast horizon in September
2015. Every data source also has gaps, some gaps are only a single missing hour, but the
most significant gaps can be days or weeks long. The year 2020 is also left untouched
in this analysis and used exclusively as test data input for the experiment described in
section 4.3.
The pixel closest to each of the rain gauges is used to evaluate the radar and NWP
data with the rain gauges. An overview showing the positions of the radar, the rain gauges
and the closest NWP and pCAPPI pixels are shown in figures 4.8 4.9.
The raw radar has a temporal resolution between 15 and 5 minutes depending on
22
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:31==
the radar strategy used, and the raw rain gauge data has a 10-minute resolution. The
numerical weather predictions have a temporal resolution of 1 hour, and the manually
reviewed rain gauge data from the IMO is only available as an hourly time series, so to
compare the three, they are all transformed to hourly average rainfall time series. Both
the 2km and the 1.25km pCAPPI layers described in section 4.2.1 are compared to see if
the altitude has a significant effect on the quality of the estimated rainfall.
Figure 4.8: The locations of the weather radar, marked with a red ’X’ on the Reykjanes
peninsula, as well as the three main rain gauges. The primary rain gauge (1475) is marked
with a red star, while other rain gauges (1481 and 1473) are marked with yellow stars.
The closest available pCAPPI pixel is shown as an orange rectangle
4.2.3
Drainage flow data
The drainage flow data used in this paper is the outflow from the pumping stations, not
the inflow. This distinction is important for two reasons, both of which result in a disparity
between inflow and outflow. The first reason for this disparity is due to CSO discharges
or rainwater pumps since the flow is not measured within these alternative paths. The
other reason for the disparity between inflow and outflow is because the chamber within
the pumping stations, see figure 4.10, acts as a buffer and the volume of water within the
station may be different at the start and end of the hour.
It should be noted that this difference of inflow and outflow is partly due to the
type of control system strategy used by Veitur. In figure 4.11 a plot taken from Veitur’s
Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system shows a time series with the
outflow and water level within the Boðagrandi pumping station. At around 9 AM on the
graph, the water level is about 1.7m, and then at 10 AM, the water level is down to 1m.
The water level within the pumping stations goes through cycles caused by the control
system, which turns the sewage pumps on and off depending on the water level. The
The outlook for smart drainage systems
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.9: The locations of the weather radar, marked with a red ’X’ on the Reykjanes
peninsula, as well as the three main rain gauges. The primary rain gauge (1475) is marked
with a red star, while other rain gauges (1481 and 1473) are marked with yellow stars.
The closest available NWP pixel is shown as an orange rectangle
difference in volume within the pumping station at the end of the hour and the start of
the hour divided by the size of the time interval (one hour for most historical data) is
equal to the difference in average inflow and average outflow.
Estimating or restoring the flow during the extreme rainfall events is impossible with
the current data but estimating the inflow from the outflow and water level observations
is possible with some minor changes. Between August 13th 2021 and December 2021, the
average flow and water level data were logged at minute intervals instead of hourly. This
was done in order to try to measure how great the discrepancy is.
The change in water level between hours is used to estimate the inflow for each hour.
Although the average water level during the first minute is not exactly equal to the water
level at the start of the hour, it is used as a close approximation. This number only gives a
change in the height of the water within the station, not the volume. In order to estimate
the volume, a heuristic is used to estimate the cross-sectional area of the chamber. In
order to proceed with this heuristic, the following assumptions have to be made:
• The area of the horizontal cross-section of the chamber is approximately the same
at all heights
• The flow into the station is approximately smooth most of the time (i.e. the rate of
flow changes slowly)
In addition to these assumptions, a metric for smoothness is needed. Let’s first define a
24
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.10: Diagram of a pumping station wet well with a single submersible pump
(Fecarotta et al., 2018). This diagram shows that the water level can vary substantially
from the minimum to the maximum heights, which may cause a difference between the
average inflow and outflow during any given hour.
function for the estimated inflow as
fin(t, A) = fout(t) + ∆h(t) ∗A
where fin(t) is the flow into the station at time interval t, which is the average flow
between some time t0 and t0 + t1, fout(t) is the average flow out of the station during
time interval t and ∆h(t) is the change in water level over the time interval t, and A is
the area of the cross section of the chamber within the pumping station. The metric for
smoothness across the whole time series is defined as the sum of the differences between
all observations. We then define smoothness as the function
s(A) = −
∑
t
∆fin(t, A)
where ∆fin(t, A) is the difference between the average flow from the last time interval to
the current one. Then finally we maximize s with respect to A, i.e. we solve
argmax
A
s(A)
and then we can compare fin(t, A) with fout(t) and evaluate it based on the average,
maximum and minimum difference or the mean absolute error.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.11: Plot taken from the SCADA dashboard used by Veitur around noon on
December 4th 2021.
The plot shows the flow measured going out of the Boðagrandi
pumping station (red) and the water level (yellow) at the same time. The X-axis is time.
The periods in both time series are due to the nature of pumps and control systems used
by Veitur.
4.3
Drainage flow simulation and forecasts
This chapter will describe the models, model training and evaluation methodology for
the drainage flow simulation and forecasting models. The term simulation refers here to
predictions made about the system’s current state using a sequence of past observations,
like temperature and rainfall. The term forecast refers to predicting future states of the
system using a sequence of past observations as well as forecast sequences for variables
that determine the system’s future state, such as temperature and rainfall forecasts. Since
one of the objectives of this thesis is to design a single model that can be used for both
purposes, any implications relating to one or the other will often apply to both simulations
and forecasts. The word prediction may be used to refer to both simulations and forecasts.
In order to gain insight into what factors are most important for the drainage flow
models, several variations of a machine learning model were designed. One of the objectives
named in the introduction was to design a model that can be used for both simulation
and forecasting. This design criterion was used to evaluate the effect of the data source
and model design separately. I.e. If the same model performs very differently on two data
sources, then it implies that the difference in performance can be associated with the data
rather than the model.
4.3.1
Models
The goal of these models is to predict drainage flow in the wastewater system in Reykjavík.
Three different sources of rainfall data are tested, two of them for drainage flow simulation
and one for drainage flow forecasting. The rain gauge data used in this experiment is a
one-dimensional time series with hourly rainfall observations. The radar data is a 400-
dimensional time series since the source data is a 20x20 grid. The NWP data is a sequence
of 100-dimensional sequences. Each forecast consists consists of 60 time steps. Since one of
the goals of the model design is that the same models can be used for both the forecasting
and the simulation task without changing the model, a special approach must be used
26
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:35==
with the data.
Figure 4.12 shows how the only difference between the forecasting task and the simu-
lation task is how the data shaped and ordered. Every model gets an input in the form
of a 3-way tensor or a sequence of matrices. Each individual simulation or forecast is
computed from a matrix with the shape (sxp), where p is the number of input variables,
which includes the rainfall, temperature and time of day variables. The temperature is a
1-dimensional variable, the time of day is a 24-dimensional variable and the three sources
of rainfall are 1-, 400-, 100-dimensional for the rain gauge, radar and NWP respectively.
So for example one model could have radar data input and a sequence length of 48, so the
input data would be in the shape (nx48x425). Both the data source and the length of the
sequence are treated as hyperparameters.
Figure 4.12: The difference between the simulation and forecasting tasks comes down to
only the shape of the input data. The sequences for the simulations (top) are comprised
of past observations, and the number of samples is one per hour since that is how much
observational data exists.
The sequences for the forecasts (Bottom) are comprised of
sequential forecasts, and the number of samples is equal to the number of forecasts made,
which is one per 6 hours, times the forecast horizon, 60 hours
Due to the high dimensionality of the input and the potential length of the sequence,
the type of model that can be used becomes limited by the computational cost of optimizing
the model. If one flattens out the input for a model using the radar data and a sequence
length of 48, and uses a linear model, the number of coeﬀicients required would be 20′400,
and the time it would take to optimize this model using the normal equations could be
too high for practical model selection.
One way of handling the high dimensionality of the data is by using special variants
of artificial neural networks (ANN). Models such as recurrent neural networks (RNN) are
generally used to model data with temporal sequences. Convolutional neural networks are
The outlook for smart drainage systems
27
==PAGE:36==
generally used to model data with spatial information or apply a form of dimensionality
reduction along a temporal sequence if applied in a certain way.
Artificial neural networks
ANNs are a class of models that all share a few key features that make them particularly
useful for all kinds of tasks. One of the key attributes of neural networks is their modular
nature. Conventional ANNs are comprised of units called layers or hidden layers, and
each layer contains one or more neurons or nodes. The nodes are connected to each other
in a structured way where the output of the nodes in one layer is connected to the input
of the nodes in the next layer.
Each neuron is defined primarily by two aspects, it’s
connectivity and its activation function. Some types of neurons like those in Recurrent
neural networks also have states which are passed between steps along a temporal sequence.
The connectivity is defined by which neurons in the previous layer are passed as input into
the neuron, and the activation function is a function applied to the weighted sum of the
inputs. The weights in this weighted sum are learned by the model during training, and the
activation function is usually a simple non-linear function with desirable computational
properties.
A ’fully connected’ neural network is one where the nodes in every node are connected
to every other node in the previous layer. The connections in a fully-connected ANN
never form a cycle within the network, and this property makes them feedforward neural
networks. A different type of ANN called recurrent neural networks (RNNs) allow for
connections to exist along a temporal sequence, or in other words, back to nodes in the
same layer at another time step. RNNs can use their internal state, also called memory,
to process sequences of inputs. These characteristics allow RNNs to learn temporal rela-
tionships. Another variation of ANNs called convolutional neural networks (CNN), also
known as shift invariant or space invariant artificial neural networks. These networks,
similar to RNNs may be applied along a temporal (or spatial) sequence, but they do not
share information or connections along this sequence. Instead, they apply the same set of
weights along this dimension. When applied along a temporal sequence, they are some-
times referred to as ’Time delay neural networks’ (Abiodun et al., 2018; Egmont-Petersen
et al., 2002; Tealab, 2018; Zell, 1994).
Part of the motivation for picking CNNs and RNNs is that the number of parameters
stays completely unchanged when a longer sequence of inputs is used with a recurrent
model and grows much slower for CNNs than for linear models. The same is not true with
linear models where the number of parameters increases for every added variable, and so
the number of parameters would scale with the product of the length of the sequence and
the number of variables. It is harder to interpret the impact of adding a longer sequence
to a model when the number of parameters in the model also increases, which can cause
overfitting. The same is true for temporal convolutional neural networks, although their
output changes shape when the number of sequences is changed. The implementations
of the neural network models used in the paper were all done with the python package
Tensorflow (Martı́n Abadi et al., 2015).
28
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.13: (Commons, 2013) Diagram of a fully-connected feed-forward neural network
with three input variables, a single hidden layer that contains four nodes and two output
nodes
Figure 4.14: Diagram showing how each step in the linear model transforms the data.
The input is a tensor with dimensions (n x s x p) where the sequence is the current and
previous observations of the input variable
The outlook for smart drainage systems
29
==PAGE:38==
Linear model
The first type of layer presented here is a fully-connected neural network
with no hidden layers and a linear activation. This model is linear, and since it also has
a squared error loss function, the only difference between this linear model and those
more conventionally used is how it is optimized. The optimization is described in section
4.3.2. The main purpose of the linear model in this paper is to include it as a baseline of
performance.
In order to make this model compatible with the same input as the other models,
a flattening layer is added between the input and the linear model. This collapses the
sequence into a vector of length equal to the product of the sequence length and the
number of variables. See 4.14 for a diagram showing the shape of the data from input to
output through this model.
Figure 4.15: Diagram showing how each step in the LSTM transforms the data. The input
is a tensor with dimensions (n x s x p) where the sequence is the current and previous
observations of the input variable
Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) is an artificial recurrent neural network (RNN)
architecture. In contrast to the standard feedforward neural networks, the RNNs have
feedback connections which mean that they not only get input from the layer before them
but also pass information back into themselves so that the next time the node processes
an input, it also has information from its previous state, see figure 4.16. The plain RNN
will only pass forward a so-called ’hidden state’,h , also known as the output state, while
an LSTM also passes forward a ’cell state’,c , whose value is regulated by three gates, σg.
Gates are sigmoid functions, which are mathematical functions that have a characteristic
”S” shape and return a value between 0 and 1 (Han & Moraga, 1995). The output of
these functions can be thought of as representing an open, if the value is close to 1, or
30
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.16: Image from (Phi, 2018). Diagram of the inner workings of an LSTM. High-
lighted and labeled are each of the gates that control the flow of information to and from
the cell state, which is shown as an arrow in the direction it travels through the cell. Below
the diagram
closed, if the value is close to 0, gate. They act as gates because they are applied with
the Hadamard product, an element-wise product, it can scale the values by any number
between 0 and 1, which can be thought of as the open and closed states. Thus the gate is
considered closed since nothing passes through. The three gates of the LSTM are the input
gate, i, the output gate, o, and the forget gate, f. The input gate regulates what may be
added to the cell, the output gate regulates when the value of cell state may passed to the
hidden state, and the forget gate regulates how much of the previous state is preserved.
The exact equations for each forward pass of an LSTM are:
ft = σg(Wfxt + Ufht−1 + bf)
it = σg(Wixt + Uiht−1 + bi)
ot = σg(Woxt + Uoht−1 + bo)
˜ct = σh(Wcxt + Ucht−1 + bc)
ct = ft ◦ct−1 + it ◦˜ct
ht = ot ◦σh(ct)
The outlook for smart drainage systems
31
==PAGE:40==
where the initial values are c0 = 0 and h0 = 0 and the operator ◦denotes the Hadamard
product, t is the index of the time step, xt, input vector to the LSTM unit at time t, ht
is the hidden state vector, ˜ct is the cell input activation vector, ct is the cell state vector,
W,U, and b are the weight matrices learned by the model during training. The function
σh is the hyperbolic tangent function(Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997).
Temporal convolution
A convolutional neural network (CNN) is similar to a recurrent
neural network in that the same weights are applied multiple times across different inputs.
CNNs become more relevant when the data are tensors rather than vectors. A tensor is
a generalization of vectors that extends to more dimensions. A vector is a 1-way tensor,
and a matrix is a 2-way tensor. CNNs are useful when working with tensor data because
there is often a shared structure or attribute across one or more of the tensor dimensions.
CNNs share weights across different inputs. In the case of temporal convolutions, the
weights are only shared across time. Figure 4.17 shows a single sample with a sequence
length of two and three input variables per time step in the sequence. The figure also
shows the output from a two-neuron temporal convolution, and the colours demonstrate
the connectivity. The green arrows represent the weights applied by the first neuron, and
the blue arrows the weights applied by the second neuron. Then figure 4.18 shows how this
looks when a temporal convolution with two convolutional neurons is applied to multiple
samples, each with three sequences. The implementation of this temporal convolution is
the Conv1D model from Tensorflow (Martı́n Abadi et al., 2015).
Figure 4.17: A 1D temporal convolution across a single sample with a sequence of length
2 and 3 input features. The number of convolutional neurons is 2. The weights of each
neuron are represented with the colored arrows, showing that the same weights are applied
to every sequence for each neuron.
32
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.18: Diagram showing how each step in the temporal convolution transforms the
data. The input is a tensor with dimensions (n x s x p) where the sequence is the current
and previous observations of the input variable
Combinations of model
One of the main benefits of ANNs is their modularity, as discussed in section 4.3.1. That
means that they can easily be combined into a single model. Although the models were
all trained with one hyperparameter search, there are effectively three different model
structures depending on the number of LSTM neurons and the number of convolutional
neurons. When either of them equals zero, that layer is not included. A flattening layer is
included before the linear model to ensure that the sequences are collapsed into a single
vector. If the number of LSTM units is 0 and the number of convolutional filters is also 0,
then what is left is only a linear model. If the LSTM is 0 and the filters are non-zero, then
you have a Conv1D layer followed by a flattening layer and a linear model. Conversely, if
there are 0 filters and non-zero LSTM, the LSTM is followed by a linear model. However,
if both have non-zero filters and non-zero LSTM units, the convolutional layer is first. All
four variations of this model are shown in figure 4.19.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.19: The different variations of the neural network components described in section
4.3.1
4.3.2
Model training
Model training is a process that involves the minimization of a loss function using the
coeﬀicients of a model. The loss function is often a type of distance function that is zero
when the inputs are the same and large when they are different. For these models the
following weighted mean squared error loss function was used:
WMSE = 1
n
∑n
i=0(wi ∗(yi′ −yi)2)
∑n
i=0 wi
where n is the number of samples, i is the sample index, wi is the sample weight, yi and y′
i
are the correct and predicted flows respectively for sample i. The weighting scheme was
used as a hyperparameter to evaluate if it could be used to improve the performance of
the models. Weight scheme a in tables 4.1 and 4.2 has equal weights and is thus identical
to the commonly used loss function mean squared error. Weight scheme b is different in
that the higher the value of the correct flow, the higher its weight during training. This
approach is sometimes used the loss function is different from the function used to evaluate
the performance for a given task; see section4.3.3 below for more details on the choice of
metric.
Table 4.1: flow thresholds for Gelgjutangi and weights corresponding to the two weighing
schemes tested for the models
Weight scheme
Flowrate [l/s]
Proportion
a
b
0 ≤y < 100
5.41
1
0.5
100 ≤y < 200
55.35
1
1
200 ≤y < 300
30.67
1
1.5
300 ≤y < 400
4.26
1
2
400 ≤y < 500
1.65
1
4
500 ≤y < 600
0.89
1
6
600 ≤y < 700
0.56
1
8
700 ≤y < 800
0.41
1
10
800 ≤y < 900
0.25
1
12
900 ≤y < 1000
0.17
1
15
1000 <
0.37
1
20
34
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:43==
Table 4.2: flow thresholds for Boðagrandi and weights corresponding to the two weighing
schemes tested for the models
Weight scheme
Flowrate [l/s]
Proportion
a
b
0 ≤y < 15
0.03
1
0.5
15 ≤y < 30
6.05
1
1
30 ≤y < 45
32.35
1
1.5
45 ≤y < 60
30.82
1
2
60 ≤y < 75
20.17
1
4
75 ≤y < 90
4.82
1
6
90 ≤y < 105
1.87
1
8
105 ≤y < 120
1.43
1
10
120 ≤y < 135
1.22
1
12
135 ≤y < 150
0.63
1
15
150 <
0.61
1
20
The models were trained using mini-batching and stochastic optimization. This opti-
mization method works by using a subset of the training data, the size of which is called
the batch size, to estimate the loss, after which the gradient of the loss function with
respect to each coeﬀicient of the model is computed. For neural networks the particular
method used to update the weights is called backward propagation of errors, or just back-
propagation. After each batch the updates the weights of each coeﬀicient in the opposite
direction of the gradient, to minimize the loss. The size of this update is called the step
size and is a product of the size of the gradient and the learning rate, which is an important
hyper-parameter for neural networks.
The optimizer used is a variation of stochastic gradient descent called Adam, which is
an adaptive optimizer based on adaptive estimates of lower-order moments (Kingma & Ba,
2014). Due to limited computational resources, it was impractical to perform a thorough
hyper-parameter search, and among the hyper-parameters that were kept fixed was the
learning rate. Two methods were used to compensate for not including the learning rate in
the hyper-parameter optimization: early stopping and learning rate decay. Early stopping
is a method that monitors the loss of a separate validation data set not used for training.
A parameter of the early stopping, called patience, determines how many epochs may pass
without an improvement to the validation loss before the training is stopped. Learning
rate decay works similarly and has a patience parameter, but if this patience parameter
is lower than that of the other patience parameter, the learning rate is reduced by some
predetermined factor after it is triggered.
Every model was set to train for up to 100 epochs, the early stopping patience was set
to 20 epochs, and the learning rate decay patience was set to 5 epochs, and the learning
rate decay factor was set to 0.3, so if the learning rate is originally set to 0.1, then after
five epochs without improvement it is set to 0.03, then 0.009, etc. The minimum number
of epochs between these decays was set to 3. That means that after the first decay if three
epochs pass without improvement, it gets triggered again. This repeats every three epochs
until either the early stopping is triggered or the 100 epochs were complete.
All input features were transformed into their standard score, also known as z-score.
This means that they are translated and scaled such that their mean is equal to zero and
their standard deviation is equal to 1. This is often applied in machine learning to help
with model training (Suthaharan, 2016). The equation to compute the z-score is z = x−µ
σ ,
where µ is the mean of x, and σ is the standard deviation.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
35
==PAGE:44==
4.3.3
Evaluation methodology
Although the simulation task and forecast task were formulated such that the models are
identical, the data they are using is not, so the two cannot be compared directly. The model
selection will be performed separately for each data source, but the rain gauge and radar-
based models will be compared together, and the NWP based model will be evaluated on
its own. Section 4.3.3 explains what parameter is to pick the best model in section 4.3.3.
Section 4.3.3 describes the model selection strategy and the hyper-parameters tested.
Choice of metrics
The choice of the metric by which models are selected can greatly affect the final results.
It’s important to make a distinction between three different concepts:
• Objective function
• Evaluation metric
• Real world benefit
The objective function is picked for computational properties such as being differentiable
with respect to the model’s coeﬀicients. The evaluation metric is used to select between
models. The distinction between the latter two metrics is made because the real world
benefit is often hard to calculate or measure and so the evaluation metric can be used as
an approximation. Ideally all three are mutually optimal but this is often hard to achieve
or prove.
The main application drainage flow forecast considered in this project is early warning
of potential overflow events. According to staff at the Veitur utility company in Reykjavík
a warning at least 24 hours in advance is usually enough to prepare to make staﬀing and
equipment preparations for such events. Since forecasts are updated every 6 hours the
prediction distances used for evaluation will be those 24 to 30 hours into the future in
order to include all observations of the target variable in the data set in the training and
evaluation.
The models in this project are regression models but the task is one of classification.
To convert the predictions into the desired binary classification form, a threshold is used
such that if a model predicts the flow to be above the threshold, it’s considered a positive
prediction and otherwise a negative prediction. Binary classification models are usually
evaluated based on the ratio of some combination of values from the confusion matrix
shown in table 4.3
Predicted
Total
p
n
Observed
p’
TP
FN
P’
n’
FP
TN
N’
Total
P
N
T
Table 4.3: A confusion matrix for binary classification
The most straightforward classification metric is accuracy, which is the ratio of correct
predictions to total predictions. The number of true negatives is not a strong indicator of
performance for this application due to its relative abundance and low importance in the
data. The critical success index shown in equation 4.1 is the accuracy when true negatives
36
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:45==
are removed from the equation.
CSS =
TP
TP + FN + FP
(4.1)
This metric is still biased towards common events since they will have more chance oc-
currences of true positives. A modified CSS known as the Gilbert skill score (GSS) in
equation 4.2 takes into consideration the number of chance occurrences of true positives
for a less biased score.
GSS =
TP −TPrandom
TP + FN + FP −TPrandom
(4.2)
Where
TPrandom = (TP + FN)(TP + FP)
T
(4.3)
The last missing criteria for the evaluation metric is the threshold selected to represent
a positive observation. The higher the threshold the more important the event but also
the less common the event, thus making evaluation of the model performance harder.
Additionally the threshold will be different for each station since both the normal operating
flow-rate and the maximum capacity of each pumping station will be different. Thus the
threshold flow-rate is picked as a number within the following constraints:
• It is greater than the flow during all historical dry-weather conditions
• It is low enough that it occurs at least 100 times in all of the 5 cross-validation sets
The thresholds selected are 500 and 90 litres per second for Gelgjugangi and Boðagrandi
respectively.
Table 4.4: Number of samples above the desired threshold for both pumping stations
Fold
No. of samples above threshold
Gelgjutangi (>500 l/s)
Boðagrandi (>90 l/s)
1
189
204
2
183
291
3
186
212
4
146
150
5
118
100
In order to turn the continuous predictions from the regression models into classifica-
tion predictions, the following approach is used. First, to compute the correct classification
answer ct from a continuous target variable, y, the equation.
ct = class(y, t) =
{
n
y < t
p
y > t
is used with the thresholds t = 500 and t = 90 for Gelgjutangi and Boðagrandi respectively.
For predicted classes c′
t computed from continuous predictions, y′, we also write:
c′
t = class(y′, t) =
{
n′
y < t
p′
y > t
The outlook for smart drainage systems
37
==PAGE:46==
TP, FN, FP and TN can be computed from table 4.3 as described above. However, since
the models are optimized initially to minimize a mean squared error function, it may be
useful to compute the predicted classes c′ˆt with a threshold ˆt ̸= t. In order to estimate ˆt we
simply try all predicted values for the training data set ˆytrain and see which one minimizes
the GSS. To reduce computational load at the risk of a slightly lower GSS, we round all
predicted values to whole numbers and then use all unique numbers as thresholds, although
the predictions are not rounded when computing the GSS or in any other evaluation only
when selecting an optimal threshold. Then finally, GSS is computed using the threshold
ˆt that minimizes the GSS in the training set.
Model selection
The objective of model selection can be thought of as optimizing the model performance
with respect to model parameters that can’t be optimized by the same means as the
model coeﬀicients, and these coeﬀicients are hyper-parameters. A grid search is when all
possible permutations of the different hyper-parameters are tested separately. This often
reveals trends in model performance when the performance is plotted against the selected
parameters.
In machine learning, a hyperparameter is a parameter whose value cannot be optimized
during training which, in contrast to coeﬀicients (also often called parameters), but is often
estimated with searching algorithms. A common practice in machine learning is to use a
grid searching algorithm that tries every possible combination of hyperparameters from
a set of hyperparameters, and the best one is selected at the end. The hyperparameters
selected for this experiment were chosen with two primary considerations: to get the best
performance possible with limited computational resources and assess the effect some of
these hyperparameters have on the model results. The hyper-parameters used in the model
selection are found in table 4.5
Hyper-parameter
Values
Data source
(Rain gauge, Radar, NWP)
No. of convolutional neurons
(0,1,5)
No. of LSTM neurons
(0,1,5)
Length of sequences
(1,12,24,48)
L2 Regularization
(0,0.1)
Weight scheme
(a,b)
Table 4.5: Overview of all hyper-parameters used in the model selection. The results with
the NWP are evaluated separately from the rain gauge and radar models.
Cross-validation For both experiments, data from 2015 to the end of 2019 was used
for training and validation. The data was split into 5 training and validation sets using a
variation of K-fold cross-validation implemented in scikit-learn knowns as TimeSeriesSplit
(Buitinck et al., 2013). The split is used explicitly for time series data to ensure that
training data never contains data that occurs after the validation data and each consecutive
validation set has higher indices than all those before it. Each validation set is about 1/6th
of the total data. The first training data set is also about 1/6th of the data and then each
consecutive training data set contains all previous training and validation data.
Each
model was initiated using the same random seed to ensure repeatability.
38
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:47==
5
Results and discussion
this chapter aims to present the results from the evaluations and experiments described in
chapter 4 and answer the research questions presented at the beginning. First, the data
evaluation results are presented. Then the results of the model selection described in 4.3
are presented, showing both the best performing models as well as an overview of model
performance grouped by different hyper-parameters. Lastly, the performance of the best
models is evaluated on otherwise untouched data to get a realistic estimate of performance.
The goal of these results is to provide answers the the reasearch questions posed in the
introduction, which as the following:
1. How accurately can urban flow be simulated and forecasted in Reykjavík, Iceland,
with currently available data and simple machine learning methods.
2. How can simple data-driven simulations and forecasts be used to improve operations
of the wastewater system in Reykjavík with currently available data?
3. What are the main improvements to the data or methods that would be required
for better performance and additional applications of the simulations and forecasts?
5.1
Data evaluation results
This section will look at the results of the data evaluation described in section 4.2. The
first data evaluated will be the radar data, which was processed from raw radar reflectivity
values into rainfall estimates. The second data source evaluated is the numerical weather
predictions for rainfall, which was provided by the IMO and used in section 4.3 as input
for a drainage flow forecast. The next data source is the drainage flow from the pumping
stations, which was used as the target variable for both the simulation and the forecasting
experiments in section 4.3.
5.1.1
Radar
When radar data is used directly to estimate rainfall, there are a few variables that can
affect the quality of the rainfall estimates. Among these are the altitude and the coeﬀicients
in the reflectivity to rainfall conversion. It is thought that Without proper adjustment,
radar reflectivity can give very inaccurate estimates of rainfall. One of the prerequisites of
radar rain gauge adjustments is a suﬀiciently dense network of high quality rain gauges,
which Reykjavík does not have. Until better radar estimated rainfall is available, it is still
useful know how accurate the rainfall estimates from the radar are as well as how the data
might be improved.
In table 5.1, the results from section 4.2.2 are presented. The table uses two met-
rics, mean squared error (MSE) and the Pearson product-moment correlation coeﬀicient
(correlation), to evaluate the radar estimated rainfall. For this experiment, the estimated
rainfall from the radar comes from the pCAPPI pixel closest to each rain gauge. A low
MSE is better, and a high correlation is better. Highlighted in each row is the best result
for each sensor. Each row represents a particular combination of altitude and period and
then for each of those, there is one row for the default Marshall-Palmer relation for the Z-R
relationship, a = 200, b = 1.6 and one where a and b are the combination that minimizes
the mean square error.
The best results for every sensor for both metrics were from the row with the 1.25km
CAPPI data for the second period and using the MSE estimated Z-R coeﬀicients. If we
only consider the results from the default Z-R coeﬀicients, the best results for both metrics
The outlook for smart drainage systems
39
==PAGE:48==
and all sensors are also found for the latter period at the lower altitude, with the exception
of the correlation for sensor 1481, which was better at 2km for that period.
Since the main difference between those periods was the radar strategy, which for the
latter period included a 0.9-degree beam between the 1.3-degree beams and 0.5-degree
beams.
One possible explanation is that this 0.9-degree beam was low enough to get
interference from the ground but high enough to be included in the interpolation of the
pCAPPI for the earlier part of the data set.
Table 5.1: Radar data evaluation results. The best scores in each column are marked with
bold face and the best scores using the Marshall-Palmer relation for the Z-R coeﬀicients
(a = 200, b = 1.6) is marked with an underline.
Each cell contains the score of the
radar estimated rainfall from a pCAPPI data set created from the raw radar scans at
the altitude specified in the leftmost column.
The rainfall estimate is computed with
the Z-R coeﬀicients specified in the third column, and the reflectivity values come from
the pCAPPI pixel closest to the sensor. The pCAPPI value is evaluated over the whole
period (Jan15-Dec19) as well as individually for the two periods that had different radar
strategies.
metric
MSE
Correlation
Altitude
period
Z-R coeﬀicients
1473
1475
1481
1473
1475
1481
1.25km
Jan15-Dec19
a=100, b=2.5
.0537
.0899
.1116
.5825
.5958
.6338
1.25km
Jan15-Dec19
a=200, b=1.6
.0616
.0891
.1196
.5366
.5937
.5927
1.25km
Jan15-Mar18
a=117, b=2.62
.0558
.0984
.1201
.5716
.5722
.6187
1.25km
Jan15-Mar18
a=200, b=1.6
.0673
.1024
.1247
.5254
.5673
.5862
1.25km
Mar18-Dec19
a= 79,b=2.25
.0501
.0608
.0951
.6096
.7209
.6740
1.25km
Mar18-Dec19
a=200, b=1.6
.0507
.0665
.1111
.5767
.6993
.6091
2km
Jan15-Dec19
a=100, b=2.5
.0582
.0809
.1245
.5485
.6351
.5700
2km
Jan15-Dec19
a=200, b=1.6
.0615
.0896
.1425
.4921
.6067
.4981
2km
Jan15-Mar18
a=117, b=2.62
.0608
.0884
.1349
.5410
.6119
.5338
2km
Jan15-Mar18
a=200, b=1.6
.0650
.0971
.1552
.4753
.5882
.4397
2km
Mar18-Dec19
a= 79,b=2.25
.0508
.0699
.1035
.5803
.6761
.6455
2km
Mar18-Dec19
a=200, b=1.6
.0545
.0766
.1206
.5621
.6456
.6172
5.1.2
Numerical weather prediction
Numerical weather predictions (NWP) are the only available rainfall forecast for this
project. The NWP is evaluated with the same metrics as the radar data. It is possible
to evaluate the performance of the NWP with respect to the distance of the forecast.
The correlation and MSE of the NWP can be seen on figures 5.1 and 5.2. In both plots,
the performance of a persistence model is also shown for each rain gauge. Interestingly
the performance of the persistence model outperforms the NWP for roughly 3 hours.
Comparing the correlation of the NWP with the radar estimated rainfall reveals that the
two are roughly similar, which should not be expected since one is an observation and
the other a forecast. This highlights just how bad the performance of the radar estimated
rainfall is when not adjusted with rain gauge observations.
The MSE plots in figure 5.2 reveal an unfortunate result for the NWP, showing at least
in one case (gauge 1473) of three that a persistence model performs about as well as the
NWP. However, it is known that NWP models often have considerable bias both in location
and in forecast distance and in hydrological research, an adjustment is often performed on
the NWP data in order to correct for this. A simple way to adjust the data is by fitting a
linear regression model with each forecast distance and each gauge individually. E.g. all
the estimates for gauge 1475 at 24 hours are used as input and all the observations for
gauge 1475 for the corresponding times are used as outputs. Then the adjusted prediction
40
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:49==
can be compared again with the rain gauge observation. There is no training and test set
here, but each distance for each meter has more than 5500 samples in this data set, so
while this does not give conclusive results for the real world expected performance, it shows
how important the adjustment can be. The MSE comparison between the unadjusted and
adjusted NWP predictions is seen in figure 5.3
Figure 5.1: Correlation of NWP rainfall forecast for predicting the later observed rainfall
from rain gauges. Also shown is the Correlation of a persistence forecast
Figure 5.2: Mean squared error of NWP rainfall forecast for predicting the later observed
rainfall from rain gauges. Also shown is the MSE of a persistence forecast
The outlook for smart drainage systems
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.3: Mean squared error of NWP rainfall forecast for predicting the later observed
rainfall from rain gauges. Also shown is the MSE of an adjusted NWP forecast
5.1.3
Drainage flow data
The drainage flow data was used as the target variable in the experiments described in
section 4.3. For this evaluation, it’s important to understand that for urban drainage
applications, it’s the inflow rather than the outflow of the pumping stations that is of
interest. The data used in the experiments are from the outflow. The assumption that the
inflow and outflow are the same breaks down for two reasons discussed in sections 4.2.3
and 3.3. One of the causes of this discrepancy is caused by the change in volume within the
pumping station between the start and end of every hour. Because the historical data used
in this paper is hourly outflow average, if the volume within the station changes during
that hour, the inflow and outflow aren’t equal. The resolution of the saved data from
the water level and flow meters was increased from hourly to a value every minute from.
This was done so that the water level at the start of the hour could be more accurately
estimated.
Table 5.2: Statistics about the difference between the input and output at Boðagrandi
and Gelgjutangi pumping stations. Overestimate refers here to the output being greater
than the input.
Pumping station
Boðagrandi
Gelgjutangi
Start of period
2021-08-13 01:00:00
2021-08-13 01:00:00
End of period
2021-12-28 23:00:00
2021-12-28 23:00:00
Mean flow
61.84 [l/s]
193.44 [l/s]
Max flow
193.74 [l/s]
1145.41 [l/s]
Min flow
13.16 [l/s]
37.96 [l/s]
Mean absolute difference
1.88 [l/s]
12.12 [l/s]
Max overestimate
9.28 [l/s]
125.43 [l/s]
Max underestimate
8.79 [l/s]
148.26 [l/s]
The first part of the approach described in section 4.2.3 requires the area of the cross-
section of the pumping station’s wet well in order to estimate the volume of water inside
42
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:51==
the station from the height. This approach assumes that the reconstruction of the inflow
using the correct estimated area would be the smoothest of all reconstructions. For this,
a metric for smoothness was defined as the sum of all changes in the reconstructed flow.
See 4.2.3 for the equations used. Figures 5.4, and 5.5 show the smoothness metric for
both stations as functions of the area used to make the reconstruction. Both plots show
very clear maxima, and from these, we estimate the areas to be 300m2 and 30m2 for
Gelgjutangi and Boðagrandi, respectively.
Figure 5.4: The smoothness of the estimated inflow for Gegjutangi as defined in 4.2 as a
function of the area shown on the x-axis. The smoothness is assumed to be maximized
when the area is equal to the true area of the chamber within the pumping station.
Figure 5.5: The smoothness of the estimated inflow for Boðagrandi as defined in 4.2 as a
function of the area shown on the x-axis. The smoothness is assumed to be maximized
when the area is equal to the true area of the chamber within the pumping station.
Next, the estimated areas are used to reconstruct the inflow for each hour as was
described in 4.2.3. Table 5.2 shows some simple statistics about the flow in these stations
during this time as well as some statistics about the difference between the inflow and
outflow.
Figures 5.6 and 5.7 show the estimated average hourly inflow and observed
outflow for the 24 hours with the greatest total absolute error.
These results demonstrate how large this discrepancy can be, and in this analysis, the
other sources of discrepancy were not considered since they cannot be evaluated. It has
The outlook for smart drainage systems
43
==PAGE:52==
not been explored how significantly this would affect drainage flow models like those made
in this paper, but it’s clear that any evaluation of the models that use the outflow data
will be affected.
Figure 5.6: (top) the 24 hours with the greatest total error in the input flow and outflow at
the Gelgjutangi pumping station. (Bottom) The difference between the estimated inflow
and the observed outflow during this period
Figure 5.7: (top) the 24 hours with the greatest total error in the input flow and outflow at
the Boðagrandi pumping station. (Bottom) The difference between the estimated inflow
and the observed outflow during this period
44
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:53==
5.2
Experiment results
This section will look at the results of the rainfall-runoff simulation experiments described
in chapter 4.3. First, the drainage flow simulation results will be presented and discussed,
beginning with the results of the model selection process and then looking at the model
evaluations on new data. After that, the drainage flow forecast results will be presented,
looking at the model selection and evaluation results.
Some of the hyperparameters included in the model selection in these following sections
were specifically selected to evaluate the effects of certain factors relevant to the simulation
and forecast performance that are not specific to the models themselves and some aspects
of the model design were also intended to reveal these factors. The main factors of interest
in this regard are: which data source is used as input and how many previous time steps
of data are included. Another unanswered question that the experiments hope to answer
relates to the quality of unadjusted radar estimated rainfall.
It is known that radar
produces a less accurate rainfall estimate when not adjusted with rain gauge observation.
However, radar does have the benefit of more spatial information and information about
rainfall in regions that may be too far from the rain gauge for it to provide a reliable
estimate of rainfall there.
5.2.1
Drainage flow simulation results
This section begins by looking at the results of the model selection, which involves selecting
the best model from many models with different hyperparameters. After that, this section
looks at the model evaluation, which evaluates the performance of the best models from
the model selection using new data to ensure an accurate assessment of the performance
that can be expected of these models in the real world.
The drainage flow simulation models are rainfall-runoff models but also have to predict
the flow due to other wastewater like sewage and, because of how Iceland’s district heating
system works, hot water used for district heating. These models use either rain gauge data
or radar data as the rainfall input, but all use the outside temperature and the time of
day in one-hot encoded form.
Model selection
Table 5.3: Hyper-parameters of the best performing models on both rain gauge and radar
data.
The individual GSS for both Gelgjutangi and Boðagrandi are included but the
average GSS was used to select the best models
Data source
gauge
radar
Number of filters
5
5
Observations
48
24
Regularization
0.0
0.1
Number of LSTM units
0
0
Weight scheme
a
a
GSS average
0.373
0.235
GSS (Gelgjutangi)
0.424
0.259
GSS (Boðagrandi)
0.322
0.211
The results in the top right plot in figure 5.8 shows that the best results with radar
data were notably worse than a large portion of the results with rain gauge data indicating
that the added spatial information is not enough to counteract the worse accuracy, at least
for these catchments that are relatively close to the rain gauge. This indicates that the less
accurate rainfall estimate greatly outweighs the benefits of the added spatial information
from the radar data.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
45
==PAGE:54==
There seems to be a pattern in the best performing models looking at the middle left
plot in figure 5.8. The plot shows that the greater the length of the sequence, the better the
performance of the best models. This indicates that past information about the system’s
state is relevant for determining the current flow.
The most apparent effect of any hyper parameter appears to be the number of LSTM
neurons in the bottom right corner of figure 5.8. It appears that almost all but a few
models with greater than 0.3 performance were models that did not include an LSTM
layer. In addition to that, the non-LSTM layer appears to contain two clusters, one where
all the models have a GSS above 0.3 and one where they have a GSS less than 0.25.
Comparing those clusters to the data source cluster in the top left plot on figure 5.8, we
can deduce that the subset of the model that used the rain gauge input and had no LSTM
units accounts for all but two of the models with a greater than 0.3 GSS.
None of the results on the right side of figure 5.8 appears to show any interesting results.
The hyperparameters of the best models for both the radar and rain gauge models, shown
on table reﬀig:bestHyperSim, both include weight scheme a and five convolutional neurons.
Model evaluation
The objective of model evaluation is to take the best model from the model selection,
retrain them and test them on previously unseen data. This is because, even though the
cross-validation used in model selection is considered a good way to select between different
models, it tends to produce optimistic performance estimates.
The best models were
selected using the Gilbert skill score (GSS), see 4.3.3 for elaboration on this metric, but
tables 5.4 and 5.5 also include four more metrics: mean square error (MSE), which was the
loss function used during the training of the models, root mean squared error (RMSE), a
common metric that shows the average deviation of the predicted values, Pearson product-
moment correlation (Correlation), a measure of the strength of a linear association between
two variables (-1 for perfect negative linear relationship, 0 for no linear relationship, 1 for
perfect positive linear relationship), Nash–Sutcliffe model eﬀiciency coeﬀicient (NSE), a
common metric in hydrology used to assess the predictive skill of rainfall-runoff models.
The results of tables 5.4 and 5.5 both show similar differences in performance between
the training and test data as well as between Gelgjutangi and Boðagrandi. According to
every single metric, the best performing model that uses rain gauge data outperforms the
best performing model that uses radar data, supporting the results of the hyper-parameter
tuning about the performance difference between the data sources.
It should be noted before a comparison is made with drainage flow models in other
papers that many other papers use the last known value of the drainage flow as input into
the model. While this difference is very likely to improve the performance of the prediction,
it would likely not have produced the same insights about the data and other modelling
aspects. To demonstrate that including the previous value allows for much better results,
see table 5.6, which shows the same evaluation metrics applied to a persistence model,
which is a model that predicts the current output always to be equal to the last observed
output. Lastly, table 5.7 shows the performance of a linear regression model that used
the predictions from the best rain gauge model and the last available observation as input
to predict the drainage flow. We see again that all metrics are improved over both the
persistence and the best rain gauge models, except the GSS for Boðagrandi. This model
may also be thought of as an ensemble of the best rain gauge and persistence models.
46
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.8: Each of the six plots shows the results of every single model trained with rain
gauge and radar data for the task of simulating drainage flow. The x-axis is the GSS (see
4.3.3 for a description of this metric). Within each plot are 2-4 horizontal box and whisker
plots with jitter along the y-axis to better show the density of the samples used to generate
the box and whiskers. Each black dot represents a single model with a permutation of
hyperparameters that included that hyperparameter in the value shown on the label on
the left of that particular box and whiskers plot. For example, in the top-right plot, the
upper box includes all models that used radar data and the lower box all models that used
rain gauge data
The outlook for smart drainage systems
47
==PAGE:56==
Table 5.4: Training and testing results for both Gelgjutangi and Boðagrandi for the best
performing model on rain gauge data
Test
Train
GEL
BOD
GEL
BOD
MSE
4131.468
321.550
5042.482
256.401
RMSE
64.276
17.932
71.010
16.013
Correlation
0.783
0.588
0.793
0.701
NSE
0.611
0.316
0.629
0.489
GSS
0.351
0.222
0.444
0.245
Table 5.5: Training and testing results for both Gelgjutangi and Boðagrandi for the best
performing model on radar data
Test
Train
GEL
BOD
GEL
BOD
MSE
6098.810
351.138
7021.803
278.148
RMSE
78.095
18.739
83.796
16.678
Correlation
0.654
0.520
0.693
0.670
NSE
0.427
0.250
0.480
0.446
GSS
0.263
0.153
0.307
0.194
Table 5.6: Training and testing results for both Gelgjutangi and Boðagrandi for the per-
sistence model
Test
Train
GEL
BOD
GEL
BOD
MSE
3394.595
182.180
4295.448
138.064
RMSE
58.263
13.497
65.540
11.750
Correlation
0.840
0.806
0.842
0.862
NSE
0.681
0.613
0.684
0.725
GSS
0.461
0.410
0.519
0.516
Table 5.7: Training and testing results for both Gelgjutangi and Boðagrandi for a lin-
ear regression model that uses predictions from the best rain gauge model and the last
observation as input to predict drainage flow
Test
Train
GEL
BOD
GEL
BOD
MSE
2740.937
159.592
3364.708
119.723
RMSE
52.354
12.633
58.006
10.942
Correlation
0.862
0.814
0.867
0.873
NSE
0.742
0.661
0.752
0.762
GSS
0.485
0.399
0.539
0.529
One important aspect of model evaluation often forgotten is to visualize the data. This
sometimes reveals faulty models and can point to issues that statistical metrics would not
48
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:57==
otherwise reveal. Figures 5.9 and 5.10 show the observed and simulated flows from the
best performing rain gauge model on the validation data. Figures 5.11 and 5.12 show the
same for the best performing radar model. Each of these figures shows first the whole of
2020, aside from some windows where part of the input data was missing. These plots,
specifically the plots that show Boðagrandi reveal a big change in the behaviour of the flow
data starting right at the end of March. This change can be seen as a sudden increase in
variance, visible by the thicker blue margin around the orange lines in figures 5.10. 5.12.
Figure 5.9: The observed and simulated flows from the best performing rain gauge model
on the validation data for Gelgjutangi
Figure 5.10: The observed and simulated flows from the best performing rain gauge model
on the validation data for Boðagrandi
The outlook for smart drainage systems
49
==PAGE:58==
After consulting with experts in wastewater systems at Veitur, no probable cause for
this change was found. Several ideas, including the installation of new pumps, construction
in the area where water was being pumped from the pits or new residential buildings in
the area. The installation of new pumps did not coincide with the start of the changed
behaviour. No other theory was explored in more depth, so the cause for this change
remains unknown.
Figure 5.11: The observed and simulated flows from the best performing radar model on
the validation data for Gelgjutangi
Figure 5.12: The observed and simulated flows from the best performing radar model on
the validation data for Boðagrandi
50
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:59==
5.2.2
Drainage flow forecasting results
This section mirrors the last section, beginning with an overview of model selection results
and then looking at the model evaluation results. As noted in section 4.3.3 the performance
of the models in the model selection was evaluated on the performance of predictions
between 24 and 30 hours, the minimum time needed for most preparations concerning
rainfall.
Model selection
The bottom left plot in 5.13 reveals a similar pattern as was seen in the simulation results.
Almost all the best performing models do not include an LSTM layer. Looking then at
the middle left plot in 5.13 we can infer that almost all the rightmost points belong to the
non-LSTM models and we again see the best performing models improve in performance
as the length of the sequence is greater. Similar results are seen for the parameters in the
right column, where there are no notable results or patterns.
Table 5.8: Hyper-parameters of the best performing model. The individual GSS for both
Gelgjutangi and Boðagrandi are included, but the average GSS was used to select the best
models
Data source
NWP
Number of filters
1
Observations
48
Regularization
0.1
Number of LSTM units
0
Weight scheme
a
Validation GSS average
0.245
GSS (Gelgjutangi)
0.266
GSS (Boðagrandi)
0.224
Model evaluation
The drainage flow forecast model was evaluated on the 2020 data using the 24-30 hour
forecasts. The same statistical metrics as in the simulation results are used in the evalu-
ation in table 5.9. The same statistics for the persistence model can also be seen in table
5.10. Here we see a difference between the simulation results and the forecast results in
that the forecast greatly outperforms the persistence model, at least when looking at the
24-30 hour forecast.
Since only the 24 to 30-hour forecast was used in the model selection, it has not been
seen how well the forecast model performs for other prediction distances, and so for this
evaluation, the best model from the model selection is used, and the performance for each
metric is plotted in figure 5.16. Here we see that the persistence model performs better
than the drainage flow model for up to around 3 hours, but after that, the performance of
the forecast greatly outperforms the persistence model in all metrics. We also see how the
drainage flow forecast metrics slightly decline over time, similarly to the NWP accuracy
evaluated in 5.1.2.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
51
==PAGE:60==
Table 5.9: Performance of the best drainage flow forecast model on the test data set, which
includes data from the year 2020.
Test
Train
GEL
BOD
GEL
BOD
MSE
6199.454
352.819
7267.361
181.472
RMSE
78.737
18.783
85.249
13.471
Correlation
0.679
0.541
0.691
0.717
NSE
0.461
0.257
0.476
0.514
GSS
0.244
0.157
0.308
0.249
Table 5.10: Performance of a persistence model for a baseline in performance
Test
Train
GEL
BOD
GEL
BOD
MSE
17093.591
595.516
18651.983
347.204
RMSE
130.742
24.403
136.572
18.633
Correlation
0.265
0.377
0.309
0.531
NSE
-0.486
-0.254
-0.345
0.070
GSS
0.049
0.046
0.078
0.073
52
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.13: Each of the six plots shows the results of every single model trained with
numerical weather prediction data for the task of forecasting drainage flow. The x-axis is
the GSS for forecasts between 24 and 30 hours into the future (see 4.3.3 for a description
of this metric). Within each plot are 2-4 horizontal box and whisker plots with jitter
along the y-axis to better show the density of the samples used to generate the box and
whiskers. Each black dot represents a single model with a permutation of hyperparameters
that included that hyperparameter in the value shown on the label on the left of that
particular box and whiskers plot.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.14: The observed and forecasted flows from the best performing rain gauge model
on the validation data for Gelgjutangi
Figure 5.15: The observed and forecasted flows from the best performing rain gauge model
on the validation data for Boðagrandi
54
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.16: A comparison between the drainage flow forecast and a persistence model for
Gelgjutangi (left) and Boðagrandi (Right) over the whole forecast horizon of 60 hours
The outlook for smart drainage systems
55
==PAGE:64==
56
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:65==
6
Conclusions
The objective of this thesis was to design, implement and evaluate a simple data-driven
drainage flow simulation and forecasting model for use in the Reykjavík wastewater and
drainage system as well as to assess the data available for this task.
The case study
provided a qualitative assessment of the Reykjavík wastewater system and identified the
most relevant available data sources. The experiments conducted showed how accurately
drainage flow could be predicted using every rainfall data and rainfall forecast available
in Reykjavík. The key applications for these simulations and forecasts were established,
and several critical obstacles were discovered, analyzed and possible solutions identified.
As the name suggests, the most important variables in rainfall-runoff modelling, es-
pecially in the case of data-driven models, are the rainfall data and the runoff data i.e.
combined wastewater flow. Since rain gauges are considered the most reliable data source,
they were used to evaluate the accuracy of the other two rainfall data sources, radar and
NWP. The evaluation of the radar data compared rainfall estimated at different altitudes
and the effect of different radar strategies. It was found that the estimates of rainfall
produced at a lower altitude are better but also more sensitive to interference from the
ground. Rainfall estimates from the NWP were only slightly worse than that of the radar,
confirming the findings of other research that highlighted the importance of radar-rain
gauge merging.
Two different problems were identified in the drainage flow data, one of which is caused
by a buffer between the inflow and outflow from the pumping stations. This discrepancy
was investigated and found to be the cause of both underestimation and underestimation
of the drainage flow. This can affect the training and evaluation of any simulation and
forecasting model that uses the data.
Three neural network layers were tested in four combinations: a temporal convolu-
tional layer, a long short-term memory layer, and a fully-connected linear layer.
The
temporal convolutional layer followed by a fully-connected linear layer performed the best
of all models on every data source. The models were trained on a regression task but
were evaluated by their ability to correctly classify instances where the flow surpasses a
threshold of interest.
It was found that giving the models a longer sequence of input data improved the per-
formance quite consistently, and it was found that models that use data from a single rain
gauge outperform those that use radar estimated rainfall. The performance of the drainage
flow forecast was similar or slightly better than the best model simulating drainage flow
with radar data, thus highlighting the need for better methods for estimating rainfall from
radar data.
The following is a list of obstacles that need to be overcome and recommendations to
improve the performance of the drainage simulations and forecasts:
• The resolution of the drainage flow sensors should be increased significantly to allow
for future applications like real-time control and the reconstruction of pumping sta-
tion inflow. It could also open up more opportunities for offline applications. The
exact resolution should be determined with experimentation and further study.
• The measured water level within the pumping stations should be logged at the start
of every flow measurement interval to improve reconstructed inflow.
• Veitur needs to invest in better control mechanisms in the drainage system to utilize
the drainage flow forecast for preemptive action.
These could include increasing
buffers and adding variable speed pumps.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
57
==PAGE:66==
• A radar nowcast is likely the only type of precipitation forecast suitable for real-time
control applications.
• A good network of rain meters, as well as use radar-rain gauge merging, are needed
to improve radar estimated rainfall.
A system that can operate using informed decisions can transition from reactive op-
erations and damage mitigation to proactive operations and optimization. The project
provides an overview of the challenges that need to be overcome so that Veitur can begin
to modernize wastewater management in Reykjavík.
58
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
Abiodun, O. I., Jantan, A., Omolara, A. E., Dada, K. V., Mohamed, N. A., & Arshad, H.
(2018). State-of-the-art in artificial neural network applications: A survey. Heliyon,
4(11), e00938. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2018.e00938
Abou Rjeily, Y., Abbas, O., Sadek, M., Shahrour, I., & Hage Chehade, F. (2017). Flood
forecasting within urban drainage systems using narx neural network. Water Sci-
ence and Technology, 76(9), 2401–2412.
AghaKouchak, A., & Habib, E. (2010). Modeling radar rainfall estimation uncertainties:
Random error model. Journal of Hydrologic Engineering, 15(4), 265–274.
Beven, K. J. (2011). Rainfall-runoff modelling: The primer. John Wiley & Sons.
Britannica, E. o. E. (2020). Drainage basin. https://www.britannica.com/science/drainage-
basin
Bruen, M., & Yang, J. (2006). Combined hydraulic and black-box models for flood fore-
casting in urban drainage systems. Journal of Hydrologic Engineering, 11(6), 589–
596.
Buitinck, L., Louppe, G., Blondel, M., Pedregosa, F., Mueller, A., Grisel, O., Niculae,
V., Prettenhofer, P., Gramfort, A., Grobler, J., Layton, R., VanderPlas, J., Joly,
A., Holt, B., & Varoquaux, G. (2013). API design for machine learning software:
Experiences from the scikit-learn project. ECML PKDD Workshop: Languages for
Data Mining and Machine Learning, 108–122.
Cole, S. J., & Moore, R. J. (2008). Hydrological modelling using raingauge- and radar-
based estimators of areal rainfall. Journal of Hydrology, 358(3), 159–181. https:
//doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2008.05.025
Commons, W. (2013). File:colored neural network.svg. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:
Colored_neural_network.svg
Courdent, V., Grum, M., & Mikkelsen, P. S. (2018). Distinguishing high and low flow
domains in urban drainage systems 2days ahead using numerical weather predic-
tion ensembles. Journal of Hydrology, 556, 1013–1025. https : / / doi . org / https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2016.08.015
Dingman, S. L. (2015). Physical hydrology. Waveland press.
Egmont-Petersen, M., de Ridder, D., & Handels, H. (2002). Image processing with neural
networks—a review. Pattern recognition, 35(10), 2279–2301.
Einfalt, T., Arnbjerg-Nielsen, K., Golz, C., Jensen, N.-E., Quirmbach, M., Vaes, G., &
Vieux, B. (2004). Towards a roadmap for use of radar rainfall data in urban
drainage [Urban Hydrology]. Journal of Hydrology, 299(3), 186–202. https://doi.
org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2004.08.004
Fecarotta, O., Carravetta, A., Morani, M. C., & Padulano, R. (2018). Optimal pump
scheduling for urban drainage under variable flow conditions. Resources, 7, 73.
https://doi.org/10.3390/resources7040073
Germann, U., & Joss, J. (2004). Operational measurement of precipitation in mountainous
terrain. Weather radar (pp. 52–77). Springer.
Goodson, G., & Kopnitsky, A. (n.d.). Nimbostratus clouds: Precipitation layer [Accessed:
2021-12-09].
Goudenhoofdt, E., & Delobbe, L. (2009). Evaluation of radar-gauge merging methods for
quantitative precipitation estimates. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 13(2),
195–203. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-13-195-2009
Gunnlaugsson, E. (2004). Geothermal district heating in reykjavík, iceland.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
59
==PAGE:68==
Han, J., & Moraga, C. (1995). The influence of the sigmoid function parameters on the
speed of backpropagation learning. International workshop on artificial neural net-
works, 195–201.
Heistermann, M., Jacobi, S., & Pfaff, T. (2013). Technical note: An open source library for
processing weather radar data (wradlib). Hydrology and Earth System Sciences,
17(2), 863–871. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-17-863-2013
Hochreiter, S., & Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short-term memory. Neural Computation,
9(8), 1735–1780. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735
Hopfield, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective
computational abilities. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 79(8), 2554–8. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.79.8.2554
Íslands, V. (n.d.). Harmonie - numerical weather prediction model. https://en.vedur.is/
weather/articles/nr/3232
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6980.
Kratzert, F., Klotz, D., Brenner, C., Schulz, K., & Herrnegger, M. (2018). Rainfall–runoff
modelling using long short-term memory (lstm) networks. Hydrology and Earth
System Sciences, 22(11), 6005–6022. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-22-6005-2018
Löwe, R., Thorndahl, S., Mikkelsen, P. S., Rasmussen, M. R., & Madsen, H. (2014). Proba-
bilistic online runoff forecasting for urban catchments using inputs from rain gauges
as well as statically and dynamically adjusted weather radar. Journal of Hydrology,
512, 397–407. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2014.03.027
Martı́n Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro,
Greg S. Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat,
Ian Goodfellow, Andrew Harp, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Jia, Y., Rafal Joze-
fowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, … Xiaoqiang Zheng. (2015). TensorFlow:
Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems [Software available from
tensorflow.org]. https://www.tensorflow.org/
Ochoa‐Rodriguez, S., Wang, L. .-P., Willems, P., & Onof, C. (2019). A review of radar‐rain
gauge data merging methods and their potential for urban hydrological applica-
tions. Water Resources Research, 55(8), 6356–6391. https://doi.org/10.1029/
2018wr023332
Pedersen, J. (2021). Using numerical weather prediction and in-sewer sensor data for real-
time monitoring and forecasting in urban drainage-wastewater systems (Doctoral
dissertation). Technical University of Denmark.
Phi, M. (2018). Illustrated guide to lstm’s and gru’s: A step by step explanation [Accessed:
2021-12-04].
She, L., & You, X.-y. (2019). A dynamic flow forecast model for urban drainage using the
coupled artificial neural network. Water Resources Management, 33(9), 3143–3153.
Shumway, R. H., Stoffer, D. S., & Stoffer, D. S. (2000). Time series analysis and its
applications (Vol. 3). Springer.
Sitterson, J., Knightes, C., Parmar, R., Wolfe, K., Avant, B., & Muche, M. (2018). An
overview of rainfall-runoff model types.
Stránský, D., Bareš, V., & Fatka, P. (2007). The effect of rainfall measurement uncer-
tainties on rainfall-runoff processes modeling. Water science and technology : a
journal of the International Association on Water Pollution Research, 55, 103–11.
https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2007.100
Suthaharan, S. (2016). Machine learning models and algorithms for big data classification.
Integr. Ser. Inf. Syst, 36, 1–12.
60
The outlook for smart drainage systems
==PAGE:69==
Tealab, A. (2018). Time series forecasting using artificial neural networks methodologies:
A systematic review. Future Computing and Informatics Journal, 3(2), 334–340.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcij.2018.10.003
Thorndahl, S., Einfalt, T., Willems, P., Nielsen, J., Ten Veldhuis, M.-C., Arnbjerg-Nielsen,
K., Rasmussen, M., & Molnar, P. (2017). Weather radar rainfall data in urban
hydrology. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 21, 1359–1380. https://doi.org/
10.5194/hess-21-1359-2017
Uijlenhoet, R., Van Der Wielen, S. H., & Berne, A. (2006). Uncertainties in rainfall re-
trievals from ground-based weather radar: Overview, case study, and simulation
experiment (No. 4). https://doi.org/10.5194/hessd-3-2385-2006
Vallabhaneni, S., Vieux, B. E., Donovan, S., & Moisio, S. (n.d.). Interpretation of radar
and rain gauge measurements for sewer system modeling. Global solutions for urban
drainage (pp. 1–10). https://doi.org/10.1061/40644(2002)231
Waibel, A., Hanazawa, T., Hinton, G., Shikano, K., & Lang, K. J. (1989). Phoneme recog-
nition using time-delay neural networks. IEEE transactions on acoustics, speech,
and signal processing, 37(3), 328–339.
Zell, A. (1994). Simulation neuronaler netze (Vol. 1). Addison-Wesley Bonn.
The outlook for smart drainage systems
61
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
