==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Implementation of the NNAlign machine learning
method using a CNN-based architecture
Master Thesis
Jonas Birkelund Nilsson (s163724)
Supervisor: Morten Nielsen
December 15, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Receptor-ligand interactions are fundamental to important cellular processes and pathways in the human body,
including the immune system. A key player of the immune system is the Major Histocompatability Complex
(MHC), which presents peptides to nearby T cells that can recognize foreign peptides from invading pathogens.
Knowing which peptides can bind to the MHC molecule is crucial for understanding how immune responses are
propagated, and thus many tools have been developed that can predict which peptides can bind to each MHC
molecule. NNAlign, which is based on an artiﬁcial neural network, can predict both the binding aﬃnity and
binding core of each peptide to a given MHC molecule. The latest version of NNAlign implemented the use of
an MHC pseudosequence, e.g. a sequence of individual residues deemed important for peptide binding, to allow
for pan-speciﬁc prediction of binding to any MHC molecule with known pseudosequence. However, this leaves
no room for the model to learn the important parts of the MHC sequence by itself. This project investigates an
alternative version of NNAlign, in which the pseudosequence representation is replaced by a convolutional neural
network (CNN) layer applied to full-length receptor sequences. The method is benchmarked on MHC class I and
class II datasets, where it in many cases achieves better performance than methods based on pseudosequences.
Additionally, the method’s wide applicability is showcased on data related to protein phosphorylation.
In
each benchmark, the CNN layer is shown to be capable of extracting biologically important information from
the input sequences without any prior knowledge given to the model. This capability is analyzed in-depth in
terms of how the CNN layer learns to put focus on distinct regions in the receptor sequence. In summary, the
proposed CNN-based implementation of NNAlign is a powerful method which can be applied widely to gain
further understanding of receptor-ligand systems.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Materials and Methods
3
2.1
Artiﬁcial neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
NNAlign . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Convolutional neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4.1
Protein sequences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4.2
MHC binding aﬃnity data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.3
MHC class II eluted ligand data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.4
MHC pseudosequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.5
Phosphorylation data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.6
Protein structures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Sequence logos and information content
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Performance measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6.1
Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6.2
Area under the receiver operating characteristics curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6.3
Positive predictive value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6.4
Cross-validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6.5
Binomial test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.7
CNNAlign: Implementation of NNAlign with convolutional layers using C programming . . . . .
13
2.7.1
Filter score rescaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Results
14
3.1
Comparison of CNNAlign and NNAlign-2.1 performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
MHC class I positional importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
HLA-A:Peptide structure visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Analyzing the CNN ﬁlters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Adding prior knowledge to boost CNNAlign’s performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.5
Prediction of binding to MHC class II
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.5.1
Eluted ligand data benchmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.6
Prediction of protein phosphorylation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Discussion
41
5
References
43
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
Biological processes and pathways are dependent on the interaction between diﬀerent proteins and other
molecules. A key concept here is receptor-ligand systems, in which a protein receptor binds to some ligand
(e.g. another protein or a small molecule) to induce a cellular response. For example, protein kinases, which
modify other proteins by phosphorylation, are crucial for regulating e.g. signaling pathways. This is accom-
plished when proteins bind to a conserved domain of the kinase referred to as the active site [1]. As such,
single residues such as the active site are often the driving factor behind receptor-ligand interactions. Receptors
located on the surface of cells often facilitate cell-to-cell communication, which allows for quick response to
e.g. changes in the intracellular or extracellular environment. This is a fundamental mechanism of the human
immune system, in which a wide range of diﬀerent cells communicate via receptor-ligand systems in order to
respond to incoming pathogen infections. The immune system is comprised of two distinct subsystems, namely
the innate and adaptive systems. While the innate system functions as a general protection layer against in-
vading pathogens, the adaptive system provides long-term immunological memory which is highly speciﬁc for
each pathogen. One of the key components of the adaptive immune system is the Major Histocompatability
Complex (MHC), whose main job is to present peptides, e.g. short chains of amino acids, on the surface of
cells. These peptides are either self-peptides originating from the cell’s own proteins or peptides derived from
a pathogen. The MHC molecule presents peptides to nearby T cells, whose job is to recognize foreign peptides
originating from e.g. a pathogen. This recognition can then trigger an immune response such that infected cells
and extracellular pathogens can be eliminated.
There are two classes of MHC molecules, namely MHC class I and MHC class II. Each MHC class is highly
polymorphic in that they have a large number of alleles, i.e. diﬀerent versions of the genes coding for the
MHC molecule. The highly polymorphic regions of the MHC molecule are predominantly located in the regions
where the peptide makes contact, and this polymorphism is therefore important for the binding aﬃnity [2].
MHC class I mainly presents peptides originating from intracellular proteins, which are either self-proteins or
proteins from a pathogen that has infected the cell. Structurally, MHC class I molecules are heterodimers
consisting of an alpha subunit and a small beta subunit (see ﬁgure 1). Two domains in the alpha chain form
a peptide binding groove, which is closed in both ends. Due to this closed conformation, MHC class I binds
predominantly short peptides, usually of length 8-10, although longer peptides of length 11-14 can also bind
[3]. While MHC class I is found on all nucleated cells, MHC class II is mostly found on immune cells called
professional antigen-presenting cells, which include macrophages, dendritic cells and B cells. These cells are able
to engulf extracellular pathogens, which are processed and digested into peptides that can be presented on MHC
class II molecules on the cell surface. The MHC class II molecule consists of an alpha and beta subunit, where
a domain from each of the alpha and beta chains come together to form the peptide binding groove (shown on
ﬁgure 1). In MHC class II the binding cleft is open at the two ends, allowing binding of peptides of much larger
lengths than MHC class I. MHC class II usually binds peptides of length 13-19, but can also bind both shorter
and longer peptides [4][5]. The part of the peptide that primarily interacts with the MHC molecule is referred
to as the binding core, which usually has a length of 9 amino acids. Residues on either side of the binding core
are referred to as peptide ﬂanking regions (PFRs) and have also been shown to be important for the peptide’s
binding [6].
1
==PAGE:5==
Figure 1: Overall structures of MHC class I and class II molecules anchored to a cell membrane. In MHC class I the
peptide binding groove consists of the two domains α1 and α2 from the alpha chain, while the binding groove in class II
is made from the α1 and β1 domains from the alpha and beta chain, respectively.
Knowing which peptides can bind to a given MHC molecule is of great utility, as it can give information
about which kinds of peptides have the potential to be immunogenic, i.e. give rise to an immune response. To
gain better understanding of the underlying rules governing immunogenecity of peptides, many methods have
been developed that can predict whether or not a given peptide will bind to an MHC molecule. These methods
are often machine-learning based, where a model is trained on large datasets of e.g. peptide binding aﬃnities.
This project deals with one of these methods called NNAlign which is based on an artiﬁcial neural network
(ANN). The method can be used to predict not only the binding aﬃnity of peptides to MHC molecules, but also
the binding core of each peptide, making it possible to learn the rules of binding to each speciﬁc MHC molecule.
Furthermore, as of the latest version of NNAlign, the method can be used to train ’pan-speciﬁc’ models, i.e.
models that can predict binding to any MHC molecule of known sequence [7].
Prediction methods based on the NNAlign framework include NetMHCpan and NetMHCIIpan, which pre-
dict binding to MHC class I and class II, respectively. These pan-speciﬁc methods are based on MHC pseu-
dosequences, i.e. sequences of speciﬁc residues from the full-length MHC sequences, selected based on their
determined importance for peptide binding. While the use of pseudosequences has shown to yield high model
performance, it does not leave much room for interpretation on what a model is learning in terms of the MHC
molecule, as the important residues are already given as prior knowledge. Another approach would be to use the
full-length MHC sequences as input to the model, and let the model learn by itself what parts of the sequences
it should focus on. This idea has been used in e.g. NetPhosPan, a method used for prediction of peptide
phosphorylation by protein kinases. The method uses a convolutional neural network (CNN) applied to full-
length kinase sequences, which is shown to be able to focus on residues near a kinase’s active site [8]. A similar
approach based on CNNs could therefore theoretically be applied to predict MHC binding, where full-length
MHC sequences are used as input. This project describes the approach of replacing the MHC pseudosequence
representation with a CNN-based representation in the NNAlign machine learning framework. The method,
dubbed ’CNNAlign’, is assessed in terms of its performance compared to many of the previously mentioned
prediction methods, and how the CNN can be interpreted in terms of what is actually being learned by the
model.
2
==PAGE:6==
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Artiﬁcial neural networks
One of the most widely used methods within machine learning is Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs), which
are extremely versatile and powerful for learning nonlinear systems, e.g. systems that cannot be described by
a linear equation. ANNs are within the category of supervised learning, where the goal is to learn a function
that maps some input data to a given target value. The two main applications of ANNs are classiﬁcation
and regression. For classiﬁcation, the network learns to classify the input data into diﬀerent classes, while a
regression ANN learns to predict a numerical value associated with the input.
Figure 2: Example of an artiﬁcial neural network with six input neurons, a single hidden layer with ﬁve hidden neurons,
and one neuron in the output layer.
ANNs are structured in layers, where the basic ANN structure contains an input layer, an arbitrary number
of hidden layers, and ﬁnally an output layer (see ﬁgure 2). The input layer holds the input data to the network,
and its only job is to forward the data to the next layer. Each artiﬁcial neuron takes some number of input values
from the previous layer’s neurons, calculates a weighted sum of the inputs, and applies a so-called activation
function to get the ﬁnal output value. Figure 3 shows an example of this calculation, where a bias is also added
during the calculation of the weighted sum. The bias is usually added to make it easier for the network to
approximate the underlying function that maps the input to the output. Once the ﬁnal output value has been
calculated, it can be passed on to the neurons in the next layer of the network.
Some examples of activation functions are the sigmoid function given by
σ(z) =
1
1 + exp(−z)
(1)
and the hyperbolic tangent function given by
tanh(z) = exp(z) −exp(−z)
exp(z) + exp(−z)
(2)
3
==PAGE:7==
As ﬁgure 3 illustrates, the sigmoid function output to the range [0,1], while the hyperbolic tangent function
maps to the [-1,1] range. As such, both positive and negative inputs will map to a non-negative number when
using the sigmoid function, while the sign of the input is preserved when using the hyperbolic tangent function
[9].
Figure 3: Examples of activation functions and an artiﬁcial neuron’s architecture. A: Two examples of activation
functions commonly used in ANNs, namely the sigmoid function and the hyperbolic tangent function. B: The neuron
receives six input values, and it calculates a weighted sum z using its own six weights and a bias weight. The neuron
then applies its activation function on z, giving the ﬁnal output y which can be passed on to the neurons in the next
layer.
ANNs are trained using a combination of two methods, namely forward propagation and backpropagation.
Usually, the network weights are initialized using pseudo-random numbers, where a number referred to as a
’seed’ can be used to control the initialization of the random number generator. In the forward propagation
step, a datapoint is forwarded through the network starting from the input layer, and the network outputs a
prediction. This prediction should ideally be equal to the target value for the given example, however, there
will most likely be some form of error. The size of the error reﬂects how much the network weights should be
adjusted in order to decrease the prediction error. This adjustment is done in the backpropagation step, which
is based on the concept of gradient descent. In gradient descent, a loss function is used, which describes the
4
==PAGE:8==
network prediction error for a given input. The idea is to minimize this function through iterative updating
of the network weights, such that better and better predictions are made. To do this, the partial derivatives
of the loss function with respect to the network weights are calculated. These derivatives (referred to as the
gradient) intuitively describe how ’steep’ the loss function is at each weight, and thus how much each weight is
contributing to the prediction error. The update of the network weights is proportional to the negative direction
of the gradient, such that we move closer and closer to the minimum of the loss function. Furthermore, the
amount that each weight is updated by is controlled by the learning rate parameter, which is essentially the ’step
size’ of each update. The networks trained in this project use stochastic gradient descent for training, meaning
that the network weights are updated after predicting each individual training example. Once all datapoints in
the training dataset have been forward and backward propagated once each, one training epoch is completed.
The number of epochs, learning rate, hidden layer sizes etc. are all hyperparameters that have to be tuned to
the speciﬁc data being used [10].
2.2
NNAlign
NNAlign is an ANN-based machine learning method designed to learn the interaction between receptors and
their ligands.
An important feature of the method is its ability to discover binding motifs, i.e.
sequence
patterns that are driving the binding of ligands to the receptor. The method is often used in the context of
MHC-peptide binding, where the goal is to predict the binding aﬃnity of peptides to certain MHC molecules.
While the method can also be used for modelling other receptor-ligand systems, it will be explained in the
context of MHC binding here. As such, in the following sections the ligands and receptors will be assumed to
be peptides and MHC molecules, respectively.
The input for NNAlign is a list of peptides each with an associated target value (i.e. binding aﬃnity), along
with an optional list of pseudosequences for the MHC molecules that the peptides have been tested against.
The pseudosequences are assumed to be aligned and of equal length, such that an equal-length encoding can be
given for all receptor sequences. If no pseudosequences are provided, NNAlign has no context regarding which
MHC molecule each peptide’s aﬃnity is measured against. However, in this case the method can be used to
train e.g. allele-speciﬁc models, where each peptide binds to the same MHC. The inclusion of pseudosequences
allows for training of pan-speciﬁc models which can accurately predict binding aﬃnity to previously unseen
receptors by their similarity to known ones.
For encoding of peptides and pseudosequences, NNAlign can use either sparse (one-hot) encoding or Blosum
encoding. In sparse encoding, the amino acids are converted into binary vectors, while Blosum encoding uses a
BLOSUM matrix, which is a 20x20 matrix of log-odds scores for all the possible amino acid substitution pairs.
Each amino acid in a given sequence is thus encoded by its corresponding row in the BLOSUM matrix. This
corresponds to 20 values for each amino acid, meaning a peptide of length 9 will get an encoding of dimension
9×20. Blosum encoding has been shown to be a highly powerful method in applications based on e.g. neural
networks, which is mainly attributed to the BLOSUM matrices’ inherent biological information about amino
acid similarity [11][12].
As explained in section 1, each peptide has a binding core which primarily interacts with the MHC molecule.
The objective of NNAlign is to align the binding cores of the peptides with each other, such that a peptide
encoding of common length can be applied. As of NNAlign version 2.0/2.1, insertions and deletions can be
5
==PAGE:9==
added while doing the alignment, which allows for encoding of binding cores with variable length, and can
yield even more accurate discovery of binding motifs (see ﬁgure 4). The encoded peptide binding core, along
with the optional MHC pseudosequence encoding, forms the input layer in the network. This is followed by a
hidden layer of neurons, and ﬁnally a single neuron in the output layer. Overall, this forms a conventional ANN
architecture, which can be trained with backpropagation using e.g. stochastic gradient descent [7].
Figure 4: Prediction of peptide binding cores in NNAlign-2.1. A: The peptide of length 8 needs an insertion of length
1 to match the motif length of 9. For this peptide an insertion at position 3 gives the best prediction. B: The peptide
of length 12 has many possible positions for its binding core. NNAlign tries both a sliding window of length 9, as well
as an insertion/deletion at diﬀerent positions in the sequence. For this peptide a deletion of length 3 at position 6 gives
the best prediction.
2.3
Convolutional neural networks
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been widely used in areas such as image analysis, where
feature extraction is important for performing e.g. classiﬁcation. Furthermore, CNNs have been used in bioin-
formatics for prediction of e.g. T cell receptor binding [13] and kinase phosphorylation [8].
In general, a CNN is a neural network in which some convolution is applied. Here, a convolution is an
operation in which a kernel (referred to as a ’ﬁlter’ here) is applied to some input data, producing a feature map
that ideally captures the most important parts of the input. The ﬁlter can be thought of as a weight matrix
which goes over the entire input data as a sliding window. At each position in the input the ﬁlter calculates
a kind of dot product referred to as a score. Each score represents the importance of the corresponding input
window based on the ﬁlter’s current weights. Usually, the convolutional step is followed by a pooling layer
and one or more fully-connected hidden layers before the output layer. The pooling step is a downsampling
6
==PAGE:10==
technique used to summarize the output of the convolution. Two of the main pooling methods are max pooling
and average pooling. In max pooling the maximum score from each ﬁlter is forwarded through the network,
while average pooling forwards the average of each ﬁlter’s scores. In this project, global max pooling is applied,
meaning that only one output value from each ﬁlter is forwarded, corresponding to the maximum of all the
ﬁlter’s scores across the input. However, local pooling can also be applied, in which multiple values from each
ﬁlter are forwarded. Here, each value would correspond to the maximum or average of a subset of the ﬁlter’s
scores (see ﬁgure 5). It is common to use multiple ﬁlters, such that the ﬁlters can focus on diﬀerent parts of
the input data, and thus more information can be learned by the network [14][15].
Figure 5: Example of a CNN 1D convolutional layer followed by a pooling layer. In the convolutional layer the ﬁlter
is passed over the input data, and a dot product score is calculated at each position. In the pooling layer the output is
either a single number or a vector depending on the type of pooling applied (global or local).
2.4
Datasets
2.4.1
Protein sequences
MHC class I protein sequences were acquired from an in-house dataset of sequences for a large number of HLA-
A, HLA-B and HLA-C alleles. All these sequences are aligned and have the same length of 180 amino acids. For
MHC class II, sequences were mostly taken from an in-house dataset of previously extracted sequences from the
UniProt database [16]. Some additional sequences were found manually on UniProt by searching for the allele
names on the Immune Epitope Database [17], and others were retrieved from the IPD-IMGT/HLA database
[18].
7
==PAGE:11==
2.4.2
MHC binding aﬃnity data
The main type of MHC binding data used in this project is called binding aﬃnity (BA) data, where each
peptide has a measured binding aﬃnity towards some MHC molecule. The binding aﬃnities are experimental
IC50 values measured in nM, and a peptide is said to bind to the MHC if its IC50 value is less than 500 nM.
The aﬃnity values have been rescaled into the [0-1] range using the relation
a = 1 −
log(A)
log(50000)
(3)
where A is the aﬃnity given in nM. The rescaled threshold of 500 nM is then approximately 0.426, and any
peptide with a rescaled binding aﬃnity larger than 0.426 is considered a binder. This rescaling has been used
in diﬀerent iterations of the prediction methods NetMHCpan and NetMHCIIpan (e.g. [19], [20] etc.).
The dataset used for MHC class I prediction consists of 165240 peptides each with a measured aﬃnity
towards one of 99 class I alleles. For MHC class II the dataset from NetMHCIIpan-3.2 was used, which contains
134281 peptides with measured binding aﬃnities towards a total of 80 class II alleles.
Figure 6 shows the
distribution of observations across alleles for the two datasets, along with the distribution of binders and non-
binders per allele. In the MHC class I dataset there is a higher number of non-binders than binders for most of
the alleles, while the fraction of non-binders varies more per allele in the MHC class II dataset. In ﬁgure 7 the
distribution of peptide lengths for the two datasets are plotted, where the most common peptide lengths are 9
and 15 for MHC class I and class II, respectively. For the class II dataset there are peptides up to 37 amino
acids in length, although the most prevalent lengths are in the range 12 to 21 [21].
Figure 6: Overview of MHC class I and class II BA datasets. The number of positive examples is labelled above each
allele’s bar.
8
==PAGE:12==
Figure 7: Length distribution of peptides in MHC class I and class II BA datasets.
2.4.3
MHC class II eluted ligand data
Eluted ligand (EL) data is a relatively new type of data which is used in state of the art machine learning
methods such as NNAlign MA. The experimental setup involves liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry,
in which peptide-MHC complexes from diﬀerent cell lines are puriﬁed and ligands are sequenced [22]. This type
of data diﬀers from BA data in that no binding aﬃnity is measured, and thus the target value for a peptide
binder is simply 1. Negative examples are then represented by artiﬁcially added random natural peptides, which
each receive a target value of 0. For this project a subset of an EL dataset from NetMHCIIpan-4.1 was used,
which covers 118 class II alleles. The subset, which contains 487025 datapoints, was made by extracting 11% of
the datapoints randomly for each allele, while retaining the ratio between binders and non-binders. An overview
of the data subset can be seen in ﬁgure 8.
Figure 8: Overview of MHC class II EL dataset. The number of positive examples is labelled above each allele’s bar.
2.4.4
MHC pseudosequences
One of the most widely used methods for encoding of MHC molecules in machine learning models is MHC
pseudosequences, which was introduced by Nielsen et. al. in the NetMHCpan prediction method. Every MHC
class I allele included in the model was deﬁned by a protein sequence of length 34, in which each residue is
within 4.0 ˚Angstrøm of the peptide in a set of representative MHC-peptide protein structures [23]. Similar to
MHC class I, MHC class II pseudosequences were introduced in the ﬁrst version of the NetMHCIIpan prediction
method for HLA-DR alleles [24], and were subsequently modiﬁed in later versions of the method to include more
MHC class II loci and residues from both the alpha and beta chain. For NetMHCIIpan-3.2, which was used for
9
==PAGE:13==
comparison in this project’s benchmarks, the pseudosequence contains 15 residues from the alpha chain and 19
residues from the beta chain. Similar distance criteria were used here to deﬁne the contact residues, however,
deﬁning the pseudosequences was less straightforward compared to MHC class I due to more variation in the
MHC class II alleles in both the sequences and structures [25][20].
2.4.5
Phosphorylation data
Two datasets from the NetPhosPan publication were used in this project. The ﬁrst dataset, which was used to
train NetPhosPan, consists of 133318 datapoints, where each datapoint consists of a 21-mer peptide, one of the
154 kinases present in the data, and a target value indicating if the peptide is reported to be phosphorylatable
by the kinase. Each peptide contains a central serine (S), threonine (T) or tyrosine (Y) residue which acts as a
phosphorylation site. In total, this dataset consists of 10344 positive examples with target value 0.95 and 122974
negative examples with target value 0.05. The second dataset is an evaluation dataset with 25901 datapoints,
of which 444 are positives with target value 1 and 25457 are negative examples with target value 0. Again, the
peptides here each have a central S, T or Y residue, and are associated with 7 diﬀerent kinases in total. For
encoding of the kinase domains, full-length kinase sequences from NetPhosPan were utilized, which range from
248 to 574 amino acids in length [8].
2.4.6
Protein structures
For biological interpretation of results from the implemented CNNs, protein structures of receptor:ligand com-
plexes were used. The RCSB Protein Data Bank was used to download relevant structures of MHC:peptide
and Kinase:peptide complexes [26]. For visualization of the structures, the open-source version of the program
PyMol was used [27]. Custom values for each amino acid in the structures were visualized by replacing the
structures’ B-factor values, which by default show level of ’disorder’ in each region of the proteins. Values are
shown using a color scale going from blue to red, where red corresponds to the highest value.
2.5
Sequence logos and information content
Sequence logos are useful for visualization of sequence motifs, i.e. prevalent sequence patterns, and positional
amino acid enrichment or depletion. A sequence logo requires a set of aligned sequences, where some positions
in the alignment may be partially or fully conserved, meaning that only a few amino acids are present in those
positions. In each position, every amino acid is represented by its one-letter code, where the height of the letter
indicates how frequent the amino acid is at that position. The height of each position’s letter stack is referred to
as the information content, which is usually measured in bits. Traditionally, sequence logos have been generated
based on Shannon information, which is given by
Di = log2(20) +
20
X
b=1
fb,i · log2(fb,i)
(4)
where fb,i is the frequency of the b’th amino acid at position i [28]. Note that only amino acids present
at position i in the sequence alignment contribute to the summation, as log2(0) is undeﬁned. If a position is
completely conserved (i.e. only one amino acid is present at that position), the information content simpliﬁes
to Di = log2(20) ≈4.322. As such, a normalized information content can be calculated by
10
==PAGE:14==
˜Di = log2(20) + P20
b=1 fb,i · log2(fb,i)
log2(20)
(5)
A popular tool for creating sequence logos is Seq2Logo, which allows for construction of several diﬀerent
logo types. The method’s default type is the Kullback–Leibler sequence logo, where amino acids are represented
as their probability of being observed, with enriched amino acids having positive values and depleted amino
acids having negative values. Here, a background distribution of amino acid frequencies is incorporated into the
information content calculation, where an amino acid is said to be depleted if its observed frequency is lower
than its background frequency [29].
2.6
Performance measurements
In the context of machine learning, performance usually refers to the estimated predictive power of a model.
After a model has been trained on a training dataset, the model can be used to make predictions on a separate
test set. The model’s performance on this test set is thus an estimate of how well the model will generalize on
previously unseen data. A model which has been optimized to perform well only on the training data will often
not generalize well on unseen test data, and is then said to be overﬁtted on the training data.
2.6.1
Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient
Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient (PCC) is a widely used measure of linear correlation. Given N datapoints each
with an (xi, yi) pair, PCC is deﬁned as
PCC =
PN
i=1(xi −¯x)(yi −¯y)
qPN
i=1(xi −¯x)2
qPN
i=1(yi −¯y)2
(6)
where ¯x and ¯y are the average of the x and y measurements, respectively. A PCC of 1 and -1 are equivalent
to perfect positive and negative linear relation, respectively, while a PCC of zero implies no linear relation [30].
For MHC binding predictions, x would be the list of measured binding aﬃnities and y would be the list of
predicted binding aﬃnities. PCC thus only describes how well a model can predict the peptides’ actual binding
aﬃnities, and not how well it performs at separating binders and non-binders.
2.6.2
Area under the receiver operating characteristics curve
Binary classiﬁcation is often done by comparing a model’s prediction to a threshold value that separates the two
classes. These kinds of models can be evaluated by the use of receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curves.
Two lists of values are used here, namely the list of predicted values by the model, and a list of the ’true’ labels
of the data. For peptide binding, this would correspond to the list of predicted binding aﬃnities, as well as
the list of labels (binder vs non-binder) assigned based on the peptides’ measured binding aﬃnities. To plot
the ROC curve, the model’s true positive rate (TPR) is plotted against the model’s false positive rate (FPR)
evaluated at diﬀerent thresholds of prediction. Here, TPR is deﬁned as the proportion of actual positives given
a correct positive prediction, while FPR is the proportion of actual negatives given a false positive prediction.
As such, each point on the ROC curve is calculated by considering the model’s ability to classify when all
predictions above a given threshold are classiﬁed as positives and the rest as negatives. The area under the
ROC curve (AUC) can then be calculated, where a value of 1 corresponds to perfect classiﬁcation, and a value
11
==PAGE:15==
of 0.5 is equivalent to random guessing [31]. An alternative metric called ’AUC 0.1’ can be calculated by only
considering the area under the ROC curve up to a FPR of 0.1. AUC 0.1 thus focuses more on the model’s
ability to make correct negative classiﬁcations. Note that AUC 0.1 is usually normalized to a value between 0
and 1 such that it can be compared to the regular AUC. If no positive or negative examples are present in the
data, AUC and AUC 0.1 are undeﬁned.
2.6.3
Positive predictive value
In an ideal binding prediction model, the highest prediction values should ideally only be given to actual positive
examples. One way to assess this is the positive predictive value (PPV), which is deﬁned as
PPV =
TP
TP + FP
(7)
where TP and FP are the number of true positives and false positives, respectively.
PPV can thus be
interpreted as the probability that a sample given a positive prediction is a true positive example [32]. In this
project, PPV is calculated by ﬁrst sorting the data by prediction score in descending order and considering
the top N predictions, where N is the number of binders in the data. PPV is then calculated on this set of
N datapoints, where ideally all of them should be actual binders. A PPV of 1 then corresponds to perfect
identiﬁcation of binders, as they were all given the highest predictions. On the other hand, a PPV of 0 means
no binders were in the top N predictions, and the model has thus not learned that high and low values should
correspond to binders and non-binders, respectively.
Just like AUC and AUC 0.1, PPV is undeﬁned if no
positive examples are present in the data.
2.6.4
Cross-validation
Reducing bias when estimating a model’s generalization performance is often achieved by performing cross-
validation (CV). One of the most common methods is K-fold CV, where a dataset is split into K partitions.
This partitioning needs to take into account the potential redundancy in the data, such that each partition does
not contain many similar datapoints. Each of the K partitions is used once as a test set while the remaining
K −1 partitions are used for training a model. As an example, for a 5-fold CV, ﬁve models are trained each
using a unique set of four partitions, while each ﬁfth partition is used as a test set for the corresponding training
set. In this way, each partition is used both for training and testing, with each datapoint being used for test
prediction only once. If multiple models are trained per CV fold, the prediction for each test datapoint is made
by taking the average of the individual models’ predictions. When predictions have been made for each test set,
the K sets of predictions are then concatenated, and a performance metric is calculated on the combined set
of predictions [33]. The datasets used in this project have been partitioned beforehand with redundancy taken
into account, such that 5-fold CV can be applied with each dataset.
2.6.5
Binomial test
When comparing two methods by their performance across multiple categories, one can make use of a binomial
test to assess if one method is more likely to win a given category than the other. The test uses the binomial
distribution, which gives the probability of achieving k successes in n trials given a probability π of winning. A
null hypothesis H0 is tested, which in this project is π = 0.5. The alternative hypothesis H1 is then π > 0.5,
12
==PAGE:16==
meaning that one method is more likely to win than the other. This test can be done using a one-tailed binomial
test, which gives a P-value equal to the probability of observing an outcome which is just as, or more, extreme
than the one being tested. In other words, this is testing whether the number of trials won by one method is
signiﬁcantly more than what would be expected given an assumed probability of winning [34].
2.7
CNNAlign: Implementation of NNAlign with convolutional layers using C
programming
To allow for detailed customization of a CNN architecture and fast training of models, the code for a CNN-based
NNAlign was implemented in C. An initial version of the code was given as a starting point, which was then
modiﬁed to work with all the diﬀerent datasets used in this project. The program takes as input a training
dataset and an optional test dataset, where each row in the datasets contains a peptide, a target value, and
the name of the receptor the peptide’s binding is measured against. Furthermore, CNNAlign requires a list
of receptor sequences, along with a ﬁle listing the ﬁlters to use for the CNN layer. For example, if the model
should use 20 ﬁlters of size 9 and 10 ﬁlters of size 7, the input ﬁle would be
9 20
7 10
The program has many additional command-line arguments for further customization of the sequence encod-
ing and network training. The most relevant parameters are described in section 3.1. By default, the program
uses stochastic gradient descent to train the network weights. Furthermore, the program provides an option
to use the Adam optimizer in the CNN layer only. Adam has been shown to often be an eﬀective alternative
to stochastic gradient descent, as it uses an individual learning rate for each network weight which is adapted
during the training [35].
Figure 9 shows the overall architecture of CNNAlign. The Blosum-encoded MHC sequence is convolved with
diﬀerent ﬁlters, where the ﬁlter scores are calculated at overlapping sequence windows. Each ﬁlter is a weight
matrix of dimension F × 20, where F is the ﬁlter length, i.e. how many amino acids it covers. As such, each
ﬁlter’s score at a given window in the MHC sequence is the sum of F dot products, where each dot product
uses the corresponding position’s amino acid encoding and the 20 ﬁlter weights at that position. The maximum
score of each ﬁlter is then passed on in the global max pooling layer, and the maximum scores from all ﬁlters
are then concatenated with the peptide encoding to form the input layer. This is followed by a conventional
feed-forward neural network structure with one hidden layer.
13
==PAGE:17==
Figure 9:
CNNAlign architecture.
The receptor sequence is Blosum-encoded, after which each ﬁlter is convolved
with the encoding at each position in the sequence. Each ﬁlter thus calculates a score (shown as a red square) at every
sequence window of the same length as the ﬁlter. The input layer of the network consists of the encoded peptide sequence
concatenated with the output of the global max-pooling in the CNN layer. This is followed by a fully-connected hidden
layer and output layer.
2.7.1
Filter score rescaling
During the CNN prediction, the ﬁlters are convolved with the BLOSUM encodings of amino acids. As such, the
20 weights per position in the ﬁlter do not correspond directly to the weights given to each amino acid in that
position. Additionally, as identical amino acids across the sequence will have the same Blosum encoding, the
computation becomes quite ineﬃcient when convolving the ﬁlter with the same encodings repeatedly. For better
interpretability and more eﬃcient computation, a weight rescaling is done where each amino acid’s score from
the ﬁlter convolution is precalculated per position in the ﬁlter. In other words, for each position in the ﬁlter its
20 weights are convolved with each of the 20 amino acid encodings, resulting in 20 precalculated convolution
scores per position. These position-speciﬁc amino acid scores can be used as lookup-table for calculating the
ﬁlter’s score at any given position in the receptor sequence. More importantly, the scores can then be interpreted
as the position-speciﬁc weights given by the ﬁlter to each amino acid.
3
Results
3.1
Comparison of CNNAlign and NNAlign-2.1 performance
CNNAlign and NNAlign-2.1 were ﬁrst benchmarked on the MHC class I dataset in order to compare their
predictive performances. For each method, a ﬁve-fold CV was performed, where four networks with diﬀerent
initializations were trained for each fold, generating an ensemble of 20 networks per method. Each network was
given 56 hidden neurons, and were set up with identical parameters regarding encoding of the peptide sequences
and insertions/deletions. An overview of these parameters can be found in table 1, along with how many neurons
each parameter contributes to the peptide part of the input layer. Both NNAlign-2.1 and CNNAlign thus used
14
==PAGE:18==
the same number of neurons for the peptide part of the input layer.
Parameter
Value
Number of input values
Peptide encoding
Blosum
-
Motif (binding core) length
9
180 (9×20)
PFR length
0
-
PFR length encoding
False
-
Max length of insertions
1
-
Max length of deletions
10
-
Individual peptide lengths encoded
8,9,10,11,12,13,14
7
Encode insertion length
True
2
Encode deletion length
True
2
Only make insertions in peptides shorter than the motif length
True
-
Table 1: Parameters used for both CNNAlign and NNAlign-2.1.
For CNNAlign, there were extra parameters to consider due to the inclusion of a CNN layer. As an example,
the hyperbolic tangent activation function was used in the CNN layer instead of the sigmoid function. This is
due to the fact that the function maps to the range [-1,1] instead of [0,1], and thus information regarding the
sign of the ﬁlter scores (positive or negative) is not lost. Furthermore, the number of ﬁlters and their lengths
needed to be selected carefully. After some initial training runs it was clear that relatively short ﬁlters gave the
best performance. One possible explanation for this is that they can more accurately capture the short local
sequence regions important for peptide binding, such as the MHC pseudosequence positions, without residues
further away introducing noise. Furthermore, having a large number of ﬁlters also increased performance to a
certain extent. This could be due to the many possible diﬀerent motifs present in the MHC sequences, which
might require many diﬀerent individual ﬁlters to learn suﬃciently. Given these considerations, it was decided
to use 180 ﬁlters in total, with 50 of length 10, 50 of length 8, 40 of length 5 and 40 of length 3.
For both CNNAlign and NNAlign-2.1, each network was trained for 200 iterations with early stopping,
meaning that the training was stopped on the iteration yielding the lowest mean squared error (MSE) on
the test data. As the same test sets were used for early stopping and estimation of model performance, the
performance estimates are inherently biased. However, since the test sets are very large, it is unlikely that the
methods’ performances would be highly overestimated. The Adam optimizer was used to train the weights in
CNNAlign’s CNN layer in this benchmark, as it yielded small gains in test performance compared to regular
stochastic gradient descent. A learning rate of 0.0005 was used for the CNN input layer and 0.005 for the
rest of the network, as low learning rates seemed to work best when using the Adam optimizer. For NNAlign-
2.1, all additional parameters were set as default, including its learning rate of 0.05. Although NNAlign-2.1’s
parameters could have been optimized further, this benchmark was more focused on the impact of having a
CNN-based MHC representation compared to the conventional MHC pseudosequence.
Figure 10 shows boxplots of the two methods’ performance per MHC class I allele. Overall, CNNAlign
achieves similar or slightly improved performance compared to NNAlign-2.1, indicating that the CNN approach
has worked favorably. CNNAlign’s performance was also assessed using a one-tailed binomial test without ties
within each performance metric. Seven alleles did not have any positive examples (i.e. peptides with binding
15
==PAGE:19==
aﬃnity > 0.426), and were therefore excluded in the binomial tests for AUC, AUC 0.1 and PPV, giving 92
alleles in total for these three metrics’ tests. A standard signiﬁcance level of 5% was used, meaning any P-value
below 0.05 was deemed signiﬁcant.
Figure 10: Comparison of performance metrics per MHC class I allele.
Table 2 shows the results of the binomial tests which indicate that, except for PPV performance, the
number of alleles won by CNNAlign in terms of performance is signiﬁcantly higher than the expected number
of alleles given the null hypothesis. While the number of alleles won by CNNAlign are quite high in most of the
performance metrics, the diﬀerence in performance between the two methods is overall very low when looking
at the individual alleles. This is illustrated on ﬁgure 11, where the low margins are most prevalent in PCC and
AUC. Overall, NNAlign-2.1 wins more alleles by large margins, but CNNAlign has more consistent performance
across the diﬀerent alleles.
Metric
#CNNAlign wins
#Ties
P-value (without ties)
PCC
71
0
0.00001
AUC
60
2
0.00103
AUC 0.1
62
0
0.00056
PPV
38
21
0.31765
Table 2: Overview of binomial test between CNNAlign and NNAlign-2.1. #CNNAlign wins gives the number of
alleles where CNNAlign has greater performance than NNAlign-2.1, and #Ties gives the number of alleles where both
methods had equal performance.
16
==PAGE:20==
Figure 11: Bar charts of performance per allele for CNNAlign and NNAlign-2.1
As shown in section 2.4.2, many alleles had a low amount of positive examples, which was thought to be
causing the large performance diﬀerences in favour of NNAlign-2.1 shown on ﬁgure 11. To investigate this, the
number of positive examples per allele was plotted against the diﬀerence in performance between CNNAlign and
NNAlign-2.1. Figure 12 shows that most of the outliers in terms of performance diﬀerences are alleles with a low
number of positive examples. For example, HLA-B35:08 only has one positive example out of 101 datapoints
in total, which means that only one out of ﬁve CV folds has a positive example for this allele. As such, these
outliers where NNAlign-2.1 wins by very large margins could be a result of undersampling in CNNAlign. In
NNAlign-2.1, the pseudosequence positions are shown explicitly to the method, such that it knows where the
important positions in the MHC sequence are located. In contrast, for CNNAlign the method seemingly needs
to observe a reasonable amount of positive examples for a given allele in order to know where to place its ﬁlters
in the MHC sequence.
Figure 12: Log10 of number of positive examples plotted against CNNAlign’s performance minus NNAlign-2.1’s per-
formance per allele. The colors indicate which of the two methods had better performance per allele.
17
==PAGE:21==
3.2
MHC class I positional importance
As mentioned earlier, one of the reasons for using CNNs is that they can often learn the important parts of the
input data without any prior information provided. In NNAlign-2.1, the MHC pseudosequences were used as
input, which is a way to help the network focus on the important positions in the MHC sequence. However, in
theory these positions could be learned automatically by CNNAlign, as its ﬁlters should ideally get the highest
scores in the MHC sequence positions that best contribute to the prediction of peptide binding. To investigate
this, a positional importance score for each of the 180 MHC class I positions was calculated as illustrated in
ﬁgure 13. At ﬁrst, a positional importance vector is initialized for each CV test fold, which has a score of
zero for each position in the MHC sequence alignment. When running predictions on each CV test set, each
peptide’s MHC sequence is passed through the CNN layer, where each ﬁlter will have a ’max position’ that gives
the highest ﬁlter score. At the corresponding index in the importance vector, a certain weight is added to each
position in the ﬁlter sequence window. The summation is thus done over every peptide-MHC pair, every ﬁlter
in the CNN layer, and every network used to make predictions. Each step in the summation adds additional
weight to speciﬁc positions in the importance vector, where the added weights are normalized by the number of
networks used for prediction. This is done because the networks in a given CV fold will not contribute to the
exact same positions in the importance vector.
Six diﬀerent methods for adding weight were tested, which are listed in table 3. Methods 2 and 4 are position-
speciﬁc, meaning that a diﬀerent weight per position in the ﬁlter’s sequence window is added to the importance
vector. The other four methods give equal (uniform) weight to all positions in the window. It is important to
note that the choice of method impacts how much each ﬁlter is weighted when doing the importance vector
summation. For example, method 1 eﬀectively gives equal weight to all ﬁlters, as the same values are added
to the importance vector for each ﬁlter. On the other hand, the values calculated with methods 2, 3, 5 and
6 depend on the scores given by each ﬁlter to the speciﬁc amino acids in their max-pooled sequence window.
Method 4 is unique in that all weights in each ﬁlter are considered by calculating a standard deviation of
each position’s 20 rescaled weights. Since large standard deviations correspond to highly dissimilar amino acid
scores, the standard deviations eﬀectively show how much a given ﬁlter has learned to discriminate between
amino acids in each position. As such, by using method 4 the weight given to each ﬁlter is roughly proportional
to how important each ﬁlter is in terms of how much they have learned during the training.
The six methods were evaluated based on AUC in terms of their ability to predict the pseudoseqeunce
positions. Each method was applied on all CV test folds, giving ﬁve importance vectors for each of the six
weighting schemes. Each set of ﬁve vectors were then concatenated, giving six ﬁnal score vectors, each with
length 900 (180×5). The corresponding vector with ’true labels’ was then created by concatenating ﬁve identical
binary vectors each of length 180, where each value is 1 if its position is in the pseudosequence and otherwise
0. This way of calculating the AUC is thus similar to how the model performance is estimated using cross
validation as described in section 2.6.4.
18
==PAGE:22==
Figure 13: Example of a step in the positional importance calculation, where the current peptide-MHC pair is being
forwarded through four networks used for predicting the peptide binding aﬃnity. The current ﬁlter’s max-pooled position
is used to update the importance vector in the positions corresponding to the ﬁlter’s preferred MHC sequence window.
In this example, method 4 in table 3 is used for calculating the added importance weights, corresponding to the standard
deviation of the ﬁlter’s rescaled weights at each position (shown in the upper left corner). As the MHC sequence is
forwarded through each of the four networks’ CNN layer, a normalization factor of 1/4 is multiplied to each of the ﬁve
weights, regardless of the chosen importance calculation method.
19
==PAGE:23==
Number
Type
Formula
1
Uniform
1
F ·N
2
Position-speciﬁc
si,j
N
3
Uniform
std.dev(s1,j1,s2,j2,...,sF,jF )
N
4
Position-speciﬁc
std.dev(si,1,si,2,...,si,20)
N
5
Uniform
abs(Smax)
N
6
Uniform
abs(Smax)
F ·N
Table 3: Methods for calculating positional importance using the CNN ﬁlters. Here, F is the ﬁlter length, N is the
number of networks used for prediction, si,j is the rescaled weight given by the ﬁlter to amino acid j in the i’th ﬁlter
sequence window position, std.dev is the standard deviation, abs is the absolute value, and Smax is the ﬁlter’s maximum
score in the max pooling.
The ROC curves and AUC values for each weighting method are shown on ﬁgure 14. Based on these results,
method 4 has the best performance in prediction of MHC pseudosequence position. As explained earlier, this
method takes into account the relative importance of each ﬁlter in regard to how much they have learned.
Filters that have not learned much are therefore accounted for while doing the position weighting, even if these
ﬁlters’ maximum scores are obtained in less important sequence regions.
Figure 14: ROC curves for six diﬀerent methods of calculating positional importance in the MHC class I dataset, based
on their ability to predict the pseudosequence positions.
Figure 15 shows a bar chart of the normalized importance scores using method 4 weighting, with the
pseudosequence positions marked in red.
Here, the scores are averaged per position over the ﬁve CV test
folds. Furthermore, a sequence logo of the MHC class I sequences was generated with Seq2Logo-2.0 using the
20
==PAGE:24==
Kullback-Leibler logo type, and the logo was overlayed on top of the bar chart. It can be seen that generally the
pseudosequence positions are weighted higher than surrounding positions not in the pseudosequence. However,
there are some exceptions such as position 24, which the CNN has deemed not as important as neighbouring
positions, despite position 24 being in the pseudosequence. Positions with high information content (indicated
by a large height of the letter stack above the 0.0 y-axis mark in the sequence logo) are not among the positions
with the highest importance scores. As high information content indicates that a given position is very conserved,
the network is indeed focusing mainly on the highly polymorphic regions of the MHC, which are important for
the peptide binding aﬃnity.
Figure 15: Bar chart of normalized positional importance scores for MHC class I. Red bars indicate that the position
is in the MHC class I pseudosequence.
3.2.1
HLA-A:Peptide structure visualization
To further illustrate how the CNN can identify the important residues in the MHC sequences, the position
importance scores were visualized using a protein structure of an HLA-peptide complex. The alpha chain of
HLA-A*02:01 together with a short peptide from the SARS-CoV-2 N-protein (PDB entry: 7KGQ) was visualized
in PyMol (ﬁgure 16). The pseudosequence residues were shown as sticks, and a B-factor coloring was applied
based on the position importance scores using method 4 weighting. It can be seen that many of the central
residues in close contact with the peptide have the highest importance scores, and that residues positioned further
away from the central binding cleft have lower importance scores. Furthermore, many positions which are not
in the pseudosequence but close to pseudosequence residues, have been given high importance. An example is
position 98, which sits between the pseudosequence positions 97 and 99, and has very high importance even
though its side chain is pointing away from the peptide. This is likely due to the way the position importance is
calculated, where all positions that are covered by the ﬁlter are part of the importance score summation. As such,
many non-pseudosequence positions’ high importance may be a result of other nearby positions contributing
highly towards the ﬁlters’ scores.
21
==PAGE:25==
Figure 16: MHC:peptide complex structure with visualization of positional importance scores. The pseudosequence
positions have been labelled and their side chains are shown with sticks.
22
==PAGE:26==
3.3
Analyzing the CNN ﬁlters
We have now shown that CNNAlign is able to learn important positions in the MHC sequence without any prior
knowledge about e.g. pseudosequences. To gain further understanding of how the CNN layer achieves this, the
ﬁlters were analyzed based on their rescaled weights as described in section 2.7.1. First of all, the sum of each
ﬁlter’s positional standard deviations calculated with method 4 in section 3.2 was used as a measure of ﬁlter
’knowledge’. Secondly, a standard deviation of the weights going from each neuron in the ﬁlter max-pooling
layer to the hidden layer neurons was calculated. The idea here is that if the weights from a ﬁlter’s neuron to
the hidden neurons are all similar, then the ﬁlter is mostly acting as an additive constant during the forward
propagation, and is likely not very important for the prediction of binding aﬃnity. This metric is thus measuring
the ﬁlter’s ’impact’ on the prediction. Furthermore, a way to quantify if a given ﬁlter prefers a small or large
number of MHC positions was considered. As the unique max-pooled positions per ﬁlter could potentially lie
very close to each other, simply reporting the unique number of positions wouldn’t indicate the ’true’ number
of distinct regions preferred by the ﬁlter. As such, a form of clustering using the Hobohm 1 algorithm was used
to calculate the number of ’unique’ regions (see ﬁgure 17). For each ﬁlter, the unique max positions are sorted
in ascending order by their index, and the ﬁrst of these is added to a list of ’unique’ positions. Each following
position is then only added to this list if it is not covered by a previously added position’s sequence window [36].
This gives an arguably more accurate metric for the ﬁlter ’generality’ than the number of unique max positions.
Figure 17: Hobohm 1 algorithm used to calculate the number of ’unique’ positions per ﬁlter.
To gain an overview of the relative importance of each ﬁlter, heatmaps of the positional amino acid score
standard deviations were generated. Figure 18 shows the heatmaps calculated on the ﬁlters in the networks
trained on the ﬁrst CV fold, which indicate that a relatively large proportion of the ﬁlters have very low standard
deviations. This suggests that there is a level of redundancy in the ﬁlters, where the redundant ﬁlters are not
learning much from the data.
23
==PAGE:27==
Figure 18: Heatmaps of positional ﬁlter amino acid score standard deviations. The ﬁlters are sorted based on the sum
of their standard deviations. Each ﬁlter’s index (a number between 0 and 179) is shown on the y-axis.
The three metrics mentioned earlier were then plotted pairwise in scatterplots for all ﬁlters in the entire
ensemble of 20 networks (180×4×5 = 3600 ﬁlters). In the ﬁrst column of ﬁgure 19 the standard deviation of
the weights going from a ﬁlter neuron to the hidden neurons is plotted against the sum of positional amino acid
score standard deviations. Some outliers are present, however, there is a fairly high positive correlation overall.
This suggests that, in general, the inﬂuence each ﬁlter has on the prediction is dependent on how much the
individual ﬁlter has learned, which is somewhat expected. In columns two and three, the number of Hobohm
1 max positions is plotted against the ﬁlter ’knowledge’ and ’impact’. Again, the correlation coeﬃcients are
fairly high here, although they are lower for the ﬁlters of length 3. However, the high correlations in these two
columns may be misleading due to the large patches of points in the lower left corner of each scatterplot, which
correspond to the many redundant ﬁlters shown in ﬁgure 18. To illustrate this, each plot in the second and
third column was remade by removing points with x- and y-values less than 15% and 20% of the maximum x-
and y-value in the plot, respectively. The resulting scatterplots, which can be seen on ﬁgure 20, indicate that
the correlation values become much lower when not considering the redundant ﬁlters. As such, there is very
little correlation overall between how many unique positions a ﬁlter prefers and how important that ﬁlter is for
the CNN prediction. This result is quite unexpected, as intuitively one would expect ﬁlters which prefer a wide
range of positions to not have a high inﬂuence, as they are not likely to capture very speciﬁc motifs, and vice
versa.
24
==PAGE:28==
Figure 19: Scatterplots of ﬁlter metrics for the individual ﬁlter lengths. Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient is displayed
above each plot. Some ﬁlters have been labelled with their index, network seed and CV fold, i.e. indexseed,fold.
Figure 20: Scatterplots in the second and third column of ﬁgure 19 with redundant ﬁlters removed.
25
==PAGE:29==
Finally, a small selection of the ﬁlters were analyzed in terms of which sequence motifs they are capturing.
These were selected from the labelled points on ﬁgure 19, which include ﬁlters with both high ’knowledge’ and
’impact’, as well as perceived outliers. A few ﬁlters with low ’knowledge’ from ﬁgure 18 were also analyzed in
order to show how they diﬀer from the other ones deemed important for the network. The ﬁlters selected for
this analysis are listed in table 4. For each of the selected ﬁlters, the matrix of rescaled ﬁlter weights was used
to create a sequence logo using Seq2Logo with the ”PSSM-Logo” option. This results in a logo plot where the
rescaled amino acid weights determine the height and sign (positive or negative) of each letter. Furthermore,
each ﬁlter’s max positions were used to extract the sequence windows that the ﬁlters obtained their maximum
scores at during the network predictions. These windows were then used to create a sequence logo with Seq2Logo
using the standard Kullback-Leibler logo type.
IndexSeed,F old
Filter
length
Sum of positional AA
score std. deviations
Std. deviation of weights
to hidden layer
# Unique max
positions
84,3
10
28.13929
0.205332
9
973,4
8
31.81872
0.149324
6
1261,4
5
13.17903
0.249473
5
1533,3
3
14.72843
0.169955
6
201,1
10
3.73109
0.104708
1
1343,1
5
2.49308
0.100149
1
Table 4: Filters selected for analysis of sequence motifs.
As we can see on ﬁgure 21, the ﬁlters with high positional amino acid score standard deviations have focused
on certain amino acids in distinct positions, which are generally enriched in the corresponding sequence window
logo position. However, there are exceptions to this such as ﬁlter 973,4, where the high-scoring asparagine (N)
at its ﬁrst position is a depleted amino acid at the same position in the sequence window logo. Interestingly,
the ﬁlters with high inﬂuence on the predictions (84,3, 973,4, 1261,4, 1533,3) have mostly negative weights in
each position, which essentially means that the ﬁlters are ﬁnding important positions mainly based on what
amino acids should not be present in each position. Given that 20 possible amino acids can be observed at each
position, it makes sense that a large number of negative weights are needed to separate out the non-important
sequence windows.
On the other hand, the ﬁlters with low ’knowledge’ and ’impact’ have mostly positive
and similar scores per amino acid in each position. Furthermore, the sequence windows they achieved their
max scores at contain very conserved positions, which are therefore not important for peptide binding. For
example, ﬁlter 1343,1 only had one max position, namely position 100, whose sequence window of ﬁve amino
acids contains no pseudosequence positions and several highly conserved positions. These positions were also
given lower importance scores when compared to other nearby positions (see ﬁgure 15). This illustrates how
ﬁlters that do not learn to diﬀerentiate clearly between amino acids sometimes end up preferring less important
sequence areas, and thus generally do not contribute much to the binding prediction.
26
==PAGE:30==
Figure 21: Sequence logos of CNN ﬁlters. Each ﬁlter, which is indicated by its index, network seed and CV fold, has
two sequence logos shown. The logos on the left sides are PSSM-logos showing the rescaled ﬁlter amino acid weights per
position. The logos on the right sides are Kullback-Leibler logos of the sequence windows from the positions that the
ﬁlters obtained their maximum scores at.
Another interesting observation is that there seemed to be a bias towards positions containing tryptophan
(one-letter code: W), as many of the ﬁlters shown have large positive weights for this amino acid. To test if this
was the case generally, a distribution of all the ﬁlters’ weights across all ﬁlter positions was ﬁrst constructed. For
each amino acid, the number of ﬁlters having at least one weight for that amino acid above the overall weight
distribution’s 99th percentile was then counted. Figure 22 shows this count for each amino acid, indicating that
more than 20% of the ﬁlters have a tryptophan weight above the overall weight distribution’s 99th percentile.
This suggests that there is some level of bias towards tryptophan in the CNN ﬁlters.
Figure 22:
Percentage of ﬁlters with an amino acid weight above the 99th percentile of the overall ﬁlter weight
distribution.
27
==PAGE:31==
3.4
Adding prior knowledge to boost CNNAlign’s performance
Thus far, CNNAlign has learned the important parts of the MHC sequences without any prior knowledge
given. However, the incorporation of prior knowledge in machine learning models can in some cases boost
predictive performance [37], and as such it was investigated whether or not adding prior knowledge could
improve CNNAlign’s performance relative to the performance values of CNNAlign and NNAlign-2.1 obtained
in section 3.1. To do this, a vector of prior weights for each MHC position was incorporated in the CNN layer’s
ﬁlter scoring. When calculating a ﬁlter’s score at a given position in the MHC sequence, the ﬁlter’s rescaled
weights for the amino acids in the sequence window are summed up. Here, these weights were multiplied by
the values in the prior vector corresponding to the positions in the MHC sequence covered by the ﬁlter. This
weighting was implemented as a burn-in period of the training, where the ﬁrst 30 epochs use the prior weights
to guide the CNN ﬁlters to important positions.
To construct the prior weight vectors, a base vector with a weight of 1 for each position was used as a
starting point. From this, three diﬀerent criteria were used to add additional weight to each position, namely
pseudosequence positions, amino acid frequencies and information content. Using the ﬁrst criterion, positions
in the pseudosequence are given an extra weight of 1. For the second criterion, the frequency of the most
frequent amino acid Fmax at each position is considered, where an added weight of 1 −Fmax will put more
emphasis on the more variable positions in the MHC sequences. Lastly, the normalized Shannon information
content ˜Di (equation 5) was used to measure the level of conservation per position, and by adding 1−˜Di to the
i’th prior vector position we measure how important that position is in the context of information content. In
total, ﬁve weight vectors were constructed using the formulas listed in table 5. Vectors 1, 4 and 5 thus contain
prior information about the MHC structure in regard to the pseudosequence positions. CNNAlign was then
retrained using the prior weight burn-in period with each of the ﬁve prior vectors, and with otherwise identical
parameters compared to section 3.1. Finally, binomial tests without ties were carried out between CNNAlign
with the diﬀerent prior burn-ins and the regular CNNAlign and NNAlign-2.1 methods.
Table 6 shows the binomial test results between CNNAlign with and without prior burn-in.
Here, the
diﬀerence in performance is in most cases negligible. An exception can be seen for prior vector 3 based on
information content, where a signiﬁcant improvement was observed in AUC 0.1. However, there is overall not
a signiﬁcant performance gain for prior vectors 1 and 3, and for prior vector 2, 4 and 5 there is a decrease
in overall performance. However, when comparing CNNAlign with prior burn-in to NNAlign-2.1 (table 7), we
see that for prior vector 1 and 3, a signiﬁcant P-value is achieved in all four metrics. This is an improvement
from the results in section 3.1, where a non-signiﬁcant P-value was obtained for PPV. These results suggest
that priors based on the pseudosequence positions or information content have given slight overall performance
gains over NNAlign-2.1. Performance per allele for CNNAlign with prior vectors 1 and 3 and NNAlign-2.1
is shown on ﬁgure 23. Here, the performance gains are most clear for prior vector 3, illustrated by the fact
that the highest AUC 0.1 and PPV performance values have increased from around 0.94 (ﬁgures 10 and 11) to
1.0, and fewer outliers with very low performance are observed in these two metrics. The fact that the prior
based on information content has yielded these improvements is promising, as it could potentially be applied to
receptor-ligand systems where a pseudosequence is not deﬁned.
28
==PAGE:32==
Number
Formula for prior position weight
1
wi = 1 + 1P,i
2
wi = 1 + (1 −Fmax,i)
3
wi = 1 + (1 −˜Di)
4
wi = 1 + 1P,i + (1 −Fmax,i)
5
wi = 1 + 1P,i + (1 −˜Di)
Table 5: Methods for calculation of prior position weights. Here, 1P is an indicator function which is equal to 1 if
position i is in the pseudosequence and otherwise 0, Fmax,i is the frequency of the most frequent amino acid at position
i, and ˜Di is the normalized information content at position i.
Prior
1
2
3
4
5
#W
#T
P
#W
#T
P
#W
#T
P
#W
#T
P
#W
#T
P
PCC
48
0
0.656
36
0
0.998
47
1
0.693
48
0
0.656
42
0
0.946
AUC
48
2
0.299
44
1
0.662
51
1
0.147
43
0
0.767
41
2
0.829
AUC 0.1
50
4
0.12
43
1
0.735
54
2
0.036
39
2
0.915
39
2
0.915
PPV
40
19
0.241
36
22
0.452
38
24
0.198
40
23
0.114
32
12
0.972
Table 6: Binomial tests without ties between CNNAlign with prior burn-in and CNNAlign without prior knowledge.
The prior numbers correspond to the numbers in table 5. #W gives the number of alleles won by CNNAlign with prior
burn-in, #T gives the number of tied alleles, and P gives the P-value in each binomial test, where bold values are below
the signiﬁcance level of 0.05.
Prior
1
2
3
4
5
#W
#T
P
#W
#T
P
#W
#T
P
#W
#T
P
#W
#T
P
PCC
66
0
0.001
64
0
0.002
70
0
0.0
73
0
0.0
66
0
0.001
AUC
59
0
0.004
56
0
0.024
58
2
0.004
54
0
0.059
53
2
0.057
AUC 0.1
58
0
0.008
60
0
0.001
57
2
0.007
54
0
0.059
59
0
0.004
PPV
44
21
0.028
44
15
0.127
46
17
0.032
45
16
0.068
36
15
0.753
Table 7:
Binomial tests without ties between CNNAlign with prior burn-in and NNAlign-2.1.
The prior numbers
correspond to the numbers in table 5. #W gives the number of alleles won by CNNAlign with prior burn-in, #T gives
the number of tied alleles, and P gives the P-value in each binomial test, where bold values are below the signiﬁcance
level of 0.05.
29
==PAGE:33==
Figure 23:
Comparison of performance per allele between CNNAlign with prior burn-in and NNAlign-2.1.
Left:
CNNAlign with prior 1 based on pseudosequence positions. Right: CNNAlign with prior 3 based on information content.
3.5
Prediction of binding to MHC class II
To extend the applicability of CNNAlign even further, the method was applied for prediction of peptide binding
to MHC class II molecules. As mentioned in section 1, MHC class II is diﬀerent from class I in that it has both
an alpha and a beta chain that come together to form the binding domain. This means that both the alpha and
beta chain should be included in the model architecture. The set of full-length MHC class II sequences described
in section 2 were used as a starting point. Most of the full length sequences were not mature proteins, as they
contained a signal peptide in the N-terminal. As such, they were ﬁrst aligned to a mature reference alpha or
beta sequence from the alleles DRA1*01:01 and DRB1*01:01, respectively. For each alignment the BLOSUM30
matrix was used, along with penalties of 14 and 1 for opening and extending a gap, respectively. The next
step was to decide how many residues to include from the sequences. Here, the MHC class II pseudosequence
positions from NetMHCIIpan-3.2 were considered, which span positions 9 to 73 in the alpha chain and 9 to 90
in the beta chain. Based on these positions, which are deemed important for peptide binding, it was decided to
use 90 residues from the alpha chain and 100 residues from the beta chain.
The architecture of CNNAlign was modiﬁed to include two separate CNN input layers, with one layer for the
alpha sequence and one for the beta sequence. Both convolutional layers were set up to have identical parameters
regarding ﬁlters, activation function etc. (see ﬁgure 24). The same ﬁlter conﬁguration used in section 3.1 was
applied, meaning that 180 ﬁlters were used for each of the alpha chain and beta chain.
Furthermore, the
hyperbolic tangent function was used again for both CNN layers. The rest of the parameters regarding peptide
encoding are listed in table 8. As the number of peptide lengths was much larger for MHC class II than class
I, only the most prevalent peptide lengths were used for individual peptide length encoding in order to avoid
having an unnecessarily long feature vector. Furthermore, the encoding of PFRs of length 3 was used, and no
insertions or deletions were allowed. This resulted in 234 peptide input neurons, as well as 180 inputs from each
of the alpha and beta chain CNN max pooling layers.
30
==PAGE:34==
Figure 24: CNNAlign architecture for MHC class II data. The alpha and beta chains have individual CNN input
layers, where the same number of ﬁlters and length per ﬁlter is used for each CNN layer. The output of the two CNN
max pooling layers are concatenated with the peptide encoding to form the network’s overall input layer.
Parameter
Value
Number of input values
Peptide encoding
Blosum
-
Motif (binding core) length
9
180 (9×20)
PFR length
3
40 (2×20)
Encoding of PFR lengths
True
4 (2×2)
Max length of insertions
0
-
Max length of deletions
0
-
Individual peptide lengths encoded
12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21
10
Table 8: Parameters used for CNNAlign in MHC class II benchmark.
CNNAlign was ﬁrst benchmarked against NetMHCIIpan-3.2 on its 5-fold CV BA dataset. NetMHCIIpan-
3.2 uses a large ensemble of networks, where each of the ﬁve CV folds has networks with 10, 15, 40 and 60
hidden neurons each trained from 10 diﬀerent initializations (5×4×10 = 200 networks in total). To match
this, an ensemble of equal size was trained with CNNAlign, where the hidden layer sizes were set as 36, 46,
56 and 66. Each network was trained for 500 epochs without early stopping using stochastic gradient descent.
A high learning rate of 0.1 for the CNN layers and 0.001 for the rest of the network was applied in the
training. Furthermore, the same ensemble was also trained using a burn-in of 75 epochs with prior weight
vectors as described in section 3.4. Vectors 1 and 3 listed in table 5 were used, e.g. a pseudosequence prior and
information content prior, which were constructed for the alpha and beta chains individually.
Performance was compared based on AUC per allele, where AUC values for NetMHCIIpan-3.2 covering 61
out of the 80 alleles were taken from the supplementary material of [20]. Figure 25 shows the performance
31
==PAGE:35==
comparisons for the three ensembles, which indicate that each ensemble performs similarly. However, when
looking at the number of alleles won by CNNAlign, the ensemble without prior burn-in performed best. The
ensembles with pseudosequence and information content priors won 27 and 26 alleles, respectively, and both
tied in 6 alleles. In comparison, the ensemble without prior burn-in won 33 alleles and tied in 5, which, while
not signiﬁcant in a binomial test against NetMHCIIpan-3.2 without ties (p = 0.114), is still an indication that
the CNN approach also works favourably for MHC class II.
Figure 25: AUC performance comparison per allele for the MHC class II BA dataset. Left: No prior burn-in. Middle:
pseudosequence prior. Right: information content prior.
For each of the three network ensembles trained, positional importance for both the alpha and beta chain
was calculated using method 4 as in section 3.2.
Then, the AUC performance in terms of predicting the
pseudosequence positions was assessed using the same procedure as for the class I dataset. The AUC values
were calculated both individually for the alpha and beta chains and also for the two chains together. Here, the
combined calculation was done by concatenating the importance scores for both chains across the ﬁve CV folds,
and similarly the ’true label’ vectors for the alpha and beta chains were concatenated across all CV folds. The
ROC curves and AUC values for the three ensembles are shown on ﬁgure 26. As expected, the AUC value for
the ensemble trained with a pseudosequence prior is higher than for the other ensembles. However, the AUC
values are fairly low overall when compared to method 4’s AUC in the MHC class I model. Interestingly, the
AUC for the beta chain is lowest for the ensemble with a pseudosequence prior by a small margin, and thus
the gain in AUC compared to the other ensembles is solely based on the alpha chain’s importance scores. The
average positional importance scores over the ﬁve CV folds for each ensemble can be seen on ﬁgure 27, where
Kullback-Leibler sequence logos for the alpha chain and beta chain sequences were generated with Seq2Logo and
overlayed. Here, aside from the ensemble with a pseudosequence prior, the alpha chain importance scores are
quite uniform and do not capture the pseudosequence positions well. This indicates that, unless prior knowledge
about the pseudosequence is given, the model learns very little from the alpha chains compared to the beta
chains.
32
==PAGE:36==
Figure 26:
ROC curves and AUC values for MHC class II positional importance, based on the ability to predict
the alpha and/or beta chain pseudosequence positions. Left: ensemble without prior burn-in. Middle: ensemble with
pseudosequence prior. Right: ensemble with information content prior.
Figure 27: Positional importance for the alpha and beta chain calculated with CNNAlign ensembles trained on MHC
class II BA data. Top: ensemble without prior burn-in. Middle: ensemble with pseudosequence prior. Bottom: ensemble
with information content prior.
33
==PAGE:37==
The average importance scores for the ensemble without prior knowledge were also visualized as B-factor
on an HLA-peptide complex for the DRB1*14:02 allele (PDB ID: 6ATF), which is shown on ﬁgure 28. The
residues with the highest importance scores seem to be located mostly on the β-sheet in the middle of the
binding groove, while the residues in the helical regions have generally lower scores. Furthermore, a bias for
tryptophan is also observed here, as a tryptophan sitting quite far from the peptide binding groove has been
given very high importance.
Figure 28: MHC class II positional importance visualized for DRB1*14:02 together with a peptide. The peptide is
shown in white, and the pseudosequence positions in the alpha and beta chain are shown as sticks. The circled tryptophan
residue is not part of a pseudosequence, but has been given high importance, despite being positioned far from the MHC
binding groove.
3.5.1
Eluted ligand data benchmark
Given the high performance achieved by CNNAlign when trained on BA data, it was next investigated if training
on a large EL dataset would yield improved performance. CNNAlign was retrained on the MHC class II EL
data subset described in section 2.4.3 using the same parameters as on the BA dataset, without prior burn-in.
The obtained CV performance per allele was then compared to NetMHCIIpan-4.1’s performance on the full
EL dataset. This comparison is not fair since NetMHCIIpan-4.1 was trained on a much larger dataset, but
nonetheless it gives an overview of what kind of performance can be achieved by CNNAlign on EL data.
Figure 29 shows the AUC performance per allele of CNNAlign and NetMHCIIpan-4.1, showing that CN-
NAlign has achieved high performance in especially the HLA-DR and H-2 alleles. However, due to many alleles
in the HLA-DP and DQ loci having very few binders, many outliers with low performance are observed for
34
==PAGE:38==
these loci. This is also illustrated on ﬁgure 30, which shows the tendency of CNNAlign to perform worse as
the number of positive examples decreases. A few exceptions are observed where CNNAlign achieved higher
performance than NetMHCIIpan-4.1 on alleles with few binders, but overall CNNAlign seems to beneﬁt from
having a relatively high number of positive examples in the training data.
Figure 29: AUC performance comparison between CNNAlign and NetMHCIIpan-4.1 on EL data. The performance
values are compared both within individual class II loci and for all loci combined.
Figure 30: Impact of number of positive examples on CNNAlign’s performance on EL data. Left: log10 of the number
of binders plotted against CNNAlign’s AUC minus NetMHCIIpan-4.1 AUC per allele. Right: log10 of the number of
binders plotted against CNNAlign’s AUC performance per allele.
The positional importance for the alpha and beta chain was calculated in the same way as for the BA
data using the EL data ensemble, and the AUC in terms of predicting the pseudosequence positions was also
35
==PAGE:39==
assessed. Figure 31 shows the ROC curves and AUC values, which indicate that the positional importance
scores are worse predictors of the pseudosequence positions compared to in the BA data ensemble. As ﬁgure
32 illustrates, many non-pseudosequence positions in both the alpha and beta chain have received very high
importance, especially positions with phenylalanine and tryptophan enrichment. Furthermore, the scores for
the alpha chain are again quite uniform compared to the beta chain, indicating that position speciﬁcity is mostly
learned in the beta chain. The average importance scores over the ﬁve CV folds were also visualized on the same
HLA-peptide structure as in ﬁgure 28, which is illustrated on ﬁgure 33. Here, more residues in the central beta
sheet and in the left-hand side of the binding cleft have received high scores compared to in ﬁgure 28, which
suggests that training on EL data has yielded diﬀerent positional preferences in the CNN ﬁlters compared to
the BA data ensemble. A tryptophan residue in the right side of the bottom helix has also received much higher
importance compared to in the BA ensemble, indicating that the tryptophan bias is also prevalent here.
Figure 31: ROC curves and AUC values for MHC class II positional importance with respect to prediction of pseu-
dosequence positions, using the ensemble trained on the EL data subset.
Figure 32: Bar charts of positional importance for MHC class II calculated with an ensemble trained on the EL data
subset. Left: alpha chain. Right: beta chain.
36
==PAGE:40==
Figure 33: MHC class II positional importance from ensemble trained on EL data, visualized for DRB1*14:02 together
with a peptide. The peptide is shown in white, and the pseudosequence positions in the alpha and beta chain are shown
as sticks. The circled tryptophan residues are not part of the pseudosequences, but have received very high importance
scores.
3.6
Prediction of protein phosphorylation
In order to assess CNNAlign’s general usability, a benchmark on kinase phosphorylation data taken from the
NetPhosPan publication was performed. CNNAlign was trained on the same ﬁve cross-validation folds used in
the NetPhosPan method, with four diﬀerent seeds for each fold, yielding an ensemble of 20 networks. Each
network had 90 hidden neurons and used 120 ﬁlters, with 40 of length 7, 40 of length 5 and 40 of length 3. As
no binding core predictions had to be made for this dataset, a motif length of 21 equal to the dataset’s constant
peptide length was used, with no additional encodings regarding e.g. insertions/deletions and peptide length.
CNNAlign was trained for 300 epochs without early stopping using standard stochastic gradient descent. Here,
the learning rates turned out to be extremely important for the performance of the trained networks. Selecting
a low learning rate for the CNN layer as in section 3.1 resulted in overﬁtting, as the test error began to increase
after about 160 epochs. After some experimentation it was found that selecting a learning rate which was
high in the CNN layer and much lower in the rest of the network gave improved performance and reduced the
overﬁtting. The best combination of learning rates turned out to be 0.1 for the CNN layer and 0.001 for the
remaining network weights.
37
==PAGE:41==
The performance per kinase was ﬁrst evaluated on the concatenated test fold predictions using AUC. Figure
34 shows a comparison of the AUC performance per kinase between CNNAlign and NetPhosPan. Here, per-
formance values for NetPhosPan were retrieved from the supplementary material of [8]. CNNAlign performs
worse here than expected, given that both methods have similar network architectures. In total, NetPhosPan
won in 117 out of 154 kinases, which in a binomial test is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in performance in favour of
NetPhosPan. The entire CNNAlign ensemble of 20 networks was then used to make predictions on the Net-
PhosPan evaluation dataset, and performance was calculated per allele using AUC and PPV. Table 9 shows
the comparison in performance between CNNAlign and NetPhosPan (performance values by NetPhosPan were
taken from [8]), which shows that CNNAlign achieves better performance on this dataset than NetPhosPan.
However, due to the small number of kinases, the gain in performance is not signiﬁcant when using a binomial
test (p=0.5 and p=0.23 for AUC and PPV, respectively).
Figure 34: Comparison of 5-fold CV AUC performance per kinase for the NetPhosPan dataset.
AUC
PPV
Kinase
CNNAlign
NetPhosPan
CNNAlign
NetPhosPan
PKACA
0.868
0.846
0.2
0.28
CDK1
0.949
0.947
0.377
0.37
ERK1
0.919
0.975
0.5
0.4
ERK2
0.981
0.986
0.4
0.53
PKCB
0.959
0.912
0.569
0.37
P38A
0.935
0.941
0.125
0.0
CK2A1
0.922
0.874
0.529
0.12
Table 9: Performance comparison on the NetPhosPan evaluation dataset. Bold values indicates a win for the corre-
sponding method.
38
==PAGE:42==
To visualize where the ﬁlters of CNNAlign put their focus in the kinases, a positional importance was
calculated using method 4 as described in section 3.2.
This was done for a single kinase, namely Cyclin-
dependent kinase 2 (CDK2), by running the network predictions on only the test datapoints for this kinase.
The importance scores averaged over the ﬁve CV sets were then visualized as B-factor on the protein structure
of the CDK2-peptide complex (PDB id: 1QMZ). This visualization is shown on ﬁgure 35, where two residues
that are important for CDK2’s activity are shown as sticks. These residues are its active site, e.g. the aspartic
acid at position 127 [38], as well as the threonine at position 160, which, when phosphorylated, contributes
to the stabilization of the active kinase conformation [39]. While positions 127 and 160 did not receive the
highest importance scores, the residues with the highest scores seem to sit in close spatial proximity to these.
To assess this, a bootstrap analysis was done by comparing the average distance measured in ˚Angstr¨om from
the top ﬁve highest scoring residues to position 127 and 160 with the average distances from random residue
samples in the structure. The distances were measured between the central C-alpha carbons of each amino
acid. 100000 random sets of ﬁve positions in the kinase were sampled, and the average distance measured in
˚Angstr¨om from each sample of residues was then computed. From these lists of random average distances, 95%
conﬁdence intervals were calculated using the 2.5% and 97.5% quantiles. Figure 36 shows the distributions of
the random samples, which shows that the average distances from the ﬁve residues with highest importance
scores to positions 127 and 160 lie outside the lower bounds of the 95% conﬁdence intervals.
The average
distances from the top ﬁve scoring residues to the two before-mentioned residues are thus signiﬁcantly lower
than what would be expected from random samples of positions. This suggests that the model has learned
biologically relevant information in regard to which part of the kinase is important for its catalytic activity. It
should be noted that the ﬁlters’ bias towards tryptophan observed in section 3.3 also seems to apply somewhat
here, as the residue in CDK2 with the highest importance score was a tryptophan. Many other positions with
this amino acid also received a high importance score compared to other nearby positions; this is illustrated on
ﬁgure 35.
39
==PAGE:43==
Figure 35: Positional importance visualization of CDK2:peptide complex. The peptide is shown in white with side
chains as sticks. The kinase active site (position 127) and position 160, along with tryptophan residues (W), are labelled
and shown as sticks.
Figure 36: Histograms of average distances from random samples of ﬁve residues to position 127 (left plot) and 160
(right plot) in CDK2. Red lines indicate the upper and lower bounds of the 95% conﬁdence intervals. Green lines indicate
the average distance from the ﬁve residues with highest importance score to position 127/160.
40
==PAGE:44==
4
Discussion
Pan-speciﬁc machine learning models that predict receptor-ligand interactions are reliant on rational receptor
sequence encoding. By focusing on speciﬁc regions in each receptor sequence that are crucial for binding of the
ligands, the models can ideally predict binding accurately across the entire receptor sequence space. NNAlign
implemented this pan-speciﬁcity by the use of pseudosequences, where each pseudosequence is a collection of
speciﬁc positions within the receptor sequence that are deemed important for the ligand’s binding aﬃnity. Other
methods such as NetPhosPan employ an entirely diﬀerent approach based on CNNs, which use ﬁlter convolutions
applied on full-length receptor sequences to identify the important receptor domains. In this project, the latter
approach has been showcased using CNNAlign, a modiﬁed version of NNAlign that uses a CNN-based receptor
sequence representation.
The obtained results indicate that CNNAlign performs better than the pseudosequence-based methods
NNAlign-2.1 and NetMHCIIpan-3.2 for MHC binding prediction. Furthermore, although CNNAlign did not
outperform NetPhosPan in cross-validated performance, it still achieved overall high performance in prediction
of phosphorylation from human kinases. It is not clear why CNNAlign did not perform on par with NetPhosPan
in terms of CV performance, although the diﬀerence in implementations may have played a role. However, one of
the key features of CNNAlign that was showcased is its interpretability in terms of what is being learned from the
receptor sequences. Especially for MHC class I, the CNN ﬁlters were able to learn the important pseudosequence
positions without any prior knowledge given to the model. This unsupervised learning of biologically relevant
information was also observed for the showcased kinase CDK2, where the positions preferred by the ﬁlters were
in close proximity to two of the kinase’s most important residues. On the other hand, for MHC class II the
learned features of the alpha and beta chains did not coincide completely with the pseudosequence positions.
This was mainly observed for the alpha chain, which is likely due to the fact that many class II alleles, such
as the alleles in the DR locus, share the same alpha chain. As such, only 19 unique alpha chains were present
among the 80 alleles in the class II BA dataset, meaning not much information could be learned from the alpha
chains. However, since CNNAlign achieved slightly better performance than NetMHCIIpan-3.2, the MHC class
II pseudosequences might not contain all the information important for peptide binding. One way to investigate
this could be to use CNNAlign to generate the pseudosequence for each allele by considering the 34 residues
with highest importance scores. Methods like NetMHCIIpan-3.2 should then achieve improved performance
when trained on the new pseudosequences if these sequences contain more information than the original ones.
The analysis of the CNN ﬁlters showed that their high speciﬁcity was driven by large negative weights, which
ensure that the ﬁlters can only achieve high scores at positions with certain amino acid content. Furthermore,
almost no correlation was observed between the number of unique positions preferred by a ﬁlter and its relative
importance for the model, which was quite unexpected. For the MHC prediction models, this may be a result of
the high weights given to a few amino acids such as tryptophan and phenylalanine, which are highly enriched in
several positions that are either nearby or coinciding with pseudosequence positions. Interestingly, positions with
tryptophan enrichment were given especially high importance in both MHC sequences and kinases, suggesting
a more general bias in favour of this amino acid. A possible explanation for this bias is that tryptophan is the
least frequent amino acid in proteins[40], and thus the model might interpret the amino acid’s presence as being
important. It’s not clear whether this bias had a negative impact on CNNAlign’s performance in terms of e.g.
AUC, and as such, it would be interesting to explore methods to reduce bias towards certain amino acids.
41
==PAGE:45==
Incorporation of a prior knowledge burn-in period in the training gave mixed results for the MHC prediction
models. For class I, a prior based on the pseudosequence or information content gave an improvement in PPV
performance when comparing against NNAlign-2.1. However, there was very little diﬀerence in performance
when comparing CNNAlign’s own performance with and without prior burn-in. Furthermore, for MHC class II
there was no observed AUC performance gain when using the two before-mentioned priors. This again suggests
that the class II pseudosequence is not as good as the class I pseudosequence, and that information content
alone is not enough for guiding the network to make better predictions. An information content prior could also
be applied for kinases, although it would require a slightly diﬀerent approach since the kinase sequences are
not pre-aligned and of equal length. An idea could be to run PSI-BLAST on each individual kinase sequence,
which builds a Position-Speciﬁc Scoring Matrix (PSSM) by iteratively searching for similar sequences using the
PSSM and updating the matrix based on the found matches.[41] The resulting PSSM could then be used to
calculate the information content per position in the kinase, thus creating a speciﬁc prior for each individual
kinase. Here, it might make sense to give high weight to very conserved positions instead of low weight, as it is
often conserved residues such as aspartic acid which are important for the kinase’s catalytic activity.
A possible drawback of CNNAlign is that low amounts of positive examples can result in subpar performance
compared to methods trained with pseudosequences. This was mainly observed for the MHC class II EL dataset,
where the method performed worse for the DQ alleles compared to e.g. DR due to many alleles having very
few binders. As such, careful balancing of positive and negative examples in the training data will likely lead
to high predictive power, as more information is learned by the CNN layer. Still, CNNAlign has shown to be a
highly capable framework for learning receptor-ligand interactions. The method provides ﬂexibility in terms of
the data used, as sequences of diﬀerent lengths can be used as input to the CNN layer. More importantly, the
CNN ﬁlters allow for valuable interpretation of what is being learned from the data, which can potentially aid
in studying receptor-ligand systems that are not yet fully understood.
42
==PAGE:46==
5
References
[1]
G. Manning et al. “The protein kinase complement of the human genome”. eng. In: Science 298.5600
(2002), pp. 1912–1934. issn: 00368075, 10959203. doi: 10.1126/science.1075762.
[2]
Chen Yanover and Philip Bradley. “Large-scale characterization of peptide-MHC binding landscapes with
structural simulations”. eng. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America (2011). issn: 10916490, 00278424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1018165108.
[3]
Scott R. Burrows, Jamie Rossjohn, and James McCluskey. “Have we cut ourselves too short in mapping
CTL epitopes?” eng. In: Trends in Immunology 27.1 (2006), pp. 11–16. issn: 14714906, 14714981. doi:
10.1016/j.it.2005.11.001.
[4]
Stewart T. Chang et al. “Peptide length-based prediction of peptide - MHC class II binding”. eng. In:
Bioinformatics 22.22 (2006), pp. 2761–2767. issn: 14602059, 02667061, 13674803, 13674811. doi: 10.
1093/bioinformatics/btl479.
[5]
Marek Wieczorek et al. “Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and MHC class II proteins:
Conformational plasticity in antigen presentation”. eng. In: Frontiers in Immunology 8 (2017), p. 292.
issn: 16643224. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00292.
[6]
Andrew J. Godkin et al. “Naturally processed HLA class II peptides reveal highly conserved immunogenic
ﬂanking region sequence preferences that reﬂect antigen processing rather than peptide-MHC interac-
tions”. eng. In: Journal of Immunology 166.11 (2001), pp. 6720–6727. issn: 15506606, 00221767. doi:
10.4049/jimmunol.166.11.6720.
[7]
Morten Nielsen and Massimo Andreatta. “NNAlign: a platform to construct and evaluate artiﬁcial neural
network models of receptor-ligand interactions”. eng. In: Nucleic Acids Research 45.W1 (2017), W344–
W349. issn: 13624962, 03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx276.
[8]
Emilio Fenoy et al. “A generic deep convolutional neural network framework for prediction of recep-
tor–ligand interactions—NetPhosPan: application to kinase phosphorylation prediction”. eng. In: Bioin-
formatics 35.7 (2019). Ed. by John Hancock, pp. 1098–1107. issn: 13674811, 13674803, 02667061, 14602059.
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty715.
[9]
Jo˜ao P.S. Rosa et al. “Overview of Artiﬁcial Neural Networks”. eng. In: Springerbriefs in Applied Sciences
and Technology (2020), pp. 21–44. issn: 21915318, 2191530x. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-35743-6_3.
[10]
Raul Rojas. Neural Networks - A Systematic Introduction. Springer-Verlag, 1996. Chap. 7.
[11]
S Henikoﬀand J G Henikoﬀ. “Amino acid substitution matrices from protein blocks”. In: Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 89.22 (1992), pp. 10915–10919. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.89.22.10915. eprint: https://www.pnas.org/content/89/22/10915.full.pdf. url: https:
//www.pnas.org/content/89/22/10915.
[12]
Morten Nielsen et al. “Reliable prediction of T-cell epitopes using neural networks with novel sequence
representations”. eng. In: Protein Science 12.5 (2003), pp. 1007–1017. issn: 1469896x, 09618368, 13595040.
doi: 10.1110/ps.0239403.
43
==PAGE:47==
[13]
Alessandro Montemurro et al. “NetTCR-2.0 enables accurate prediction of TCR-peptide binding by using
paired TCRα and β sequence data”. eng. In: Communications Biology 4.1 (2021), p. 1060. issn: 23993642.
doi: 10.1038/s42003-021-02610-3.
[14]
Uday Kamath, John Liu, and James Whitaker. “Convolutional Neural Networks”. eng. In: Deep Learning
for Nlp and Speech Recognition (2019), pp. 263–314. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-14596-5_6.
[15]
Sakshi Indolia et al. “Conceptual Understanding of Convolutional Neural Network- A Deep Learning
Approach”. eng. In: Procedia Computer Science 132 (2018), pp. 679–688. issn: 18770509. doi: 10.1016/
j.procs.2018.05.069.
[16]
Rolf Apweiler et al. “UniProt: the Universal Protein Knowledgebase”. eng. In: (2009).
[17]
The Immune Epitope Database (IEDB). https://www.iedb.org.
[18]
James Robinson et al. “IPD-IMGT/HLA Database”. eng. In: Nucleic Acids Research 48.1 (2020), pp. D948–
D955. issn: 13624962, 03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz950.
[19]
Morten Nielsen and Massimo Andreatta. “NetMHCpan-3.0; improved prediction of binding to MHC class
I molecules integrating information from multiple receptor and peptide length datasets”. eng. In: Genome
Medicine 8.1 (2016), p. 33. issn: 1756994x. doi: 10.1186/s13073-016-0288-x.
[20]
Kamilla Kjærgaard Jensen et al. “Improved methods for predicting peptide binding aﬃnity to MHC class
II molecules”. eng. In: Immunology 154.3 (2018), pp. 394–406. issn: 13652567, 00192805, 09534954. doi:
10.1111/imm.12889.
[21]
NetMHCIIpan-3.2 dataset. https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/service.php?NetMHCIIpan-3.2.
Available at the webserver under ’Datasets’. Accessed: 2021-10-30.
[22]
Bruno Alvarez et al. “NNAlign MA; MHC peptidome Deconvolution for Accurate MHC Binding Motif
Characterization and Improved T-cell Epitope Predictions”. eng. In: Molecular and Cellular Proteomics
18.12 (2019), pp. 2459–2477. issn: 15359484, 15359476. doi: 10.1074/mcp.TIR119.001658.
[23]
Morten Nielsen et al. “NetMHCpan, a method for quantitative predictions of peptide binding to any
HLA-A and -B locus protein of known sequence”. eng. In: Plos One 2.8 (2007). Ed. by Esper Kallas, e796.
issn: 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000796.
[24]
Morten Nielsen et al. “Quantitative predictions of peptide binding to any HLA-DR molecule of known
sequence: NetMHCIIpan”. eng. In: P L O S Computational Biology (online) 4.7 (2008). Ed. by Ruth
Nussinov, e1000107. issn: 15537358, 1553734x. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000107.
[25]
Edita Karosiene et al. “NetMHCIIpan-3.0, a common pan-speciﬁc MHC class II prediction method includ-
ing all three human MHC class II isotypes, HLA-DR, HLA-DP and HLA-DQ”. eng. In: Immunogenetics
65.10 (2013), pp. 711–724. issn: 14321211, 00937711. doi: 10.1007/s00251-013-0720-y.
[26]
Stephen K. Burley et al. “RCSB Protein Data Bank: Powerful new tools for exploring 3D structures of bi-
ological macromolecules for basic and applied research and education in fundamental biology, biomedicine,
biotechnology, bioengineering and energy sciences”. eng. In: Nucleic Acids Research 49.1 (2021), pp. D437–
D451. issn: 13624962, 03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1038.
[27]
Open-Source PyMOL. https://github.com/schrodinger/pymol-open-source.
44
==PAGE:48==
[28]
Thomas D. Schneider and R. Michael Stephens. “Sequence logos: a new way to display consensus se-
quences”. eng. In: (2016).
[29]
Martin Christen Frølund Thomsen and Morten Nielsen. “Seq2Logo: a method for construction and visu-
alization of amino acid binding motifs and sequence proﬁles including sequence weighting, pseudo counts
and two-sided representation of amino acid enrichment and depletion”. eng. In: Nucleic Acids Research
40.W1 (2012), W281–W287. issn: 13624962, 03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks469.
[30]
MM Mukaka. “A guide to appropriate use of Correlation coeﬃcient in medical research”. und. In: Malawi
Medical Journal : the Journal of Medical Association of Malawi 24.3 (2012), pp. 69–71. issn: 19957270,
19957262.
[31]
AP Bradley. “The use of the area under the roc curve in the evaluation of machine learning algorithms”.
eng. In: Pattern Recognition 30.7 (1997), pp. 1145–1159. issn: 18735142, 00313203.
[32]
Alaa Tharwat. “Classiﬁcation assessment methods”. eng. In: Applied Computing and Informatics 17.1
(2021), pp. 168–192. issn: 22108327. doi: 10.1016/j.aci.2018.08.003.
[33]
George Forman and Martin Scholz. “Apples-to-apples in cross-validation studies”. eng. In: Acm Sigkdd
Explorations Newsletter 12.1 (2010), pp. 49–57. issn: 19310153, 19310145. doi: 10 . 1145 / 1882471 .
1882479.
[34]
scipy.stats.binom test. https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.stats.
binom_test.html.
[35]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization”. und. In: (2017).
[36]
U HOBOHM et al. “SELECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE PROTEIN DATA SETS”. eng. In: Protein
Science 1.3 (1992), pp. 409–417. issn: 1469896x, 09618368. doi: 10.1002/pro.5560010313.
[37]
Eyal Krupka and Naftali Tishby. “Incorporating prior knowledge on features into learning”. eng. In:
Journal of Machine Learning Research 2 (2007), pp. 227–234. issn: 15337928, 15324435.
[38]
UniProtKB - P24941 (CDK2 HUMAN). https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P24941.
[39]
Marcos Malumbres. “Cyclin-dependent kinases”. eng. In: Genome Biology 15.6 (2014), p. 122. issn:
14656914, 14656906, 1474760x, 14747596. doi: 10.1186/gb4184.
[40]
Lionella Palego et al. “Tryptophan biochemistry: Structural, nutritional, metabolic, and medical aspects
in humans”. eng. In: Journal of Amino Acids 2016 (2016), p. 8952520. issn: 20900112, 20900104. doi:
10.1155/2016/8952520.
[41]
Medha Bhagwat and L. Aravind. “PSI-BLAST tutorial”. eng. In: Methods in Molecular Biology 395
(2007). Ed. by NH Bergman, pp. 177–186. issn: 19406029, 10643745.
45
