==PAGE:1==
Weakly Supervised Semantic
Segmentation for Lung Cancer
CT Images
Ayman Eleya Zaki (s103861)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Lung cancer is one of the most harmful kinds of malignancy. It has a relatively
high rate of death and often diagnosed in a late stage. While Computed To-
mography (CT) scans used to distinguish the disease, pathologist experts and
radiologists are still required to analyze the CT scans and carry out an assess-
ment which is time and resources consuming. Hence, automating the assessment
process is crucial to speed up the process, and therefore, the patient can avoid
late diagnosing and start treatments in the early stage.
Deep learning models have recently shown impressive capabilities in the image
segmentation ﬁeld. However, training segmentation models require fully anno-
tated labels on pixel-level, which are expensive to produce.
Hence, training
the models using unlabeled or partially labelled images is desirable for saving
resources. This work focuses speciﬁcally on weakly-supervised semantic segmen-
tation for lung cancer. We apply the GrabCut method to generate labels for
tumors annotated with bounding boxes. Further, we use the labels to train an
oﬀ-the-shelf semantic segmentation model such as DeepLabv3. The experiments
conducted on medical images for Lung Cancer Diagnosis.
Our results show that The GrabCut produces acceptable training labels if the
foreground and background distributions do not overlap. Further, training the
DeepLebV3 on those labels resulted in a model with a good performance.
This work can beneﬁt any application where image segmentation required under
a weak level of annotation, such as a bounding box. The same technique applies
to both semantic and instance segmentation. We recommend this work when
objects have clear boundaries with the background and the other objects in the
==PAGE:4==
ii
same image.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is prepared at the DTU Compute (Institution of Applied Mathemat-
ics and Computer Science) and fulﬁls the requirements for acquiring a Master
in Machine Learning and Data Science. The thesis has been achieved between
31-03-2020 and 31-03-2021, and it deals with weakly-supervised semantic seg-
mentation for lung cancer CT images.
The thesis consists of less than 10000 words and 30 ﬁgures.
Lyngby, March 16, 2021
Ayman Eleya Zaki (s103861)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
At the end of this journey, I would like to admit that it has been a real tough
one. Studying, working full time, and having three adorable kids made it un-
forgettable. I thank God for helping me all the times.
Although the road was rough, I met some people who helped me a lot. I like to
thank them all, especially my supervisor, Tommy Sonne Alstrøm. I admire his
way of simplifying complicated stuﬀand theories. Tommy, thank you for your
support, motivation, and guidance. I appreciate it and will never forget the rest
of my life.
I like to thank my wife and my kids for their support and patience. Moreover,
I send them my apologies because I could not give them the time and the care,
they needed in the last two and a half years.
I like to thank my family, uncle George and my friends for motivating and
encouraging me.
Finally, I like to dedicate this work to my mother-in-law that passed away in
2019. She died of lung cancer that got diagnosed at a late stage. I also like to
dedicate it to my father that passed away when I was 16 years old. I hope he is
proud of me.
Sincerely,
Ayman Eleya Zaki
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Computer Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Object Classiﬁcation, Detection and Segmentation . . . .
3
1.1.3
Weakly Supervised Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.1.4
Weakly Supervised Image Segmentation . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.3
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
15
2.1
GrabCut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.1
Convolutional Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.2
Pooling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.3
Flattened layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3
DeepLabv3 for Semantic Segmenation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Method
23
3.1
Pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.1
Converting DICOM image to RGB . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.2
Generating Training Labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Model Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Imbalanced Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3.2.2
Transfer Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.3
Training related hyper-parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.4
Model hyper-parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.5
Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Experimental Results and Discussion
29
4.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.1
Dataset Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.2
Evaluation Metrics Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
GrabCut Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.1
Experimental Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Signiﬁcance of Model Optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.1
Fine-tuning on Imbalanced Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.2
Fine-tuning on Balanced Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Conclusion
41
A Appendix A
43
Bibliography
45
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
1.1
Traditional computer vision vs deep learning [MCC+19] . . . . .
2
1.2
Test error results, taken from AlexNet’s paper [KSH12], show
that CNN outperformed the previous traditional models on ILSVRC-
2010 [YL10] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Object Classiﬁcation, Detection and Segmentation [WSH20] . . .
3
1.4
AlexNet architecture consists of ﬁve convolutional and three fully-
connected layers [KSH12]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Inception module [LCY14] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
Residual learning: a building block. [HZRS16] . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.7
R-FCN architecture [DLHS16] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.8
Fully convolutional networks (FCN)[LSD15] . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.9
IRNet[ACK19]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.10 Results taken from Simple Does It [KBH+16] . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1
Three examples of GrabCut . The user drags a rectangle loosely
around an object.
The object is then extracted automatically
[RKB04] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2
Grab Cut - Binary-classiﬁcation of pixels [PHC+18]
. . . . . . .
16
2.3
A standard multilayer perceptron [MS19]
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Convolutional neural network with many convolutional layers [mw21] 19
2.5
CNN - Convolutional Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
Activation Functions[aM21] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.7
CNN - Max Pooling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.8
DeepLabv3 [CPSA17] - Parallel modules with atrous convolution
(ASPP), augmented with image-level features . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1
The chart shows imbalanced classes. As seen, class A is the dom-
inating class in the dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:12==
x
LIST OF FIGURES
3.2
The chart shows balanced classes after applying down-sampling
on class A and up-sampling, on class E.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Model Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1
Samples from lung lesion dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
AU-ROC [Gle19] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Samples from diﬀerent groups where the GrabCut failed to gen-
erate masks for. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Model evaluation of experiment 4.3.1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
Results of experiment 4.3.2.1 - In the ﬁrst row, the input image
with tumor to be segmented. In the second row, we added the
bounding box to the image to help the reader detecting the tumor.
The third row shows results obtained from GrabCut which is used
as a baseline for segmentation. In the fourth row, we show the
generated masks, and we added the bounding box to them so ease
the process of quantitative evaluation as we do not have ground-
truth masks. In the ﬁfth row, we show the generated masks.
. .
36
4.6
Model evaluation of experiment 4.3.2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.7
Results of experiment 4.3.2 - In the ﬁrst row, the input image
with tumor to be segmented. In the second row, we added the
bounding box to the image to help the reader detecting the tumor.
The third row shows results obtained from GrabCut as a baseline.
In the fourth row, we show the generated masks, and we added the
bounding box to them. In the ﬁfth row, we show the generated
masks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.8
[PET-CTLi20] groups. The ﬁgure shows one sample taken from
each group and its pixel distribution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.9
The ﬁgure shows two images and the corresponding pixel distri-
bution of each image. The ﬁrst image is for a dog and the second
for a car. We carefully selected these images with no background
color as we wish to focus only on the object itself. We see from
the distributions that they do not share the same statistical prop-
erties. In this sense, CNNs can diﬀerentiate their features and
assign the correct class to them. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Lung cancer is one of the most harmful kinds of malignancy. It has a relatively
high rate of death and often diagnosed in a late stage [SR12].
While Com-
puted Tomography (CT) scans are used to distinguish the disease, pathologist
experts and radiologists are still required to analyze the CT scans and carry
out an assessment which is time and resources consuming. Hence, automating
the assessment process using computer-aided systems, such as deep learning, is
crucial to speed up the process, and therefore, the patient can avoid late diag-
nosing and start treatments in the early stage. The main goal of segmentation
is to represent the image in a more simpliﬁed manner such that it is easier to
analyze. However, training segmentation models require fully annotated labels
which are expensive to produce[KBH+16]. Starting from this point, the reduc-
tion of the annotation level is crucial for saving time and resources. Therefore,
many methods are under research attempting to train deep learning models
on unlabeled or partially labeled data such as weakly-supervised learning. This
work focuses on weakly-supervised learning, more speciﬁcally, weakly-supervised
semantic segmentation. We apply the GrabCut method [RKB04] to generate
labels from objects annotated with bounding boxes [KBH+16]. Further, we use
the labels to train a semantic segmentation model called DeepLabv3 [CPSA17].
The experiments are conducted on medical images for Lung Cancer Diagnosis
[PET-CTLi20]
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
1.1
Related Work
We consider the related work in the following categories separately; ﬁrstly, we
present a brief overview of traditional and modern computer vision techniques.
Secondly, we introduce some state-of-the-arts for object classiﬁcation, detection,
and segmentation. Finally, we introduce diﬀerent methods and architectures for
solving weakly supervised image segmentation.
1.1.1
Computer Vision
Computer vision is a scientiﬁc ﬁeld that deals with how computers can simulate
the human visual system in understanding digital images and videos. In this
section, we brieﬂy illustrate the evolution of computer vision. We present both
traditional techniques and modern techniques introduced by Deep Learning.
Figure 1.1: Traditional computer vision vs deep learning [MCC+19]
Traditional computer vision relies heavily on a hand-engineered process for fea-
ture extraction of the images. Models like SIFT [Lin12], SURF [BETVG08],
and BRIEF [CLSF10] are usually used for extracting the features from the raw
image [MCC+19]. The diﬃculty in these models is to select for which features
to look at for each class. If the number of classes is large, the process complexity
increases, and inaccurate results expected. Recently, Deep Learning has shown
better results in computer vision than traditional approaches (see Figure 1.2).
Deep learning is a subset of Machine Learning that provides us with End-to-End
Learning (see Figure 1.1). It replaces the manual process of feature engineering
used in traditional computer vision with representations or features learning.
Here, the models automatically discover the representations that belong to each
feature. Convolutional Neural Networks form the core of deep learning com-
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Related Work
3
puter vision architectures. Hence, in the following sections, we illustrate some
of the state-of-arts architectures that employed CNNs to solve computer vision
problems.
Figure 1.2: Test error results, taken from AlexNet’s paper [KSH12], show that
CNN outperformed the previous traditional models on ILSVRC-
2010 [YL10]
1.1.2
Object Classiﬁcation, Detection and Segmentation
Object classiﬁcation is a computer vision technique that assigns a label or class
to each object in an image. Object detection labels object more precisely by
applying object classiﬁcation to distinguish the objects, and eventually, it places
a bounding box around them.
Object segmentation provides an even more
detailed classiﬁcation by assigning a class to each pixel in an image (see Figure
1.3).
Figure 1.3: Object Classiﬁcation, Detection and Segmentation [WSH20]
In the following sections, we review brieﬂy the state-of-the-art for object classi-
ﬁcation, detection and segmentation
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
1.1.2.1
Object Classiﬁcation
In this section, we mention in chronological order, some state-of-the-arts that
used convolutional neural networks for object classiﬁcation.
In the late 90s, [LBBH98] introduced a simple CNN model, dubbed as LeNet-5,
for classifying low-resolution greyscale digits. LeNet-5 building blocks consisted
of two convolutional and average pooling layers, followed by a ﬂattened layer
and two fully-connected layers, and ﬁnally, a softmax classiﬁer. [KSH12] intro-
duced a new model to handle images with higher resolution, dubbed as AlexNet.
It has a similar architecture to LeNet-5 but with more layers. It uses more ﬁl-
ters and more stacked convolutional layers to be able to handle images with
higher resolution (see Figure 1.4). In 2013 [ZF13] proposed a tweaked version
of AlexNet, dubbed as ZFNet, that used ﬁlters of size 7x7 instead of 11x11 as
in AlexNet. ZFNet outperformed previous models on ImageNet classiﬁcation
benchmark1. In 2014 [SZ15] released an even deeper model, dubbed as VGG16.
The main achievement of this model was the ability to learn complicated pat-
terns. The VGG16 achieved that by increasing the non-linearity decisions by
stacking multiple small kernels rather than using a large kernel.
Figure 1.4: AlexNet architecture consists of ﬁve convolutional and three fully-
connected layers [KSH12]
2014 [LCY14], introduced the concept of inception modules allowing the network
to learn even more complex patterns. Here, the convolutional layers are linked
together via multiple-layers 1x1 convolution perceptron to form more complex
ﬁlters with diﬀerent size (see Figure 1.5). Moreover, the authors reduced the
number of parameters on the ﬁnal feature map layers by applied global average
pooling. Hence, reducing the computational power.
Inspired by [LCY14], [SLJ+15] released the GoogLeNet model achieving a per-
formance close to the human-level. Later in 2015, [SVI+16] released the Incep-
tion V2 and Inception V3 achieving even better results on images with higher
1http://www.image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/index
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Related Work
5
Figure 1.5: Inception module [LCY14]
resolutions. In 2015 [HZRS16] addressed that deeper neural networks are hard
to train as they are more prone to vanishing or exploding gradients. [HZRS16]
introduced ResNet model (see Figure 1.6) utilizing the residual block where the
activation of a layer fast-forwarded to a deeper layer in the network, and the
residual computed with a reference to the input. Doing so, the model learns a
residual function that keeps most of the information and produces only slight
changes.
Figure 1.6: Residual learning: a building block. [HZRS16]
In 2017 [SIVA17] released Inception-ResNet model combining the inception
modules to increase sparsity and the residual blocks to learn deeper layers.
The Inception-ResNet is faster to train and outperforms all previous mod-
els on ImageNet classiﬁcation benchmark2.
[HSS18] proposed the “Squeeze-
and-Excitation” module. It utilizes a combined architecture of multiple fully-
connected layers, inception modules and residual blocks. The main advantage
was a model with a lower number of parameters. Therefore, reducing the com-
putational cost.
2http://www.image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/index
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
1.1.2.2
Object Detection
In 2012 [UvdSGS13] proposed a model called Selective Search that depends on
region search. It initializes small regions in an image and then merges them
with a hierarchical grouping based on similarity metrics. Eventually, it outputs
a box around each object. In 2014 [GDDM16] proposed the R-CNN model. It
combines the Selective Search method for detecting region proposals and deep
learning to classify objects in these regions. The region proposal is passed to a
CNN from which the features vector gets extracted. The features vector is then
fed into multiple SVM classiﬁers to produce the class probability of each region.
Also, it is fed into a linear regressor to shape the bounding box for each object.
Later, [Gir15] improved the performance of the R-CNN model proposing the
Fast R-CNN. In this work, the authors utilize a CNN-based features extractor
to produce feature maps for the images. Further, they apply the Selective Search
to the feature maps instead of the entire image to detect the Region of Interests
(ROIs).
In 2016, [DLHS16] released the Region-based Fully Convolutional Network (R-
FCN) (see Figure 1.7). In this work, the authors employ a CNN to extract
feature/score maps. In parallel, they run a Region Proposal Network to detect
a region of interest (ROIs). Further, the ROIs are mapped to the score maps to
compute the class probability of each region. Finally, the object gets detected
by combining the votes from the score maps for each region.
Figure 1.7: R-FCN architecture [DLHS16]
Moving towards faster and better performance, in 2016, [RDGF16] introduced
the "You Only Look Once" model, dubbed as YOLO. It predicts the bounding
boxes and class probabilities in a single evaluation. Initially, the model takes
an image as input and divides it into a grid.
Each cell of the grid predicts
bounding boxes with a conﬁdence score. This conﬁdence is simply the proba-
bility of detecting an object multiply by the IoU between the predicted and the
ground truth boxes. As an improvement to the YOLO model, [RF17] released
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Related Work
7
YOLO9000 that can detect more than 9000 object categories while running in
almost real-time. And the YOLOv2 model focused on improving accuracy while
still being a fast detector. Similarly to the YOLO models, [LAE+16] developed
a Single-Shot Detector(SSD) to predict all at once the bounding boxes and the
class probabilities with an end-to-end CNN architecture.
1.1.2.3
Object Segmentation
Segmentation is a more detailed type of objects labelling in which each pixel gets
labelled with a given class. It is related to both image classiﬁcation and object
detection, as both of these techniques might take place before segmentation can
begin. In this section, we mention, in chronological order, some state-of-the-arts
for image segmentation.
In 2015 [LSD15] was the ﬁrst to use the fully convolutional network, dubbed as
FCN for image segmentation (see Figure 1.8). The work modiﬁed well-known
architectures such as AlexNet [KSH12] and VGG16 [SZ15] to accept input with
arbitrary size. Additionally, they replaced the fully connected layer used for
object classiﬁcation with convolutional layers to classify each pixel.
One of
FCN’s drawbacks is the loss of global information in deep layers.
Figure 1.8: Fully convolutional networks (FCN)[LSD15]
[LRB15] addressed this challenge and introduced an improved end-to-end convo-
lutional network, dubbed as ParseNet, to predict values for all the pixels at the
same time rather than taking regions as input to keep the global information.
[NHH15] proposed another end-to-end model composed of two linked networks,
convolution and deconvolution network. The convolutional network generates
==PAGE:20==
8
Introduction
the features vector of the input image.
This vector is passed further to the
deconvolutional network to output a map of pixel-wise probabilities belonging to
each class. Finally, when all proposals are processed, all maps are concatenated
to obtain the fully segmented image.
[LDG+17] proposed a model called Feature Pyramid Network (FPN). It consists
of a bottom-up, a top-down branch, and side connections.
The bottom-up
outputs feature maps, while the top-down upsamples the feature maps and
enhances them with the same stage from the bottom-up branch using the side
connection to preserve the global information. Finally, Multi-Layer Perceptron
(MLP) is employed to generate the mask.
Preserving global information has formed a challenge as the CNNs kept get-
ting deeper and deeper. [ZSQ+17] introduced Pyramid Scene Parsing Network
(PSPNet) to improve learning the global context in the deepest layers. In PSP-
Net, the features are extracted from the input image and fed into a Pyramid
Pooling Module to distinguish the diﬀerent scales. Further, the output is up-
sampled and concatenated to the initial feature maps and ﬁnally processed by
a convolutional layer generate the segmentation.
[HGDG17] released the Mask R-CNN model outperforming all previous models
on COCO dataset3. The Mask R-CNN is a Faster R-CNN with three output
branches to compute, 1) the bounding box coordinates, 2) the associated class,
and 3) the binary mask to segment the object. The particularity of this model
is its multi-task loss. It combines the loss of branches trying to solve comple-
mentary tasks leading to better performance.
Inspired by the FPN model o[LDG+17], [CPK+18a] released DeepLab models
to solve the problem of losing deep features in deeper layers.
According to
the authors, consecutive max-pooling and striding reduce the resolution of the
feature maps. Hence, the authors introduced the atrous convolution that is a di-
lated convolution [ZSQ+17] to captures multiple scales of objects. Additionally,
they proposed an atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP) to segment objects
at multiple-scales. The same authors introduced enhanced models of DeepLab
such as DeepLabv1 [CPK+16], DeepLabv2 [CPK+18b], DeepLabv3 [CPSA17],
and ﬁnally DeepLabv3+ [CZP+18].
[LQQ+18] released the Path Aggregation Network (PANet) based on Mask R-
CNN and the FPN frameworks. Additionally, it uses a new augmented bottom-
up pathway to improve the propagation of the low-layer features.
[ZDS+18] proposed a Context Encoding Network (ENCNet) that captures global
3https://cocodataset.org/home
==PAGE:21==
1.1 Related Work
9
features in images to improve segmentation. The model uses a feature extractor
to generate feature maps. Further, the feature maps fed into ENCNet trained
using Semantic Encoding Loss.
Finally, the outputs processed by a dilated
convolution strategy to produce the ﬁnal segmentation.
1.1.3
Weakly Supervised Learning
Weakly supervised learning is a machine learning framework where the model
is trained on unlabeled or partially labelled data such as a bounding box. Ma-
chine learning models are usually trained on fully annotated data. However,
as the amount of data increases rapidly, annotation cost increases too. Hence,
it is preferable to train the models on data with a weaker level of supervi-
sion/annotation. In 2018 [Zho18] categorized weakly-supervised learning into
the following three categories:
• Incomplete supervision is where training data is not fully labelled. Here,
the data is unlabelled or partially labelled, such as an object inside a
bounding box.
• Inexact supervision is where training data is labelled but not as exact as
desired.
• Inaccurate supervision is where the training data is labelled but with some
mistakes.
1.1.4
Weakly Supervised Image Segmentation
Many weakly supervised methods have been developed to overcome the need for
pixel-level annotation, which is expensive to produce. The proposed methods
require diﬀerent levels of annotation such as bounding box [KBH+16], scribbles
[LDJ+16], or image-level annotation/unlabeled data [WXS+18, LVS19, AK18]
It is worth mentioning that Convolutional Neural Network is the core compo-
nent among all methods, although they handle the problem diﬀerently. They
presented various approaches attempting to achieve satisfactory results under a
weak level of supervision. For example, 1) Transferring the learning from dis-
criminative to non-discriminative regions [WXS+18, KL16] 2) Applying other
loss functions than traditional cross-entropy [TDP+18], or 3) Proposing an ad-
vanced DCNN architecture [PCMY15]
==PAGE:22==
10
Introduction
In 2015, [PCMY15] developed Expectation-Maximization (EM) methods for
training DCNN semantic segmentation models. In E-step, it estimates the dis-
tribution of the latent pixel labels. In M-step, it optimizes the DCNN parame-
ters using stochastic gradient descent (SGD). The authors build on the DeepLab
model [CKMY15] for semantic image segmentation followed by a fully-connected
CRF [KK11] to smooth the predictions while preserving image edges.
[KL16] proposed a novel loss function, dubbed as SEC. It consists of three com-
bined losses, namely Seeding, Expansion, and Constrain-to-boundary loss. In
seeding-loss, image localization cues guide the segmentation network to match
only these cues while ignoring the rest of the image. Further, it expands the
segmentation mask to cover larger areas than the localization cues. For this
purpose, it aggregates the segmentation score into the classiﬁcation score us-
ing a pooling layer. Finally, the work applies the constrain-to-boundary-loss
using CRF [Wal04] to prevent the segmentation network from generating dis-
continuous masks. Another loss function introduced by [TDP+18] addressing
some limitations when using standard loss, such as cross-entropy, in weakly su-
pervised image segmentation. According to the authors, cross-entropy does not
distinguish seeds or scribbles from unlabeled pixels. For this purpose, [TDP+18]
proposed a novel loss function that combines partial cross-entropy evaluated on
labelled pixels and a normalized cut for regularization computed on unlabeled
pixels.
In 2018 [ZZY+18] proposed a framework that exploits the class peak response
to achieve instance and semantic segmentation under image-level annotations.
In the training phase, an FCN [LSD15] is employed to produce a class response
map. Additionally, the author constructed a peak stimulator layer to extract
those peaks. In the inference phase, the extracted peaks are back-propagated to
generate a peak response map (PRM) which provides a ﬁne-detailed represen-
tation for each instance in the image. The PRMs are then used to train the any
segmentation model. [WXS+18] proposed framework that enables transferring
learning from discriminative regions to non-discriminative regions [ZKL+16a].
The work showed that dilated convolutional networks could boost the low re-
sponses in the object region produced from CAM [ZKL+16b]. Based on that,
they propose an augmented CNN-based classiﬁer with multi-dilated blocks.
First, they apply a standard kernel to obtain accurate localization maps for
the discriminative regions. Secondly, by enlarging dilation rates, the convolu-
tional kernels are motivated to transfer the learning to non-discriminative object
regions obtaining the training labels. Next, the training labels are used to train
the segmentation model.
Similar to [WXS+18], [AK18] suggested that propagating local responses to ad-
jacent areas with the same semantic entity can be used to segment the entire
object. [AK18] proposed framework consists of three DCNNs with a core com-
==PAGE:23==
1.1 Related Work
11
ponent called AﬃnityNet. The AﬃnityNet employed to predict the semantic
aﬃnity between pairs of adjacent coordinates. The authors utilize Class Acti-
vation Map [ZKL+16b] to highlight the discriminative region, then propagate it
into the AﬃnityNet to cover the entire object. Finally, they utilized a segmen-
tation model to segment the object.
[ACK19] addressed that the output of CAMs isn’t suﬃcient to train a network
due to the low resolution.
Moreover, in the case of instance segmentation,
the CAMs cannot distinguish diﬀerent instances. For this purpose, [ACK19]
proposed a framework, called Inter-pixel Relation Network (IRNet) (see Figure
1.9), that generates a pseudo instance segmentation label to train an oﬀ-the-
shelf instance segmentation model. Here, the CAM is employed to estimate the
area of each class. Further, they utilized the IRNet for estimating two additional
pieces of information complementary to CAM, 1) class agnostic instance map,
which is a rough estimate of the segmentation, 2) pair-wise semantic aﬃnities to
detect the boundaries between the diﬀerent instances. Further, they combined
1) and 2) to obtain instance-wise CAMs, which are then enhanced based on the
semantic aﬃnities between neighbor pixels. After the enhancement, a pseudo
mask segmentation label is generated by selecting the instance label with the
highest score in the instance-wise CAMs at each pixel. The pseudo mask is then
used to train the segmentation model.
Figure 1.9: IRNet[ACK19]
Under similar settings of exploiting CAMs as a seed, [WYLM18] showed that
class-local response contains common-features about the objects. They proposed
an iterative bottom-up and top-down framework under image-level annotation.
The work exploits the CAM [ZKL+16b] to assign a class to each region. Further,
the authors use the local maximum of these regions as seeds. In the bottom-
up step, the region classiﬁcation network, dubbed as RegionNet, is trained on
sets of training images and seeds to mine the common-features. It outputs a
label for each region with key features only. Hence, the other regions missed.
==PAGE:24==
12
Introduction
Further, the authors expand the object region to those missing regions based on
some similarity measures. Finally, the reﬁned regions are used as input in the
top-down step to train the segmentation network to predict the mask.
Advanced or complicated architectures are not necessarily better than simpler
ones. In 2017, [KBH+16] introduced a simple framework, dubbed as Simple
Does It (SDI). The authors could achieve 93% accuracy of fully supervised
learning by only using bounding-box annotation (see Figure 1.10). They used a
modiﬁed version of the GrabCut algorithm [RKB04] to generate training labels
to train an Oﬀ-the-shelf segmentation model. [LVS19] proposed another simple
framework for achieving image instance segmentation. It consists of two steps;
1) training a PRM [ZZY+18] to output pseudo masks, 2) using the masks to
train fully supervised segmentation model such as M-RCNN [HGDG17]. The
results showed that the framework performed much better on objects with large
size and when the number of instances is not too large.
Figure 1.10: Results taken from Simple Does It [KBH+16]
In the digital world, we live in, the amount of data around us increasing rapidly
and will keep doing so. Although we can access the data, we still need a so-
phisticated way to get a deep insight to make the right decision. In the image
processing ﬁeld, deep learning models are usually trained on fully supervised la-
bels. Analyzing and annotating those labels for a large dataset is a cumbersome
and expensive process.
Therefore, it is desired to use unlabeled or partially
labelled data to train the models. That is why weakly supervised gaining more
popularity nowadays because it only requires unlabeled or partially labelled data
for training the segmentation models.
We presented various techniques and frameworks in (see Section 1.1.4) for ap-
plying weakly supervised learning. Some are more complicated than others. It
==PAGE:25==
1.2 Contribution
13
is crucial to ask ourselves, do we always need complex models to achieve weakly
supervised learning? The answer is no, not necessarily. The data nature will
decide the model complexity. For instance, to generate training labels for image
segmentation, and if there are clear boundaries between the objects, we can ap-
ply a simple method such as the GrabCut. However, if the objects overlap, we
need a more complicated technique to generate training labels with acceptable
quality.
1.2
Contribution
Based on our discussions and analyses of the related work, the GrabCut[RKB04]
method is implemented to generate training labels for images annotated with
bounding box. Those labels are then passed to a segmentation model, called
DeepLabv3 [CPSA17], to perform semantic segmentation on. All experiments
are conducted on medical images for lung cancer. All experiments conducted
on medical images for lung cancer [PET-CTLi20]. In this work, we examine the
following:
1. Can the GrabCut generate training labels for lung cancer images that are
usually fuzzy and having low resolution?
2. If there is no clear boundary between foreground (tumors) and back-
ground, will that form a challenge on the GrabCut when generating the
labels?
3. Is it feasible to ﬁne-tune a semantic segmentation model, such as DeepLabv3
[CPSA17], on those labels?
1.3
Overview
The following sections are organized as follows; In section 2, we describe the
GrabCut method, Convolutional Neural Networks, and ﬁnally, the DeepLabv3
as our semantic segmentation model. Section 3 describes the method applied
in this work, including data pre-processing and model optimization. In section
4, we present our experimental results, analysis, and discussion. And ﬁnally,
section 5 is devoted to the conclusion and suggestions for future work.
==PAGE:26==
14
Introduction
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2
Weakly Supervised
Semantic Segmentation
Weakly supervised learning aims to reduce the cost of labelling the data. This
chapter is devoted to a detailed presentation of how labels can be generated
using the GrabCut method.
Further, we describe the DeepLabv3 [CPSA17]
architecture as our semantic segmentation model.
A variety of aspects will be analysed: architecture, model optimisation, training
scenarios, transfer learning, data augmentation and post-processing.
2.1
GrabCut
GrabCut [RKB04] is an eﬃcient method that accomplished image segmentation
before deep learning.
In GrabCut, the image is deﬁned in RGB space and
two Gaussian Mixture Models are employed to cluster the pixels. One GMM
for foreground pixels and the other for background.
Each GMM consists of
K clusters, according to [RKB04] K = 5. The algorithm starts when the user
draws a rectangular (bounding box) around the object to be segmented. Next,
the GMMs are applied to estimate two color distributions, a distribution for
the background to be the area outside the rectangular, and another for the
==PAGE:28==
16
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
foreground to be the part inside the box.
Further, the GrabCut constructs
a graph where the nodes represent the pixels.
The nodes are linked to the
foreground node and background node with weighted links representing the
probability of a pixel belongs to the foreground or background. Additionally,
the GrabCut measures the smoothness of the labelling between neighboring
pixels. For pixels pairs with the same label, we decrease the energy function
so the min-cut will ﬁnd it expensive to separate the pixels pairs, otherwise, we
increase the energy function for dissimilar pixels pairs.
Figure 2.1: Three examples of GrabCut . The user drags a rectangle loosely
around an object.
The object is then extracted automatically
[RKB04]
In the following section, we illustrate brieﬂy some important theoretical aspects
behind GrabCut[RKB04] implementation.
Figure 2.2: Grab Cut - Binary-classiﬁcation of pixels [PHC+18]
Each pixel zn in the image is assigned to a GMM with K components using α
= 0 or 1 for background and foreground respectively. Given the data and the
==PAGE:29==
2.1 GrabCut
17
parameters we can write the energy function as (2.1)1.
E(α, k, θ, z) = U(α, k, θ, z) + V (α, z)
(2.1)
Where:
• E(·) is the energy function to minimize
• U(·) is the data term
• V (·) is the smoothing term
For each GMM component, the data term is deﬁned as (2.2).
U(α, k, θ, z) =
X
n
D (αn, kn, θ, zn)
(2.2)
Where:
• D(·) is the Gaussian probability distribution
• αn ∈{0, 1} is the hard assignation to background or foreground node
• kn ∈{1, K} is the k’th GMM component
• θ represents the parameters of the GMM component
• zn is a vector contains the RGB values of pixel n
For each cluster, θ is deﬁned as following:
• µ is the mean of each RGB channel
• Σ is covariance matrix
• det Σ is the determenant of Σ
• π GMM mixing coeﬃcient
1We follow this convention to follow the same notation as the original paper. Both Greek
small letters with an underscore and bold Roman letters represent vectors.
==PAGE:30==
18
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
D(·) is the likelihood of a pixel belongs to the foreground and background. It
is deﬁned as (2.3).
D (αn, kn, θ, zn) = −log
K
X
k=1
π (αn, k)
1
p
det Σ (αn, k)
· exp

−1
2 [zn −µ (αn, k)]T Σ (αn, k)−1 [zn −µ (αn, k)]

(2.3)
V (·) is deﬁned as (2.4).
V (α, z) = γ
X
(m,n)∈C
[αn ̸= αm] exp −β ∥zm −zn∥2
(2.4)
γ (αm, αn) =
(
1
if αn ̸= αm
0
otherwise
(2.5)
β =

2
D
(zm −zn)2E−1
(2.6)
Where:
• C is the set of neighbor pixels
In this work, we use bounding box annotation instead of interactively drawing
a bounding box around each object as described in [RKB04] . for this purpose,
each bounding box is determined using four coordinates which are given to the
GrabCut algorithm along with the image.
2.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) have recently changed the computer vision
ﬁeld due to their capabilities in learning features automatically. The traditional
neural networks, also called multilayer perceptron (MLP) (see Figure 2.3), are
modelled to simulate the human brain. The neurons are represented by linked
nodes that are activated on a certain threshold. The simplest ANN consists of
an input layer, one hidden layer and ﬁnally output layer.
MLPs are not the best to use in image classiﬁcation for some reasons; ﬁrstly,
the MLPs use one perceptron for each input. Hence, the number of weights
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Convolutional Neural Networks
19
Figure 2.3: A standard multilayer perceptron [MS19]
increases rapidly and becomes hard to manage. Secondly, the MLPs are trans-
lation invariant, meaning that the MLP tries to correct itself every time the
object appears in a diﬀerent location. Lastly, the spatial information is lost
when the image is ﬂattened into an MLP [MS19].
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are special type of Neural Networks
that have proven huge capabilities in processing data that has grid structure,
such as images. It is designed to automatically learn spatial hierarchies of fea-
tures.
CNN is typically composed of three types of building blocks, namely
convolution, pooling, and fully connected layer. First two blocks are used for
features extraction, whereas the last block, fully connected layer, is used for
ﬁnal output, such as classiﬁcation (see Figure 2.4).
Figure 2.4: Convolutional neural network with many convolutional layers
[mw21]
==PAGE:32==
20
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
2.2.1
Convolutional Layer
A convolution layer is a core component of the CNN that is used for features
extraction.
It consists of a combination of linear and nonlinear operations,
i.e., convolution operation and activation function (2.2.1.1). The convolution
operation is a linear operation used for feature extraction where a small array
of numbers, called a kernel, is applied across the input (see Figure 2.5). The
output of the linear operation is passed through a nonlinear activation function.
Those functions help to decide if the neuron/node would ﬁre or not on a speciﬁc
input.
Figure 2.5: CNN - Convolutional Operation
2.2.1.1
Activation Functions
One of the reasons why CNNs are very powerful is their ability to produce
non-linear decisions.
These non-linear decisions produced by the activation
functions. Here, the convolutional layer output passed to an activation function,
such as RELU (see Figure 2.6), which then determines whether a neuron would
ﬁre on a speciﬁc input or not.
Figure 2.6: Activation Functions[aM21]
==PAGE:33==
2.3 DeepLabv3 for Semantic Segmenation
21
2.2.2
Pooling
This layer used mainly to reduce the dimensions of the feature maps, hence,
reducing the number of parameters to learn and consequently less computational
power. There are several types of pooling, such as maximum (see Figure 2.7),
minimum, and average pooling.
Figure 2.7: CNN - Max Pooling
2.2.3
Flattened layer
After computing the convolutional operations and the pooling, the CNN outputs
the features map. Flattening the last pooling layer produces this feature map
that is passed then to an ANN classiﬁer.
2.3
DeepLabv3 for Semantic Segmenation
Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) [LSD15] are used for semantic segmen-
tation. However, one of their drawbacks is that they predict the output with
fuzzy boundaries. This is because the input feature map keeps getting smaller
while crossing the convolutional and pooling layers. Hence, it results in a loss
of deep features.
The DeepLab models addressed this challenge by utilizing Atrous Convolu-
tions and Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP) modules.
The architec-
ture has evolved over several models, namely DeepLabv1 [CPK+16], DeepLabv2
[CPK+18b], DeepLabv3 [CPSA17], and ﬁnally DeepLabv3+ [CZP+18].
DeepLab introduced the Atrous Convolution as an approach to control eﬀective
ﬁeld-of-view of the convolution. It uses a parameter called "atrous/dilation rate"
==PAGE:34==
22
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
that enlarges the ﬁeld-of-view to capture features at each scale in deeper layers.
Hence, it outputs better segmentation masks as it preserves the spatial resolution
in deeper layers. The ﬁlters in Atrous Convolution are up-sampled normally by
inserting zeros between two successive ﬁlter values along each spatial dimension.
In this work, we use DeepLabv3 (see Figure 2.8). We devote this section to
illustrate some of its essential details and diﬀerences from prior DeepLab models.
Figure 2.8: DeepLabv3 [CPSA17] - Parallel modules with atrous convolution
(ASPP), augmented with image-level features
While DeepLabV1 employs Atrous Convolution and Fully Connected Condi-
tional Random Field (CRF) [Wal04] to control the resolution at which image
features are computed, DeepLabV2 considered objects at diﬀerent scales by
using Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP). Apart from using Atrous Con-
volution, DeepLabv3 uses an improved ASPP module by including batch nor-
malization and image-level features. Further, it does not use the CRF as prior
models.
On top of the extracted feature maps from the backbone, DeepLabv3 employs
four parallel atrous convolutions with diﬀerent atrous rates to control segment-
ing the object at diﬀerent scales.
Along with the four atrous convolutions,
DeepLabv3 uses image-level features to preserve global information. After ap-
plying all operations parallelly, it concatenates the results and passes it through
1x1 convolution to get the ﬁnal output.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Method
This chapter describes the method used in this thesis. However, before doing
so, we have to deﬁne some of the terminologies used in this thesis to prevent
confusion. The term bounding box annotation refers to a box around an object,
in our case, it is a box around a lesion. The generated label refers to those
labels generated by the GrabCut method. Mask refer to the ﬁnal output, and
it is one-channel binary segmentation for each class.
3.1
Pre-processing
3.1.1
Converting DICOM image to RGB
DICOM stands for Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine.
It is
a standard and internationally accepted format to view, store, retrieve and
share medical images [pd21]. As DICOM images cannot be opened by standard
imaging software present on operating systems such as Windows or Mac OS, it
was crucial to ﬁrst convert them from DICOM to JPG or PNG format before
applying any further processing. For this purpose, we utilised the Python library
Pydicom.
==PAGE:36==
24
Method
3.1.2
Generating Training Labels
One of the main goals of this work is to illustrate how to generate training
labels for images giving a weaker annotation level, in our case, it is a bounding
box which is determined by four coordinates.
As described in the GrabCut
method (see Figure 2.1), an image is given as input along with the bounding
box coordinates. The GrabCut runs iteratively, usually for ﬁve iterations, to
generate a training label for each input image - See step 1 and 2 in Figure 3.3
3.2
Model Optimization
3.2.1
Imbalanced Classiﬁcation
Imbalanced classiﬁcation is when the distribution of samples in training set
across the known classes is biased or imbalanced. The distribution can vary
from slight to severe imbalance. This poses a challenge for predictive modeling
as most machine and deep learning models assume that the number of examples
for every class does not vary much from others. However, training a model on
an imbalanced training set results in a model with poor predictive performance,
speciﬁcally for the minority class. Our dataset is a subset of the Lung Lesion
dataset. It is seen in Figure 3.1 that the class ’A’ has the majority number
of samples with at least 3 times larger than the closest class, whereas ’E’ has
the minority. Imbalanced classiﬁcation can be mitigated diﬀerently due to the
nature of the dataset. According to [Cha18], there are three main approaches
to follow:
• Undersampling - Delete random examples from the dominating class to
equalize the ratio of the classes in the training set. However, this approach
might result in deleting examples that contain essential information about
the predictive class.
• Oversampling - Increase the number of class with fewer examples. A simple
way is to copy the existing examples until achieving balanced classiﬁcation.
Though, oversampling may lead to overﬁtting to the training set
• Synthetic sampling - Synthetically manufacture observations of unbal-
anced classes
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Model Optimization
25
Figure 3.1: The chart shows imbalanced classes. As seen, class A is the dom-
inating class in the dataset.
3.2.1.1
Data Augmentation
In this section, we illustrate how to handle the imbalanced classes. We down-
sample class A and up-sample class E using data augmentation, which is also
utilized to avoid overﬁtting. Class B and G are kept untouched. There are
various ways to augment data, for instance, ﬂipping, rotation, shifting, noise
addition blurring, and more.
However, it is crucial to understand the data
nature to select these augmentation techniques that ﬁt perfectly with data. In
our case, the images obtained from PET-CT scanning. Additionally, they are
always in the same orientation, which means they are not ﬂipped or rotated.
For our purpose, we apply data augmentation by shifting and blurring for up-
sampling (see Figure 3.2).
Figure 3.2: The chart shows balanced classes after applying down-sampling
on class A and up-sampling, on class E.
==PAGE:38==
26
Method
3.2.2
Transfer Learning
Training deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) from scratch is cumber-
some and time-consuming as it requires a large amount of labeled training data.
Moreover, it requires dealing with a large number of parameters to ensure proper
convergence. [TSG+16] addressed that transferring learning can eﬀectively help
to eliminate the need for training the network from scratch. However, the diﬀer-
ences between natural and medical images might hinder the successful learning
transfer due to the domain’s diﬀerences. [TSG+16] shows that ﬁne-tuning a
pre-trained CNN on natural-images outperformed training a CNN from scratch
on medical images.
In this work, we use DeepLabv3-ResNet101 as our pre-trained CNN. It is con-
structed by a DeepLabv3 model with a ResNet-101 backbone [Tea21].
3.2.3
Training related hyper-parameters
The hyper-parameters are those properties that control the training process of a
model and its architecture. In deep learning models, they determine the network
structure, such as the number of neurons in the hidden layers. They can also
deﬁne how the model is trained, for instance, the learning rate. According to
[Leo19], we can categorize the parameters as follow:
1. Optimization hyper-parameters, such as learning rate, batch size, and the
number of epochs.
2. Model hyper-parameters, such as the number of hidden units and layers.
In this work, we use the cross-entropy as the loss function to minimize, Adam-
optimizer as the optimization algorithm, and batch-size of 32. Training deep
learning models is usually achieved experimentally. Therefore, we will be experi-
menting with the hyper-parameters to ﬁnd the optimal values for our model. We
will be ﬁne-tuning the semantic segmentation model DeepLabv3 on our dataset.
3.2.3.1
Optimization hyper-parameters
They control the process of training and optimizing the model. In this work, we
experiment with three hyper-parameters related to model optimization, namely
learning rate, L2-regularization, and the number of epochs. Learning rate and
L2-regularization are used by Adam-optimizer.
Choosing a suitable value of
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Model Optimization
27
learning rate is crucial as it aﬀects the training process heavily. A small learning
rate means that the model converges very slow. Contrastingly, a large learn-
ing rate prevents the model from convergence, as it fails to ﬁnd the optimal-
minimum. The L2-regularization is used to prevent overﬁtting. It tries to handle
the Bias-Variance dilemma. It reduces overﬁtting by reducing the variance of
the model. Thus, it adds bias to the estimate. The number of epochs determines
how many times the model is trained on the entire dataset. To select the correct
value, we should observe the test Error. Intuitively, we must keep training the
model as long as the test error keeps decreasing.
3.2.4
Model hyper-parameters
They determine the model structure, such as the number of hidden units, num-
ber of hidden layers, and number of channels in the output layer. As mentioned
previously, we are ﬁne-tuning the pre-trained model DeepLabv3. The model
has been trained on a subset of COCO train2017 [cd17], on the 20 categories
presented in the Pascal VOC dataset [Tea21]. For our purpose, we ﬁne-tune the
DeepLabv3-ResNet101 on our medical dataset for lung lesions. Additionally, we
adjust the model architecture to only output four classes, namely A, B, E, and
G.
3.2.5
Architecture
Our architecture is inspired by the one proposed in the SDI [KBH+16]. However,
we do not utilize the CRF [Wal04] to reﬁne the output of the segmentation
model. In our work, we employ the DeepLabv3 [CPSA17] to predict the ﬁnal
mask without applying any post-processing. As shown in Figure 3.3, the input
image and bounding box coordinates are passed to the GrabCut to generate the
training label. Further, the generated training label and the input image used
to train DeepLabv3 as our semantic segmentation model. Finally, the mask is
predicted. It is worth mentioning that the architecture is agnostic to the choice
of the segmentation model.
==PAGE:40==
28
Method
Figure 3.3: Model Architecture
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Experimental Results and
Discussion
4.1
Experimental Setup
The implementation of this work are conducted using Pytorch v0.6.0 and Python
3.7.3. We used the pre-trained DeepLabv3 model with a ResNet-101 backbone.
The model has trained on COCO train2017 [cd17]. Further, we ﬁne-tuned the
model on our dataset. For the GrabCut method, we used the OpenCV library.
We adjusted it such that it can handle multiple objects in one image [jl18].
We also used the interactive version of the GrabCut for experimental purposes
[Tah20]. We used this repository [Min19] as inspiration for our implementation.
During the implementations, several experiments and unit tests were conducted
to verify the correctness of the codes.
4.1.1
Dataset Description
[PET-CTLi20, TCIACl13] dataset consists of CT and PET-CT DICOM images
of lung cancer. Additionally, XML annotation ﬁles contain the bounding box
coordinates of the tumor location in each image. The images were obtained
from patients with suspicion of lung cancer who underwent lung biopsy and
==PAGE:42==
30
Experimental Results and Discussion
PET/CT scanning.
Subjects are grouped into four groups according to the
tissue histopathological diagnosis as following (see Figure 4.1):
• Group A with Adenocarcinoma
• Group B with Small Cell Carcinoma
• Group E with Large Cell Carcinoma
• Group G with Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Figure 4.1: Samples from lung lesion dataset
4.1.2
Evaluation Metrics Description
Model performance evaluation is essential in Machine Learning. In this section,
we explain the evaluation metrics used in this work. Besides the train and test
error, we also used F1-Secore and AU-ROC metrics.
We start by deﬁning the terms used to compute F1-Score and AU-ROC
Recall(TPR) =
TP
TP + FN
(4.1)
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(4.2)
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Experimental Setup
31
Specificity =
TN
TN + FP
(4.3)
FPR =
FP
TN + FP = 1 −Specificity
(4.4)
Where:
• TPR (True Positive Rate) is the portion of positive cases got correctly
classiﬁed with respect to all positive cases.
• FPR (False Positive Rate) is the portion of negative cases got correctly
classiﬁed with respect to all negative cases.
• TP is the number of positive samples got correctly classiﬁed.
• TN is the number of negative samples got correctly classiﬁed.
• FP is the number of negative samples got classiﬁed as positive.
• FN is the number of positive samples got classiﬁed negative.
4.1.2.1
F1-Score
F1-score is a weighted average of Precision and Recall. The predicted mask
considered true positive if it overlaps with the ground-truth with 50% or more,
and as false positive, if it overlaps with the ground-truth segment with less then
50%
F1-score = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(4.5)
4.1.2.2
AU-ROC
AUC - ROC curve is a performance measurement used for evaluating classiﬁ-
cation problems. ROC stands for Receiver Operator Characteristic. It is an
evaluation metric used for binary classiﬁcation where the TPR and FPR are
plotted against each other at various thresholds. The AUC stands for Area Un-
der Curve. It evaluates the model ability to distinguish between the diﬀerent
classes.
==PAGE:44==
32
Experimental Results and Discussion
Figure 4.2:
AU-ROC [Gle19]
A model with AUC close to 1, considered to be a perfect model that can dis-
tinguish between the diﬀerent classes. On other hand, a model with AUC close
to zero, considered to be a poor model, as it cannot distinguish between the
classes.
4.2
GrabCut Evaluation
This section is devoted to present the results of experiments conducted to gen-
erate labels using the GrabCut method.
4.2.1
Experimental Results
We ran the GrabCut over the entire dataset that consists of almost 19,000
images. The GrabCut only succeeded to generate about 2,200 masks which is a
low number compared to the total number of images. In this section, we evaluate
quantitatively some of the images where the GrabCut failed to generate masks
for (see Figure 4.3). In this evaluation, we attempt to reveal the reasons that
might prevent GrabCut from generating the masks (see Section 1.2). There are
two factors we suspect will prevent the GrabCut from generating masks:
• If the distributions of background and foreground overlap
• If the bounding box is imprecise, for example, too large compared to the
tumour size
==PAGE:45==
4.2 GrabCut Evaluation
33
Figure 4.3: Samples from diﬀerent groups where the GrabCut failed to gener-
ate masks for.
4.2.2
Discussion
At ﬁrst glance in Figure 4.3, we observe that the location and the size of the
bounding box compared to the tumor size is reasonable. However, we can eas-
ily see that there is no clear boundary between the tumor inside the bounding
box and the area outside of the box. In other words, the distributions of the
foreground and background overlap in such a way that the GrabCut could not
diﬀerentiate them. Hence, it fails to generate the masks. Contrastingly, it suc-
ceeded in generating good masks for the images with a distinguishable boundary
==PAGE:46==
34
Experimental Results and Discussion
between the tumor and area outside the bounding box (see Figure 4.5). It is
crucial to mention that the patients underwent lung biopsy and PET/CT scan-
ning, which could be another reason why some tumors were not detected in the
CT scans but got detected by biopsy. To verify our assumption, we ran the
interactive implementation of the GrabCut mentioned in [RKB04]. We inter-
actively draw a bounding box around the tumor. Further, the GrabCut run
iteratively to generate a mask. As expected, no masks got generated, which is
consistent with the above analysis.
4.3
Signiﬁcance of Model Optimisation
4.3.1
Fine-tuning on Imbalanced Dataset
In this section, we present the setup of the experiment conducted on model op-
timization (see Section 3.2). We start by ﬁne-tuning the pre-trained DeepLabv3
model on our imbalanced dataset (see Section 3.2.1). Additionally, we do not
apply any techniques that prevent over-ﬁtting, such as data augmentation and
regularization - See the table below.
Parameter name
Value
Learning rate
1e-3
L2-regularization
Not applied
Batch size
32
Epochs no.
5
Dataset size.
2214
Table 4.1: Experiment setup - hyper-parameters values
4.3.1.1
Experimental Results
Figure 4.4 shows the values of the various metrics used for evaluation. According
to the test-auroc value(close to 90%), the model performs very well. We can
see the model started to converge after the third epoch. This indicates that
ﬁne-tuning pre-trained models can be feasible and saves time and resources.
However, in the ﬁrst epoch, the test loss is lower than the train-loss, indicating
slight overﬁtting. The model corrected this overﬁtting in later epochs where we
see the test loss and train loss are almost equal.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Signiﬁcance of Model Optimisation
35
Figure 4.4: Model evaluation of experiment 4.3.1
4.3.1.2
Discussion
Usually, the training error is lower than the test error. Though, in some cases,
they might be very close to each other. For instance, the model is almost perfect,
stopping the training prematurely or using test data very similar to the training
data. It is relevant to mention that we have not applied any regularization or
data augmentation during the training, which could be an additional reason
why the model experienced this overﬁtting in the ﬁrst epoch.
We also observed that the model predicted all the classes to be one class. This
is seen from the color mapping in (see Figure 4.5), which is green.
In our
implementation, we encoded each class to have masks with a diﬀerent color
from the other classes. As mentioned in the experiment’s setup, we have used
the imbalanced dataset. We suspect, therefore, that the model is sensitive to
one class A, which is the majority. Hence, it predicted all other classes to be
class A.
We suspect that the reasons for this slight overﬁtting might be 1) the model
is performing very well, 2) the test data is very similar to training data due to
the nature of CT scans. In CT scans, the images are taken for thin sections
of the body. Hence, two consecutive sections/images share a high similarity.
To examine our suspicions, we conduct the following experiment (see Section
4.3.2). We use a balanced dataset to examine if the model is bel to predict the
correct class or not. Additionally, we apply L2-Regularization, to prevent this
slight overﬁtting, we experienced in this experiment.
==PAGE:48==
36
Experimental Results and Discussion
Figure 4.5: Results of experiment 4.3.2.1 - In the ﬁrst row, the input image
with tumor to be segmented. In the second row, we added the
bounding box to the image to help the reader detecting the tumor.
The third row shows results obtained from GrabCut which is used
as a baseline for segmentation. In the fourth row, we show the
generated masks, and we added the bounding box to them so ease
the process of quantitative evaluation as we do not have ground-
truth masks. In the ﬁfth row, we show the generated masks.
4.3.2
Fine-tuning on Balanced Dataset
In this section, we present the setup of the second experiment conducted on
model optimization (see Section 3.2). We start by ﬁne-tuning the pre-trained
DeepLabv3 model on our balanced dataset (see Figure 3.2). Additionally, we
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Signiﬁcance of Model Optimisation
37
apply L2-Regularization to help the model not to overﬁt and runs the training
for six epochs.
Parameter name
Value
Learning rate
1e-4
L2-regularization
1e-3
Batch size
32
Epochs no.
6
Dataset size.
1722
Table 4.2: Experiment setup - hyper-parameters values
4.3.2.1
Experimental Results
Figure 4.6 shows the values of the various metrics used for evaluation. Although
we optimized the model by applying regularization and balancing the classes,
the results are still very similar to 4.3.1. We see the model started to converge
after the fourth epoch and slight overﬁtting in the ﬁrst epoch. Additionally, the
model is not able to diﬀerentiate the diﬀerent classes and predicted all classes
to be one class.
Figure 4.6: Model evaluation of experiment 4.3.2
4.3.2.2
Discussion
The results show that applying regularization did not help with overﬁtting.
Hence, we think that the overﬁtting is due to the nature of CT scans presented
in (see Section 4.3.1.2). The results show also that the model still cannot dif-
ferentiate between the four classes. We suspected in the beginning that this is
==PAGE:50==
38
Experimental Results and Discussion
Figure 4.7: Results of experiment 4.3.2 - In the ﬁrst row, the input image with
tumor to be segmented. In the second row, we added the bounding
box to the image to help the reader detecting the tumor. The
third row shows results obtained from GrabCut as a baseline. In
the fourth row, we show the generated masks, and we added the
bounding box to them. In the ﬁfth row, we show the generated
masks.
due to the class imbalance mentioned in Section 3.2.1. However, we faced the
same challenge even after balancing the classes. We suspect now that the four
classes share the same statistical properties. Consequently, the model extracts
the same features regardless of the class type.
We conducted the following experiment to get a quick understanding of why
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Signiﬁcance of Model Optimisation
39
the model cannot diﬀerentiate the classes. We plot the pixel distribution of one
sample taken from each group. As seen in Figure 4.8, the four groups have
almost identical pixel distribution even though the tumors in groups E and G
are larger than tumors in groups A and B. We conclude that the network could
not diﬀerentiate the features of the diﬀerent classes. Therefore, it predicted all
masks to be one class. However, if we wish to gain a more precise understanding
of why the model failed in classifying the tumors correctly, we need to apply the
Grad-CAM [SCD+17]. It can help us to visually validate at which features the
network is looking, so we understand why the network misclassiﬁed the classes.
Due to the lack of time, we leave this part to further work.
Figure 4.8: [PET-CTLi20] groups. The ﬁgure shows one sample taken from
each group and its pixel distribution.
==PAGE:52==
40
Experimental Results and Discussion
To support our previous argument, we also examine the pixel distribution of
two other objects that don’t have the same shape, such as a dog and a car.
Figure 4.9: The ﬁgure shows two images and the corresponding pixel distri-
bution of each image. The ﬁrst image is for a dog and the second
for a car. We carefully selected these images with no background
color as we wish to focus only on the object itself. We see from
the distributions that they do not share the same statistical prop-
erties.
In this sense, CNNs can diﬀerentiate their features and
assign the correct class to them.
Based on the analyses and discussion (see Section 4.3.2.2), we decided to col-
lapse the four classes into a single class and only focus on verifying if the model
can segment the tumor correctly regardless of its type. By looking at the quan-
titative evaluations in Figure 4.5 and Figure 4.7, we can see that the model can
segment the tumors.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
This work focused on weakly-supervised semantic segmentation for lung cancer
CT images. The dataset consists of CT-PET scans for lung cancer annotated
with a bounding box. Given the image and its bounding box, which detects the
tumor, we applied the GrabCut method [RKB04] to generate training labels for
the images. Further, the labels are used to train the DeepLabv3 [CPSA17] model
to predict the semantic masks. The experimental results (see Figure 4.5) showed
that the GrabCut performed well when the foreground (tumor) and background
are distinguishable, and vice versa (see Figure 4.3). The experimental results of
model optimization (see Section 4.3.1) showed a well-performing model, achiev-
ing an 88% AuRoc score (see Figure 4.4). As we do not have ground-truth labels
for the dataset, we evaluated the generated masks quantitatively. We observed
that the model segmented lung cancer well. However, it failed in diﬀerentiating
the classes and predicted them to be class A (see Figure 4.5). We suspected
this due to the class imbalance mentioned in (see Section 3.2.1). The same ex-
periment showed slight overﬁtting at the beginning of the training process (see
Figure 4.4). Also, the train and test losses are almost equal. We carried out
the second experiment (see Section 4.3.2) on model optimization, attempting to
handle the overﬁtting and the failure in distinguishing the classes. We optimized
our model by applying L2-regularization and balancing the classes using data
augmentation and down-sampling (see Figure 3.2). The results of the evaluation
metrics (see Figure 4.6) showed almost the same results as in experiment (see
Figure 4.4). We see that the train and test losses are still almost identical. We
==PAGE:54==
42
Conclusion
assume this because the train and test data share a high similarity (see Section
4.3.1.2). We see also that the model failed, again, in distinguishing the classes.
To ﬁnd a reason for this failure, we analyzed samples of the data from the dif-
ferent groups (see Figure 4.8). We observed that they share almost the same
pixel distribution (see Figure 4.8). Therefore, we conclude that the model could
not diﬀerentiate them as the network extracted the same features regardless of
the class.
This thesis can beneﬁt any applications where image segmentation is required
under a weak level of supervision. More speciﬁcally, objects are annotated with
bounding boxes. The same technique applies to both semantic and instance
segmentation. We recommend this work when objects have clear boundaries
with the background and the other objects in the same image.
The experiments in this work showed two major issues that open for more
work to be done.
First issue is to investigate if other techniques mentioned
in [KBH+16] can deliver better labels for a medical dataset when the fore-
ground and background distributions overlap. Second issue is to investigate,
using GradCam [SCD+17], why the model is failing in classifying the classes
correctly.
...
==PAGE:55==
Appendix A
Appendix A
The below repository contains the codes used in the thesis:
https://lab.compute.dtu.dk/s103861/weakly-supervised-image-segmentation-using-
dnn
==PAGE:56==
44
Appendix A
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[ACK19] Jiwoon Ahn, Sunghyun Cho, and Suha Kwak.
Weakly Supervised
Learning of Instance Segmentation with Inter-pixel Relations. Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, apr 2019.
[AK18] Jiwoon Ahn and Suha Kwak. Learning Pixel-Level Semantic Aﬃnity
with Image-Level Supervision for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmenta-
tion. Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 4981–4990, mar 2018.
[aM21] adil Moujahid, 2021.
[BETVG08] Herbert Bay, Andreas Ess, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Luc Van Gool.
Speeded-up robust features (surf). Computer vision and image under-
standing, 110(3):346–359, 2008.
[cd17] coco dataset, 2017.
[Cha18] Shubrashankh Chatterjee, 2018.
[CKMY15] Liang-chieh Chen, Iasonas Kokkinos, Kevin Murphy, and Alan L
Yuille. Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional
nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs. IEEE transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 2015.
[CLSF10] Michael Calonder, Vincent Lepetit, Christoph Strecha, and Pascal
Fua. Brief: Binary robust independent elementary features. In European
conference on computer vision, pages 778–792. Springer, 2010.
==PAGE:58==
46
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[CPK+16] Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Iasonas Kokkinos, Kevin
Murphy, and Alan L. Yuille. DeepLab: Semantic Image Segmentation
with Deep Convolutional Nets, Atrous Convolution, and Fully Connected
CRFs. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
jun 2016.
[CPK+18a] Liang Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Iasonas Kokkinos, Kevin
Murphy, and Alan L. Yuille. DeepLab: Semantic Image Segmentation
with Deep Convolutional Nets, Atrous Convolution, and Fully Connected
CRFs. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
2018.
[CPK+18b] Liang Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Iasonas Kokkinos, Kevin
Murphy, and Alan L. Yuille. DeepLabv2. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2018.
[CPSA17] Liang Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Florian Schroﬀ, and Hartwig
Adam. Rethinking atrous convolution for semantic image segmentation,
2017.
[CZP+18] Liang Chieh Chen, Yukun Zhu, George Papandreou, Florian Schroﬀ,
and Hartwig Adam. DeepLabv3+. Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics), 2018.
[DLHS16] Jifeng Dai, Yi Li, Kaiming He, and Jian Sun. R-FCN: Object detec-
tion via region-based fully convolutional networks. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2016.
[GDDM16] Ross Girshick, JeﬀDonahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik.
Region-Based Convolutional Networks for Accurate Object Detection and
Segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine In-
telligence, 38(1):142–158, 2016.
[Gir15] Ross Girshick. Fast R-CNN. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, volume 2015 Inter, pages 1440–1448,
2015.
[Gle19] Stephanie
Glen.
datasciencecentral.
https:
//www.datasciencecentral.com/profiles/blogs/
roc-curve-explained-in-one-picture, 2019.
[HGDG17] Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick.
Mask R-CNN.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 42(2):386–397, mar 2017.
==PAGE:59==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
47
[HSS18] Jie Hu, Li Shen, and Gang Sun.
Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 7132–7141, 2018.
[HZRS16] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep
residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Com-
puter Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
volume 2016-Decem, pages 770–778, 2016.
[jl18]
johnny lu, 2018.
[KBH+16] Anna Khoreva, Rodrigo Benenson, Jan Hosang, Matthias Hein, and
Bernt Schiele. Simple Does It: Weakly Supervised Instance and Semantic
Segmentation. Proceedings - 30th IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2017, mar 2016.
[KK11] Philipp Krähenbühl and Vladlen Koltun.
Eﬃcient inference in fully
connected crfs with Gaussian edge potentials.
In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 24: 25th Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2011, NIPS 2011, 2011.
[KL16] Alexander Kolesnikov and Christoph H. Lampert. Seed, Expand and
Constrain: Three Principles for Weakly-Supervised Image Segmentation.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), mar 2016.
[KSH12] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoﬀrey E Hinton. Imagenet
classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. Advances in neu-
ral information processing systems, 25:1097–1105, 2012.
[LAE+16] Wei Liu, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Christian Szegedy,
Scott Reed, Cheng Yang Fu, and Alexander C. Berg. SSD: Single shot
multibox detector. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including sub-
series Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioin-
formatics), volume 9905 LNCS, pages 21–37, 2016.
[LBBH98] Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haﬀner.
Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of
the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2323, 1998.
[LCY14] Min Lin, Qiang Chen, and Shuicheng Yan. Network in network. In
2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014
- Conference Track Proceedings, 2014.
[LDG+17] Tsung Yi Lin, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, Bharath
Hariharan, and Serge Belongie.
Feature pyramid networks for object
detection. In Proceedings - 30th IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
==PAGE:60==
48
BIBLIOGRAPHY
and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2017, volume 2017-Janua, pages 936–
944, 2017.
[LDJ+16] Di Lin, Jifeng Dai, Jiaya Jia, Kaiming He, and Jian Sun. ScribbleSup:
Scribble-Supervised Convolutional Networks for Semantic Segmentation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016.
[Leo19] Jorge Leonel, 2019.
[Lin12] Tony Lindeberg. Scale invariant feature transform. 2012.
[LQQ+18] Shu Liu, Lu Qi, Haifang Qin, Jianping Shi, and Jiaya Jia.
Path
Aggregation Network for Instance Segmentation. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2018.
[LRB15] Wei Liu, Andrew Rabinovich, and Alexander C. Berg. ParseNet: Look-
ing Wider to See Better. jun 2015.
[LSD15] Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell.
Fully convo-
lutional networks for semantic segmentation. In 2015 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 3431–3440.
IEEE, jun 2015.
[LVS19] Issam H. Laradji, David Vazquez, and Mark Schmidt. Where are the
Masks: Instance Segmentation with Image-level Supervision. jul 2019.
[MCC+19] Niall O’ Mahony, Sean Campbell, Anderson Carvalho, Suman Hara-
panahalli, Gustavo Velasco-Hernandez, Lenka Krpalkova, Daniel Rior-
dan, and Joseph Walsh. Deep Learning vs. Traditional Computer Vision.
Deep Learning vs. Traditional Computer Vision, oct 2019.
[Min19] Manpreet Singh Minhas. Transfer learning for semantic segmentation
using pytorch deeplab v3, Sep 2019.
[MS19] PhD Researcher Matthew Stewart.
https://towardsdatascience.
com/simple-introduction-to-convolutional-neural-networks-cdf8d3077bac,
2019.
[mw21] math works, 2021.
[NHH15] Hyeonwoo Noh, Seunghoon Hong, and Bohyung Han. Learning De-
convolution Network for Semantic Segmentation. may 2015.
[PCMY15] George Papandreou, Liang-Chieh Chen, Kevin Murphy, and Alan L.
Yuille. Weakly- and Semi-Supervised Learning of a DCNN for Semantic
Image Segmentation. Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision, feb 2015.
==PAGE:61==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
49
[pd21] post dicom, 2021.
[Li20] Li, P., Wang, S., Li, T., Lu, J., HuangFu, Y., Wang, D. A large-scale ct
and pet/ct dataset for lung cancer diagnosis, 2020. The Cancer Imaging
Archive, https://doi.org/10.7937/TCIA.2020.NNC2-0461.
[PHC+18] Shiyan Pang, Xiangyun Hu, Zhongliang Cai, Jinqi Gong, and Zhang
Mi. Building change detection from bi-temporal dense-matching point
clouds and aerial images. Sensors, 18:966, 03 2018.
[RDGF16] Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and Ali Farhadi.
You only look once: Uniﬁed, real-time object detection. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2016.
[RF17] Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. YOLO9000: Better, faster, stronger.
In Proceedings - 30th IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, CVPR 2017, 2017.
[RKB04] Carsten Rother, Vladimir Kolmogorov, and Andrew Blake. " grab-
cut" interactive foreground extraction using iterated graph cuts. ACM
transactions on graphics (TOG), 23(3):309–314, 2004.
[SCD+17] Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ra-
makrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual
explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pages
618–626, 2017.
[SIVA17] Christian Szegedy, Sergey Ioﬀe, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Alexander A.
Alemi. Inception-v4, inception-ResNet and the impact of residual con-
nections on learning. In 31st AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
AAAI 2017, pages 4278–4284, 2017.
[SLJ+15] Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott
Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and An-
drew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. Proceedings of the
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 07-12-June:1–9, 2015.
[SR12] Arnold M. Schwartz and M. Katayoon Rezaei. Chapter 65 - lung cancer:
Epidemiology, surgical pathology, and molecular biology. In Stephen G.
Spiro, Gerard A. Silvestri, and Alvar Agustí, editors, Clinical Respiratory
Medicine (Fourth Edition), pages 776–787. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia,
fourth edition edition, 2012.
==PAGE:62==
50
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[SVI+16] Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioﬀe, Jon Shlens, and
Zbigniew Wojna. Rethinking the Inception Architecture for Computer
Vision.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, volume 2016-Decem, pages
2818–2826, 2016.
[SZ15] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional net-
works for large-scale image recognition. In 3rd International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 - Conference Track Proceedings,
2015.
[Tah20] Muhammad Taha, 2020.
[Cl13] Clark K, Vendt B, Smith K, Freymann J, Kirby J, Koppel P, Moore S,
Phillips S, Maﬃtt D, Pringle M, Tarbox L, Prior F. A large-scale ct
and pet/ct dataset for lung cancer diagnosis, 2013. The Cancer Imag-
ing Archive (TCIA): Maintaining and Operating a Public Information
Repository, 10.1007/s10278-013-9622-7.
[TDP+18] Meng Tang, Abdelaziz Djelouah, Federico Perazzi, Yuri Boykov, and
Christopher Schroers. Normalized Cut Loss for Weakly-supervised CNN
Segmentation. Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, apr 2018.
[Tea21] Pytorch Team, 2021.
[TSG+16] Nima Tajbakhsh, Jae Y Shin, Suryakanth R Gurudu, R Todd Hurst,
Christopher B Kendall, Michael B Gotway, and Jianming Liang. Convo-
lutional neural networks for medical image analysis: Full training or ﬁne
tuning? IEEE transactions on medical imaging, 35(5):1299–1312, 2016.
[UvdSGS13] J. R. R. Uijlings, K. E. A. van de Sande, T. Gevers, and A. W. M.
Smeulders. Selective Search for Object Recognition. International Jour-
nal of Computer Vision, 104(2):154–171, sep 2013.
[Wal04] Hanna M Wallach. Conditional random ﬁelds: An introduction. Tech-
nical Reports (CIS), page 22, 2004.
[WSH20] Xiongwei Wu, Doyen Sahoo, and Steven CH Hoi. Recent advances in
deep learning for object detection. Neurocomputing, 396:39–64, 2020.
[WXS+18] Yunchao Wei, Huaxin Xiao, Honghui Shi, Zequn Jie, Jiashi Feng,
and Thomas S. Huang. Revisiting Dilated Convolution: A Simple Ap-
proach for Weakly- and Semi- Supervised Semantic Segmentation. Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, may 2018.
==PAGE:63==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
51
[WYLM18] Xiang Wang, Shaodi You, Xi Li, and Huimin Ma.
Weakly-
Supervised Semantic Segmentation by Iteratively Mining Common Ob-
ject Features. Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, jun 2018.
[YL10] Shenghuo Zhu Ming Yang Timothee Cour Kai Yu (NEC). LiangLiang
Cao Zhen Li Min-Hsuan Tsai Xi Zhou Thomas Huang (UIUC). Tong
Zhang (Rutgers). Yuanqing Lin, Fengjun Lv.
ILSVRC2010. http://
www.image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/2010/index, 2010.
[ZDS+18] Hang Zhang, Kristin Dana, Jianping Shi, Zhongyue Zhang, Xiao-
gang Wang, Ambrish Tyagi, and Amit Agrawal. Context Encoding for
Semantic Segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 7151–
7160. IEEE, jun 2018.
[ZF13] Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and Understanding Con-
volutional Networks. Computer Vision–ECCV 2014, nov 2013.
[ZKL+16a] Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Agata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and An-
tonio Torralba. Learning Deep Features for Discriminative Localization.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, volume 2016-Decem, pages 2921–2929.
IEEE, jun 2016.
[ZKL+16b] Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Agata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and An-
tonio Torralba. Learning deep features for discriminative localization.
In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 2921–2929, 2016.
[ZSQ+17] Hengshuang Zhao, Jianping Shi, Xiaojuan Qi, Xiaogang Wang, and
Jiaya Jia. Pyramid scene parsing network. In Proceedings - 30th IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2017,
volume 2017-Janua, pages 6230–6239, 2017.
[ZZY+18] Yanzhao Zhou, Yi Zhu, Qixiang Ye, Qiang Qiu, and Jianbin Jiao.
Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation using Class Peak Response.
Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, apr 2018.
