==PAGE:1==
Region based Ship-Supply Forecasting
Predicting Ship-Supply Based On Maritime AIS Data & Machine Learning
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
¨
Forecasting Ship Movements Using AIS Data
TORM Project
Master Thesis
December 1, 2021
Author:
Nicolai Emil Hinge
Student no.:
S193149
Copyright
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibliographic cita-
tion, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Kelvin Davies, 2010
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics, Akademivej, Building 358, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
man.dtu.dk
Copyright © Technical University of Denmark 2021
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This project investigates whether or not it is possible to automatically forecast destinations for all
the tanker ships on the seas at any given time by applying machine learning and some math-
ematical formulas. The Danish tanker company TORM will help in this project by providing the
S-AIS data required to make these forecasts and to provide infomation on the maritime industry
as well as the way they as a tanker company would ﬁnd the outputted forecast useful. One of the
fundamental challenges for a tanker company like TORM is making the best possible desicion on
how their ﬂeet should position itself on the world seas to limit the downtime between charters and
to maximise the earned proﬁt on the charter. The longer the ship has to wait to be chartered or
travel to the start of a charter, the more cost is going to pile up for the downtime, and the more
competitors there are in a region, the more competitive the pricing has to be for the charter lower-
ing proﬁts. If they chose to wait for a better proﬁt, it will lose them money in the extra downtime the
ship has, and if they decide to go for the closest and soonest charter they might not lose as much
for the downtime, but end up with a low proﬁt on the charter because of competition. Thereby
when TORM makes the decision to position their ﬂeet in a certain manner, then can often end
up with an opportunity cost because there was a better position for one of their ships to go to,
that they might not have been able to predict. The case is set from the perspective of analyzing
the data and creating a system in a manner that TORM could possibly use for better decision
making when it comes to deciding what to do with the ﬂeet, and thereby reduce the downtime to
charter proﬁt rate. The research in this paper is centered on S-AIS data and machine learning to
predict the pre-speciﬁed TORM region that tankers will visit. Herein results from the test routes
showed that it is possible to predict the destination region up to two weeks in advance, although it
might be difﬁcult to do so depending on the data availability in the area traversed. In some cases
the lack of data would result in speciﬁc areas being very hard to correctly predict. With a longer
data collection phase of running the machine learning on live S-AIS data would result in some
more accurate predictions in these less traversed areas, and while waiting for the system to learn
enough the waypoint data could still be useful in manual analysis to get an idea of ship routing to
different destinations.
==PAGE:4==
Table of Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem Formulation
2
2.1
Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Preceding Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Related Work
4
4
Methodology
6
4.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
5
Framework
7
5.1
Key Performance Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5.2
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5.3
Delimitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
6
State of the art
10
7
Theory
11
7.1
Aerospace Routing Waypoints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
7.2
Multiobjective Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
7.3
Bucket Sort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
7.4
Bucketing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
7.5
Heading calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
7.6
Haversine formula
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
7.7
Point positioning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
7.8
Machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
8
Analysis
19
8.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
8.2
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
8.3
Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
8.4
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
8.5
Waypoints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
8.6
Waypoint Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8.7
Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8.8
Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
8.9
Multi-guess prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8.10 Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
9
Discussion
49
10 Conclusion
52
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
When looking at the transportation of goods on a global level, maritime transport is clearly the
most commonly used mode of transport, with over 90% of all the goods in the world being shipped
across the oceans. One of the sectors within maritime transportation focuses on bulk transporta-
tion of vast amounts of liquids such as chemicals, gasses, fresh water, hydrocarbon products such
as crude oil, which is processed into gas & diesel for our internal combustion vehicles & asphalt
for our roads. The type of ships that transports such materials are called Tankers, and have some
enormous on the ship that can carry millions of liters. The most commonly seen business model
in the tanker or bulk carrier industry is ship chartering on a journey by journey basis where a
major supplier of one of the aforementioned materials will charter nearby ships to transport their
cargo from one point to another. With around 10,102 tanker ships registered worldwide in various
sizes, the supply of ships in a region is likely to be higher than the demand for chartering. In these
cases the shipowners ends up competing on price resulting in owners getting a worse rate for the
charter or no charter resulting in a costly wait for the next customer. With an increasingly difﬁcult
ratio of supply to demand, the need for a more efﬁcient way of operations would be very welcome.
Some of these companies have analysts that tries to make the best possible routes for ships, but
little research have actually gone into trying to use forecasting to predict the amount of ships in a
region at a given time in the future. If a precise prediction for the future tanker supply in a region
could be made, it would be possible to react faster in the decision making, resulting in ships being
able to change course earlier and therefore having more and possibly better options for where to
go, and spend less fuel without being hired. By having this type of data on the future, it would
therefore be possible for ships to always take the most efﬁcient path, where the time travelling
with an empty ship to the earnings for the reached chartering job is as good as possible for the
tanker-owners.
In this project a forecast for a set of pre-speciﬁed regions will be made, based on a system that
will estimate the destination of all large tankers around the globe and their respective estimated
time of arrival. A visualization of the currently used routes will also be made using a methodology
similar to that from the aerospace based on lines and waypoints to deﬁne where ships usually
follow the same path and where they commonly make a turn based on their destination. Using
this information should make it possible to get an overview of which regions are going to have a
high density of ships in the near future, and that could create a tool that could assist the current
analysts in making even better recommendations and thereby assist the ship owners by improving
their decision making ability with this additional information.[2]
1
==PAGE:6==
2
Problem Formulation
2.1
Case
With approximately 3,100 seafaring staff out of around 3,400 total employees, and over 100 tanker
ships running worldwide with a size between 37,000 dwt to 110,000 dwt, TORM is a huge com-
pany in the maritime tanker industry. With over 80% of TORM’s entire ﬂeet being based on tanker
shipping, and over 90% of their staff working on the ships, the company also has a relatively large
stake in the tanker market.
The way that the tanker shipping industry often works is through chartering ships out for trans-
portation of products such as gasoline, jet fuel & diesel oil. The price of every chartered journey is
bargained over with the customer. The bartering is based on factors such as the length and time
of the journey, and also based on the number of competing tankers that also wants to bid on the
same delivery. This works a bit like the systems that are known from taxis. A taxi is a chartered
transportation from point A to point B, and the taxi is only getting paid whenever it is on a char-
tered journey while the time between journeys only lose the taxi money on constant expenses
such as wear, gas & driver salary/time, or the journey to point A where the journey start is also an
unpaid extra expense for the taxi. Like taxis, there might be a buildup of multiple vessels at some
of the regions of the world where a lot of chartering is happening, just like the sometimes really
long line of taxis waiting for a customer at the airport.[3]
Therefore it might not always be the best choice to go to the "airport"-equivalent of the tanker
industry, since the large competition in the area might mean that the journeys have to be offered
at much more competitive pricing, lowering proﬁts. Another factor is that a tanker ship might have
ended a charter far away from the popular location, and the long unpaid journey from that location
might be a really bad idea because of the large cost of running these huge ships with crew, fuel &
maintenance.
So having some knowledge on how many ships which are going to be in a region at a certain time
could be very important information for knowing exactly how to position a ﬂeet of tankers for the
shortest possible route to a customer with a low number of competitors to maximize proﬁts. The
data that could support such a tool or system is actually available for everyone to purchase. A
safety system called Automatic Identiﬁcation System is mandated to be installed in every tanker
ship and it provides the exact coordinates, speed, headning and more, for ships with an hourly
poll rate updating it. This data is mainly shared with receivers on land and in-between ships that
are nearby each other, but a sattelite-based reciever network can pick up S-AIS data from all over
the world. TORM already pays a company with access to the full sattelite-based version for this
data, so it is already available for them to use.
So by using this data the exact location of all large tanker ships around the globe can be seen
and by combining data about their location, heading and speed over multiple hours of data, it
might be possible to predict their current destination and their estimated time of arrival. Doing
so for every working tanker on the map could give a global view of the number of tankers in
every region around the globe in the near future.[4] Currently TORM is trying to analyze the S-
AIS data manually, which gives them some idea of the current situation on the map, but this is a
time consuming task, and getting a similar level of in-depth analysis where every ship is looked at
individually and with multiple hours of data for every ship would be extremely hard or impossible
to do manually.
2
==PAGE:7==
2.2
Preceding Work
Before the start of this project, a project has been made on trying to discover the highways in
the sea for the tanker industry ships. In this preceding report the aforementioned S-AIS data was
analyzed to come up with a map of the highways that are used by the tanker industry. The S-AIS
data was analyzed in depth to get a better understanding of the data and the reliability of different
areas of it.
In this previous work there are some data cleaning that will be used on parts of the data describing
the regions. This data was converted into convex regions that could make it faster to calculate
whether or not a point sits within a region or not. The Central America region can be seen in ﬁgure
1 below.
Figure 1: Conversion of Central America region
The ﬁrst ﬁgure shows the regions that have been assigned to deﬁne the bigger region of Central
America, the picture in the middle shows these smaller regions merged together into the larger
level 2 region, which is used for analysis, and the last picture shows the convex region which are
used for calculations. All regions have been under the same type of conversion to create these
merged level 2 regions and the fully convex level 2 regions, which will be explained further later in
the report.
2.3
Problem Statement
The main problem to be solved is providing some sort of data analysis system that will take in the
S-AIS data that is already available and turn that into a usable prediction for the near future of the
destination of tanker ships. The way that this system will work is by using some of the knowledge
from the preceding work about creating a highway mapping system that can discover what high-
way a ship is sailing, and combine it with some new methods in order to predict the location of
individual ships. Therefore the problem statement will be as follows:
Create a system that utilizes historical S-AIS data from ships in order to predict the destination of
tanker ships across the globe.
3
==PAGE:8==
3
Related Work
To look further into this subject, it would be wise to ﬁrst take a look at some of the previous re-
search made that could possibly carry some relevance to the subject at hand.
Research has been made by the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre (JRC) in 2015
to determine the completeness and accuracy of the automatic ship reporting data, which includes
the AIS data that will be analyzed in this project. This together with previous ﬁndings and infor-
mation gained through questioning of the source of the speciﬁc data used in the project, will give
a good indication of how reliable the data will be in the analysis and how much it can therefore be
trusted. The conclusion was that a small number of the received data contains errors partly from
the installed equipment and partly from the reception of the signal. When a ship is only seen by
a single satellite in the SAIS system, the satellite only receives around 74% of the sent data, two
satellites cuts this down to 86% & with three satellites it would be further increased to 97%.
Although these numbers are a few years old they give a good indication that not all data might
have reached the database that will be used in this report, and there might therefore be some
points in the data where the data skips a transmission never received from a ship, especially
when they are out of reach of the coastal AIS or LRIT systems.
The paper also analyzed the data in detail revealing that certain ships might have a much higher
rate of errors than others and that the latency in the system created an average positional error
of 23 nautical miles in their testing. This information is also really useful for some of the later
methodology for determining when a ship is still on route. (Greidanus, Alvarez, Eriksen and Gam-
mieri, 2015)
Some of the information relayed over the AIS data is also inputted manually by humans, this
means an introduction of things like human error could be inevitable. Abbas Harati-Mokharti et.
al. from Liverpool John Moores University & Chabahar Maritime University looked further into
these human factors in the AIS system in their 2007 paper; Automatic Identiﬁcation System (AIS):
a human factors approach. In this paper discussion is made about the possibility and amount
of errors occurring, the type of errors and the importance of the ﬁelds where errors most often
happen. All of this builds on top of the previous paper mentioned in ensuring that there is enough
knowledge about the data to know what to trust and to easily identify more of the typical errors
when working with the data.
Some of their more interesting ﬁndings include; that mariners can not fully trust the data in the AIS
system because it is not reliable in many cases. That many input errors in the ship’s navigational
status are due to memory slips or omission to execute an action. The AIS integrity is dependent
on a lot of manual inputs which as mentioned before are not always perfect. Lastly optional ﬁelds
such as the destination and ETA are manually inputted and not always considered important and
therefore they are not updated so often leading to outdated information being transmitted in some
of the ﬁelds of the AIS data. [5]
4
==PAGE:9==
A similar type of prediction using AIS data has also been made before in the paper "Automatic
identiﬁcation system (AIS) data based ship-supply forecasting. In this paper the focus is put on the
amount of ships that will be within a region in the near future, and these numbers are found using
a three-step forecasting process consisting of predicting the unknown destination, prediction ar-
rival & predicting the anchor time. This paper shows a lot of potential in forecasting the congestion
of ships in each regions when predicting it for the dry bulk carrier ship type, which uses a very
similar type of business model to the tanker ships of chartering for an A to B transport. This paper
was able to reach a prediction accuracy of 98% for the destination of the ships with a deviation in
ETA of 4 to 5 days, which the paper considers decent in consideration of the time it takes a ship
to complete a longer route. [7]
A forecast accuracy on the destination of 98% is deﬁnitely useful especially if it can be that ac-
curate when the ship is still not close to completing its route. The deviation of ETA between 4
to 5 days does seem very large in comparison to the data available using AIS and it would be
interesting to see if a more accurate estimation of the ETA could be achieved by using some new
methods for the estimation.
There is also a paper currently in the works that focuses on creating a route library based on
previous AIS data for ships. This paper focuses on creating as accurate a route planning as
possible with the actual historical AIS data from ships that made similar routes. In this paper
the main researcher Jie Cai throuroughly analysed AIS data from ships and concluded that ships
will follow a different pattern depending on the time of year. This was split up into three different
seasons that each have a slightly different route.[8]
The study seems to mainly focus on the open-sea travels of ships such as a ship travelling from
Northern Europe to Central America, or the West Coast of North America to Far East Asia. Even
so the conclusion that there are some type of seasonality in the way that ships travel is important
to note. This could have an effect on the way that a system were to predict a ships destination
based on its route, and it could also affect how a prediction system should use the stored historical
observations based on seasonality.
5
==PAGE:10==
4
Methodology
This paper examines data provided by the Tanker transport company TORM as a case study.
Herein the investigation is centered at a software product that will be evaluated on its effectiveness
at ship route prediction in order to try and make as precise a prediction as possible with the second
goal being extending how far into the future the prediction can take place and still stay accurate.
These methods for testing were part of an agile approach where it is vital that tests and changes
can be performed as quickly as possible in order to analyse and decide on the next steps of the
research process.
4.1
Limitations
The provided S-AIS data is given by TORM under NDA, so only snippets of information from the
S-AIS data is allowed to be shown in this paper to allow anyone without an NDA to view the
content. This limits how much information can be shared with the viewer in relation to the S-AIS
data. This mostly comes down to sharing large parts of the actual data itself, so all of the analysis
and discussion will not be limited.
The data provided was only accurate for just under two years of data, it spans a period between
the ﬁrst month of 2019 to the last month of 2020, therefore it will be hard to analyze and conﬁrm
actual seasonality in the data over a longer period of time in this paper. A machine learning
algorithm will usually also make more accurate predictions with a larger dataset since there would
be more data to compare to, but the given data should be enough to still create the concept of a
system that works.
6
==PAGE:11==
5
Framework
The framework for this case study is described in the ﬂowchart below in ﬁgure 2. This ﬂowchart
showcases the systematic approach that will be used in this study exposition.
Figure 2: Flowchart of the case study framework
First step is data cleaning, were there will be an analysis on the stability of the different information
that is given in the data provided, since some of this is machine generated and some is human
input. The data cleaning will also analyse the type of errors that are in the data and clean it de-
pending on what information that will be used for this case study and what information is deemed
not useful. Then there will be some data pre-processing where the given information is processed
to ﬁt the delimitations that were created and to build a usable representation of some of the given
data. Next up is a data analysis where the system for handling the data is built. Lastly there will be
a bit of testing of the system to ﬁnd the most usable setup possible from the tested alternatives.
Here the system created in the data analysis is used and the outputted results are used to go
back to the last step and improve the performance.
5.1
Key Performance Indicators
To make sure there is a way to measure the performance for the system in some usable terms. A
set of performance indicators will be set so that the performance goal of this system can be seen
more clearly.
For this, the main purpose of the system is to predict the ship movements ahead of time, and that
the outputted prediction is as accurate as possible. Here it will be the goal to predict a destination
close to the ﬁnal destination port that a ship is visiting and the general region that it will be within.
This is because a ship could easily take a charter from within such a region without much of a
downside, so they could be contenders for other ships within that region when someone needs
transportation.
To measure these, there will be a focus on some key performance indicators such as the mean
average deviation of the predicted destination versus the actual visited location. This will be used
to see how close the predictions are, but it will also help to see exactly how many days ahead
the prediction can be made and still perform at a reasonably accurate level. The accuracy mostly
means when the machine learning is able to consistently classify the correct area to a new obser-
vation.
Graphs of time and deviation will also be a large part of the KPIs here. The reasoning being
that this graph will give an indication of how well the predictions perform over the entire journey,
and to see how much the deviation ﬂuctuates. Here it is also important that the results from the
predictions does perform at a consistent level throughout a journey in a predictable manner. I.e.
the system will perform better and better when the time to arrival is reduced and does not have
sudden very poor results.
7
==PAGE:12==
5.2
Data Processing
The data that will be used throughout this report, is the Satellite Automatic Identiﬁcation System,
in short called S-AIS. This AIS system is required by the International Maritime Organization to
be installed on any vessel above 500 gross ton and above 300 gross ton for ships that travel
internationally and any passenger vessels. These systems transmit some of the basic data of a
vessel such as its position, speed, heading, name, and course every hour. The main objective
for this system is enhancing safety at sea, and the data that these systems send are available for
everyone, and it would therefore be a tool available for a company that wishes to utilize it in hope
of providing a better analysis on ship positioning.
Normal AIS relies on ships working together to relay information from ships further out from shore.
The negative effect from this method is the inability for ships further out at sea to communicate
their data if there are not enough ships in line to relay it all the way back to shore. To solve this
a version of the system have been made called S-AIS, which picks up the signals from ships all
around the globe through satellites. The data from these systems are not free though, since they
require a large network of satellites, but large maritime companies usually already pay for the
S-AIS data to get as complete a view as possible of the positioning of ships. [21][22]
The S-AIS data have been provided by TORM, which receives it from an outstanding company
that collects the data. This data has been made anonymous by the request of TORM, so the
actual ship names have been replaced with the column "RN" which just assigns a number to each
ship that TORM can translate back to real names. The entirety of the data set was provided in
23 comma separated value ﬁles and spans almost 2 years, from 2019-01-01 to 2020-12-01. A
snippet of a few rows from the data can be seen below in ﬁgure 3.
Figure 3: Snippet of the AIS data provided.
The information stored in each row is quite a vast amount compared to just knowing the location
of a ship. To better explain what the different columns mean and how to handle it, take a look at
ﬁgure 4. A data analyst from TORM & other studies was also used to estimate the reliability of
these columns, since some are written by machine sensors while others are inputted manually by
someone by the crew of the respective ship.
8
==PAGE:13==
Figure 4: Short explanation of AIS columns
Also take note, the destination is inputted manually, so even in cases where the information in
that column is properly updated, the captain or shipping company might have different callsigns
for different ports, so two different inputs might be two different callsigns reffering to the same
port. This issue is solved by the S-AIS data provider for TORM, which create a "DestinationTidied"
column that takes the known callsigns for each port and standardize them to a single callsign for
each port or port area in some cases with larger ports.
5.3
Delimitations
The data provided is very extensive and covers a large time period for a huge amount of ships out
at sea. To create a more agile workﬂow where new tests can quickly be executed, it was decided
to limit the data while testing to a set of criteria to allow this fast execution. These criteria is meant
to reduce the amount of ship routes that needs to be analyzed and computed while still executing
it in a manner similar to that which would be used on the entire dataset of ship routes. By doing
so the assumption will be that the system will be able to predict routes from this criteria with the
same accuracy as it would if any route on the world was taken while the entire dataset was used.
Therefore the exact same steps could be made with a different set of data or the entire dataset,
and it should conclude to a similar result. The data is also delimited to only a month worth of data.
The reasoning for this is again the sheer number of datapoints to go through that will take a lot of
time.
9
==PAGE:14==
6
State of the art
Unfortunately it was not possible to ﬁnd the state of the art for route prediction technology within
the maritime industry, but rather in the form of other types of route prediction.
One of the most advanced types of route prediction is most likely made for missile systems that
has to predict an incoming missiles trajectory and intercept it on its predicted path. The only prob-
lem with these systems is they are highly classiﬁed and therefore not something that this report
can gain access to or talk about in further detail. Therefore the next-best system would be route
prediction for cars by using their GPS signal.
There have been articles such as "A personal route prediction system based on trajectory data
mining", which tries to data mine historical GPS data of a person’s routing patterns to and from
destinations in order to make a probabilistic prediction of the routing for a future route.
This system consists of three mayor modules. The ﬁrst module continuously mines data about a
person’s patterns in routing in order to tolerate what they call "different kinds of disturbance in tra-
jectory data". This module’s job is to gather GPS information and ﬁlter it into useful data. A set of
ﬁve ﬁlters are implemented so the data is sorted correctly based on the mode of transport and to
remove outliers from the data. These ﬁlters are; The Duplication ﬁlter, which checks the distance
between two consecutive points is smaller than a threshold. The Speed ﬁlter, which checks if the
speed between two consecutive points is above a set threshold. The Acceleration ﬁlter, which
removes data above a set acceleration threshold. The total distance ﬁlter, which ﬁlters redundant
data of users moving around in the same area, such as inside a building. The centroid of a set
size of data is calculated and if the maximum distance to the centroid is below a threshold, the
data is seen as redundant. And lastly the angle ﬁlter, which calculates the angle of three consec-
utive points and checks if it is below a set threshold.
The second module is there to create complete functional routes from the data from module one,
this is done with their CRPM algorithm.
The third and last module is the one that will choose the most suitable route patterns and build
probability trees based on the routes from module two for prediction.
The probability for taking a certain route is made based on a set of probabilities for visiting a set
of regions r. Which they express as the following probability formula:
P(r,, r1, r2, r3, . . . , rk) = P(r,|r1, r2, r3, . . . , rk) × P(r1, r2, r3, . . . , rk)
The way that this system works is by relying on the presence of a mobile phone with working GPS
capabilities to constantly relay the GPS information of a persons whereabouts when travelling.
This system strives to use this data in a way where intelligent transportation systems are able to
give drivers better advice which can lead to a better fuel economy for hybrid vehicles and provide
better location-based services for users. Being more certain in which route a person will take
could also increase the accuracy of giving people advertisements of places that they will pass on
their route. [1]
10
==PAGE:15==
7
Theory
7.1
Aerospace Routing Waypoints
The way that the waypoint system works will be inspired by the method used in the aerospace.
Here an airplane’s route are deﬁned by straight lines going in between a pre-deﬁned set of way-
points, which are often weather stations, to keep the plane up to date with the weather on its
planned route. An example of a way a plane might plan its route is shown below in ﬁgure 5, where
the plane is set to take off at Kastrup Airport and ﬂy past The Leaning Tower of Pisa landing at
San Guisto Airport.
Figure 5: Route made using SkyVector route planner
While someone might think that the airspace is like a road that goes in any direction for any dis-
tance, but the fact is that planes that have a task of getting from one airport to another will often
take the same shortest path, which actually creates a sort of roadway in between airports. The
same argument can be made when looking at the S-AIS data for ships, difference being that the
road going in any direction will never cross dry land of course. Ships going between two regions
or two ports also usually use the same path. This also comes from the high cost that time has for
a large ship made of thousands of tonnes of metal, so it would be an extremely unwise decision
to not go the fastest route possible. In the marine industry charts are sometimes used with pre-
deﬁned waypoints to deﬁne a route.
7.2
Multiobjective Optimization
Deﬁning the actual KPIs of an algorithm can sometimes carry multiple objectives. In these cases
it sometimes will be harder to deﬁne one result as superior to another. In these situations the
concern is trying to optimize on several objectives simultaneously. Optimizing might lead to some
trade-offs which somehow have to be valued as to get the most desirable results from the collec-
tion of all objectives. In the case of a maritime prediction system, these objectives could be the
accuracy of the prediction versus the time in advance that it can be predicted. Finding an optimum
for a multiobjective problem can be done using the following methods.
11
==PAGE:16==
Pareto Optimality
Pareto Optimality is a point at which none of the objectives are able to improve further, without
worsening one or multiple other objectives. The Pareto optimality is a good solution when it is
not desirable to begin making trade-offs on the objectives to further improve other variables. This
type of optimality is great when not knowing the exact value that each of the objectives have and
the objectives does not have a direct correlation that always making one variable worse when the
other improves.
One design for Pareto Optimality is called dominance. In this design the performance is directly
compared to the objectives values only being better than a previously compared result. Here,
a multi-objective function with the two objective functions fx() and fy() with (x, y) requires a new
result (x’, y’) to be both:
x > x′ and y > y′
Where the optimization tries to minimize both objectives. If one of these two formulas are not met,
the new result (x’,y’) is deemed not better than the old (x,y). This is a very simple and easy solution
that makes sure that a new best result is always better than the old no matter the importance of
the individual objectives.
Pareto Frontier
Another way to ﬁnd an optimal result could be by using the Pareto Frontier. In this case the entire
criterion space can be mapped and the frontier is extracted as the boundary of the criterion space
where the results are not directly dominated by another point in the criterion space. By not being
dominated, means having the best result for a given objective value on one dimension. When
comparing two objectives, this method is also known as the Pareto Curve. An example can be
seen in ﬁgure.
These frontiers can also be created through testing. In this kind of generation, a large number of
tests is made and the points that are dominated by others are removed. The remaining points will
then deﬁne the Pareto Frontier. Generating the frontier is although time-consuming since a lot of
points are likely to be dominated by the few that actually land on the frontier, and the approach is
also not a sureﬁre way as to achieve a smooth and correct frontier.
Constraint Methods
When using the Pareto Frontier, the constraints can be used to remove sections of the frontier
and obtain a more precise point in the criterion space. Here all but one of the objectives can be
constrained, and the last objective chosen can then be optimized to it’s most optimal point within
the speciﬁed constraints. These constraints are obtained through the problem designer or by an
ordering of the objectives.
Lexicographic Method
Using the lexicographic method is also a way of using constraints to ﬁnd a solution. The objectives
are ranked in order of importance and converted to a series of single-objective optimizations.
Then these single-objective functions are ranked based on importance and sorted. The objectives
are then solved, starting from the most important objective and then going down the ranking of
other objectives in the order of importance. For every new optimization down the line, a new
constraint is added that makes sure that the previous objective is only able to stay the same or
improve with the new solutions, as shown in ﬁgure 6.
12
==PAGE:17==
Figure 6: By Mykel J.: Iterations of optimization for the lexicographic method
It is always known that the optimization in each new iteration after the ﬁrst is feasible, since the
exact solution that the previous iteration gave is always available. It is even possible that a future
iteration ﬁnds a way to even improve one of the previous objectives further. The solution that
is obtained by using the lexicographic method is very dependent on the sequence at which the
objectives are optimized in, and the weight in importance for each objective is almost inﬁnite
between objectives, since the method doesn’t allow any decreases in a previous objective, even
if it could lead to a huge increase in another one down the line.
Weight Methods
Sometimes it is possible to ﬁnd a preference in objectives and their relative importance. In these
cases the objectives can be weighted against each other to ﬁnd the optimal solution.
Weighted Sum Method
In cases where the weights are not obvious, it is possible to use a vector of weights to convert the
objectives into a single objective. Here the weights has to be non-negative and sum to a value of
1. This vector is used to trace the space of different weights over the Pareto Frontier. The point of
which the vector is parallel with the Pareto Frontier is where the weights can be found. Here the
weights sum to 1 and corresponds with the angle of the vector, i.e. at 45 degrees the weights are
equal. This is illustrated below.
Figure 7: By Mykel J.: Vector hitting the solution space to ﬁnd optimal weights
The downside when comparing it to the constraint method is that it can not ﬁnd solutions in
concave areas of a solution space. The w1 weight is then optimized where w2 = 1 −w1 to ﬁnd the
solution. [6]
13
==PAGE:18==
7.3
Bucket Sort
Since the problem that this paper is trying to solve also includes a lot of data and distances,
it might be relevant to implement an algorithm that can reduce the time it takes to sort a large
amount of elements.
Bucket sort is a well-known method for optimizing the sorting of elements distributed across a
range in a correct order. The way the bucketing works is by creating a number of buckets and
assigning a group of possible element values into each bucket. After this the buckets are already
in lexical order and can be sorted independently, which cuts the sorting of a large set of elements
down into buckets of smaller sets of elements.
An example of this could be a random sequence S of numbers that ranges between 0 and 99.
S = {8 27 22 89 42 73 21 88 33 46}
Buckets are then made within the range at which numbers can appear and in a manner where
they cover the entire range and have a lexical order to them. This could be 10 buckets Bn which
could follow these ranges:
B1 = 0 to 9, .. , Bn = 10n −10 to 10n −1, .. , B10 = 90 to 99,
Then the numbers in S is ﬁrstly moved into the correct buckets matching the areas at which the
buckets range between.
Figure 8: Example of a bucket sort
Since the buckets are already in a lexical order, the only thing left unsorted is the sequence of el-
ements within buckets that have multiple elements stored. The next step is therefore to sort each
bucket correctly and then combine the buckets for the ﬁnal result. The result from this type of sort
is a faster way of sorting the elements, since the need to compare elements is greatly reduced to
only comparing elements within the same bucket. The number of buckets used is up to the user
and will have an effect on exactly how efﬁcient the sorting is.
The data sorted will also have an effect on the bucketing. A set of data with large clusters creates
buckets that still have a relatively large set of elements within to sort. Therefore the performance
of bucketing is best when the data is as evenly distributed across the entire range as possible.
7.4
Bucketing
While the bucket sort method can be used to sort all of the elements, it might also be relevant
to be able to exclude elements in some cases where i.e. the distance between two points has a
constraint in length, making the elements in some of the buckets completely infeasible no matter
their positioning in the bucket’s space. So in this case, a set of subregions partitioned from the
entire region are still used, which are also called buckets.
The goal of this method is not to sort the entirety of all of the elements, but rather to only ﬁnd the
closest subregions and sort the elements within those, to save computing time. The general way
of doing this is almost identical to that of step one in the bucket sort method. The only difference
14
==PAGE:19==
being that there is a main number or other object being sorted as well. After assigning a buckets,
the buckets that are outside a length constraint from the main bucket of which the main number
is in, are removed. All of the remaining buckets are then left and can be sorted to ﬁnd the closest
results.
These buckets can also be made into rectangular shapes, i.e. if the buckets are assigned based
on two ranges, which could be coordinate longitude & latitude. Although the method does also
allow the use of other shapes. Since the compared element could lie on or close to the border of
a bucket, the neighbouring buckets are not excluded to make sure that all of elements that falls
within the length contraint are included. In the case of rectangular buckets, this means taking
all of the eight neighbouring buckets that share a border or a point with the main bucket that the
compared element is within. An example can be seen in ﬁgure 9.
Figure 9: Example of a bucketing subregion selection
The objective is to ﬁnd the dot’s (dark red) bucket (red) that it is within, and then include the neigh-
bouring buckets (orange). From this point all of the dots that lie within those selected buckets are
sorted and every dot outside this area have been excluded from the problem.
7.5
Heading calculation
When calculating the difference in heading between two sets of data, it requires a little function
to work properly, since the angle in heading goes from a range of -180 to 180, and resets when
moving across any of the two extremes. The way that the difference between two headings A & B
is calculated, is by using the formula:
|A −B| < 180 ⇒|A −B|
When the requirements for this formula is true, the shortest difference in heading does not overlap
the point where the numbers reset at the two extremes. If it is not true, the following two formulas
are checked to ﬁnd the difference in heading.
A > B ⇒(360 −A) + B
A < B ⇒(360 −B) + A
One of the three formulas has to be valid and calculated the correct difference in heading between
point A & point B.
15
==PAGE:20==
7.6
Haversine formula
To deﬁne the distance between a set of coordinates, there is a need for a way to calculate the
shortest distance between two points on the surface of a sphere. To do so, the Haversine Formula
is a great and very popular method.
The Haversine Formula takes the longitude and latitude from two points together with the radius
of the sphere that the two points are located on, and outputs a distance in the same unit used for
the radius. The haversine function can be split up into three parts to make it easier to understand,
as shown below:
a = sin2(latdifference
2
) + cos(lat1) × cos(lat2) × sin2(londifference
2
)
b = 2 × atan2(sqrt(a), sqrt(1 −a))
c = R × b
Where latdifference & londifference is the absolute difference between the two coordinates in the
latitude direction and the longitude direction respectively. R is the radius of the sphere that the
calculation is made on, which for our case is put to equal 6371 kilometers. In the case with the
earth this number can vary slightly since the earth is not completely spherical in shape. The
equatorial radius is smaller at only 6356.75 Kilometers and calculating the polar radius gives a
slightly greater number of 6378.14 Kilometers. 6371 Kilometers is known as the volumetric mean
radius or global-average and is precise enough in most cases, since the earth only varies up to
14.25 Kilometers in radius from the volumetric mean radius, the variability in length is less than
0.3% which is a close-enough result, but not the exact distance.[9] [10]
7.7
Point positioning
When having a line going from A(xA, yA) to B(xB, yB) to determine the side of which a point
P(xP , yP ) lies compared to the line, it is needed to make an equation that will calculate this no
matter the distance to the line. One way of doing so would be by using the formula:
(xP −xA) × (yB −yA) −(yP −yA) × (xA −xB)
This will give some number based on the distance the point is away from the line and the number
will either be a positive value or a negative value based on which side of the line it lies on. This
also relies on which point of the line is the ﬁrst. When going from A to B, positive value counts
as the right side of the line and the negative as the left. This is important especially when using
this information to ﬁnd out when a point is within a region deﬁned by a set of lines, since one
line calculated in the wrong direction would switch the result making it infeasible to be within the
region after the next implementation.
When trying to deﬁne a point as inside or outside a region, a downside of the formula is that it
counts the line as an inﬁnitely long line, so the point can be far off from the actual line and still
calculate inside or outside, because of this a concave region would result in certain areas of the
region not calculating correctly since the lines would overlap inside the region, making some lines
count both inside and outside for different points that should always be counted as inside. A sim-
ple ﬁx to this problem is to only have convex regions, since a convex region would never have any
lines cross anywhere inside the region. Whenever a concave region is encountered, it is possible
to convert it into multiple concave regions that can describe the same area. Doing so makes the
formula work again. [11]
16
==PAGE:21==
7.8
Machine learning
In this paper it is planned to utilize machine learning to compare part of a new journey to historical
data and thereby come up with a prediction of destination based on where the matching historical
data went. There are also a large quantity of data that needs to be compared in this step, so the
algorithm used has to be efﬁcient enough in a manner so it can easily be performed on a very
large quantity of data.
In machine learning we have both clustering and grouping as two different types of approaches
to machine learning. In this case it can be assumed that the clusters are known, since the data
stored would include the actual destination port that the ship visited in the end, and the regions
that the data is within is already known. The region is therefore known as the cluster that we ﬁrst
of all need to specify for the success of the system. Each group given for the regions will have a
large amount of data, and it will most likely be possible to ﬁnd a similar route that ends somewhere
within the region in the data, to compare a new ship route with.
To do so the machine learning classiﬁcation algorithm K Nearest Neighbour is tested. The Nearest
Centroid Classiﬁer would also be a close contender to do some testing on.
K-Nearest Neighbour
The K-Nearest Neighbour is a really fast and simple yet effective calculation to use for classifying
a new observation, which in this case would be a ship on its way to some unknown destination.
Here the K stands for the number of nearby observations in the stored data that the new obser-
vations will be compared to. The previous data have already been classiﬁed and the number of
observations from each class within the K closest to the new observation will be counted and the
class with the largest recurrence will then be assigned to the new observation.
With this method the vector distance between the new observation and the historical data will be
found in order to ﬁnd the K closest. The K is a variable that can be adjusted so it suits the clas-
siﬁcation of a certain set of data as best as possible. A K of four would mean the four historical
data observations that has the shortest vector distance to the new observation would be counted.
An example of a K of three can be seen below in ﬁgure 10 where the observations only have two
variables making it visible in 2D.
Figure 10: Mock-up example of a K of 3 nearest neighbour
In this example the different shape and colour deﬁne three different classes, and each shape
deﬁned an observation. When looking at the 3 nearest observations, even through the closest is
the circles, the new observation gets classiﬁed as a square since there lies two squares and only
one circle within the K of 3. Thereby also showing that setting a different K like K of 1, can output
different results since a K of 1 would mean the new observation would be classiﬁed as a circle
instead of a square.
Variables that are compared between observations in this example were also fairly simple, in
reality it could be a list of a bunch of different variables that are compared. [12]
17
==PAGE:22==
Nearest Centroid Classiﬁer
The Nearest Centroid Classiﬁer is an even faster algorithm when compared to the K Nearest
Neighbour. This method cuts the number of vector distance comparisons down signiﬁcantly. The
way this is achieved is by only comparing the new observation to a set of ﬁctional observations
that each represent a class that the new observation could be classiﬁed as. This is done through
the simpliﬁcation of each class being made into a singular observation with the average value of
all of the observations inside that class. When classifying a new observation the vector distance
to each of these average observations for each class is compared and the new observation is
assigned to the centroid with the shortest vector distance. This distance to each variable will be
found with this formula:
|OCnv| = sqrt((VCn−O)2)
(1)
Where O is the new observation we want to classify, V is the variable v, Cn is class number n of
our classes and OCnv is the distance between the observation variable v and the class n variable
v.
Here in ﬁgure 11 the same example as before with KNN is shown with the Nearest Centroid
Classiﬁer.
Figure 11: Mock-up example of a Nearest Centroid Classiﬁer
Now the same example as last time seems to give the squares as the best option
One difference is the requirement to also properly update this centroid observation with the correct
weights every time a new observation is added to the class.
The results of the centroids might also differ in these cases since there can be a large variance
in the number of data-points of which each centroid is built upon. This means that one centroid
might consist of one point of data while another has 20. This might dillute the high in data centroid
with some outliers that worsen the precision, while the centroid for a single port might be more or
less set at a random accuracy to the actual median data of a ship on a voyage to that port. This
could mean that a centroid with one random outlier might ﬁt new data better than the actual port it
is going to, because the many data-points for that point makes the correct centroid less accurate.
[13]
18
==PAGE:23==
8
Analysis
In the ﬁrst part of the analysis, the data is set up in a manner that would be able to provide useful
information for a bulk carrier company and also provide a usable platform to make a prediction
system. The data was partially cleaned in the preceding work and have then been further cleaned
here in order to clean some previously unused data.
8.1
Data
TORM has a list of regions which have been divided in a way that they deemed useful, based on
their own internal knowledge. This list gives multiple levels of precision based on how large or
small the regions should be. The hierarchy list can be seen below in ﬁgure 12.
Figure 12: Region Hierarchy
Almost every region in this hierarchy is completely under one of the lower levels, only the Africa
region in level 1 splits into both west and east of Suez in level 0, as the only exception. It is
also clear on this hierarchy list, that TORM might see the Suez canal as a particularly important
bottleneck for ships, since their level 0 regions are purely based on which side of that canal the
area is located. These regions can be used as the output of the system that will be created, to give
an estimated overview of the level of saturation of tankers that each region will experience over
a time period. The regions themselves are deﬁned as a set of multiple coordinates that together
shape the region on a map. Below is a map with all of the level 2 regions shown in ﬁgure 13.
19
==PAGE:24==
Figure 13: All regions shown together
As can be seen on the plot of the regions, the entirety of the coordinate system from -180 to 180
longitude & -90 to 90 latitude is not covered with the regions. To better understand these regions
and their placement, ﬁgure 14 gives a better visualization of their positioning on the world map.
Figure 14: Regions visualized on a world map
The regions are made to cover ports, and therefore more or less follow around the coastlines
of the larger continents. In some cases where the regions go far away from the coast it might
be because of islands further out from the shore, that are also getting covered under the same
region. These regions will later be incorporated into the prediction in an appropriate manner.
A list of ports have also been provided, which gives the latitude & longitude coordinates of every
port that is of signiﬁcance to this system. This includes 12,874 port locations with some of these
locations being different parts of the same port. All of the ports are visualized as blue dots on a
world map in ﬁgure 15.
20
==PAGE:25==
Figure 15: Ports visualized on a world map
For this project it will be assumed that this list is a complete list of every location that a tanker ship
might visit, even though there might be ports too small to be on this list or unofﬁcial and therefore
not listed. Using this list it will be possible to correlate the ports with the respective region that
they fall within, and the ships inputted destination with a certain region.
8.2
Data Analysis
In order to delimit the data, the ﬁrst step taken is to remove some of the data that is not completely
clean. This means removing rows where the shipType is not "Tanker", data where the coordinates
are out of bounds are also removed, since some ships had difﬁculties noting their actual location,
and ended up transmitting wrong data or in some cases even data outside the correct latitude
& longitude bounds. Some of this removed data does represent real tanker ships, but not being
certain which are real or not would not beneﬁt the analysis and testing in this project, so they have
to be removed.
It is important that the leftover data remains as useful as possible for an agile approach, therefore
it was decided to start by using data from a single month, to create the waypoints. This should give
plenty of data to work with while also having recordings of vessels that travel all over the world.
The month of S-AIS data of which the algorithm will be based is between the dates 01-01-2019
to 01-02-2019.
While the ships does transmit a status that could be e.g. "moving using engines", "Anchored",
"Mooring", this information is not always reliable and could therefore create issues in the ex-
tracted routes if they were to be relied upon when extracting all of the routes. Therefore the actual
journeys that a vessel is making is decided upon its coordinate position and relative closeness to
a port when staying stationary for a while.
While it would be much easier to pick out routes based on their end destination, and thereby
much easier to delimit it to journeys that end in a highly populated area, such as Rotterdam, it
would most likely interfere with the performance of the prediction if all routes had the same ending
destination.
21
==PAGE:26==
8.3
Filtering
The next step of the analysis is all about preparing the data in the data pre-processing step for
the analysis and the algorithm.
The coding language used for this project is R 3.6.1 in combination with R Studio. First part of the
code will execute some of the limitations. Starting off the given AIS data and the Port coordinates
are imported into data.frames. The AIS data is then run through a for loop that extracts all rows
with shipType "Tanker" and all of the previously mentioned conditions such as being within the
correct longitude & latitude ranges. All this data is saved in a new data.frame with name "Ships2".
Voyage start
Next up a new column is added to the imported data, which indicates which region each of the
voyages starts from. To start this off, the data is sorted by RN number and then each RN is sorted
by its respective time found in the Movement_Date_time column. It does so by ﬁrst checking if the
data still belongs to the same RN number, i.e. the same ship, and then if it has been standing still
while moored close to a port for multiple hours of data. If this is true, then the ship’s starting region
is set to that of the nearby port’s region. if the code then spots movement on the next datapoint, it
will just check that it is indeed still the same ship and assign the last data’s start region to it. When
the ship comes to a stop once again close to a new port, this port’s region will now take over as
the start region instead.
When the RN number changes, the new data is not assigned any starting region until this new
vessel makes a stop at a port within a region.
Port check
It is also necessary to know which port a ship is visiting. This requires ﬁnding the closest port
from a list of 12.873 ports against thousands of rows of coordinates. To make this more efﬁcient a
set of optimizations were created that would skip unnecessary computation. Ships with a speed
above 5 knots are never considered in port since they are still moving and might just be moving
close by a port, so these scenarios does not get a port assigned. The ﬁrst port that ships would
be compared to would be their own given destination, this way some data might only need to be
compared to one port to ﬁnd a match.
To optimize this process, a bucketing algorithm is implemented to reduce the number of required
checks. Ports are divided up into four large blocks that each have four smaller blocks within.
The large blocks are divided into above or below 0 latitude & above or below 0 longitude. The
smaller regions are similarly divided in the middle. This gives them an extra column "Block" in
the data.frame that indicates which block they are a part of by numbering between 1 to 16. The
different blocks can be seen in ﬁgure 16
22
==PAGE:27==
Figure 16: Sectioned map for grouping ports
AIS data rows are then ﬁrst checked against the large blocks and their the matching blocks smaller
blocks to quickly exclude a large part of the port coordinates that does not fall close by the data
position. The remaining port coordinates are then checked against the AIS data coordinates and
the ﬁrst port that fall within 0.1 degrees of both longitude and latitude is saved in a new column
named "Port" in the "Ships3" data.frame. This stops the current loop early if the closest port is
checked early in the loop, and the strict distance limit on the coordinates should make it impossi-
ble to stop at the wrong port.
23
==PAGE:28==
8.4
Machine Learning
With the collection of data at every waypoint and a database ﬁlled with previous routes. It makes
for an unmanageable amount of combinations of data and routes. While looking at individual
waypoints will give an indication of a set of possible destinations based on the waypoint and the
direction travelled from it, it still leaves us with a list of multiple destinations. In some cases, such
as the Panama Canal or the Suez Canal, all ships will travel at the same route up until the point
where they’re out on the other side of this area, since ships going to a wide variety of destinations
all have to travel through the same point at these locations. In these cases it will be very difﬁcult
to discover the destination of a ship until they passed these kinds of areas, since almost all of
the ships travelling to these locations will be one the same list of possible destinations at every
waypoint. An example of this can be seen in ﬁgure 17, where all of the possible destinations within
the Mediterranean & Europe are depicted from a ship that just sailed through the Suez Canal.
Figure 17: Possible paths of a ship from Suez
Therefore, to better the discovery of the actual route a ship might take, it could have a beneﬁt to
implement a system such as machine learning that will ﬁnd patterns and utilize some of the be-
forehand unused data such as the ship’s RN number, speed, size, etc. By doing so, the machine
learning could learn the patterns of ships, which might exclude or lower the chance to visit certain
areas because it learned that a speciﬁc ship prefers visiting certain regions over others, or that a
ship that slowed down usually visits a nearby port, or that ships with a short length usually prefers
shorter routes.
These type of discoveries would require a deep human analysis into the data to even have a
chance to discover any of such patterns for a speciﬁc time, and these patterns might change over
time or with the seasons, making it extremely difﬁcult to always keep an updated list of the pat-
terns by human analysis. With the use of machine learning, the system would always have the
ﬂexibility to discover and change patterns based on the newest data.
24
==PAGE:29==
Figure 18:
Waypoint data
delegation
Throughout all of the waypoints created, the total amount of data
points stored is 2931. Of these points of data in the waypoints,
the delegation between the different regions can be seen in ﬁgure
18.
When taking a look at the delegation between regions there
is a huge difference in the amount of waypoints available for
each region.
With the South European (SEU) region be-
ing the most common between all waypoints, and the South
& East Asia region having a very sparse number of way-
points.
With the machine learning algorithm this could lead to some is-
sues, if the number of historical AIS data for some regions are as
sparse. It could lead to regions with a stronger presence in the
data, being more likely to be assigned to new observations that sit
in between multiple groups. In some cases if a waypoint does not
contain that much data to begin with, there is also an increased
chance that a waypoint might just be missing enough data for a
region to actually convince the KNN that it is the correct region to
assign. I.e. A waypoints might have one previous observation of the SEA region and ﬁve of the
FEA region, so no matter how close to the previous SEA observation the new observation lies, it
would still be assigned the FEA region as long as K > 1.
25
==PAGE:30==
8.5
Waypoints
Taking some inspiration from the knowledge gained from the aerospace routing, combined with
the information that is available in the S-AIS data, it might be possible to predict or at least esti-
mate the destination of ships based on the path they are taking. Therefore it would be interesting
to set up a similar waypoint system for ships that will deﬁne the paths that they take, so there can
be some insight into predicting or estimating the destination they are sailing towards.
In the case of airplanes, the waypoints are based on a vast network of airports and weather sta-
tions around the world. This results in a large set of waypoints with a ﬁxed positioning to these
geographical landmarks. In this case with the maritime industry, the points of interest that can be
used as waypoints are locations in the middle of the sea. While the planning using these might
be useful, ships are known for not being able to accurately calculate the exact distance and route
that will be taken in advance, and therefore it could be a beneﬁt to utilize a more dynamic system
that will be able to change over time and depending on the season. To do so, a computer gen-
erated map of waypoints will be created. These waypoints will be generated using the historical
S-AIS data and a set of rules that will deﬁne where these generated waypoints should lie on the
map. This waypoint system will then be used by the machine learning in order to predict the ship
journeys.
Candidate waypoints
The way that waypoints are designated, is by ﬁrst ﬁnding the candidates by using a set of condi-
tions that they have to meet. This is done by ﬁnding areas on a ships route where it performs a
larger turn. In this case the number will be found by calculating the difference in heading between
the newest and the last data point for the same RN number with a time difference of one hour.
The time difference is important in case that the AIS data was not received for that ship in that
particular hour, creating a jump in the data. The difference in heading have also been found in
a way where it is able to loop around at 360 & 0 degrees´so a heading of e.g. 355 going to 55
doesn’t create a difference of 300 degrees but rather 60 degrees as it should be. This was also
mentioned before in the Heading Calculation section.
The end result of this is a list that envelopes all points of which a turn above the deﬁned amount
have been made within two points in time one hour apart from each other.
This method does leave some inaccuracy in the placement of the turn for the ship, since the turn
could have been performed at any time after the previous data logging, leaving up to an hour of
inaccuracy in the exact point that the ship turned. This is something that has to be accepted,
since it would be close to impossible to make every AIS-transmitting ship on the globe, log and
send data that is not already a part of the AIS information. But nevertheless the next step will
compensate for this inaccuracy.
Waypoint optimization
While the previous steps could be executed individually for each row of data, the following step
will require a lot of comparisons between candidate waypoints in order to properly combine them
into functional waypoints. With the number of candidate waypoints for the entire data set is around
150.000 rows, the comparison between all of these points would require almost 22,5 billion com-
parisons. This would lead to a very long execution time with the amount of calculations that is
also required to measure the distance between two sets of coordinates, and this would not follow
the chosen agile methodology. Therefore a type of bucketing is implemented to the code which
helps to sieve out elements with a very large distance to the compared element. This process
vastly reduces the overall number of comparisons required to create the waypoints.
Using the bucketing method on a range we already know, the range of the longitude and latitude
coordinates around the world of -180 to 180 longitude and -90 to 90 latitude. With this the can-
26
==PAGE:31==
didate waypoints are all sorted into buckets which matches the range that they are within. The
longitude and latitude is sectioned up into ranges of a variable, an example of this could be 36
buckets in the longitude range and then 18 buckets in the latitude range, as seen in ﬁgure 19 .
Figure 19: 36 by 18 Buckets grid on world map
Now when comparing candidate waypoints to other candidates, the amount of comparisons is
reduced to the amount of candidates in the bucket and its neighbours. Since two candidates can
merge while still being more than 0 meters from each other, it could occur that a candidate lies
on the edge of the range that it was given in its bucket, therefore the nearby buckets are also
compared to make sure every possible result is checked, if the point is close enough to the edge
to cause a concern. This is also why the bucket size should not go below the maximum length
that candidate waypoints can create a waypoint from. If the waypoint was smaller it would require
the neighbours neighbour to make sure that all possible candidates are included. Although it is
also worth to mention that the actual bucketing should be an insigniﬁcant amount of computation
with the amount of data that is processed. Therefore a solution with as close to
When adding the nearby buckets into the areas that needs to be checked, it is important to note
that the map is looping around on all sides. Therefore a method is required for picking the sur-
rounding 8 buckets that also loops around. This is done by checking the selected bucket to the
grid as shown in ﬁgure 20.
Figure 20: Areas with diﬀerent neighbouring calculations with the algorithms order of discovery
27
==PAGE:32==
If the selected bucket is in the dark grey region 1, and is not one of the outermost buckets that
connect to another side of the map, the following formulas are used to ﬁnd the eight neighbouring
buckets:
N = bucket −longbuckets , NW = bucket −(longbuckets + 1)
W = bucket −1) , SW = bucket + longbuckets −1
S = bucket + longbuckets , SE = bucket + longbuckets + 1
E = bucket + 1 , NE = bucket −longbuckets + 1
Where bucket is the number for the selected bucket and longbuckets is the amount of buckets in
the horizontal direction, i.e. longitude on a map. When ﬁnding the neighbouring buckets for the
edge-buckets, some slightly different formulas are used that loops around to the correct neighbour
on the opposite side of the grid. An example of this is the bottom row, as depicted as area 6 in
ﬁgure 20, which has the following differences for the SW, S, & SE neighbours:
SW = bucket −(latbuckets −1) ∗longbuckets −1 , S = bucket −(latbuckets −1) ∗longbuckets
SE = bucket −(latbuckets −1) ∗longbuckets + 1
Where latbuckets is the number of buckets in the vertical direction, i.e. latitude on a map.
Each edge has speciﬁc changes, and each corner is also special since they loop around in both
the vertical and horizontal direction.
To ﬁnd an optimal partitioning of the region, a set of tests were conducted in which the runtime of
the algorithm was measured and the fastest partitioning was found. These tests were conducted
by calculating the waypoints from the ﬁrst 100 candidate waypoints measured against the entire
set of candidates of around 150,000 candidate waypoints.
The results from this test were rather insigniﬁcant, and considering that smaller bucket sizes could
lead to other issues, such as some valid comparisons being left out, it was decided to stick to a
36 by 18 grid of buckets, making every bucket have a size of 5 by 5 degrees on each respective
coordinate direction.
With this test only the waypoint generation was measured. The time it took to generate the actual
subregions for the tests were not included since this should be a one-time operation and therefore
not of any signiﬁcant importance, if i.e. the system were to start once and run for multiple years.
It has to be noted that the time it took to generate and assign these buckets to all of the candidate
waypoints did increase exponentially with the decrease in bucket size.
An example of a row being sorted in the buckets could be a coordinate with a longitude of 119,5.
First off the row would be sorted to bucket no. 12 in the longitude direction, which covers the
longitude range 110-120. Secondly, the coordinate lies very close to the upper edge of the range.
Therefore bucket no. 13 in the longitude direction is also included in the following comparison.
Assuming a close to even distribution of candidates across all buckets, this would lead to the row
only requiring 1/72th the amount of comparisons, even assuming nine buckets are checked every
time. This would be around 2000 comparisons instead of 150.000 comparisons. The bucketing
algorithm would only have compared the coordinates for buckets 1 to 36 and then 1 to 18, so
the time added for the bucketing algorithm is insigniﬁcant in comparison to the large decrease in
comparisons it provides.
The 36 by 18 buckets were chosen because of their relative size to some of the other variables,
such as the distance at which candidate waypoints can merge, has to be smaller than the bucket,
or else the comparison would always require comparing multiple buckets anyways to make sure
every element that can be merged is compared.
28
==PAGE:33==
It would be possible to create buckets that were made out of lines instead. that only have con-
straints in either the latitude and longitude space, instead of the boxes that were visible back in
ﬁgure 19. The reasoning behind sorting based on both longitude & latitude is because some re-
gions might have a high amount of trafﬁc, and by using boxes this is somewhat reduced from only
using one coordinate.
With some routes around the world being more well-used than others, and with general vessel
trafﬁc mostly moving in the longitude coordinate, this means square buckets have a much larger
difference in size, I.e. a square bucket placed in the Mediterranean has a very large number of
elements, and some buckets that lie completely over land would have zero elements. The buckets
that only utilize one of the two coordinates has the disadvantage of reaching the point of having
too small buckets earlier with way less buckets in the system. For example a system where each
bucket covers the entirety of the latitude for a range of two longitude lines, 36 buckets would give
each bucket a width of 10 degrees each, where the same system with both a width and height
range of 10 degrees would give a total of 36 by 18 buckets, which is 648 buckets.
Usable waypoints
The new list of candidate waypoints are then compared to ﬁnd data that ﬁts within a predeﬁned
distance from each other. To compensate for the inaccuracy in the exact time that the turn was
performed, the max distance is set to roughly be larger than the size of an hours travel for a large
tanker ship.
If two candidate checkpoints are found to be within this distance, they will be merged to an aver-
age point of the two with a strength of 2. Every additional candidate that lies within this distance
will then be added to the same average waypoint with it’s relative strength to the number of way-
points combined, and the strength of the waypoint goes up by one. If there are no or very few
candidate checkpoints besides the current candidate, the candidate will be ignored at the end of
the checking and ignored with regards to it most likely being an unusual place to turn for a ship.
e.g. if a vessel turned because of a sudden change in destination.
After this is complete, a new data frame is created that saves all of the current waypoints. One
of the interesting things to see here is how well this method captures information of ships leaving
ports. Therefore a map of the waypoints created solely from routes leaving the Rotterdam area
can be seen in ﬁgure 21
Figure 21: All Rotterdam-related waypoints
Rotterdam was chosen here to see how many waypoints include routes from a single port, since
this port in particular sees a lot of trafﬁc from the maritime industry in general. This should give a
good visual example of the density of data around the port and further away from it.
When creating the Rotterdam waypoints, it is clear to see that the conditions set allows waypoints
29
==PAGE:34==
to be created close to well-used ports and also at some key waterways such as the Gibaltar Strait
and The Dardanelles, for the case of the waypoints from Rotterdam routes. It is important that
that the system is able to correctly identify areas such as those as high trafﬁc and therefore place
a waypoint there, since it could give a lot of information on limiting the possible routes a ship is
taking to routes on the other side of these areas.
I.e. a ship going through The Dardanelles in Turkey must be going to The Sea of Marmara or
The Black Sea As mentioned the data density will of course get lower and lower the further from
Rotterdam the ships go, and therefore the number of waypoints gradually decreases when the
distance to Rotterdam increases.
Although it was able to pick up some of these straits, it is clear to see that the waypoints does not
include some of the vital waterways such as the Suez Canal. Another important feature also men-
tioned earlier is that the waypoints are much more densely populated around Rotterdam, but this
density is really high very close to Rotterdam and barely extends into the surrounding regions.
So trying to do a region prediction for a route might be difﬁcult when a large proportion of the
waypoints are situated in the same region. The use of the starting location will be tested later on
to see whether it has the potential to improve results even though the data is very localized.
When using the above methods to create waypoints on the used month of S-AIS data.
The
resulting waypoints map ends up at a total of 2,554 waypoints. This in itself is a huge change since
the old criteria from the preceding work gave a much lower yield of waypoints when compared to
the amount of data processed. The resulting waypoints can be seen on the map in ﬁgure 22
Figure 22: One month S-AIS data waypoints
As can also be seen by the fact the map now has to actually be zoomed out to view all of the
waypoints, the amount of waypoints are spread out signiﬁcantly and the high density areas of the
map are only created by the fact that a lot of ships have moved through there. These waypoints
are much more diverse so when later testing the system it will most likely be able to not only work
better for routes than the localized data when ships are further from their starting position.
Now it is possible to move on to the next step of the process.
30
==PAGE:35==
8.6
Waypoint Data
Now there is a list of all the more commonly seen path-splits, it is possible to now add some
information to each waypoint to make them more useful for estimating the tanker ship’s destina-
tions. This is done by going through all of the historical ship routes that have been saved in the
S-AIS dataset. Every time a ship passes close by any of the waypoints, their ﬁnal destination,
heading, etc. is saved with the respective waypoint it passed marked down. A snipped with all of
the waypoint data columns can be seen in ﬁgure 23
Figure 23: Snipped of the waypoint data
As can be seen in the picture all of the waypoint data is stored in the same data.frame, and cat-
egorised based on what waypoint they are tied to. Then when a ship passes a waypoint that
waypoints data will be called from the data.
The heading information will later be used to ﬁlter the correct previous ships going through the
waypoint to a new one and compare their ﬁnal destinations. The destinations will be used to know
what destination a set heading will most commonly give, and the chance for the ﬁnal destination
to be in the different regions. When collecting this data it would sometimes be possible for some
very different headings to result in the same destination. The reason for this would be a waypoint
created at a position that would be on top or very close to the destination port. When this is the
case, a ship coming from any direction towards the port can have very different headings, making
it very confusing for any type of machine learning to ﬁnd any patterns in the heading. The ships
are also still moving towards the port, so the previous ﬁlter that removed standstill ships from the
candidate list for waypoints does not remove them.
The time it took previous ships to complete their route from this waypoint can also be compared
to try and give an estimation of the time that it is going to take for the ship to reach it’s destination.
As seen in ﬁgure 23, the data stored for each waypoint is also kept with a timestamp for the date
of time when the ship passed through it. This way it will be possible to keep the waypoints up-
dated by controlling how far back the data goes before deletion, and to see in what season it was
recorded. This will also allow the waypoints predictions to dynamically adjust to small changes in
the way the ships travel over the different seasons of the year. These could be a change in the
travel time from a given waypoint being longer in one season over another. Maybe the season is
more prone to rough seas or heavy trafﬁc for certain routes, making ships move slower and take
longer to travel. The route shifting around is also a possibility, where waypoints have to shift with
the route to keep ships within it. This could be relevant for areas closer to the north and south
pole, where ice might make it impossible to travel on exactly the same route all year around, so
the route will shift.
31
==PAGE:36==
Over a long period of multiple years, changes in ship design might also make changes to how
newer ships perform, making older data less useful. This could come with a future change in
ship propulsion or legislation for a more environmentally friendly maritime. This could for example
make ships faster, slower, able to go on shallower land, follow tailwinds more, etc. With a times-
tamp on all the data, it is possible to weigh newer data higher and/or delete data that gets too old
and begins offsetting predictions.
The amount of scenarios where a scenario could apply some sort of change to a current route are
very large. By scenario it is meant to be something like frozen sea, rough weather, etc. Therefore
it is much more time-efﬁcient to create a system like this that will deal with the most important pa-
rameters of these scenarios, like the route and the travel time. Having to create speciﬁc systems
around every known change that might happen across all of the globe would be a very expensive
endeavour for what might bring the same or an only slightly better way of estimating. And even so,
you introduce the possibility of encountering a scenario that does not have a system in place to
adjust for it. This could be a human error because it was overlooked when producing the systems
or it might just be a completely new scenario that nobody was able to plan for.
As mentioned, ships will often move in the same paths, and therefore it is possible to visualize
the commonly used paths and determine where a ship is headed based on it’s location. This is
visualized for the Gulf of Finland below in ﬁgure 24.
Figure 24: Routes visualized for Gulf of Finland
Here the main path of the ship would be assumed to be the currently most likely predicted port,
which in this example is St. Petersburg. From this main path, there are six "exits" that the ship
can take on it’s way, which leads to some of the alternative destinations on its way. As a ship
passes each of the exits from the main path, the respective port that the exit would lead to can
be removed from the probability calculations. In this way the process of elimination at the ﬁnal
stretch of the road will always provide a very accurate prediction towards the end.
Ships moving though waypoints would essentially remove regions from the list of possible desti-
nations, based on what waypoints they’re going through. This would work similarly to what can be
seen in ﬁgure 25
Figure 25: Mock-up example of a vessel going through waypoints limiting possible destinations
32
==PAGE:37==
8.7
Optimization
To further optimize the algorithm, a set of different methods have been implemented that seeks to
speed up the runtime of the algorithm while not degrading the results that it outputs.
One of the optimizations used is the fast sorting of data within R. This is used to quickly order a
large set of coordinates according to the longitude coordinate. This results in half of the coordinate
already being close to the compared coordinate, making it much faster when it is only required to
check the coordinates within a given distance from the compared coordinate.
A psuedo code for how the fast ordering of elements was used to speed up waypoint generation
can be seen below in ﬁgure 26
Figure 26: Psuedo code for ordering optimization
Another method used to optimize the algorithm is the use of waypoint data reduction, by sorting
the waypoint data based on starting region. When enough data is present in a waypoint, this
method is used to only compare data that started from the same region as the compared ship that
is currently sailing through the waypoint. This has both the advantage of reducing the waypoint
data that has to be processed and it improves the quality of the data by using more comparable
data to the current ship.
33
==PAGE:38==
8.8
Tests
To test the waypoint-based machine learning prediction system, a new set of data needs to be
used. This is because measuring KPIs on a system by using parts of the data that is already a
part of the known data in the system, it will always be possible for the system to ﬁnd the identical
data and predict with a 100% accuracy. Therefore routes that will be tested are taken from the
next month of data, i.e. the time period 01-02-2019 to 1-03-2019.
It is also important to note that the data that the system needs to predict might vary slightly from
the previous month because of the slight difference in time of year having an effect on the routing
of ships, but at the same time there might also be a swift in the same month’s data if you’re looking
at data from a year ago for comparison, so this is still the best alternative.
All of the routes that are used for testing will start and end in the same month as the previous
data have been delimited to, since this is what the system has knowledge on. The data will be
tested with different amount of hours or days left until they reach their destination, so as to test
how accurately the destination can be predicted in advance to arrival. Some of the tests have
also been made to get a look at how the algorithm performs with some slightly different route
conditions. Some of the tested routes can be seen below.
Test 1: Salvador-Le Havre
One test made went from a ship departing from Salvador, Brazil which lies within the South Amer-
ica region from 7-1-2019.
The ships destination is Le Havre, France which lies in the North
European region, which it reaches at 21-1-2019. This route contains 286 data points The route
can be seen below in ﬁgure 27.
Figure 27: Salvador to Le Havre test route
This route starts in a route with a decent amount of data and ends at a very popular region, as
can be seen in the previous table of data for each region in ﬁgure 18. When using the K-Nearest
Neighbour machine learning on this route, the results were the following:
Here the guessed port is depicted with the deviance in kilometers this port lies away from the
correct port. The Time and Distance columns depict the situation for the ship of how far away from
it’s destination it is when the row guess was made. Below in ﬁgure 28 the results are depicted with
34
==PAGE:39==
every point on the journey that the ship changed it’s prediction. The deviation has been colored
green to red according to it being lower or higher than the actual distance left, respectively.
Figure 28: Salvador to Le Havre results
Here it is possible to see that the prediction seems pretty unusable at the beginning of the journey,
with the deviance from the actual port being as high as the long distance the ship has left on its
journey. Another visualization of the data can be seen in ﬁgure 29. Where the ship essentially
moves from right to left towards the port at the origin (0,0).
35
==PAGE:40==
Figure 29: Salvador to Le Havre graph
In this graph the deviation is seen on the vertical axis and the days left of the journey is seen on
the horizontal axis.
At around ﬁve days before its arrival, it starts to make some predictions that have a fairly high
accuracy to the destination. While the guess itself is still 794 km off, which might seem like a lot,
this would only equate to just over one days travel for a vessel like this. When closing in on the
destination, it becomes harder for the accuracy to stay high since it encounters a very high trafﬁc
area and a wrong guess will equal a higher inaccuracy.
Test 2: Antwerp-Lomé
Another test is made with data about a ship moored at Antwerpen inside the North European
region and it sails over and anchors at Lomé in the West Africa region during the period from
8-1-2021 to 29-1-2021. This test route represents data that might be encountered on a regular
basis pretty well and is not the cleanest data with regular intervals. The S-AIS data for the ship
can be seen in ﬁgure 30
Figure 30: Antwerpen to Lomé test route
As can be seen in the route data, the data is missing at a segment of the journey, with only two
datapoints for the entire day of 11-1-2021. another factor that might be hard to spot in ﬁgure 30 is
36
==PAGE:41==
that the ship slows down to a complete standstill multiple times during the journey.
The results for this route iss summed up in the graph on ﬁgure 31.
Figure 31: Antwerp to Lome graph
The prediction starts out very uncertain in the area where a lot of ships are traversing, but already
a few days into the journey, with over two weeks until its initial arrival at Lome, the prediction starts
making some very close predictions. This is disrupted a bit later between 13-8 days before arrival
where the ship most likely travels on a larger highway with lots of other ships. After this there is
a period of very close predictions once again for a few days before the predictions again has a
spike in deviation, yet the spikes does become increasingly smaller with the number of days the
vessel has travelled. After this the deviation seems to slowly but surely decrease up until the point
at which the vessel has arrived at Lomé.
It is interesting to take a deeper look at the results and the predictions that are made on the way,
in order to understand the results more in-depth than just the distance to the correct target. When
looking at all of the guesses in their respective order of best guess to worst, it is possible to see
that the algorithm was able to pick some ports much closer to the correct answer as it’s second,
or third best prediction in multiple cases. A good example of this can be seen below in ﬁgure 32
where a snippet of the predictions can be seen.
Figure 32: Table with snippet of predictions for Antwerp-Lomé
Here the best prediction for the vessel was Dakar, which is in the correct level 2 region, and also
on the ship’s route, yet pretty far in distance from the correct prediction. Although the second
and third best prediction was almost always Abidjan & Lagos, which are only 591 km & 245 km
away from a correct prediction respectively. These second and third guesses would therefore in
some cases be up to four times better in deviation from the correct port. Tema is even closer than
the two others and also on the list, yet it’s positioned much worse at ninth, making it not a very
signiﬁcant discovery.
To test whether adding these secondary guesses to the prediction will help the overall perfor-
mance, a test will later be made that checks this theory.
37
==PAGE:42==
Another small note here is that even though it is very difﬁcult for the algorithm to know the desti-
nation right at the beginning of the journey, it still had some very close guesses in the top 10 with
both Lagos, Lome, & other ports in the Gulf of Guinea being on the list multiple times with under
24 hours into the journey.
Test 3: Karachi-Singapore
Another test was made on a journey between Karachi and Singapore between the 8-1-2019 and
18-1-2019. Similar to the previously mentioned test, this too is not the best of the best in terms
of data, and the route is even missing the entirety of almost two days in a row at one point. This
time the inputted destination for the ship is set to Shanghai located in the Far East Region, which
is not the location or region at which the ship ends up visiting. Singapore is inside the South-East
Asia Region. The route taken can be seen below in ﬁgure 33.
Figure 33: Karachi to Singapore test route
This route is fairly short when compared to the two previous tests, to see if the prediction also
works when a ship is not travelling as far. The route is missing a few points of data in the middle
of the journey. The results for this routes predictions can be seen in ﬁgure 34
38
==PAGE:43==
Figure 34: Karachi to Singapore graph
Here the prediction varies widely during the ﬁrst days of travel, with a single random correct guess
happening just towards the beginning of the journey. The prediction ﬁnds a very accurate predic-
tion with just over 5 days left on the journey and sticks to some good predictions all the way to
the end, with just a bit of disruption towards the end, since there are a lot of ships that pass by
Singapore to get to some of the other ports in China, Japan, etc.
Test 4: Rotterdam-Puerto Miranda
The fourth test starts in Rotterdam, which is a very busy area for ship-trafﬁc and ends in Puerto
Miranda in Venezuela. This journey starts 14-02-2019 and ends 16 days later 02-03-2019. The
route can be seen in ﬁgure 35 below.
Figure 35: Rotterdam to Puerto Miranda test route
This is another journey where the vessel travels across the Atlantic Ocean to reach its destination.
39
==PAGE:44==
In this case it moves from Northern Europe to the northern side of South America.
The results can be seen in ﬁgure 36.
Figure 36: Rotterdam to Puerto Miranda graph
The results here seems to be very difﬁcult
Test 5: Mumbai-Singapore
Test number ﬁve starts off in Mumbai and shares the same end destination as test 3; Singapore.
This journey was made from 15-02-2019 to 24-02-2019. This test therefore has some similarities
to test 3, which will also test whether the results between multiple similar journeys can give a
consistent performance. The route can be seen in ﬁgure 37
Figure 37: Mumbai to Singapore test route
As can be seen on the map, the route has some similarity to the route in test 3.
The results can be seen below in ﬁgure 38
40
==PAGE:45==
Figure 38: Mumbai to Singapore graph
As can be seen in the results. The algorithm was able to pick up an accurate prediction sometimes
at just over 6 days before arrival. This starts the results off good, and the prediction is also later
on
Test 6: Kurashiki-Hong Kong
This test takes place in and around the East China Sea and South China Sea, and it took place
between 19-02-2019 to 28-02-2019. This route is different from the other routes in location, which
is taken as to also include a route in and around the aforementioned seas. The route can be seen
in ﬁgure 39
Figure 39: Kurashiki to Hong Kong test route
The route does have some missing data around three days into the journey, where there is a gap
of just over one day missing. The results can be seen in the graph in ﬁgure 40
41
==PAGE:46==
Figure 40: Kurashiki to Hong Kong graph
The missing data is located around the 4 to 6 day before arrival marks. The results does get better
the closer to the destination the vessel is. At around four days before arrival, the predictions are
consistently getting better with every guess.
Test 7: La Plata-Salvador
This test starts the 19-02-2019 and ends 25-02-2019, and sails from South America Argentine to
Brazil by the South Atlantic Sea. The route can be seen in ﬁgure 41
Figure 41: La Plata to Salvador test route
The results can be seen in the graph on ﬁgure 42
42
==PAGE:47==
Figure 42: La Plata to Salvador graph
Besides from the one large outlier and the other lesser one, the results at around 2 days and
forward seem very consistently. In the beginning of the journey, the prediction was unsure whether
the vessel would continue all the way up to the Gulf of Mexico. After that the prediction was certain
the destination was somewhere within South America.
Test 8: Los Angeles-Vancouver
This journey starts 08-02-2019 and ends 13-02-2019. Like the previous test, this journey stays
completely within the same part of a continent, i.e. a more local journey. Unlike the previous test,
this one is located on North America’s west coast in the Paciﬁc Ocean.
The route can be seen in ﬁgure 43
Figure 43: Los Angeles to Vancouver test route
The route follows the west coast closely all the way up to Vancouver.
The results can be seen in the graph on ﬁgure 44
43
==PAGE:48==
Figure 44: Los Angeles to Vancouver graph
Here it seems like there was a period at around 2 days before arrival where the prediction got
confused and thought the vessel was heading to a port that was much further away. After a short
period of that the prediction stabilizes at a really good set of predictions with a very small devia-
tion. Note that these smaller deviations around larger cities might also be caused from multiple
port locations near the city. So the prediction being wrong by a tiny margin could simply be it not
knowing the exact port in Vancouver that the vessel will visit.
8.9
Multi-guess prediction
It was discovered in the Antwerp to Lomé case that the secondary predictions in some cases have
some really good values. Therefore a test will now be performed on some of the tests which will
take a look into the results that can be achieved by including these predictions.
This is done by taking the location of the guesses and ﬁnding the mean coordinates for them in
order to use this imaginary destination port to calculate the deviance. These ports will also go
through a solve in order to ﬁgure out what the most effective weights for the 1st, 2nd, & 3rd guess
would be.
When looking at the three best predictions with the Antwerp-Lomé route that was ﬁrst discussed
for this, it is clear to see that there would be a bit of deviance to save if the predictor was always
able to pick the best of the best three predictions at every point of the journey. This would for
example give a mean deviation in prediction of 1801 km over the entire journey, which is 206 km
better than the 2007 km mean found when only picking the best predicted port at every point in
the journey.
When doing an evenly weighted average coordinate for all three of the best ports for every point
in the journey, the results seem to overall have a worse performance, than just picking the ﬁrst as
usual, with a mean deviation of 2279 km. At ﬁrst glance, this number makes it seems like a worse
result, although when looking at the graph in ﬁgure 45, it seems like it does have some beneﬁts.
44
==PAGE:49==
Figure 45: Antwerp-Lomé Graph with orange 3-port prediction
When looking at a graph with the deviations, it seems like the spikes seen before in the results
have been reduced in size when using this method. While the mean deviation over the entire
journey seems to have worsened, it seems to mostly be an effect of some poor results in the
beginning of the journey worsening a bit. Since these starting results have some huge deviations,
they do make a noticeable dent in the overall mean deviation, although it could be argued that
the results this early are already too inaccurate to hold any interest to us. There are also a lot
of identical predictions when looking at the graph. This is caused by some points of the journey
only having one port prediction available. Therefore the weights did not change the result from
the original in these cases.
This pattern seems to continue when testing the same three-port system on different routes. Be-
low is a graph in ﬁgure 46, where the solved weights have been used to ﬁnd a weighted coordinate
prediction and the deviation from that has been found.
Figure 46: Salvador-Le Havre Graph with orange 3-port prediction
So with continued testing the solved weights seems to be a great solution to even out the predic-
tion deviations for a more dependable prediction.
45
==PAGE:50==
Continuing on, a solver was used to quickly see what the very best weights would be for each
route.
With the ﬁrst run, the solver agreed with the initial method of picking the ﬁrst port in every instance,
by only allocating a weight to the ﬁrst port.
To see whether there would be a difference if these large starting deviations were excluded, a new
solve was made with the objective focused on the last week of. This would still start the objective
at a point which lies over two weeks before arrival. When doing this, the solver suddenly prefers a
solution that also includes the third port prediction, with it getting very close to 25% of the weight.
The second port was surprisingly not given any weight from the solver. This might be because
the results are more than often more correct on the ﬁrst when there are only two guesses, but
with a larger list of ports which is being reduced to the best three, the second and third are seen
as useful. The positive effect from the second prediction is not enough for the solver to include it
because of the negative effect when there are only two predicted ports.
It also looks like the weighted method can have a great effect on some of the results. As seen
in ﬁgure 47, where the La Plata to Salvador predictions have completely lost the huge deviation
guesses that it was plagued by in the ﬁrst results.
Figure 47: Los Angeles-Vancouver Graph with orange 3-port weighted prediction
The blue line is the original result while the orange is the weighted 3-port result.
46
==PAGE:51==
8.10
Results
When looking at the combined results for all of the routes tested, the average prediction accuracy
for the algorithm is displayed in ranges to indicate predictions just before arrival, close to arrival,
in the area, still able to change region, and far from arrival. The results are depicted below in
ﬁgure 48 as a table with the average deviation over a set of time-intervals. This table shows
the predictions made when only using the best port prediction at every step. It also shows the
weighted 3-port method that ﬁnds a weighted coordinate for the best three ports.
It is also interesting to compare these results with the actual distance that a vessel could sail
during that time, which would indicate how far from it’s current destination it might be able to
relocate to if it chooses to. Therefore the possible distance that a ship could travel is also shown.
Figure 48: Table of average deviation
The table does seem to indicate that the results for the predictions does get better the closer to
the ﬁnish-line the vessel is. This can be seen more clearly in ﬁgure 49 where it is shown on a
graph.
Figure 49: Graph of average deviation
As discovered earlier, it is possible to ﬁnd a better prediction if you dig a bit further into the
prediction results and look at the second and third best predictions too.
As can be seen in the graph, the predictions are steadily decreasing with the number of days
a ship is from it’s destination. The only point at which the predictions are especially difﬁcult to
get right for the best port test, is the 1-2 day period. This might be because the vessels are still
following some of the major seaways while also being relatively close to the actual goal. Because
the vessel is only 1-2 days out, the inaccuracy is way more impacting, and because the ship is yet
to be on a deﬁnitive path that only leads towards its destination. An example of this from the ﬁrst
route to Le Havre can be seen in ﬁgure 50
47
==PAGE:52==
Figure 50: Le Havre example
Here the blue dots are a spread of the amount of data dots that the ships transmit, leaving a vis-
ible pattern of paths. A vessel that is still where the red dot is positioned is still sailing in a major
highway for vessels, which can go to any port north of this location in Europe. Only after splitting
off the highway at the ? arrows, the vessel will clearly show that it intends to moor in Le Havre, or
a port in that area.
When using the weighted best three port predictions to ﬁnd a prediction coordinate, the results
stabilize. This leads to a more consistent result, with a much lower deviation, especially in the
more usable later days of the travel, between 0 to 4 days before arrival. The aforementioned
problem with predictions not being accurate at 1-2 days before arrival have also been completely
eliminated when using this method because of the more stable weighted results, and the predic-
tions are now consistently much lower proportionally to the actual distance that a ship could travel
in the given period of time.
48
==PAGE:53==
9
Discussion
Another option for choosing a section if S-AIS data to work with, was to choose the starting point
of all journeys to a single area, such as the Rotterdam port and the surrounding ports. This might
have been able to speciﬁcally adjust the algorithm to work the best in that speciﬁc scenario, but it
would not be feasible to do that with the over ten thousand ports around the world to make it work
with every possible route a ship might take. Some of the more unused ports might also not have
enough S-AIS data to repeat the same process. Therefore the more generalized way of using all
of the clean data from within a time period, would give a system that can operate on every journey
no matter the start and end location.
With the 16 blocks for optimizing the port search for ships, this might cause some small issues, if
the destination entered is not correct, with ports that lie very close to the borders of one of these
blocks, i.e. meaning withing the search area of half a degree in either direction. This won’t be a
large problem when the port is still close to half a degree away from the block’s edge, but if a port
lies exactly on the line it could cause some difﬁculty with the system not recognizing it as in port if
the ship is still in the bordering block and not the block assigned to the port. The port coordinates
are saved down to two decimal numbers, so this does leave around a 1 kilometer border between
regions in which this could happen.
If the ship is going to the entered destination, this will still be checked no matter the block it lies
within, so the issue would only persist when the destination entered does not correlate with the
port visited. The 16 blocks are also very unevenly saturated with ports. A block such as 13 or
16 have a very low number of ports to keep track of, where block 7 & 8 are highly saturated
because of the large amount of maritime activity they experience in comparison to other blocks.
The blocks were divided to improve computing time and not to ﬁnd the best possible optimization,
and it is why it consists of simple lines following longitude & latitude. It will very likely be possible
to improve the segmentation of blocks here but it was not needed for the purposes of this analysis.
With the initial candidate waypoints being found through the action of ships turning it will be pos-
sible, but highly unlikely, that a ship will go in a straight enough line between two ports to whereby
it doesn’t trigger the creation of any waypoints, and it doesn’t enter any existing waypoints on
the way. In this speciﬁc case the only way to not assume that it is actually heading towards the
inputted destination would be the normal diversion detection that discovers ships that make a
sudden change in their route outside of any waypoint. The reason why this is highly unlikely is
because the waypoint system tends to see a lot of ship movement right outside ports, and thereby
it creates a waypoint that ships will pass through when exiting the port.
The largest issues that could come up from this is ships travelling across the oceans in a straight
line. In these cases there would be a larger chance for them to experience this scenario of not
going within proxy of a waypoint for a long time and therefore the prediction would not be updated
during this part of the journey.
The waypoint system might also be keeping track of some unnecessary waypoints in this system.
One example of this is ships that crosses below Africa. These ships will all follow a similar route
and might trigger the creation of some waypoints because of the amount they are going to turn
when following the coastline. In these cases the waypoints will be saved with the list of ships that
passes through it, but the only determination the waypoint can make for a ships route is whether
it is still going the exact same direction or made a complete u-turn. Since no data is saved for
anything else than these two directions, the waypoint can basically only be used for updating a
conﬁrmation of route and a time-estimation for it reaching it’s destination.
Just the waypoint system as a standalone helping tool will make data analysts aware of the usual
routes that ships take all across the oceans. This means that an analyst would be able to check
the direction a ship is sailing with the historical data for ships going the same heading through the
same waypoint in a really easy manner. This alone could improve the speed at which an analyst
49
==PAGE:54==
could make their own predictions since they would have so easy access to the similar historical
data from the same point on the map by using the waypoints and the data that is stored within
them.
The machine learning system is mainly based on current position, the ship heading data, and the
starting region. If it was desired to improve the prediction accuracy, then it would be a good idea
to start by looking at the possible factors that can be included as variables in the machine learning
process, since one of the main strength of machine learning over manual analysis is the sheer
amount of data comparison that can be made through computing.
Some examples for added variables that could help the predictions would be adding the ship
length as a factor in the route that a ship most likely will take. A large ship might tend to take
longer journeys, especially because of the economies of scale. There might also be some areas
that are restricted in size such as the Panama Canal & the Suez Canal which both have a Pana-
max & Suezmax ship size deﬁned which are the largest ships that are allowed to pass through
these areas. Other areas of the sea does have similar restrictions on ship size, so some desti-
nations might be excluded with a larger ship since it will not be allowed to pass through certain
areas.
The draught could also be a really important factor to take into account when it comes to tanker
chartering. While the draught might change depending on the ship, the system should record
historical data for draught for every ship, meaning every ship would have a low and high draught
number speciﬁcally for their ship. There might only be a slight correlation with destinations and
having a ship that is already fully loaded, which would be visible with a ship having a low draught,
since the ship would be sitting much lower in the water with thousands of tonnes of liquids on-
board. But the more important factor here would be using the draught as a number to effectively
know how many ships are ready to take on a new charter. Then a company such as TORM would
be able to take look at ready to load ships when deciding on where to place their own ﬂeet. In
an extreme case example, a region could show as being full of ships at the time a TORM vessel
could enter it, but with the draught information they could see that many of the ships are already
loaded or would still be unloading when they arrive in the region. So a region that others see as
completely saturated could be taken advantage of by someone with this knowledge.
Another business-related advantage that could be taken advantage of is the ability to assign dif-
ferent companies to each ship, which would be possible with the correct ship names that are not
present in this report because it was conﬁdential information for TORM to give out the S-AIS with
identiﬁable data. There might be a tendency from some competitors to be more competitive than
others and thereby lower the proﬁts in areas they’re in or possibly even take the charters. If a
company would be known for this, there could be a multiplier or bias to ships from that competitor,
making routes try to avoid confronting ships from that company whenever it is possible to do so.
The exact strength of this would have to be determined by analysts but the implementation would
give the system some additional information that could be very useful.
The current tests were made without the machine learning factoring in the season at which the
historical data was recorded. The reason behind this was that all of the data was tested from
within the same month, so it was assumed that all of the data was within the same season. In
reality ships will take different routes depending on the time of year, as also discussed in the paper
about AIS route library voyage planning[8]. With the seasonality the machine learning would have
to categorize data according to each season, since the routes are slightly different depending on
the season and such. Therefore the likelihood of a waypoint having different headings for the
same destination could be a possibility. In these cases it would be crucial that these way different
headings are not averaged together, creating a new mean heading that sits a space in between
the two routes and does not represent a correct heading for the destination region at all, but in-
stead that they are grouped according to the season they were recorded in.
In a lot of the routes, the "DestinationTidied" data is also the actual destination that a ship will
50
==PAGE:55==
travel to. Although, as also shown in one of the examples of the test routes analyzed, it is def-
initely not certain that it is correct. In this study the problem was tackled in a general manner
that tried to predict with equal accuracy for both ships with no destination inputted, ships with the
wrong input and ships with the correct input. Therefore the DestinationTidied was not used.
If a higher accuracy was wished, and the difference in accuracy between different ships was not
signiﬁcant, then the DestinationTidied could be a signiﬁcant factor to take a look at. The biggest
downside of using it would be trusting manually inputted data too much. In these cases there
would still be the occasional wrong inputs that could create an unexpected inaccuracy when pre-
dicting the destination region, and there is also the possibility of companies deliberately inputting
incorrect data as to not be easy to predict for a competitor if they knew this data was used.
51
==PAGE:56==
10
Conclusion
The prediction system was able to autonomously narrow down the prediction deviation in a bet-
ter way than the distance the vessels were able to travel over the same leftover distance. Using
solved weights on the three closest ports, to create a weighted coordinate prediction, yielded the
best possible results. These results had a very good accuracy up to 4 days before arrival and still
a decent accuracy above that. While it might still have left what seems like a large deviation to
the exact ports in some cases, this is usually not the actual goal of a tanker company to know.
The regions map provided by TORM is what they usually operate from, and in many cases the
predictions made for the routes were within the correct level 2 region well in good time.
These predictions varied a bit in how far in advance they became accurate, depending on the
exact test that is looked upon. This especially came down to how well traversed the area already
was in the limited set of test data. In some cases the machine learning could get a correct predic-
tion up to two weeks in advance of arrival and in others the ship would already be really close or
in the region of its destination before a correct prediction.
Overall the system accuracy would most likely beneﬁt from an increased amount of training data
to increase the accuracy of predictions. The more data it collects the better it will become and
the more accurate its predictions would be. Meanwhile the waypoint data could still be used to
give some pointers to translate the direction of a ship at some point on the map to a potential
destination according to historical S-AIS data.
With the information gained from the predictions after a longer training period. A ﬂeet manager
could decide to slow steam to the region to arrive just in time for a charter and save on fuel. This
could be a great idea if the predictions show a currently high saturation of the region but a low
amount of ships arriving in the next couple of days. Slow steaming is a well-known method in
marine shipping. This method utilizes the fact that fuel consumption increase exponentially with
speed to save a lot of fuel by slowing down. So if the ship is 4 days travel away and it would be
smarter to arrive in 5 days according to the predictions, then the ship could reduce its speed by
20% and save approximately 35% to 45% in fuel consumption depending on the exact ship. A big
ship can easily spend 200 mton of fuel every day. With a bunker fuel price of $500 /mton of very
low sulfur fuel oil (VLSFO), that equates to $100,000 in fuel per day of travel. With slow steaming
saving an average of 40% then the prediction to slow steam by 20% could save approximately
$40,000/day in fuel. This is offset by the other operational costs of a tanker, but with fuel cost
being around 50% of the expenses on a large ship, it could be assumed that it would lead to an
additional operational cost of $20,000 for each day the ship is going 20% slower. Overall this is
still a saving when compared to going normal speed to a location where there might be some
downtime because the ship arrived early. The costs are also moved over from burning marine fuel
which is bad for the environment to cost of paying crew, logistics and such. This is also a very
good thing with the large focus that organizations such as the International Maritime Organization
have put upon making the marine industry a more environmentally friendly sector.[23]
There is also the possibility to change course way ahead of arrival to a region, making it possible
to avoid a region that is currently highly saturated by tankers and with a continued high amount
of ships arriving. Avoiding a continuous highly saturated region as such early on might save a
large amount of fuel that would be otherwise wasted by going towards this unfruitful region for an
extended period. This could provide a very signiﬁcant saving. If the early change were to save a
day worth of travelling, it would save around $100,000 in fuel alone and an equally large amount
on other operational costs.
Overall the way that the system can be utilized when fully operational, could lead to potentially
thousands of dollars in fuel savings which would also lead to a big saving for the environment
because of the large amount of green house gasses that is not released from burnt fuel.
52
==PAGE:57==
References
[1] Chen, L., Lv, M., Ye, Q., Chen, G. and Woodward, J., 2011. A personal route prediction
system based on trajectory data mining. Information Sciences, 181(7), pp.1264-1284.
[2] US. Dept. of Transportation Maritime Administration (2016) Merchant Fleets of the
World [Online] Available at: www.maritime.dot.gov/sites/marad.dot.gov/files/
oictures/ds16worldregistriesAndNotes.pdf
[3] TORM (2020) Operations, policies & more, in TORM [UNDER NDA]
[4] Maritime
Intelligence
(2017)
Understanding
AIS
(Automatic
Identiﬁcation
System)
[Online]
Available
at:
maritimeintelligence.informa.com/resources/
product-content/understanding-the-automatic-identification-system
[5] Harati-Mokhtari,
A.,
Wall,
A.,
Brooks,
P. and Wang,
J.,
2008. Automatic Identi-
ﬁcation System (AIS): A Human Factors Approach. [online] Available at:
http:
//researchgate.net/publication/254062770_Automatic_Identification_
System_AIS_A_Human_Factors_Approach [Accessed 11 March 2021].
[6] Kochenderfer, M. and Wheeler, T., 2019. Algorithms for optimization. The MIT Press.
[7] Lechtenberg, S., de Siqueria Braga, D. and Hellingrath, B., 2019. Automatic identiﬁca-
tion system (AIS) data based ship-supply forecasting. [online] Available at:
http://
econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/209386/1/hicl-2019-28-003.pdf [Accessed 15
March 2021].
[8] Cai, J. and Rytter, N., 2021. A practical AIS-based route library for voyage planning at the
pre-ﬁxture stage.
[9] Van Brummelen, G., 2012. Heavenly Mathematics : The Forgotten Art of Spherical Trigonom-
etry. Princeton University Press.
[10] Dr. David R. Williams, NASA (2020). Earth Fact Sheet. Available at: https://nssdc.
gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/earthfact.html [Accessed 4 March 2021]
[11] Mathmonks
(2021),
Convex
and
Concave
Polygons
https://mathmonks.com/
polygon/convex-and-concave-polygons [Accessed 10 March 2021]
[12] Chistopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan and Hinrich Schütze (2008). Introduction
to Information Retrieval. Available at: https://nlp.stanford.edu/IR-book/html/
htmledition/k-nearest-neighbor-1.html#sec:knn [Accessed 5 March 2020]
[13] T. M. Cover & P. E. Hart, (2016) Nearest Neighbour Pattern Classiﬁcation. Available
at:
https://www.cs.bgu.ac.il/ adsmb182/wiki.ﬁles/borak-lecture%20notes.pdf AAU, Torben
Tvedebrink, 19th April 2018, Lecture 3: Available at: https://www.moodle.aau.dk/
course/view.php?id=25056) [Accessed 5 March 2021]
[14] Pallotta, G. et. al., 2013. Vessel Pattern Knowledge Discovery from AIS Data: A Framework
for Anomaly Detection and Route Prediction. Entropy, [online] Available at: https://www.
mdpi.com/1099-4300/15/6/2218 [Accessed 8 February 2021].
[15] Rong, H. et. al., 2019. Ship trajectory uncertainty prediction based on a Gaussian
Process model. Ocean Engineering, [online] 182, pp.499-511. Available at:
https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029801818315427 [Accessed
9 February 2021].
[16] Vaaben, B. and Larsen, J., 2015. Mitigation of airspace congestion impact on airline net-
works. Journal of Air Transport Management, 47, pp.54-65.
53
==PAGE:58==
[17] Aharon, H. et. al., 2014. Recent progress in road and lane detection: a survey. Machine
Vision and Applications.
[18] Kundakçi, B. and Nas, S., 2018. Mapping Marine Trafﬁc Density by Using AIS Data: An
Application in the Northern Aegean Sea. Polish Maritime Research, 25(4), pp.49-58.
[19] Greidanus, H., Alvarez, M., Eriksen, T. and Gammieri, V., 2015. Completeness and
Accuracy
of
a
Wide-Area
Maritime
Situational
Picture
based
on
Automatic
Ship
Reporting Systems. Journal of Navigation,
[online] 69(1),
pp.156-168. Available at:
http://cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-navigation/article/
completeness-and-accuracy-of-a-widearea-maritime-situational-picture-based-on-aut
89154C15A5139518219F2B33D774CC45 [Accessed 11 March 2021].
[20] Eriksen, T., Høye, G., Narheim, B. and Meland, B., 2006. Maritime trafﬁc monitoring us-
ing a space-based AIS receiver. Acta Astronautica, [online] 58(10), pp.537-549. Available
at:
http://sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0094576506000233?
via%3Dihub [Accessed 21 March 2021].
[21] International Maritime Organization, NA. AIS Transponders. IMO [online] Available at:
https://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Safety/Pages/AIS.aspx [Accessed 18 Febru-
ary 2021].
[22] International Maritime Organization,
NA. Revised Guidelines For The Onboard Op-
erational
Use
Of
Shipborne
Automatic
Identiﬁcation
Systems
(AIS)
[Online]
Avail-
able at:
https://www.navcen.uscg.gov/pdf/ais/references/IMO_A1106_29_
Revised_guidelines.pdf [Accessed 20 April 2021]
[23] Oilmonster.com, (2021) Bunker Fuel Prices. Available at: https://www.oilmonster.
com/bunker-fuel-prices
54
