==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Electrical Engineer
Vision-based Autonomous Docking of Un-
derwater Vehicle
Shuo Wen (s192278)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Elektro
Department of Electrical Engineer
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Autonomous underwater vehicles play an important role in the execution of various
dangerous underwater missions. At present, research on underwater vehicles is very
popular. However, due to the short battery life and long charging time, a docking
station needs to be established underwater to enable it to automatically charge, trans-
fer data, and wait for tasks. But in an underwater environment, GPS signals will be
shielded, and the vehicle cannot locate itself and the docking station through GPS.
The location of the vehicle and the docking station can only be estimated through the
fusion of multiple sensors (cameras, pressure sensors, etc.), and automatic docking
can be achieved through control algorithms. However, the harsh underwater visual
conditions are the biggest challenge for underwater robots’ visual perception.
The purpose of this paper is to realize the visual perception algorithm of the underwa-
ter vehicle, through a variety of filters combined with decision algorithms for image
processing, make the vehicle perceive the docking station, and finally get the docking
station relative to the vehicle’s 3D Cartesian coordinate through the position esti-
mation algorithm. Then, a PID controller is designed and works under multi-sensor
information fusion. Finally, the docking of the underwater vehicle was tested in the
laboratory pool, and it was found that the vehicle could well identify the docking
station, estimate its 3D coordinates, and complete the underwater docking.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Electrical Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark to fulfill the requirements for acquiring a Master of
Science degree in Electrical Engineering. And the experimental work was carried out
in Autonomous Systems Test Arena (ASTA). The thesis was started on 08 February
2021 to the end of October 2021. The supervisor is Roberto Galeazzi, the Associate
Professor at DTU Electrical Engineering.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my special thanks of gratitude to my supervisor Roberto
Galeazzi who gave me patient guides and assistance and helpful feedback during the
whole process. My supervisor taught me a lot about this field from his guidance. I
am really thankful to him.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
FCU
Flight Control Unit
IMU
Inertial Measurement Unit
ESC
Electronic Speed Controllers
LED
Light Emitting Diode
ROV
Remotely Operated Vehicle
AUV
Autonomous Underwater Vehicle
DOF
Degrees of Freedom
GPIO
General-Purpose Input/Output
SSH
Secure Shell
RGB
Red, Green, and Blue
HSV
Hue, Saturation, Value
L1,...,L9
LED 1, ,...,LED 9
T1,...,T6
Thruster 1,...,Thruster 6
FOV
Field Of View
PID
Proportional Integral Derivative
PPM
Pulse Position Modulation
PWM
Pulse-width modulation
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Acronyms
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The state of art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Hardware, Software and Test Facilities
5
2.1
Underwater Vehicle (BlueRov)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Docking Station & Vehicle Camera . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Experimental facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Visual Perception Algorithm
13
3.1
Image Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Artificial Markers Recognize . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Camera Calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Distance Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Bearing Angle Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.6
3D Cartesian Coordinate Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Controller Design
29
4.1
PID controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Depth Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Yaw Control & Surge Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Surge Control Under Kinetics Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
4.5
Control Flow Chart
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
Ziegler-Nichols method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Experiments and Results
39
5.1
ROV Visual Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Control System Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Auto Docking Test & Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Conclusion and Future works
53
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
With the continuous growth of world energy consumption, energy security and di-
versification have become the focus of attention. In recent years, offshore structures
(oil & gas, floating offshore wind, and tidal) and marine renewable energy seem as
significant energy potential exists. Deep-water floating offshore wind (FOW) power
has been extensively developed and is gradually becoming an indispensable pillar of
wind power generation [13]. As energy demand continues growing and meet EU power
targets, offshore wind energy production platforms will be moved further offshore [9].
In order to save costs, AUV will be used extensively to survey and inspect the subsea
facilities of offshore wind farms.
In addition, there are some underwater tasks, such as underwater search and res-
cue, maintenance and repair of underwater equipment, etc. People have to work in
unknown waters or deep underwater, which may endanger their health and even be
life-threatening, due to insuﬀicient oxygen, high water pressure, underwater ocean
currents, etc. According to reports[12], there are accidents and deaths of professional
divers every year.
The future of offshore structures inspection and maintenance (I&M), dangerous un-
derwater works foresee the wider use of robotics technology to autonomously perform
tasks that require the extensive use of manpower(ROV operators, engineer divers,
crew of support vessel) nowadays. In the future, robots can realize subsea residency
by installing a robot ecosystem underwater[34].
Still, one of the main shortcomings of autonomous underwater vehicles is the low
battery life and time-consuming charging, which can cause mission interruption and
significantly limit the scope of work. The possible solution that can be thought of
now is to design underwater docks. AUV can automatically charge, transfer data,
and wait for tasks here.
For docking with the station, the AUV needs to identify the dock and locate it. How-
ever, due to insuﬀicient underwater light intensity, low visual range, and turbid water,
etc., the accuracy of general computer vision recognition algorithms is greatly reduced
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
or even diﬀicult to achieve. Identifying the dock is one of the main challenges of AUV.
Moreover, GPS radio signals will be affected by absorption, refraction, and scattering
in water, resulting in short traveling underwater. Therefore, for AUV, GPS basically
cannot work under water[30], which also poses a big challenge to the positioning of
the dock and AUV. Although IMU can effectively locate the orientation of AUV, it is
a magnetic sensor and is easily affected by external magnetic fields. It is not accurate
to rely solely on IMU for positioning. The current solution is to use a multi-sensor
fusion algorithm [26].
Finally, AUV needs to maintain depth and orientation and smoothly dock with the
dock in the presence of interference (such as ocean currents or drifting). Position
keeping is also one of the challenges that need to be solved.
1.2
The state of art
As mentioned earlier, the underwater visual conditions are poor, so utilizing acous-
tic(Acoustic localization) and optical(Artificial visual marker & Camera) methods to
guide the direction of the underwater robot seems the best solution currently. The
algorithm based on circle marker detection was described in [22] [31] [21] ,and the al-
gorithm based on cruciform marker detection was described in [15]. And all achieved
good results in static docking.
As for the underwater robot control system, due to the completion of the docking
task does not require high accuracy, and considering the advantages of simplicity and
stability, PD and PID control [1] are still the mainstream control laws. But according
to the journal [26], the PID controller may solve the control algorithm of position
keeping. Still, it may affect the control effect because it is a linear controller, and the
underwater system is non-linear. It can be solved by automatically adjusting the PID
control parameters through the adaptive process controllers. In addition, with the
development of technology, some control laws, such as H infinite control and model
predictive control (MPC) [19], have significantly reduced the tracking error and have
strong robustness.
To autonomously deliver I&M services the robots should have the capability to adapt
morphologically and functionally to the specific tasks that need to be performed. This
could be achieved through an intelligent mechatronic system that enables the robot
to connect to tools, other robots, charging stations, or surfaces in general.
Such
iR2M (intelligent Robotic Reconfiguration Module) has been developed within the
REMORA (Reconfigurable Modular Robotics for Aquatic Environment) Laboratory.
With the module being available, it is of interest to develop control algorithms that
enable the docking of underwater robots against a fixed surface and robot-to-robot
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Objective
3
docking.
The first functionality will allow the system to connect with a docking
station where the robot could recharge its batteries, be repaired, or wait for the
next task. The second functionality opens opportunities for morphological system
reconfiguration and extended fault tolerance.
1.3
Objective
This project aims to determine the specific position and orientation of the dock-
ing point based on visual perception algorithms. There are some artificial markers
(LEDs) with specific characteristics on the docking station, which are used for leading
the vehicle. Moreover, the autonomous docking process of the underwater vehicle and
docking stations on the same plane or different planes through control strategies will
be realized. Then the robotic will be tested in the laboratory to check if it can dock
to a surface or not. Finally, the performance of the designed control system in the
presence of external disturbances (as current) will be assessed.
The entire project will be completed on a BlueROV underwater vehicle equipped with
six thrusters and onboard electronics. The onboard electronic equipment consists of a
PixHawk flight control unit and an Odroid-XU4 single-board computer. The Odroid
computer can run ROS and is based on Linux operating system. The front of the
vehicle is equipped with a Raspberry PI Camera V2 camera, controllable magnets,
and LEDs.
The main contributions of this paper are:
• Developing a visual perception algorithm that can accurately obtain the location
and orientation of the docking station from the different(long or short) distances.
• Designing a motion control system that has both certain anti-disturbance func-
tions and robustness and is compatible with ROS.
• Realizing the docking between the BlueROV underwater vehicle and the docking
station.
1.4
Thesis Outline
The structure of this thesis is as follows:
• chapter2: This chapter mainly introduces the structure of the underwater
vehicle, hardware, software, the structure of the docking station, and the exper-
imental facilities in detail.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
• chapter3: Development of the visual perception algorithm and decision strat-
egy that can enable the vehicle to accurately percept the docking station and
acquire it’s 3D Cartesian coordinate and bearing with respect to the station.
• chapter4: Devise the controllers, allow the robot to smooth finish the docking
task through the position information supplied by the vision algorithm, and im-
plement the devised control strategy on the BlueROV platform (implementation
will be done in the ROS environment).
• chapter5: Test the robotic docking to a surface and assess the performance of
the designed control system in the presence of external disturbances (as current).
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Hardware, Software
and Test Facilities
This chapter mainly introduces the structure of the underwater vehicle (hardware
and software), the composition of the docking station (hardware and software), and
the experimental site. Figure 2.1 shows the structure diagram of the connection of
various hardware in the underwater vehicle and how to connect to the laptop.
Figure 2.1: Underwater vehicle and laptop‘s hardware connection diagram.
The underwater vehicle consists of an on-board Linux computer, a Pixhawk flight
controller constituted by FCU (Flight Control Unit) and IMU (Inertial Measurement
Unit), six electronic speed controllers (ESC), six thrusters, and a depth sensor. The
on-board computer is equivalent to the communication interface between the laptop
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Hardware, Software and Test Facilities
and FCU. The FUC reads the control signal from the laptop, runs the low-level mo-
tion controller, and sends out the control signal to ESCs. After ESCs receive the
control signal, they will adjust the speed and direction of the thruster.
The depth sensor can feedback the current water depth according to the water pres-
sure.
The camera on the front of the vehicle is composed of a Raspberry Pi circuit board
equipped with a Raspberry Pi camera, a controllable magnet, and 9 LEDs. They are
controlled by GPIO pins.
2.1
Underwater Vehicle (BlueRov)
2.1.1
Freame of Bluerov
The underwater vehicle used in this experiment is Blue Robotics (BR) BlueROV 1
[4], it’s flexible and expandable, which can be reconfigured by adding some hardware,
like a camera, sensors, etc., to complete some tasks or come true some functions. The
most important is it’s the most affordable on the market. The Mechanical parts of
the ROV consist of a BlueROV R1 frame, six 3-phased motors, enclosure with flanges,
end caps, and penetrators. The vehicle is negative buoyancy instead of neutral buoy-
ancy. Figure 2.2 shows the appearance of the BlueROV R1.
Figure 2.3 shows the layout of the thrusters. The first and second thrusters (T1,
T2) can make the vehicle forward and turn left or right, the third to fifth thrusters
(T3, T4, T5) can allow the vehicle to lift or sink, and the sixth thruster (T6) can
theoretically control the lateral movement of the vehicle, but due to the following
reasons, the sixth thruster in this project will not be used:
• It is at the bottom of the vehicle, and there is only one thruster, so it is ineﬀicient
to make the vehicle move laterally.
• When the vehicle moves forward or laterally, the thruster will push the water
flow to generate thrust. When the vehicle is moving forward, the water flow
produced by T1 and T2 will form a water wall, which interacts with the water
wall produced by T6, making it diﬀicult to control the vehicle.
Shown in the Figure 2.4 and Figure 2.5 is the ROV with the camera which used in
this project.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Underwater Vehicle (BlueRov)
7
Figure 2.2: The BlueROV.
Figure 2.3: The layout of the
thrusters.
Figure 2.4: The
front
of
the
ROV.
Figure 2.5: The
side
of
the
ROV.
Typically, for autonomous underwater vehicles, choose the NED(North-East-Down)
world coordinate system, as shown in Figure 2.6. As for ROV’s coordinate system,
shown in Figure 2.7, the forward direction is the positive direction of the x-axis and
is defined as the surge. The sinking direction is the positive direction of the z-axis,
which is defined as heave. Through the right-hand rule, the positive direction of the
y-axis can be found and defined as sway. When describing rotational motion, define
the rotation around the x-axis, y-axis, and z-axis as roll, pitch, and yaw, respectively.
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Hardware, Software and Test Facilities
Figure 2.6: The World Coordi-
nate System.
Figure 2.7: The
ROV
Coordi-
nate System.
2.1.2
Hardwares
Odroid-XU4 [11] was chosen as the onboard computer, which is equivalent to the
brain of the robot, used to communicate with the upper computer and run the pro-
gram used to control the robot. It is shown as Figure 2.8.
The Pixhawk-v2 [24] flight controller is used as an autopilot computer for sensor
fusion and generates a three-phase voltage for the ESC. There is also an IMU sensor
on it, which is composed of an accelerometer, a gyroscope, and a magnetometer. The
accelerometer can be used to estimate the acceleration of the vehicle in the direction
of the surge, sway and heave at the moment. However, it is generally not used to
estimate the speed of ROV and the distance passed. Because even a high-precision
accelerometer will have a constant error, the speed and the passing distance are the
accumulation of acceleration and time integration. Of course, the fixed error will
also be accumulated. The longer the accumulation time, the greater the error. The
gyroscope is used to estimate the Euler angle (yaw, pitch, and roll) of the vehicle
relative to the world coordinates.
The role of the magnetometer is to assess the
magnetic field intensity on each axis of the ROV at any given time, which is shown
as Figure 2.9.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Docking Station & Vehicle Camera
9
Figure 2.8: Odroid-XU4.
Figure 2.9: Pixhawk-v2.
Afro ESC (30A) shown as Figure 2.10 as electronic speed controllers receive power
directly from the battery and respond to signals generated by the Pixhawk. Then
generate appropriate 3-phase voltage for the Thrusters (motors).
The vehicle is also equipped with a depth sensor shown as Figure 2.11, which can
handle up to 10 bar absolute pressure (90-meter water depth), the relative accuracy
(-20-85°C) is +/- 4 mbar (4 cm in freshwater).
Figure 2.10: ESC.
Figure 2.11: Depth Sensor.
2.2
Docking Station & Vehicle Camera
The docking station consists of Raspberry Pi 3 (Figure 2.12), a Raspberry Pi camera
V2 Video Module(Figure 2.13), a controllable magnet, and 9 LEDs lights (Figure
2.16). The brightness of the 9 LEDs are different. The two LEDs on both sides have
the strongest brightness, and the 7 LEDs in the middle have moderate brightness. By
default, all the LEDs are turned on, and the magnet strength is set to strong.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Hardware, Software and Test Facilities
Figure 2.12: Raspberry Pi 3.
Figure 2.13: Raspberry Pi cam-
era.
Figure 2.14: Controllable Mag-
net & 9 LEDs.
Figure 2.15: Docking Station.
Figure 2.16: Docking station.
The camera on the front of the vehicle and the docking station are exactly the same,
but only the Raspberry Pi, Raspberry Pi cameras, and controllable magnets were used.
The magnets are controlled by Raspberry pi and used to assist in the completion of
docking tasks and to connect the vehicle to the docking station at very close distances.
The Raspberry Pi is also used as a communication link, connected with the onboard
computer and the topside computer, runs the vision perception algorithms.
2.3
Software
The operating system is Ubuntu since the Odroid is only compatible with Ubuntu,
and this project was based on ROS. All of the vision and control algorithms are based
on ROS. Both the Odroid and Raspberry Pi are configured with static but different
IP addresses. The laptop can communicate with them by SSH (Secure Shell).
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Experimental facility
11
Odroid can access data from Pixhawk and send the control signal to it by MAVROS
[17].
The firmware installed on Pixhawk is Ardusub [3] which is a project initi-
ated by Blue Robotics and later merged with the Ardupilot project. Ardusub imple-
mented some low-level controllers such as stability control, which communicates with
MAVROS by MAVLink.
2.4
Experimental facility
All testing of the project takes place in the Autonomous Systems Test Arena (ASTA),
DTU Lyngby Campus. The size of the pool is (L x W x H = 6.5m x 3.5m x 3m).
The laboratory is shown as Figure 2.17.
Figure 2.17: The Laboratory.
==PAGE:24==
12
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Visual Perception
Algorithm
This chapter involves the specific process of realizing the underwater robot visual
perception algorithm, including image processing, camera calibration, distance esti-
mation, orientation estimation, the 3D Cartesian coordinate system established, and
decision-making algorithms.
3.1
Image Processing
OpenCV (Open Source Computer Vision Library), a cross-platform computer vision
library, is used in the vision part. It provides many general computer vision and
image processing algorithms and provides a standard API(Application Programming
Interface) with high readability.
Since we need to use ROS and OpenCV to process the video images delivered by
the Raspberry Pi camera, but the ROS image cannot be processed directly through
OpenCV. Cv_Bridge[7] needs to be used to convert ROS image message to OpenCV
image matrix.
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Visual Perception Algorithm
Figure 3.1: CvBridge.
The video pictures in the RGB format obtained through CvBridge need to be con-
verted to the HSV format. Because the images in HSV format can separate the hue,
saturation, and value of the picture, making the ROV better detect the LEDs. Af-
ter that, the dimensionality is reduced by converting the HSV format image into a
grayscale image to speed up the calculation. There is no need to process color images
in this project. In addition, because the underwater environment is almost dark, im-
age binarization processing can help the ROV find the LEDs. Image binarization can
set the gray value of all pixels on the image according to the stated threshold. The
pixel value larger than this threshold will be set to 255. Otherwise, be set to 0. It
can significantly reduce the amount of data in the image and divide the light and dark.
Since we only care about whether the ROV can correctly recognize the artificial mark-
ers (LEDs) on the station, the Gaussian blur can be added to reduce the details in the
image and filter out the Gaussian noise in the image. Gaussian blur can average pixel
intensity and smooth the image. It is widely used in image noise reduction process-
ing. The salt and pepper noise in the image can be filtered by median filtering. More
details see [28]. Finally, through the open operation of the morphological transforma-
tion, the final noise reduction process is performed on the image to eliminate the light
source and noise formed by some non-artificial marker points. Open operation is to
erosion the image first and followed by dilation to eliminate the noise in the image[20].
Figure 3.2 shows the docking station observed by the robot at 30 cm (measured by
a ruler) after image processing. The two LEDs in the middle cannot be identified
because the water is turbid.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Artificial Markers Recognize
15
Figure 3.2: Detected dock after image processing.
3.2
Artificial Markers Recognize
In order to enable the ROV to recognize artificial markers (LEDs), the computer
vision algorithm that detects circles or similar circles needs to be used. Opencv API
provides such as Hough circle detection algorithm, edge detection algorithm, blob
detection algorithm, and so on. However, due to the influence of distance, light inten-
sity, water turbidity, and other factors underwater, the light cannot be guaranteed
to be a circle all the time, so the effect of utilizing the Hough circle detection method
is not good.
The edge detection algorithm[8] seems to be a good idea, which is a feature extrac-
tion algorithm based on the principle of image brightness discontinuity. However,
due to underwater image noise and light scattering, sometimes the artificial markers
identified by this algorithm have a large deviation, which makes it impossible to lo-
cate the center of each LED[23] accurately. This will make the position of the dock
estimated by the vision algorithm wrong. Some people make improvements based on
this algorithm[33] by applying more noise filtering methods to the raw image, such
as morphological transformation, etc., to make the position information of artificial
marker points obtained through the edge detection algorithm more robust and ac-
curate. And the others use the Hough line detection algorithm[15] to identify the
rectangular artificial markers and use edge detection to segment the inner and outer
rectangles also got good results.
In short, the prerequisite for better accurate recognition of artificial markers under-
water is to perform suﬀicient noise removal processing, also known as image prepro-
cessing.
However, since edge detection only extracts the edges of artificial marker points based
on the brightness difference in the picture. However, it is seriously affected by noise.
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Visual Perception Algorithm
All edges with differences in brightness will be detected. Therefore, the requirements
for image noise reduction processing are relatively high.
This project adopted the blob detection algorithm supplied by OpenCV API, a more
convenient and straightforward method. A blob is a group of connected pixels in an
image with the same gray value. The artificial marking points (LEDs) in the picture
are blobs. The blob detection algorithm can identify these points and return the pixel
coordinates of their centers. Moreover, it can be filtered according to the blobs’ size,
color (black or white), circularity, etc. This greatly reduces the effect of noise in the
image on the result.
Figure 3.3 is the artificial mark point identified by the blob detection algorithm. Red
circles circle them. And it can be found that the middle area was filtered out according
to size and circularity.
Figure 3.3: Detected dock by blob-detection algorithm.
3.3
Camera Calibration
Due to reasons such as production and installation accuracy, the lens will have a
certain degree of distortion, which will cause image distortion, especially in cheap
cameras. If no correction is made and processed the image by the principle of the
Pinhole camera model, the experimental data obtained will be inaccurate.
This project uses the camera calibration API provided by OpenCV ([5]) to perform
online camera calibration through the checkerboard, as shown in the Figure 3.4 &
Figure 3.5 (only rotated the checkerboard), and eliminate camera distortion. The
algorithm principle is based on Zhang’s Camera Calibration [35].
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Camera Calibration
17
Figure 3.4: Camera calibration process
in air.
Figure 3.5: Camera calibration process
under water.
Although it is possible to calibrate the camera in the air, in Shortis, Mark’s research
[27], it is stated that in the underwater environment, the refraction effects will greatly
affect the accuracy of the calibration. This project was also calibrating the cameras
separately underwater and in air (Shown as Figure 3.6 & Figure 3.7), the results are
indeed different. And the research pointed out that 2D camera calibration is widely
used in the case of short-distance measurement and moderate accuracy requirements.
Figure 3.6: Camera calibration
in air.
Figure 3.7: Camera calibration under
water.
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Visual Perception Algorithm
The intrinsic matrix is :
K =


1258.9
0
653.11
0
1257.30
354.62
0
0
1

, The focal length is approximately 1258 pixel.
The projection matrix is :
P = K ∗
[R
|
t]
=


1409.41
0
655.65
0
0
1399.76
346.26
0
0
0
1
0

,
[R
|
t]
is extrinsic ma-
trix.
The distortion matrix is :
D =
(0.523586
−0.409324
−0.018267
0.005029
0)
3.4
Distance Estimation
For the monocular camera estimating the distance between the ROV and station, the
most common and simple way is based on the pinhole camera model (shown in Figure
3.8), through the focal length, the height of the object, and the height of the target
in the image to calculate the distance[2].
Figure 3.8: Pinhole Camera Model.
Both the target height (H) and the height in the image (h)are known, the focal length
(f) can be obtained from intrinsic parameters, the actual distance (D) is what we are
interested in, and it can be obtained by Eq 3.1.
D = H ∗f
h
(3.1)
The brightness of the LEDs on the docking station is different. The two outermost
LEDs have the strongest light that can be detected at a long distance. The five LEDs
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Distance Estimation
19
in the middle are used to estimate the distance when the distance is short. When
the ROV is very close to the dock, the camera cannot observe all the LEDs. The two
innermost LEDs can be used to estimate the distance, but it depends on the degree
of turbidity of the water.
For ease of understanding, each LED was numbered, but the top LED will negatively
influence the algorithm in this project, so it was not numbered and used (the reason
will be mentioned later). Shown in Figure 3.9
Figure 3.9: The layout of LEDs on the docking station..
A high-precision ruler measured the required LEDs’ distance. As shown in Table 3.1.
LED
Distance (cm)
LED 7 to LED 8
20
LED 3 to LED 4
3.1
LED 1 to LED 2
1.5
Table 3.1: The distance of LEDs.
After these LEDs were detected through image processing and spot detection, they
were also processed by the following vision algorithm to obtain the distance between
the LEDs in pixels:
This vision algorithm is based on the number of detected feature points by the blob
detected algorithm. Then added different filters on each situation is able to achieve
accurate screening of all feature points.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Visual Perception Algorithm
1. When at the farthest visible distance of the docking station, ideally, only LED
7 & LED 8 will be detected, and the Euclidean distance between the two points
is directly calculated by Eq 3.2 (p as the pixel coordinate of the first feature
point, q as the pixel coordinate of the second feature point).
d (p, q) =
√
(qx −px)2 + (qy −py)2
(3.2)
2. If the five artificial markers in the middle can be detected, but due to the long-
distance, they will fusion as one point. So only three points will be detected.
In this case, calculated Euclidean distance of two sides features points.
3. When the middle five LEDs can be detected separately, define an empty con-
tainer, filter all the detected feature points according to the angle, and record
the four points that can form into a rectangle. Nevertheless, the docking sta-
tion and the vehicle may be tilted, so the angle cannot be strictly limited to 90
degrees. It should be limited to 85 to 91 degrees. Thus the top LED will have
an impact on this algorithm and be eliminated.
4. When the dock is too close to the vehicle to detect all LEDs, calculate the
Euclidean distance of the two innermost LEDs and estimate the distance.
Ideally, the above method will calculate the required pixel length between LEDs in
the image through the Euclidean distance publicity, thus estimating the distance be-
tween the dock and the vehicle.
Image preprocessing combined with the above algorithm can filter out most noise
(feature points generated by non-LEDs). But if the sun is complete and the water
surface in the dock is not very deep, there is still a part of the noise that can not be
filtered, which causes interference to the accuracy of artificial markers percept. In
this case, three distance filters will be added to filter the noise further and make the
detection results more accurate.
Because the pixel distances of LEDs are not the same, these three distance filters filter
the correct feature points based on the different lengths of the detected feature points.
The distance filter has two main functions:
• Filtering out accurate LED feature points.
• Selecting the correct actual distance between the LEDs to estimate the distance
between the station and the vehicle.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Distance Estimation
21
For the convenience of understanding, the actual distance between LEDi and LEDj
is denoted as LEDij, the pixel distance is indicated as ledij, and the actual distance
between vehicle and station is denoted as Dvs.
The function of distance filter 1 is to filter if feature points are produced by LED 7
& LED 8 or LED 1 & LED 2. Then Dvs will be calculated.
Filter 1 was added when two feature points or more than four points were detected.
The former determines whether the L1 and L2 or L7 and L8 generate these two fea-
ture points. The latter is applied in situations where many noise points were detected
simultaneously. Or judging if they were made by the L1 and L2 when the vehicle is
too close to the dock.
Filter 2 can detect when only three feature points are found, whether the points on
both sides are generated by the L7 and L8.
When four points that can form a rectangle are detected, it is impossible to determine
that all of the points were generated by the middle 4 LEDs(L3 to L6). If the angle
composed of three points belongs to (85°,91°), they will be put into the empty Points
container. Then the Filter 3 will according to the length of the pixel to filter all these
points.
According to the principle of pinhole imaging, as the distance between the vehicle and
the station changes, the pixel distance between artificially marked points will also be
different. However, artificial markers on different station positions are used to esti-
mate the distances when the ROV and the docking station are in various ranges, so
the pixel distances between the artificial markers will not overlap much. For example,
when the pixel distance between L7 and L8 is not very large, the middle artificial
markers (L3 to L6) can already be detected. Even when the distance between the
vehicle and the station is so close that only two of the middle markers can be observed.
For artificially marked points (such as L3 and L4), the pixel distance between them
will also be greater than the maximum pixel distance between L7 and L8. They will
not be considered produced by L7 and L8. The filtering principle is to filter according
to the pixel distance range between LEDs.
Besides, it is not diﬀicult to find that L1 and L2 are in the same column on the
docking station, and L3 and L4 are in the same row. So the filter one will also filter
by led pixel coordinates. If the horizontal (vertical) coordinate difference is less than
5, they will be judged as L1 & L2 (L7 & L8).
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Visual Perception Algorithm
The core algorithms are shown below, due to the distance filers are almost the same,
so only Filter 1 showed:
1 # The real distance between vehicle and station is D_vs
2 # P is the feature points detected
3 # LED_78 is the real distance between LED 7 & LED 8
4 # LED_12 is the real distance between LED 1 & LED 2
5 # f is the focal length
6
7
8 for(i=0;i<P.size()-1;i++){
9
for(j=1;j<P.size();j++){
10
if(abs(led_i - led_j)<MAXled_78 && abs(led_i - led_j)>MINled_78 &&
abs(led_i.y - led_j.y) < 5)
11
D_vs = LED_78*f / abs(led_i - led_j)
12
13
else if(abs(led_i - led_j)<MAXled_12 && abs(led_i - led_j)>MINled_12
&& abs(led_i.x - led_j.x) < 5)
14
D_vs = LED_12*f / abs(led_i - led_j)
15
16
}
17 }
Listing 3.1: Distance Filter 1.
1
2 # P is the feature points detected
3 vector<Point2d> pointS;
4
5 for (int i = 0; i < P.size()-2; ++i) {
6
for (int j = 2; j < P.size(); ++j) {
7
int num = i+1;
8
double a=angle(P[num].pt,P[i].pt,P[j].pt);
9
if (a<91&&a>=85){
10
int p2I=num,p3I=j;
11
for (int k = j+1; k < keypoints.size(); ++k) {
12
double a2=angle(P[p2I].pt,P[k].pt,P[p3I].pt);
13
if (a2<91&&a2>=85) {
14
pointS.push_back(P[p2I].pt);
15
pointS.push_back(P[i].pt);
16
pointS.push_back(P[p3I].pt);
17
pointS.push_back(P[k].pt);
18
}
19
}
20
21
}
22
}
23 }
Listing 3.2: Rectangle Detection Algorithm.
The principle of the rectangle detection algorithm was based on the consecutive an-
gles of the rectangle are supplementary. First, determine the three points that can
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Distance Estimation
23
form a right angle, save them in ’Points’. Then combine the two points other than
the vertex with the extra feature points until the second right angle is found. Finally,
put this feature point in ’Points’. Sometimes, the same points will be added to the
point set, which needs to be de-duplicated until the point set has only four vertices
of the rectangle.
The algorithm flow chart is as follows:
Figure 3.10: The flow chart of the vision algorithm.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Visual Perception Algorithm
3.5
Bearing Angle Estimation
In order to complete the docking task, it is not only necessary to know the distance
between the vehicle and the dock but to know the bearing angle of the dock. So that
the ROV can know where to dock. This project uses the principle of similar triangles
to estimate the bearing angle [14].
Figure 3.11: Bearing Angle Estimation.
Iθ is the bearing angle that we are interested in, Vθ is the half of the field of view
(FoV), Vx is half of the width of image view (in pixel). The pixel coordinate of the
midpoint of the object projection is ix.
Ix = Vx −ix
(3.3)
Iθ = Ix
Vx
∗Vθ
(3.4)
==PAGE:37==
3.6 3D Cartesian Coordinate Estimation
25
3.6
3D Cartesian Coordinate Estimation
Through the above distance estimation algorithm and bearing angle estimation algo-
rithm, the 3D Cartesian coordinates of the station with respect to the vehicle can be
estimated.
This project used the Raspberry Pi camera v2 [6], and the camera parameters pro-
vided by the manufacturer are shown as Table 3.2.
Camera Module v2
Focal length
3.04 mm
Horizontal field of view
62.2 degrees
Vertical field of view
48.8 degrees
Sensor image area
3.68 x 2.76 mm (4.6 mm diagonal)
Table 3.2: The distance of LEDs.
The focal length (pixel) can be calculated by camera parameters, see Eq.3.5
FocalLength(pixel) = FocalLength(mm) ∗ImageWidth(pixel)
SensorWidth(mm)
(3.5)
The calculated focal length in air is 1058 pixels. Compared with the focal length
of 1066 pixels obtained by the previous calibration (in air), it is found that there
is a slight error of 8 pixels. Therefore, the focal length used in this experiment is
1258 −8 = 1250 pixels (under water).
The estimated distance is the distance from the camera’s center to the station’s cen-
ter, which needs to be converted into specific 3D Cartesian coordinates.
Generally, as mentioned earlier, the vehicle’s forward direction is defined as X, the
downward direction is defined as Z, and the y-direction can be known according to
the right-hand rule. The horizontal angle between ROV and the docking station is
defined as φ, and the vertical angle is defined as θ. For ease of understanding, 3.12
and 3.13 in the figure respectively show the two-dimensional Cartesian coordinate
system when the vehicle and the station are on the same plane and different planes.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Visual Perception Algorithm
Figure 3.12: Vehicle & Station
in same plane.
Figure 3.13: Vehicle & Station
in different plane.
The φ and θ can be calculated by Eq(3.3) & Eq(3.3). The distance D and the azimuth
angle are known, and the three-dimensional coordinates of the station with respect
to the vehicle can be obtained through the Equations following:
x = D ∗cos φ
(3.6)
y = D ∗sin φ
(3.7)
z = D ∗sin θ
(3.8)
Since the vehicle is not equipped with GPS, there is no need to convert the coordinate
system to world coordinates. This project takes the docking station as the origin of
the 3D coordinate system, and the entire docking process is to move the robot to
the origin of the coordinate system. And because there are no obstacles between the
vehicle and the docking station, there is no need to consider collisions with the pool
wall or obstacles.
The vehicle needs to maintain depth during docking. Due to the layout of the thruster
3-5, if the vehicle pitches or rolls, the ROV will move forward or laterally while
maintaining the depth, which is not what we want. And the more degrees of freedom,
the more factors to consider when modeling, and the greater the diﬀiculty. Therefore,
==PAGE:39==
3.6 3D Cartesian Coordinate Estimation
27
the pitch and roll angles will remain zero during the whole process. The form of the
returned Cartesian coordinate system information by the visual perception algorithm
is the distance [x, y, z] (cm), the horizontal and vertical angles between the vehicle
and the station[φ, θ] (deg).
==PAGE:40==
28
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Controller Design
BlueROV has a total of six degrees of freedom (DoF), but since the vehicle needs to
maintain depth and cannot perform pitch and roll, the vehicle only has four degrees
of freedom in this project, yaw, heave, x, and y.
4.1
PID controller
The best way to control ROV accurately is to analyze its kinetics and kinematics,
establish a mathematical model, and obtain accurate model parameters through sys-
tem identification. Then the ROV is controlled based on this mathematical model.
In this way, the position and orientation of ROV can always be estimated. But it is
diﬀicult and time-consuming to establish an accurate mathematical model for under-
water vehicles due to it is affected by multiple factors, like complex hydrodynamic
characteristics. In addition, the docking task does not need high precision control.
And some people control ROV not based on the model and got good results[21][25].
This project implements the Proportional Integral Derivative(PID) controller to con-
trol the position and orientation of the vehicle without modeling the ROV. The PID
controller is composed of proportional control, differential control, and control. Pro-
portional control is used to reduce the steady-state error, but it cannot completely
eliminate the error.
It is necessary to add integral control to reduce the steady-
state error, and the differential control is used to prevent overshoot. Since there is
no mathematical model of the vehicle, the Ziegler-Nichols method [32] was used to
adjust parameters. The control loop of the underwater vehicle is shown in Figure 4.1.
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Controller Design
Figure 4.1: The control loop.
The control process is when the robot obtains the coordinates of the docking station
through the vision algorithm. It will compare with the reference value to get the
error and transmit it to the PID controller. After the controller processes the error,
the corresponding channel signal will be generated and sent to the mixer (a low-level
controller) of the Autopilot (Pixhawk). The mixer converts the channel signal into
the PWM input corresponding to each ESCs. And then, the ESCs will convert the
input into the corresponding thrust force to push the robot to move.
Since the vehicle needs time to adjust its heave to let the vehicle and the station
are on the same level.
If the vehicle changes the distance to the docking station
while adjusting the depth, the docking between the vehicle and the station cannot be
completed when the distance is very close. In addition, the surge and heave motions
will influence each other, making control diﬀicult. Therefore, in this project, heave
control is decoupled with surge and yaw control. So three PID controllers will be
added to the project, shown in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: The control loop (decoupled).
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Depth Control
31
By only the information supplied from the vision algorithm, the vehicle can dock with
the station. However, it is hazardous to rely solely on the data obtained by the visual
algorithm to control the vehicle. The entire vehicle will be out of control once the
visual information is not received (the camera is blocked and so on), just like people
walk in the dark. Besides, when the position information obtained through the visual
algorithm is incorrect, the robot’s motion behavior will also be wrong.
In order to deal with this problem, it is necessary to use the depth sensor and IMU
(Inertial Measurement Unit) data to control the vehicle through sensor information
fusion.
The specific control method will be explained in the following sections.
4.2
Depth Control
When performing depth control, first obtain the water depth of the docking station
through computer vision, and adjust the heave of the vehicle until it is at the same
level as the station. Record the data of the depth sensor at this time as a reference
value. When the docking station depth cannot be obtained by the vision algorithm,
utilize this reference value to control the depth of the vehicle until the data is detected
by the vision algorithm again. The depth control will always run during the entire
docking process.
4.3
Yaw Control & Surge Control
The yaw angle control can control ROV’s heading to align with the dock.
Surge
control can adjust the speed according to the distance between ROV and the dock.
The yaw angle control and the surge control are separated initially because they both
use T1 and T2. When the yaw angle error is significant, they will affect each other if
the heading angle and the surge are controlled simultaneously. So at first, the surge
control stop until the ROV’s head is pointed at the dock (the yaw angle error is ad-
justed to 0), and then the forward command is issued. The yaw controller will always
run and correct the angle error during the forward process, so the angle error will not
be large during the entire docking process. If the yaw angle error is small(between
-5 degrees to 5 degrees), the forward speed and heading can be controlled together.
If the angle error becomes large due to disturbance or other reasons, stop the ROV,
adjust the yaw angle on the spot, then continue to move forward until the docking
process is completed.
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Controller Design
In adjusting the yaw angle, IMU’s information is needed to prevent the vehicle from
losing control when the vision algorithm fails. However, since the IMU is sensitive to
the magnetic fields, it is necessary to calibrate the IMU first and then check whether
the IMU will be interfered with by the geomagnetic field underwater. This project
was carried out in a pool in the laboratory. The vehicle was placed at the bottom
of the water and rotated to detect whether IMU will be affected by the geomagnetic
field. After testing (as shown in Figure 4.3), in this environment, IMU will not be
disturbed.
Figure 4.3: IMU test underwater.
During this project, when the ROV was within 50 cm from the docking station, it
could not perceive the artificial markers because the distance was too close. So the
gyroscope in IMU is needed to maintain the heading until the docking process is
completed.
4.4
Surge Control Under Kinetics Model
To ensure that ROV can still be controllable when the vision algorithm fails. Estab-
lishing a kinetic model in the surge direction is necessary to estimate the distance
that ROV travels. Like the depth sensors and IMU in the heave and yaw directions,
respectively, assist in controlling ROV. Although the IMU includes an accelerometer,
which can estimate the acceleration of the vehicle. But because the speed and posi-
tion are obtained by continually integrating acceleration with respect to time, even if
the error is small, as time increases, the data results will ’drift,’ leading to huge errors.
From chapter 7 of Handbook of Marine Craft Hydrodynamics and Motion Control[18],
the 6 DoF Motion Equation can be expressed as:
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Surge Control Under Kinetics Model
33
M ˙v + C(ν)v + D(ν)v + g(η) + go = τ + τwind + τwave
(4.1)
M = MRB + MA
(4.2)
C(ν) = CRB(ν) + CA(ν)
(4.3)
D(ν) = D + Dn(ν)
(4.4)
where :
M : system inertia matrices (including rigid-body(MRB) and added mass(MA))
C(ν): Coriolis–centripetal matrix (including rigid-body(CRB(ν)) and added mass(CA(ν)))
D(ν): damping matrix
g(η): vector of gravitational/buoyancy forces and moments
go: vector used for pretrimming (ballast control)
τ, τwind, τwave: vector of control inputs,wind force,wave-induced forces
This formula can be simplified by the following assumptions.
1. Due to the vehicle cannot perform pitch and roll, g(η)=-W-B, where W is weight,
B is buoyancy. But this will affect the heave not the surge, so g(η) = 0.
W = mg
(4.5)
B = V ρg
(4.6)
2. Since heave was decoupled with surge and yaw, so the associated coupled motion
can be neglected.
3. For underwater vehicles, since they run under the wave-affected zone, the force
caused by waves can be ignored[18], and the hydrodynamic matrices can be
seen as constant. The associated hydrodynamic equation:
τhyd = MA ˙v + CA(v)v + D(v)v
(4.7)
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Controller Design
4. Because the ROV is symmetric in the x-z plane and almost symmetric in the
x-y and y-z planes, the influence of the off-diagonal elements of the added mass
matrix is much less than the diagonal elements, so the off-diagonal elements
inertia matrix can be ignored. The added mass matrix of the surge is:
MA = −X ˙u
(4.8)
and MRB = m
5. According to the book[18] and other people’s results after modeling the ROV.[10],
the Coriolis-centripetal matrix of 4 DoF is:
CRB(ν)ν =


−mvr
mur
0
0

=


0
−mr
0
0
mr
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0




u
v
w
r


(4.9)
If yaw-rate r is small, the influence of Coriolis force on surge can be ignored.
CA (ν) ν =


(Y ˙vvr + Y ˙rr) r
−(X ˙uur + X ˙wwr) r
0
−(Y ˙vvr + Y ˙rr) ur + (X ˙uur + X ˙wwr) vr


(4.10)
≈


0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−X ˙uur
0
0
0
0
−Y ˙vvr
X ˙uur
0
0




ur
vr
wr
r


The added Coriolis-centrifugal force will not influence the surge, so C(ν) is
approximately equal to 0.
6. ROV is mainly affected by three hydrodynamic dampers: skin friction, potential
damping, and vortex shedding. The effect is divided into linear damping D and
secondary damping Dn(ν), which can be expressed as:
D = −


Xu
0
0
0
0
Yv
0
Yr
0
0
Zw
0
0
Nv
0
Nr


(4.11)
Dn (ν) = −


X|u|u |ur|
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N|r|r|r|


(4.12)
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Surge Control Under Kinetics Model
35
In surge direction,
Dν = D + Dn(ν) = −(Xu + X|u|u |ur|)
So the Eq(4.1) can be simplified to ￿
(m −X ˙u)˙v −(Xu + X|u|u |ur|)v = τ
(4.13)
In order to linearize a nonlinear system, it is necessary to find an operating point,
then linearize the system around the operating point. Let this operating point be
(v0, τ0), ˙v0 = 0, then:
τ0 = −(Xu + X|u|u |ur|)v0
(4.14)
The linear model is:
˙v = (Xu + X|u|u |ur|)
(m −X ˙u)
v +
1
(m −X ˙u)τ
(4.15)
The equation of distance been traveled is:
D(t) = D0 + v · t
(4.16)
Since the thrust τ is generated by the PPM(Pulse Position Modulation) signal trans-
mitted to the thruster, it is necessary to convert the PPM into thrust τ. According
to Hansen’s report[10], It is challenging to model the propulsion system due to the
interaction between the propellers, the propeller, and vehicle, and due to other fluid
effects, so the following black-box modeling method was used:
Fi,∞(ui) =





a−
i u2
i + b−
i ui + c−
i ,
if ui < −d
(reverse)
0,
if −d ≤ui ≤d
(deadband)
a+
i u2
i + b+
i ui + c+
i ,
if ui > d
(forward)
(4.17)
where Fi,∞(ui) represents when the control signal ui is transmitted to the i-th
thruster, its generated thrust F. a−
i ,b−
i ,c−
i ,a+
i ,b+
i ,c+
i are thruster parameters.
According to the information of performance charts[29], we get that. When u is 1500
ppm, the thruster does not rotate.
When u is greater than 1500 ppm, it rotates
clockwise to generate a positive thrust. When u is less than 1500 ppm, it rotates
counterclockwise to produce reverse thrust. When u is between 1525-1475 ppm, it is
a dead zone, and the thrust is 0 at this time.
Since T1 and T2 determine the movement in the surge direction, and through exper-
iments, it is found that when ROV advances or retreats, the control signals are the
same, so the resultant force received is:
τX = F1 + F2
(4.18)
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Controller Design
4.5
Control Flow Chart
Figure 4.4 shows the flow chart of the entire control process.
Figure 4.4: The control flow chart.
When the ROV and the docking station are not in the same plane, the depth con-
troller adjusts the depth. When the ROV and the docking station are in the same
depth, record the depth sensor data at this time to assist in the control of the ROV
depth. Then perform yaw angle controller to correct the heading error and save the
IMU (Gyroscope) data when the error is 0, which is used to control ROV’s heading
in the case of loss of visual signal. After that, run the surge controller, and run depth
control and yaw control simultaneously. When the yaw angle error is significant, stop
the movement of ROV in the surge direction and adjust the heading.
The distance information will be estimated by the model when the distance is less
than 40cm. Moreover, in some cases, the gap between the estimated distance at this
time and the previous is more than 50cm (the distance is not gradually changing
but dramatically). The ROV will consider as the estimated distance obtained by the
==PAGE:49==
4.6 Ziegler-Nichols method
37
visual algorithm is incorrect and utilize the information from the model.
Finally, the docking is completed when the estimated distance is equal to 0.
4.6
Ziegler-Nichols method
For excellent and stable control performance, the essential part of the PID controller
is to tune the parameters Kp, Ki, and Kd, but you cannot just shoot these param-
eters in the dark and hope they can work correctly. In addition, it will take lots of
time to select appropriate parameters. One of the more intelligent ways is by using
Ziegler-Nichols Method, and it does not need a mathematical model.
Through the following steps, you can select the appropriate PID parameters:
step 1 Choose a small Kp value, set Ki and Kd to 0, observe the controller output
response.
step 2 Gradually increase the Kp value until it reaches the ultimate gain Ku, enabling
the controller output value to be stable and consistent oscillations, and record
the Ku value and oscillation period Tu at this time.
step 3 Calculate the required Kp, Ki, and Kd according to the Ziegler–Nichols Method(Table
4.1).
Control Type
Kp
Ti
Td
Ki
Kd
P
0.5Ku
−
−
−
−
PI
0.45Ku
0.80Tu
−
0.54Ku/Tu
−
PD
0.8Ku
−
0.125Tu
−
0.10KuTu
classic PID
0.6Ku
0.5Tu
0.125Tu
1.2Ku/Tu
0.075KuTu
Pessen Integral Rule
0.7Ku
0.4Tu
0.15Tu
1.75Ku/Tu
0.105KuTu
some overshoot
0.33Ku
0.50Tu
0.33Tu
0.66Ku/Tu
0.11KuTu
no overshoot
0.20Ku
0.50Tu
0.33Tu
0.40Ku/Tu
0.066KuTu
Table 4.1: Ziegler–Nichols Method.
==PAGE:50==
38
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5
Experiments and
Results
This chapter is divided into three parts, which test the accuracy of the visual per-
ception algorithm, the control performance of the ROV, and the performance of the
autodocking process under the combination of vision and control algorithms.
Be-
sides, it describes the problems encountered during the experiment and the feasible
solutions.
5.1
ROV Visual Test
In this section, the ROV was moved by hand and kept neutral buoyancy by tying the
foam and manually adjusting the docking station’s position to make the ROV and
the station on the same plane or a different plane.
In all the vision diagrams of this section, the ”s_t_r” in the upper left corner rep-
resents the 3D coordinates of the robot with respect to the station. The data in
the middle represents the distance from the docking station to the robot, and the
following data represents the angle between the robot and the docking station in the
x-axis(φ) and y-axis(θ) directions. In addition, with the midpoint of the docking
station as the origin, a three-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system is established,
with red representing the x-axis, green representing the y-axis, and blue representing
the z-axis.
Generally, we set the forward direction of the ROV as the positive direction of the
x-axis, and the direction of sinking is the positive direction of the y-axis. The y-axis
direction can be obtained by the right-hand rule[16], as shown in Figure 5.1 and
Figure 5.2.
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Experiments and Results
Figure 5.1: Top view.
Figure 5.2: Front view.
In the experiment, we use a tape measure to measure the distance between the ROV
and the docking station (in the x-direction, y-direction, and z-direction), calculate
the angle between them through the arc-tangent function(Eq 5.1),
φ = arctan x
y
(5.1)
and calculate the distance between them through the Pythagorean theorem(Eq 5.2)
the actual distance.
z =
√
x2 + y2
(5.2)
First, the ROV visual perception algorithm tested the farthest visible distance of the
artificial marker in turbid water and clear water. The result found that in turbid
water, the farthest visible distance was about 4m. As shown in Figure 5.3, in clear
water, The farthest visible distance is 5.4m, shown in Figure 5.4.
The ROV and
station are on the same plane.
==PAGE:53==
5.1 ROV Visual Test
41
Figure 5.3: In turbid water.
Figure 5.4: In clear water.
When the distance was very close to the docking station, you could see that the ROV
could not detect the two innermost LEDs separately in the turbid water. They are
mixed, shown in Figure 5.5. On the contrary, they can be seen clearly in the water
with low turbidity, shown in Figure 5.6. However, most of the underwater environ-
ment is unclear, so the experiments in this project were conducted assuming that the
water is turbid. And the two innermost artificial markers are discarded to estimate
the distance. But the absence of innermost LEDs will cause the available artificial
markers cannot be detected to calculate the distance, or even the estimation is wrong
==PAGE:54==
42
5 Experiments and Results
in close range (approximately 30cm from the docking station). This situation will
cause ROV to lose control or perform wrong actions within the last 30cm. The solu-
tion is to establish the ROV surge direction kinetics model, which has been mentioned
in the previous control chapter. The subsequent control part test will describe Its
results and performance.
Figure 5.5: The 2 internal LEDs were not detected.
Figure 5.6: The 2 internal LEDs were detected.
Secondly, the visual perception algorithm is tested separately with and without the
distance filter.
The result is that if there is no distance filter, the algorithm will
incorrectly connect the artificial marker points, resulting in an error in the position
estimation, shown in Figure 5.7.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 ROV Visual Test
43
Figure 5.7: With distance filter(left) and without(right).
And during the experiment, it was found that if the docking station is fixed near the
water surface (approximately 1 meter underwater) with suﬀicient sunlight, the water
surface will appear specular reflection behavior, as shown in the figure 5.9, resulting
in incorrect position estimation results.
Figure 5.8: Specular reflection phenomenon.
Although the distance filter can solve this problem, it will cause the loss of estimation
information and stagnate ROV. So the best way is to filter out the image generated
by the specular reflection by setting the ROI (Region of Interest), as shown in 5.9.
This does cause the ROV’s vertical field of view to decrease, but this is not a problem.
When the vehicle cannot detect the docking station, the acoustic positioning system
can obtain its approximate depth and orientation, but this is only rough position
information, and the accuracy is low. The primary function of the visual perception
algorithm is to provide high-precision and accurate location information and a higher
update rate.
==PAGE:56==
44
5 Experiments and Results
Figure 5.9: After setting ROI.
Finally, we put the ROV to the farthest distance (380cm) that it can detect the
docking station, as shown in Figure 5.10, then gradually reduce the distance. By
comparing the length measured with a tape measure and the estimated distance, it
is found that the distance error in the x-axis direction is about 8 cm, 2 cm in the
y-direction, and 15 cm in the z-direction.
Figure 5.10: The outermost LEDs was used.
When the distance from the ROV and the station is 323.26 cm, the rectangle composed
of four middle artificial markers can be observed. As shown in Figure 5.11, At this
time, the distance error in the x-direction is about 5 cm, in the y-direction is 2 cm,
and in the z-direction is 7.8 cm.
==PAGE:57==
5.1 ROV Visual Test
45
Figure 5.11: The middle LEDs was used.
The closest distance that the ROV can utilize artificial markers to estimate the dock-
ing station position information is about 33.86 cm, as shown in Figure 5.12.
At
this time, there is almost no error with the estimated distance in the x-direction,
y-direction, and z-direction. It can be found that when the distance is shortened, the
vision estimated error will gradually decrease.
Figure 5.12: Final detected.
When the distance is less than 33.86 cm, the artificial marking points on the docking
station cannot be detected. The position information will disappear. As shown in
Figure 5.13. It can be concluded that if the visual perception algorithm without the
help of the two innermost LEDs, the visible distance is 400 cm to 34 cm. But if
the robot is not in a fully controllable state, it will be dangerous. Therefore, the
remaining 34cm needs to be controlled by the distance estimated model.
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Experiments and Results
Figure 5.13: Distance information lost.
Figure 5.14 is the distance transformation diagram of the whole process. The unit of
the x-axis is time (s), the y-axis is the distance (cm) for the blue line, and the angle
(degrees) for the red line. The blue line is the distance from ROV to the docking
station, and the red line is the yaw angle that needs to be rotated to the center of the
alignment station. From the picture, it can be seen that when the distance between
the docking station and the ROV is less than 34 cm, the visual estimation algorithm
will be wrong and did not work.
Figure 5.14: distance transformation plot.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Control System Test
47
5.2
Control System Test
5.2.1
Yaw Control Test
First, place the docking station within the visible range and only run the yaw angle
controller. Adjust the parameter Kp according to the Ziegler-Nichols method to make
the ROV perform a stable and uniform swing around the reference angle, as shown in
Figure 5.15, the x-axis is time (second), and the y-axis is the yaw angle. The ultimate
gain Ku= 5, the oscillation period Ti≈4.
Figure 5.15: Yaw-Time Plot,Ku=5,Ti≈4.
Then calculate the PID controller parameters Kp = 1, Ki = 0.5, Kd = 0.08 according
to Table 3.1. Since we do not want the overshoot, the control type is No Overshoot.
The output plot is shown in Figure 5.16.
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Experiments and Results
Figure 5.16: Yaw-Time Plot Kp = 1, Ki =0.5, Kd =0.08.
But under this parameter, the controller corrected the error a bit slowly, about 4s.
And the oscillation amplitude is slightly larger, which will make the ROV sway from
side to side as it moves forward. We hope that the yaw angle error can be corrected
quickly, so we need to increase the Kp value to increase its adjustment speed. When
Ku=10, the second ultimate gain is reached, and the oscillation period is about 2.2,
shown in Figure 5.17.
Figure 5.17: Yaw-Time Plot ,Ku=10,Ti≈2.2.
The controller parameters with No Overshoot type calculated by the Ziegler-Nichols
method are Kp= 5, Ki=1.8, Kd=0.3. But the system performance is not very good
under these parameters, and there will be some overshoot. We increase the Kd to 0.8
to reduce the overshoot. And the performance is shown in Figure 5.18. The controller
can correct the yaw angle error within 1.5s, and the ROV did not show an apparent
side-to-side swing after reaching the steady-state.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Control System Test
49
Figure 5.18: Yaw-Time Plot,Kp=5,Ki=1.8,Kd=0.8.
5.2.2
Depth Control Test
The parameters of the depth controller were also selected by the Ziegler-Nichols
method and made some adjustments. Since it is power-consuming that the process of
the ROV adjusting its depth, we hope that the depth can be adjusted gradually and
do not want too much overshoot, so we also choose the No Overshoot type. Finally,
we get Kp=0.5, Ki=0.2, Kd=0.1. We tried to control the ROVs depth to keep it at
2m underwater and get the control performance as shown in the figure. The x-axis
represents time(s), the y-axis represents depth(m), the blue line represents the depth
error, and the purple line represents the current depth.
Figure 5.19: Depth Control Performance Plot.
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Experiments and Results
5.3
Auto Docking Test & Result
The modeling in the direction of ROV’s surge mentioned in Chapter 4.4 estimates
the distance the vehicle has traveled. Due to the limited time of this project, the
model parameters cannot be accurately obtained through experiments. All model pa-
rameters used in this project come from the BlueROV 1 model parameters obtained
by Hansen through experiments in 2016[10]. However, because the ROV used in this
project is different from Hansen’s, the former is equipped with a camera and LEDs in
the vehicle’s front, so the center of gravity will shift forward, resulting in a mismatch
of model parameters. However, since we only perform modeling in the surge direction,
there are few model parameters involved, so we can adjust these model parameters
slightly to make the model achieve the desired effect.
Secondly, the model of the surge direction we built can only roughly estimate the
distance of advancement, it is not very accurate, so we cannot get the parameters of
the surge controller through the Ziegler-Nichols method. We choose to use manual
tuning. Since we expect the ROV to move slowly to ensure that it does not yaw, and
if there is a disturbance (such as water current), there is enough time to adjust the
yaw angle. After many experiments, Kp is chosen to be 0.7 so that the ROV speed
will not rapidly increase. The derivative term can predict the behavior of the sys-
tem. Setting Kd=0.3 enables ROV to decelerate in advance before reach the docking
station. The integral term can eliminate the steady-state error. Set Ki=0.5 so that
ROV will not hit the docking station.
Figure 5.20: Auto docking Test Plot.
We place the ROV 3m away from the docking station and start the automatic docking
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Auto Docking Test & Result
51
procedure. The data diagram of the docking process is shown in Figure 5.20.
The green line represents the distance that the ROV has passed during the entire
operation process estimated by the model. The purple line represents the distance
between the ROV and the docking station estimated by the visual perception algo-
rithm. The red line represents the estimated yaw angle.
The plot shows after running the program, the ROV could quickly correct the yaw
angle error. After manually interfering with the ROV heading, the angle error could
also be fixed soon. But when ROV was very close to the station, the yaw angle was
misestimated, so the IMU was used to control ROV’s heading when the distance was
within 50cm. In addition, the established kinetic model of surge direction can match
the ROV well and estimate the distance roughly. When the vision algorithm cannot
estimate the distance between the vehicle and the station (about 40cm in front of the
station), the model was used to estimate and compensate for missing or inaccurate
data so that the ROV stopped close in front of the station. Finally, the magnet in
front of the ROV attracted the magnets in the docking station to complete the final
docking.
==PAGE:64==
52
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion and Future
works
6.1
Conclusion
In the visual part of this paper, through the binarization of raw images, Gaussian
filtering, morphological operations, and other image processing methods, and the
combination of artificial mark point features and distance filters, the ROV can accu-
rately perceive all artificial mark points. Secondly, the distance method based on the
pinhole camera model can estimate the distance between the ROV and the docking
station almost accurately, and the distance error is within10cm. Then, based on the
principle of similar triangles, the bearing angle of the docking station is estimated,
and the error is less than 2 degrees. Finally, it established a 3D Cartesian coordinate
system ROV and the docking station as the coordinate origin.
As for the control part, the ROV depth and yaw angle are controlled by the com-
bination of the PID controller and sensors’ information. The PID parameters were
obtained by the Ziegler-Nichol method. It is found that the PID parameters calcu-
lated by this method cannot always guarantee the controller work is stable; sometimes,
large oscillations or overshoots may occur. The parameters need to be optimized in
combination with manual adjustment. Secondly, a kinetics model in the surge direc-
tion was established. This model estimated the distance that the ROV had passed
to make up for the lack of information in the vision algorithm. However, because
the model is not accurate enough, it can only roughly estimate the distance that
the vehicle passes to ensure that it can stop before hitting the docking station and
complete the docking with the help of magnets.
In conclusion, combined with the docking station location information provided by
the visual perception algorithm, and the data from the depth sensor and IMU, the
automatic docking of the underwater vehicle can be realized under the control of the
PID controller. However, due to insuﬀicient model matching and uncomplete ROV
modeling, it is impossible to accurately estimate the position and orientation of the
ROV with respect to the docking station at each moment. So the ROV relies heavily
on visual algorithms. ROV will not accurately estimate its position relative to the
==PAGE:66==
54
6 Conclusion and Future works
dock if the vision algorithm fails to work. Therefore, the path planning algorithm
cannot be used to plan the docking path, and the ROV can hardly finish the docking
process without the help of the magnets.
6.2
Future Works
In future works, we hope to establish the high matched mathematic model of the
ROV accurately and accurately estimate the position of the ROV with respect to
the docking station at each moment through the model and motion controllers. The
position information assessed by the model and by the visual perception algorithm
is combined to improve the shortcomings of ROV’s extreme dependence on the vi-
sual algorithm and increase its robustness. Secondly, we hope to develop the path
planning algorithm based on the model of ROV so that the ROV can smooth the
automatic dock without the help of magnets.
In addition, because ROV may encounter obstacles (such as marine debris or marine
life) during the underwater journey, which may block the camera or affect ROV’s
motion. We hope to solve this problem through the path planning algorithm and
with the help of sonar.
These problems include different treatments for dynamic
obstacles and static obstacles. For static blocks, only need to use sonar combined
with local path planning algorithm to avoid. But for dynamic barriers, the situation
will be more complicated. We may need to estimate its moving speed, and make
decisions based on its moving speed, choose to wait or bypass it to prevent collisions,
etc.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Adam Aili and Erik Ekelund. “Model-Based Design, Development and Control
of an Underwater Vehicle.” In: 2016.
[2]
Abduladhem Abdulkareem Ali and Hussein Alaa Hussein. “Distance estimation
and vehicle position detection based on monocular camera.” In: 2016 Al-Sadeq
International Conference on Multidisciplinary in IT and Communication Sci-
ence and Applications (AIC-MITCSA). 2016, pages 1–4. doi: 10.1109/AIC-
MITCSA.2016.7759904.
[3]
ardusub. https://www.ardusub.com/.
[4]
BlueRobotics. BlueROV Documentation. https://docs.bluerobotics.com/
bluerov.
[5]
Camera Calibration. https://docs.opencv.org/3.4.15/dc/dbb/tutorial_
py_calibration.html.
[6]
Camera Module v2. https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/accessories/
camera.html.
[7]
cv_bridge. http://wiki.ros.org/cv_bridge.
[8]
Edge detection. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edge_detection.
[9]
Future Energy Industry Trends. https://northsearegion.eu/northsee/e-
energy/future-energy-industry-trends/.
[10]
Andreas Baldur Nørregård Hansen. “System Identification and Dynamic Posi-
tioning of Autonomous Underwater Vehicle.” In: IEEE Control Systems Maga-
zine (2016).
[11]
Hardkernel. Odroid-XU4. https://wiki.odroid.com/.
[12]
Å. Irgens et al. “Mortality among professional divers in Norway.” In: Occupa-
tional Medicine 63.8 (November 2013), pages 537–543. issn: 0962-7480. doi:
10.1093/occmed/kqt112. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/occmed/
article-pdf/63/8/537/4278288/kqt112.pdf. url: https://doi.org/10.
1093/occmed/kqt112.
[13]
Erlend Gjelstad Jakobsen and Nikolas Ironside. “OCEANS UNLOCKED - A
FLOATING WIND FUTURE.” In: (2021). url: https://www.cowi.com/
insights/oceans-unlocked-a-floating-wind-future.
==PAGE:68==
56
Bibliography
[14]
Basia Korel. “Tutorial on Range and Bearing Estimation.” In: (2009).
[15]
A. A. Kushnerik, A. V. Vorontsov, and A. Ph. Scherbatyuk. “Small AUV dock-
ing algorithms near dock unit based on visual data.” In: OCEANS 2009. 2009,
pages 1–6. doi: 10.23919/OCEANS.2009.5422096.
[16]
Christian Mai et al. “Modeling and Control of Industrial ROV’s for Semi-
Autonomous Subsea Maintenance Services.” In: IFAC-PapersOnLine 50.1 (2017).
20th IFAC World Congress, pages 13686–13691. issn: 2405-8963. doi: https:
/ / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ifacol . 2017 . 08 . 2535. url: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2405896317334572.
[17]
mavros. http://wiki.ros.org/mavros.
[18]
Leigh McCue. “Handbook of Marine Craft Hydrodynamics and Motion Control
[Bookshelf].” In: IEEE Control Systems Magazine 36.1 (2016), pages 78–79. doi:
10.1109/MCS.2015.2495095.
[19]
A. Molero et al. “Model predictive control of remotely operated underwater
vehicles.” In: 2011 50th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control and European
Control Conference. 2011, pages 2058–2063. doi: 10.1109/CDC.2011.6161447.
[20]
Morphological Transformations. https://opencv24-python-tutorials.readthedocs.
io/en/latest/py_tutorials/py_imgproc/py_morphological_ops/py_
morphological_ops.html.
[21]
Myo Myint et al. “Visual-servo-based autonomous docking system for under-
water vehicle using dual-eyes camera 3D-pose tracking.” In: 2015 IEEE/SICE
International Symposium on System Integration (SII). 2015, pages 989–994. doi:
10.1109/SII.2015.7405161.
[22]
N. Palomeras et al. “AUV homing and docking for remote operations.” In: Ocean
Engineering 154 (2018), pages 106–120.
[23]
Jin-Yeong Park et al. “Experiments on vision guided docking of an autonomous
underwater vehicle using one camera.” In: Ocean Engineering 36.1 (2009). Au-
tonomous Underwater Vehicles, pages 48–61. issn: 0029-8018. doi: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2008.10.001. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0029801808002242.
[24]
pixhawk. https://pixhawk.org/.
[25]
Muhammad Qomaruzzaman and Ronny Mardiyanto. “Automatic Docking Based
on Visual Feedback on Remotely Operated Vehicle.” In: 2018 5th International
Conference on Information Technology, Computer, and Electrical Engineering
(ICITACEE). 2018, pages 353–358. doi: 10.1109/ICITACEE.2018.8576927.
[26]
Monica Saini and Pooja Bhardwaj. “AUV–The main Challenges and possible
Solutions.” In: (2017).
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
57
[27]
Mark Shortis. “Camera Calibration Techniques for Accurate Measurement Un-
derwater.” In: 3D Recording and Interpretation for Maritime Archaeology. Edited
by John K. McCarthy et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019,
pages 11–27. isbn: 978-3-030-03635-5. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-03635-5_2.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-03635-5_2.
[28]
Smoothing Images. https://opencv24-python-tutorials.readthedocs.io/
en/latest/py_tutorials/py_imgproc/py_filtering/py_filtering.html.
[29]
T200 Thruster. https://www.bluerobotics.com/store/thrusters/t100-
t200-thrusters/t200-thruster-r2-rp/.
[30]
THE MANY CHALLENGES OF UNDERWATER COMMUNICATION. https:
/ / schmidtocean . org / cruise - log - post / the - many - challenges - of -
underwater-communication/. 2015.
[31]
Petar Trslic et al. “Vision based autonomous docking for work class ROVs.” In:
Ocean Engineering 196 (2020), page 106840. issn: 0029-8018. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2019.106840. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0029801819309369.
[32]
Duarte Valério and José Sá da Costa. “Tuning of fractional PID controllers
with Ziegler–Nichols-type rules.” In: Signal Processing 86.10 (2006). Special
Section: Fractional Calculus Applications in Signals and Systems, pages 2771–
2784. issn: 0165-1684. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sigpro.2006.
02.020. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0165168406000624.
[33]
Guanyu Wang et al. “Improvement on vision guidance in AUV docking.” In:
OCEANS 2016 - Shanghai. 2016, pages 1–6. doi: 10.1109/OCEANSAP.2016.
7485653.
[34]
FlatFish Resident AUV: Leading the Autonomy Era for Subsea Oil and Gas
Operations. Volume Day 4 Thu, May 03, 2018. OTC Offshore Technology Con-
ference. D041S054R001. April 2018. doi: 10.4043/28881-MS. eprint: https:
//onepetro.org/OTCONF/proceedings-pdf/18OTC/4-18OTC/D041S054R001/
1194205/otc-28881-ms.pdf. url: https://doi.org/10.4043/28881-MS.
[35]
Z. Zhang. “A flexible new technique for camera calibration.” In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 22.11 (2000), pages 1330–
1334. doi: 10.1109/34.888718.
==PAGE:70==
