==PAGE:1==
Influence of tumor motion on target coverage in online
MR­guided adapted radiotherapy
Experimental evaluation of a model to predict the impact of
beam gating on target coverage
Laia Poqui Sallés
DTU Biomedical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Influence of tumor motion on target coverage in online MR­guided adapted radio­
therapy
Experimental evaluation of a model to predict the impact of beam gating on target cover­
age
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
Laia Poqui Sallés
DTU Supervisor
Claus E. Andersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Denmark
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Oncology at Rigshos­
pitalet, Copenhaguen University Hospital, together with the Technical University of Den­
mark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Biomedical Engineer­
ing.
Laia Poqui Sallés ­ s192785
Signature
Date
ii
2nd January, 2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The ViewRay MRIdian linac offers the option to perform magnetic ressonance­guided
radiotherapy, an attractive treatment for abdominal tumors due to superior soft tissue
contrast. A further advantage of the MRIdian is the automated beam­gating based on
continuous 2D imaging and real time target tracking, all of which leads to an opportunity
of a treatment margin reduction.
Although the margins required to cover a moving target depends on several parameters
such as the gating window (or boundary) and the respiratory motion, its relation is un­
known. To address this, a new Matlab model is presented by the Department of Oncology
at Rigshospitalet. This software predicts the effective dose distribution to a gated target
with a known motion pattern.
The purpose of this study is to experimentally evaluate the performance of this new model
by using film dosimetry. To do so, gafchromic films were placed inside a cavity of a mov­
able piston from a dynamic phantom. A treatment plan with a 3,4 Gy mean dose per
fraction was prepared to be delivered to a tracked structure and when delivered, irradi­
ated the films. Two breathing motion patterns were used for the testing: breath­hold and
free breathing. Moreover, conditions of the delivery were varied among several configu­
rations to test the model for different treatment types. The exposed films were converted
to dose profiles by using the Radiochromic.com dosimetry protocol.
Each condition was also simulated using the Matlab model. Therefore, a comparison
between the curves could be done. The assessment on the agreement between curves
was done by a) visually comparing their deviation from one another, b) computing several
metrics such as the root­mean­square and the maximum deviations, and c) addressing
the differences in the target dose coverage of the GTV and the PTV. Moreover, a small
assessment on the effect of each variable to the dose profile was done.
The results showed a good agreement for both the breath­hold and the free breathing
motion patterns, even if some of them represented non­optimal clinical conditions. Fur­
thermore, dosimetric variations were observed depending on the gating method and the
motion parameters.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Countless people supported my effort on this report. My sincere thanks to Claus E. Ander­
sen, I have benefited greatly from your knowledge and numerous revisions. You helped
me make some sense of the confusion and I greatly appreciate that. I am indebted to Cé­
cile Anne Peucelle and Kristian Boye, who taught me and supervised all the experimen­
tal processess involved in the project. Your detailed feedback and teaching have been
very important to me and have allowed me to learn and grow during this experience. I
also greatfully recognize the help from Ivan Richter Vogelius, Isak Hannes Wahlstedt and
Claus Behrens, who patiently listened to pieces of the work weekly, and provided with
great advice.
Thank you to my partner, Joan Maria Arenas Gomez, for constantly listening to me talking
about the project, giving me great programming advice and for your enormous support in
the most needed moments. And thank you to my friends and family, for encouraging and
supporting me whenever I needed them.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Influence of tumor motion on target coverage in online MR­guided adapted radiotherapy
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Outline of the project
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Introduction
3
2.1
Uncertainties and Margins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Motion Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Bladder and rectum filling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Respiration motion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.3
Adaptive radiotherapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.4
Respiration management techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Dose in Magnetic Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
The MR­Linac at Rigshospitalet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4.1
ViewRay MRIdian Linac . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4.2
The Matlab simulation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
Methodology
19
3.1
Experimental Set­up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.1.1
Gating Phantom and Set­up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.1.2
Film Dosimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.1.3
Treatment Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2
Tracking Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3
Dose Profile Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.3.1
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.3.2
Target Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Results and Discussion
33
4.1
The Static Case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Dose Profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.2.1
Shape and Considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.2.2
Information in plots and tables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.2.3
Breath­hold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2.4
Free Breathing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.3
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5
Conclusion
61
A Appendix A
69
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Influence of tumor motion on target coverage in online MR­guided adapted radiotherapy
1
Outline of the project
In the Department of Oncology at Rigshospitalet, Copenhaguen University Hospital, sev­
eral radiotherapy treatments are done at the ViewRay MRIdian Linac, a linear accelerator
that has incorporated magnetic resonance (MR) imaging in its system. This machine is
called an MR­Linac.
The particularity of the treatments done in the MR­Linac is that, apart from being able to
effect online­adaptive radiotherapy, and having a software that allows adding the neces­
sary margins around the tumor volume, which is a universal requirement in radiotherapy;
the ViewRay MRIdian Linac is able to perform advanced beam gating.
This treatment modality is based on online MR imaging of a predefined anatomical target
such that dose distributions can be obtained even if the tumor area is under significant
influence of breathing or other motion drivers. Gating ensures that the effective dose
received by the target is marginally changed by motion. This is possible thanks to the
online availability of the MR images, which off­line in regular computed tomography (CT)
accelerators. The greater soft tissue contrast and the avoidance of the extra dose to the
patient also play a role.
However, tumors differ greatly from patient to patient. Targets may differ in size, contrast,
and location in the anatomy, plus the patient’s compliance to gating (ability to execute
reproduceable breath­holds) also plays an important role. All of them can impact the
tracking algorithm accuracy. Thus, the strategy to approach each patient must be studied:
gating parameters are to be studied before treatment.
The aim is to know how the gating parameters will affect the volume needed to ensure
full target coverage during treatment. With this information and other features such as
the recorded tumor motion and the prepared treatment plan, the goal is to estimate this
volume.
To address this, a Matlab model is proposed at the Department of Oncology by part of the
team, as an independent tool from the treatment delivery system (TDS). The aim of this
new piece of software is to mimic the TDS of the MR­Linac and with its outcome, build up
the knowledge to create an efficient strategy for the beam gating. In other words, translate
reasonable estimates of non­ideal behavior, such as tumor movement due to breathing
motion, into the choice of beam gating parameters.
This project consists in performing an experimental evaluation of this Matlab model by
using film dosimetry so that the software can be validated before it is used clinically.
Several configurations are studied. The same configurations are performed both in the
Matlab simulation and in the experimental set­up with film measurements. Thus, the main
objective of the project is to know whether this independent model is able to imitate the
machine dose­delivery in gated treatments, under well controlled conditions. Does the
simulation perform good results even when the treatments are extreme cases? How do
patient breathing motion or other parameters such as the period, or the size of the gating
window, affect the predictions of the model? It is the purpose of this study to find this
out by using film dosimetry in a controlled experimental set­up and by analyzing the dose
profiles resulting from it and the simulation.
1
==PAGE:10==
Also, since some motion and gating parameters are varied in the configurations used to
evaluate the software, a small assessment on how they affect the target dose distribution
and its coverage is made, as a secondary aim for this project.
1.1
Objectives
The specific objectives that are intended to be reached with this Master Thesis are the
following:
• To evaluate the Matlab simulation software against film measurements on dose pro­
files obtained under well­controlled conditions with a moving phantom irradiated in
an MR­linac under different gating conditions.
• To evaluate the Matlab software for different gating parameters and motion patterns,
including two different breathing conditions: deep­inspiration breath hold (BH) and
free breathing (FB).
• To identify different clinically relevant metrics useful for comparison of software sim­
ulations and dose­profile measurements.
• To identify limitations associated with the software and the evaluation methodology.
• To provide a brief literature review of tumor motion problematics, gated treatments
and the application of MR­Linacs in radiation therapy.
2
==PAGE:11==
Influence of tumor motion on target coverage in online MR­guided adapted radiotherapy
2
Introduction
2.1
Uncertainties and Margins
Radiation treatments (RT) consist of a planning session, in which the patient geometry is
observed and analyzed, and multiple irradiation sessions. The patient structures visual­
ized are the basis from construction of the treatment plan and the intention is to deliver
this plan in the irradiation sessions [1].
However, there are several sources of uncertainties that might interfere with the intention
to deliver this plan. The International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements
(ICRU) considers three sources of geometrical uncertainty: patient set­up variation, organ
motion and deformation and machine related errors [1]:
• Patient set­up errors have their origin in the positioning of the patient on the treat­
ment platform. These variations are inevitable from session to session although the
measures taken to ensure high reproducibility.
• Tumor motion within the patient can arise from several sources such as variations
in rectum, bladder filling, cardiac action and respiration, for example.
• Machine­related geometrical errors come, for example, from difference in beam
sizes and gantry angles. Nevertheless, these are generally considered small com­
pared to set­up deviations and organ motion.
Also, in the planning process, several geometrical uncertainties are involved within the
delineation process [2]. Examples of these are that the imaging modalities have a limited
resolution and that interpretation between observers or images differs, and thus, delin­
eation of structures and margins also does [3], [4].
It is of outmost importance that during the treatment process of external beam radiother­
apy of solid tumors, these geometrical uncertainties are considered. Nowadays, they are
generally handled by adding safety margins to the target zone with the main goal of as­
suring a full radiation coverage of the tumor and exempting healthy surrounding organs
from it.
The gross tumor value (GTV) is defined by physical examination and imaging studies,
and englobes the macroscopic extent of the tumor [5]. However, the goal of radiotherapy
is to fully irradiate the clinical target volume (CTV), defined as the GTV plus the regions
with suspected microscopic tumor, according to the ICRU report 50 [6]. Therefore, ICRU
reports 50 and 62 suggest that setup and organ positioning uncertainties should be incor­
porated into the treatment planning process by taking a margin around the CTV, thereby
defining the planning target volume (PTV) [2], [6], [7]. The PTV, thus, is given a high dose
to ensure that the CTV received adequate dose.
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Volume concepts used in radiotherapy
How these margins should be defined as a function of the distribution of organ position
and setup errors is not specified in these reports [2].
The organs at risk (OAR) in the vicinity of the planned volume are also identified and if
possible, excluded from the irradiated volume.
Figure 2.2: Contouring of planning target volumes and OARs [8]
4
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Motion Management
RT is a common approach for cancers in the thoracic and abdominal regions. The goals
are to maximize the dose within a safe range without exceeding the tolerance for the dose
in normal tissues [9]. However, nowadays tumor and organ motion are still a challenge to
accurate treatment.
The common approach is to use motion­encompassing PTVs, nevertheless, this can in­
crease the risk of toxicity, especially in tumors near critical organs or those that exhibit
large motion [10].
Various types of organ motion have been studied along the years, and they can be clas­
sified in three categories: organ motion related to patient position changes, motion that
happens in between fractions, and that which occurs during fractions [11].
2.2.1
Bladder and rectum filling
The bladder is a hollow organ that varies in position not only because of external pressure
from other pelvic organs, but because of changes in filling as well. Both external pressure
from organs and volume changes may occur simultaneously, resulting in considerable
movement of tumors and/or the bladder itself [12]. Although not as big as bladder filling,
rectal filling also has an impact in organ motion.
Several studies have proved the large day­to­day variations in the bladder volume. Mei­
jer et al., for instance, quantified the organ motion of the bladder by analyzing bladder
volumes at different moments of RT [13]. The acquired results on the geometric uncer­
tainties showed that organ motion is the most important uncertainty for the bladder. They
stated that locally the bladder surface can move with a standard deviation of 8 mm for a
single patient and 4 mm for the entire group, with these shifts being primarily observed at
the posterior and cranial side of the bladder. Also, significant changes in the shape of the
bladder were observed when comparing the organ at the planning CT with the bladder
shape averaged over the rest of the scans [13]. Not only the small surface movements,
but displacement of the bladder can happen. In another study Muren et al. observed
bladder displacements as large as 29­36 mm, that were observed at the superior, left,
anterior and posterior side of the bladder [14].
In conclusion, the bladder is known to considerably move when influenced by changes in
bladder and rectal filling. Thus, large margins are required to account for target motion
[15].
Several types of tumors can be affected by bladder and rectal filling. Buchali et al. [16], for
instance, investigated the mobility of cervical and endometrial tumors in response to this
phenomena; and Ten Haken et al. [17] demonstrated variations in the prostate position.
2.2.2
Respiration motion
Tumors can also move 10­20 mm as a result of respiration, particularly in the intrathoracic
and upper abdominal regions [9]. However, lung tumors, for instance, can move up to
34 mm in cranial­caudal direction between the inhale and exhale [18]. Moreover, tumor
respiratory motion is also very different among patients, and even for the same patient,
the tumor motion’s frequency, amplitude and velocity can change over time too. Shown
in Figure 2.3, Wu et al showed how lung tumors have both regular and irregular breathing
motions with variations in amplitude, phase shift, signal noise, and breathing with cardiac
motion [19].
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Tumor motion and data quality: (a) regular breathing, (b) frequency changes,
(c) baseline shifts, (d) amplitude changes, (e) cardiac motion, (f) combinations [19]
Respiratory and cardiac motion are the main contributors to intrafraction motion during RT,
which mainly affects organs of the thorax and abdomen. Liver, pancreas and obviously
lung tumors are the most affected ones. However, kidneys and prostate tumors are also
affected by this phenomenon [20].
Thus, it is relevant to account for respiratory motion during RT. If it is not, limitations
in image­acquisition, treatment­planning and radiation delivery will be present within the
treatment.
Image acquisition limitations
If respiratory motion is not considered, it causes artifacts during image acquisition, which
cause distortion of the target volume and incorrect positional and volumetric information
[21].
This artifacts can be generated for all imaging modalities. The common modality used
for thoracic observation in RT planning is the CT, in which the artifacts appear due to
6
==PAGE:15==
the fact that different parts of the object move in and out of the CT slice window during
image acquisition [21]. Also, respiratory motion artifacts will appear in positron emission
tomography (PET) scanning [22], which is becoming a standard technique for non­small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) [21].
Figure 2.4: CT scans of the same patient: (a) with free breathing, (b) gating at exhale [23]
Treatment planning limitations
As detailed in section 2.1, during treatment planning, margins need to be large enough
to ensure coverage of the target. Thus, to obtain the PTV from the CTV involves to ac­
count for respiratory motion and others, such as setup error. However, this is suboptimal
because it increases the radiation field size in a considerable way and, consequently, the
volume of healthy tissues exposed to high doses [21].
Radiation delivery limitations
Radiation delivery in the presence of organ motion causes an averaging of the static dose
distribution over the path of the motion, which results in a deviation between the intended
and delivered dose distributions. Due to this, a blurring of the dose distribution by the
anatomy moving near the beam edges occurs, also increasing the beam penumbra [21].
2.2.3
Adaptive radiotherapy
Adaptive radiation therapy (ART) allows for treatment adjustment according to physical
or functional changes to the target volume and OAR [24], which is the main strategy that
has been developed in order to overcome motion management. Its principle focuses
on including feedback knowledge of patient­specific anatomical or biological variations
observed during the radiotherapy course in the individual treatment plan and dose delivery
optimization [25].
In offline ART a new plan is generated for future fractions depending on the new obtained
anatomical information. However, in online ART, this new imaging information is taken
immediately before treatment delivery in order to generate a new plan while the patient is
on the treatment table [24].
A complete implementation of an ART process includes four key components [25]:
7
==PAGE:16==
1. Treatment dose assessment
2. Treatment variation identification
3. Treatment modification decisions
4. Adaptive treatment modification
The first and original treatment plan assessment is done in the pre­treatment acquired
images from the patient, usually a CT scan or a MR. The target volumes and OARs are
contoured and transferred to the TDS [24]. The planning objectives are entered into the
planning system, which in some cases will be integrated with the delivery system and in
other cases, it will be a separate one. The assessment of the original treatment plan is
then done.
Before the delivery of each fraction the patient undergoes the daily CT/MRI scan in the
treatment position and the contours form the planned scan are transferred to it. Then
physicians verify the registration of the image and contours and recontour the target and
OARs, if needed; with the patient on the treatment table. If any structure dose exceeds
the constraints, online reoptimization of the initial plan can be performed with the new
contours. A comparison of the reoptimized plan’s dose distribution and/or dose volume
histogram (DVH) with that of the initial plan is now performed. Finally, quality assurance
(QA) of the reoptimized plan needs to be performed. Conventional quality assurance pro­
cedures for intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) plans require comparisons between
the computed and measured dose in a phantom, which cannot be done in an online adap­
tive setting. Consequently, integrated QA software systems are necessary [24].
Figure 2.5: Clinical workflow of ART [24]
The principle of ART is intuitive and well understood, however, clinical implementation
of this technique is complex. This technique is nowadays broadly used and controlled,
especially with specific types of tumors. For instance, dose­response related organ de­
formation and volume regression are the most significant variations during the course of
head­and­neck tumor treatment. Lung cancer and liver cancer ART also need to address
several issues on intertreatment setup variation, intratreatment respiratory induced varia­
tion as well as dose response induced tumor regression. Therefore, adaptive replanning
during the treatment course of these cancers becomes essential [25].
2.2.4
Respiration management techniques
Respiratory motion has to be addressed during RT treatment planning and delivery in or­
der to achieve tumor motion control, which is why respiratory motion­management tech­
niques (MMT) have been developed [18]. These methods can be separated into two
8
==PAGE:17==
categories: passive and active respiratory MMT. Passive respiratory MMT require only
the a priori extent of tumor motion, whereas the active ones require information on the
tumor position in real­time [18].
• Motion encompassing methods are passive techniques that include the entire range
of tumor motion for respiration. Examples of these are the PTVs, which considers
the tumor motion with a motion encompassing safety margin, or the MidV concept,
which considers the motion as a random positioning error in a probabilistic safety
margin calculation [18].
• Respiratory gating techniques are active methods that involve the administration of
radiation within a particular portion of the patient’s breathing cycle, referred to as
‘gate’. The position and width of the gate are determined by monitoring the patient’s
respiration [21].
• Breath­hold techniques are another type of active respiratory MMT that include sev­
eral methods where the patient is asked to hold their breath in a specific condi­
tion. These methods include, for instance, the Deep­inspiration breath­hold method
which involves verbally coaching the patient to a reproducible deep inhale breath­
hold during simulation and treatment. Another example is the Self­held breath­hold
without respiratory monitoring, in which the patient voluntarily holds his/her breath
at some point in the breathing cycle. During the breath­hold, the beam is turned on
and the dose is delivered to the tumor [21].
• Real­time tumor tracking methods reposition the radiation beam dynamically to fol­
low the tumor’s changing position, which means they are also active techniques. To
succeed, these methods should identify the tumor position in real time; anticipate
the tumor motion to allow for time delays in the response of the beam­positioning
system; reposition the beam; and adapt the dosimetry to changing lung volume and
critical structure locations during the breathing [21].
Respiratory MMT aim to ensure tumor coverage while sparing healthy tissue, but on the
other hand, most of them have the main disadvantage of the cycle­to­cycle and day­
to­day reproducibility issues; it is almost impossible to keep the exact same breathing
pattern from fraction to fraction or breath­to­breath within the treatment. Moreover, a
disadvantage of several gating techniques is the decreased delivery efficiency, or the
ratio of beam­on time to delivery time, which causes longer imaging and treatment times.
The longer the imaging and treatment time, the more likely the patient will become tired
and uncomfortable, and possibly shift position, which negates the potential gains from the
techniques [23].
All in all, however, respiratory MMT seems to be effective to reduce acute and late toxicity
in abdominal and thoracic tumors.
9
==PAGE:18==
2.3
Dose in Magnetic Fields
An MR imaging scanner is integrated with a radiotherapy source in magnetic resonance
imaging­guided radiotherapy (MRIgRT), which provides real time imaging during patient
treatment. On the one hand, it provides higher soft­tissue contrast than the conventional
CT­based image guided radiotherapy. However, on the other hand, since MRI requires
magnetic fields, considerations on the Lorenz force influence must be made [26].
The Lorenz force is the force acquired by a charged particle that results from the presence
of an electric or a magnetic field. In RT, then, the photon beam originated from the linear
accelerator, will travel unaffected in a magnetic field, but it’s the secondary generated
electrons that will hamper the actual dose deposition in tissue [27]. The trajectory of
these electrons will be affected by the presence of the magnetic field, and their induced
curvature will depend on the electron energy and the magnetic field strength [28]. All in
all, these electrons will describe helical paths in between collisions. The consequences
of their curved trajectories are that the penetration depth of electrons will be smaller and
the average direction of electrons in the tissue is deflected [29].
As for this, Raaymakers et al. try to quantify this effect in their study [28]. By using Monte
Carlo simulations, they calculated and showed the impact of a 1,5 T field on the pencil
beam dose deposition. The difference provoked by the 1,5 T was found to be 3 mm,
which means that it requires a 3 mm shift in the depth of the 1,5 T profile to match its
corresponding part of the 0 T case [28].
Also, they used the pencil kernel with and without the 1,5 T to determine its effect in the
dose distribution of 1 x 1 and 5 x 5 cm2 fields. The asymmetry of the magnetic field can
be seen clearly, and it was found to be shifted approximately 0.7 mm. Moreover, the
penumbra increased approximately 1 mm by the presence of the 1,5 T [28].
Figure 2.6: (a) Monte Carlo simulations showing the dose curve for the pencil beam with
and without the presence of 1,5 T in a Depth­Dose curve. (b) Calculated central dose
profiles at 5 cm depth for 1 x 1 and 5 x 5 cm2 fields; both with and without the presence
of 1,5 T [28]
In the same study, film measurements were also performed to evaluate this effect. This
was performed by applying 1,1 T instead of 1,5 T, but the results were very similar and
agreed with the corresponding Monte Carlo simulations [28].
10
==PAGE:19==
In conclusion, they showed the impact of a 1,5 T magnetic field on the dose deposition
summarized as the following three concepts: a) a decrease of the build­up region, b) a
symmetric increase in the penumbra and c) a shift of the entire radiation field.
Another related phenomenon, described in the study from the same group by Raaijmakers
et al. [30], is the influence of such magnetic field in a finite, inhomogeneous phantom, and
the additional effect resulting from this: a dose increase at water­air boundaries. When
magnetic field­affected electrons leave the tissue at the distal side, they also experience
the Lorentz force. However, their main free path in the air is much longer than in tis­
sue, and thus, they are able to complete their helical path, returning into the tissue after
an arc­shaped trajectory [30]. The result from this is an increased dose at all tissue­air
boundaries, expecting then treatments of lung tumors to be particularly affected [31].
As seen in this section, it is of immense importance that devices that integrate linear accel­
erators with MRI follow a reference dosimetry system. Dose distributions and dosimetry
should remain the same regardless of the magnitude or polarity of the magnetic field [32].
It was found that by modifying the magnetic shielding system, the accelerator and the MRI
system can be decoupled, without compromising the magnetic field homogeneity. The
consequence of this design, though, is the beam transmission through the MRI system,
which results in beam attenuation and scatter among others. However, further investiga­
tions showed that the beam quality after transmission was acceptable, meaning that the
integration is technically feasible [28].
11
==PAGE:20==
2.4
The MR­Linac at Rigshospitalet
2.4.1
ViewRay MRIdian Linac
The integration of MR imaging and linear accelerators (MR­Linacs) into hybrid treatment
systems has made MR­guided RT a clinical reality [33]. The MR­Linac used at the Depart­
ment of Oncology at Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, is a ViewRay MRIdian Linac (ViewRay
Inc., Oakwood, USA). It is an integrated MR­guided RT instrument designed to provide si­
multaneous MR imaging and a range of external­beam RT options (from very basic fields
to complete on­couch adaptive and MR­controlled intensity modulated RT) [34].
The ViewRay MRIdian Linac integrates a 0.35 T split superconducting magnet (double­
donut) with a 6 MV flattening­filter­free (FFF) linear accelerator [33].
Figure 2.7: Photograph of the MRIdian Linac system at Heidelberg University Hospital
[33]
MR Imaging
MR imaging is possible due to its MR unit in the system. Because of its excellent soft­
tissue contrast, MR imaging enables direct visualization of soft­tissue targets and nearby
OARs, thus providing a platform for fast and accurate delineation for plan adaptation and
target tracking during treatment [35].
Magnetic and Radiofrequency Shielding
As explained in section 2.3, strong magnetic fields would interfere with the operation of
the linear accelerator if not properly shielded. Furthermore, linacs are known to produce
radiofrequency (RF) emissions that can significantly degrade the quality of MR images.
Consequently, in the ViewRay MRIdian Linac, six shielding compartments are mounted
upon the gantry, which contains the linac as well as other linac components (magnetron,
12
==PAGE:21==
pulse transformer, port circulator and gun driver). Each compartment consists of sev­
eral concentric ferromagnetic cylinders, shielding their inside from the magnetic field and
the RF noise. The RF shielding is implemented via RF absorbing carbon fiber and RF
reflecting copper materials [33] [36].
Position Correction
Both MR and linac share the same isocenter. Room lasers are installed to project a virtual
isocenter outside the borehole of the system, which is 70 cm wide. Then, coach can be
moved in all three dimensions, within the bore restrictions, enabling the correction of setup
errors by couch shifts [33].
Treatment Planning and Delivery
The treatment planning system (TPS) is integrated into the treatment delivery software
and shares the patient database. Dose calculation is done by a fast Monte Carlo dose
calculation algorithm with the option to take the static magnetic fiend into account [33].
The system allows on­table adaption of treatment plans based on the MR treatment setup
scans. Each daily scan is registered to the primary planning image and initial planning
contours can be copied or deformed to it. The deformed ones can be modified or recon­
toured, and the treatment plan can then be recalculated on the daily anatomy [33].
As mentioned in section 2.2.3, no verification measurement for QA can be performed.
Therefore, the system provides a secondary Monte Carlo dose calculation that can ac­
count for the magnetic field. The software generates a report with both original and sec­
ondary dose calculations in DVHs [33].
The TPS requires the mass and electron density to calculate the doses. This can be
extracted from the Hounsfield units (HU) of the CT scan, information that is not available
in MR imaging. In ViewRay, doses are shown in an MR image, however, a CT scan is
always used as a background to address the issue. On the other hand, it is also possible
to insert the values of the mass and electron density manually. This is the reason why
patients that are to be treated in the MR­Linac always undergo both an MR scan at the
treatment machine and a CT scan.
Cine MR imaging and Beam Gating
In the MR­Linac cine MR imaging (continuous 2D MR­imaging) in one or three sagittal
planes can be used for automated beam control. A gating target structure is defined
by the user as well as some gating parameters, such as the desired gating margin and
percentage of the target allowed outside the margin before beam shut­off [33].
Before treatment, a cine MR scan is acquired and used by the system for automatically
selecting a tracking key frame. After, during treatment, the live cine MR imaging frames
are deformably registered to that key frame and thus, the gating target is also deformed.
If in any frame the gating target is outside the specified margins and the allowed outside
percentage, then the beam is shut off [33].
There are several parameters that define the beam gating. For instance, the size of the
gating window or boundary, which is the margin used to limit the area where the target
must be when the beam is on; the gating trigger or ROI, value corresponding to the % of
points allowed to be outside the boundary before turning the beam off; and the real­time
tracking imaging frame rate, which can be either 4 or 8 frames per second.
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.8: Cine during a liver metastasis treatment. The tracking structures is delineated
in red and the boundary in yellow
Tracking
The treatment delivery computation unit employs a decision­making approach in which
multiple tracking modules (trackers) process the current image simultaneously and inde­
pendently. Originally, the deformable image registration algorithm was a single Global
Deformable Registration algorithm. It used the sum of squared differences between the
key frame and the current image as a similarity measure, along with a regularization term.
However, since March 2020 ViewRay has been releasing the new implementation of the
software, which combines a Global Deformable Registration algorithm with a number of
Local Registration algorithms, which operate only on the ROI plus a user­defined margin.
In this case, the similarity between the reference and the cine can be measured using sev­
eral options such as normalized correlation coefficient, mutual information or normalized
distance [11].
With the implementation of the new version, the ViewRay system has become able to
enhance the ability to track OAR and targets that have different sizes, different levels of
mobility, and different deformation characteristics. New tracking algorithms were created
by combining different trackers. For instance, the new tracking algorithm for Small Mobile
Targets is suitable for tracking objects and areas that move a lot but do not deform too
much and are small in size; which, in testing, performed well for targets within the liver
(metastases) and pancreas. An other example is the new tracking algorithm for Large
Deforming Targets, for tracking objects and areas that are mostly static but deform signif­
icantly with time, such as the prostate, the bladder, liver and lung [11].
In general, compared to conventional RT, three prominent features can be identified when
using the MRIdian Linac [33]:
• Superior soft tissue imaging contrast due to the integration of MR imaging
• The possibility of on­table adaption of the patients position to the treatment plan
• The option to use cine MR imaging for intrafraction target tracking and automated
beam gating
14
==PAGE:23==
2.4.2
The Matlab simulation model
A Matlba model has been developed at the Department of Oncology at Rigshospitalet
to improve the assessment of treatments with this new technology. The aim of the first
version of this model is to mimic the TDS of the machine and predict the effective dose
distribution to a gated target with a known motion pattern.
For known breathing patterns and gating conditions, the model can predict actual beam­
on positions during treatment delivery and hence, estimate the effective longitudinal dose
profile from the planned one. Only tracking in the longitudinal direction is considered in
the simulation.
The software needs several inputs for it to be able to simulate one specific treatment
configuration:
• the breathing­motion pattern,
• the motion parameters,
• the gating parameters,
• the prescribed dose.
Two different breathing patterns can be used in the simulation: a cosine to the 6th power,
which is used to reproduce breath­hold and a sine, used to reproduce free breathing.
From the motion itself, two parameters are to be modified if needed: the breathing pe­
riod (T), representing the duration of a respiratory cycle (inspiration + expiration) and the
position offset (y0).
On the other hand, for the beam gating, it’s four parameters that can be tested in the
simulation:
• The gating window size (B): window of position values where the beam is to be on
if the target structure is found in between its boundaries.
• The area threshold (ROI%): the area points of the target allowed to be outside the
boundary before switching the beam off,
• The cine frame rate (fps): the imaging acquisition frame rate.
• The gating window location: whether the gating window is located in the center of
the signal or shifted to the positive or negative axis of the signal.
All of these variables are set manually in the model, but it is important to note how the
model is able to define the area threshold percentage (ROI%) variable. Its typical values
used for it are either 0% or 5%. In order to account for it, this percentage has been
translated into cm2. This allows to calculate the “effective” boundary, which is added to
the size of the gating window (B) that contemplates for the 5% ROI. For a 0% ROI, no
effective boundary is needed.
Set boundary
3 mm
5 mm
ROI%
5%
5%
Effective Boundary
4.6 mm
6.7 mm
Table 2.1: Values of the effective boundary according to the set boundary and the ROI
value
15
==PAGE:24==
In the model, the motion is discretized in time steps of 0.01 s and, in order to mimic
the TDS, the positions that it records are done either with a time step of 1/4 s or 1/8 s,
which are the video frame frequencies in the cine mode at the MR­Linac. The time steps
are allowed to vary according to a normal distribution with a standard deviation of 0.07
s so as to simulate natural variations in the processing time of individual video frames.
This value was estimated from previous oscilloscope measurements that relate specific
positions of the piston motion with the beam­on control signal from the accelerator. Also,
spatial randomness (normally distributed with a standard deviation of 1 mm) is added to
the tracked positions to account for the finite spatial resolution of the cine video.
Figure 2.9: Example of a motion plot extracted from the Matlab simulation model
By simulating a cosine6 with specific parameters, an example on a motion plot is shown
in Figure 2.9 Only 5 cycles (N=5) were plotted so to be able to appreciate all the features
from the graph, however, N is set to be the number of cycles required to deliver a fraction
of the treatment plan. This value also varies depending on the other parameters set in
the simulation. The motion is represented by the continuous line, tracked positions are
represented with asterisks and the gating window is the purple rectangle that is set from
position ­3 until position +3. The green part of the motion represents when the beam is
on and the red one when the beam is off.
The tracked positions represent the positional information that is available for the TDS
and upon which the system must decide whether to beam on or off. If a point is read to be
inside the tracking window, the beam will be turned on, whereas it will be turned off when
a point is detected to be outside.
Image acquisition and processing time of the TDS add a lag time to the beam on/off
signal. This is also considered in the simulation as a fixed parameter in the model, and
is the reason why beam­on can occur even if the actual position is outside the tracking
window and vice versa. From previous oscilloscope measurements, this lag has been
estimated to be 0.12s.
The total set of recorded positions with beam on is used to calculate the simulated effective
16
==PAGE:25==
dose distribution (only in the longitudinal direction), that is compared to the static dose
distribution.
Figure 2.10: Figure 13: Example of the comparison between planned and gated condi­
tions extracted from the simulation model
For the purpose of this project, no more outputs from the simulation are needed. However,
the program is also able to provide the distribution of the beam on positions in the form of
a histogram. With it, it is possible, in the new and developing versions of the simulation
program, to obtain DVH curves for targeted structures.
17
==PAGE:26==
18
==PAGE:27==
Influence of tumor motion on target coverage in online MR­guided adapted radiotherapy
3
Methodology
3.1
Experimental Set­up
In order to approach the evaluation of the Matlab simulation, the experimental setup ex­
plained in the following sections was used. The purpose was to measure the dose dis­
tribution along the longitudinal direction in a moving phantom while delivering a gated
treatment. Film dosimetry was used to measure the dose. The films were irradiated in
two different sessions. Some films were irradiated in the first session in July 2021 (done
for another project), and the rest were irradiated in the second session, in October 2021.
The setup for both sessions was the same and the image processing and analysis of both
batches of films was done after the irradiation of the second batch of films.
3.1.1
Gating Phantom and Set­up
A CIRS Gating Phantom was used in this experiment. This phantom is intended for evalu­
ating gating functions, tracking, beam gating and latency. It consists of a 25,6 cm diameter
and 20 cm high cylinder filled with an MRI signal generating gel, which makes it possible
to generate MRI contrast, plus several spheres that allow for contrast in the imaging. It
has a cylindrical hole where the piston was located with a simulated target inside [37].
Figure 3.1: Representation of the CIRS gating phantom [37]
Inside the piston (6 cm diameter and 30 cm length) there is a cavity usually used for ion
chambers. Nevertheless, a nylon insert, made for the experiment, was used in this case
in order to hold a radiochromic film.
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.2: Nylon insert and a strip of radiochromic film
In order to simulate the breathing movement, an actuator was connected to the piston.
The motor was a CIRS model 008A Linear Actuator and the software to control it is called
CIRS Motion Control. The Advanced Motion Parameters Toolbox was used to adjust all
the parameters for the movement such as the waveform, inferior­superior amplitude, cycle
time, phase shift and start position [38].
Figure 3.3: Representation of the setup of the experiment [37]
3.1.2
Film Dosimetry
For film dosimetry EBT3 radiochromic films were used, following the methodology that
Devic et al. [39] propose. Their high spatial resolution, minor energy dependence and
near tissue equivalence make them suitable for dose distribution measurements in a dose
range from 0.01 to 8 Gy [39]. For the experiment, strips of films of dimensions 7 mm x
13,5 mm were used; inserted inside the phantom.
The structure of EBT films consists of two sheets of clear polyester, each having a thick­
ness of 97 µm. In between them, there are two sensitive layers, both of a thickness of 17
µm and separated by a 6 µm thick surface layer [39].
20
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.4: Box of the radiochromic films and picture of some of the strips used in the
experiment
Figure 3.5: Diagram of the gafchromic film structure and dimensions of an EBT ra­
diochromic film [39]
The active layer has a selective sensibility for different types of particles. The monomers
that constitute the layer, polymerize in a chain that results in a change of color. To quantify
this change of chemistry, which also means the change of color, the films need to be
scanned in a flatbed scanner to measure the light transmission: the more irradiation in
the film, the less the transmission.
However, transmission levels must be correlated to dose levels and thus, a calibration
curve was applied.
Calibration
The calibration was made by irradiating several films with a known and homogenous dose.
A calibration procedure was done for each of the sessions before irradiation of the films. In
both cases, one single entire film was cut into eight calibration strips that were irradiated at
different dose levels. For the first irradiation session, the calibration was made at a Varian
Truebeam accelerator and for the second one, at a Clinac Novalis Tx. In both cases, a
flat photon beam energy of 6 MV was used.
Further in the process, the online software Radiochromic.com was used. Méndez et al
[40] propose that for a good functioning of this software, the dose range chosen for the
calibration is between the 0 and 120% of the dose of interest for the experiment. Since
the maximum dose of one fraction in the treatment plan was of 3,9 Gy, the dose range
chosen for the calibration was between 0 and 5 Gy.
21
==PAGE:30==
Dose range for the calibration films
Film 0
Film 1
Film 2
Film 3
Film 4
Film 5
Film 6
Film 7
0 Gy
0.5 Gy
1 Gy
1.5 Gy
2 Gy
3 Gy
4 Gy
5 Gy
Table 3.1: Gy range for the calibration films
However, the output of the accelerators can vary slightly from day to day and due to the
experimental setup used. Therefore, correction factors for the calibration were calculated,
which were later applied to the monitor units (MU) to irradiate the films, in order to correct
for the known amount of systemic error.
On the one hand, following the IAEA TRS­398 [41], the calibration factor in regards to ab­
sorbed dose to water in beam quality for external beam radiotherapy was applied. More­
over, correction factors related to the film irradiation conditions for the specific setup, were
as well considered. Those latest were to correct for:
• The daily output. The machines are calibrated to deliver 1 cGy/MU in water at the
reference depth (depth at which the maximum dose deposition occurs) under the
reference conditions: 10x10 cm2 field at a source to surface distance (SSD) of 100
cm. However, this output can vary from day to day due to several elements, such as
atmospheric conditions. Thus, it was necessary to apply the first correction factor
in order to obtain the “output for the day” of the calibration.
• The field size: the output factor. Since a field of 20x20 cm2 was needed to cover the
whole film, this element had to be corrected. At the time of commissioning, several
measurements were done and it was calculated by interpolation.
• Measurement depth: the Percentage Depth Dose (PDD) factor. Measurements
were performed at a depth of 5 cm, and a PDD in water curve measured for a field
size of 20x20 cm2 was used.
Figure 3.6: Scan of the exposed films for the calibration
22
==PAGE:31==
Scan of the films
Before processing the images of the films, they needed to be scanned. An Epson Ex­
pression 10000 XL flat­bed document scanner was used.
Radiochromic.com is the tool that was used (further in the process) to analyze the images
and Méndez et al. [40] developed a methodology to follow for a good functioning of this
open software. In their protocol, it is stated that a resolution of 100­150 dots per inch
(dpi) is suitable for this kind of experiments. However, the Epson scan used allowed for
scanning at 96 dpi, 150 dpi or 300 dpi.
Therefore, the films were scanned both at 96 and 150 dpi, which are relatable to 4 and 6
pixels/mm, respectively.
96dots
inch ∗1inch
2, 54cm ∗
1cm
10mm ∗1pixel
1dot
= 3.78pixels
mm
≈4pixels
mm
(3.1)
150dots
inch
∗1inch
2.54cm ∗
1cm
10mm ∗1pixel
1dot
= 5.91pixels
mm
≈6pixels
mm
(3.2)
Both configurations were studied. In Figure 3.7, an example of two dose profiles (chosen
from a random irradiated film) are shown. Only the top part of the profile is represented
in the figure. Both profiles correspond to the same film, so the same irradiating condition,
however, one corresponds to a scan done with 96 dpi and the other to one done with 150
dpi.
Figure 3.7: Peak of the dose profile of a random irradiated film. In blue, scanned with the
96dpi configuration. In red, scanned with the 150dpi configuration
Because 150 dpi means more pixels per millimeter, more precise information is presented
in the signal. On the other hand, the 96 dpi signal, due to the inferior ratio, appears to
have an averaging effect on the signal. On account of this effect, the rest of the analysis
was decided to be performed with the 150 dpi scan configuration.
Both batches of films and both calibration films were scanned several days after irradiation
in order to let the process of polymerization finish. The first batch scans were made 8 days
after exposure and the second batch ones were made 3 days after exposure.
23
==PAGE:32==
Radiochromic.com Software
Calibration strips were uploaded into Radiochromic.com and the reference doses were
associated to a region of interest selected for each strip, which were selected to be cen­
tered on the image and on the scan.
Radiochromic.com provides the mean error of the calibration, which computes the dif­
ference between film doses after applying the calibration to the pixels of the regions of
interest and reference doses [40]. The calibration of the first experimental session re­
sulted in a mean error of 5,8 cGy (1.9%) and the second one in a mean error of 4,9 cGy
(1.7%). Since Méndez et al. stated that calibration mean errors around 1­2.5% were
expected with this procedure, the calibrations were kept as acceptable.
Figure 3.8: Region of interest designated for each calibration strip for the second batch
of films
After the calibration process was done, the scans of the irradiated films were uploaded in
the Dosimetry functionality of Radiochromic.com with their correspondent calibration lot.
The software computes film doses with the Multigaussian method, which is a multichan­
nel method that employs all irradiated color channels simultaneously to obtain the dose
distribution [40].
An other region of interest for every film was selected (this time in the films that were
irradiated for the experiment). It was decided to be 1,4 mm wide in all films and the
length between 130 and 135 mm in order to cover all the film. The software averages
the information in the selected region of interest and an averaged profile can then be
extracted as a .csv format. The default noise reduction that the software offers was kept,
which applies a 3x3 square median filter to the dose distribution.
24
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.9: Selection of region of interest in one strip, plus visualization of the averaged
dose profile in Radiochromic.com
This selection should be centered on the strip to avoid the lateral artifact. Moreover,
to study this effect, several random films were selected, and their dose profiles were
exported three times in three different reading angles of the region of interest.
Figure 3.10: Peak of the dose profile of a random irradiated film, read out in three different
tilting conditions.
The angles to extract the profile were chosen visually. In blue, no tilting was applied to
the reading signal, in red a tilt of approximately 1º was applied, and in yellow a tilt of
approximately 3º. The tilts of 1º and 3º were chosen because visually, so that the lateral
artifact seemed diminished to its minimum.
It is observable that if an optimal tilting were not chosen, the dose profile is affected by this
effect; in this case, as a shift of the signal. This is probably due to the positional difference
of the reference peak in the signal, which will be explained in section 3.1.3.
25
==PAGE:34==
Therefore, for all the films that are studied in this report, an optimal angle for the readout
of the profile for each film was visually chosen.
3.1.3
Treatment Plan
A treatment plan was calculated in ViewRay to be delivered to a virtual spherical target
placed in the cavity of the piston inside the phantom. The target was a 1 cm radius
spherical GTV located at the isocenter plane along the piston; and a 5 mm margin was
added for the PTV. The tracking structure was the contrast­allowing sphere shell from
inside the piston. The delivery of the treatment was done while the piston, thus, the
target, was moving.
Figure 3.11: Contouring of the structures for the treatment plan. The tracking structure is
contoured in yellow, the GTV in red and the PTV in blue
The plan was made to deliver 3,5 Gy per fraction to the GTV in a total of 30 fractions, the
total prescribed dose being 105 Gy. Several beams were used to obtain a uniform dose
to the target.
Moreover, a small peak of dose was decided to be irradiated in the films after the plan. It
represents the reference peak, which was used further in the process to align the dose
profiles to each other. The distance between the isocenter and the reference peak is
known and equivalent to 65,9 mm.
Figure 3.12: Picture of a randomly chosen exposed film. Blue zones indicate irradiation.
The reference peak can be seen between the dose irradiated by the plan itself and the
number of the film.
26
==PAGE:35==
3.2
Tracking Configurations
Films were irradiated in several conditions characterized by different breathing patterns
and different tracking configurations. To also be able to analyze the gating phenomenon
studied in this project, several films were chosen to be irradiated in the static condition:
the phantom was at rest while dose delivery. All the other films were irradiated while
the gating phantom was in motion, meaning that the target was alternatively inside and
outside of the boundary.
The configurations are separated in two generic groups: breath hold (cosine6) (BH) and
free breathing (sine) (FB). Each configuration is named after the parameter that was
changed in it. For example, in films 107 and 108, the gating window size was modi­
fied from 3 mm (value for the rest of the configurations) to 5 mm, so the name for that
configuration was decided to be B = 5 mm. In Table 3.2, all configurations are shown.
On the whole, the modified parameters in the configurations are the motion of the target,
the period of the motion (T), the boundary/gating window size (B), the ROI% and the
recording frame rate (fps).
27
==PAGE:36==
Configuration name
Target motion
Period
Boundary
ROI
fps
Films
#
Static (BH)
Static
9, 10 and 11
1
T = 5 s (BH)
Cos6
T = 5 s
B = 3 mm
5%
4 fps
12 and 13
2
fps = 8
Cos6
T = 5 s
B = 3 mm
5%
8 fps
14 and 15
3
B = 5 mm (BH)
Cos6
T = 5 s
B = 5 mm
5%
4 fps
16 and 17
4
T = 4 s
Cos6
T = 4 s
B = 3 mm
5%
4 fps
18 and 19
5
T = 6 s
Cos6
T = 6 s
B = 3 mm
5%
4 fps
20 and 21
6
T = 25 s
Cos6
T = 25 s
B = 3 mm
5%
4 fps
22 and 23
7
2 mm Threshold
Cos6 + 2 mm threshold
T = 5 s
B = 3 mm
5%
4 fps
24 and 25
8
ROI = 0%
Cos6
T = 5 s
B = 3 mm
0%
4 fps
26
Configuration name
Target motion
Period
Boundary
ROI
fps
Films
#
Static (FB)
Static
101 and 102
9
T = 5 s (FB)
Sin
T = 5 s
B = 3 mm
0%
4 fps
103 and 104
10
B = 5 mm (FB)
Sin
T = 5 s
B = 5 mm
0%
4 fps
107 and 108
11
T = 10 s
Sin
T = 10 s
B = 3 mm
0%
4 fps
109 and 110
12
Shift +3 mm
Sin
T = 5 s
B = 3 mm + Shift 3 mm
0%
4 fps
112 and 113
13
Shift +6 mm
Sin
T = 5 s
B = 3 mm + Shift 6 mm
0%
4 fps
114 and 115
14
Shift +9 mm
Sin
T = 5 s
B = 3 mm + Shift 9 mm
0%
4 fps
116 and 117
15
Shift ­9 mm
Sin
T = 5 s
B = 3 mm – Shift 9 mm
0%
4 fps
118 and 119
Table 3.2: Tables with all the configurations studied in this project; the first one corresponding to a breath hold imitation motion and the second
one corresponding to free breathing
28
==PAGE:37==
3.3
Dose Profile Analysis
The output from Radiochromic.com were several .csv files with the values of the dose
profiles for each film that was irradiated during the experiment. The analysis of these was
done by a Matlab code.
This Matlab code performs several signal processing functions to be able to visualize the
dose profiles of one or more films in the same figure.
First, all the profiles are aligned so that the dose isocenter is centered at position zero,
which is done thanks to the reference peak. Also, signals can be normalized if needed
by the user. If that is the case, they are normalized to the maximum of the planned dose
profile. Finally, since conditions were replicated, film signals can be averaged to avoid
uncertainties, which is performed thanks to an interpolation.
The planned dose profile refers to the calculated plan, extracted directly from the TPS.
Gating only happens during delivery, therefore, no gating parameter is accounted in this
profile. However, it is important to take it into consideration in this analysis to be able to
see how the effect of the beam gating is.
For each configuration, a simulation curve and a film dosimetry measured curved are
obtained, which are the tools used in this project to evaluate the performance of the sim­
ulation. Therefore, several distances between them are computed to quantify the error
between them. As will be observed in the results section, the measurement signals are
noisy, and some error must be expected when comparing them to their corresponding
simulations.
On the other hand, and as an addition to the comparison study between simulation and
measurement, an assessment on the effect of the changing variable for every configura­
tion is attempted. To do so, the shaping of the dose profile and the target coverage are
considered.
3.3.1
Metrics
Several metrics were used to quantify features for the analysis.
With the purpose of evaluating the agreement between simulation and measured curves,
three deviations are used to quantify the error: the root­mean­square deviation, the max­
imum deviation and very similar to it, the Fréchet distance.
The first two are commonly used for the purpose of error quantifying.
However, the
Fréchet distance is found to be more specific and peculiar but suitable for the curves
compared in the report.
The root mean square represents the square root of the differences between predicted
and observed values, or in other words, the quadratic mean of the differences between
them. The maximum deviation, conversely, is the maximum difference between predicted
and observed values.
RMS(x, y) =
v
u
u
t( 1
n)
n
X
i=1
(yi −xi)2
(3.3)
MD(x, y) = max |(yi −xi)|
(3.4)
29
==PAGE:38==
The Fréchet distance is also a measure of similarity between two curves, in which these
curves are sequenced in vertexes. The value of this distance is computed in two steps.
First, all vertexes from one curve are coupled with vertexes from the other curve. Each
vertex is coupled with the vertex from the other curve in which the distance between them
is minimum.
Then, the second step for the computation of this distance is to find the maximum length
of all couplings, resulting in the Fréchet distance.
F(x, y) = inf
α,β max
t∈[0,1] d(x(α(t)), y(β(t)))
(3.5)
Due to the coupling phenomenon in this distance value, it is possible to have two curves to
compare that are different in size, and therefore, no interpolation or over/under sampling
is needed. Moreover, the Fréchet distance is a suitable similarity measure for curves
that don’t backtrack in the position axis, which happens with the signals evaluated in this
report.
Nevertheless, this deviation is pretty correlated to the maximum distance and thus, eval­
uation is performed together with it.
Figure 3.13: Visualization of the coupling for the computation of the Fréchet distance [42]
Last, all metrics are computed directly in the normalized version of the curves. Therefore,
they are expressed in percentage points (%­points).
3.3.2
Target Coverage
Finally, in order to assess how the dose distribution changes affect the coverage of the
tumor, the following approach was implemented.
Vertical lines representing the GTV and the PTV were added in the dos profiles for each
configuration. They were located at positions 10 and 15 mm respectively, since the treat­
ment plan was delivered to a 1 cm spherical target, and the added PTV was of 5 mm.
30
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.14: Example of an assessment on target coverage for a random configuration
According to Danish practices for stereotactic treatments, the GTV and PTV should be
covered by 95% and 67% of the prescription dose, respectively (C. Peucelle, Personal
communication, December 29, 2021). Whether each configuration meets these criteria is
discussed for each of them in both, the simulation and the measurement curves.
31
==PAGE:40==
32
==PAGE:41==
Influence of tumor motion on target coverage in online MR­guided adapted radiotherapy
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
The Static Case
In both measurement sessions, before performing any gated configuration, several films
were exposed in the static condition, meaning that the film was irradiated without the
piston being moved. These are not used for comparison with simulation curves, however,
they are used to compare with the dose­plan, to observe how able was the experiment to
achieve the prescribed dose – 3.43 Gy in one single fraction.
Figure 4.1: Top part of the dose profile in the static condition. In gray the planned profile,
in blue the measured profile from the first measurement session, and in red the measured
profile from the second measurement session.
An approximated difference of 2.3% between the measured profiles and the prescribed
dose is observed. This difference shows that even though the setup was built to perform
the experiment in well controlled conditions, some uncertainties are inherited.
These uncertainties might be explained by several features such as errors in film dosime­
try or that the exact composition of the gating phantom is unknown.
Thus, it is decided that, for the rest of the configurations, the measurement curves are
normalized to the planned curve. In this way, it is intended to compensate for this error.
33
==PAGE:42==
4.2
Dose Profiles
4.2.1
Shape and Considerations
The breath­hold motion is simulated by a cosine to the 6th power, which is an asymmetric
function with one of the edges of the curve behaving as a flat­line for a period of time. An
example of this can be observed in Figure 2.9 from the Introduction.
On the other hand, free breathing is simulated by a regular sine. It is symmetric and no
flat­line is present in the signal.
The presence of the flat­line in the motion is important, since for the seconds with it, the
target is not moving from inside the gating boundaries and thus, beam is ON for a longer
period before the target moving again outside. On the contrary, free breathing signals
don’t have the flat­line effect. Since the total beam ON time is made to be constant in all
simulations and measurements (1 min), the flat­line effect has an impact on the number
of times that the beam is going to switch between ON and OFF: it is going to happen a lot
more in FB.
Therefore, the lag time of the system regarding image acquisition and processing time
becomes important. This lag time will define when the beam switches OFF after the
system detects that the target is outside the boundary and vice versa. The more times
the system has to switch between ON and OFF, the more times the lag time will affect.
The result from this: a profile where the tissue surrounding the target and boundary re­
ceives more dose than desired, and the tissue from inside the target closest to the gating
window edges, being under dosed. This is clearly seen in FB configurations’ dose profiles
(see Figure 4.14). In the penumbral region of a dose profile, the dose changes rapidly cre­
ating a falloff and representing the edges and limits of the irradiated structure. However,
in FB, this falloff is not sharp and dose is accumulated in an undesired zone.
However, it is still clinically relevant to study the free­breathing situation, in view of the
fact that patients treated in the MR­Linac might not be able to hold breath.
Also, the movement direction of the piston is important to be noted.
On the dose profiles, the right is referred as the cranial direction and is towards the gantry.
The left is referred as the caudal direction and is towards the patient’s feet. Due to the
fact that the targeted structure was going into the boundary via the caudal direction, and
also because of the lag time effect, the dose profiles are expected to be slightly shifted
towards the cranial direction. Again, in Figure 2.9, it can be seen how this effect is – there
is green line going outside the boundary, which will create the asymmetric shaping of the
dose profiles.
4.2.2
Information in plots and tables
The graphs presented in the results section to evaluate the agreement between simulation
and measurement curves are composed of several features. First, three dose profile
curves are represented:
• The blue curve is the dose profile extracted from the simulation program
• The red curve is the dose profile acquired with the film measurements
• The gray curve is the calculated dose profile from the TPS, which does not consider
any beam gating
34
==PAGE:43==
There are also two text boxes in the plots. The first one of them contains the given value
to the motion and gating parameters at that specific configuration. The other text box has
the value of the three computed deviations for the case.
On the other hand, for the assessment of the coverage, results are presented in a table.
There are coverage values for both simulation and measurements, and they are separated
in GTV and PTV. Also, results for both sides of the profile are presented. As explained in
Section 3.3.2 from the Methodology the GTV coverage ideally would reach a value of 95%
and the PTV a value of 67%. Therefore, percentages that reach the desired coverage are
written in green and the ones that don’t are painted in red.
As an example, the coverage resulted from the planned dose profile is the following:
Planned – Static/No gating
GTV
PTV
Left side:
97.1%
Left side:
74.6%
Right side:
97.1%
Right side:
74.7%
Table 4.1: Coverage table for the planned dose profile. All numbers are in green since
they reach the desired coverage values; otherwise they would have been in red.
Finally, in some sections, an extra graph is added. This graph presents all together the
curves from simulations and measurement from different configurations, where the same
parameter is changed into different values.
35
==PAGE:44==
4.2.3
Breath­hold
Evaluation on changes in motion period (T)
The target motion period was varied in several configurations. In Figure 4.2, the profile
resulting from this configuration can be seen, where a period of 5 seconds was set, a
clinically common situation. The rest of the parameters were set as default: a boundary
of radius 3 mm, ROI 5% and an image framerate of 4 fps.
As expected, a shift of the profile towards the right is observed.
Figure 4.2: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #1: T = 5 s (BH). In gray, the
planned dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the mea­
sured dose profile.
Configuration 1, T = 5 s (BH)
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
90.9%
Left side:
60.8%
Left side:
89.6%
Left side:
57.9%
Right side:
97.7%
Right side:
81.0%
Right side:
97.1%
Right side:
80.9%
Table 4.2: Coverage table for configuration #1: T = 5 s (BH). In red, the % that don’t reach
the desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do.
The measurement and simulation profiles present a good fit between them, shown also
in the metrics. The root­mean­square error is small, meaning a few big deviations in the
whole of the curves. The Fréchet distance and the maximum deviation are more sensitive
to outliers and thus, slightly higher values are observed, probably present in the noise of
the central region of the measurement profile.
The coverage of the target varies between the left side and the right. Due to its nature,
the shape of the dose profile is tilted to the right and consequently, the left side remains
uncovered by the 95% for the GTV, or the 67% for the PTV, of the prescribed dose.
36
==PAGE:45==
When comparing simulation and measurement coverage values, the left side also presents
the ones with more deviation from one another. The biggest of them, being for the PTV
coverage of the left side, of a 4.76%. Contrarily, the PTV coverage on the right side only
shows a difference of 0.12% between simulation and measured curve.
Configurations #4 and #5, T = 4 s and T = 6 s respectively, show very similar agreements
between simulation and measurement, to configuration T = 5 s (BH). Apart from the vis­
ible noise present in the peak of the dose profile, both signals overlay each other and
the deviations present low values. The maximum deviation zones (probably where the
Fréchet distance value is taken from) are observed in the right part of the profiles.
The difference in coverage values between simulation and measurement have similar
outcomes in both cases. A maximum difference of a 1.9% is observed in T = 4 s, and one
of 2.1% in T = 6 s.
Figure 4.3: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #4: T = 4 s. In gray, the planned
dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the measured dose
profile.
Configuration 4, T = 4 s
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
89.5%
Left side:
60.1%
Left side:
89.9%
Left side:
58.9%
Right side:
97.7%
Right side:
81.2%
Right side:
97.0%
Right side:
81.3%
Table 4.3: Coverage table for configuration #4: T = 4 s. In red, the % that don’t reach the
desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do.
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.4: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #5: T = 6 s. In gray, the planned
dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the measured dose
profile.
Configuration 5, T = 6 s
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
92.2%
Left side:
61.7%
Left side:
92.6%
Left side:
60.4%
Right side:
97.7%
Right side:
80.8%
Right side:
96.9%
Right side:
82.1%
Table 4.4: Coverage table for configuration #5: T = 6 s. In red, the % that don’t reach the
desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do
Finally, regarding the effect in coverage of the motion period: values are also alike be­
tween T = 5 s and T = 4 s and T = 6 s, being the left side negatively affected by the time
lag effect. Nonetheless, it is noticeable how target coverage increases with the period.
Although in T = 6 s, it still does not reach the desired values in the left side, they are closer
to them than for T = 4 s and T = 5 s. This is even more pronounced in configuration #6,
T = 25 s.
A target motion period of 25 seconds is unrealistic in clinical terms. However, it allows to
prove that for configurations as this one, with a case very close to a non­gated treatment,
the simulation is also able to produce excellent predictions. A RMS value smaller than 2
%­points is observed, again meaning an adequate fit in the overall signal. Even though,
the measurement signal presents a small fall in the top of the right side, which generates
the deviation corresponding to the MD and Fréchet errors.
38
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.5: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #6: T = 25 s. In gray, the
planned dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the mea­
sured dose profile.
Configuration 6, T = 25 s
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
95.3%
Left side:
63.9%
Left side:
95.3%
Left side:
61.0%
Right side:
97.6%
Right side:
80.2%
Right side:
96.2%
Right side:
79.9%
Table 4.5: Coverage table for configuration #6: T = 25 s. In red, the % that don’t reach
the desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do
The shape of this profile is not as tilted to the right or to the cranial direction because of
the less time that the target spends in the transition zone from ON to OFF, making it the
closest to the non­gated treatment represented by the planned profile.
This last feature directly affects the target coverage. In this case, the left side of the profile
is not as underdosed as in the other cases. Even though in the left side for the PTV 67%
is stil not reached, the GTV is exposed with more than the 95% of the prescribed dose.
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.6: Influence of motion period in dose profiles for simulated and measured curves
for BH
Evaluation on changes in image acquisition frame rate (fps)
In configuration #2, fps = 8, the image acquisition frame rate is changed from 4 frames
per second to 8. By increasing the frame rate, more data points the system has and faster
it will declare whether the target structure is inside or outside the gating window, which
could result in a less right­tilted profile. However, the time lag effect is still present and
the profile shape and coverage values don’t seem to be affected by this feature.
Figure 4.7: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #2: fps = 8. In gray, the planned
dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the measured dose
profile.
40
==PAGE:49==
Configuration 2, fps = 8
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
92.1%
Left side:
61.5%
Left side:
89.8%
Left side:
57.7%
Right side:
97.7%
Right side:
80.9%
Right side:
96.3%
Right side:
80.9%
Table 4.6: Coverage table for configuration #2: fps = 8. In red, the % that don’t reach the
desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do.
Both visual input and agreement metrics show poorer relation between simulation and
measurement signals. In the top­left and the bottom­right parts of the profile is where
most of the difference can be found. However, a RMS value of around 2 can still be
considered for an adequate prediction.
Moreover, coverage discrepancies between simulation and measurement are slightly high
for this configuration, only in the left arm of the profile. A 6.2% difference is observed
between curves in the left PTV coverage prediction.
As mentioned, regarding the dose distribution shape and the target coverage, no big
differences are observed in comparison to configuration #1, where all motion and gating
parameters are the same except the frame rate. So, it is concluded that this parameter
doesn’t have an impact on the dose profile and the tumor coverage.
Figure 4.8: Influence of image acquisition frame rate in dose profiles for simulated and
measured curves for BH
Evaluation on changes in boundary size (B)
In configuration #3, B = 5 mm (BH), the size of the gating window was changed from a
radius of 3 mm to one of 5 mm.
In terms of agreement between simulation and measurement signals, again, an accept­
able fit is presented by the Matlab model. The root mean square error is very low, resulting
41
==PAGE:50==
in a general good fit during all parts of the signal. The only small discrepancies can be
observed in the top­right arm and the noise at the central region of the profile.
Although a difference in the PTV coverage of the left side is found to be around 5.5%
between measurement and simulation, the rest of the coverage calculations present a
difference between 0% and 1%.
Figure 4.9: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #3: B = 5 mm (BH). In gray,
the planned dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the
measured dose profile.
Configuration 3, B = 5 mm (BH)
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
88.3%
Left side:
58.2%
Left side:
87.4%
Left side:
54.9%
Right side:
97.8%
Right side:
81.9%
Right side:
97.1%
Right side:
82.2%
Table 4.7: Coverage table for configuration #3: B = 5 mm (BH). In red, the % that don’t
reach the desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do.
Regarding the impact of the size of the boundary in the dose profile, it is important to
consider the fact that increasing it led the beam to be activated for positions of the tracking
structure further towards the cranial direction. Thus, the deformation of the profile to the
right is slightly more pronounced than with smaller boundaries.
Because of this, the coverage of the tumor suffers from the same consequences as the
previous configurations, but again, slightly more pronounced: the left side of the profile
doesn’t achieve the desired coverage values.
42
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.10: Influence of the size of the gating window in dose profiles for simulated and
measured curves for BH
Evaluation on shift in the signal
Configuration #7, with a 2 mm shift in the signal, was performed by moving the piston to
the motion maximum position, with a value of 2; and the motion was performed from there.
This represents an inspiration breath­hold type treatment where the patient has moved
2 mm longitudinally between match and delivery. The treatment is still restricted by the
gating window, but the effective distribution is skewed due to the systematic displacement
away from the planned isocenter.
Since this is a quite extreme assumed configuration, the profile distribution and target
coverage are greatly affected. All values from the negative side of the profile don’t reach
the 95% and 67% coverages, and all values from the positive side do; obviously due to
the 2 mm shift.
However, it is found that the simulation is still able to perform a good fit to the measurement
curve.
The MD and the Fréchet distance present high values probably from the right umbra
section, where the measurement curve is found to be a bit higher than the simulation. On
the hand, the rest of the profile is a close fit between the two of them, which is supported
by the low RMS value.
Also, coverage values in simulation and measurement don’t deviate a lot. All but with an
exception: the PTV coverage in the left side of the distribution gives a 10.4% difference
between simulation and measurement. This difference is due to the shift of the signal,
which makes the left position of the PTV be in the middle of the penumbra region, where
dose changes rapidly and therefore, present very different values for a short distance shift.
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.11: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #7: +2 mm threshold. In gray,
the planned dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the
measured dose profile.
Configuration 7, 2 mm threshold
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
88.9%
Left side:
38.3%
Left side:
86.2%
Left side:
34.3%
Right side:
98.8%
Right side:
92.2%
Right side:
97.9%
Right side:
90.9%
Table 4.8: Coverage table for configuration #7: +2 mm threshold. In red, the % that don’t
reach the desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do.
Evaluation on changes in ROI%
The last configuration tried with the breath hold as motion was configuration #8, ROI =
0%. As explained in previous sections, the ROI is the percentage of the structure area
that is allowed to be outside the gating window without the beam switching off. In the rest
of the configurations for BH, the ROI was decided to be tested as 5%, but in this one, it is
modified to 0%.
The measurement curve for this configuration is found to be noisier than the rest, since it
was not irradiated in two films. Only one single film was exposed to this conditions and
the signal is not the average of two, which might have led into uncertainties. This was
due to problematics in the experimental session.
However, the assessment is done anyway. The fit between curves is clearly seen. A RMS
value of 1 denotes the general agreement between them and the high MD and Fréchet
distance might be due to the noise in the central region. However, a small disagreement
is seen in values from the top­right part of the profile.
44
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.12: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #8: ROI = 0%. In gray, the
planned dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the mea­
sured dose profile.
Configuration 8, ROI 0%
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
93.1%
Left side:
63.6%
Left side:
93.5%
Left side:
63.7%
Right side:
97.6%
Right side:
79.9%
Right side:
96.7%
Right side:
79.9%
Table 4.9: Coverage table for configuration #8: ROI 0%. In red, the % that don’t reach
the desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do.
First, coverage differences between simulation and film measurements are extremely low
in this case. A maximum difference is found to be of around 0.9% for the right position of
the GTV, corresponding to the zone with more noise of the profile. Even so, the simulation
of this configuration is considered as successful.
Regarding the effect of the variable, it is noticeable how this configuration does not pro­
duce such a tilting­to­the­right effect as the others. This is because the configuration using
0% ROI is closer to the static case. Indeed, when there is a 0% ROI the beam shuts off as
soon as one tracking point is detected outside the boundary, which allows less inaccuracy
than the 5% ROI. Even though, it’s still slightly tilted and therefore, coverage in the left
side is close but does not achieve the desired values.
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.13: Influence of the ROI % in dose profiles for simulated and measured curves
for BH
46
==PAGE:55==
4.2.4
Free Breathing
Evaluation on changes in motion period (T)
In the free breathing condition, two configurations with a different motion period were also
tested. The comparison between simulation and measurement on configuration 9, T = 5
s (FB), is presented below.
Figure 4.14: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #9: T = 5 s (FB). In gray,
the planned dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the
measured dose profile.
An adequate agreement between curves is observed. A MD and a Fréchet distance of
around 3 are observed, plus a RMS deviation smaller than 2, which represent a great
prediction from the model to fit into this configuration.
A 3.9% maximum difference between coverage values in simulation and measurement
is presented, corresponding to the left PTV coverage. Indeed, it is exactly at the zone
where a small shift between curves is observed.
Configuration 9, T = 5 s (FB)
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
87.1%
Left side:
58.9%
Left side:
87.9%
Left side:
61.3%
Right side:
88.6%
Right side:
60.5%
Right side:
89.1%
Right side:
59.3%
Table 4.10: Coverage table for configuration #9: T = 5 s (FB). In red, the % that don’t
reach the desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do.
In most FB configurations, GTV and PTV are clearly not under the desired coverage re­
strictions. Because of the enlargement of the penumbra, which means, the overdose of
the tissue surrounding the target structure as explained in section (shape and considera­
tions), the core of the target itself is not exposed enough.
47
==PAGE:56==
However, if increased the period, less movement of the target in the transition zone be­
tween inside and outside of the gating window is going to happen and thus, a closer to
the planned profile one is obtained.
Figure 4.15: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #11: T = 10 s. In gray, the
planned dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the mea­
sured dose profile.
Once more, the model fit to the film measurement presents fine metrics, with a remark­
able 1 %­points value for the RMS. The Fréchet distance presents a slightly higher one,
probably due to the noise present in the top right arm of the profile.
Moreover, coverage agreement between profiles present a maximum of 1.% difference,
corresponding to the top­right small disagreement.
Configuration 11, T = 10 s
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
94.7%
Left side:
66.6%
Left side:
94.6%
Left side:
66.7%
Right side:
94.2%
Right side:
65.6%
Right side:
92.7%
Right side:
66.2%
Table 4.11: Coverage table for configuration #11: T = 10 s. In red, the % that don’t reach
the desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do.
Even though the exact values for the desired coverage are not reached, all of them are
extremely close. The GTV is almost reaching the 95%, and the PTV almost the 67% of
the prescribed dose. Yet, a FB motion period of 10 s is very close to a BH and it is why
the dose profile looks so promising.
48
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.16: Influence of the motion period in dose profiles for simulated and measured
curves for FB
Evaluation on changes in gating window size (B)
As in for BH, two different gating window sizes were tried. In configuration #10, B = 5 mm
(FB), a size of 5 mm was used to simulate and measure the dose profile seen in Figure
4.17.
Figure 4.17: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #10: B = 5 mm (FB). In gray,
the planned dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the
measured dose profile.
Noise in the top of both left and right arms of the profile is observed. Even so, the agree­
49
==PAGE:58==
ment between simulation and measurement is visually noted and the calculated deviations
prove it with low values. Furthermore, target coverage percentages also agree between
them, being a difference of 2.5% in the right­PTV the highest of them.
Configuration 10, B = 5 mm (FB)
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
85.4%
Left side:
60.6%
Left side:
83.7%
Left side:
59.4%
Right side:
85.7%
Right side:
60.6%
Right side:
85.6%
Right side:
62.2%
Table 4.12: Coverage table for configuration #10: B = 5 mm. In red, the % that don’t reach
the desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do.
As commented for configuration #9, T = 5 s (FB), the shape of these profiles doesn’t allow
the coverage of the target structure to be fulfilled, making this a specially challenging
clinical situation.
Figure 4.18: Influence of the gating window size in dose profiles for simulated and mea­
sured curves for FB
When compared to configuration #9, with all the same motion and gating parameters but
the size of the gating window, a poor difference between them can be observed.
However, it is important to note that measurement signals for this two configurations were
specially noisy, as showed in the following figures. Configuration #9 was done on films
103 and 104, and configuration #10 was done on films 107 and 108. The shifts in the sig­
nals and its noise are attributed to the film measurements’ uncertainties and experimental
errors. The two figures representing this can be found in Appendix A.
Evaluation on shifts in the gating window location
Until this point, all FB configurations have been done with the gating window located in
the center of the signal, reason why there is no tilting in the dose profiles.
50
==PAGE:59==
The following configurations were done by shifting the gating window to either the positive
axis of the motion or the negative. What is expected in the shape of the dose profiles
from this configurations is that the closer the gating window is to the edge of the signal,
the more tilted to either left or right the dose profile will be. Moreover, the central region
of the profile is expected to get wider because if the target structure does not go out of
the gating window in the limit of the signal, the less times the lag time will affect.
On the one hand, a shift of 3 mm was studied in configuration #12, and a shift of 6 mm in
configuration #13.
Figure 4.19: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #12: Shift +3 mm. In gray,
the planned dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the
measured dose profile.
Configuration 12, Shift +3 mm
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
89.8%
Left side:
60.8%
Left side:
91.0%
Left side:
62.0%
Right side:
87.9%
Right side:
59.8%
Right side:
88.2%
Right side:
59.4%
Table 4.13: Coverage table for configuration #12: Shift +3 mm. In red, the % that don’t
reach the desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do.
For the shift of 3 mm, simulation and measurement present a good agreement. There
is no shift between the signals and only the noise from the top central region is being
translated in some difference between them. Deviation metrics also reflect this, being this
one of the best configurations predicted by the simulation. A RMS value lower than one,
a MD and a Fréchet distance value of around three, and last, a maximum difference in
coverage from simulation and measurement of 1.9%, suggest the great fit within the two
curves.
Nevertheless, for the shift of 6 mm, a small shift between signals is observed. Besides,
51
==PAGE:60==
the different shaping of the dose profile and the widening of the central region are already
noticeable.
Figure 4.20: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #13: Shift +6 mm. In gray,
the planned dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the
measured dose profile.
Configuration 13, Shift +6 mm
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
92.8%
Left side:
63.9%
Left side:
92.2%
Left side:
60.8%
Right side:
87.5%
Right side:
59.4%
Right side:
89.9%
Right side:
63.9%
Table 4.14: Coverage table for configuration #13: Shift +6 mm. In red, the % that don’t
reach the desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do.
Target coverage values also reflect this effect. For the 3 mm shift, coverage % is slightly
minor than with a 6 mm shift due to the aforementioned widening, as seen in Tables 4.13
and 4.14. Still, with the 6 mm shift, neither the 95% of the prescribed dose for the GTV
nor the 67% for the PTV are achieved.
Last, a shift of 9 mm was studied. This challenging configuration was tried in both direc­
tions of the axis, which is reflected on the profiles shape. Both profiles present small shifts
between simulation and measurement curves, being smaller the one of ­9 mm. Because
of this, the metrics in these agreements don’t present values as good as for the previous
configurations, being the MD in both cases greater than 5.5 pp.
Moreover, when comparing the coverage values for both curves, the shift of +9 mm
present the highest difference of all configurations: 8.1% difference in the left PTV edge
between the simulation and the measurement. Also, the shift of ­9 mm presents the sec­
ond highest difference, a 7.4%.
52
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.21: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #14: Shift +9 mm. In gray,
the planned dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the
measured dose profile.
Figure 4.22: Dose profile comparison plot for configuration #15: Shift ­9 mm. In gray,
the planned dose profile (no gating), in blue the simulation dose profile, and in red the
measured dose profile.
Regarding the effect on the dose distribution, the enlargement of the penumbra seen in
the other FB configurations, is less pronounced here. This is due to the closeness of the
gating window to the edge of the signal, meaning that the tissue close to the boundaries
of the gating window won’t receive as much dose as in the previous cases, and that the
53
==PAGE:62==
core of the target will receive more. This phenomenon can also be seen in the coverage
values, where the 95% and the 67%, for the GTV and PTV respectively, are closer to be
reached for both, the shift in the positive and in the negative axis.
Configuration 14, Shift +9 mm
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
94.7%
Left side:
62.4%
Left side:
96.9%
Left side:
67.9%
Right side:
91.5%
Right side:
66.1%
Right side:
89.7%
Right side:
62.3%
Table 4.15: Coverage table for configuration #14: Shift +9 mm. In red, the % that don’t
reach the desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do.
Configuration 15, Shift ­9 mm
Simulation
Measurement
GTV
PTV
GTV
PTV
Left side:
91.6%
Left side:
65.9%
Left side:
94.6%
Left side:
71.2%
Right side:
95.0%
Right side:
63.3%
Right side:
93.8%
Right side:
62.2%
Table 4.16: Coverage table for configuration #15: Shift ­9 mm. In red, the % that don’t
reach the desired coverage values; in green, the ones that do.
Figure 4.23: Influence of the gating window location in dose profiles for simulated and
measured curves for FB
54
==PAGE:63==
4.3
Discussion
On the Curves Agreement
The aim of doing the test presented in this report was to evaluate the Matlab software, by
comparison against film dosimetry of profiles.
The software was built in a solid base, where the values for the added uncertainties were
carefully chosen or even experimentally proven prior to this project. This is the case of the
time lag. Therefore, it was expected to achieve a good similarity between the simulated
dose profiles and the experimentally measured ones. Indeed, after the experiment, it is
found that there is a strong correlation between them.
The RMS deviation values ranged from 0.97 to 2.35 %­points, within all configurations.
The RMS describes the general fit of the curves, since it is not as sensitive to outliers as
other metrics. Therefore, what this numbers show is an excellent performance from the
simulation.
Maximum deviation values, on the other hand, show the deviation marked by the out­
liers, and within our comparison, values ranged from 2.26 to 5.92 %­points. Although
higher, this values denote again the great agreement between simulation and measure­
ment curves.
Last to compare this agreement, the target coverage differences between the evaluated
software profiles and the measured ones was used. This difference ranged from a 0% to
a 8.1% difference.
Regarding this last comparison, it is important to note how the shape of the profile affects
this difference in the agreement of the curves. When the profile is tilted to one side,
the reason of which is explained in section 4.2.1, the other side’s GTV and PTV edges
might locate in the penumbral region of the profile instead of in the central region. In the
penumbra, dose changes abruptly and a small position difference might mean a big dose
one. Therefore, if there is a slight deviation­shift between simulation and measurement
in that particular location, coverage values might present greater differences. This is the
reason why for most configurations the maximum difference between coverage values
from simulation and measurements corresponds to the left PTV edge.
Even though still good, there are several configurations that present slightly worse pre­
dictions than the others. In configurations 13, 14 and 15 shifts of 6 and 9 mm to the gating
window location were applied. In these, the highest differences in coverage and distances
were observed. However, configuration number 12, which is also with a gating window
shift but smaller (3 mm), present one of the best agreements between signals. Therefore,
it is thought that by moving the boundaries of the gating window to the limits/edges of the
signal, it might make the simulation present the worst predictions.
Nevertheless, this shifts were only studied for free breathing. Studies with movements of
the gating window in breath hold conditions might give a better overview.
To further compare the simulation prediction based on coverage values, the following
graphs are presented, where only PTV coverage is shown.
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.24: Comparison in PTV coverage between simulation and measurement for
breath­hold configurations. The dashed line represents the 67% required dose coverage
for the PTV. 1.96 std was used to compute the uncertainty.
Figure 4.25: Comparison in PTV coverage between simulation and measurement for free
breathing configurations. The dashed line represents the 67% required dose coverage
for the PTV. 1.96 std was used to compute the uncertainty.
Figure 4.24, for BH configurations, clearly shows the model’s ability to predict whether
the PTV coverage will fulfill the 67% of the prescribed dose requirement, or not. This is
also reflected in Figure 4.25, for FB, although for two configurations, 14 and 15 this is not
happening. The simulation predicted less than a 67% coverage, whereas measurements
56
==PAGE:65==
showed more than a 67% for those. In any case, this would mean a more pessimistic pre­
diction from the simulation which seems to provide a safety margin for the non­simulated
cases.
Also, it is important to note how even in extreme treatments, for instance, see configuration
7 in 4.24, where the coverage is far from the desired values, the simulation is capable of
performing an adequate prediction.
As explained previously in this section, the shape of the dose profile directly affects cov­
erage values and is the reason why in Figure 4.24, clusters are clearly separated in the
PTV­left and PTV­right groups.
In conclusion, the results showed an excellent agreement between the dose profiles ob­
tained with the new Matlab simulation software and the experimentally obtained film mea­
surements. This agreement was for both free breathing and breath hold as motion drivers,
and also for variations in the motion and gating parameters within them.
On the Parameters Effect
Without being any motion or gating parameter, the position and time uncertainties are
the direct effectors on the a) leaning towards the motion direction in the breath­hold and
b) widening of the base in the free breathing. The lag time represents the amount of
time between the moment the target is recorded to be outside the gating window and the
actual moment when the beam is switched off. When combined with other sources of
uncertainties, such as the time steps of the recorded positions and their variance, this
leads to two things:
• Overdosing the tissue that is outside the gating window, but the closest to it
• Underdosing the tissue that is inside the gating window but the closest to its edge.
However, apart from these static parameters of the system, motion and gating parameters
were changed among configurations with the purpose of testing the simulation. A small
assessment on how they affect the dose distribution is also attempted.
The motion period affects in an expected way: the longer, the closer to the static case.
The less time moving within the transition zone between inside and outside the gating
window, the less times the position and time uncertainties affect.
Also as expected, an increase on the gating window size led the beam to be activated for
positions further towards the motion direction, which directly affected the profile leaning;
effect that in FB could not be observed.
What was surprising to be found was that the imaging frame rate of the image acquisition
system was not affecting the quality of the tracking and thus, no differences were observed
between profiles. By increasing the frame rate, more data points the system has and faster
it will declare whether the target structure is inside or outside the gating window, which
could result in a less right­tilted profile. However, the time lag effect is still present and
the profile shape and coverage values don’t seem to be affected by this feature.
Moreover, when another parameter, the ROI% was modified from 0% to 5%, no big
change was observed. Only a slight leaning to the right from the profile made a small
difference. Making, thus the 0% case closer to the static and presenting better coverage
results, which is the reason why for the free breathing configurations, only a 0% ROI was
tested.
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 4.26: Part of a motion plot used to illustrate the effect of the uncertainties in the
beam on and beam off transition, being the purple zone the gating window.
Lastly, it is important to mention the effect of the breathing pattern on the dose distribution.
Due to the profiles shape resulted from free breathing, this motion results in having a
negative impact on the target coverage. The 95% coverage of the GTV and the 67%
coverage of the GTV are almost never achieved. The conclusion drawn from this brings
the question whether a patient is a viable candidate to be treated in the MR­Linac or not,
depending on his/her ability to execute reproducible breath­holds.
On the Limitations
First, it is important to outline that for this type of treatments at the MR­Linac an assumption
is made. When a treatment plan is prepared, physicist and physicians assume that the
radiation is getting all the same attenuation, so it’s a homogeneous field. This means
that it is assumed that even though the tumor moves, it moves “within the same tissue”,
so all radiation is delivered in the same type of tissue. For example, in the case of liver
metastasis treatments, tumors that are in the top part of the liver can’t be considered for
this type of process, since they are too close to the lungs and thus, air is going to greatly
affect the radiation attenuation. Consequently, in this project, both simulation and film
measurements are done assuming this homogeneity.
It is also important to note that the whole study was made only with the presented breath­
ing motion patterns ­ both as the assumed motion in the simulation and as motion driver
for the phantom. This could be erratic since it’s not realistic.
Therefore, a second version of the simulation is being developed. In this second version,
a new input is needed: tracking points from the real target, obtained from the ViewRay
system. Under this new feature, the simulation will be able to predict dose distribution
58
==PAGE:67==
profiles and DVH curves with a more realistic approach.
Lastly, this study is a 1­D approach. All experiments were performed on motion only in the
longitudinal direction, which is also the only movement that this version of the simulation
stands. However, tumors might move in all directions and thus, this might lead to a slightly
deviated performance from the simulation or results ­ a study that is left for the future.
Thanks to the results obtained with this experiments, the simulation is to be developed
into new versions and most important, is to be tried without the need of performing film
dosimetry experiments to evaluate its predictions.
For a future, the general scope of the greater project handled at the Department of Oncol­
ogy in Rigshospitalet is to essentially have a model that works and that is able do DVHs
in real cases; information that would be used to estimate parameters in the gating con­
figurations of RT at the MR­Linac; for instance, to estimate the treatment margins at the
beam gating needed to cover all PTV and GTV.
59
==PAGE:68==
60
==PAGE:69==
Influence of tumor motion on target coverage in online MR­guided adapted radiotherapy
5
Conclusion
This research aimed to evaluate the Matlab model or simulation against film measure­
ments by comparing on the dose profiles obtained with methods. Several relevant met­
rics to evaluate the agreement between profiles were found; based on which it can be
concluded that the Matlab model was able to reproduce the profiles obtained via film
dosimetry.
Moreover, it was able to do it for different parameters, including the two breathing patterns:
breath­hold and free breathing. Also, by analyzing changing parameters in the motion
and in the gating, this report assesses how they effect on the dose profiles and the target
coverage.
This research illustrates the model’s ability to predict the dose behaviour in gated treat­
ments for both breath­hold and free breathing. The study suggests that the uncertainty
of coverage estimate for breath hold is 1.44 %­points and the one for free breathing is
1.86 %­points, computed as the standard deviation of the residuals for all PTV coverage
values.
However, it also raises the question of which treatment conditions are optimal to be per­
formed in the MR­Linac. For instance, free breathing profiles showed poor target cover­
age, resulting in the question: is this beneficial for patients that can’t execute reproduce­
able breath­holds?
Furthermore, while being an only 1­D movement study and only tested for two breathing
patterns limits the generalizability of the results, this approach provides new insight into
new versions of the model. By being able to trust the results of the first version, the
development of the model is now feasible and optimistic.
However, to better understand the implications of these results, future studies could ad­
dress the deviation found in the static condition between the measured profiles and the
planned one.
In conclusion, the completion of this study confirms the possibility to trust the predictions
of the Matlab simulation without having to experimentally prove them. All in all, the use
of this model will result in building up the knowledge on how the gating parameters will
affect the volume needed to ensure full target coverage during treatment.
61
==PAGE:70==
62
==PAGE:71==
Influence of tumor motion on target coverage in online MR­guided adapted radiotherapy
Bibliography
[1]
J. C. Stroom and B. J. Heijmen, “Geometrical uncertainties, radiotherapy plan­
ning margins, and the ICRU­62 report,” Radiotherapy and Oncology, vol. 64, no. 1,
pp. 75–83, 2002, ISSN: 01678140. DOI: 10.1016/S0167-8140(02)00140-8.
[2]
M. Van Herk, “Errors and Margins in Radiotherapy,” Seminars in Radiation Oncol­
ogy, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 52–64, 2004, ISSN: 10534296. DOI: 10.1053/j.semradonc.
2003.10.003.
[3]
J. M. Links, L. S. Beach, B. Subramaniam, M. A. Rubin, J. G. Hennessey, and A. L.
Reiss, “Edge complexity and partial volume effects,” Journal of Computer Assisted
Tomography, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 450–458, 1998. DOI: 10.1097/00004728-199805000-
00019.
[4]
D. F. Dubois, B. R. Prestidge, L. A. Hotchkiss, J. J. Prete, and W. S. Bice, “In­
traobserver and interobserver variability of MR imaging­ and CT­ derived prostate
volumes after transperineal interstitial permanent prostate brachytherapy,” Radiol­
ogy, vol. 207, no. 3, pp. 785–789, 1998, ISSN: 00338419. DOI: 10.1148/radiology.
207.3.9609905.
[5]
W. Small and E. D. Donnelly, “Leibel and Phillips Textbook of Radiation Oncology,”
JAMA, vol. 307, no. 1, Jan. 2012, ISSN: 0098­7484. DOI: 10.1001/JAMA.2011.1943.
[Online]. Available: https://jamanetwork-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/journals/jama/
fullarticle/1103972.
[6]
ICRU, “ICRU report 50: Prescribing, recording and reporting photon beam therapy
(ICRU report 50),” Tech. Rep., 1993, pp. 357–360.
[7]
——, “ICRU report 62: Prescribing, recording and reporting photon beam therapy.
(Supplement to ICRU Report 50),” Tech. Rep., 1999.
[8]
R. K. Charaghvandi, B. van Asselen, M. E. Philippens, H. M. Verkooijen, C. H. van
Gils, P. J. van Diest, R. M. Pijnappel, M. G. Hobbelink, A. J. Witkamp, T. van Dalen,
E. van der Wall, T. C. van Heijst, R. Koelemij, M. van Vulpen, and H. J. van den
Bongard, “Redefining radiotherapy for early­stage breast cancer with single dose
ablative treatment: A study protocol,” BMC Cancer, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1–9, 2017,
ISSN: 14712407. DOI: 10.1186/s12885-017-3144-5.
[9]
P. S. Verma, H. Wu, M. P. Langer, I. J. Das, and G. Sandison, “Survey: Real­time
tumor motion prediction for image­guided radiation treatment,” Computing in Sci­
ence and Engineering, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 24–35, 2011, ISSN: 15219615. DOI: 10.
1109/MCSE.2010.99.
[10]
J. R. van Sörnsen de Koste, M. A. Palacios, A. M. Bruynzeel, B. J. Slotman, S.
Senan, and F. J. Lagerwaard, “MR­guided Gated Stereotactic Radiation Therapy
Delivery for Lung, Adrenal, and Pancreatic Tumors: A Geometric Analysis,” Interna­
63
==PAGE:72==
tional Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics, vol. 102, no. 4, pp. 858–866,
2018, ISSN: 1879355X. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2018.05.048.
[11]
ViewRay, MRIdian Linac System Training Notes on New Imaging Features for Sys­
tem Software Version 5.3.1, 2020.
[12]
L. Fokdal, H. Honoré, M. Høyer, P. Meldgaard, K. Fode, and H. Von Der Maase,
“Impact of changes in bladder and rectal filling volume on organ motion and dose
distribution of the bladder in radiotherapy for urinary bladder cancer,” International
Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 436–444, 2004,
ISSN: 03603016. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2003.10.039.
[13]
G. J. Meijer, C. Rasch, P. Remeijer, and J. V. Lebesque, “Three­dimensional analy­
sis of delineation errors, setup errors, and organ motion during radiotherapy of blad­
der cancer,” International Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics, vol. 55,
no. 5, pp. 1277–1287, 2003, ISSN: 03603016. DOI: 10.1016/S0360-3016(02)04162-
7.
[14]
L. P. Muren, R. Smaaland, and O. Dahl, “Organ motion, set­up variation and treat­
ment margins in radical radiotherapy of urinary bladder cancer,” Radiotherapy and
Oncology, vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 291–304, 2003, ISSN: 01678140. DOI: 10.1016/S0167-
8140(03)00246-9.
[15]
H. T. Lotz, F. J. Pos, M. C. Hulshof, M. Van Herk, J. V. Lebesque, J. C. Duppen, and
P. Remeijer, “Tumor motion and deformation during external radiotherapy of bladder
cancer,” International Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics, vol. 64, no. 5,
pp. 1551–1558, 2006, ISSN: 03603016. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.12.025.
[16]
A. Buchali, S. Koswig, S. Dinges, P. Rosenthal, J. Salk, G. Lackner, D. Böhmer, L.
Schlenger, and V. Budach, “Impact of the filling status of the bladder and rectum on
their integral dose distribution and the movement of the uterus in the treatment plan­
ning of gynaecological cancer,” Radiotherapy and Oncology, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 29–
34, 1999, ISSN: 01678140. DOI: 10.1016/S0167-8140(99)00068-7.
[17]
R. K. Ten Haken, J. D. Forman, D. K. Heimburger, A. Gerhardsson, D. L. McShan,
C. Perez­Tamayo, S. L. Schoeppel, and A. S. Lichter, “Treatment planning issues re­
lated to prostate movement in response to differential filling of the rectum and blad­
der,” International Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology, Physics, vol. 20, no. 6,
pp. 1317–1324, 1991, ISSN: 03603016. DOI: 10.1016/0360-3016(91)90244-X.
[18]
S. Ehrbar, A. Jöhl, A. Tartas, L. S. Stark, O. Riesterer, S. Klöck, M. Guckenberger,
and S. Tanadini­Lang, “ITV, mid­ventilation, gating or couch tracking – A comparison
of respiratory motion­management techniques based on 4D dose calculations,” Ra­
diotherapy and Oncology, vol. 124, no. 1, pp. 80–88, 2017, ISSN: 18790887. DOI:
10.1016/j.radonc.2017.05.016. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
radonc.2017.05.016.
[19]
H. Wu, G. C. Sharp, B. Salzberg, D. Kaeli, H. Shirato, and S. B. Jiang, “A finite state
model for respiratory motion analysis in image guided radiation therapy,” Physics
64
==PAGE:73==
in Medicine and Biology, vol. 49, no. 23, pp. 5357–5372, 2004, ISSN: 00319155.
DOI: 10.1088/0031-9155/49/23/012.
[20]
K. M. Langen and D. T. Jones, “Organ motion and its management,” International
Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 265–278, 2001,
ISSN: 03603016. DOI: 10.1016/S0360-3016(01)01453-5.
[21]
A. T. Group, P. J. Keall, G. S. Mageras, J. M. Balter, R. S. Emery, K. M. Forster, S. B.
Jiang, J. M. Kapatoes, D. a. Low, M. J. Murphy, B. R. Murray, C. R. Ramsey, M. B.
Van Herk, S. S. Vedam, J. W. Wong, and E. Yorke, The management of respiratory
motion in radiation oncology report of AAPM Task Group 76. 10. 2006, vol. 33,
pp. 3874–900, ISBN: 9781888340617. [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/17089851.
[22]
S. A. Nehmeh, Y. E. Erdi, K. E. Rosenzweig, H. Schoder, S. M. Larson, O. D. Squire,
and J. L. Humm, “Reduction of respiratory motion artifacts in PET imaging of lung
cancer by respiratory correlated dynamic PET: Methodology and comparison with
respiratory gated PET,” Journal of Nuclear Medicine, vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1644–1648,
2003, ISSN: 01615505.
[23]
P. J. Keall, V. R. Kini, S. S. Vedam, and R. Mohan, “Potential radiotherapy improve­
ments with respiratory gating,” Australasian Physical and Engineering Sciences in
Medicine, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2002, ISSN: 01589938. DOI: 10.1007/BF03178368.
[24]
S. Acharya, B. W. Fischer­Valuck, R. Kashani, P. Parikh, D. Yang, T. Zhao, O.
Green, O. Wooten, H. H. Li, Y. Hu, V. Rodriguez, L. Olsen, C. Robinson, J. Michal­
ski, S. Mutic, and J. Olsen, “Online Magnetic Resonance Image Guided Adaptive
Radiation Therapy: First Clinical Applications,” International Journal of Radiation
Oncology Biology Physics, vol. 94, no. 2, pp. 394–403, 2016, ISSN: 1879355X.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.10.015. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2015.10.015.
[25]
D. Yan, “Adaptive Radiotherapy: Merging Principle Into Clinical Practice,” Seminars
in Radiation Oncology, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 79–83, 2010, ISSN: 10534296. DOI: 10.
1016/j.semradonc.2009.11.001. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
semradonc.2009.11.001.
[26]
D. J. O’Brien, N. Schupp, S. Pencea, J. Dolan, and G. O. Sawakuchi, “Dosimetry
in the presence of strong magnetic fields,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series,
vol. 847, no. 1, 2017, ISSN: 17426596. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/847/1/012055.
[27]
F. M. Khan, The physics of Radiation Therapy, 2nd, Williams Wilkins, Ed. Baltimore,
MD, 1994.
[28]
B. W. Raaymakers, A. J. Raaijmakers, A. N. Kotte, D. Jette, and J. J. Lagendijk,
“Integrating a MRI scanner with a 6 MV radiotherapy accelerator: Dose deposition
in a transverse magnetic field,” Physics in Medicine and Biology, vol. 49, no. 17,
pp. 4109–4118, 2004, ISSN: 00319155. DOI: 10.1088/0031-9155/49/17/019.
65
==PAGE:74==
[29]
A. J. Raaijmakers, B. Hårdemark, B. W. Raaymakers, C. P. Raaijmakers, and J. J.
Lagendijk, “Dose optimization for the MRI­accelerator: IMRT in the presence of a
magnetic field,” Physics in Medicine and Biology, vol. 52, no. 23, pp. 7045–7054,
2007, ISSN: 00319155. DOI: 10.1088/0031-9155/52/23/018.
[30]
A. J. Raaijmakers, B. W. Raaymakers, and J. J. Lagendijk, “Integrating a MRI scan­
ner with a 6 MV radiotherapy accelerator: Dose increase at tissue­air interfaces in
a lateral magnetic field due to returning electrons,” Physics in Medicine and Biol­
ogy, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 1363–1376, 2005, ISSN: 00319155. DOI: 10.1088/0031-
9155/50/7/002.
[31]
M. J. Menten, M. F. Fast, S. Nill, C. P. Kamerling, F. McDonald, and U. Oelfke,
“Lung stereotactic body radiotherapy with an MR­linac – Quantifying the impact of
the magnetic field and real­time tumor trackingThe impact of a magnetic field and
real­time MLC tumor tracking on lung SBRT,” Radiotherapy and Oncology, vol. 119,
no. 3, pp. 461–466, 2016, ISSN: 18790887. DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2016.04.019.
[32]
S. Stefanowicz, H. Latzel, L. R. Lindvold, C. E. Andersen, O. Jäkel, and S. Greilich,
“Dosimetry in clinical static magnetic fields using plastic scintillation detectors,” Ra­
diation Measurements, vol. 56, pp. 357–360, 2013, ISSN: 13504487. DOI: 10.1016/
j.radmeas.2013.03.012. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radmeas.
2013.03.012.
[33]
S. Klüter, “Technical design and concept of a 0.35 T MR­Linac,” Clinical and Trans­
lational Radiation Oncology, vol. 18, pp. 98–101, 2019, ISSN: 24056308. DOI: 10.
1016/j.ctro.2019.04.007.
[34]
S. Mutic and J. F. Dempsey, “The ViewRay System: Magnetic Resonance­Guided
and Controlled Radiotherapy,” Seminars in Radiation Oncology, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 196–
199, 2014, ISSN: 15329461. DOI: 10.1016/j.semradonc.2014.02.008. [Online]. Avail­
able: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.semradonc.2014.02.008.
[35]
R. Kashani and J. R. Olsen, “Magnetic Resonance Imaging for Target Delineation
and Daily Treatment Modification,” Seminars in Radiation Oncology, vol. 28, no. 3,
pp. 178–184, 2018, ISSN: 15329461. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . semradonc . 2018 . 02 . 002.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.semradonc.2018.02.002.
[36]
N. Wen, J. Kim, A. Doemer, C. Glide­Hurst, I. J. Chetty, C. Liu, E. Laugeman, I.
Xhaferllari, A. Kumarasiri, J. Victoria, M. Bellon, S. Kalkanis, M. S. Siddiqui, and B.
Movsas, “Evaluation of a magnetic resonance guided linear accelerator for stereo­
tactic radiosurgery treatment,” Radiotherapy and Oncology, vol. 127, no. 3, pp. 460–
466, 2018, ISSN: 18790887. DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2018.04.034. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2018.04.034.
[37]
VR­RT QA Tools (Technical document about CIRS phantom).
[38]
CIRS Motion Control User Manual, 2017.
[39]
S. Devic, J. Seuntjens, E. Sham, E. B. Podgorsak, C. R. Schmidtlein, A. S. Kirov,
and C. G. Soares, “Precise radiochromic film dosimetry using a flat­bed document
66
==PAGE:75==
scanner,” Medical Physics, vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 2245–2253, 2005, ISSN: 00942405.
DOI: 10.1118/1.1929253.
[40]
I. Méndez, J. J. Rovira­Escutia, and B. Casar, “A protocol for accurate radiochromic
film dosimetry using Radiochromic.com,” Radiology and Oncology, vol. 55, no. 3,
pp. 369–378, 2021, ISSN: 15813207. DOI: 10.2478/raon-2021-0034.
[41]
IAEA, “IAEA TRS 398:Absorbed Dose Determination in External Beam Radiother­
apy: An International Code of Practice for Dosimetry based on Standards of Ab­
sorbed Dose to Water,” vol. 12, no. June, p. 183, 2006. [Online]. Available: http:
//www-naweb.iaea.org/nahu/DMRP/documents/CoP_V12_2006-06-05.pdf.
[42]
M. Buchin and B. Kilgus, CCCG 2020: Frechet Distance Between Two Point Sets
­ YouTube. [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=12vrDDBnEFg
(visited on 12/20/2021).
,
67
==PAGE:76==
68
==PAGE:77==
Influence of tumor motion on target coverage in online MR­guided adapted radiotherapy
A
Appendix A
Averaging of signals of films 103 and 104, and 107 and 108. The first, showing configu­
ration #9 and the second configuration #10.
Figure A.1: Averaging of signals of films 103 and 104 equivalent to configuration #9.
Figure A.2: Averaging of signals of films 107 and 108 equivalent to configuration #10.
69
==PAGE:78==
Technical University of Denmark
Laia Poqui Sallés
Tlf. +34 696 47 47 17
