==PAGE:1==
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vi­
sion for patients rehabilitation
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
Shuai Wang
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Shuai Wang , 2022
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Bygn­
ing 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months during the fall semester at Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Mathematical Modelling and
Computation.
Kongens Lyngby, January 2, 2022
Shuai Wang ­ S200108
ii
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
With the development of artificial intelligence, highly accurate and real­time human track­
ing on mobile devices has become possible. Hand and body dexterity can be affected by
stroke, but there is no affordable and convenient method to provide a long­term quantita­
tive approach to track body dexterity.
In this thesis, we use a MediaPipe model trained by deep learning to achieve real­time,
distance invariant tracking of hand and arm body landmarks. The purpose is to explore if
mobile devices are feasible for at­home monitoring of patients during rehabilitation. First,
by allowing the user’s hand to do peak­valley movements (e.i., opening and closing the
hand in front of the camera), the landmark of the hand is collected using landmark­based
registration. Then, a long­term change in hand dexterity that a patient may experience
during rehabilitation, is simulated by using of a number of rubber bands with different
degrees of kinetic constraints. The changes in hand mobility are evaluated by comparing
and analyzing the change in the hand area visible to the camera and the movement speed
of the fingers. Second, in a mirror hand test, the motion data of the left hand and right
hand are compared. Third, MeidaPipe landmarks of arm movements are analyzed to test
if they could potentially allow monitoring changes in arm strength over time. The changes
are simulated by using of different dumbbell weights.
The rubber band test found that it was possible to measure the difference in hand dexterity.
With the use of more than two rubber bands, the hand peak area and speed will decrease
with the increase of rubber bands, the test results are able to fulfill two­sample t­test,
p−value < 0.05. The mirror hand test indicated that under the condition of equal external
force limitation in the left and right hand comparison experiment, there is a significant
difference between the dexterity of the two hands in hand peak area and speed. The
dumbbell arm test suggested that the MediaPipe Pose model is able to detect differences
between arm muscle strengths by detecting movement speed, but requires external force
limitations to reach a specific level.
Finally, this thesis reflects on how mobile devices may provide input to a digital patient twin
by offering a convenient, remote quantification of patients’ physical dexterity for clinical
professionals, and a user­friendly method for stroke patients to record the progress of
their rehabilitation with their own phones or tablets.
All code and test data for this paper is open sourced on Github: https://github.com/
lingwsh/hand_track_mediapipe.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Author: Shuai Wang, MSc of Mathematical Modelling and Computation, DTU Compute
Supervisor1: John Paulin Hansen, Professor of Department of Technology, Manage­
ment and Economics, DTU Management
Supervisor2: Milton Edgardo Mariani, PhD student of Management and Economics,
Management and Economics,DTU Management
I would like to thank my supervisors Professor John Paulin Hansen and Milton Edgardo
Mariani for their patient guidance during the writing of this thesis. In addition, great thanks
to my parents for their encouragement and financial support during my graduate studies.
Finally, the thesis was completed under the influence of Covid­19. I would also like to
thank my close friends for their help during this difficult time.
iv
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Main contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Goals and research questions
3
3
Background and related work
5
3.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
Theory and Methodology
8
4.1
Digital twin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.1.1
Origins and evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.1.2
Digital twin assistant system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.1.3
DTA characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.2
MediaPipe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2.1
Hands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2.2
Pose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.3
Landmark based registration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.3.2
Elements of image registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.3.3
Landmark and label
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.3.4
Image transformation and FRE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.4
Hand area tracking procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4.1
Hand area calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4.2
Data acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4.3
Description of data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.4.4
Data Re­display
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4.5
Head area peak/valley noise remove . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.4.6
Hand peak/valley speed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4.7
One group landmark based registration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.4.8
Multi­group landmark based registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Experiment
27
5.1
Hand area tracking experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.1.1
Single hand tracking with rubber band constraints
. . . . . . . . . . 27
5.1.2
Mirror hand compare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Dumb­bell exercise arm angle tracking Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.3
MeidaPipe model performance and stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
v
==PAGE:8==
6
Numerical Result
35
6.1
Hand area tracking experiment analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.1.1
Different rubber band data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.1.1.1
Mix condition compare
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.1.1.2
Stable condition compare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.1.1.3
Fluctuate condition compare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.1.1.4
Registration based group compare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.1.2
Different people tracking analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.1.3
Mirror hand data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
Dumb­bell exercise analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7
Discussion
51
8
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
54
A Appendices
58
A.1 Hand area data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
vi
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Stroke is a global health problem and is the second commonest cause of death and a
leading cause of adult disability worldwide [1]. There will be more strokes in the future,
because of demographic problems and inadequate control of the main risk factors for
stroke. This disease requires more research attention to prevent it [2]. Paresis affecting
the upper extremity is a common motor impairment in patients with stoke [3].
However, the hand is the commonly used body part in daily life. If we can track and
evaluate the flexibility of the patient’s hand, and then pass tests to evaluate the patient’s
ability to use tools and do daily life activities, such as eating, brushing teeth, washing
the face and so on. However, these behaviors are abstract behaviors that are difficult to
evaluate for stroke patients. These abstract life actions, such as eating, can be described
by the position, gesture, and speed of the hand in the 3D space. Through 2D camera
combined with AI computer vision technology, it can be used to record these data. The
hand data in 3D space is used as the basis for designing a method for collecting stroke
patients’ data, which can be used to assess the health of stroke patients’ hands and
motivate them to do better rehabilitation training.
Digital Twins(DT) are defined as “digital replications of living as well as nonliving entities
that data to be seamlessly transmitted between the physical and virtual worlds” [4]. For
example, the Digital twin of hands and arms in 3D space through gestures can be used to
collect user hand movement data, and vibration and sound feedback can also be used to
make rehabilitation training more interesting, thereby promoting stroke patients to obtain
better rehabilitation results.
The digital twin assistant(DTA) system can track arms and hands in real time. DTA can
estimate arm and hand dexterity ability. Although real­time analysis, the output result can
also give an instruction signal to remote assess for rehabilitation trainers and doctors, it
could help the doctor or trainer to give real­time instruction to the patient in the rehabilita­
tion progress.
DT data can be used to reconstruct 2.5D hand models of stroke patients’ hands, for ex­
ample, to show the comparison models of hand movement in different time periods. User
gesture data can be collected in real time, allowing doctors or rehabilitation trainers to
give real­time observation and guidance.
1.2
Research Directions
With the continuous development of artificial intelligence technology, new deep learn­
ing models have been able to run real­time human body joint tracking 3D motion data
smoothly on common mobile devices, such as MediaPipe. The traditional tracking and
localizing techniques still require multiple cameras for triangulation [5], depth cameras,
radar data collection, and then long time computing by high performance computers to
get the results. However, the new deep learning model MediaPipe can be used to track
human motion data in real time with only a single RGB camera, and it can run on vari­
ous platforms such as ordinary laptops, smartphones (IOS and Android) and web pages.
Users do not need to spend extra money on special capture devices, and can use this
method to capture data at any location.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
1
==PAGE:10==
Stroke patients need special rehabilitation to recover from upper limb paralysis. Stroke
patients need physician guidance for rehabilitation, but the patient cannot feel the physi­
cian’s movements directly on the limb. Our approach provides a DT­based digital model
that captures the physician’s movements and then transmits them remotely to the patient
wearing the exoskeleton upper limb device in real time via the Internet, allowing them to
feel the physician’s hand movements: the raising and lowering of the arm, rotation of the
wrist. This helps the patient to directly feel the rehabilitation movements directed by the
physician.
Through rehabilitation, stroke patients can also compare changes during rehabilitation
with historical data from the DT model. The results of the comparison can help the patient
to better understand the results of the rehab and motivate them to do better rehab. At the
same time, doctors can also get detailed data about the changes in the patient’s body after
rehabilitation, which can help to arrange the subsequent rehabilitation treatment plan.
1.3
Main contributions
The main contributions of this thesis are the following:
• A deep learning­based camera tracking method MediaPipe Hand for tracking and
analyzing the dexterity of stroke patients’ hands for comparing the recovery of pa­
tients’ landmark hands’ data after rehabilitation therapy for long­term recording and
comparing. It is also used to motivate patients to better participate in rehabilitation
therapy.
• A MediaPipe Pose based single RGB camera DTA system for real­time feedback
of the human arm. The purpose is for rehabilitation doctors to better guide the
rehabilitation training of stroke patients.
1.4
Structure of the thesis
The thesis is structured as follows:
• chapter 1 briefly introduces the thesis topic in three perspectives: Background and
Motivation (section 1.1), Research directions (section 1.2) and Main contributions
of the thesis (section 1.3).
• chapter 2 shows the main scientific research questions and answers that need to
be studied in this paper.
• chapter 3 in section 3.1 analyze the main research background of the thesis, and
in section 3.2 analyze the development and application of different hand tracking
techniques in varied fields.
• chapter 5 contains the background knowledge and methodology needed for the
technology in the thesis.
• chapter 6 discusses the results of different experiments in detail.
• In chapter 7, the conclusions of different experiments and the drawbacks of the
method of this thesis are summarized and discussed.
• chapter 8: Overview of the main conclusions and strengths and weaknesses of the
article.
• chapter A: Other relevant comparative data results.
2
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:11==
2
Goals and research questions
The purpose of this thesis is a study on the physical condition assessment of stroke pa­
tients using deep learning based and computer vision. In the research process, it is impor­
tant to consider how to make it easier for patients to use and not to increase the additional
cost of using the device for the user. In the long­term, data collection at the same time to
pay attention to the user’s privacy protection.
The main goal is to record the user’s body landmarks in real time through MeidaPipe and
analyze the health status of the body through different experiments on different parts of
the body landmark.
Therefore, the first research question of this master thesis is as follows.
How to build a Digital Twin to track the body for elderly stroke patients?
The original parameters of Digital Twins are mainly the extraction of human biometric
features using different sensors, such as: blood pressure, heartbeat, and blood oxygen
saturation. However, the physical condition of stroke patients cannot be directly reflected
by these parameters, while using computer vision and deep learning is able to obtain
results that cannot be directly obtained by traditional methods of sensors, such as: deter­
mining the health condition of the body based on its movement patterns. And it has the
following advantages
1. the test methods mentioned in this article, such as hand Peak­Valley tracking, are
simpler to use than professional medical devices, and the test results can be ob­
tained using a common computer, smartphone or tablet. It is very convenient for
stroke patients to use and record their own Digital Twin data independently or with
the help of others.
2. Since both stroke patients and normal users will own at least one of the devices,
such as a laptop, tablet, or smartphone, it is not necessary to purchase additional
devices to record their health data in order to participate in the test.
3. Although we use the mobile device’s camera to analyze video images and record
the user’s body landmark in real time, the data is only saved anonymously with the
user’s body landmark data, and no information about the user’s image is stored. This
approach allows users to manage and share their data with doctors and researchers,
but without revealing their personal image privacy data.
How to use machine learning and computer vision to get human motion landmark
parameters?
• Traditional methods to get human landmarks cannot provide high precision human
joint landmarks and can only find the position of the hand. Methods based on deep
camera and simultaneous multiview images require the use of high performance
computers and the equipment is expensive. Usually these methods need to be
used with professional computing software, which is very difficult for ordinary users
in daily use.
• Deep learning based MediaPipe methods can run fluently on multiple platforms,
such as: ordinary laptops, tablets and Android phones or IOS phones.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
3
==PAGE:12==
• Due to the rapid development of machine learning and machine vision, MediaPipe’s
model can now calculate and display the results in real time. The model also sup­
ports the fusion of different models and supports the simultaneous calculation and
display of hand model, body model, and face model, which provides great conve­
nience for subsequent data analysis.
How can the hand models be tracked for long­term analysis and comparison, so that
stroke patients can better understand the results of their rehabilitation training?
• The MediaPipe hand model is used to track and record the Peak­Valley motion of
the hand in real time, and to evaluate the change of hand dexterity by comparing
the speed of hand motion and the area of the peak and valley. In the process of
comparison, to avoid the effect of the change of the camera’s far and near view on
the hand area, this article uses landmark based registration to eliminate this effect.
• The above method not only compares the dexterity of the same hand of the user,
but also compares the dexterity of the left and right hands by mirror transformation.
• The MediaPipe body model can track the landmark of the major joints of the whole
body, and by recording the changes in speed and number of dumbbell exercises
done by stroke patients, the recorded data can be used to compare the changes in
arm muscle strength in a long­term situation.
4
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:13==
3
Background and related work
3.1
Background
In the early stage of hand tracking, the main method of hand detection and gesture in­
terface is based on feature extraction.[6] proposed a real­time 2D tracking method for
hand monocular view maps. Kanade­Lucas­Tomasi (KLT) feature tracker is a method to
compare two photos by finding different vector differences between them to see if the
features in them are the same. This is a traditional method of image registration, but it is
very costly for computer performance. With the help of the learned color distribution, a
group of KLT features are retained and the hand position is determined by classifying the
features. Although this method can be run indoors and outdoors, working with different
people. But the output is only 2D coordinates of the hand position, and this phase be­
longs to the early onset of hand detection. [7] The method based on frequency analysis
is used for instantaneous estimation of class separability without any training to classify
hand gestures. Although it has classification capability for simple hand gestures, it is still
significantly far from the complex gesture classification used in daily life.
Hand tracking application: Hand tracking is a popular topic in the machine vision and
graphics communities, including 2D/3D gesture recognition using RGB/depth cameras,
and hand model reconstruction. These techniques have been utilized in these domains
[8]–[13]. One real time hand and body digital twin system are designed for reducing con­
struction worker risk in [14]. This article offers construction workers the possibility to op­
erate robots remotely through body and hand tracking technology. The LSTM ResNet
model designed for prediction of hand grasp, which is based on real time RGBD video, is
a new system of prosthesis control [15]. But this method can not adapt well in new envi­
ronment and new object, our method designs a robust and real time hand tracking method
for arm rotation direction detection based on MediaPipe [16]. These similar technologies
can also be used by rehabilitation trainers and physicians for the remote rehabilitation of
stroke patients. Combining the necessary exoskeleton equipment with the low­cost Me­
diaPipe hand and body tracking model could provide more assistance to patients in the
future and reduce the cost of traveling to doctors’ appointments and rehab training.
However, for now, these applications, which are mainly designed to solve specific us­
age needs, are not designed to be optimized for stroke patients. Although in the [12],
there is mention of Finger Dexterity, its main purpose is to explore Mid­air text entry. this
cannot be directly used for long­term assessment of hand dexterity comparison in stroke
patients. NU­Wrist is a preliminary mechanical design robot for wrist rehabilitation, which
include wrist range safety design and Human­Robot axes Self­Alignment method [17].
The proposed robot design provides rotation within the anatomical range of human wrist
and forearm motions. A novel compliant robot handle link ensures dynamic passive self­
alignment of human­robot axes during therapy exercising.This approach helps the stroke
patient to better determine the range of motion of the hand, but then this approach requires
specific equipment to be defined and only wrist motion can be measured.
3.2
Related work
It remains challenging due to inherent depth and scale ambiguities, diverse appearance
variations, and complex joint and recovery space configurations. While a large number of
existing works have considered markerless gesture recognition, most of them requiring
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
5
==PAGE:14==
depth cameras [18]–[30] or simultaneous multiview images [20], [31]–[35] to solve the
above challenges. Articles in Table 3.1 based on different techniques of hand tracking
will be explored in this paper for the characteristics of the different methods. This paper
will also explain why MediaPipe is used as a hand tracking method to discuss different
rehabilitation applications.
The 3D hand pose could be got by generative adversarial network (GAN)1 convolutional
neural network(CNN)2 with a single RGB 2D image[36]. Mobile GPUs are possible to
calculate 2.5D hand landmarks by a special ML pipeline[16]. Hand tracking for 3D model
by monochrome camera can achieve egocentric tracking[37].
However, most of these methods are not directly applicable in the real world where only
monocular RGB images are available. Moreover, users cannot directly use depth cam­
eras and synchronized multiview devices directly in their daily devices, which is a huge
limitation for application scenarios. Monocular RGB camera solutions [16], [36], [38]–[43]
have great potential to apply in daily life with a acceptable cost.
Table 3.1: Camera types in articles reviewed
Method
Articles
Depth camera
[18]–[29], [44]–[46]
Multi­view camera
[20], [31]–[35]
Monocular RGB Camera
[16], [36], [38]–[43], [47], [48]
Depth cameras: Real­time method [30] of gesture matching based on depth camera
could provide a robust tracking method.In the article, the hand ROI detector is used to
find the hand position then use Reinitializer combine particle swarm optimization (PSO)
to renderer hand 3D model. It only supports single­handed 3D models. It can not be used
for estimation of multi­hand interaction, while MediaPipe Hand [16] is able to achieve si­
multaneous tracking of multiple hands.Depth cameras, also used to build the hand track­
ing dataset, BigHand2.2M Benchmark [46] is a accuracy hand dataset for hand gesture
recognizing.
With the popularity of deep learning, the use of neural networks and supervised learning
can be used to get better results than traditional methods while having labeled data. A
two CNNs method could produce 3D hand joint locations by RGB­D cameras in [44]. This
paper presents a method for real­time, robust and accurate rate hand pose estimation by
moving egocentric RGB­D cameras in a cluttered real environment. The method in the
article uses two subsequently applied convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to localize
the hand and regress 3D joint localization. By using the CNN to estimate the 2D position
of the hand center in the input, hand localization can be achieved even in the presence of
clutter and occlusion. To train the CNN, a new realistic dataset is introduced in the paper
that uses a merged real approach to capture and synthesize annotated data from a large
number of natural hand interactions in cluttered scenes. Later, fingertips can be localized
by a trained Cycle­GAN model [48]. The Cycle­GAN [49] training materials do not need
paired training data, which provide an easy way to find and train data by group category.
Multiview cameras: Deep learning could provide better key point estimation for optical
marker­based tracking by 2D camera in [35]. The system in the article can efficiently and
accurately collect a large amount of ground truth from the hand by using special gloves
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generative_adversarial_network
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convolutional_neural_network
6
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:15==
and multiple cameras for triangulation. This accurate data can help deep learning training
to get better results. FreiHAND [43] uses multi camera to take different hand pose data
in green space. It increases robust in real situation. FreiHAND also provides a 3D hand
normalization method, which helps improve 3D space hand tracking accuracy.
Table 3.2: Hand tracking running platform and cost compare
Application
ContactPose [45]
Multiview Bootstrapping [34]
MediaPipe [16], [38]
Method
Depth camera
Multi­view camera
Single RGB Camrea
PC
Yes
Yes
Yes
Android
X
X
Yes
Apple IOS
X
X
Yes
Webpage
X
X
Yes
No extra cost
X
X
Yes
Monocular RGB Camer: InterHand2.6M [41] is a large 3D hand pose baseline dataset.
It provides 3D hand joint coordinates by a single RGB camera.
In the path of single­camera hand tracking development, it will start to achieve the recon­
struction of the hand 3D model with the help of some props. [47] uses a single camera
to track gestures wearing colored gloves, and calculate the distance between the target
and the database through Gaussian noise reduction and comparison with the model in
the database. This article introduces a hand­tracking user input device composed of a
single camera and a cloth glove. It demonstrated this device for several canonical 3­D
manipulation and pose recognition tasks.
The method of hand tracking began to develop from the traditional method to the direction
of deep learning. From the depth RGB camera, to the RGB camera, to the monochrome
camera, the gesture 3D model can be tracked with less information with new theory devel­
opment. Thanks to the development of neural network algorithms and mobile hardware
performance increasing, mobile devices now is possible to have real­time gesture tracking
capabilities.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
7
==PAGE:16==
4
Theory and Methodology
4.1
Digital twin
Digital twin(DT) becomes popular in industry application[50] and play a key role in satis­
fying customer needs and requirements[51]. Digital Twin Assistant (DTA) system is DT
powered by different sensors and other new technologies, eg: Machine Learing(ML) and
Deep Learning(DL) [52]. Our method is a DTA system designed for stroke or other dis­
ability patients based on ML and DL with a single RGB camera.
Successful rehabilitation is physically demanding as it involves testing the body’s limits
while attempting to improve physical conditions. For rehabilitation, the involvement of
professional rehab trainers and doctors may be essential. This presents us with the same
problem, sometimes there are not enough professionals to guide every person who needs
rehabilitation, whether it is due to high demand, inaccessibility to rehab centers, or cost.
Papers that focus on rehabilitation target a different population than papers that focus on
sports or welfare. The focus of this type of research is not on being competitive, as in
sports, or on maintaining good health in everyday life, as in well­being. Rehabilitation pa­
pers focus on people who have lost their ability to exercise and how to help them recover.
They may have suffered a stroke, have a movement disorder, or their age has taken its
toll on their bodies. The DTA system is a way to track and compare historical data and at
an acceptable cost by using the information collected as a quantitative assessment before
and after rehabilitation training. Because the equipment for body tracking does not have
to be purchased specifically, it reduces additional expenses for the patient.
4.1.1
Origins and evolution
Beginning in the early 2000s, the use of digital twins became popular in the digitization
of machinery and production systems in manufacturing. For example, General Electric
(GE) builds cloud­hosted digital twins for its machines, and these computers use artificial
intelligence, physics­based models, and data analysis to process the information gathered
from sensors to better manage these machines [4].
The concept of the digital twin can be applied to a wide range of technologies and there­
fore may disrupt industries beyond manufacturing. Therefore, it is critical to expand its
definition. By seamlessly transferring data between the physical and virtual worlds, the
digital twin will facilitate monitoring, understanding, and optimizing the functionality of all
physical entities, living and nonliving.
For example, a biologist creating a tree’s digital twin would be able to digitally examine its
internal and external components; measure the amount of oxygen released, the sum of
water, and the sunlight received; determine the age of the tree and track its growth from
seedling to adult; and monitor and combat harmful pests or diseases before they spread
to other parts of the tree.
The human digital twin can also collect and analyze physical, physiological, and contex­
tual data to improve quality of life and enhance well­being. For example, strokes can
be predicted before they happen so that preventive measures can be taken. Machine
and deep learning techniques can also be used to detect lifestyles and predict potential
health problems. In addition, contextual data, such as information about environment,
age, emotional state, and preferences, can be collected and analyzed to fully understand
8
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:17==
and characterize the user’s overall situation. The purpose of using digital twins in this pa­
per is to provide stroke patients with a platform that can collect physical movement data
and medical data to help provide a system for sharing information between stroke patients
and rehabilitation trainers and physicians.
4.1.2
Digital twin assistant system
The Digital twin assistant system is a cloud­based service that collects body movement
data and biological data from stroke patients on a long­term basis, and then analyzes and
stores the results and raw data at different time points, securely stored in a database using
encrypted methods Figure 4.1. Real­world physical characteristics and medical data are
collected through 2D single RGB cameras on mobile devices (laptops, smartphones and
tablets) and medical sensors (also smartwatches that can record basic biological informa­
tion:e.g. Apple watch since Series 4 has heart monitoring electrocardiogram (EKG) and
irregular heart rhythm, both are approved by US Food and Drug Administration at 2018)
. The digital twin of a stroke patient contains not only a replayable body landmark and
bio­information. The system can be used to automatically compare models to see how
the patient’s body is performing. The system’s feedback and viewing systems provide
secure, authorized access to rehab trainers and physicians, who are kept informed of the
patient’s condition. The system can also push alerts directly to the patient and the rele­
vant authorized viewers if something unexpected happens. Since the recording of user
data can be done by the user, the frequency of recording can be significantly increased
and reduced with the frequency of meeting with the doctor. Moreover, the results of the
recorded body landmark can quantify the changes in the user’s physical condition, which
can help doctors better track and judge the patient’s physical condition.
Figure 4.1: Digital twin assistant system
By storing the data over time, it is possible to analyze small changes in the physical func­
tion and health of stroke patients. Dedicated rehabilitation trainers and doctors can also
access long­term exercise and biorecorded data of patients through DTA authorization,
and by viewing the results and combining their expertise, they can help stroke patients
develop more effective training and treatment plans.
This master thesis focuses on collecting users’ body movement data through MediaPipe’s
Hand and Pose AI models, and comparing historical record data through landmark based
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
9
==PAGE:18==
registration mathematical models to discover changes in stroke patients’ physical condi­
tions. It provides various deep learning based camera tracking test methods.
1. Hand peak­valley motion, which can assess hand dexterity by the change of hand
motion area and speed.
2. By mirror transformation, continue to use the above­mentioned Hand peak­valley
motion, which can compare the flexibility of the left and right hands.
3. By doing dumbbell exercises with the arms, the body landmark was recorded during
the exercise and the number and speed of movements were calculated. These data
can be used to analyze the arm muscle strength changes.
4.1.3
DTA characteristics
Under the definition of DT, DTA system could have these characteristics. They show on
Figure 4.2
Figure 4.2: Digital twin assistant system characteristics
• Identification. Digital twins need to use each other’s unique IDs to keep the in­
formation interaction between twins via DTA system. Each stroke patient’s body
mechanics are unique, such as the size of the palm of the hand, the length of the
fingers and arm bones and characteristic behavior patterns.
• Mobile device support. The DTA system uses a monocular RGB camera from a
mobile device,e.g., smart phone,laptop, computer, and iPad. Through the camera
sensor, the patient’s dynamic body movement data can be captured and stored in
real time. Digital twin provides data to support the analysis of the patient’s hand
dexterity.
• Machine Learning. The DTA system and with the support of Artificial Intelligence
and Deep Learning, the 3D motion information of the human body can be captured
using only a monocular RGB camera. This can help patients to obtain 3D motion
data of the body at a lower cost and can provide better support for decision making
in the DTA system.
• Real­time. The DTA system can display 3D data of body movements of stroke
patients in real time with low latency. The body movement data can also be trans­
10
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:19==
mitted remotely to a rehabilitation physician or data storage center via 5G, 4G or
other network transmission protocols.
• Re­display. The redisplay of the collected human 2.5D movement data by Medi­
aPipe can be used to compare the physical movement history of stroke patients and
to know the effect of rehabilitation training.
• Reliability.The 3D human motion data recorded by the DTA system is based on
real­time video streaming data, calculated by artificial intelligence and deep learning
methods, which can authentically record the human motion data.
• Data security. Digital twin records body movement data and does not contain other
personal and private data. This essential movement data can be stored and trans­
ferred using standard encrypted methods, such as SHA­265 and HTTPS, to ensure
that only relevant rehabilitation physicians and researchers can view and use it to
protect the privacy of patient users.
4.2
MediaPipe
MediaPipe [53] is a cross­platform platform that supports Android, iOS, C++, Python and
webpage, and helps developers focus on implementing machine learning algorithms. The
platform’s input, output and internal computation module flow are optimized to improve
the overall operational efficiency. The following Hands[16], Pose [38] and Holistic1 are all
based on the MediaPipe platform.
4.2.1
Hands
Real­time, low­latency gesture tracking with a single RGB camera via MediaPipe Hands
project [16]. The input is a video stream, or a single image. The output is a video image at
30 frames per second, containing the coordinates and depth information of the 21 finger
joint planes of multiple hands. The detail hand landmark and a real hand tracking are
show in Figure 4.3
1https://ai.googleblog.com/2020/12/mediapipe­holistic­simultaneous­face.html
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
11
==PAGE:20==
(a) Hand landmarks
(b) Hand skeleton calculated by MediaPipe
Figure 4.3: Real time hand tracking(ref:MediaPipe Hands)
The MediaPipe[53] visualizer is a tool that helps users understand the topology and overall
behavior of their pipelines, as shown in Figure 4.4. The tool consists of a visualization of
a timeline view and graph view.
First, the MediaPipe system in Figure 4.4 receives the image stream through the camera
and starts queuing each frame as it enters the Flow Limiter. When the landmark of the
hand is detected for the first time, the palm of the hand is detected first. After the palm is
detected, the landmark of the hand is then detected by image cropping.If the landmark of
the hand is detected, the next step detects the landmark of the hand in the next image.If
the landmark of the hand is not detected before, the detection of the palm of the hand will
be performed again. Finally, the landmark and hand images are output.
MediaPipe Hand combines two machine learning(ML) models, a palm detector and a hand
landmark model. The palm detector uses Single Shot MultiBox Detector(SSD)[54] for real
time palm tracking. It helps crop the image before the hand landmark model is working.
4.2.2
Pose
MediaPipe Pose proposes a lightweight convolutional neural network architecture for hu­
man pose estimation. The network is able to track 33 key points of the human body
Figure 4.5 in real time and can run smoothly on mobile phones. In Figure 4.6, the results
based on this model are shown. In this thesis, it uses the output of MediaPipe Pose land­
mark to calculate the angle of arm movement. The speed of the dumbbell movement is
analyzed to evaluate the flexibility of the arm in section 5.2.
4.3
Landmark based registration
4.3.1
Introduction
Image registration is the process of determining a geometrical transformation that aligns
the points of an image with the corresponding points in a reference coordinate frame.
12
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4.4:
Machine learning inference pipelines of hand tracking(ref:ref:MediaPipe
Hands)
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.5: pose landmarks(ref:MediaPipe Pose)
Figure 4.6: 33 pose landmarks in tester
14
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:23==
This reference coordinate frame is often given as another image. However, it can be any
arbitrary object coordinate system. In this topic, image registration will be applied in hand
area tracking comparing.
Image registration adds value to hand landmark images by enabling
• Monitoring of changes in the individual hand
• comparison of one hand area with others hands in different frames
• comparison of groups’ hand landmarks with others experiments
4.3.2
Elements of image registration
The task of image registration can be phrased as the following [55]: Given a so­called
reference R and a so­called template image T , the basic idea is to ﬁnd a reasonable ge­
ometrical transformation such that a transformed version of the template image becomes
similar to the reference image.
Image registration consists of the following elements:
• The geometrical transformation required to transform the template to the refer­
ence image. In some cases a rigid transformation, i.e., a translation and rotation
suffices, in other situations a nonlinear geometrical transformation is necessary.
• The similarity measure that describes the goodness of the registration.
• The optimization algorithm that controls (determines the parameters of) the geo­
metrical transformations to maximize similarity.
• The regularization term securing that only reasonable transformations are obtained.
4.3.3
Landmark and label
A landmark is a point of correspondence for each object that matches between and within
populations.
In the literature, landmarks have been known by various synonyms and are partitioned
into various types. We will consider the three types deﬁned by [56] in relation to biological
shapes:
• Scientific landmarks are points assigned by an expert that correspond between
objects in some scientifically meaningful way, for example, the corner of an eye or
the meeting of two sutures on a skull. In biological applications, such landmarks are
also known as anatomical landmarks.
• Mathematical landmarks are points located on an object according to some mathe­
matical or geometrical property of the figure, for example, at a point of high curvature
or at an extreme point. The use of mathematical landmarks is particularly useful in
automated recognition and analysis. Geometrical transformations to maximize sim­
ilarity.
• Pseudo­landmarks are constructed points on an object, located either around the
outline or in between scientific or mathematical landmarks.
A label is a name or number associated with a landmark, and identifies which pairs of
landmarks correspond when comparing two objects. Such landmarks are called labelled
landmarks. In Figure 4.3(a), the hand has 21 joint point, each landmark has assigned a
label name. The Figure 4.3(b) shows the hand joints in reality.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
15
==PAGE:24==
4.3.4
Image transformation and FRE
This part introduces the landmark based registration and the contents of the section are
mainly adopted from [57]. If two image are similar, the optimal translation, rotation, and
scale parameters are found by matching feature points, which is called landmark based
registration. This transformation method is often used in computed tomography(CT) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) slice comparison. It is used to find physical changes
in the patient’s body over time, such as whether the size of the tumor has changed. But in
this master thesis, the main purpose is compare hand landmarks in single and multiple ex­
periments. Suppose there are two images with feature points xi, yi ∈R2. The process of
finding the transformation ˆw ∈Rm Equation 4.1 such that the squared distances between
xi and yi after geometric transformation minimized is called geometrical mapping.
ˆw = arg min
w
N
∑
i=1
∥ˆy(xi, w) −yi∥2
(4.1)
Translation. In exceptional cases, it is enough to consider only the translated movement
between image captures. The translation formula for 2D space t = (t1, t2)T in 2D is as
follows Equation 4.2
y(x; t) = x + t
(4.2)
By differentiating the objective function of Equation 4.1 get ˆt in Equation 4.3
x =
N
∑
i=1
xi/N
y =
N
∑
i=1
yi/N
ˆt = y −x
(4.3)
Rigid transformation, including translation and rotation, can be used for comparison in
the case where the participating user’s hand is at a fixed distance from the camera. Trans­
lation parameters in 2D are t = (t1, t2)T. The rotation matrix R is an orthogonal matrix,
which mean RT R = I. If the angle in 2D space is θ, the rotation matrix is Equation 4.5.
In here the transformation shows in Equation 4.4.
y(x; R, t) = Rx + t
(4.4)
R =
( cos θ
−sin θ
sin θ
cos θ
)
(4.5)
Centered landmark is the average of all coordinates subtracted from each point coordi­
nate, which is used to reduce the cost of align. By inserting Equation 4.6 into the Equa­
tion 4.1 the objective function becomes Equation 4.7
˜xi = xi −x
˜yi = yi −y
(4.6)
16
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:25==
LOBJ =
N
∑
i=1
∥R˜xi −˜yi + t −(y −Rx)∥2
(4.7)
Differentiation to t yields t = y −Rx and inserting this in Equation 4.7 , the result is
Equation 4.8
LOBJ =
N
∑
i=1
∥R˜xi −˜yi∥2
=
N
∑
i=1
(
˜xT
i RT R˜xi + ˜yT
i ˜yi −2˜xT
i RT ˜yi
)
(4.8)
Through RT R = I, it can be shown [58] that get minimize R by apply a SVD(singular
value decomposition) of H = ∑N
i=1 ˜xi˜yT
i = UDV T , with UT U = V T V = I, then get
ˆR = V diag(1, 1, det(V U))UT
ˆt = y −ˆRx
(4.9)
The diagonal matrix inserted in between V and U ensures that we get a proper rotation.
Similarity transformation, including translation, rotation, and isotropic scaling, adds a
scale parameter compared to the rigid transformation. The transformation equation is as
follows Equation 4.10 and s > 0. By similarity transformation, the area of the hand can
be compared with the landmark of different users’ hands at different distances. Because
the area of the hand will shrink and enlarge with the distance from the camera lens, as in
Figure 4.16.
y(x; s, R, t) = sRx + t
(4.10)
By calculating similarity to Equation 4.10, the result Equation 4.11 is obtained .
ˆR
=V diag(1, 1, det(V U))UT
ˆs
=
∑N
i=1 ˜xT
i ˆRT ˜yi
∑N
i+1 ˜xT
i ˜xi
ˆt
=¯y −ˆs ˆR¯x
(4.11)
Fiducial registration error(FRE), is used to compare the difference between the two
sets of points and is used to judge the good or bad result of the geometric transformation.
When the FRE is smaller, it means that a better transformation result is achieved.
σ2
FRE =
1
2N
N
∑
i=1
∥(xi; ˆw) −yi∥2
(4.12)
and ˆw are the optimal parameters given by Equation 4.1.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
17
==PAGE:26==
4.4
Hand area tracking procedures
4.4.1
Hand area calculation
Figure 4.7: The whole hand area are calculated by sum of 4 triangles
Heron’s formula 2, formula that is named after Hiero of Alexandria, the formula requires
only three side lengths to calculate the area of a triangle. This differs from other triangle
area formulas in that it is not necessary to first calculate the angles or any other distances
in the triangle. In Heron’s formula Equation 4.13, (a,b,c) are three edges of triangle. In
each frame hand landmark area are calculated by sum of 4 triangles. Five fingertips and
wrist point show in Figure 4.7.
s = a + b + c
2
Area =
√
s(s −a)(s −b)(s −c)
(4.13)
4.4.2
Data acquisition
The real­time video is captured by a monocular RGB camera and the landmark data of
timeline and video frames are calculated by MediaPipe Hand model.The example of land­
mark in image shows on Figure 4.3:b. These progress shows on graph Figure 4.4.
2sometimes called Hero’s formula,wiki:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heron%27s_formula
18
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.8: The whole process of hand tracking.
In Figure 4.8, after obtaining the landmark of the hand through MediaPipe, the data col­
lection part in A will automatically save and calculate the area of the hand and display the
landmark image result in real time,e.g. Figure 4.10. Analysis and comparison’s part will
do more calculations later.
4.4.3
Description of data set
In the experimental real­time video stream, each frame is computed by MeidaPipe Hand to
obtain the landmark result, the result of each frame is as follows Figure 4.9. The calculated
data for each frame of the video stream is saved along with the current timestamp, while
the video data is not saved, which significantly reduces the amount of data that needs to
be saved.
The storage method is Hickle. It is a convenient way of dumping python variables to
HDF5 files that can be read in most programming languages, not just Python. Hickle is
fast, and allows for transparent compression of the data, and only save landmark data
also protects the user’s privacy. To better identify the different experiments in the saved
file names and to protect user privacy, the system uses the current timestamp to generate
an MD5 as the unique ID for this experiment. Different parts of the data in detail show
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
19
==PAGE:28==
below.
MULTI_HAND_LANDMARKS: Collection of detected/tracked hands, where each hand
is represented as a list of 21 hand landmarks and each landmark is composed of x, y
and z. x and y are normalized to [0.0, 1.0] by the image width and height respectively. z
represents the landmark depth with the depth at the wrist being the origin, and the smaller
the value, the closer the landmark is to the camera. The magnitude of z uses roughly the
same scale as x.
MULTI_HANDEDNESS: Collection of handedness of the detected/tracked hands (i.e., is it
a left or right hand). Each hand is composed of a label and score. label is a string of values
either ”Left” or ”Right”. Score is the estimated probability of the predicted handedness and
is always greater than or equal to 0.5 (and the opposite handedness has an estimated
probability of 1 ­ score).
Note that handedness is determined assuming the input image is mirrored, i.e., taken with
a front­facing/selfie camera with images flipped horizontally. If it is not the case, please
swap the handedness output in the application.
Figure 4.9: The hand landmark description in one image
4.4.4
Data Re­display
By reading the stored files and replotting the images of the hand joints according to the
timeline, the necessary data collected from the previous experiment can be represented.
In Figure 4.10, the top red point with the largest hand area is called Peak, and the red point
with the smallest hand area is called Valley. Additional experimental results are obtained
later by analyzing the hand peak and valley.
20
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.10: The hand landmark re­display by video with timeline
4.4.5
Head area peak/valley noise remove
In patient experiments recorded in real time, patients may shake their hands or make other
gestures due to different situations, resulting in irregular changes in the hand area, which
may generate noise like in Figure 4.11. For example, at the beginning of the experiment,
the patient’s hand may shake when it starts to move, or the patient may receive other
pathological factors that cause hand trembling during the experiment.
Figure 4.11: Hand area with noise, the red circles are noise in the experiment
In order to get Hand area Local extremes in Figure 4.11, there are four steps. Step1:
Calculating the first difference by Equation 4.14, the result Figure 4.12 shows the trend of
increasing and decreasing area is indicated by positive and negative numbers, and the
magnitude of the value indicates the speed of change..
out[i] = a[i + 1] −a[i]
(4.14)
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.12: The first difference of hand area
Step2:The local extreme is focused in here, so the Sign function Equation 4.15 will remove
trends in Figure 4.13.
sgn x :=





−1
if x < 0
0
if x = 0
1
if x > 0
(4.15)
Figure 4.13: Sign function result after the first difference of hand area
Step3: after the Sign function, redo the Equation 4.14 will get local extremes like Fig­
ure 4.14. The peak and valley can be identified by Equation 4.16, the final result shows
on Figure 4.11.
Index =
{
Peak
if x < 0
V alley
if x < 0
(4.16)
22
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.14: Peak and Valley with noise after second difference calculation
Due to the fluctuation of the gesture area, the wrong Peak and Valley are shown in Fig­
ure 4.11. By setting α and β to control, the equation is as follows Equation 4.17. Now
the true hand area Peak and Valley are filtered in Figure 4.15.In experiment test, the
α = 0.4, β = 0.5 in here.
Peak[i] > α × Peakmax
V alley[i] < β × V alley
(4.17)
Figure 4.15: Hand area after removing noise, only the real peak and valley are kept
4.4.6
Hand peak/valley speed
After filtering by Equation 4.17, the true peak and valley can be used to calculate the
velocity of hand­area motion. Definition of a complete motion: The motion between two
adjacent Peaks or two adjacent Valleys can be called one training cycle. To mitigate the
miscalculation of Peak and Valley, the average speed (count/minute) of both is calculated
by the Equation 4.18 to represent the frequency of the overall training.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
23
==PAGE:32==
VPeak =
Length(Peak)
Speak[end] −Speak[0]
Vpeak =
Length(V alley)
Svalley[end] −Svalley[0]
V = Vpeak
Vvalley
(4.18)
The opening and closing of the fingers is a basic form of hand movement, the amplitude
and frequency of hand movement which can be used to assess and track hand health in
real time and in the long term.
4.4.7
One group landmark based registration
When recording the user’s hand landmark in real time, moving the hand closer and further
away from the camera causes the measured hand area to expand or shrink in the equal
proportion, but the area of the hand remains virtually unchanged. In Figure 4.16, the object
at the same height is shown on the left, and when it is close to the camera, the image
becomes larger, and when it is far away, the image becomes smaller, eg:The height of
the object is L, when d3 > d1 > d2,, the projection result is L2 > L1 > L3. The photo
on the right is the result of the same hand in the real camera, which validates the above
statement.
Figure 4.16: Hand area scaled by distance
In the experiment, the testers need to repeat the Peak => Valley => Peak loop exercise,
and in different experiment groups, the testers need to take rubber bands for simulating
hand stroke or injuring caused disability impact. The MediaPipe could calculate the hand
joint position in real time. The whole test process shows on Figure 4.17.
24
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.17: Hand peak => valley => peak hand area test progress by bare hand and
restrained with rubber band
At the same time, when users do hand area testing, they also need to take into account
the impact of hand rotation and translation on hand area. Because MediaPipe can only
capture 2.5D data, the joint depth data is the depth of the joint relative to the wrist, which
is negative near the camera and positive far from the camera. These depth data are
not accurate spatial data, so the user’s palm is required to face the camera for testing to
ensure the accuracy of the experiment.
When the testers do the peak and valley exercise, the palm joint will not change too
much in reality, because the bone in the palm has no extra joint. For this reason, the
landmark based registration will base on the palm five joint. The palm joints show in
Figure 4.18. Through section 4.3: landmark based registration, the algorithm could auto­
register the peak and valley landmark to the first Peak and Valley landmark. This method
could remove the hand translation, rotation, and scale influence.
Figure 4.18: The yellow marker is hand palm registration 5 key joints
From Figure 4.10, plot one group all Peak and Valley Landmark together in Figure 4.19.
The left part is an unregister landmark, they are not aligned well. The right part is the
landmark registered by five palm key joints, they are aligned well. In one group landmark
based registration process, the later landmarks will register with the first Peak and Valley
landmark, which will have reduced translation, rotation, and scale influence on the hand
area.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
25
==PAGE:34==
The FRE calculated by Equation 4.12 explains the result of landmark based registration.
The smaller FRE means the register result is better, the larger FRE means the register is
not good.
Figure 4.19: One group landmark registration
4.4.8
Multi­group landmark based registration
Comparing different groups, landmarks need register the second group Peak and Valley
landmarks to the previous group first Peak and Valley landmark. The second group ex­
periment is a hand with two rubber bands. The registration result shows on Figure 4.19.
The second column is the result after landmark based registration, which is in same posi­
tion with the result in Figure 4.19. The FRE of peak hand landmark decreases a lot from
75256.9 to 205.71, which means the registration is success. The FRE of Valley hand
landmark has the same conclusion.
Figure 4.20: Two group landmark compared registration
26
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:35==
5
Experiment
5.1
Hand area tracking experiment
In this experiment, MediaPipe hand model is used to capture the hand landmark in real
time video, the DTA system will calculate the hand area in real time and save the landmark
data. Then, the peak and valley values of the hand area are obtained by data analysis.
By removing noise, then find these local extremes, the frequency and number of hand
movements are obtained. Subsequently, the hand landmark at different time points was
matched and transformed by landmark based registration to provide methodological sup­
port for comparing the average change of hand area between one experiment and multiple
experiments.
5.1.1
Single hand tracking with rubber band constraints
Before starting to design the experiment, it is necessary to explain why different rubber
bands are used to limit the hand motion, and then observe the changes in hand area
and velocity. The ultimate goal of the experiment is to detect changes in hand dexter­
ity in elderly stroke patients or patients with hand injuries in time to give physicians or
rehabilitation physiotherapists a tool to quantitatively track and assess changes in hand
dexterity. In order to simulate the dexterity of the user’s hand in different situations, dif­
ferent numbers of rubber bands were used to achieve this result. Multiple experiments
under the same conditions and repetitive experiments at different distances are performed
to enable statistical experiments to increase the reliability of the results.
Four different repeated experiments were designed with the same participant’s left hand.
The detail shows in below:
• Bare hand: left bare hand doing Peak­Valley exercise 20 times.
• Hand with 1 rubber band: 20 times of Peak­Valley exercise with the left hand.
• Hand with 2 rubber bands: The left hand did 20 times Peak­Valley exercise under
the restriction of two rubber bands.
• Hand with 3 rubber bands: The left hand did 20 times Peak­Valley exercise under
the restriction of three rubber bands.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.1: Four Control test groups compare hand area and speed with none, one, two
and three rubber bands
There are three conditions in the later compared analysis. Condition:Mix, in each ex­
periment will repeat 20 times Peak­Valley exercises; Condition:Stable, the first 10 times
hand Peak­Valley exercise, the hand is fixed at same place; Condition:Fluctuate, the
later 10 times, the hand will do the exercise at difference place so that the hand’s area
will be influenced by the distance of camera. Each exercise is required for more than 30
seconds, when the hand wearing rubber bands need to be placed at the two joints of each
finger, the position of reference Figure 5.1 in 3: THUMB_IP, 6: INDEX_FINGER_PIP, 10:
MIDDLE_FINGER_PIP, 14: RING_FINGER_PIP, 19: PINKY_PIP, e.g., B. For the analy­
sis of experimental results, see C.
Table 5.1: Single hand tracking conditions and experiments design
Condition/Experiments NO
Bare hand
1 rubber band
2 rubber bands
3 rubber bands
Mix
1­20
21­40
41­60
61­80
Stable
1­10
21­30
41­50
61­70
Fluctuate
11­20
31­40
51­60
71­80
In each repeat experiment, the hand landmark is found through the noised removed pro­
cess to all Hand Peak and Valley landmarks and timestamps, and then the speed of hand
movements, and the hand area at each Hand Peak and Valley are calculated. By com­
paring the changes in hand area and velocity for different numbers of rubber bands, the
following questions are addressed. The result and analysis show on section 6.1.
• First: Can the MediaPipe Hand model find significant changes in hand Peak and
Valley area under different finger limitation by wearing different rubber bands af­
ter landmark based registration, and does the result can be verified by statistical
experiments?
28
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:37==
• Second: Does different rubber bands have a negative impact on the hand movement
speed, i.e., the more rubber bands there are, the lower the hand movement speed
will be?
5.1.2
Mirror hand compare
The above method is mainly used to compare one hand in one group of experiments
and one hand in different groups of experiments, however, most people have two hands.
Although humans have two similar hands, it is practically impossible to compare them
directly in an experiment. The reason they cannot be compared is that the two hands are
mirror symmetric. To compare the two hands experimentally by image, one would need to
perform the experiment on both hands separately. Then use a mirroring technique, such
as in Figure 5.2, to perform the transformation before comparing.
By comparing the speed of left hand and right hand and the Hand Peak­Valley landmark
over time, the difference in dexterity between the two hands can be known. This is im­
portant to assess the overall physical coordination of stroke patients, as the left and right
hands need to work together to perform various tasks in daily life more efficiently, such
as: putting on clothes, carrying dishes, lifting heavy objects, clapping,hugs etc. Assess­
ing the dexterity of both hands experimentally can also help detect stroke earlier if a large
difference is found in the dexterity of one hand compared to the other.
Figure 5.2: Left hand flip as mirror hand to compare with right hand
When the landmarks of the left and right hands are compared, special comparison pro­
cessing is required. The reasons and steps of the mirroring experiment are described in
detail in the next.
• Step1:Figure 5.3:(a) is the landmark of the left hand, and the Mirror transform in 1
will mirror the left hand into the right hand. The specific method, is the left hand
original picture Figure 5.2:(a) after doing the mirror transformation, and then use
MediaPipe Hand model to generate the landmark of the hand.
• Step2: By registering the right hand landmark Figure 5.3:(b) to the left hand land­
mark Figure 5.3:(a), we get the right hand transformation result.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
29
==PAGE:38==
• Step3:Putting the landmark of the right hand transformation result and the left and
right landmark on the same image Figure 5.3:(d), it is obvious that the registration
process is a failure. The reason is that the registration points are based on the five
points of the palm as the standard, while the left and right hands cannot be matched
directly due to the mirror symmetry problem, resulting in the failure of the registration
results.
• Step4:By registering the right hand landmark Figure 5.3: (b) to the left hand mirror
landmark Figure 5.3: (c), the new transformation result of the right hand is obtained.
• Step5:Once again, put the transformed landmark of the right hand and the mirror
Figure 5.3:(c) of the left hand on the same image Figure 5.3:(e), and you can see
that the left and right hands almost perfectly match each other. This shows that the
registration is successful, and this method of postregistration mirroring can be used
to compare the landmarks of both left and right hands.
Figure 5.3: This figure show why left and right hand landmark can not register directly.
After the left hand mirrored to right, the landmark based registration work well
To verify that the left­right hand dexterity comparison is valid in the MediaPipe Hand model,
the following experiments were designed in this section to verify that the left­right hand
model can be used to compare the difference between left and right hand dexterity.
Three experimental groups were designed with the same participant.
• Left bare hand group: left bare hand doing Peak­Valley exercise 20 times.
• Left bare hand with 2 rubber bands group: The left hand did 20 times Peak­Valley
exercise under the restriction of two rubber bands.
• Right bare hand group: 20 times of Peak­Valley exercise with the right hand.
• Right bare hand with 2 rubber bands group: The right hand did 20 times Peak­
Valley exercise under the restriction of two rubber bands, so that it could compare
with the left hand.
Each exercise is required for more than 30 seconds, when the hand wearing rubber bands
30
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:39==
need to be placed at the two joints of each finger, the position of reference Figure 4.7 in 3:
THUMB_IP, 6: INDEX_FINGER_PIP, 10: MIDDLE_FINGER_PIP, 14: RING_FINGER_PIP,
19: PINKY_PIP, e.g., B. For the analysis of experimental results, see C.
Figure 5.4: Put two rubber bands on the right hand at second joint of fingers
Two questions need to be explored here based on the experimental results
• First: Is there any difference in the comparison of hand area between the left hand
and the right hand of the same tester’s bare hand or hand with two rubber bands?
• Second: compared with the left and right hand speed test results, is there a signifi­
cant difference in the comparison?
The null hypothesis given for both cases is that there is no significant difference between
the area and speed of the left hand and the right hand. The result and analysis show on
section 6.1.3.
5.2
Dumb­bell exercise arm angle tracking Experiment
The experiment was conducted with MediaPipe Pose [38] to track 2.5D data of major
joints in the human body. Since it is for detecting the angle of arm movement, only 2D
data is used in this experiment to calculate the angle of arm movement using the three
points right_shoulder(12), right_elbow(14), right_wrist(16) in Figure 4.5. The purpose of
the experiment is to explore whether the force change of the user’s arm can be detected
by the speed through the MediaPipe Pose model. This will help stroke patients to better
focus on the changes in arm strength. All data are recorded in real time and eventually
stored as landmarks . The stored data does not include the user’s picture, which reduces
the storage size and protects the user’s privacy.
In this experiment of dumbbell movement, three experimental groups will be used: no
load, light load and heavy load in Figure 5.5. Because the angle does not change de­
pending on the distance away from the camera, each experimental group is repeated 10
times in this experiment and the data is collected for more than 30 seconds each time. In
order to simulate the variation of the user’s arm muscles, different weights of load were
used to simulate the variation of arm force. The null hypothesis was that the average
speed of the dumbbell was the same for the three different loads. The results of the
analysis of the experiment are presented in section 6.2.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
31
==PAGE:40==
• No load: No load was used as the control group for the experiment.
• Light load (683g): A cup with water was used as the load.
• Heavy load (1060 g): A large plastic bottle with water was used as the weight.
Figure 5.5: Dumb­bell three conditions: no load, light load (683 g) and heavy load (1060
g).
An image of the change in arm angle with time during a dumbbell movement is shown in
Figure 5.7. The blue dots and red dots are the positions of arm extension and contraction,
respectively. When the noise was not removed in Figure 5.6, the final local extremes of
the plot clearly did not meet the experimental requirements, resulting from the disturbance
generated at the end of the experiment when the arm ended its motion. After noised re­
moval, most the correct local extremes are preserved in Figure 5.7 to ensure the accuracy
of the speed calculation. The average speed in each experiment was calculated by using
the same noise method section 4.4.5 and equation Equation 4.18 as in the hand area
analysis. The mean speed results in different conditions are shown in Table 6.27.
Figure 5.6: Dumb­bell angle tracking plot with noise in one experiment.
32
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.7: Dumb­bell angle tracking plot after noise removed in one experiment.
5.3
MeidaPipe model performance and stability
Figure 5.8: Delay test methods used in both experiments.
In this experiment, by using MediaPipe hand and pose time delay analysis, after capturing
a frame with the camera, the complete processing time of the current image is calculated
after the end of processing Figure 5.8. By recording the delay for each frame of the image,
the results of the two experiments recorded in Figure 5.9 are shown. The average delay
time and FPS are calculated in Table 5.2. The data shows that the dumbbell motion has
a higher delay time and a lower FPS. However, both methods have in stronger stability
and the delay does not fluctuate with the change of environment. Even if the user wears
the exoskeleton device Figure 5.10, the MediaPipe Hand and Pose models can still find
the hand and body key points correctly.
Table 5.2: Experiment delay data and FPS
Experiment
Mean delay(ms)
FPS
Hand area tracking
83
10
Dumb­bell angle tracking
178
4
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.9: Delay plot for both experiments, the test equipment is Macbook air with M1
chip.
Figure 5.10: MediaPipe model still could recognize pose landmark when participant wear­
ing LEGO exoskeleton equipment.
34
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:43==
6
Numerical Result
6.1
Hand area tracking experiment analysis
The hand tracking system based on landmark registration section 4.3 is design for long­
term hand dexterity and comparison. The next two experiments explore the hand tracking
working on different situations and people. The assumption is that the hand tracking sys­
tem could detect hand dexterity changed by rubber band and work with different people.
6.1.1
Different rubber band data analysis
In the first experiment, it will test one user putting different number rubber bands around
the finger or bare hand without any rubber band for testing flexibility of the hand under
different fingers’ pressures. Because the hand tracking system will project the hand land­
mark of different groups to the first peak and valley landmarks of the first group, to elim­
inate the effect of projecting different groups to each other. The experiment will also
compare whether the different order of projection groups will affect the final results of the
experiment. The detail design of the four groups shows on Figure 5.1.
Figure 6.1: Hand Peak area compare by bare hand and hand with 1 to 3 rubber bands in
repeat 80 times experiments
The experiments of Peak­Valley area tracking were repeated 20 times for each of the four
different cases, and the total number of experiments was 80. The area of Hand Peak
in each experiment is shown in Figure 6.1. The horizontal coordinates of the axes are
the numbers of the different experiments, each belonging to experiment group reference
Table 6.1; the vertical coordinates are the average relative area of the hand’s landmark in
each experiment. The blue line represents the average area of the hand in each experi­
ment from the raw recorded landmark data; the orange line represents the average area
of the hand after landmark based registration.
The assumption for Figure 6.1 Hand peak area is that the average area of the peak hand
decreases as the number of rubber bands increases. The assumption is that the average
area of Hand Peak is the same for the same person with bare hand and 1­3 rubber bands.
This prerequisite is satisfied by using two­sample t­test to test whether the hand peak
mean values are equal between different experimental groups.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
35
==PAGE:44==
6.1.1.1
Mix condition compare
In Figure 6.1, the mean area of the original hand landmark fluctuated widely from one ex­
periment to another, so this conclusion could not be obtained directly by visual observation
between different experimental groups.
Table 6.1: Experiment mix conditions and Hand Peak area mean
Experiment NO
Condition(mix)
Peak Area original mean
Peak Area mean after registration
1­20
Bare hand
70.00
101.71
21­40
1 rubber band
48.78
101.42
41­60
2 rubber bands
36.39
73.12
61­80
3 rubber bands
25.09
47.27
Table 6.2: P­value of different experiments original Peak mean area compare by Two­
Sample t­Test at mix condition
Two­Sample t­Test
Bare hand
1 rubber band
2 rubber bands
3 rubber bands
Bare hand
­
0.02
<0.001
<0.001
1 rubber band
­
­
0.03
<0.001
2 rubber bands
­
­
­
0.02
Table 6.3: P­value of different experiments after registration Peak mean area compare by
Two­Sample t­Test at mix condition
Two­Sample t­Test
Bare hand
1 rubber band
2 rubber bands
3 rubber bands
Bare hand
­
0.91
<0.001
<0.001
1 rubber band
­
­
<0.001
<0.001
2 rubber bands
­
­
­
<0.001
In Table 6.1, it can be seen that the landmark mean area decrease in Mix condition,
and in Table 6.2, it can be seen that the comparison of the mean area between different
experiments passed the Two Sample t­Test, i.e., the P­value of all the experiments for
two­by­two comparison was less than the confidence level of 0.05, which means that the
mean area between different groups The mean area of Hand Peak decreased with the
increase of rubber bands.
The mean area of different experiments tends to be more stable in Figure 6.1 after land­
mark based registration. The area in Table 6.1 found Bare hand and hand with 1 rubber
band were found to be very close to each other. By Two Samples t­Test D, except for
this group of data, the P­value of all groups is close to 0, which is much smaller than
the confidence level of 0.05, indicating that the mean values between different groups
are significantly different. It can be tentatively concluded that the area of the hand after
landmark based registration provides better comparative results when rubber bands are
increased to a certain number. However, since there is no more significant difference in
36
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:45==
the results of non­landmark based registration, the robustness of different methods under
different segmentation cases will be compared later.
6.1.1.2
Stable condition compare
When the experimental hand was recorded in a fixed position on the landmark of the hand,
the comparison of the average area of the hand after landmark based registration of the
bare hand and hand with 1 rubber band could not pass Two Sample t­Test in Table 6.6.
However, all other cases could pass the statistical test and the experimental results were
consistent with the hypothesis from Table 6.4 and Table 6.4.
Table 6.4: Experiment stable conditions and Hand Peak area mean
Experiment NO
Condition(stable)
Peak Area original mean
Peak Area mean after registration
1­10
Bare hand
93.50
99.11
21­30
1 rubber band
60.84
97.51
41­50
2 rubber bands
42.25
68.21
61­70
3 rubber bands
29.18
49.52
Table 6.5: P­value of different experiments original Peak mean area compare by Two­
Sample t­Test at stable condition
Two­Sample t­Test
Bare hand
1 rubber band
2 rubber bands
3 rubber bands
Bare hand
­
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
1 rubber band
­
­
<0.001
<0.001
2 rubber bands
­
­
­
<0.001
Table 6.6: P­value of different experiments after registration Peak mean area compare by
Two­Sample t­Test at stable condition
Two­Sample t­Test
Bare hand
1 rubber band
2 rubber bands
3 rubber bands
Bare hand
­
0.34
<0.001
<0.001
1 rubber band
­
­
<0.001
<0.001
2 rubber bands
­
­
­
<0.001
The only reason why the hand could not pass the test was that one rubber maybe not
affect the change in the area of the Peak­Valley exercise, but when the number of rubber
bands increased to two, the movement of the hand received greater restriction and the
area of the hand decreased again. Another situation is that the palm of the hand becomes
smaller when doing the hand Peak­Valley exercise, and the area of the hand becomes
larger after landmark based registration, and only when the difference in hand area is
large, this method can steadily distinguish the area between different landmarks.
6.1.1.3
Fluctuate condition compare
When the distance of the user’s hand from the camera is random for each test. Although
the original landmark area in Table 6.7 still decreased with rubber bands increased, their
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
37
==PAGE:46==
average area results Table 6.7 could not pass the Two Sample t­Test, because their hand
mean compare P­value all above Confidence level 0.05. However, most of the average
area using landmark based registration still passed the Two Sample t­Test in Table 6.8,
and confidence level α ≈0 < 0.05. The only group that did not pass the test here was still
the bare hand and hand with one rubber band case, which confidence level α = 0.81 >
0.05. The reason for this situation is the same as the hypothesis analyzed above.
Table 6.7: Experiment fluctuate conditions and Hand Peak area mean
Experiment NO
Condition
(fluctuate)
Peak Area
original mean
Peak Area mean
after registration
11­20
Bare hand
46.51
104.30
31­40
1 rubber band
36.73
105.34
51­60
2 rubber bands
30.54
78.03
71­80
3 rubber bands
21.00
45.03
Table 6.8: P­value of different experiments original Peak mean area compare by Two­
Sample t­Test at fluctuate condition
Two­Sample t­Test
Bare hand
1 rubber band
2 rubber bands
3 rubber bands
Bare hand
­
0.47
0.23
0.07
1 rubber band
­
­
0.52
0.11
2 rubber bands
­
­
­
0.31
Table 6.9: P­value of different experiments after registration Peak mean area compare by
Two­Sample t­Test at fluctuate condition
Two­Sample t­Test
Bare hand
1 rubber band
2 rubber bands
3 rubber bands
Bare hand
­
0.81
<0.001
<0.001
1 rubber band
­
­
<0.001
<0.001
2 rubber bands
­
­
­
<0.001
The experimental comparison of the fluctuating condition, combined with the results of the
mix and stable conditions above, shows that after using the landmark based registration
method, the hand tracking method used in this paper is more stable than the direct calcu­
lation of the hand landmark area. The hand tracking method is more robust than the direct
calculation of hand landmark area. Using this method, it is possible to more accurately
detect the hand’s status change when the Hand Peak area changes significantly. Thus,
we know the change of hand dexterity.
38
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.2: Hand Valley area compare by bare hand and hand with 1 to 3 rubber bands
in repeat 80 times experiments
Table 6.10: Experiment mix conditions and Hand Valley area mean
Experiment NO
Condition(mix)
Valley Area
original
mean
Valley
Area
mean
after registration
1­20
Bare hand
3.44
6.25
21­40
1 rubber band
5.43
11.41
41­60
2 rubber bands
6.50
11.25
61­80
3 rubber bands
4.21
7.24
Table 6.11: P­value of different experiments original Valley mean area compare by Two­
Sample t­Test at mix condition
Two­Sample t­Test
Bare hand
1 rubber band
2 rubber bands
3 rubber bands
Bare hand
­
0.15
0.10
0.61
1 rubber band
­
­
0.54
0.42
2 rubber bands
­
­
­
0.24
Table 6.12: P­value of different experiments after registration Valley mean area compare
by Two­Sample t­Test at mix condition
Two­Sample t­Test
Bare hand
1 rubber band
2 rubber bands
3 rubber bands
Bare hand
­
<0.001
<0.001
0.10
1 rubber band
­
­
0.83
<0.001
2 rubber bands
­
­
­
<0.001
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
39
==PAGE:48==
From Figure 6.2, the area changes of the four experiments, the average area of the orig­
inal hand landmark and the average area after landmark based registration have no ob­
vious characteristics. By analyzing the mean area of different groups through Table 6.10
analysis, the mean area after landmark based registration only met the expectation at 1­3
rubber bands, which is more rubber bands smaller Hand valley area. In Table 6.11, as
all the p values are greater than the confidence level α = 0.05, which means the different
experiments handed the original mean area are equal, it can not be rejected.
Although in Table 6.12, the P­values of the four comparisons were much smaller than the
confidence level α = 0.05, indicating that the stability of the average hand area improved
after landmark based registration. However, the original hypothesis cannot be rejected
because the average area of bare hand is lower than the other three groups, and the
confidence level α = 0.83 > 0.05 for the comparison of hand area of 1 rubber band and
2 rubber bands. Therefore, the original hypothesis that there is no significant difference
between the two mean values should also be accepted.
In conclusion, Hand valley area could not be used to directly judge the dexterity of the hand
in this experiment. The reason may be that there was only one tester and it was a person
with normal hand movement, so the area of hand closure was small causing a large error.
If the elderly stroke patient’s hand could not be completely closed and participated in the
test, different conclusions might be derived.
Figure 6.3: Hand Peak­Valley speed compare by bare hand and hand with 1 to 3 rubber
bands in repeat 80 times experiments
Table 6.13: Hand Peak­Valley different rubber bands mean speed compare
Experiment NO
Condition
Speed(count/min)
1­20
Bare hand
54.08
21­40
1 rubber band
56.55
41­60
2 rubber bands
51.52
61­80
3 rubber bands
37.13
40
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:49==
Table 6.14: P­value of different experiments speed compare by Two­Sample t­Test
Two­Sample t­Test
Bare hand
1 rubber band
2 rubber bands
3 rubber bands
Bare hand
­
0.10
0.11
<0.001
1 rubber band
­
­
<0.01
<0.001
2 rubber bands
­
­
­
<0.001
In different groups of speed tests, the null hypothesis is that the speed of the Peak­Valley
exercise is the same for different conditions of the hand. The expected result is that the
speed of the Peak­Valley exercise of the hand decreases as the rubber band increases.
Two Sample t­test was done to verify whether the means were the same between the two
groups by comparing the means in different conditions.
From the observation of Figure 6.3, it can be seen that the average speed tends to de­
crease with the increase of rubber bands. In Table 6.13, the average speed of Bare hand
and 1 rubber band are close to each other. By Two Sample t­test, the mean values be­
tween different experiments were compared, and only when bare hand was compared
with 1­2 rubber bands respectively, the confidence level was α = 0.10, 0.11 < 0.05 in
Table 6.14, and the original hypothesis could not be rejected. However, when comparing
bare hand with 3 rubber bands, the confidence level is α = 0.00, and the original hypoth­
esis is rejected, indicating that the mean values of the two are significantly different. Also
by Table 6.14, it can be seen that when the rubber bands are above 1, the confidence
level α < 0.05, rejecting the original hypothesis, indicating that the speed decreases with
the increase of rubber bands at 1­3 rubber bands.
6.1.1.4
Registration based group compare
Based on the conclusions of the above repeated experiments under different conditions,
it is concluded that the average area will have better stability after landmark based regis­
tration. Now what is explored here is the impact of choosing different reference groups for
landmark based registration on the stability of experimental results under different rubber
bands in one experiment.
After registration with group1, the peak result In Table 6.15 shows FRE decrease a lot,
e.g. Group1’s FRE sum decrease from 12050.7 to 11.34, which means the 21 hand joints
aligned well after 5 palm joints landmark based registration; the standard deviation(std)
keep at same level or decrease,e.g. the group2 hand area std decrease from 5.44 to
3.68. Due to the translation, rotation and scale by registration, the hand average area
changed. The Figure 4.19 and Figure 4.20 display the progress of group landmark based
registration.
In Figure 6.4, each plot contains the whole group hand area of peak or valley. The regis­
tration progress will reduce the influence of hand move close or far way scale problem like
Figure 4.16 by find optimized translation, rotation, and scale parameters for each peak
and valley landmark.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.4: Group3 hand with one rubber band register to hand with three rubber band
data result. The left column is result before landmark based registration, the right column
is after
Table 6.15: Landmark based registration by 5 palm joint based on Bare Hand
Landmark Type
Peak
Parameter
Before registration
After registration
Avg
area
std
FRE sum
Avg
area
std
FRE sum
Bare hand
53.52
3.01
12050.7
51.36
3.49
11.34
1 rubber band
58.62
5.44
26692
52.46
3.68
47.63
2 rubber bands
46.34
6.14
75256.9
40.59
4.19
205.71
3 rubber bands
25.37
4.27
46701.9
35.85
4.34
106.47
In Table 6.16, despite the decrease in FRE, the small area of the Valley­shaped landmark
cannot be used to analyze the change in hand area of the average user in this case.
However, there is still a potential value in analyzing the area change of the Valley for
special users whose hands cannot be closed. In this experiment, the tester owns a normal
function hand, the later analysis will focus on the hand peak area.
42
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:51==
Table 6.16: Landmark based registration by 5 palm joint based on Group1
Landmark Type
Valley
Parameter
Before registration
After registration
Avg
area
std
FRE sum
Avg
area
std
FRE sum
Bare hand
4
1.25
22580.78
4.24
1.3
189.21
1 rubber band
6.99
1.52
61523.37
5.76
1.42
162.35
2 rubber bands
7.03
2.61
146657.51
4.97
2.35
928.81
3 rubber bands
4.92
1.7
60686.98
5.89
2.36
137.57
Table 6.17: Hand peak area compare based on different register group
Based group
Bare
hand
1
rubber
band
2
rubber
bands
3
rubber
bands
Speed
(count/min)
Bare hand
51.36
54.01
60.34
40.55
38.11
1
rubber
band
52.46
55.31
62.13
41.48
34.99
2
rubber
bands
40.59
42.9
48.35
32.33
31.96
3
rubber
bands
35.85
37.73
42.22
28.62
33.84
To test that the different selection of base projection groups does not affect the final results
of the experiment, the results of the above four experimental groups Figure 5.1 were
projected onto different groups as shown in the Table 6.17. Although there is a significant
change in the hand average area when the landmark of the same group is projected to
different groups; however, when projected to the same group, the hand area can still be
obviously distinguished as the average area of the Peak of the hand decreases gradually
with the increase of the rubber band. Nevertheless, group1 and Group2 showed different
results from the hypothesis, and the expected result was that the average area of the hand
in Group2: the hand with one rubber band should have a smaller hand average area, but
in reality it was slightly larger than Group1 without rubber band restriction. The possible
reason for this observation is that one rubber band is not enough to restrict a normal user
to do simple hand movements of peak and valley. When there is more than one rubber
band, the limitation of hand movement increases significantly and the average area of the
hand peak decreases as expected.
According to the comparison in Table 6.17, each column is the average area of one experi­
ment registered with different experiments. The calculated average area data are multiple
hand peak landmarks for each experiment. To compare the consistency of experimental
results across different average areas after different registrations, two sample t­tests were
performed for each column.
By comparing Table 6.18, Table 6.19, Table 6.20 and Table 6.21, it is observed that the
confidence levels of bare hand and hand with 1 rubber band accept the null hypoth­
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
43
==PAGE:52==
esis, which is their mean peak areas are equal.
Because the confidence level α =
0.39, 0.33, 0.24, 0.36 > 0.05 in four different registrations.
In the rest of cases, the confidence level α = 0.00 < 0.05, and the null hypothesis is
rejected, i.e., the mean values between the two groups are not the same. According
to the comparison of the mean area size in Table 6.17, it can be concluded that when
the rubber bands are increased to more than 2, the peak area of the hand decreases
significantly regardless of the group of data to which the registration is applied.
Table 6.18: P­value of two sample t­test on Landmark based bare hand registration
Two­Sample t­Test
Bare hand
1 rubber band
2 rubber bands
3 rubber bands
Bare hand
­
0.39
<0.001
<0.001
1 rubber band
­
­
<0.001
<0.001
2 rubber bands
­
­
­
<0.01
Table 6.19: P­value of two sample t­test on landmark based 1 rubber band registration
Two­Sample t­Test
Bare hand
1 rubber band
2 rubber bands
3 rubber bands
Bare hand
­
0.33
<0.001
<0.001
1 rubber band
­
­
<0.001
<0.001
2 rubber bands
­
­
­
<0.01
Table 6.20: P­value of two sample t­test on landmark based 2 rubber bands registration
Two­Sample t­Test
Bare hand
1 rubber band
2 rubber bands
3 rubber bands
Bare hand
­
0.24
<0.001
<0.001
1 rubber band
­
­
<0.001
<0.001
2 rubber bands
­
­
­
<0.01
Table 6.21: P­value of two sample t­test on landmark based 3 rubber bands registration
Two­Sample t­Test
Bare hand
1 rubber band
2 rubber bands
3 rubber bands
Bare hand
­
0.36
<0.001
<0.001
1 rubber band
­
­
<0.001
<0.001
2 rubber bands
­
­
­
<0.01
The speed of hand movement decreases, which to some extent satisfies the hypothesis
that the speed decreases with the increase in resistance due to the number of rubber
bands. However, in Group4, the speed did increase relative to Group3. There are two
hypotheses, one is that the speed of hand movement is not only hand, the external force
limit increases and then decreases, the other case is that as the external force limit in­
creases to a certain level, because the hand does not change significantly resulting in an
44
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:53==
increase in the speed of movement, but the overall amplitude of movement is smaller. As
for which the hypothesis is correct, more experimental data are needed to prove it in the
future.
6.1.2
Different people tracking analysis
The second experiment will compare different users’ wear with one or more rubber bands
compared to the bare hand with no any rubber band. The main purpose of this test is to
verify that the hand tracking system can work properly with different users.
There are some testers attending this experiment in Health & Rehabilitation Scandinavia
1 at Copenhagen Bella Center on 2021 November 16th. Health & Rehab Scandinavia
focused on professional knowledge sharing, inspiration and networking in the industry for
assistive technology and welfare technology. My project as part of DTU management re­
habilitation projects attend this exhibition.The main purpose of attending the show was to
get feedback from different user groups on hand dexterity assessments that were tracked
and recorded over time. Figure 6.5 is on site and different participants attended in the
experimental tests. The following is the feedback from different testers.
Figure 6.5: Participants of different types and ages. Left: I am introducing an older person
to the theory of how Hand tracking works. Right top: I am giving a presentation to a young
woman in a wheelchair on how to participate in the experiment and how to understand the
results. Right bottom: A healthy young woman showing a keen interest in Hand tracking
as I am introducing how to participate in the experiment.
The elderly(Figure 6.5:Left): As individuals grow older, there is an urgent need for daily
body monitoring systems to help them understand changes in their physical status. The
probability of stroke increases with age, and stroke detection has always been complex
and requires visits to professional physicians. However, as an older adult, frequent visits
to the doctor can increase the risk and cost of travel. The older adults in A showed strong
interest in MediaPipe hand tracking. The reasons are: First, although the test was con­
ducted using a computer at the time, it could be migrated to a smartphone in the future.
Convenient, high­frequency and independent daily health tracking is important for the
daily use of older people. Second, compared with a smartwatch that can detect heartbeat
and oxygen saturation, our method can detect hand dexterity by external motion, which is
1https://www.health­rehab.dk/
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
45
==PAGE:54==
very attractive for elderly people with self­examine, and does not require the purchase of
additional testing equipment, reducing the cost of use. Thirdly, the experimental results
detected in this experiment can be compared to make the elderly users understand the
purpose of the test visually. At present, there is no relevant, simple and effective testing
method for the elderly to use in daily life.
The lady in the wheelchair(Figure 6.5:Right top): also expressed great interest in hand
tracking because of the importance of the hand in life. Despite being in a wheelchair and
participating in this activity, the results of the experiment showed her that hand dexterity
can be recorded and compared by capturing the position of joints through artificial intel­
ligence methods, and that data related to hand movement can be calculated and output
through computers and mobile phones. This approach could be of great help in assist­
ing those in need of rehabilitation to independently determine the health status of their
hands. If this technology is widely used in mobile phone software in the future, it will be
more convenient for different people to use.
Lady(Figure 6.5:Right bottom): Because what was presented in the table caught her at­
tention, despite having healthy hands now, in the future each person will have decreased
hand dexterity as they grow older or suffer from disease. There are no existing methods
that can easily and directly measure hand dexterity quantitatively and track it over time.
After her introduction to the program, she was able to understand that when hand stretch
is limited by the rubber band, the speed of hand movement and the area of the hand will
be affected. For normal people, the topic of concern for physical health still occupies an
important place in life. She said she would increase her attention to the development of
artificial intelligence body motion capture technology and its impact on the lives of ordinary
people.
In this experiment, the process of user participation throughout the experiment is divided
into four main steps.
1. explain to the test the reason why hand tracking is needed: to achieve a low­cost
real­time tracking solution to help elderly stroke patients track the health status of
their hands on a long­term scale.
2. introduce to the user how to do the Peak of hand and Valley’s exercise, and then
start the project to record the landmark of hand. after the recording, introduce to the
user, the fundamental information of the recording: recording duration, data size
and anonymous storage method.
3. Let the user conduct a second experiment, this time to simulate the restricted hand
movement, and give the user one or more rubber bands to simulate this situation.
After the user gets used to it, give the user to start recording the landmark of the
hand for the second time.
4. Explain to the user the results of the change in hand speed and hand area be­
tween the two exercises, and the theoretical process of how to get the results. Then
re­present the stored landmark data to the user, informing that the data is stored
anonymously and does not contain any user photos. After obtaining the user’s con­
sent, an agreement is signed for the donation of the data for scientific use.
Data in the Table 6.22 were collected at Health & Rehab Scandinavia from users of differ­
ent ages and genders. In total, ten data were collected from participant donations, five of
which could be used for experimental analysis. The other reasons for not being able to be
used for analysis are: first, the users could not proficiently perform the Hand Peak and Val­
46
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:55==
Table 6.22: Different people two group experiments hand Peak compare
Experiment
condition
Bare hand (Peak)
Hand with rubber band (Peak)
Group
Area
before
Area
after
Speed
Area
before
Area af­
ter
Speed
1
25.97
25.77
12.48
8.86
14.93
14.9
2
71.89
50.71
40.4
73.57
47.79
16.02
3
49.4
40.41
45.33
22.71
24.2
65.39
4
24.18
25.38
49.56
9.81
9.75
39.89
5
30.8
37.45
50.73
24.1
33.37
48.71
Table 6.23: P­value of different participants two group experiments compare
Participants
Before registration
After registration
1
<0.001
<0.01
2
0.81
0.71
3
<0.001
<0.001
4
<0.001
<0.001
5
<0.01
0.01
ley exercise in their first experience; second, there were complex lights and objects in the
background, which affected the judgment of the model; third, the occasional passerby’s
hand would replace the tester’s, which had a considerable impact on the experimental
results. The improvement measure is to introduce the project to the user and then let the
user try hand tracking first, and then let the user participate in the formal experimental
analysis when the user is adept.
The results of five different participating users were analyzed to detect whether the aver­
age landmark area recorded by MediaPipe before and after landmark based registration
is satisfied by the reduction of the average landmark area after wearing rubber bands.
The null hypothesis was tested by conducting two sample t­tests for each participant,
for both before and after registration, to see if they had the same mean value in Ta­
ble 6.22. Only the null hypothesis for participant 2 was accepted, with a confidence level
of α = 0.81 > 0.05 in Table 6.23. Although the area of the hand in the second experiment
with rubber bands was smaller than the first group of bare hand, the area was closer,
50.71 > 57.79 from Table 6.22. The other four participants had a confidence level of
α = 0.00 < 0.05 in Table 6.23, and the area difference was larger, that means MediaPipe
hand landmark tracking can measure the decrease of hand dexterity change when the
area difference is larger.
6.1.3
Mirror hand data analysis
In the 80 replicate experiments, the hand valley area of this experiment was not analyzed
primarily because only the hand peak area had significant data differences. In Figure 6.6,
the blue line before landmark based registration has large fluctuations; after landmark
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
47
==PAGE:56==
based registration, the stability of the experimental area under different conditions is im­
proved. By observing Figure 6.6, it can be concluded that the peak area of the right hand
is higher than that of the left hand under the same conditions. The same conclusion can
be drawn in Table 6.24 by comparing the data directly. That is, the bare hand peak area
of the right hand is larger than that of the left hand; the peak area of the right hand with 2
rubber bands is also larger than that of the left hand.
Figure 6.6: Left and right hand repeat experiments’ peak area compare, each condition
repeat 20 times, the total experiments is 80 times.
In Table 6.25, although the average area of the bare hand peak area of the right hand is
larger than that of the left hand, the P­value of this data set is α = 0.13 > 0.05, and the
confidence level cannot pass the two­sample t­test experiment. However, the confidence
level of α = 0.00 < 0.05 for the right hand with 2 rubber bands indicates that the original
hypothesis is not true and there is a difference in the average area of the left hand and
right hand. The Peak area of the right hand was greater, indicating that the dexterity of
the right hand extension is greater than that of the left hand.
Table 6.24: Left and right hand Peak before and after landmark based registration and
speed of 20 times repeat experiments, the total experiments number is 80 times.
Experiment
Hand Peak mean data
Condition
Area
before
Area
after
Speed
Left bare hand
70.00
101.71
54.08
left 2 rubber bands
36.40
73.12
51.52
Right bare hand
38.84
110.20
65.72
Right 2 rubber bands
21.55
81.63
50.80
Through the observation of the average speed in Figure 6.7 and the actual speed in Fig­
ure 6.6, the basic conclusion is that the speed of the right bare hand is the highest. Mean­
48
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:57==
Table 6.25: P­value of two sample t­test on left and right hand area compare after land­
mark based registration
Two­Sample t­Test
Left bare hand
left 2 rubber bands
Right bare hand
Right 2 rubber bands
Left bare hand
­
<0.001
0.13
<0.001
left 2 rubber bands
­
­
<0.001
<0.01
Right bare hand
­
­
­
<0.001
while, the p­value of the right bare hand compared with the left hand was α = 0.00 < 0.05
by the two­sample t­test in Table 6.26, indicating a significant difference between the mean
values of the two. Although there was no significant difference in the p­value of the 2 rub­
ber bands, the movement speed of the right hand was higher than that of the left hand
when combined with the actual situation without the limitation of rubber bands.
This comparison experiment of the peak area and speed of the right and left hands can
help the rehabilitation physiotherapist or physician to better determine the changes in the
motion of the right and left hands of stroke patients and give better rehabilitation advice
in time.
Figure 6.7: Left and right hand speed compare at different conditions,each condition re­
peat 20 times, the total experiments is 80 times.
Table 6.26: P­value of two sample t­test on left and right hand speed compare
Two­Sample t­Test
Left bare hand
left 2 rubber bands
Right bare hand
Right 2 rubber bands
Left bare hand
­
0.11
<0.001
0.06
left 2 rubber bands
­
­
<0.001
0.71
Right bare hand
­
­
­
<0.001
6.2
Dumb­bell exercise analysis
In this experiment, by conducting 10 replicate experiments for each of the three load
conditions, the total number of experiments is 30. The average speed of each individual
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
49
==PAGE:58==
experiment was recorded separately, and the average speed of all experiments is shown
in Table 6.27. The average speed fluctuates under different conditions, and combined
with the data in Table 6.27, it is known that the speed of the exercise decreases as the
load increases. According to the P­value analysis in Table 6.28, when heavy load, the
confidence water product P­value α = 0.00, 0.047 < 0.05. The original hypothesis is
not true, which means no load, light load, and heavy load have different mean values.
However, the average speed of no load and light load, despite 36.23>35.65, has the
same mean speed due to the close values because of P­value 0.74>0.05. The original
hypothesis is true and both have the same mean value.
Figure 6.8: Mean speed of dumb­bell experiments in three different conditions: no load,
light load and heavy load.
Table 6.27: Mean speed data in dumb­bell experiment
Condition
Experiments number
Speed
No load
1­10
36.23
Light load
11­20
35.65
Heavy load
21­30
31.83
Table 6.28: P­value of two sample t­test for mean speed compare in dumb­bell experiment
Two­Sample t­Test
No load
Light load
Heavy load
No load
­
0.74
<0.01
Light load
­
­
0.047
In summary, the MediaPipe Pose model can track the change in arm muscle strength by
calculating the mean speed of dumb­bell movement only when the load is increased to a
certain weight.
50
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:59==
7
Discussion
This thesis explores different methods of hand tracking and finally settles on using a Me­
diaPipe based deep learning approach to track hand and body movement data. Because
it works smoothly on mobile devices such as laptops, smartphones, and tablets, users do
not need to spend extra money on the device and the tracking results are real­time and
accurate. This provides convenience and reduces the burden of daily use for users. By
creating a digital twin for stroke patients, the landmarks of the user’s hand and body can
be collected in real time. The concept of Digital twin assistant sysmten is used to manage
the interaction of data between virtual and real. The core contribution of this thesis is to
provide a method that enables the quantification of body movement data that can be col­
lected independently for stroke patients to help motivate and understand the changes in
their physical condition. It also provides rehabilitation trainers and physicians with a better
overview of changes in the patient’s physical condition over time, avoiding the influence
of subjective factors through a quantitative approach.
The Landmark base registration method compares the hand area of different experiments
to analyze changes in hand dexterity. Three different experiments were conducted to
examine the stability of the method under different conditions.
In Experiment 1, 80 sets of experimental data were analyzed by comparing four sets of 0­
3 rubber bands. The data was taken from the same hand of the same user and repeated
20 times in each condition, the first 10 times the hand was fixed in the same position,
and the other 10 times the hand would do peak­valley exercise at different distances from
the camera to simulate the uncertainty of the distance of each experiment in reality. The
mean area and velocity of the hands were cross­compared between different groups,
combined with two sample t­tests. It was concluded that the hand mean area based on
landmark based registration has better stability under different conditions. The change of
hand dexterity when wearing different rubber bands can be distinguished more accurately.
In this experiment, the landmark based registration was also performed on four groups
wearing different numbers of rubber bands from 0 to 3. The experimental results showed
that the same conclusion was reached regardless of the group to which the registration
was applied. More than two rubber bands significantly reduced the average peak area of
the hand. Similarly, for the analysis of speed, there is a similar conclusion that more than
one rubber band will weaken the speed of the hand doing peak­valley exercise.
In Experiment 2, the tests of bare hand and hand with rubber bands were conducted
with five different users. It can be concluded that although the mean hand of one of the
five different users failed the two sample t­test test, the remaining four users satisfied the
statistical test. It shows that the method provided in this thesis is applicable to different
people in most cases.
In Experiment 3, for the same user’s left and right hand, 20 experiments were repeated in
the bare hand and hand with 2 rubber bands cases for the left and right hand, respectively,
for a total of 80 experiments. Although the value of the peak area right hand was greater in
the case of bare hand, the average value failed to pass the test experiment. That does not
indicate that the flexibility in the right hand is greater than that in the left hand. However, in
the case of the hand with 2 rubber bands, the peak area of the right hand was significantly
larger than that of the left hand. This experiment shows that the mirror hand can be used
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
51
==PAGE:60==
to detect the difference between the user’s left and right hand dexterity. It can help stroke
patients to compare the changes of left and right hand dexterity.
In the dumb­bell exercise experiment, 30 repetitions of no load, light load and heavy load
were compared with cross­averages for the same test participant. Then after two sample
t­tests, it was concluded that the MediaPipe Pose model can capture the landmark of the
body and calculate the movement speed to infer the arm muscle movement state when
the arm movement is limited by large external forces.
In the experiments of performance testing, hand area tracking and dumbbell motion delay
were tested. Although it can be concluded that both methods are stable in real life and
can get stable body and hand landmarks while wearing LEGO exoskeleton equipment and
normal clothes, the latency was 80­180 ms and the frame rate was 4­10 FPS. Although
the running speed does not exceed the ideal of 30 FPS, it is still possible to record and
analyze the experimental results on mobile devices.
The digital twin assistant system can be combined with the three experimental methods
mentioned in this thesis to obtain the basic data of the body landmark. This system can
analyze changes in the flexibility of one hand and both hands over time by hand tracking.
The user monitors the usual dumbbell movement through a mobile device, which can be
used to compare changes in arm muscle strength. Changes in the physical condition
of stroke patients can be detected in time by the data provided by the DTA system. It
can also be used to provide feedback on the status of physical flexibility improvement
after rehabilitation training. The data accumulated over time also provides rehabilitation
trainers and physicians with quantitative data references on the physical movement status
of stroke patients.
The method explored in this paper has some weaknesses. In both the experiments of
hand tracking one­handed and left­ and right­handed comparisons, it takes more than 2
rubber bands for the average area and movement speed of the hand to be significantly
different. This indicates that the method cannot accurately detect the change in hand
dexterity, but only when there is a large change in hand dexterity. In the dumbbell exercise
experiment, there was no significant difference in speed between the no load and small
load comparison experiments. When using a big load, the system detects a significant
change in speed. The method used in this experiment can provide a basic reference for
rehabilitation. For more advanced testing, it is still necessary to conduct other tests with
the guidance of professionals.
The thesis uses these data to provide digital twin data support for stroke patients by estab­
lishing different methods to obtain different body data. The hand landmark data is used to
compare the hand area using landmark based registration, combined with the peek­valley
movement speed to evaluate hand dexterity. The velocity test of the dumbbell movement
also allows the stroke patient to understand the strength changes of the arm muscles.
Because these are quantitative data, direct comparisons can be made directly through
numerical magnitudes rather than individual subjective perceptions. Thus, it helps stroke
patients to develop better scientific rehabilitation training.
52
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:61==
8
Conclusion
This thesis measures hand dexterity and arm strength changes through three different
experiments based on the MediaPipe hand and pose models. The aim is to help stroke
patients to better assess their rehabilitation training. In the hand traking experiment, it was
concluded that when there was a substantial change in hand dexterity, it was known by
observing the resultant change in hand area and speed. In the dumbbell exercise experi­
ment, the change in movement speed was obtained by observing different load situations.
It can be learned that when the load is large enough, the movement speed of the arm de­
creases significantly. Although the performance analysis experiments were performed on
a laptop with high latency, the change in body flexibility could still be analyzed. Although
the accuracy is not as high as professional equipment, it is still a cheap and convenient
way to test the flexibility of the body for patients at home using mobile devices.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
53
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[1]
W. H. Organization, The world health report 2003: shaping the future. World Health
Organization, 2003.
[2]
R. Bonita, S. Mendis, T. Truelsen, J. Bogousslavsky, J. Toole, and F. Yatsu, “The
global stroke initiative,” The Lancet Neurology, vol. 3, no. 7, pp. 391–393, 2004.
[3]
V. Parker, D. Wade, and R. L. Hewer, “Loss of arm function after stroke: Measure­
ment, frequency, and recovery,” International rehabilitation medicine, vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 69–73, 1986.
[4]
A. El Saddik, “Digital twins: The convergence of multimedia technologies,” IEEE
multimedia, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 87–92, 2018.
[5]
R. I. Hartley and P. Sturm, “Triangulation,” Computer vision and image understand­
ing, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 146–157, 1997.
[6]
M. Kolsch and M. Turk, “Fast 2d hand tracking with flocks of features and multi­
cue integration,” in 2004 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshop, IEEE, 2004, pp. 158–158.
[7]
M. Kölsch and M. A. Turk, “Robust hand detection.,” in FGR, vol. 4, 2004, pp. 614–
619.
[8]
W. Hürst and C. Van Wezel, “Gesture­based interaction via finger tracking for mobile
augmented reality,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 233–258,
2013.
[9]
Y. Jang, S.­T. Noh, H. J. Chang, T.­K. Kim, and W. Woo, “3d finger cape: Clicking
action and position estimation under self­occlusions in egocentric viewpoint,” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 501–510,
2015.
[10]
R.­H. Liang and M. Ouhyoung, “A real­time continuous gesture recognition system
for sign language,” in Proceedings third IEEE international conference on automatic
face and gesture recognition, IEEE, 1998, pp. 558–567.
[11]
A. Markussen, M. R. Jakobsen, and K. Hornbæk, “Vulture: A mid­air word­gesture
keyboard,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Com­
puting Systems, 2014, pp. 1073–1082.
[12]
S. Sridhar, A. M. Feit, C. Theobalt, and A. Oulasvirta, “Investigating the dexterity
of multi­finger input for mid­air text entry,” in Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2015, pp. 3643–3652.
[13]
T. Starner, J. Weaver, and A. Pentland, “Real­time american sign language recogni­
tion using desk and wearable computer based video,” IEEE Transactions on pattern
analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 1371–1375, 1998.
[14]
M. Kurien, M.­K. Kim, M. Kopsida, and I. Brilakis, “Real­time simulation of construc­
tion workers using combined human body and hand tracking for robotic construction
worker system,” Automation in Construction, vol. 86, pp. 125–137, 2018.
[15]
L. T. Taverne, M. Cognolato, T. Bützer, R. Gassert, and O. Hilliges, “Video­based
prediction of hand­grasp preshaping with application to prosthesis control,” in 2019
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE, 2019, pp. 4975–
4982.
[16]
F. Zhang, V. Bazarevsky, A. Vakunov, A. Tkachenka, G. Sung, C.­L. Chang, and M.
Grundmann, “MediaPipe Hands: On­device Real­time Hand Tracking,” 2020. arXiv:
2006.10214. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.10214.
54
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:63==
[17]
N. Omarkulov, K. Telegenov, M. Zeinullin, I. Tursynbek, and A. Shintemirov, “Prelim­
inary mechanical design of nu­wrist: A 3­dof self­aligning wrist rehabilitation robot,”
in 2016 6th IEEE international conference on biomedical robotics and biomecha­
tronics (BioRob), IEEE, 2016, pp. 962–967.
[18]
I. Oikonomidis, N. Kyriazis, and A. A. Argyros, “Efficient model­based 3d tracking
of hand articulations using kinect.,” in BmVC, vol. 1, 2011, p. 3.
[19]
C. Xu and L. Cheng, “Efficient hand pose estimation from a single depth image,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2013,
pp. 3456–3462.
[20]
S. Sridhar, A. Oulasvirta, and C. Theobalt, “Interactive markerless articulated hand
motion tracking using rgb and depth data,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision, 2013, pp. 2456–2463.
[21]
C. Qian, X. Sun, Y. Wei, X. Tang, and J. Sun, “Realtime and robust hand tracking
from depth,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2014, pp. 1106–1113.
[22]
S. Khamis, J. Taylor, J. Shotton, C. Keskin, S. Izadi, and A. Fitzgibbon, “Learning an
efficient model of hand shape variation from depth images,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2015, pp. 2540–2548.
[23]
L. Ge, H. Liang, J. Yuan, and D. Thalmann, “Robust 3d hand pose estimation in
single depth images: From single­view cnn to multi­view cnns,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 3593–
3601.
[24]
S. Yuan, G. Garcia­Hernando, B. Stenger, G. Moon, J. Y. Chang, K. M. Lee, P.
Molchanov, J. Kautz, S. Honari, L. Ge, et al., “Depth­based 3d hand pose estimation:
From current achievements to future goals,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 2636–2645.
[25]
S. Li and D. Lee, “Point­to­pose voting based hand pose estimation using resid­
ual permutation equivariant layer,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 11 927–11 936.
[26]
J. Malik, I. Abdelaziz, A. Elhayek, S. Shimada, S. A. Ali, V. Golyanik, C. Theobalt,
and D. Stricker, “Handvoxnet: Deep voxel­based network for 3d hand shape and
pose estimation from a single depth map,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer­
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 7113–7122.
[27]
L. Fang, X. Liu, L. Liu, H. Xu, and W. Kang, “Jgr­p2o: Joint graph reasoning based
pixel­to­offset prediction network for 3d hand pose estimation from a single depth
image,” in European Conference on Computer Vision, Springer, 2020, pp. 120–137.
[28]
L. Huang, J. Tan, J. Meng, J. Liu, and J. Yuan, “Hot­net: Non­autoregressive trans­
former for 3d hand­object pose estimation,” in Proceedings of the 28th ACM Inter­
national Conference on Multimedia, 2020, pp. 3136–3145.
[29]
L. Huang, J. Tan, J. Liu, and J. Yuan, “Hand­transformer: Non­autoregressive struc­
tured modeling for 3d hand pose estimation,” in European Conference on Computer
Vision, Springer, 2020, pp. 17–33.
[30]
“Accurate, robust, and flexible realtime hand tracking,” Conf. Hum. Factors Comput.
Syst. ­ Proc., vol. 2015­April, pp. 3633–3642, 2015. DOI: 10.1145/2702123.2702179.
[31]
L. Ballan, A. Taneja, J. Gall, L. Van Gool, and M. Pollefeys, “Motion capture of hands
in action using discriminative salient points,” in European Conference on Computer
Vision, Springer, 2012, pp. 640–653.
[32]
F. Gomez­Donoso, S. Orts­Escolano, and M. Cazorla, “Large­scale multiview 3d
hand pose dataset,” Image and Vision Computing, vol. 81, pp. 25–33, 2019.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
55
==PAGE:64==
[33]
R. Wang, S. Paris, and J. Popović, “6d hands: Markerless hand­tracking for com­
puter aided design,” in Proceedings of the 24th annual ACM symposium on User
interface software and technology, 2011, pp. 549–558.
[34]
T. Simon, H. Joo, I. Matthews, and Y. Sheikh, “Hand keypoint detection in single
images using multiview bootstrapping,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp. 1145–1153.
[35]
M. Kurien, M.­K. Kim, M. Kopsida, and I. Brilakis, “Real­time simulation of construc­
tion workers using combined human body and hand tracking for robotic construction
worker system,” Automation in Construction, vol. 86, pp. 125–137, 2018.
[36]
F. Mueller, F. Bernard, O. Sotnychenko, D. Mehta, S. Sridhar, D. Casas, and C.
Theobalt, “GANerated Hands for Real­Time 3D Hand Tracking from Monocular
RGB,” Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., pp. 49–59,
2018, ISSN: 10636919. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00013. arXiv: 1712.01057.
[37]
S. Han, B. Liu, R. Cabezas, C. D. Twigg, P. Zhang, J. Petkau, T. H. Yu, C. J. Tai,
M. Akbay, Z. Wang, A. Nitzan, G. Dong, Y. Ye, L. Tao, C. Wan, and R. Wang,
“MEgATrack: Monochrome Egocentric Articulated Hand­Tracking for Virtual Re­
ality,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 39, no. 4, 2020, ISSN: 15577368. DOI: 10.1145/
3386569.3392452.
[38]
V. Bazarevsky, I. Grishchenko, K. Raveendran, T. Zhu, F. Zhang, and M. Grund­
mann, “Blazepose: On­device real­time body pose tracking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10204,
2020.
[39]
Y. Wang and Y. Liu, “IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR
VIDEO TECHNOLOGY 1 Mask­pose Cascaded CNN for 2D Hand Pose Estimation
from Single Color Image,” pp. 1–11, [Online]. Available: http://www.yangangwang.
com..
[40]
D. Kulon, R. A. Güler, I. Kokkinos, M. Bronstein, and S. Zafeiriou, “Weakly­supervised
mesh­convolutional hand reconstruction in the wild,” Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., pp. 4989–4999, 2020, ISSN: 10636919. DOI: 10.
1109/CVPR42600.2020.00504. arXiv: 2004.01946.
[41]
G. Moon, S. I. Yu, H. Wen, T. Shiratori, and K. M. Lee, “InterHand2.6M: A Dataset
and Baseline for 3D Interacting Hand Pose Estimation from a Single RGB Image,”
Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes
Bioinformatics), vol. 12365 LNCS, pp. 548–564, 2020, ISSN: 16113349. DOI: 10.
1007/978-3-030-58565-5_33. arXiv: 2008.09309.
[42]
X. Zhang, H. Huang, J. Tan, H. Xu, C. Yang, G. Peng, L. Wang, and J. Liu, “Hand
image understanding via deep multi­task learning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 11 281–11 292.
[43]
C. Zimmermann, D. Ceylan, J. Yang, B. Russell, M. J. Argus, and T. Brox, “Frei­
HAND: A dataset for markerless capture of hand pose and shape from single rgb
images,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., vol. 2019­Octob, pp. 813–822, 2019,
ISSN: 15505499. DOI: 10.1109/ICCV.2019.00090. arXiv: 1909.04349.
[44]
F. Mueller, D. Mehta, O. Sotnychenko, S. Sridhar, D. Casas, and C. Theobalt, “Real­
Time Hand Tracking Under Occlusion from an Egocentric RGB­D Sensor,” Proc. ­
2017 IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Work. ICCVW 2017, vol. 2018­Janua, pp. 1284–
1293, 2017. DOI: 10.1109/ICCVW.2017.82.
[45]
S. Brahmbhatt, C. Tang, C. D. Twigg, C. C. Kemp, and J. Hays, “Contactpose: A
dataset of grasps with object contact and hand pose,” in Computer Vision–ECCV
2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings,
Part XIII 16, Springer, 2020, pp. 361–378.
56
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:65==
[46]
S. Yuan, Q. Ye, B. Stenger, S. Jain, and T.­K. Kim, “Bighand2. 2m benchmark: Hand
pose dataset and state of the art analysis,” pp. 4866–4874, 2017.
[47]
R. Y. Wang and J. Popović, “Real­time hand­tracking with a color glove,” ACM Trans.
Graph., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1–8, 2009, ISSN: 07300301. DOI: 10.1145/1531326.
1531369.
[48]
F. Farahanipad, M. Rezaei, A. Dillhoff, F. Kamangar, and V. Athitsos, “A pipeline for
hand 2­d keypoint localization using unpaired image to image translation,” pp. 226–
233, 2021.
[49]
J.­Y. Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Unpaired image­to­image translation
using cycle­consistent adversarial networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Interna­
tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Oct. 2017.
[50]
F. Tao, H. Zhang, A. Liu, and A. Y. Nee, “Digital Twin in Industry: State­of­the­Art,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2405–2415, 2019,
ISSN: 15513203. DOI: 10.1109/TII.2018.2873186.
[51]
P. Hehenberger and D. Bradley, “Mechatronic futures: Challenges and solutions for
mechatronic systems and their designers,” Mechatronic Futures: Challenges and
Solutions for Mechatronic Systems and Their Designers, pp. 1–259, 2016. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-32156-1.
[52]
R. Gámez Dı́az, Q. Yu, Y. Ding, F. Laamarti, and A. El Saddik, “Digital twin coaching
for physical activities: A survey,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 20, p. 5936, 2020.
[53]
C. Lugaresi, J. Tang, H. Nash, C. McClanahan, E. Uboweja, M. Hays, F. Zhang, C.­L.
Chang, M. G. Yong, J. Lee, et al., “Mediapipe: A framework for building perception
pipelines,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08172, 2019.
[54]
W. Liu, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, C. Szegedy, S. Reed, C. Y. Fu, and A. C. Berg,
“SSD: Single shot multibox detector,” Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (including Subser.
Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics), vol. 9905 LNCS, pp. 21–37,
2016, ISSN: 16113349. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0_2. arXiv: 1512.02325.
[55]
E. Haber and J. Modersitzki, “A multilevel method for image registration,” SIAM
journal on scientific computing, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1594–1607, 2006.
[56]
I. L. Dryden and K. V. Mardia, Statistical shape analysis: with applications in R. John
Wiley & Sons, 2016, vol. 995.
[57]
K. V. Leemput and R. Larsen, 22525 Course Note Medical Image Analysis. 2020,
pp. 17–21.
[58]
P. H. Schönemann, “A generalized solution of the orthogonal procrustes problem,”
Psychometrika, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 1966.
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
57
==PAGE:66==
A
Appendices
A.1
Hand area data
Table A.1: Landmark based registration by 5 palm joint based on Group2
Landmark Type
Peak
Parameter
Before registration
After registration
Avg
area
std
FRE sum
Avg
area
std
FRE sum
Bare hand
53.52
3.01
47681.6
54.01
3.68
39.67
1 rubber band
58.62
5.44
13880
55.31
3.88
19.2
2 rubber bands
46.34
6.14
71920.1
42.9
4.46
146.25
3 rubber bands
25.37
4.27
93945.9
37.73
4.58
123.59
Table A.2: Landmark based registration by 5 palm joint based on Group4
Landmark Type
Peak
Parameter
Before registration
After registration
Avg
area
std
FRE sum
Avg
area
std
FRE sum
Bare hand
53.52
3.01
35329.9
60.34
4.16
194.53
1 rubber band
58.62
5.44
31354.5
62.13
4.37
48.88
2 rubber bands
46.34
6.14
103902
48.35
5.11
120.04
3 rubber bands
25.37
4.27
102859
42.22
5.15
258.11
Table A.3: Landmark based registration by 5 palm joint based on Group2
Landmark Type
Peak
Parameter
Before registration
After registration
Avg
area
std
FRE sum
Avg
area
std
FRE
sum
Bare hand
53.52
3.01
4459.24
40.55
2.75
128.4
1 rubber band
58.62
5.44
56633.6
41.48
2.89
134.5
2 rubber bands
46.34
6.14
106501
32.33
3.33
146.95
3 rubber bands
25.37
4.27
43033.7
28.62
3.52
32.59
58
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
==PAGE:67==
Table A.4: Landmark based registration by 5 palm joint based on Group3
Landmark Type
Valley
Parameter
Before registration
After registration
Avg
area
std
FRE sum
Avg
area
std
FRE sum
Bare hand
4
1.25
79489.24
4.76
1.44
118.59
1 rubber band
6.99
1.52
20085.37
6.49
1.59
60.9
2 rubber bands
7.03
2.61
86174.3
5.64
2.58
816.07
3 rubber bands
4.92
1.7
82105.11
6.64
2.67
52.74
Table A.5: Landmark based registration by 5 palm joint based on Group4
Landmark Type
Valley
Parameter
Before registration
After registration
Avg
area
std
FRE sum
Avg
area
std
FRE sum
Bare hand
4
1.25
70303.91
6.8
2.04
91.98
1 rubber band
6.99
1.52
5280.12
9.24
2.25
64.1
2 rubber bands
7.03
2.61
42217.63
8.01
3.7
1206.75
3 rubber bands
4.92
1.7
49916.95
9.47
3.82
33.65
Table A.6: Four group hand speed analysis
Landmark Type
Meanspeed
Peak
Valley
Parameter
Speed
(count/min)
Real
Original
noise
Speed
(count/min)
Real
Original
noise
Group1
bare band
38.11
38.41
17
38
21
37.8
17
37
20
Group2
single
rubber
band
34.99
35.27
17
35
18
34.71
17
34
17
Group3
two
rubber
band
31.96
31.95
16
47
31
31.96
15
46
31
Group4
three
rubber
band
33.84
37.09
18
54
36
30.59
15
53
38
Hand tracking and interaction by computer vision for patients rehabilitation
59
==PAGE:68==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygning 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
