==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis:
Global models of substorm dynamics from
satellite magnetic field measurements
Author:
Marie Vigger Eldor - s164051
Supervisors:
Prof. Christopher Charles Finlay (DTU)
Postdoc Clemens Kloss (DTU)
Date: January 2, 2022
DTU Space
The National Space Institute
Cover photo: Combination of ESA images https://www.esa.int/ESA_Multimedia/Missions/Swarm/(sortBy)/view_
count/(result_type)/images & https://www.esa.int/ESA_Multimedia/Keywords/Description/Aurora_Borealis/(result_
type)/videos
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This thesis presents a model of the ionospheric currents for geomagnetically disturbed
times based on data from the satellite mission Swarm accompanied by auxiliary data on
solar wind conditions and data from ground magnetometers. The model is derived using
the ionospheric currents modelling procedure of AMPS (Laundal, Finlay, Olsen, and Reis-
tad 2018) and is implemented in the Python software Multifit (Kloss 2021). The SML
index is a measure of the auroral electrojet activity derived from ground magnetometers;
in a departure from the original AMPS approach it is here included as an additional input
and found to be a crucial controlling parameter for the models presented.
Using ESA’s Swarm satellite mission magnetic data from the years 2014 to 2017 was used
to produce a series of models of the horizontal divergence-free ionospheric currents (DFC)
and field-aligned currents (FAC). These models were derived using a robust regularised
least squares method. It is shown to be possible, using this approach, to model the radial
component of the ionospheric field, Bion
r
during disturbed conditions, to an accuracy within
40-50nT. However modelling the southward Bion
θ
and eastward Bion
ϕ
field components is
found to be more diﬀicult due to the influence of the highly dynamic and small-scale FACs
that are not well captured by the model. During a large substorm event, the models show
that the structures of the DFCs evolve as the time progresses. At the beginning of the
substorm the DFCs have a very complex pattern but as time elapses the pattern starts
aligning with the FACs and gains a more defined structure where the negative parts of the
DFC gather around the upward FAC and the positive parts of the DFC gather around the
downward FAC. The model also shows, as expected, that the maximum amplitude of the
horizontal sheet current density of the ionosphere, moves southwards to lower magnetic
latitudes during the substorm.
For validation purposes the model predictions are compared to independent data from the
satellite and ground observatories. The results of this comparison show that the model
predictions follow the same general patterns as the independent satellite data although it
fails to reach the same amplitudes. This may partly be a consequence of the model lacking
information concerning substorm activity due to the relatively short timespan of the input
Swarm data. By expanding the dataset it should be possible to better train the algorithm
to model substorm dynamics by basing it on a wider range of events. The comparison to
ground observatory data shows that the model deviates significantly, both in amplitude
and pattern, from the measured data. This is due to unresolved small scales or non-typical
dynamical features in any given substorm and the un-modelled induced currents in the
mantle. In future models it is recommended to include ground observatory data along with
satellite data when deriving the model, to account for the induced currents, and to consider
including new input parameters e.g. the amount of open magnetospheric flux. It is also
discovered that the chosen a-priori data error, σ = 40nT, seems to be an underestimate
for the components Bion
θ
and Bion
ϕ ; it is suggested to apply individual a-priori errors to
ii
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:3==
the different field components in the future. The distributions of residuals, between model
and Swarm data, appear to be Laplacian distributed, whereas Huber weights were used in
this thesis. It is recommended to investigate whether a Laplacian weighting-scheme could
improve the accuracy of the model.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my two supervisors Chris Finlay and Clemens Kloss for their knowl-
edge, guidance, and support during these last five months, I have been very happy to be a
student of yours. I would also like to thank the division of Geomagnetism and Geospace
for creating a very welcoming environment and a special thanks to Anna Willer for intro-
ducing me to the world of geomagnetism and space weather. Also thank you to my friend
and colleague Linda Christoffersen for your bold feedback and good company. Finally a
huge thank you to my parents for supporting me in every way throughout my education.
iv
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Earth’s magnetic field - background theory
6
2.1
Magnetic sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Internal sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
External sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Geomagnetic disturbances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Substorms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Magnetic activity indices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Representing the ionospheric current system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Apex coordinate systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
The geomagnetic elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.3
Maxwell’s equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.4
Modelling the ionospheric magnetic field: AMPS . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Model parameter estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4.1
Multifit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Observations
20
3.1
Swarm data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Ground stations and observatories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Data selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.1
Selection of disturbed conditions using SML index . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Results
29
4.1
A model of the polar ionospheric field during disturbed conditions
. . . . .
29
4.1.1
Model setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.2
Fit of model to Swarm data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.3
Typical model properties and ionospheric currents during disturbed
conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Dynamics during substorms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Comparison with independent observations during an example substorm
event . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.1
Comparison to independent satellite data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.2
Ground observatory comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4
Testing alternative datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
v
==PAGE:6==
5
Discussion
48
5.1
Fit of Model A to Swarm data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
Evaluation of model performance under typical conditions . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
Evaluation of model performance during substorms . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4
Fit of Model A to independent data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
Controlling factors in the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.6
The influence of data selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.7
Recommendations and Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
A Model construction and setup
57
A.1 Regularisation of FAC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.2 Choice of truncation level m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.3 Choice of truncation level n . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.4 Test of convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.5 Test of a-priori data error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.6 Construction of Model B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
B Scripts
65
vi
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:7==
Chapter1
Introduction
For centuries scientists have tried to explain the peculiar phenomena that give rise to the
sources of Earth’s magnetic field. While the causal observer is bedazzled by the beauty of
polar lights researchers have strived to fully explain the electromagnetic mechanism behind
the phenomenon. This is not an easy task since the magnetic field is made up by a variety
of different sources both in- and outside the Earth [Olsen and Stolle 2012]. In particular
sources above the Earth’s surface, e.g. the ionospheric field, have proven to be particularly
complicated to model since they may be rather localised in space while vary rapidly in time.
During geomagnetically disturbed times the ionospheric currents make up a complex sys-
tem that consists of both horizontal sheet currents and field-aligned, also known as Birke-
land, currents [Kelley 2007]. Due to the highly dynamical nature of the polar ionosphere,
which is mainly driven by the solar wind’s interaction with the Earth’s magnetosphere,
modelling the currents during disturbed times can be very challenging. Yet these dis-
turbed conditions, with their associated strong ionospheric currents, are also the most
important to understand both from the standpoint of space weather applications and for
the fundamental understanding of solar-terrestrial coupling.
1.1
Aim of the thesis
The aim of this thesis is to derive a climatological model of the ionospheric currents dur-
ing magnetically disturbed times. The model will be based on the average magnetic field
and polar current system (AMPS) modelling scheme (Laundal, Finlay, Olsen, and Reistad
2018), but for the purpose of this thesis a measure of the auroral eletrocjet activity, known
as the SML index, is introduced as an additional input parameter in the modelling scheme.
Furthermore, the model will be based on magnetic data from ESA’s Swarm A satellite
obtained in the time interval of 01/01/2014 to 31/12/2017 and additional auxiliary data
on solar wind and interplanetary magnetic field conditions.
DTU’s python software for geomagnetic field modelling, called Multifit [Kloss 2021], will
in this thesis be used to produce the ionospheric current models based on data from Swarm
A from geomagnetic disturbed times.
Chapter 2 will introduce the basic principles and methodology used in this thesis. Chapter
3 will present the properties of the dataset used for the modelling procedure and show
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
1
==PAGE:8==
how geomagnetic disturbed times are selected.
Chapter 4 presents the results of the
model including the performance during typical conditions and during substorm events.
Comparisons to independent data sources e.g. satellite and ground observatory data will
be conducted as well and in chapter 5 the findings will discussed and recommendations to
future work will be proposed. A summary and conclusion can be found in chapter 6.
2
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:9==
Symbols and notation
Abbreviations
Description
AE
Auroral electrojet indices
AL
Auroral activity indices
AMPS
Average Magnetic field and Polar current System
AU
Auroral activity indices
ASM
Absolute scalar magnetometer
CHAOS
Time-dependent geomagnetic field model (acronym pointed to
CHAMP, Ørsted and Scientific Application Satellite-C (SAC-C)
DFC
Divergence-free currents
ESA
European Space Agency
FAC
Field-aligned currents or Birkeland currents
HRN
Ground observatory in Norway
IGRF
International Geomagnetic Reference Field model
IMF
Interplanetary magnetic field
LEO
Low Earth orbit
LS
Least-squares
MA
Modified-Apex coordinate system
MLT
Magnetic local time
MGD
Ground observatory in Russia
QD
Quasi-Dipole coordinate system
R1
Region 1 currents
R2
Region 2 currents
RMS
Root-mean-square value
SH
Spherical Harmonics
SOD
Ground observatory in Finland
SME
Electrojet index for magnetic activity
SML
SuperMAG version of AL index
SMU
SuperMAG version of AU index
STR
Star tracker
VFM
Vector field magnetometer
Symbol
Description
a
Mean radius of Earth
B
Magnetic flux density or simply the magnetic field
Be
Component of B in the geodetic east direction
BIMF
IMF strength
BIMF,y
IMF component in the y-direction
BIMF,z
IMF component in the z-direction
BINT
Internal magnetic field
Bion
Ionospheric magnetic field
Bmag
Magnetospheric magnetic field
Bn
Component of B in the geodetic north direction
BNEC
Magnetic field vector in Earth entered coordinates
Bpol
The magnetic poloidal field for the ionosphere
Bϕ
Component of B in the ϕ direction
Br
Component of B in the radial direction
Bθ
Component of B in the θ direction
Btor
The magnetic toroidal field for the ionosphere
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
3
==PAGE:10==
Bu
Component of B in the geodetic up direction
c
Tunning constant
Cd
Data covariance matrix
Cm
Model covariance matrix
D
Declination
d
Data vector for the forward problem
d1, d2
MA base vectors
dSMLabs
The absolute change in SML index
dSMLlimit
SML change limit
E
Electric field
e or ei
Residual vector or individual residuals
EP
Direction of flow for Pedersen currents
F
Field intensity or field strength
Fm
magnitude of the cross product between f1 and f2
f1, f2
Base vectors
F10.7
Solar radio flux index
G
Design or kernel matrix for the forward problem
gm
n
SH coeﬀicient of degree n and order m for the potential field V
H
Horizontal field intensity
h
Altitude from the Earth’s surface to the point of the measurement
hA
Geodetic height of the field line apex
hm
n
SH coeﬀicient of degree n and order m for the potential field V
hR
Fixed reference height
I
Inclination
Id
Identity matrix
Im
Mathematical operation for the toroidal potential
J
Electric current density in units A/m2
JFAC
Current density for the FAC
JH
Horizontal sheet current density
JH,DFC
Horizontal sheet current density produced by the DFC
JH,FAC
Horizontal sheet current density produced by the FAC
Jr
Current density for the radial currents
Ju
Current density for the upward currents
k
Unit vector relative to the ellipsoid
Kp
Global geomagnetic activity index
m
SH order or truncation level
m
Model parameter for the forward problem
mDFC
SH order for the DFC
mdipole
unit vector in the direction of the magnetic dipole axis
mFAC
SH order for the FAC
misfitnorm
Normalised misfit
modelnorm
Model norm
N
Number of datapoints
n
SH degree or truncation level
nDFC
SH degree for the DFC
nFAC
SH degree for the FAC
nt
A constant that defines the number of data points in the time interval
from t0 to t0 + tql
P
Poloidal potential
P m
n
Legendre functions of degree n and order m for the potential fields
4
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:11==
R
Distance from satellite to center of the Earth in km
r
Unit vector
RC
RC index of magnetospheric ring current
RCe
External RC-index
RCi
Internal RC-index
s
unit vector pointing in the direction of the Sun
T
Toroidal potential
t0
Time of substorm onset
tql
Quiet limit
V
SH potential
vx
Solar wind speed
W
Weight matrix
whuber
Vector containing Huber weights
X
Component of B pointing towards geographic North
Y
Component of B pointing towards geographic East
Z
Component of B pointing vertically downwards
Greek symbols
Description
α2
Regularisation parameter of the FAC
βtilt
Dipole tilt angle
δm
Change in model parameters
ϵ
Solar wind magnetospheric coupling function
ϵ0
Vacuum permittivity 8.8541878176 · 10−12As/Vm
ηm
n
SH coeﬀicient of degree n and order m for toroidal potential
θ
Colatitude in degrees
θc
IMF clock angle in degrees
Λ
Regularisation matrix
λm
Latitude in MA coordinates
λq
Latitude in QD coordinates
µ0
Magnetic permeability of the vacuum 4π · 10−7Vs/Am
ρ
Density of electric charges in units of As/m3
σ
Standard deviation or data error
τ
Solar wind-magnetospheric coupling function that deals with
lobe reconnection rate on the night-side of the magnetotail
Φ
Loss function
ϕ
Longitude in degrees
ϕMLT
Longitude for magnetic local time
ϕnoon
Apex longitude of the magnetic meridian
ψm
n
SH coeﬀicient of degree n and order m for toroidal potential
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
5
==PAGE:12==
Chapter2
Earth’s magnetic field - background theory
2.1
Magnetic sources
Earth’s magnetic field is a complex system that spans from the interior of the Earth and
reaches out far beyond the Earth’s surface. In fact the magnetic field of Earth extends far
out into space. Further out in the heliosphere, where the solar wind dominates, positively
and negatively charged particles make up an ionised gas.
Figure 2.1: Near-Earth geomagnetic field sources from Olsen and Stolle 2012, seen from
an observer on the Earth’s surface.
6
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:13==
As these particles approach the Earth they interacts with the internally generated mag-
netic field. This causes the particles to move and generate disturbances in the magnetic
field [Baumjohann and Nakamura 2007]. This chapter will introduce the present state of
theory regarding contributions to the magnetic field of Earth including magnetic fields
with origins internal and external to Earth’s surface, with a focus on ionospheric fields
and how to model these. Figure 2.1 displays the different regions that all contributes to
the magnetic field of Earth.
2.1.1
Internal sources
The internal sources of the Earth’s geomagnetic field are defined as the sources that are
below as seen by an observer. The observer can for instance be a magnetometer on board
a satellite or a ground based magnetometer station.
The outer core field
The core field, also known as the Earth’s main field, makes up for more than 94% of
the total magnetic field of Earth [Olsen and Stolle 2012]. The core field is produced by
motions of the liquid outer core that consists of molten iron alloy. The temperatures in
this region greatly exceeds the Curie temperature hence no magnetised material can exist
here. The molten iron has the viscosity of water and it is much hotter in the center of the
planet thus thermal convection can take place. This gives rise to currents that drive the
dynamo action that produces and sustains the magnetic field [Christensen and Wicht 2015].
The mantle field
The mantle is a solid layer in the Earth that mainly consists of rocks and minerals. The
temperature in the mantle also exceeds the Curie temperature hence the mantle is a
non-magnetic region. In contrast to the outer core, there are no movement of electrical
conducting material and thus no dynamo action. However the mantle still contributes to
Earth’s magnetic field. Due to time-changes in the ionospheric and magnetospheric mag-
netic field, secondary electromagnetic induced currents in the conducting mantle appears
[Constable 2015].
The lithospheric field
The lithospheric field, also known as the crustal field, is the geomagnetic field caused by
magnetised material in the Earth’s crust. When a magnetic material cools down through
the Curie temperature magnetism in the material can arise. In the crust this is the case.
The magnetic field arising from this process make up for 3% of the total magnetic field at
the Earth’s surface.
2.1.2
External sources
The external geomagnetic sources are characterised as all geomagnetic sources that are
above the observer. Figure 2.2 shows the external sources. The following sections will
describe the origin of the outer geomagnetic field.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: The left image illustrates the major current systems in the ionosphere, while on
the right is shown the current systems in the magnetosphere. The yellow lines are the field-
aligned currents (also known as Birkeland currents) while the orange lines represents the
solar quiet currents in the ionospheric E-layer and the green line is the auroral electrojet,
also in the E-layer. The image is taken from “Lecture notes, MSc Geomagnetism course,
DTU” 2021.
The magnetospheric field
The Sun plays an important part in the external magnetic field. It emits plasma into the
surrounding space. This highly conducting plasma is what we know as the Solar wind.
The solar wind has a typical velocity of about 500km/s and is made mostly of electrons
and protons [Baumjohann and Nakamura 2007]. The solar wind cannot simply penetrate
the magnetic field of Earth and when it gets near it, it gets deflected. The speed of the
solar wind is so high that when it ”hits” the magnetic field of Earth a bow shock wave is
produced, see figure 2.3a. Thermal energy is created in this process as the particles from
the solar wind get slowed down, this plasma is situated in the magnetoshealth [Baumjohann
and Nakamura 2007].
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3: Interaction between the solar wind and the magnetic field of Earth (a) and an
illustration of the different regions in the external magnetic field. Figures reprinted from
Baumjohann and Nakamura 2007.
8
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:15==
The magnetopause separates the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) lines and the ter-
restrial magnetic field lines. The cavity in the solar wind created by the planet’s own
magnetic field is called the magnetosphere [Baumjohann and Nakamura 2007].
The solar wind generates a pressure that pushes the terrestrial dipole-like field to take a
new shape. On the day-side the field gets more compact and on the night-side the shape
of the field gets dragged out in to a tail-like shape called the magnetotail [Baumjohann
and Nakamura 2007]. The magnetosperic field is connected to the ionosphere through
field-aligned currents, also known as Birkeland currents.
The ionospheric field
The ionosphere is a region in the upper atmosphere where charged particles exist. When
the solar wind interacts with the Earth’s internal magnetic field it sets the charged parti-
cles in motion and this is the main driver of the ionospheric field.
The ionospheric field is a three-dimensional current system. In this thesis I decompose the
currents into field aligned currents (FAC) and horizontal sheet currents. The horizontal
sheet current is two dimensional and consist of Pedersen and Hall currents generated by
the FAC and the divergence free currents (DFC) respectively [Laundal, Finlay, Olsen, and
Reistad 2018].
Figure 2.4:
A sketch showing the cur-
rents in the polar ionosphere (reprinted
from Cowley 2000).
The dashed lines
represents the polar gap boundary while
the solid lines illustrates the plasma flow.
”12” indicates noon while ”24” is mid-
night and dawn on the right and dusk on
the left. ”⊙” indicates upward FAC and
⊗indicates downward FAC. EP indicates
the direction of flow for the Pedersen cur-
rents.
During highly geomagnetic disturbed times the
FACs form two ring-shaped currents near the
auroral oval [Milan et al. 2017]. The inner ring
Region 1, denoted R1, is the strongest ring
and at dawn the current here is directed down-
ward and at dusk the current is directed up-
ward.
The outer ring is called Region 2 (R2) and here
the current is directed upward at dawn and
downward at dusk, see figure 2.4.
At polar
latitudes, which is the focus of this thesis, the
field-aligned current density JFAC is approxi-
mately equal to the upward or vertical current
density Ju:
Ju ≈Jr ≈JFAC
(2.1.1)
where Jr is the radial current density. u de-
notes the magnetic upward direction which at
the North pole is very close to the geodetic
up.
The ionosphere consists of three main regions:
the D-layer (extends from 60km-90km), the
E-layer (extends from 90km-150km), and the
F-layer (extends from 150km-500km) [Kelley
2007]. When the FACs enter the E-layer, at
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
9
==PAGE:16==
an altitude of approximately 110km, Jr is transformed into a horizontal current density
JH,FAC which drives the Pedersen current. Combining this current density with the Hall
currents created by the divergence-free part JH,DFC, the total horizontal sheet current
density can be described as:
JH = JH,DFC + JH,FAC
(2.1.2)
The currents in the E-layer are below satellite altitude but above the Earth’s surface
making the ionosphere an internal source for satellite observations but an external source
for ground observations.
For observations taken at the surface the most predominant
field perturbations are caused by the DFC and the induced currents below ground. For
measurement taken from higher altitudes the FACs also play an important role [Kelley
2007].
2.2
Geomagnetic disturbances
At high-latitudes the FACs connect the ionospheric currents to the magnetospheric cur-
rents. Hence the dynamics of the ionosphere is heavily controlled by the dynamics of the
magnetosphere.
Figure 2.5: The sketch shows the recon-
nection and convection phase in the mag-
netosphere for southward IMF, reprinted
from Baumjohann and Nakamura 2007.
When the IMF has a southward compo-
nent the
field lines can merge
with the
terrestrial
field
lines
on
the
dayside
of
the magnetopause [Baumjohann and Naka-
mura 2007].
This will create open field
lines
that
the
solar
wind
will
transport
across
the
polar
cap.
On
the
night-
side of the magnetosphere the open field
lines will reconnect causing magnetic ten-
sion.
To release this tension the stretched
field lines will transport plasma back to-
wards the Earth [Baumjohann and Naka-
mura 2007].
Figure 2.5 illustrates this phe-
nomenon.
This system will generate ionisation in the Auroral oval which lies as a band around the
polar cap.
This is where the auroral electrojets are formed.
The so-called convection
electrojets consist of a westward and eastward components which are mainly controlled by
the FACs [Baumjohann and Nakamura 2007]. Indices such as AE, AU and AL are used
as a measure of polar electrojet activity, section 2.2.2 will describe this in more detail.
2.2.1
Substorms
During times of high solar activity the enhancement in the merging rate sends flux from
the dayside of the magnetopause into the magnetotail. Here some of the flux is recon-
nected and returned to the dayside, but not all. The rest of the flux accumulates in the tail
lobes. When too much flux, or magnetic energy, has compiled in the tail lobes, typically
after 30-60min, the tail becomes unstable and is forced to release the energy [Baumjohann
and Nakamura 2007]. This release of stored magnetic energy from the tails is known as a
substorm. At this time more intense polar lights will be seen in the auroral oval.
10
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:17==
During a substorm an enhancement of the ionospheric currents can be measured, in partic-
ular regarding a strengthening in the westward substorm electrojet at the midnight sector.
The substorm current wedge arises from the coupling between the magnetosphere and the
westward currents through FACs on either side of the local midnight sector [Kepko et al.
2015].
2.2.2
Magnetic activity indices
Magnetic activity indices have been developed in order to characterise magnetospheric
activity. The AL index has been used in relation to substorm activity and is often used to
monitor the strength of a substorm [Newell and Gjerloev 2011]. The AL index is derived
using magnetic data obtained by 12 ground stations in the Northern polar region. Despite
the advantages of AL the utilisation of the index has been limited due to uncertainties in
the index that stems from the limited number of ground stations. Newell and Gjerloev
2011 chose to refer to the originally derive index as Auroral Electrojet AE(12) (12 stands
for the 12 ground stations used) and it is computed by using the largest value AU(12) of
the horizontal component H and the lowest value AL(12) of the H component:
AE(12) = AU(12) −AL(12)
(2.2.1)
The collaboration SuperMAG, which will be explained further in section 3.2, has over 100
magnetic ground observatories at its disposal. Using magnetic data from all stations in
the SuperMAG network Newell and Gjerloev 2011 used the term SME for AE(100), where
100 indicates the more than 100 ground stations in SuperMAG, and the same term will
be used in this thesis.
AE and SME are local scalar values that by using stations from various locations all over
the world seek to provide a global coverage. SME differs from AE mainly by the number of
ground stations used. For the development of the SME index, the coordinates were firstly
transformed into a coordinate system with the horizontal component pointing towards the
magnetic north. SME is then be found by taking the difference between the SMU, which
is found by the station with the largest H value, and the SML, which is the station with
the lowest H contribution [Newell and Gjerloev 2011]:
SME = SMU −SML
(2.2.2)
This procedure is a way of removing a baseline from the measurements, which is a crucial
step in processing magnetic ground data. It can be done in several ways also manually by
observing a nearby quiet day and using this as a baseline. However, SuperMAG requires
an automated procedure for baseline determination hence a manually selection cannot be
used here.
SME has shown high correlations with auroral power, much better than any other indices
including Kp (the planetary range index) [Newell and Gjerloev 2011]. SME shows partic-
ularly good correlations with nightside auroral power [Newell and Gjerloev 2011]. This led
Newell and Gjerloev 2011 to conclude that the SME represents the nightside integrated
auroral power.
SML-index
A substorm is characterised as a sharp peak in auroral power, also seen as a decrease in the
horizontal magnetic field component H, that lasts for about 20 min [Newell and Gjerloev
2011]. This thesis uses the following substorm identification scheme proposed by Newell
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
11
==PAGE:18==
and Gjerloev 2011. A substorm onset was detected at time t0 when the following criteria
were fulfilled:
SML(t0 + 1) −SML(t0) < −15 nT
SML(t0 + 2) −SML(t0) < −30 nT
SML(t0 + 3) −SML(t0) < −45 nT
i=30
X
i=4
SML(t0 + i)
26
−SML(t0) < −100 nT
The SML data are sampled every 60s (1 per min) in a 30 min buffer. From the criteria it
appears that the drop in SML must be sharp, around 45nT in 3min. The drop must also
be sustained, as expressed in the last criterion, for at least 30min [Newell and Gjerloev
2011]. If an onset has been identified the algorithm by Newell and Gjerloev 2011 will
advance 20 min which is the minimum time interval between two onsets, however most
onsets happens with larger time-span between each other.
2.3
Representing the ionospheric current system
Section 2.1 and 2.2 described our present knowledge concerning different sources of the
Earth’s magnetic field. In this section I will describe the physics and mathematics of the
phenomena and I will introduce the modelling scheme used, in this thesis, to derive the
models of the ionospheric currents during geomagnetically disturbed times.
2.3.1
Apex coordinate systems
In this thesis the magnetic apex coordinate system is used to represent the magnetic
field.
Richmond 1995 came up with two magnetic apex coordinate systems, the first
called modified apex denoted MA and the second one called the quasi-dipole coordinate
system denoted QD. A combination of these two apex coordinate systems is used in this
thesis. These systems involve non-orthogonal angular coordinates established in terms of
the field line apex which is defined as the highest point above the ellipsoid of the adjacent
International Geomagnetic Reference Field (IGRF) magnetic field line. In magnetic apex
(MA) coordinates, the latitude is defined as:
λm = ± cos−1
r
a + hR
a + hA
(2.3.1)
where a is the mean radius of the Earth, hR is a fixed reference height, and hA is the
geodetic height of the field line apex. In QD-coordinates the latitude is given by:
λq = ± cos−1
r
a + h
a + hA
(2.3.2)
where h is the altitude from the Earth’s surface to the point of the measurement. The
longitude, denoted ϕ, for both coordinate system is the centered dipole longitude of the
apex. MA latitude is constant along the field lines because it only depends on hA, while
the QD-latitude is dependent on h as well hence QD-latitude is not constant along the
field lines. Richmond 1995 found that magnetic Apex and Quasi-dipole coordinates were
very eﬀicient for representing FACs and horizontal sheet currents respectively, since these
current systems are organized by the internal geomagnetic field.
12
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:19==
2.3.2
The geomagnetic elements
Figure 2.6: Geomagnetic elements defini-
tions (reprinted from “Lecture notes, MSc
Geomagnetism course, DTU” 2021).
Earth’s magnetic field is described by a three-
dimensional vector field known as the mag-
netic flux density often simply called the mag-
netic field B. The magnetic field can be com-
pletely described by three independent ele-
ments:
(X, Y, Z), (H, D, F), and (Z, H, D).
Where the component X is pointing towards
geographic North, Y is pointing towards geo-
graphic East, and the Z component is pointing
vertically down, see figure 2.6. H is known as
the horizontal magnetic field intensity, D is the
angle between the magnetic vector in the hori-
zontal plane and the geographic North, known
as the declination, F is the magnetic field in-
tensity also known as the field strength. The
inclination I is the angle between the horizon
and the magnetic field lines. The geomagnetic
elements are related in the following way:
H =
p
X2 + Y 2
F =
p
X2 + Y 2 + Z2
D = tan−1  Y
X

I = tan−1  Z
H

X = H cos(D)
Y = H sin(D)
Z = F sin(I) = H tan(I)
2.3.3
Maxwell’s equations
Maxwell’s equations ties the magnetic field B to the electric field E.
In vacuum the
following is defined:
Faraday’s law of induction:
∇× E = −∂B
∂t
Ampere’s law:
∇× B = µ0J + µ0ϵ0
∂E
∂t
Gauss law of electrostatics:
∇· E = ρ
ϵ0
Divergence free condition:
∇· B = 0
where µ0 is a constant (4π ·10−7[Vs/Am]) known as the magnetic permeability of the vac-
uum, J is the electric current density in the units of [A/m2], ϵ0 a constant (8.8541878176 ·
10−12[As/Vm]) known as the vacuum permittivity, and ρ is the density of electric charges
given in units of [As/m3].
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
13
==PAGE:20==
In the case of suﬀiciently slowly changing fields, which it is valid when investigating the
magnetic field of Earth over periods longer than a few seconds, the displacement currents
can be neglected such that the pre-Maxwell equations are obtained:
∇× B = µ0J
∇· J = 0
In source-free regions (J = 0), such as the Earth’s lower atmosphere, B is curl-free. This
means that B can be represented by the negative gradient of the scalar potential V , because
B is now a Laplacian potential field:
B = −∇V
(2.3.5)
V can be expanded as a series of spherical harmonics (SH), which are solutions to Laplace’s
equation ∇2V = 0. The above equation is only true for source-free regions hence not for
altitudes above 110km. At higher altitudes the ionospheric field is, in this thesis, instead
described as a sum of scalar potentials representing the toroidal and poloidal magnetic
components, the next section will present this approach.
2.3.4
Modelling the ionospheric magnetic field: AMPS
In this thesis I base the modelling of the ionospheric currents, during disturbed times, on
the Average Magnetic field and Polar current System (AMPS) modelling scheme (Laundal
2018). AMPS is a recent model that describes the average ionospheric magnetic field and
current system for given input values of the solar wind speed, orientation of the Earth’s
magnetic dipole axis, magnetic field vector and the values of a solar flux index F10.7 [Laun-
dal 2018]. AMPS was constructed using measurements from the satellites CHAMP and
Swarm where the core field and magnetic field produced by large-scale magnetospheric
currents, as estimated using the CHAOS field model (Olsen, Lühr, et al. 2014, Finlay et
al. 2020), have been removed. The remaining signals are assumed to be the magnetic field
associated with the ionospheric currents. Model parameters are estimated from millions of
measurements in order to produce a model of the ionospheric field that can be evaluated
at an location and time of interest, given the specified input values. This model is an
improvement over previous models in that it accounts for the time-dependent core field
and the large-scale magnetospheric field. An advantage of the AMPS model is that it is
capable of making precise comparisons between the northern and southern hemisphere and
it describes the total ionospheric field including both FACs and the horizontal currents.
Thus no assumptions about the conductivity in the ionosphere are needed when deriving
the currents [Laundal 2018]. The software for evaluating AMPS is freely available to the
scientific community as a Swarm data product and its software is written in the program-
ming language Python. The following paragraphs will present the mathematical building
blocks of the AMPS, and this thesis’, modelling scheme.
As mentioned V can be expanded as a series of SH however, due to the presence of currents
in the ionosphere we cannot represent the magnetic field as a purely Laplacian potential.
It is instead represented as a sum of two scalar potentials T and P that represents the
toroidal and poloidal components respectively:
Bion = Bpol + Btor = ∇× ∇× rP + r × ∇T
(2.3.6)
Equation 2.3.6 expresses that the magnetic field perturbation, associated with ionospheric
currents, Bion is a combination of the poloidal perturbation Bpol and the toroidal pertur-
bation Btol, where r is a unit vector. The poloidal field is essentially a Laplacian field due
14
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:21==
to the fact that Bion is sampled in a thin spherical shell compared to the radius. Equation
2.3.6 can thus be rewritten as:
Bion = Bpol + Btor = −∇V −r × ∇T = −∇V + ∇× Tr
(2.3.7)
∇V represents the magnetic field produced by ionospheric currents that are internal to the
shell at where the satellite orbits e.g. DFCs since these consist of purely toroidal currents
that will create a poloidal field. The other part of equation 2.3.7, the torodial magnetic
field, is associated with the radial currents that cross the shell e.g. FACs consisting of
poloidal currents that produce a toroidal field; the resulting magnetic fields produced
purely by the FACs is:
Btor = ∇× Tr = −r × ∇T
(2.3.8)
In this thesis, it will be assumed that after removal of a reference field model that includes
core, lithospheric and magnetospheric sources, such as the CHAOS field model [Olsen,
Lühr, et al. 2014], the remainder, Bion, is due to currents produced by the ionosphere as
well as un-modelled induced currents on ground [Laundal, Finlay, and Olsen 2016].
The potentials V and T can be expanded in a basis of spherical harmonics as done in
Laundal, Finlay, Olsen, and Reistad 2018 in apex coordinates:
T(λm, ϕMLT ) =
X
n,m
P m
n (sin λm)[ψm
n cos(mϕMLT ) + ηm
n sin(mϕMLT )]
(2.3.9)
V (λq, ϕMLT , h) = a
X
n,m

a
a + h
n+1
P m
n (sin λq)[gm
n cos(mϕMLT ) + hm
n sin(mϕMLT )]
(2.3.10)
where (ψm
n , ηm
n , gm
n , hm
n ) are the spherical harmonic coeﬀicients of degree n and order m,
P m
n (sin λm) and P m
n (sin λq) are Schmidt semi-normalised associated Legendre functions,
and ϕMLT is the magnetic local time that replaces the apex longitude. This replacement
can be done because the magnetic disturbances, in the ionosphere, mainly occur from
interactions with the solar wind and are better organized with respect to the sun’s position,
rather than an Earth-fixed longitude [Laundal, Finlay, and Olsen 2016]. In radians ϕMLT
can be written as:
ϕMLT = ϕ −ϕnoon + π
(2.3.11)
where ϕnoon is the apex longitude of the magnetic meridian. For the purpose of investi-
gating the disturbances in the ionospheric field a noon meridian is chosen for high latitudes.
Because the FACs flow along the magnetic field lines MA coordinates are often used for
toroidal field representation [Richmond 1995].
It is assumed that T is constant along
the IGRF magnetic field lines and so it is possible to express equation 2.3.8 using MA
coordinates for the toroidal potential ∇T [Richmond 1995]:
∇T =
d1
(a + hR) cos λm
∂T
∂ϕMLT
−
d2
(a + hR) sin Im
∂T
∂λm
(2.3.12)
where d1 and d2 are MA base vectors [Richmond 1995] and sin Im is given by:
sin Im =
2 sin λm
√
4 −3 cos2 λm
(2.3.13)
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
15
==PAGE:22==
The related toroidal magnetic field can then be written as:
Btor = k ×
h
d1
cos λm
∂T
∂ϕ −
d2
sin Im
∂T
∂λm
i
(2.3.14)
where k is an unit vector relative to the ellipsoid.
When describing the poloidal field QD coordinates are used. This is the case because
the poloidal potential depends on currents that are far away from the satellites and at
satellite altitude these currents are mainly the horizontal currents. The horizontal currents
in the ionosphere are mainly situated in the conducting E-layer [Kelley 2007] and hence
to describe the radial dependence one needs a system that can include heights thus QD
coordinates are used. The poloidal field can in QD-coordinates Bpol therefore be written
as [Richmond 1995]:
Bpol = −∇V = −
1
a + h
1
cos λq
∂V
∂ϕMLT
f2 × k −
1
a + h
∂V
∂λq
k × f1 −
p
Fm
∂V
∂h k.
(2.3.15)
where f1 and f2 are the QD base vectors and Fm is the magnitude of their cross product,
|f1 × f2| [Richmond 1995].
The total field perturbation, or ionospheric magnetic field, in apex coordinates can thus
be written as a combination of equation 2.3.14 and 2.3.15. Following Laundal, Finlay, and
Olsen 2016 the field components in the geodetic east Be, north Bn and up Bu directions
are then respectively:
Be = −d1,n
cos λm
∂T
∂ϕMLT
+ d2,n
sin Im
∂T
∂λm
−f2,n
a + h
1
cos λq
∂V
∂ϕMLT
+ f1,n
a + h
∂V
∂λq
(2.3.16)
Bn =
d1,e
cos λm
∂T
∂ϕMLT
−
d2,e
sin Im
∂T
∂λm
+ f2,e
a + h
1
cos λq
∂V
∂ϕMLT
−f1,e
a + h
∂V
∂λq
(2.3.17)
Bu = −
p
Fm
∂V
∂h
(2.3.18)
AMPS is a time dependent model via a number of external parameters: the IMF compo-
nents BIMF,y and BIMF,z, solar wind speed vx, dipole tilt angle βtilt, and the solar radio
flux index F10.7 [Laundal, Finlay, Olsen, and Reistad 2018]. These variables are available
for the times of the input data from the satellites Swarm and CHAMP. The modelling
procedure, used in this thesis, differs from the AMPS modelling; here I include the SML
index as an additional external input for the model. For each of the spherical harmonic
coeﬀicients (ψm
n , ηm
n , gm
n , hm
n ) in equations 2.3.9 and 2.3.10 an expansion of the external
parameters are made. As an example the expansion for gm
n is given by:
gm
n = gm
n1 + gm
n2 sin θc + gm
n3 cos θc + gm
n4ϵ + gm
n5ϵ sin θc + gm
n6ϵ cos θc+
gm
n7βtilt + gm
n8βtilt sin θc + gm
n9βtilt cos θc + gm
n10βtiltϵ + gm
n11βtiltϵ sin θc+
gm
n12βtiltϵ cos θc + gm
n13τ + gm
n14τ sin θc + gm
n15τ cos θc + gm
n16τβtilt+
gm
n17βtiltτ sin θc + gm
n18βtiltτ cos θc + gm
n19F10.7 + gm
n20SML
(2.3.19)
here θc, in degrees, is the IMF clock angle that is given by:
16
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:23==
θc = arctan 2(BIMF,y, BIMF,z)
(2.3.20)
ϵ, with units of mV/m, is the solar wind-magnetospheric coupling function expressed as:
ϵ = 10−3|vx|
4
3
q
B2
IMF,y + B2
IMF,z
2
3 sin
8
3
|θc|
2

(2.3.21)
The tilt angle βtilt, in units of degrees, is expressed in the following way where mdipole is
the unit vector in the direction of the magnetic dipole axis and s represents a unit vector
pointing in the direction of the Sun:
βtilt = arcsin
 s · mdipole

(2.3.22)
τ is another solar wind-magnetospheric coupling function that deals with lobe reconnection
rate on the night-side of the magnetotail. τ, with units of mV/m, is expressed as:
τ = 10−3|vx|
4
3
q
B2
IMF,y + B2
IMF,z
2
3 cos
8
3
θc
2

(2.3.23)
2.4
Model parameter estimation
Now that I can represent the ionospheric current system by a toroidal-poloidal decomposi-
tion I need to establish the model parameters which are the SH coeﬀicients (ψm
n , ηm
n , gm
n , hm
n ).
To solve for the model parameters I utilise the robust regularised least squares method
presented in this section.
The total magnetic field of Earth can be approximated as:
B = BINT + Bmag + Bion
(2.4.1)
Here BINT represents the magnetic field caused by the internal parts, Bmag is the mag-
netic field caused by the magnetosphere, and Bion is the ionospheric magnetic field. In
this thesis the field of interest is Bion and thus we would like to construct a model of this
field based on the observed values. This is done by solving an inverse problem by means
of robust regularised least squares.
A linear forward problem, where d is a vector containing the data, G is a design matrix,
and m is a vector containing the model parameters, can be written as:
d = Gm
(2.4.2)
The data vector d has the size N which is the number of data points, m has the size M
which is the number of model parameter which means that the matrix G, connecting the
model and the data, has a size of N × M. In order to solve for the model parameters in
m the following loss function is minimised:
Φ(m) = 1
2(d −Gm)TW(d −Gm) + 1
2mTΛm
(2.4.3)
Here Λ is the regularisation matrix of size M ×M where α2 is a regularization parameter,
and W is the diagonal weight matrix containing Huber weights.
The diagonal weight
matrix is given by:
W = whuberC−1
d
(2.4.4)
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
17
==PAGE:24==
where Cd is the data covariance matrix and whuber denotes the Huber weights vector
updated in every iteration; each element of whuber is computed in the following way where
c is the tuning constant:
whuber,i =







c
ei
ei > c
1
|ei| ≤c
−c
ei
ei < −c
(2.4.5)
ei denotes the individual residuals for each data point, where σ is the expected data error:
ei = di −(Gm)i
σ
(2.4.6)
The data covariance matrix Cd is given by:
Cd = σ2Id
(2.4.7)
here Id is the identity matrix and σ is the a-priori data error. The regularisation matrix
Λ is given by:
Λ = α2C−1
m
(2.4.8)
where Cm is the model covariance matrix given by:
Cm = G−gCd(G−g)T
(2.4.9)
where G−g denotes:
G−g = (GTG + α2Id)−1GT
(2.4.10)
A solution that minimises the loss function can be obtained by taking the derivative with
respect to the model parameters:
∂Φ
∂m = GTW(d −Gm) + Λm
(2.4.11)
By setting equation 2.4.11 to zero the solution for the model parameters is obtained:
m = (GTWG + Λ)−1GTd
(2.4.12)
The solution is found through an iterative process because the Huber weights depend on
the residuals hence they need to be updated after each iteration.
In chapter 4 I will present specific output statistics of the model including normalised
misfit (misfitnorm) and model norm (modelnorm) these parameters are computed in the
following way:
misfitnorm = eTWe
N
modelnorm = mTΛm
(2.4.13)
18
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:25==
2.4.1
Multifit
The ionospheric currents modelling of this thesis is carried out by using the Python pack-
age Multifit developed by Dr. Clemens Kloss at DTU Space. Multifit consist of the field
modelling methods AMPS and CHAOS. CHAOS is, much like AMPS, a time-dependent
high-resolution modelling procedure that estimates the spherical harmonic coeﬀicients for
both internal and external fields [Finlay et al. 2020].
Figure 2.7: The figure displays the four different parts/processes in the driver.py script
(reprinted from Kloss 2021).
To utilise Multifit a driver script is created. The driver script is called ”driver.py” and it
contains all the information and inputs Multifit needs in order to produce climatological
models. Figure 2.7 illustrates schematically the different parts in driver.py. The first part
of driver.py contains information about directories of the Swarm data and which variables
to include as well as the a-priori data error σ. The second part process the data using the
specifications given in the first part.
Figure 2.8:
A schematic illustration of the different models produced by driver.py
(reprinted from Kloss 2021).
The third part of driver.py contains information about the computation scheme. Here
the user can specify the solution approach, e.g.
least squares (LS) or Tikhonov, and
the truncation degree and order. In this thesis Multifit is set to run 10 iterations for a
model where the first iteration always uses LS and the remaining 9 iterations uses a robust
regularisation with Huber-weighting. The last part of driver.py saves the model parameter
estimates and in the specified directory. The models that are created can be seen in figure
2.8.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
19
==PAGE:26==
Chapter3
Observations
3.1
Swarm data
On the 22nd of November 2013 the European Space Agency (ESA) launched a satellite
mission called Swarm. Swarm is a constellation consisting of three satellites Swarm A,
Swarm B, and Swarm C. Swarm A and C are flying side-by-side at an altitude of 450km
while Swarm B is flying at an altitude of 530km [ESA Swarm mission: An overview 2021].
The satellites are polar-orbiting which allows for a global coverage with the exception of
a small polar-gap. The satellites measure the Earth’s magnetic field strength and direction.
The 9 meter long satellites have a 4 meter long boom where the magnetometers are
located - strategically placed away from electronics on board the spacecraft. There are
two kinds of magnetometers on board, a vector magnetometer (VFM) measuring the
direction of the magnetic field using a three-axis fluxgate along with star trackers, and a
scalar magnetometer (ASM) that measures the strength of the magnetic field. The star
trackers (STR), determine the altitude of the spacecraft. Figure 3.1 shows a side-view of
the Swarm satellites with locations of the instruments shown.
Figure 3.1: Instruments on board the Swarm mission, reprinted from Swarm instruments
2012.
In this thesis the climatological models of ionospheric currents, with a focus on disturbed
times, are developed using magnetic field measurements from the Swarm mission. The
datafiles are obtained through ESA1. An example of a datafile extracted from ESA is
SW_OPER_MAGA_LR_1B_20140201T000000_20140201T235959_0601_MDR_MAG-
_LR.cdf where the number 0601 referrers to the baseline. Data from the years 2014-2017
1https://swarm-diss.eo.esa.int
20
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:27==
from Swarm A is utilised. The data is extracted from .cdf files that have a sampling rate
of 1 measurement per second.
Based on the raw Swarm L1b .cdf files a datafile, containing all measurements from
01/01/2014 to 31/12/2017 along with auxiliary data from https://omniweb.gsfc.nasa.gov/
ow.html, was created. The content of this datafile can be seen in table 3.1. This file, is
further processed before it is used as an input for the ionospheric field modelling. The
further processing will be described in section 3.3.
Variable
Size
Description
BNEC
3 × N
Magnetic field vector in Earth centered coordinates
θc
N
Clock angle in degrees
ϵ
N
Solar wind magnetospheric coupling function
F10.7
N
Solar radio flux index measured in sfu
BIMF,y
N
IMF component in the y-direction
BIMF,z
N
IMF component in the x-direction
λm
N
Modified-Apex latitude
MLT
N
Magnetic local time in degrees
ϕ
N
Longitude in degrees
λq
N
Latitude in QD coordinates
R
N
(Radius) Distance from satellite to center of the Earth in km
RCe
N
External RC-index
RCi
N
Internal RC-index
σ
N
Standard deviation in nT or data error
SML
N
SuperMAG version of the AL index
τ
N
Solar wind-magnetospheric coupling function that deals with
lobe reconnection rate on the night-side of the magnetotail
θ
N
Co-latitude in degrees.
Time
N
Time in Modified Julian Date 2000 (MDJ2000)
βtilt
N
Dipole tilt angle in degrees
vx
N
Solar wind speed in km/s
Table 3.1: The content and dimensions of the variables in the datafile where N is the
number of data points.
In figure 3.2 are shown an example of the three components in B_NEC where the internal
and magnetospheric field is subtracted from the measurements of Swarm A. This specific
event will be investigated in the upcoming chapters.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.2: An example of Swarm A data, where the internal and magnetospheric field is
subtracted, taken at 20/12/2015 during a large substorm that started at 15:40 UTC.
3.2
Ground stations and observatories
INTERMAGNET, short for International Real-time Magnetic Observatory Network, is an
organisation that since 1991 has operated a global network of more than 100 geomagnetic
observatories. The data, at the ground observatories, is measured by fluxgate magnetome-
ters. The magnetometers measure the variation of the vector geomagnetic field in three
directions. The measurements are calibrated using measurements of D, I, measured by a
non-magnetic theodolite and a single axis fluxgate sensor, and absolute measurements of
F by the use of a proton precession-type scalar magnetometer.
Figure 3.3: A map of the locations of 127 ground observatories that are currently a part
of the INTERMAGNET collaboration.
22
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.3 shows the location of 127 magnetic observatories that are a part of INTER-
MAGNET. Most stations are located in the northern hemisphere, mainly in Europe, the
uneven distribution means that it is not possible to achieve proper global coverage. This
is why LEO satellites play such an important role in studies of Earth’s magnetic field.
Nonetheless, ground observatories have several advantages: (1) they provide continues
monitoring and high quality data at fixed locations that allows for investigation of the
past and present changes in the magnetic field (2) the stations are located at the Earth’s
surface i.e. between two magnetic sources which could be important for future separation
of sources, (3) their magnetic data allows for derivation of magnetic activity indices e.g.
Kp, Dst, AL and AU [Kauristie et al. 2017]. The magnetic activity indices play an im-
portant part of the selection of magnetic disturbed times that will be carried out in this
thesis.
Figure 3.4: An example of ground observatory data obtained from INTERMAGNET
during a substorm at 20/12/2015, at the station SOD in Finland.
The internal and
magnetospheric field have been subtracted from the observatory data BSOD. The vertical
green line represents the onset of the substorm found by SuperMAG.
SuperMAG is a collaboration between different organisations worldwide that conduct mea-
surements and process magnetic 3D vector data from more than 300 ground based magne-
tometers [SuperMAG 2021]. The data is a combination of absolute measurements, carried
out by INTERMAGNET observatories, and relative (variometer) measurements. Super-
MAG provides data with or without a subtraction of baseline. All data has been resampled
to 1 min temporal resolution and all units have been converted to nano Tesla [Newell and
Gjerloev 2011]. SuperMAG provides a magnetic activity index called the SuperMAG elec-
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
23
==PAGE:30==
trojet index SME which is utilised in this thesis, more information is provided in section
2.2.2 and 2.2.2.
A second type of data product from SuperMAG is also used in this thesis. This type
is a substorm list which is obtained from the SuperMAG’s website2. This substorm list
includes magnetic longitude, latitude, MLT, and date/time given in UTC of each recorded
onset of a substorm according to Newell and Gjerloev 2011. It was used here to validate
my data selection scheme by comparing the SuperMAG substorms to the data selected
here, further details of the method are given in section 2.2.2.
In figure 3.4 is shown an example of ground station data from the observatory SOD in
Finland. Bion
r
, Bion
θ
, and Bion
ϕ
represent the three components of the ionospheric field
which are found by subtracting the internal BINT and magnetospheric Bmag field from
the observatory data BSOD. This specific observatory data and substorm event will the
used in the later chapters as a part of the assessment of the produced models.
3.3
Data selection
The datafile, collecting the Swarm data and auxiliary information from 2014 to 2017,
contains data from both magnetically disturbed and quiet times. Since the focus of this
thesis is on substorm activity a data selection scheme was devised that selects magnetically
disturbed times. This selection scheme will be introduced in the following sections.
3.3.1
Selection of disturbed conditions using SML index
This algorithm has, in this thesis, been implemented in the Python programming language
and applied to the datafile, see appendix B for information about the script. The algo-
rithm detected 7775 substorm onsets between 2014 and 2017 while the oﬀicial substorm
list, provided by SuperMAG, detected 7270 substorm onsets. Figure 3.5 shows a plot of
the SML indices for the period 2015-02-25 to 2015-03-01. The red dots represents the time
and SML value of the onsets determined by the implemented algorithm and the Newell
and Gjerloev list. The green vertical lines display the time of the onsets determined by
ground stations (the substorm list) produced by the SuperMAG community. The figure
shows that the determined onsets based on Swarm data times, coincide well with the on-
sets found by SuperMAG with very few exceptions.
After establishing the onsets of the substorms we wish to go further and to select all data
within a substorm and this is done by imposing a substorm criteria. I define a change
limit (dSMLlimit) as the the minimum absolute change in SML before the data can be
classified as being quiet. The change limit is set to 0.75nT/sec which has been chosen so
that there is still a suﬀicient amount of data to provide a global coverage but ensuring
that the main part of the data selected is indeed linked to substorm activity. I also define
a quiet limit, denoted tql, which specifies how long time a time interval is considered in
order to assess whether the data is classified as being quiet. The quiet limit is set to 15min
based on the same logic as for the choice of change limit.
2https://supermag.jhuapl.edu/substorms/?start=2014-01-01T00%3A00%3A00.000Z&interval=35040%
3A00&fidelity=low
24
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.5: A timeseries of SML indices in the end of February to the beginning of March
2015. The red dots represents the onsets found using SML data interpolated to the times
of Swarm A data while the vertical green lines represents onset-times determined directly
by SuperMAG.
The absolute change in SML is given by:
dSMLabs =
dSML
dt

(3.3.1)
A set of data points (from an onset t0 to t0 + tql) is classified as disturbed data when the
following is satisfied:
1
nt
t0+tql
X
i=t0
dSMLabs(i) > dSMLlimit
(3.3.2)
where nt is the number of data points in the time interval from t0 to t0 + tql. Equation
3.3.2 is implemented in a Python script that runs through every detected substorm onset
(see appendix B for information about the script). All data points after an onset that
fulfil this criteria are selected as disturbed time data and are collected in a file named
SwarmA_disturbed_dSML.h5.
Figure 3.6:
A timeseries of SML indices for Swarm A data times for 03/09/2015 -
13/09/2015.
The red dots represents the onsets found using the algorithm described
above while the dark-blue dots denotes the selected disturbed data.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.6 shows an example of SML indices at times of Swarm A data and which points
the above algorithm selects as disturbed times for the 10 day period 2017-09-03 to 2017-
09-13. Figure 3.6 shows examples of both small and large substorms. It shows that not
all small substorm-type dips in the SML index get selected because they do not fulfil the
criteria within the chosen dSMLlimit and tql. This selection can be tuned by changing
these constants, however here it is preferred to choose only disturbed times with as little
as possible contamination of quiet times.
The resulting datafile of Swarm A measurements during disturbed substorm-related times,
SwarmA_disturbed_cleaned_dSML.h5, is then cleaned for NaN-values and large outliers
ready for use in the modelling process. Figure 3.7 displays the distribution of SML indices
for the cleaned datafile and the original datafile called Multifit_datafile.h5. The figure are
showing that the selection scheme has, as desired, mainly chosen data points with high
SML values. The histograms also show a major reduction in data points, in fact the total
number of datapoints in the cleaned datafile is N = 501345 thus only about 1.59% of the
original dataset is kept.
Figure
3.7:
The
two
figures
show
the
distribution
of
SML
indices
for
SwarmA_disturbed_cleaned_dSML.h5
(top)
and
the
original
un-selected
Multi-
fit_datafile.h5 (bottom).
The content of the final selected and cleaned Swarm A dataset is listed in table 3.1 and
figure 3.9 shows the related distribution of the most important input variables for the
ionospheric modelling process. Table 3.2 displays the value at the mode of the histograms
for the variables. Figure 3.8 shows two density plots with corresponding histograms of the
IMF solar wind speed vx vs. the IMF magnetic field strength BIMF (figure 3.8a) and the
IMF components Bz and By (figure 3.8b). Figure 3.8a shows that the main part of BIMF
has a value of 0-10nT while the solar wind speed is mainly from 600-700km/s.
26
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:33==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: Two density plots displaying the relationship between the solar wind speed vx
and the IMF magnetic field strength B (3.8a) and between the two different components of
the IMF Bz and By (3.8b). The dashed blue lines represents the mode of the distributions.
The histogram containing the distribution of QD-latitude in figure 3.9 shows that despite
the reduction in data points a satisfactory global coverage is still achieved in the dataset
SwarmA_disturbed_cleaned_dSML.h5. There is a gap in the distribution of MA-latitude
around 0 degrees. This is expected and due to the way the MA-coordinates system is con-
structed and not caused by the reduction in data. Dealing with this data distribution
requires regularisation of the FAC part of the model (see appendix A.1).
The histogram of clock angles shows that the data distribution is slightly biased towards
clock angles of 90◦to 180◦. This is a consequence of the SML selection.
Variable
Mode of distribution
SML
-428.35 nT
vx
655.24 km/s
BIMF
3.30 nT
BIMF,y
1.77 nT
BIMF,z
-2.23 nT
F10.7
71.23 sfu
Tilt angle βtilt
-13.92°
Clock angle θc
118.31°
Table 3.2: The value of the each variable at the mode of the histograms are shown in the
table. These values will be referred to as ”typical conditions” throughout this thesis.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.9: Histograms showing the distribution of data points in the processed datafile
SwarmA_disturbed_cleaned_dSML.h5.
28
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:35==
Chapter4
Results
The aim of this thesis is to derive a climatological model of the ionospheric currents
for magnetic disturbed times.
We begin by presenting an example model (Model A)
obtained by the methods presented in the previous chapters.
The model setup, fit to
the contributing data, and typical ionospheric currents during disturbed conditions, are
documented in section 4.1. In section 4.2 the fit to the collected data during two example
substorms, and associated dynamics of the current system are presented. Comparison
between the model and independent ground and satellite data will be presented in section
4.3.
Finally, results from a model derived using an alternative dataset, referred to as
Model B, will be presented in section 4.4.
4.1
A model of the polar ionospheric field during
disturbed conditions
4.1.1
Model setup
The climatological model of the ionospheric field, developed in this thesis, is created by
using the specifications listed in table 4.1. The specifications were determined by running
a series of test models for the regularisation parameter α2 for the FAC, the a-priori data
error σ, the truncation levels, and convergence level. These test models are documented
in appendix A.
Reg.
parameter
α2
Total
number of
iterations
Data
error
σ
Truncation
level
mDFC
Truncation
level
mFAC
Truncation
level
nDFC
Truncation
level
nFAC
Model
A & B
1e6 nT−2
10
40nT
3
3
45
65
Table 4.1: Displayed are the chosen α2, max. iteration, σ, and truncation levels that are
used to produce Model A.
4.1.2
Fit of model to Swarm data
In this subsection the fit of Model A to the contributing Swarm data is presented. The
summary statistics is documented alongside with histograms of the residuals and how they
are distributed with position versus QD-latitude and MLT.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
29
==PAGE:36==
Table 4.2 displays the summary misfit statistics for the fit of the modelled ionospheric field
to the Swarm magnetic field measurements considering the three components separately.
The third column contains the RMS of the un-weighted residuals for each ionospheric
component. The RMS of Bion
θ
and Bion
ϕ
are larger than the RMS of Bion
r
both in the
weighted and in the un-weighted case. This implies that we are not able to fit Bion
θ
and
Bion
ϕ
as accurately as Bion
r
.
When applying the Huber weights to the data the RMS significantly changes as seen in
column five. This means that the Huber weights indeed affect the modelling of the iono-
spheric field. However the mean of the Huber weights, seen in column six, are reasonably
close to 1 which means that only a small percentage of data points are down-weighted.
This is consistent with the histograms of residuals, figure 4.2, which show a small number
of very large outliers.
Model A
Mean of
residuals
(nT)
RMS
(nT)
Mean of
weighted residuals
(nT)
Weighted
RMS
(nT)
Mean of
Huber weights
Bion
r
-0.6245
31.6950
0.1923
14.9891
0.9811
Bion
θ
3.4703
75.6737
3.2916
27.3335
0.9317
Bion
ϕ
0.3779
87.2566
0.1634
28.4523
0.9206
Table 4.2: Mean residuals, RMS, and Huber weights for the three ionospheric components
Bion
r
, Bion
θ
, and Bion
ϕ
for Model A.
In figure 4.2 further details of the fit of Model A to the Swarm data are given in the form
of the distributions of the residuals between model prediction of Bion
r
, Bion
θ
, and Bion
ϕ
and
Swarm data. The blue dotted lines mark the a-priori assumed data errors σ while the red
dotted line represents the mean value of the residuals found in table 4.2. It can be seen
that the majority of the residuals are within the assumed error margins indicating the
consistency of the assumed errors and results obtained from Model A. The distributions
appear to be approximately Laplace distributed due to the long tails and the shape central
spike.
Figure 4.1: RMS values with respect to QD-latitude of the residuals, between model
prediction and Swarm data corrected for internal and magnetospheric fields, for the field
intensity F ion and the three ionospheric components.
30
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.2: Distributions of the residuals be-
tween the predictions of Model A and Swarm
data for the three field components. The a-
prior data error estimates and mean value of
the residuals can also be seen in the figures.
The few large outliers have been removed in
these figures.
Figure 4.1 summarises the dependence
of the RMS residual as a function of
the QD-latitude for the field intensity
F ion,
and
the
three
ionospheric
field
components.
The
figure
shows
that
the
majority
of
the
residuals
are
lo-
cated in the polar region which is also
were we have high amplitude and dy-
namic during substorm activity.
The
high RMS values in the polar regions im-
plies that the chosen a-priori data er-
ror is an underestimate for these two
components.
However,
the RMS for
F ion and Bion
r
in the polar regions are
significantly smaller and seems to stay
within
40-50nT
indicating
the
consis-
tency of a-priori data error for Bion
r
and
F ion.
Figure 4.3 shows further details in polar
and global plots of the median residuals
plotted in QD/MLT coordinates. It is seen
that the majority of large residuals are lo-
cated around the polar caps. The residuals
are largest in the Bion
ϕ
component, which
coincides with the histograms introduced
previously, which is dominated by FAC sig-
natures, and smallest for Bion
r
, which is
dominated by signatures from horizontal
currents.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.3: Global and polar plots of the median values of the residuals in QD/MLT
coordinates. The titles of the plots refer to the variable stored in the datafile. The gray
spots are bins with no data.
32
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:39==
4.1.3
Typical model properties and ionospheric currents during
disturbed conditions
This section presents the properties of Model A under typical conditions, for disturbed
times, found in table 3.2. Plots of FAC and DFC under typical conditions will be docu-
mented and a summary diagnostics of Model A will be presented.
Table 4.3 contains important summary diagnostics of the model e.g. normalised misfit and
average Huber weights values. A ||δm||/||m|| ∼0.18% means that the model parameter
estimates only change ∼0.18% from the 9th to the 10th iteration. This indicates that the
model has converged within these 10 iterations.
Model norm
FAC (nT)2
Normalised misfit
||δm||/||m||
1.2732 · 10−6
1.0213
1.7926 · 10−3 ∼0.18%
Table 4.3: Model norm, normalised misfit, and the convergence criteria computed for
Model A.
Figure 4.4 presents a visualization of the FAC and DFC under typical conditions given in
table 3.2. In the plot can be seen the ring-shaped patterns for R1 and R2. The upward
part of R1 can be seen at 68◦QD-latitude and 20hr MLT, while the downward R1 can be
found at 68◦QD-latitude and 4hr MLT. R2 appears much weaker and are located at 61◦
QD-latitude, 10hr MLT for the downward current and at 64◦QD-latitude, 4.5hr MLT for
the upward current.
In figure 4.5 the horizontal sheet current under typical conditions is presented. The hor-
izontal sheet current is estimated by combining the FAC and the DFC see section 2.3.2
[Laundal, Finlay, Olsen, and Reistad 2018].
Figure 4.6 displays the model predictions of the ionospheric E-layer field components Bion
r ,
Bion
θ
, and Bion
ϕ
on global and polar maps for the date 20/01/2015 at 12:00 UTC at a height
of 450km. The field predictions at Swarm altitudes are produced by adding the magnetic
field produced by the FAC (Btor) and the magnetic field produced by the DFC (Bpol).
From all three figures it can be seen that the ionospheric field is mostly active in the polar
regions as expected. A clear two celled pattern is seen in all three figures and there appears
to be an asymmetry in the field pattern between the Northern and Southern hemispheres.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.4: Field aligned currents are presented here as red and blue colors and the DFC
function is shown as contours for the Northern Hemisphere. The blue color represents
the downward current while the red represents the upward current. The dotted contour
lines illustrates negative values while the solid lines are positive values of the DFC. The
apex north pole is at the center of the plot with QD-latitude circles of 60◦, 70◦, and 80◦
marked. The red and blue triangles indicates the placement of the maximum in upward
and downward current densities and the value of these can be seen in the top right corner.
|| represents the scale of the total upward current and ⊥is the scale of the total DFC. The
input driving conditions are listed in the lower left corner, these are typical of the selected
data see table 3.2.
Figure 4.5: A plot of the horizontal sheet currents in the Northern Hemisphere under
typical conditions (see table 3.2). The arrows represents the direction and strength of
the current, the scale of the arrows can be found in the lower right corner. The colors
illustrates the strength of the currents as well. The yellow star represents the peak current.
The figure is produced in a similar way as figure 4.4.
34
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.6: Ionospheric field predictions made in a height of 450km for the time 20/01/2015
at 12:00 UTC. The predictions are made under typical external parameters (see table 3.2).
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
35
==PAGE:42==
4.2
Dynamics during substorms
Having documented the basic structure of the ionospheric currents during disturbed con-
ditions we next move on to describe how the currents change during example substorm
events.
In particular, we examine the predictions of Model A during two substorms,
comparing these with the Swarm data collected during these events.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: Plots of the interpolated SML index for a large substorm (a) and for a standard
size substorm (b). The green line represents the onset time for each substorm.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: Polar plots of the satellite Swarm A’s track during the large substorm at
20/12/2015 (a) and standard substorm at 10/11/2015 (b). The satellite’s path is marked
with a colorbar illustrating the time at each location. The green dot represents where
the onset, for each of the two substorms, was measured by a ground observatory. The
red dots represent the location of three ground observatories Hornsund (HRN) in Norway,
Sodankyla (SOD) in Finland, and Magadan (MGD) in Russia.
36
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:43==
Using the substorm list form Newell and Gjerloev two example substorms have been cho-
sen. The onset times are compared to the satellite location in figure 4.8. Substorms can
last for several hours but in this section only the time interval that the satellite is in the
polar cap/auroral oval is displayed and used. Hence the term ”beginning” and ”end” of
a substorm corresponds the entrance and exit of the polar cap/auroral oval for the satellite.
The first event is from 20/12/2015 with an onset time of 15:40 UTC and is a relatively
large substorm with SML values below -2000nT. A plot of the interpolated SML index
with respect to time can be seen in figure 4.7a. The second event is from 10/11/2015 with
an onset time of 11:33 UTC. This substorm will be referred to as the standard substorm
since the amplitude of the SML index (around 500nT) is the typical amplitude of sub-
storms found in the dataset. The interpolated SML index for this substorm can be seen
in figure 4.7b.
Figure 4.9 and 4.10 display the model predictions for the magnetic field caused by the FAC
BFAC, the DFC BDFC, and the total ionospheric prediction Bion = BFAC + BDFC where
data is recorded by Swarm A during the time of the substorm. The blue line represents
Swarm A data used as input to the modelling, found by subtracting estimates of the
magnetic field caused by the magnetosphere Bmag and the internal sources BINT from the
measured magnetic field Bdata.
Figure 4.9: Timeseries for magnetic field predictions BDFC, BFAC, and Bion compared to
the measured field Bdata, where estimates of the internal and magnetospheric sources are
subtracted, for the large substorm.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.10: Timeseries for magnetic field predictions, made by Model A, BDFC, BFAC,
and Bion compared to the measured field Bdata, where estimates of the internal and mag-
netospheric sources are subtracted, for the standard substorm.
38
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.11: Plot of the FAC and DFC during a large substorm at 20/12/2015 made by
Model A, where the external parameters vary with time. The clock angle and timestamp
are shown in the bottom left corner of each plot.
For the large substorm the dynamics of the global patterns of FAC and DFC plotted with
respect to clock angle in figure 4.11 as a time sequence during the substorm. There is a
gradual amplification in both the FAC and DFC until 16:13 UTC where the maximum
amplitude is reached, afterwards the strength dims down again.
The structure of the
currents also change during the substorm; at first the DFC pattern is rather complex but
becomes more structured as the amplitude of the currents increase. The positive values of
DFC starts to align with the downward FAC around R1 while the negative values of the
DFC starts aligning with the upward FAC in R1, as the time elapses.
Figure 4.12 shows a similar time sequence of the horizontal sheet current plotted for the
large substorm at the same times as for figure 4.11. At the beginning of the substorm the
sheet current has a high amplitude but as the time progresses the amplitude decreases.
At 16:13 UTC the current amplitude has reached its minimum. At and after 16:13 UTC
the maximum amplitude, of the horizontal current, has moved down from 70◦magnetic
latitude to 60◦magnetic latitude.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.12: Plots of the horizontal sheet currents during the large substorm event at
20/12/2015 made by Model A, where the external parameters vary with time. The times-
tamps are shown in the bottom left corner of each plot and the minimum latitude is here
set to 55◦.
4.3
Comparison with independent observations during an
example substorm event
In the previous section the predictions of Model A were compared to dependant data
from Swarm A. In this section the model performance is examined by comparing it to
independent data. Section 4.3.1 documents a comparison between Model A predictions
to independent satellite data from Swarm A. Independent ground observatory data from
three stations will be compared to the model predictions in section 4.3.2.
40
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:47==
4.3.1
Comparison to independent satellite data
Figure 4.13:
Polar plot of Swarm
A’s path at 24/12/2020 that is il-
lustrated with a colorbar-track rep-
resenting the time at each location.
Figure 4.14 shows the model predictions Bion, made
by Model A, and Swarm A data from the period
24/12/2020 at 15:00 UTC to 16:40 UTC during a
substorm at 15:11 UTC. The Swarm data is out-
side the scope of the data used for the field mod-
elling of Model A making the Swarm data indepen-
dent.
In
figure
4.13
in
shown
the
satellite’s
path
during
the
substorm
at
24/12/2020.
The
satellite
flies
straigt
across
the
North
pole
and hence through the auroral oval and polar
cap.
The ionospheric model prediction in figure 4.14 is
roughly following the measured data in all three
components. The model, however, seems to strug-
gle reaching the same amplitudes values as the mea-
sured signals. This will be further discusses in chap-
ter 5.
Figure 4.14: Timeseries of model predictions (Model A) and independent Swarm A data
for the magnetic field components at a height of 400km. The time interval is from a period
outside the dataset used for the construction of the model.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
41
==PAGE:48==
4.3.2
Ground observatory comparison
In figure 4.8 three ground observatories, relatively close to the Swarm A path, are marked.
Hornsund (HRN) in Norway is located at 77◦latitude and 15.55◦longitude. Due to the
high northern location, HRN might not be in the auroral oval during the two substorms.
Hence a station in Sodankyla (SOD) in Finland located at latitude 67.37◦and longitude
26.63◦and a station in Magadan (MGD) in Russia at latitude 59.97◦and longitude 150.85◦
are chosen as well.
At ground only the ionospheric field produced by the DFC can be seen and thus BDFC is
the total model prediction for the ground stations. Figure 4.15 and 4.16 show timeseries
of the modelled ionospheric field BDFC during the day 20/12/2015 where the green ver-
tical line represents the onset for the large substorm. The internal field BINT and the
field caused by the magnetosphere Bmag have been subtracted from the observatory data
BHRN and BSOD, for HRN and SOD respectively. The model predictions deviates from
the observatory data at both HRN and SOD. In particular the models struggles at fitting
the high amplitude peaks. This will be futher discussed in chapter 5.
Figure 4.17 and 4.18 presents the ionospheric field predictions alongside with the measure-
ments taken from HRN and MGD at 10/11/2015. For HRN the model cannot fit the high
peaks at 15:00 - 18:00 UTC. For MGD the BDFC
r
does a better job at fitting the data but
fails in fitting the Bion
θ
and Bion
ϕ . This will be further discussed in chapter 5.
Figure 4.15: Magnetic field measurements from HRN in Norway taken at 20/12/2015
compared to Model A predictions of the ionospheric field seen at ground. The green line
represents the time of the onset for the large substorm.
42
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.16: Magnetic field measurements from SOD in Finland taken at 20/12/2015
compared to Model A predictions of the ionospheric field seen at ground. The green line
represents the time of the onset for the large substorm.
Figure 4.17: Magnetic field measurements from HRN in Norway taken at 10/11/2015
compared to Model A predictions of the ionospheric field seen at ground. The green line
represents the time of the onset for the large substorm.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.18: Magnetic field measurements from Magadan (MGD) in Russia taken at
10/11/2015 compared to Model A predictions of the ionospheric field seen at ground.
The green line represents the time of the onset for the standard substorm.
4.4
Testing alternative datasets
In this section an alternative dataset will be tested. The alternative dataset is derived
using Swarm A data in the same time period as before (2014-2017) but a different data
selection criteria is chosen. To see this selection criteria see Appendix A.6. In principle
the selection criteria uses the same onset determination as Model A but here it sets a
threshold for the SML index. The threshold is used to determine when to stop including
data i.e. when the substorm has ended. For this model the selection criteria stops when
50% of the onset SML value is restored or when 3 hours have pasted. With this approach
17% of the original data is kept and stored in the datafile. This model will be referred to
as Model B.
Variable
Mode of distribution
SML
-267.00 nT
vx
420.18 km/s
BIMF
3.28 nT
BIMF,y
2.23 nT
BIMF,z
-2.09 nT
F10.7
72.12 sfu
Tilt angle βtilt
-13.91°
Clock angle θc
117.97°
Table 4.4: Mode of distributions for Model B.
44
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:51==
For Model B the mode of the distributions can be found in table 4.4. The mean of the
residuals, the RMS, and the Huber weights can be found in table 4.5. The convergence,
normalised misfit, and model norm for Model B is shown in table 4.6. The RMS values
for the three magnetic field components and the intensity F ion for the ionospheric field is
shown in figure 4.19.
Model B
Mean of
residuals
(nT)
RMS
(nT)
Mean of
weighted residuals
(nT)
Weighted
RMS
(nT)
Mean of
Huber weights
Bion
r
-0.2051
22.0294
0.1674
10.9066
0.9919
Bion
θ
2.2068
55.0815
1.9184
20.5232
0.9555
Bion
ϕ
-0.0825
66.6818
-0.1292
22.6905
0.9440
Table 4.5: Mean of residuals, RMS, and Huber weights for the three ionospheric compo-
nents for Model B.
Model norm
FAC (nT)−2
Normalised misfit
||δm||/||m||
5.8749 · 10−6
0.6246
1.1163 · 10−4 ∼0.01%
Table 4.6: Model norm, normalised misfit, and the convergence criteria for Model B.
The large substorm presented in the previous sections are shown in figure 4.20 with field
predictions for Model A and Model B alongside with satellite data from Swarm A. The
difference in Model A and Model B predictions are quite small and Model B does not
seem to fit the Swarm data significantly better than Model A despite the lower misfit and
RMS. This will be further discussed in chapter 5.
Figure 4.19: RMS values for residuals between model prediction and Swarm data with
respect to QD-latitude for the field intensity F ion and the three ionospheric components
for Model B.
The magnetic field measured at the ground observatories HRN and SOD, during the large
substorm, is also compared to the model predictions for Model A and Model B in figure
4.21 and 4.22. Similarly as for the Swarm data Model B does not seem to perform a
significantly better job than Model A in fact they seem to perform equally bad for both
stations.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.20: Timeseries for magnetic field predictions, made by Model B, BDFC, BFAC,
and Bion compared to the measured field Bdata, where estimates of the internal and mag-
netospheric sources are subtracted, for the large substorm.
Figure 4.21: Magnetic field measurements from HRN in Norway taken at 20/12/2015
compared to Model A and Model B predictions of the ionospheric field seen at ground.
The green line represents the time of the onset for the large substorm.
46
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.22: Magnetic field measurements from SOD in Finland taken at 20/12/2015
compared to Model A and Model B predictions of the ionospheric field seen at ground.
The green line represents the time of the onset for the large substorm.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
47
==PAGE:54==
Chapter5
Discussion
This chapter will evaluate and discuss the results presented in the previous chapter. Sec-
tion 5.1 will evaluate the fit of Model A to the contributing Swarm data, including a
discussion of residuals. Section 5.2 discusses the model performance during typical con-
ditions while section 5.3 evaluates the model performance during substorm activity. An
assessment of the agreement of the model predictions and independent data is carried out
in section 5.4. The influence of the SML index on the ionospheric field model is inves-
tigated in section 5.5 and finally recommendations and suggestions for future work are
presented in section 5.6.
5.1
Fit of Model A to Swarm data
In section 4.1.2 it was shown that the model fits Swarm A data better in the Bion
r
com-
ponent than in the Bion
θ
and Bion
ϕ
components. This was seen in table 4.2, in figure 4.2,
and in figure 4.1 where we found smaller residuals and a smaller RMS value for the Bion
r
component. This is expected because Bion
θ
and Bion
ϕ
are affected by FACs which have less
effect on Bion
r
. The FACs are known to be very dynamic and can be of small scale and
hence they are not easily captured by the large-scale model, constructed here, which is an
average of the ionospheric field for a given set of driving parameters.
It is also seen in figure 4.3, that shows what part of the data that is not explained by
the model, that large residuals, in polar regions, are significantly high for Bion
θ
and Bion
ϕ .
The polar regions, and in particular the auroral oval, are places where there are intense,
small-scale and highly dynamic currents [Kepko et al. 2015] and hence higher errors in
these regions are expected. This implies that the model cannot fully explain the processes
in this part of the ionospheric magnetic field.
Furthermore, table 4.3 showed a change-rate of ∼0.18% for Model A and it was concluded
that the model had converged. If the model has not completely converged it will affect
the model accuracy. It could be argued that the model needs a few more iterations to
bring down the change-rate even further in order to make sure that the model has fully
converged. However the drawback here is that it will increase the model computation
time.
48
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:55==
5.2
Evaluation of model performance under typical
conditions
For typical conditions Model A seems to perform according to the presented theory by
Milan et al. 2017. A distinct ring pattern, for the FACs, appears where the inner ring
(R1) is the strongest and the outer ring (R2) the weakest (seen on figure 4.4) which
is what we would expect to see according to Milan et al. 2017. Furthermore, the DFC
also seems to a have distinct pattern that seems to be correlated with the FAC maximums.
The horizontal sheet current, modelled by Model A under typical conditions, is also in
agreement with the expected outcome (Milan et al. 2017). The convection electrojets, seen
in figure 4.5, consist of an eastward and westward electrojet with a maximum amplitude of
432 mA/m. These electrojets are mainly consisting of the Hall currents that are generated
by the downward FAC.
Investigating the total ionospheric field prediction of Model A, under typical conditions in
figure 4.6, we find that all three components show a two celled pattern in field strength. Of-
ten, in the published literature, only the Northern polar region is shown however figure 4.6
clearly shows a difference in the pattern and strength between the Northern and Southern
hemispheres indicating polar asymmetry in the ionospheric field for all three components.
This is likely due to the differences in solar illumination, and hence ionospheric conductiv-
ity in the two hemispheres. The global maps also show that the ionospheric field is mainly
active at the auroral oval at the polar regions.
5.3
Evaluation of model performance during substorms
The performance of Model A was tested during two substorm events: one large substorm
at 20/12/2015 15:40 UTC and one of standard size substorm at 10/11/2015 11:33 UTC.
For the large substorm, seen in figure 4.9, Model A has a seemingly good fit of Bion
r
.
As mentioned Bion
r
is dominated by signatures from the DFC and hence the DFC part
appears to be well resolved in by the model. The peak at the beginning of the substorm
(around 15:45) is poorly resolved in all three components. One reason for this could be
that such peaks do not always appear in substorms for these solar wind driving and SML
input parameters, at least for the dataset used for the development of Model A. Hence
the model may not be able to predict this event very accurately. It is expected that the
model has a less accurate performance for large substorms since the primary substorm
data, used for the modelling, consists of smaller events.
During the standard substorm, seen in figure 4.10, the predictions of Model A seem, over-
all, to fit the data relatively well. The sharp peaks in the substorm are, however, again
poorly resolved by the model. This suggests that the model still lacks important factors
for substorm dynamics or has insuﬀicient spatial resolution to capture small scale feature
seen in the observations.
Investigating figure 4.11 we see that an increase in amplitude for the FAC happens in both
R1 and R2 during the large substorm which is a behavior that we expect to see during
substorms. The highest value of the FAC is found at 16:13 UTC which approximately
corresponds to the minimum SML value as seen in figure 4.7a. The DFC goes from having
a complex pattern to align with the FAC and gain a more structured pattern.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.12 shows the horizontal sheet current during the large substorm. A clear change
in pattern and amplitude is seen as time advances. The yellow star marks the place of
maximum current density which seems to move down towards lower latitudes during the
course of the substorm. A dimming of the horizontal currents is also seen at 16:13 which
is where the FAC is at its maximum amplitude.
5.4
Fit of Model A to independent data
A way of testing the performance of the model is by making comparisons to independent
data e.g. ground observatories and Swarm data taken outside the scope of the dataset,
used to produce Model A. During a substorm event at 24/12/2020 measured by Swarm A
a model prediction was made, the result can be seen in figure 4.14. The model is roughly
following the same trend as the data measured from Swarm. However the model seems
to struggle reaching the same peak amplitudes as the measurements. An improvement of
the model could be made by including data from more years and in that way training it
to model substorm dynamics based on a broader range of events.
Comparisons to ground observatories, seen in figures 4.15, 4.16, 4.17, and 4.18, show that
Model A deviates from the measured station data. Model A is clearly not able to model
the signals for Bion
θ
and Bion
ϕ
appearing right after the substorm onset. This strongly
indicates limitation of the model. One explanation for the large deviations in amplitude of
the signals is that the model does not consider the induced currents in the Earth’s mantle.
Far away from the Earth’s surface, e.g. at Swarm altitude, the signals coming from the
induced currents in the mantle are very weak. Ground observatories are stationary and are
placed at the surface of the Earth and hence are more likely to pick up these signals. Thus
the magnetic field contribution from the induced currents appear in the station data but
not in the model itself. The absence of signals, also seen in the observatory comparison,
is likely due to unresolved small scale behaviour or non-typical dynamical features in any
given substorm.
5.5
Controlling factors in the model
A factor that separates this modelling procedure from previously published models e.g.
the AMPS model (Laundal, Finlay, and Olsen 2016) is the inclusion of the extra external
parameter SML. By varying the SML index while fixing all other external parameters we
can investigate the influence of this parameter.
Figure 5.1: The impact of varying the SML index -300nT (a), -400nT (b), and -500nT (c)
for FAC and DFC. The rest of the external parameters are fixed and set to the typical
values as seen in table 3.2.
50
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:57==
The SML index were introduced in the model as a measure of the auroral eletrocjet activity.
The convection auroral electrojets are connected to the FAC and thus making the SML
index an important factor. The importance is illustrated in figure 5.1 here it is shown how
both the amplitude of the FAC and the pattern of the DFC is effected by the changing
SML. It indicates that SML is indeed a crucial factor in controlling the ionospheric field
models we have developed of the ionospheric dynamic.
5.6
The influence of data selection
Model B is a model created with an alternative dataset explained in appendix A.6. The
dataset is from the same timespand 2014-2017 but includes data from all detected onsets.
This results in a dataset with 5,413,183 datapoints for Model B in contrast to the 501,289
datapoints used in the development of Model A.
The RMS values for Model B seen in table 4.5 are noticeable smaller than those of for
Model A both in the weighted and un-weighted case. The Huber weights are also slightly
higher which means more data is given a higher weight. In the plot of the RMS with
respect to QD-latitude, figure 4.19, we see that the RMS is still highest at polar latitudes
but are smaller than the results for Model A. This indicates that Model B has a gen-
eral better fit to the selected data than Model A. However it should be noted that Model
B might contain far more quiet-time data than Model A which will influence the estimates.
In table 4.6 a convergence of ∼0.01% is reached after 10 iterations in contrast to the
∼0.18% of Model A. In general it is desired that the change-rate of the model parameters
is, with iteration number, as small as possible. A way of testing this is by investigating
the predictions made by Model B.
Figure 4.20 shows the model predictions of Model A and B compared to the measured
Swarm data. It appears that Model B does not perform significantly better than Model
A regarding predictions during the substorms. Similarly this is also not the case for the
prediction of the ground observatory data in figure 4.21 and 4.22.
The normalised misfit, convergence, and RMS values have improved from Model A to
Model B however the model performance for data and substorm predictions is not sig-
nificantly different. This means that changing the selection scheme has not supplied the
model with improved knowledge about the dynamics of a substorm; this seems to be
limited by the current model parameterisation.
5.7
Recommendations and Future work
In the above sections the successes and limitations of the model have been discussed. Even
though the model provides promising results there are still obvious improvements needed
to obtain better models of the typical behaviour of the ionospheric field during disturbed
conditions. In this section a few recommendations for future work will briefly be outlined.
Model A is constructed by a data selection scheme that removes a substantial amount
of datapoints. Due to the small time interval of the dataset (2014-2017), this induces
a somewhat imperfect global coverage and limited constraints regarding some ranges of
input parameters that may be visited, especially during large substorms. This limits the
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
51
==PAGE:58==
performance of the model predictions. It was tested, with Model B, that including data
from more onsets, and hence data from smaller substorms from the same time period, did
not improve the model predictions during substorms. Instead for the future it is recom-
mended to include data from more years and most importantly data from several different
satellites such as Swarm B, C, and CHAMP. Especially CHAMP data might be useful
since it was collected at lower altitude, closer to the E-layer currents, than Swarm data.
Figure 4.2 shows that all three histograms have long tails which is a feature of Huber
and Laplace distributions.
The model assumes a Huber-distribution of errors but the
sharp central spike of all three histograms indicates a Laplacian error distribution may
be more appropriate. In future work it might therefore be worth considering a Laplacian
weighting-scheme instead of the Huber weighting.
It was noted that the a-priori error, σ = 40nT, might be an underestimate for the Bion
θ
and Bion
ϕ
components. Applying individual a-priori errors to the different components
could be investigated in future work.
Furthermore, an inclusion of induction in the forward model should be considered in order
to account for the induced currents in the mantle. This might help improve the fit to
ground station data, and it could also be considered to use ground data as input to the
inversions.
As described in section 5.4 there seem to be something missing in the model that causes
the absence of signals. It could be considered to include new input parameters e.g. time
from the substorm onset, or a measure of the amount of open magnetospheric flux or the
size of the polar cap.
52
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:59==
Chapter6
Conclusion
In this thesis models of the magnetic fields produced by electrical currents in the iono-
sphere during magnetic disturbed times have been constructed. This was done by deriving
a climatological model of the average ionospheric currents for given input parameters using
data from the satellite Swarm A and auxiliary data in the form of measurements of the
solar wind and interplanetary magnetic field interpolated in time to match the timestamps
of the Swarm data. The modelling procedure was based on the methods of AMPS [Laun-
dal, Finlay, Olsen, and Reistad 2018] and was carried out in the Python software Multifit
[Kloss 2021]. In addition to the standard solar wind driving input for AMPS the SML index
was introduced in the modelling procedure to better account for variations in the auroral
electrojet activity. Apart from being a model input SML was also used to select magnetic
disturbed times in the dataset through the method proposed by Newell and Gjerloev 2011.
The results of the model, shown in chapter 4, showed that under typical conditions the
model was able to fit the radial component of the ionospheric field Bion
r
within 40-50nT.
The prediction of Bion
θ
and Bion
ϕ
had significantly higher residuals, than the predictions
for Bion
r
, especially near the poles. It was explained that the field-aligned currents (FAC),
which are challenging to model as they can be small scale and highly dynamic, strongly
affected Bion
θ
and Bion
ϕ
but had a less effect on Bion
r
which was mainly dominated by
signals coming from the divergences-free currents (DFC).
During a large substorm event plots of the FACs and DFCs were produced and it was
found that the DFC went from having a complex pattern to being more aligned with the
FAC and gain a more structured pattern and a higher amplitude. The positive DFC val-
ues gather around the downward FAC in region 1 while the negative DFC values gather
around the upward FAC. Plots of the horizontal sheet currents during the same substorm
showed that the maximum current density moved down towards lower magnetic latitudes
during the course of the substorm.
Comparisons to independent satellite data from Swarm A and ground observatory data
were conducted. For the satellite data it was found that the model displayed a similar pat-
tern as the data but failed to reach the same field strength amplitudes. It was suggested
to include satellite data, in the modelling procedure, from more years in order to train
the algorithm to model substorms based on a broader range of events. The comparison to
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
53
==PAGE:60==
ground observatory data showed some large deviations between model and data. It was
suggested that the differences to the ground observatory data, were likely due to unre-
solved small scale behaviour or non-typical dynamical features in any given substorm as
well as un-modelled induced currents in the mantle. It was suggested that future models
should attempt to implement ground observatory data in the modelling scheme.
The influence of the SML index, on the model, was investigated. Here it was found that
SML strongly affected the amplitude of FAC and the pattern of the DFC. Since the SML
index is a measure of the auroral electrojet activity it is connected to the substorm cur-
rent wedge, involving both FAC and the westward substorm electrojet, making it a crucial
factor in the ionospheric modelling.
A number of suggestions and recommendations for future work have been made. It was
concluded that changing the selection scheme to include more data from classified sub-
storms did not affect the modelling significantly and it was instead recommended to include
data from a longer time period and data from different satellites especially CHAMP since
it collects data from lower altitudes closer to the E-layer currents. The histograms of
the residuals between model predictions and data showed Laplacian distributions and it
was recommended to consider using Laplacian weighting-scheme instead of the used Hu-
ber weighting in the robust least squares inversion scheme. It was also noted that the
adopted simple a-priori data error, σ = 40nT, might have been an underestimate for the
components Bion
θ
and Bion
ϕ
and thus it was recommended to investigate the influence of
individual a-priori error estimates for different field components. The absence of some
observed signals, in particular for the ground observatories, suggested that the model was
not complete, thus it was recommended to consider the inclusion of new input parameters
e.g. time from substorm onset, measure of open magnetospheric flux, or size of polar cap
in future models.
54
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
Laundal, K., C. Finlay, N. Olsen, and J. Reistad (2018). “Solar Wind and Seasonal In-
fluence on Ionospheric Currents From Swarm and CHAMP Measurements”. In: Journal
of Geophysical Research: Space Physics 123. Full paper. doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/
2018JA025387.
Kloss, C. (2021). “Geomagnetic field modelling and polar ionospheric currents”. PhD the-
sis. DTU.
Olsen, N. and C. Stolle (2012). “Satellite Geomagnetism”. In: Annu. Rev. Earth Planet.
SCi. Chap. 40(1):441-465. doi: 10.1146/annurev-earth-042711-105540.
Kelley, M. (2007). “The Earth’s Ionosphere. Plasma Physics and Electrodynamics”. In:
vol. 2nd Edition. Academic Press, Amsterdam, San Diego, London.
Baumjohann, W. and R. Nakamura (2007). “Magnetospheric Contributions to the Terres-
trial Magnetic Field”. In: Elsevier B.V. Volume 5, p. 77–91. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-
53802-4.00097-X.
Christensen, U. and J. Wicht (2015). “Numerical Dynamo Simulations”. In: Treatise on
Geophysics 8.2nd edition, pp. 245–277.
Constable, S. (2015). “Induction Studies”. In: Treatise on Geophysics 5.2nd edition, pp. 219–
254.
“Lecture notes, MSc Geomagnetism course, DTU” (Jan. 2021). Lecture notes. url: https:
//learn.inside.dtu.dk/d2l/le/content/59429/viewContent/220058/View.
Cowley, S. W. H. (2000). “Magnetosphere-ionosphere interactions: A tutorial review”. In:
Magneto- spheric Current Systems, pp. 91–106. doi: 10.1029/gm118p0091.
Milan, S. et al. (2017). “Overview of Solar Wind–Magnetosphere–Ionosphere–Atmosphere
Coupling and the Generation of Magnetospheric Currents”. In: Space Science Reviews
206, pp. 547–573.
Kepko, L. et al. (2015). “Substorm Current Wedge Revisited”. In: Space Sci Rev 190:1–46.
doi: 10.1007/s11214-014-0124-9.
Newell, P. and J. Gjerloev (2011). “Evaluation of SuperMAG auroral electrojet indices as
indicators of substorms and auroral power”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research 116,
Full article.
Richmond, A. (1995). “Ionospheric electrodynamics. Handbook of Atmospheric Electro-
dynamics”. In: vol. 2. CRC Press, Boca Raton. Chap. 9.
Laundal, K. (2018). The average magnetic field and polar current system (AMPS) model.
url: https://klaundal.w.uib.no.
Olsen, N., H. Lühr, et al. (2014). “The CHAOS-4 geomagnetic field model”. In: Geophysical
Journal International 197, pp. 815–827. doi: 10.1093/gji/ggu033.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
55
==PAGE:62==
Finlay, C. et al. (2020). “The CHAOS-7 geomagnetic field model and observed changes in
the South Atlantic Anomaly”. In: Earth Planets Space 72 156. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1186/s40623-020-01252-9.
Laundal, K., C. Finlay, and N. Olsen (2016). “Sunlight effects on the 3D polar current
system determined from low Earth orbit measurements”. In: Earth, Planets and Space
68:142. doi: 10.1186/s40623-016-0518-x.
ESA Swarm mission: An overview (2021). url: http://www.geomag.bgs.ac.uk/education/
swarm%5C_overview.html.
Swarm instruments (2012). url: https://www.esa.int/ESA_Multimedia/Images/2012/11/
Swarm_instruments_side_view.
Kauristie, K. et al. (2017). “On the usage of geomagnetic indices for data selection in
internal field modelling”. In: Space Science Reviews 206.0038-6308, pp. 61–90.
SuperMAG (2021). url: https://supermag.jhuapl.edu/info/.
56
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:63==
AppendixA
Model construction and setup
A.1
Regularisation of FAC
In order to create the best possible models a regularisation of the FAC needs to be estab-
lished. This is done by running a series of test models where the regularisation parameter
is varied. In this thesis regularisation parameters between 1e1nT−2 and 1e8nT−2 were
tried.
Table A.1 displays the normalised misfit and model norm for each of the eight
model runs.
α2 [nT]−2
N
Misfit norm.
Model norm. [nT]2
n
m
1e1
501289
1.2915
9.3820e-02
65
3
1e2
501289
1.3156
7.8680e-03
65
3
1e3
501289
1.3351
1.6890e-03
65
3
1e4
501289
1.3847
2.1409e-04
65
3
1e5
501289
1.4378
1.5606e-05
65
3
1e6
501289
1.4731
2.7756e-06
65
3
1e7
501289
1.5270
9.5367e-07
65
3
1e8
501289
1.8137
1.5209e-07
65
3
Table A.1: Eight runs of the model with different regularisation parameters. The table
displays the number of data N, regularisation parameter α2, normalised misfit, model
norm for the FAC, truncation degree n, and truncation order m for the FAC each model
was produced after 7 iterations.
Figure A.1 shows the L-curve that is produced by plotting the model norm, on a logarith-
mic scale, against the normalised misfit, on a linear scale. The red circle marks the point
of maximum curvature also known as the best trade off between good data fit and model
complexity. The title of the plot displays the regularisation parameter for this point.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
57
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.1: An L-curve for the different regularisation parameters for the FAC. The
red circle marks the point of maximum curvature on the graph and the corresponding
regularisation parameter α2 is printed in the title of the plot.
As figure A.1 displays the L-curve does not have a sharp knee hence it is hard to choose a
perfect regularisation parameter. Figure A.2 shows three examples of the current density
Jr for the FAC for a regularisation of 1e4nT−2 (A.2a), 1e6nT−2 (A.2b), 1e8nT−2 ((A.2c)).
This figure reveals the effect of the regularisation. In figure A.2a strong clear patterns at,
and close to, equator appears with changing polarity. As the regularisation increases this
pattern gets damped. Figure A.2b shows a damped pattern around equator while still
maintaining moderately strong currents in the polar regions. In figure A.2c the pattern
around equator has been damped but so have the amplitude of the currents in the polar
regions. Since we do not wish to attenuate the signal coming from the polar currents a
compromise must be made. Thus a regularisation parameter of 1e6nT−2 is chosen based
on figure A.1 and A.2.
58
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:65==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.2: Three examples of the current density Jr modeled with a regularisation of
1e4nT−2 (a), 1e6nT−2 (b), 1e8nT−2 (c) at 20/01/2015 12:00 UTC and in a height of 110
km.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
59
==PAGE:66==
A.2
Choice of truncation level m
The regularisation parameter was found by running eight different models with fixed trun-
cation levels at mFAC = 3, mDFC = 3, nFAC = 65, and nDFC = 45. These levels were
chosen based on the previous AMPS model truncation levels. It was also tested whether or
not these truncation levels were adequate. This was done by running three models with a
fixed regularisation of 1e6nT−2 where mFAC and mDFC was varied simultaneously. Table
A.2 displays the normalised misfit for each of the three test models. As expected, the
misfit appears to drop slightly as the truncation levels mFAC and mDFC increase.
Figure A.3 shows three polar plots of the FAC and DFC with respect to clock angle for
the three test models. There appears to be a small change in amplitude for both currents.
As the truncation levels increase so does the complexity of the DFC-pattern. Table A.2
also indicates that the models with higher truncation levels need longer time to converge
than the model for mDFC, mFAC = 3.
To avoid the risk of a model that is unnecessarily complex and is computationally slow the
truncation level of mDFC, mFAC = 3 was chosen and kept fixed for the results presented
in the thesis. This is justified since the normalised misfit is not changing much for the
truncations tested.
mFAC
mDFC
nFAC
nDFC
Misfit norm.
||δm||/||m||
3
3
65
45
1.4731
1.0396e-02 ∼1.04%
4
4
65
45
1.4458
1.1482e-02 ∼1.15%
5
5
65
45
1.4154
1.3097e-02 ∼1.31%
Table A.2: Displayed are the different truncation levels of the model vector m and the
corresponding normalised misfit for three different model runs. δm is the change in model
parameter from one iteration to the next. The models were produced with a regularisation
parameter of 1e6nT−2 and a run of 7 iterations each.
Figure A.3: Plots of the FAC and DFC with respect to clock angle, under typical con-
ditions, for three different truncation levels of mDFC and mFAC. Here nDFC = 45 and
nFAC = 65 for all three plots.
60
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:67==
A.3
Choice of truncation level n
The choice of truncation levels nDFC and nFAC is based on three test-models each made
from 2 iterations with an a-priori error of 30nT and a regularisation parameter of 1e6nT−2.
Increasing the truncation levels also increases the computation time and hence only two
iterations are run. The convergence, normalised misfit, and truncation levels for these
tests can be seen in table A.3. The change-rate is rather high and that is due to the
few iterations run, it is also seen that increasing the truncation level also increases the
change-rate. Hence higher truncation levels requires a higher number of iterations in order
for the model to converge.
mFAC
mDFC
nFAC
nDFC
Misfit norm.
||δm||/||m||
3
3
60
40
1.4250
3.0458e-01 ∼30.5%
3
3
65
45
1.4227
3.4355e-01 ∼34.4%
3
3
70
50
1.4209
3.8380e-01 ∼38.4%
Table A.3: Displayed are the different truncation levels nDFC and nFAC and the cor-
responding normalised misfit for three different model runs. δm is the change in model
parameter from one iteration to the next. The models were produced with a regularisation
parameter of 1e6nT−2 and a run of 2 iterations each.
In figure A.4 are shown the FACs and DFCs for the three test-models with varying trun-
cation levels.
The FACs and DFCs do not change significantly much when increasing
the truncation levels nFAC and nDFC. The normalised misfit seen in table A.3 seems to
decrease, but only slightly, with increasing truncation level. Because we wish to main-
tain a somewhat simple model with a high accuracy truncation levels of nFAC = 65 and
nDFC = 45 are chosen. By increasing the truncation levels we also increase the complexity
and the computation time of the model which, in the case of this thesis, has been chosen
not to do due to time constraints.
Figure A.4: Plots of the FAC and DFC with respect to clock angle under typical conditions
for three different truncation levels of nDFC and nFAC. Here mDFC = 3 and mFAC = 3
for all three plots.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
61
==PAGE:68==
A.4
Test of convergence
In this section it will be investigated how many iterations are needed in order to obtain
a good convergence. For this a test with a regularisation parameter of 1e6(nT)−2 and
truncation levels of mFAC = 3, mDFC = 3, nFAC = 65, and nDFC = 45 is made. The
normalised misfit and ||δm||/||m|| of the last 7 to 10 iterations are shown in table A.4.
||δm||/||m|| is a measure of convergence. δm represents the change in model parameter
from one iteration to the next. To say that a model has converged the following must
be satisfied: ||δm|| ≪||m||. It is seen from table A.4 that this is the case for the last 4
iterations. The 7th iteration however seems to have the highest value of both misfit and
||δm|| ≪||m|| which indicates that the model has not yet reached a proper convergence
level.
The rate at which ||δm||/||m|| is decreasing from iteration to iteration is dropping which
indicates that it has reached a plateau. By including more iterations ||δm||/||m|| would be
smaller however there are no indications that the misfit would change significantly. Thus
I fix the number of iterations to 10 for the modelling procedure throughout this thesis.
Iteration number
||δm||/||m||
Misfit norm.
7
1.0396e-02 ≈1.04%
1.4731
8
6.1493e-03 ≈0.61%
1.4730
9
3.8351e-03 ≈0.38%
1.4730
10
2.4704e-03 ≈0.25%
1.4730
Table A.4: The last four iterations for a model with a regularisation of 1e6nT−2, a-priori
error of 30nT, and truncation levels of mFAC = 3, mDFC = 3, nFAC = 65, and nDFC = 45
is shown.
A.5
Test of a-priori data error
σ is a measure of data errors. For all the above models σ was fixed to 30nT. For the final
model however, a σ of 40nT is chosen. This is based on three test models where σ was
varied. Table A.5 displays the settings of these models.
It is seen that a model with σ = 100nT will converge faster than a models with lower σ
values. However by increasing σ we also damp the amplitude of the signal in particular
at the poles which we would like to avoid. However with a low value of σ we risk having
a model that will not converge and hence we need to increase σ.
Figure A.5 shows two plots of the RMS for the residuals between model prediction and
Swarm data with respect to QD-latitude for a-priori data errors of 30nT (A.5a) and 100nT
(A.5b). Despite the difference in a-priori error the two plots do not deviate significantly
much from each other. This means that a higher σ does not necessarily increase the model
accuracy. In figures it is seen that Bion
r
and F ion can be fitted within 40nT at the poles.
Based on these plots and the convergence of the models a σ-value of 40nT is chosen.
62
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:69==
σ (nT)
α2
(nT−2)
Total
iteration
number
(mDFC,
mFAC)
(nDFC,
nFAC)
Misfit norm.
||δm||/||m||
30
1e6
10
(3, 3)
(45, 65)
1.4730
2.4704e-03 ≈0.25%
50
1e6
10
(3, 3)
(45, 65)
0.7626
1.3253e-03 ≈0.13%
100
1e6
10
(3, 3)
(45, 65)
0.2946
5.0287e-04 ≈0.05%
Table A.5: The results of three model runs with varying a-priori data error σ.
(a)
(b)
Figure A.5: Plots of the RMS with respect to QD-latitude for the models σ = 30nT (a)
and σ = 100nT (b).
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
63
==PAGE:70==
A.6
Construction of Model B
Model B makes use of the same auxiliary data obtained from Swarm A as Model A. The
data is from 01/01/2014 to 31/12/2017. The difference between Model A and Model B is
the substorm selection criteria.
Instead of using the change in SML value Model B uses a SML-threshold. The SML-
threshold is a measure of the restored SML value. In this model the threshold is set to
50% of the onset SML value.
Each onset, located in the dataset, will in Model B result in a substorm. The minimum
duration of a substorm is set to 30min with means that the data selection method includes
data for all values that are characterised as onset and values 30min after the substorm
onset. If the SML-threshold of 50% of the SML value is reached after 30min the algorithm
stops and does not include more datapoints from this substorm and moves on to the next
substorm onset. If the threshold is not reached the algorithm will continue on including
data until the threshold is reached or after 3hr have pasted.
Figure A.6:
A timeseries of SML indices for Swarm A data times for 03/09/2015 -
15/09/2015.
The red dots represents the onsets found using the algorithm described
for Model B while the dark blue dots denotes the selected disturbed data.
The same
timeseries has been plotted for Model A see figure 3.6.
An example of the selection criteria is shown in figure A.6. It is clearly seen how this
model includes more datapoints. About 17% of the original datafile is included in the
construction of Model B due to this selection scheme.
This results in a better global
coverage.
64
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:71==
AppendixB
Scripts
Table B.1 displays the scripts used to derive the ionospheric current models, process the
datafiles, and visualise the figures shown throughout this thesis. All scripts can be found
in the zip-folder, called ”Scripts”, submitted along with this thesis.
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
65
==PAGE:72==
Name of script
Short description
Data processing:
driver.py
Python script used for model derivation.
The script contains data configuration,
dataload function, and model specification
e.g. truncation degree, robust weighting,
a-priori error estimate, and regularisation.
add_external_parameters.py
Python script that collects external solar
driving parameters and interpolates
them to fit Swarm data times.
dSML_Selection.ipynb
Data selection script for Model A based
on the rate of change of SML.
Threshold_Selection.ipynb
Data selection script for Model B based
on a SML-threshold.
CleanMyFile.ipynb
Removes NaN-values and large outliers.
PlotCoef.ipynb
Distributions for different data variables
in the ”cleaned” datafile.
Test of model setup:
Regularization_FAC.ipynb
Comparison of models with different
regularisations of FAC used in
section A.1.
Truncation_dependance.ipynb
Comparison of models with different
truncation levels of n and m for
the DFC and FAC used in
section A.2 and A.3.
Sigma_test.ipynb
Comparison of models with different
a-priori data errors used in section A.5.
Visualisation of results:
FinalResults.ipynb
Containing plotting commands used to
produce the plots seen in section 4.1.
ResultsComparisons.ipynb
Containing plotting commands for all
figures shown in section 4.2 - 4.4.
Table B.1: Name and short description of all the scripts used to derive the models and
visualise the figures shown in this thesis. All scripts can be found in the uploaded zip-folder
submitted along with this thesis.
66
Global models of substorm dynamics from satellite magnetic field measurements
==PAGE:73==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 327
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 9500
www.space.dtu.dk
