==PAGE:1==
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in
the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
Exploration of Toll­Like Receptor Agonists in Cell Lines
Master Thesis
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1
Diabetes
Exploration of Toll­Like Receptor Agonists in Cell Lines
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
Anja Jensen­Dahm
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Søltofts Plads,
Bygning 224, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
http://www.bioengineering.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Bartholin Institute, Department
of Pathology, at Rigshospitalet in collaboration with Department of Biotechnology and
Biomedicine, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of cell biology.
Anja Jensen­Dahm ­ s164494
Signature
Date
ii
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is one of the most prevalent autoimmune diseases in children and
adolescent world wide, and while genetic susceptibility is known to contribute to disease
progression, it cannot alone explain the development of T1D. Environmental factors also
play a critical role in type 1 diabetes progression, and particularly virus has been deemed
an important mediator.
In this study, differences between pancreatic alpha and beta cells were investigated and
compared to macrophages, as it was hypothesised that innate antiviral immune sensor
systems are differently regulated in the two cell types upon stimulation with Toll­like re­
ceptor (TLR) agonists. Research was done in regards to genes known to be dysregulated
in T1D patients. Furthermore, analyzes to clarify if high glucose environments affect gene
expression and stress levels of the cells were performed. In addition oxidtive phosphory­
lation was investigated to measure stress­levels of the cells.
The results showed that alpha cells and macrophages increase the oxidative phosphyla­
tion and ATP production, required for viral degradation upon TLR7 stimulation, while beta
cells tended to decrease ATP production.
Furthermore, all three cell lines upregulate innate antiviral immune genes, such as MDA5
(melanoma differentiation­associated protein 5) and ISG15 (Interferon stimulated gene
15), downstream from TLR3 and TLR7 cells upon stimulation. The results revealed fur­
thermore, that alpha cells facilitated the strongest response.
In conclusion, the results from this study support that alpha cells are better at clearing
virus, after an infection has been established, compared to beta cells, which contributes
to the explanation of why beta cells are more sensitive towards infections.
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
iii
==PAGE:6==
Dansk Resumé
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) er en af de mest udbredte immun sygdomme i børn og unge ver­
den over, og genetisk predisponering er ikke hele forklaringen. Miljøfaktorer spiller også
en afgørende rolle og særligt virus anses for at være vigtig brik i udviklingen af T1D.
I dette studie er forskelle mellem pankreatiske alfa­ og beta celler blevet undersøgt og
samlignet med makrofager. Hypotesen var at alfa­ og betaceller regulerer innate an­
tivirale immune sensor systemer forskelligt ved stimulering med Toll­like receptor (TLR)
agonister.
Forskningen blev udført på gener kendt for at være dysregulerede i T1D patienter. Tolbu­
tamide blev også brugt til at undersøge, hvorvidt glukose kan påvirke immunresponsen i
cellerne. Derudover, blev cellernes stresniveauer tested, ved at undersøge den oxidative
fosforylering under forskellige forhold.
Resultaterne viste at alfaceller og makrofager øger den oxidative fosforylering og dermed
ATP­produktion når de udsættes for en TLR7 agonist, mens betacellerne omvendt sænker
ATP­produktionen.
Alle tre cellelinjer opregulerede desuden innate antivirale immun­gener, såsom MDA5
(melanoma differentiation­associated protein 5) og ISG15 (Interferon stimulated gene 15)
under stimulering. Resultaterne viste desuden, at alfacellerne havde det kraftigste re­
sponse på stimuleringen af de pankreatiske celler.
Baseret på resultaterne fra studiet, er konklusionen at alfaceller, ift. betaceller, er bedre
til at bekæmpe virus, efter at infektionen har etableret sig, hvilket kunne forklare hvorfor
betaceller er mere følsomme overfor infektioner.
iv
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
A great thanks to Ph.D, Senior Researcher Martin Haupt­Jørgensen, for giving me the
opportunity to write my thesis in colaboration with the Bartholin Institue, Rigshospitalet,
and for the supervision and support throughout the project.
I would like express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Ph.D. Postdoc Kristina Peder­
sen. Her constant support, critical thinking and expertise has been indispensable to me.
Thank you for an always open door and a phone on speaker, even the 1st of January, the
immense help in the laboratory, and for always keeping candy in the bottom drawer.
Thank you to Professor Susanne Brix Pedersen, for agreeing to be my internal supervior
from DTU.
A special thanks is also in place the Lab Technician Maureen Inventor Hansen, for tech­
nical support in the laboratory, for the help with some of my final samples, and for all the
festive initiatives.
I would also like to thank the rest of the people at the Bartholin institute. These past five
month would not have been as fun and enlightening without you. A special thanks also to
Master Student Ole Pihl Christiansen, for some great discussion about all from the innate
immune system to roast pork.
Finally, I would like to thank my boyfriend, close friends and family for the great support
during my education and the writing of this thesis. Thanks for helping out, and for listening
every time!
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Dansk Resumé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Type 1 diabetes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Innate Antivrial Immune Response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Pancreatic Cell Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Insulin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.5
Cell Stress
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
1.6
Aim and Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2
Material and methods
17
2.1
Cell Cultures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.2
Testing of TLR Ligands and Therapeutics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.3
Gene Expression Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.4
Stimulation Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.5
Mitochondrial Cell stress test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.6
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3
Results
26
3.1
Using Poly­D­Lysine to increase adherence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2
Determining ligand concentrations in order to ensure immune response . . 26
3.3
Using Tolbutamide to simulate high glucose concentrations in order to in­
duce insulin secretion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.4
Measuring NO Concentrations to Determine Cell Stress . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.5
Gene Expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.6
Cell stress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4
Discussion
38
5
Conclusion
43
Bibliography
44
A Appendix
50
B Appendix
52
C Appendix
54
C.1 Krebs­Ringer bicarbonate buffer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
C.2 PCR programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
C.3 Primers used in this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
C.4 Seahorse Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
D Appendix
58
D.1 Insulin ELISA data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
vi
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Type 1 diabetes
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is one of the most dominant autoimmune diseases in children and
adolescents, with a prevalence of 0.5% in Denmark [1]. Worldwide it affects approxi­
mately 9 million people and accounts for 5­10% of all diabetes cases [2]. There has been
an alarming increase in incidence over the past 30 years [3] which cannot in itself be ex­
plained by transmission of genetic drift. In addition, the concordance rate in monozygotic
twins are only about 50% [4] which could indicate that environmental factors are important
contributors to disease progression. Therefore, it is of increasing importance to investi­
gate environmental factors, such as viral infections investigated in this study, that may be
essential determinants of the growing incidence of the disease.
T1D is an autoimmune disease characterized by T cell infiltration of the pancreatic islets,
leading to insulitis and destruction of the insulin­producing beta cells followed by hypoinsu­
linemia and hyperglycemia. Furthermore, it is associated with severely reduced life ex­
pectancy and complications such as retinopathy and coronary artery disease [5]. To date,
we know very little about the reason for the specific beta cell destruction, whilst other hor­
mone producing pancreatic cells such as alpha­, delta­, and epsilon cells are spared [6].
1.1.1
Pathogenesis
T1D is most often preceded by islet autoantibody (AB) seroconversion, yet the knowledge
about the progression rate of T1D after seroconversion is still limited, and some AB pos­
itive (AB+) individuals never develop the disease [7]. In a study from 2013, Ziegler et al
[7] showed a clear correlation between children with multiple ABs and an increased risk
of T1D compared to children with only one or no ABs. Here the incidence of T1D was
0.4% for AB­ children and 12.7% for children with a single type of AB, while it increased
to 61.6% and 79.1% for children with 2 and 3 types of AB respectively, within ten years
of AB detection. Furthermore, the type of ABs also seem to affect the risk and progres­
sion rate of T1D. The combination of insulinoma antigen 2 ABs (IA­2As) and insulin ABs
(IAAs) induce a higher risk than IAA in combination with glutamic acid decarboxylase 65
ABs (GADA) or IA­2A cimbined with GADA. In addition, a small percentage of patients do
not present with any ABs before onset of T1D [7].
Despite the limited information on disease progression, it can typically be classified into
three stages once ABs have been identified. In stage 1, the patient is asymptomatic and
still posses a high level of functional beta cells. In stage 2, peripheral CD4+ and CD8+
T cells with beta­cell specificity is often found in the patient and the functional beta­cell
mass decreases, which results in dysglycaemia. Moving into stage 3, full onset of insulin­
dependent diabetes occurs. The patient has most often evolved a persistent inflammation
of the pancreatic islets (insulitis) as well as persistent hyperglycaemia. In stage 3, symp­
toms like polyuria, polydipsia and polyphagia also occur, as the beta cell mass left has
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
1
==PAGE:10==
insufficient production of insulin, thus the patient must rely on chronic insulin treatment
[4].
Investigations of insulitis­positive pancreatic islets from recent­onset T1D patients show
that the infiltration is predominately caused by CD8+ T cells [8, 9]. Macrophages (CD68+)
are also present during both early and late insulitis but in less abundance. CD20+ B cells
are present in only small numbers in early insulitis. However, they seem to be recruited
to the islets when beta­cell death increases [9]. CD4+ T cells also infiltrate the islets but in
fewer numbers than both CD8+ T cells and CD68+ cells [9]. CD138+ plasma cell seems
to be infrequent at all stages of insulitis, and Forkhead box protein P3+ regulatory T (Treg)
cells and Natural killer (NK) cells are almost completely absent [9, 10].
T cells are produced in the thymus, were they also undergo positive and negative selec­
tion in order to generate functionally competent and self­tolerent T cells. In the thymic cor­
tex hematopoietic lymphoid progenitors develope into T cell receptor (TCR)­expressing
CD4+CD8+ double­positive (DP) thymocytes. During early T cell maturation, the V(D)J
rearrangement of TCRα and TCRβ genomic loci in thymocytes result in great diversity be­
tween DP thymocytes. Cortical epithelial cells, developed in the thymus and contributes
to T cell development, express self­peptides on major histocombatibility complex (MHC)
class I or II molecules. The DP thymocytes that bind to these self­peptides with low affin­
ity receives a survival signal and differentiate into single positve CD4+CD8­ or CD4­CD8+
thymocytes. Positively selected thymocytes starts expressing the chemokine receptor
CCR7, and migrate to the thymic medulla. Here a subpopulation of medullary thymic
epithelial cells produce CCR7 ligands, thus attracting the positively selected thymocytes.
After positive selection, the thymocytes undergo negative selection in the medulla, where
thymocytes with high­affinity self­reactivity are deleted through apoptosis. The surviving
cells are subsequently released into circulation as mature naïve T cells [11].
In order for the autoreactive T cell to infiltrate the islets, naïve T cells need to be primed.
This happens in the pancreatic lymph node, where antigen presenting cells (APC) present
islet specific autoantigens, such as insulin, glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD65), and
islet protein tyrosine phosphatase­like molecule (IA­2), with the help of MHC molecules to
the naïve T cell [12]. While presentation of antigens through MHC class II is recognized
by CD4+ T cell, CD8+ T requires presentation via MHC class I. The T cell recognize the
peptide via the TCR and this interaction is the first signal of T cell activation. In total three
signals are required, without all three, the T cell instead becomes anergic. For signal 2,
APCs upregulate the expression of the co­stimulatory signal; CD80/CD86, which binds to
CD28 on T cells. Furthermore, the APC also produces pro­inflammatory cytokines after
activation, which serves as the third signal and also helps differentiate between type 1, 2,
and 3 immune responses [13]. By mediating a type 1 response, CD4+ type 1 helper (Th1)
cells present the antigen on MHC class I molecules and furthermore secretes interferon­γ
(IFN­γ) thus activating CD8+ cytotoxic T cells which, as mentioned above, is the predom­
inant cell type infiltrating the islets of T1D patients [9]. Studies on non­obese diabetic
(NOD) mice, a common T1D animal model, also confirms that Th1 cells are key in de­
2
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:11==
struction of beta cells, as activators of CD8+ T cells [8] further supporting the important
role of T cells in T1D pathogenesis. Another subpopulation of T cells are the Treg cells
that plays a fundamental role in creation and maintanance of periferal tolerance [14]. De­
ficiency of Treg cells in the islets of T1D patients may therefore be an underlying cause of
disease, as Treg cells suppress autoreactive T cells and induce immune tolerance [9, 14]
T1D is resulting from loss of immune tolerance to beta­cell autoantigens, and posttrans­
lational modifications (PTM) has been investigated as a possible contributor to this event.
It has been suggested that PTMs of beta­cell proteins could generate neo­autoantigens
that the immune system is ignorant to, as they may be absent during thymic selection of
T cells, thus causing the T cells to react to these ”foreign” proteins. This can furthermore
cause a break in the peripheral tolerance towards unmodified islet antigens, strengthened
by the lack of Treg cells, as T cells are able to recognize both the cognate neo­epitope and
the native antigen that are readily presented on beta cells [15]. Preproinsulin is implicated
as a potential target autoantigen in T cell–mediated beta­cell destruction both in humans
and in NOD mice. Thus, this islet protein, is suggested as a likely candidate for PTM [16].
1.1.2
Genetics
T1D was recognized as an organ­specific autoimmune disease in the 1960s and this view
was strengthened by the observation of HLA being associated with insulin­dependent
diabetes, and the demonstrations of islet antibodies [17]. Today, HLA is considered the
strongest genetic factor of T1D as three polymorphic variants of the HLA class II gene,
determines between 40­60% of genetic susceptibility [4, 18].
Figure 1.1: Structure of the two HLA molecules [19]
The HLA molecules are split into two classes; I and II, based on their structure (see figure
1.1) and function in the immune response [20]. HLA class I molecule are expressed by
all nucleated cells, as it presents intracellular peptides to CD8+ T cells thus inducing a
cytotoxic immune attack upon infection of the host. The CD4+ T cells are activated when
their TCRs recognises exogenous antigens presented by HLA class II molecules which
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
3
==PAGE:12==
are present on professional antigen presenting cells such as dendric cells (DCs), B cells
and macrophages [4, 20].
HLA class II consist of a heterodimer encoded by genes at the HLA­DR, HLA­DQ, and
HLA­DP loci where particular variants of the three loci can modulate the risk of occur­
rence of beta­cell autoimmunity and thus T1D. One example is HLA­DRB1*04 combined
with DQA1*03 and DQB1*03:02 that confer high risk of T1D [4]. Regnell et al. [4] also
hypothesis that a trigger related to either a DQ8 heterodimer or a DQ2 heterodimer could
cause an autoimmune reaction against proinsulin (in the form of IAA) or GAD65 (in the
form of GADA), respectively, further endorsing the importance of specific HLA haplotypes
in relation to T1D.
AB produced by plasma cells usually precede the clinical onset of T1D and is therefore
used as prognostic biomarkers of the disease [4]. Children having the HLA­DR3­DQ2
haplotype developes GADA first while those with the HLA­DR4­DQ8 haplotype develops
IAAs first [21]. This too support that genetic circumstances are involved in the trigger­
ing event of T1D. Besides IAA and GADA, IA­2A and zinc transporter 8 autoantibodies
(ZnT8A) do also appear, as a second or third AB, which further increases the risk of de­
veloping T1D [4].
Virtually all children developing T1D before the age of five produce IAAs first, suggest­
ing an important role of peptides derived from insulin [6]. The strong genetic connection
between HLA class II and T1D facilitates activation of CD4+ T cells, and as mentioned
in section 1.1.1, Th1 cells are thought to be key for beta­cell destruction, due to their
recruitment of CD8+ T cells [8]. Moreover, Th1 cells can be induced by IL­12p70 that
is one of the main cytokines produced during viral infections. Th1 cells also stimulate
(auto)antibody production in B cells and activate macrophages [22]. However, it is impor­
tant to note that the functional activity of CD4+ cells can vary depending on the ratio of T
helper cell subtypes, as not only Th1 cells are produced. Therefore, the reduced rate of
beta­cell destruction in some patients, might reflect conflicting activities between two pop­
ulations of immune cells, one of which could be protective of beta cells. It has therefore
been suggested that Treg cells could play an important role in regulating the inflammatory
process [9].
Other genetic factors have also been be associated with T1D. Several innate antiviral
immune genes has been shown to be dysregulated in T1D patients, presumable due to
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) found within these genes. The list of dysregulated
genes include TLR4, TLR7, several type 1 IFN genes, IRF7, the entire OAS gene family,
MX1, MX2, ISG15 and IFIH1 amongst others [23]. SNPs and dysregulation of IFIH1
has been studies extensively in relation to T1D [24]. IFIH1 encodes for the melanoma
differentiation­associated protein 5 (MDA5) protein, a pattern recognition receptor (PRR)
that recognizes virus, and association of dysregulation of this receptor in relation to T1D
has strengthened the viral hypothesis elaborated in section 1.1.3.
T1D is strongly connected to genetic susceptibility and does also have a familial aggrega­
tion. Children born in families with T1D has an increased risk of getting diabetes at some
4
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:13==
point in their life. The risk varies depending whether it is the mother (3%), father (5%), or
a sibling (8%) who has the disease [4, 21]. However, not everything can be explained by
genetics as for example the concordance rate in monozygotic twins is only about 50% [4,
18], indicating the involvement of environmental risk factors in addition to genetics.
1.1.3
Environmental factors
Many different environmental factors can possibly affect the progression of T1D in an
individual. Caesarean section, lack of breast feeding, low levels of vitamine D, dietary
gluten, changes in microbiota, viral infections etc. can all, alone or in combination, af­
fect the immune balance, thus influence the susceptibility to disease development [3, 25].
These factors fits into the ”hygiene hypothesis” which suggests that the decrease in in­
fection frequency is negatively correlated to the frequency of allergies and autoimmune
diseases in industrialized countries, a trend observed over the past 40 years [26]. This
also applies to T1D, as we have seen a dramatic increase in prevalence and incidence
in western countries while having a significantly lower incidence rate in middle­ and low
income countries [27].
Since the end of the nineteenth century, T1D have been connected to prior viral infec­
tions [17]. Viruses are able to infect beta cells inducing a strong immune responses which
leads to local inflammation by reducing beta­cell viability and enabling autoantigen pre­
sentation to naïve T cells by APCs [3, 17, 28]. This makes viruses strong candidates
for environmental triggers of T1D, which is further supported by the seasonal variation in
the incidence of T1D, where disease diagnosis is more frequent during the cold months
which has been shown in a variety of epidemiological studies [29]. Many viruses includ­
ing cytomegalovirus, mumps, rotavirus, and rubella, have been linked to T1D, however,
enteroviruses have the most evidence available, implicating them as triggers of T1D [3].
One suggestion of an immune response [17], is that the virus may trigger one or more
islet antibodies, usually IAA and/or GADA, by infecting the beta cells and thus reduce
beta cell viability which causes progression to lysis. This makes the beta cell susceptible
to recognition by resident macrophages or DCs. After activation of such cells, they will
move to a draining lymph node of the pancreas, where autoantigen presentation will take
place thus creating the foundation for beta­cell autoimmunity in predisposed individuals
[17].
Pedersen et al. [23] also found supporting evidence for enterovirus to be an important en­
vironmental risk factor. In the study, all major innate antiviral immune pathways were in­
vestigated, and there was found a significant dysregulation of 21 genes in islets of Langer­
hans in either AB+, new­onset T1D, long standing T1D patients compared to healthy con­
trols. Of those 21 genes, 13 were dysregulated in new­onset T1D patients. One of the
dysregulated genes was toll­like receptor (TLR) 7, a PRR for single­stranded RNA (ss­
RNA). The receptor was downregulated in AB+ individuals, while being upregulated in
new­onset and long­standing T1D patients. TLR3, a double­stranded RNA (dsRNA) re­
ceptor, showed the same trend. Downstream from TLR3 and TLR7 is the 2’­5’A oligoad­
enylate (2’­5’A) pathway encoded by the OAS gene family. This family of genes was also
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
5
==PAGE:14==
found to be dysregulated in T1D patients [23]. When synthesised, 2’­5’A binds to the
ankyrin repeat domain of monomeric RNase L, activating it to form an active dimer that
degrades ssRNA [30]. However, Pedersen et al. also found indications that the RNase L
gene could be downregulated in T1D patients, including prediabetic AB+ patients, imply­
ing that these patients will have difficulties clearing an infection, substantiating that viral
infections are immense risk factors.
Investigation of the pancreatic islets have given an indication of which genes might be of
interest in relation to viral infections and T1D, as it is indicated that environmental factors
such as enteroviral infections can stimulate the dysregulated 2’­5’ pathway through TLR
7 and type 1 IFNs in predisposed individuals, thus causing inflammation in the pancreatic
islets, autoimmunity, and finally progression to T1D.
1.2
The Innate Antivrial Immune Response
The first line of defense of the body is the innate immune system which facilitates a broad
non­specific response against invading pathogens. Several classes of preformed soluble
molecules are present in extracellular fluid, blood, and epithelial secretions in order to kill
pathogens or weaken its effect. If these fail, innate immune cells such as macrophages,
DCs, and NK cells becomes activated by PRRs that detect highly conserved patterns
on the pathogens known as pathogen­associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) [31, 32].
PRRs are specialized sensor pathways and each receptor recognizes certain types of
PAMPs, thus activating specific signaling cascades initiating an innate immune response
capable of clearing that pathogen [31]. PRRs are localized either in the cytoplasm where
they recognize intracellular PAMPs, or as membrane­bound receptors on the cell surface
or in the endosome where they recognize extracellular PAMPs in the extracellular space
or after uptake into the cell by e.g phagocytosis [32].
While nucleotide­binding oligomerization domain­like (NOD­line) receptors bind peptido­
glycon from bacteria, TLR2 bind lipoproteins on Gram­positive bacteria and fungi, and
TLR4 binds lipopolysaccarides (LPS) on Gram­negative bacteria, TLR3, TLR7, and MDA5
investigated in this study, all recognize viruses. TLR3 and TLR7 are transmembrane pro­
teins localized in the endosome and are both viral receptors, recognizing dsRNA and
ssRNA respectively. MDA5 is a cytoplasmic PRR that is also activated by virus as it
binds long dsRNA as well as uncapped ds­ and ssRNA. Upon binding of viral PAMPs,
both TLR3, TLR7, and MDA5 induce type 1 IFN production [33].
General for all TLRs are that ligand binding induces oligomerization of their Toll/IL­1 re­
ceptor (TIR) domain, which initiates a signaling cascade after recruitment of adaptor pro­
teins. All TLRs recruit myeloid differentiation primary response protein 88 (MyD88) with
the exception of TLR3 which instead recruits the adaptor protein TIR­domain­containing
adapter­inducing interferon­β (TRIF). TRIF initiates signaling cascades that activates IFN
regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and NF­κB, while MyD88 activates NF­κB, IRF5, and IRF7 [34].
When dsRNA is detected by TLR3, it facilitates oligomerization of the TIR domain that in
turn binds to the TIR domain of TRIF (see figure 1.2). The TIR­TIR interaction facilitates
oligomerization of TRIF that becomes activated. TRIF then binds the ubiquitin ligase, tu­
6
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:15==
mor necrosis factor receptor–associated factor (TRAF) 3 that inhibits the kappa B kinase­ε
(IKKε) complex and furthermore recruits TANK­binding kinase 1 (TBK1). The TRIF/TBK1
complex recruits and phosphorylates IRF3 causing IRF3 dimerization and translocation
into the nucleus where type 1 IFNs such as the IFN­β gene is transcribed [3, 34].
After binding of ssRNA, the TIR domain of TLR7 interacts with the TIR domain of the
MyD88 (see figure 1.2) to induce type 1 IFNs and proinflammatory cytokines. MyD88
formes a Myddosome signaling complex with proteins from the interleukin­1 receptor­
associated kinase (IRAK) family, namely IRAK4 and IRAK1/2. This complex formation is
driven by oligomerization of their respective death domains. The complex recruites IRF7
which is phosphorylated by IRAK1. Also TRAF3 and TRAF6 takes part in the activation
of IRF7. After activation, IRF7 is translocated into the nucleus where type 1 IFNs such as
IFN­α are transcribed [3, 34].
Both MyD88 and TRIF also induce transcription of proinflammatory cytokines such as
IFN­γ, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α and interleukin (IL) 12 via the NF­κB pathway. NF­
κB is a heterodimer sequestered in the cytoplasm by its inhibitory subunit IκB. When IκB is
phosphorylated by the IKK complex consisting of the catalytic subunits IKKα, IKKβ and the
regulatory subunit NEMO, it becomes polyubiquitinated and degraded. This releases NF­
κB which is translocated into the nucleus where proiniflammatory genes are transcribed
[34].
The signaling adaptor of MDA5 is the mitochondrial antiviral­signaling protein (MAVS).
MDA5 binds to the K63­linked polyubiquitin chains of the tandem caspase recruitment
domain (CARD) locates on MAVS. This triggers oligomyzation and initiates a helical as­
sembly of MAVS at the outer membran of the mitochondria. Through recruitment of TRAF
proteins, MAVS activates TBK1 and IKK. This results in activation and translocation of
IRF3, IRF7 and NF­κB into the nucleus for transcription of type 1 IFNs and proinflamma­
tory cytokines (see figure 1.2) [34, 33].
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.2: PRRs (blue) screen the intra­ and extracellular environment for PAMPs.
Activated PRRs bind adaptor proteins (purple) and recruit protein kinases (yellow) and
ubiquitin­protein ligases (green) that regulate immune signal transduction to transcription
factors (orange) through PTM of signaling cascade proteins. Immune signaling scaffolds
such as the mitochondria typically coordinate these actions. Activated transcription fac­
tors are translocated into the nucleus where they bind to promoter response elements,
stimulating appropriate antiviral gene transcription. Blue and green circles represent ubiq­
uitination and phosphorylation, respectively. Black arrows show activation; red lines show
deactivation [33].
8
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:17==
1.2.1
Viruses as triggers of IFN­α responses
Enterovirus is a genus within the family of Picornaviridae, comprising over 300 serotypes,
and includes species like poliovirus, rhinovirus and coxackievirus, the latter being sus­
pected of triggering T1D in susceptible individuals. These viruses are causative agents
for a wide spectrum of diseases and are, in humans, some of the most common infectious
agents worldwide [35].
Enteroviruses are small (15­30nm) viruses encapsulated in icosahedral capsids contain­
ing positive­sense ssRNA but without a lipid envelope. The viral genome has an internal
ribosomal entry site and the infected cell can therefore directly translate the mRNA [3,
35]. Enterovirus enters the cell by binding two receptors, namely decay accelerating fac­
tor (DAF) and coxsackie­adenovirus receptor (CAR). Inside the cell, the virus is uncoated
and recognized by PRRs such as MDA5 or TLR7, which triggers antiviral immune re­
sponses mediated by IFN stimulated genes (ISGs) [3].
Activation of the PRR and subsequently transcription of type 1 IFN genes leads to secre­
tion of the cytokines, which establishes an effective type 1 IFN­driven immune response.
This induces IFN­stimulated genes (ISGs) which encode mediators for establishing an
antiviral and inflammatory state within the host [36]. After secretion, type 1 IFNs bind to
the cognate IFN­α/β receptor (IFNAR) causing phosphorylation of tyrosine kinases Janus
kinase (JAK) 1 and tyrosine kinase (TYK) 2. This facilitates the phosphorylation of the cy­
toplasmic effectors signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 1 and STAT2,
leading to dimerization of the two molecules and subsequent interaction with interferon
regulatory factor 9 (IRF9) to form the interferon­stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) com­
plex [36, 37]. The ISGF3 complex is finally translocated into the nucleus, where it binds
to IFN­stimulated response element resulting in ISG transcription [36].
ISGs includes the OAS family, MX1, and ISG15 amongs others [23]. Activation of the OAS
genes results in production of 2’­5’A that binds the ankyrin repeat domain of monomeric
RNase L. This causes inactive RNase L to form the activated dimers, that degrades viral
as well as cellular ssRNA. The cleaved RNA products can activate retinoic acid­inducible
gene (RIG) I another cytosolic PRR to amplify production of IFN­β [30].
1.3
Pancreatic Cell Lines
The human pancreas consist of two types of tissue; the exocrine gland, composed of
acinar­ and ductal cells that produce an array of digestive enzymes such as lipases, pro­
teinases, and amylases; and the endocrine gland, also known as islets of Langerhans
which represents less than 2% of the total pancreatic mass, accounting for 1­2 million
islets [38]. There are five major cell types constituting the islets and each synthesises
and secretes a specific hormone [39].
Beta cells, that produce insulin, and alpha cells, that produce glucagon, both play an es­
sential role in blood glucose regulation [39]. However, despite the similar function and
location of these two cell types, only the beta cells are targeted for T cell mediated de­
struction in T1D patients, while alpha cells are spared. Furthermore, alpha cells tend
to handle viral infections better than beta cells [40] and because viruses, as described
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
9
==PAGE:18==
above, are potential triggers of T1D in predisposed individuals, this difference could be
vital for a better understanding of the disease.
In order to investigate the dysregulation of different genes that were found to be asso­
ciated with T1D by Pedersen et al. [23], this study focused on three mouse cell lines,
namely; Alpha TC1 clone 6 as a model for pancreatic alpha cells; Beta TC6 as a model
for pancreatic beta cells; and RAW 264.7 as a model for islet infiltrating macrophages.
In healthy individuals alpha cells are restrained by the high local concentrations of insulin.
However in T1D patients, glucagon secretion is dysregulated, presumably due to the lack
of insulin [41], which can exaggerate hyperglycaemia as well as fail to counter regulate
hypoglycaemia [38]. The alpha TC­1 clone 6 islet cell line is a cellular model for alpha
cell (dys)function [42] and is differentiated from a parental cell line derived from mice, to
produce high levels of glucagon [43].
Investigation of beta cells are essential for understanding T1D. In healthy individuals beta
cells play a vital role in controlling glucose homeostasis, however, the reason and mech­
anism for destruction of beta cells in T1D patients are poorly understood [6]. The beta
TC6 cells are epithelial cells originating from mice, and are insulinoma cells, created to
constantly produce insulin.
As described section 1.1.1, macrophages are known to infiltrate the islets of T1D patients
and seem to be recruited actively during insulitis [9]. Macrophages can be classified
into two groups; M1 and M2. M1 are the classically activated macrophages with a pro­
inflammatory phenotype, while M2 are alternatively activated macrophages with a anti­
inflammatory phenotype [44]. LPS and IFN­γ are the main simulators of M1, hence why it
is M1 that contributes to the pathogenesis and progression of T1D through exacerbation
of the inflammatory responses via secretion of inflammatory cytokines. RAW 264.7 cells
are monocyte/macrophage­like cells originating from an Abelson Leukemia virus trans­
formed cell line derived from BALB/c mice and is an appropriate model for macrophages
[45].
1.4
Insulin
Insulin was discovered in 1921 by the young surgeon Frederick G Banting and his as­
sistant Charles Best. They managed to isolate insulin from the pancreas of a dog, and
keep another, insulin deficient dog, alive for 70 days, until they ran out of insulin. With the
help from colleagues J.B. Collip and John Macloed, they purified the insulin, and already
in January 1922, a 14­year old patient named Leonard Thomson, received the first dose
of life­saving insulin. With the nobel­prize awarded in 1923, the foundation for diabetic
treatment was laid [46].
Insulin consists of 51 amino acids with a molecular weight of 5.8 kDa. However, the
insulin gene encodes for a precursor called preproinsulin which is 110 amino acids long
(see figure 1.3). The hydrophobic N­terminal signal peptide present on preproinsulin inter­
acts with cytosolic ribonucleoprotein signal recognition particles (SRP) and is translocated
across the the rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER) and into the lumen. During this pro­
10
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:19==
cess the signal peptide is cleaved off, yielding proinsulin [47]. Proinsulin then undergoes
folding and formation of three disulfide bonds executed by a diverse range of chaperone
proteins. The proinsulin is transferred to the Golgi apparatus and enters immature secre­
tory granules, where it is cleaved into insulin and C­peptide. After conversion into insulin,
the monomeric structure consist of an A­chain of 21 amino acids and a B­chain of 30
amino acids, connected by disulfide bonds which were created during processing of the
proinsulin, linking A7­B7, A20­B19 and A6­A11 [47, 48, 49]. At micromolar concentra­
tions, the insulin monomers form dimers. Three dimers then form an insoluble crystalline
hexamer which are stored in the granules at concentrations of about 40 mM.
Figure 1.3: The full amino acid sequence and structure of human insulin. Preproinsulin
consist of all 110 amino acids, but do not contain any disulfide bridges. Amino acid 1­24 is
the N­terminal signal peptide that is cleaved off when it enters the lumen of the rER. The
B chain (blue), C­peptide (brown), and A chain (red) and the disulfide bonds represents
proinsulin. The C­peptide is cleaved of within secretory granules in the Golgi apperatus
and yields mature insulin, consisting of the A and B chain connected by disulfide bonds
[49].
Insulin is secreted as a response to stimulation of the glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2)
sensor, constitutively expressed on beta cells [47] and is mainly controlled by the rate
of metabolism [50]. When the beta cell is stimulated by glucose, the metabolism accel­
erates which increases the ATP/ADP ratio and causes closure of the ATP­sensitive K+
(KATP) channels (see figure 1.4). This results in decreased K+ efflux and depolarisation of
the membrane, leading to an opening of the voltage dependent Ca2+ channels and influx
of Ca2+. The increase in Ca2+ concentration activates the effector system that promotes
the release of insulin from the granules by exocytosis [50].
When insulin is secreted into the blood stream, the insulin concentration is lower com­
pared to the secretory granules where it was stored, and the hexamer configuration be­
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
11
==PAGE:20==
comes less stable and dissociates back into dimers [47]. The dimeric form is responsible
for the endogenous delivery of the hormone and is further dissociated into the biologically
active monomeric form of insulin before binding to the insulin receptor on the cell surface
of the target cell such as liver cells and skeletal muscle cells [51, 52].
Figure 1.4: The figure represents a pancreatic beta cell. Glucose enters the cell via the
GLUT­2 glucose transporter and is subsequently metabolised, producing ATP. The in­
crease in the ATP/ADP ratio closes the KATP channel. This depolarises the cell membrane
and leads to opening of voltage dependent Ca+ channels. The rise in the intracellular Ca+
triggers insulin granule exocytosis. (Modified from [53])
Insulin secretion can also be induced in the absence of glucose, by the sulfonylrea, Tolbu­
tamide, which is an artificial inducer. The KATP channel is composed of two important
membrane proteins; the regulatory sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1) and the pore­forming
inward rectifyer of potassium (Kir). Tolbutamide closes the KATP channel independently
of changes in the ATP/ADP ratio, by binding directly to SUR1. This promotes the same
effect on membrane potential and Ca2+ influx as glucose stimulation, hence Tolbutamide
induces exocytosis of insulin and can therefore be used to mimic high glucose concen­
tration [50].
Diazoxide is a benzo thiadiazine derivative (7­chloro­3­methyl­2H­1,2,4­benzothiadiazine
1,1 dioxide) that is extensively protein bound (>90%) [54]. Its primary mode of action is
12
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:21==
also through the KATP channel. By binding to the SUR1 subunit, diazoxide opens the KATP
channel, thus increasing the entry of potassium. This results in hyperpolarisation and in­
hibits generation of the membrane potential. Without the membrane potential the Ca2+
channels are kept shut and insulin granule exocytosis i not triggered.
In this study, Tolbutamide and Diazoxide was used to simulate high and low glucose con­
centrations, respectively, and based on the literature [50, 54] different concentration and
stimulation periods were tested in order to determine the optimal treatment for induction
and inhibition of insulin secretion.
1.5
Cell Stress
Levels of mitochondrial respiration can be used in order to measure cell stress and was
in this study used to investgate if beta cells become more stressed during a viral infec­
tion compared to alpha cells and macrophages.The Seahorse XFe24 Analyzer is able to
measure metabolically active samples, such as cell cultures or isolated islets, and report
metabolic rates in real­time by measuring oxygen concentrations in the growth medium
of seeded cells. The Agilent Seahorse XF’s Cell Mito Stress Test Kit enables direct mea­
surements of parameters indicating cell stress. This kit contains four drugs that affect
the electron transport chain (ETC), and thus are able to affect the oxygen consumption
rate (OCR) of the cells during the assay. This enables us to gain knowledge about the
mitocondrial respiration of the cells as well as the non­mitocondrial oxygen consumption,
thus giving us an indication of the stress level of the cells [55, 56].
Figure 1.5: The electron transport chain is imbedded in the inner mitochondrial mem­
brane, in close collaboration with the TCA cycle, and consist of the five complexes, I­V.
(Figure modified from [57])
The ETC is embedded in the inner membrane of the mitocondrion, adjacent to the tricar­
boxylic acid (TCA) cycle [57]. It is composed of four transmembrane protein complexes
(I­IV) and two freely mobile electron transfer carriers, namely ubiquinone that constitutes
the Q­cycle, and cytochrome c that shuttles between complex III and IV. These complexes
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
13
==PAGE:22==
are assembled into a specifically configured ”supercomplex” that together with the ATP
synthase (complex V) are the basis of ATP production during oxidative phosphorylation
(see figure 1.5) [58]. Before disrupting the function of any of the complexes, the OCR
can be used as a measurement of the basal respiration of cells, creating a baseline for
respiration [55].
Starting from the back, complex V consists of two domains; F1 and F0 (see 1.6). F0 is
located in the inner mitocondrial membrane and has a number of membrane spanning
subunits associated with a c­ring subunit. In addition, it also consist of a peripheral stalk
composted of four other subunits, one of them being the oligomycin sensitivity­conferring
protein (OSCP). The F1 domain is situated in the matrix and consist of three α­subunits
and three β­subunits making up the catalytic head and one γ­, δ­, and ε­subunit that make
up the central stalk connecting the F1 head to F0 c­ring.
Figure 1.6: Schematic representation of complex V. Created with BioRender.com
A total of ten protons has been passed from the mitocondrial matrix (matrix) to the inter­
membrane space (IMS) as a response to electron transport through complex I­IV. This
creates a proton gradient called the mitocondrial membrane potential (δψ). In complex V,
the protons can pass from the IMS through F0 to the matrix, transferring the stored energi
of δψ to F1, causing a conformational change in complex V, phosphorylating ADP into
ATP [58]. When administering Oligomycin to the cells, it binds at the c­ring positioned at
the proton channel of F0 and blocks proton translocation by blocking access to the essen­
tial carboxyl [59]. This also prevents electron flow through the ETC, resulting in inhibition
of mitochondrial respiration, enabling measurement of the proton leak across the mem­
brane and thus also ATP­linked respiration (see figure 1.7) [55].
Carbonyl cyanide­p­trifluoromethoxyphenylhydrazone (FCCP) is a lipophilic weak acid,
known as a proton shuttling compound, and when administered it dissolves into the lipids
of the inner membrane of the mitochondrion where it crosses the membrane to release a
proton into the matrix, hence disrupting the membrane potential [60]. This allows proton
14
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:23==
flow despite the blockage of complex V and results in increased oxygen consumption, as
the rate­limiting step (translocation of protons to make ATP) is removed, making us able
to measure the maximum respiration (see figure 1.7) [55].
When looking at complex I, the coenzyme NADH, produced in the TCA cycle, donates
two electrons via the iron­sulfur center of complex I to ubiquinone, reducing it to ubiquinol
(QH2) in the Q cycle (see figure 1.5). The electron transfer causes complex I to pump
four protons from the matrix across the inner membran to the IMS [58]. However, this
electron transfer can be prevented by rotenone which inhibit the electrons from leaving
the iron­sulfer center, thus blocking the first step of the ETC [61]. Complex III transfers
one electron from the Q­cycle to cytochrome c, which happens in several steps, starting
with QH2 binding to the cytoplasmic side of complex III and releasing two protons into
the IMS, one electron is transferred directly to cytochrome c via cytochrome c1, while
another electron takes a round in the Q cycle [58]. Antimycin A binds specifically to the
quinone reduction (Qi) site of complex III blocking the Q­cycle, thus stalling the electrons
on ubisemiquinone, which can react with O2 to generate reactive oxygen species [58, 62].
In cooperation, rotanone and antimycin A prevents ATP formation and subsequently shots
down the oxidative phosphorylation, enabling measurement of the non­mitochondrial oxy­
gen consumption (see figure 1.7) [55].
Figure 1.7: Before adding any reagents, the basal respiration is measured. By adding
oligomycin, complex V is inhibited and the only mitocondial respiration is due to proton
leak. After adding FCCP, the membrane potential is destroyed allowing ”unlimited” respi­
ration. Finally, rotenone and antimycin A is added to block complex I and III blocking the
ETC completely, thus OCR now reflects non­mitocondiral respiration [55]
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
15
==PAGE:24==
1.6
Aim and Hypothesis
In predisposed and/or AB+ individuals, environmental factors such as enterovirus infec­
tions can stimulate the dysregulated 2’­5’A pathway through TLR7 and type 1 IFNs in the
innate immune sensor system, thus causing inflammation in the pancreatic islets, autoim­
munity, and finally progression to T1D.
The hypothesis was that the innate antiviral immune sensor systems were differently ex­
pressed in alpha­ and beta cells upon stimulation with TLR3 and TLR7 ligands.
The aim of this study was to investigate the responsiveness of the 2’­5’A pathway com­
ponents upon stimulation of different innate immune receptors by their ligands.
Based on this aim, I wanted to:
1. Clarify the effect of TLR3 and TLR7 stimulation on gene expression and cell stress
across different cell lines.
2. Investigate if and how high glucose levels affect the response to stimuli.
3. Compare the responses seen in pancreatic alpha­ and beta cells as well as islet
infiltrating macrophages.
16
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:25==
2
Material and methods
Details about chemicals, therapeutics and equipment used during this study can be found
in appendix A .
2.1
Cell Cultures
Three different cell lines were used in this study; Alpha TC 1 clone 6 (alpha), Beta TC 6
(beta) and RAW 264.7 (RAW) cells.
Alpha cells were cultured in full medium described in table 2.1, in special TC Flask, Cell+
flasks in order to gain better adherence of the cells. Beta and RAW 264.7 cells were grown
in Cell star® cell culture flasks. All cell lines were split every 48­72 hours, when reaching
a confluence of 70­90%. This was done by aspirating the old medium and rinsing the
cells with 6mL PBS by rotating the flask. The PBS was then aspirated before the addition
of 3mL trypsin. The alpha cells were then incubated at 37°C for 5 minutes, while the
beta­ and RAW cells had the trypsin aspirated before the addition of a new portion of 3mL
trypsin. The cells were then incubated at 37°C for 10 minutes. After incubation, many
cells were still attached to the bottom. These were loosened by spraying the trypsin down
on the bottom of the flask, using a 5mL Mohr pipette. When all cells were in suspension,
twice the amount of their respective growth medium was added to the flask to inactivate
the trypsin, before splitting the cells by transferring approximately 4 million alpha cells or
2 million beta­ or RAW cells (2­4mL at 70% confluence) to a new T75 flask adding growth
medium to a total volume of 15mL. The cells were then incubated at 37°C, in 5% CO2
while the remaining cells were discarded.
Alternatively, after adding growth medium and inactivating the trypsin, the cells would be
transferred to a 15mL falcon tube and centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 minutes, creating a
pellet of cells. The supernatant was then aspirated and the pellet was resuspended in
10mL fresh growth medium. 10µL of cell suspension was mixed with 10µL trypan blue
stain and incubated at room temperature for 2 minutes before transferring 10µL to a LUNA
cell counting slide and counting the cells on a LunaTM fl Dual Fluorescence Cell Counter.
If cell viability were above 90%, the cells were ready to be seeded for experiments, while
2­4 million cells were transferred to a new culture flask as described above.
All culture plates were seeded with cells by adding an appropriate amount of cells from the
cell suspension to the wells and adding growth media corresponding to the recommended
amount and incubated the plate over night at 37°C in 5% CO2, unless specified otherwise.
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
17
==PAGE:26==
Compound
Alpha TC1 clone6
Beta TC6
RAW 264.6
Gibco DMEM
31885­023
31966­021
31885­023
Glucose
1 g/L
4.5 g/L
1 g/L
Na­Pyruvate
1 mM
1 mM
1 mM
FBS*
10%
15%
10%
100x NEAA
0.1mM
­
0.1mM
Hepes
15mM
­
15mM
Table 2.1: Constituents of full medium solutions used for each cell line.
*Inactiaved at 60°C for 45 minutes. FBS = Fetal bovine Serum, DMEM = Dulbecco’s
Modifed Eagle’s Medium
2.1.1
Alpha Cells ­ Adherence
Alpha cells specifically, and to a lesser extend beta cells, needed special coated flask
and plate, especially during experiments. In order to increase adherence of the cells, Cell
star® cell culture flasks and plates were treated with Gibco Poly­D­lysine, a chemically
synthesised matrix that is able to increase cell adherence. This was done by covering
the bottom of the flask or plate with 50µg/mL Poly­D­lysine diluted in Gibco phosphate
buffered saline pH 7.4 (1X) (PBS), and incubating the flask/plate for 2 hours at room
temperature. Subsequently, the flask/plate was washed with sterile demineralized water
three times. If not used immediately, the flask/plate were left to dry for two hours, before
covered with with parafilm and stored at 4°C for up to two weeks.
2.2
Testing of TLR Ligands and Therapeutics
2.2.1
Poly (I:C) and Imiquimod (R837)
Different concentrations and incubation times of Polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (Poly(I:C))
and Imiquimod (R837) stimulation was investgated. The two ligands were tested by seed­
ing 106 RAW cells per well in a 6­well culture plate and incubating over night. The next
day, the cells were washed with 1 mL PBS and given 1 mL of fresh growth medium and
stimulated with two different concentration of Poly(I:C) (50 or 100µg/mL) and two concen­
trations of R837 (10 or 25µg/mL) and incubated for 4 and 6 hours. The cells were then
harvested by TRIzol and gene expression were tested by qPCR.
2.2.2
Krebs­Ringer Bicarbonate Buffer Test ­ Tolbutamide Stimulated
Insulin Secretion
In order to determine the optimal treatment for maximal and minimal insulin secretion, dif­
ferent concentration and incubation times for stimulation by Tolbutamide and Diazoxide
was tested. The assay set­up testing this was similar to that of a regular glucose stimu­
lated insulin secretion (GSIS) assay.
3x105 cells were seeded in a 12­well plate and incubated over night. The next day, the
18
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:27==
cells were washed with 1mL K1 (see table 2.2) and starved for 1 hour in 1 mL K1 at nor­
mal growth conditions. After 1 hour, the K1 media was aspirated and 1 mL of K2 was
added. The cells were then stimuliated with 25µM or 50µM Tolbutamide for 25 minutes at
growth conditions, taking supernatant samples at 10, 15, 20 and 25 minutes, or stimulated
with 100µM or 200µM Diazoxide for 2 hours, taking supernatant samples at 1 hour and 2
hours. The supernatant samples were subsequently tested in a Mercodia Mouse insulin
ELSA assay to determine insulin concentration.
The experiment was repeated for all eight media combinations. For K2, K4, D2, and D4
the same medium was used during starvation and stimulation.
Name
Media
Serum
Glucose
Name
Media
Serum
Glucose
K1
KRBH
0.1% BSA
0 mM
D1
DMEM
0.1% FBS
0 mM
K2
KRBH
0.1% BSA
5 mM
D2
DMEM
0.1% FBS
5 mM
K3
KRBH
1.0% BSA
0 mM
D3
DMEM
1.0% FBS
0 mM
K4
KRBH
1.0% BSA
5 mM
D4
DMEM
1.0% FBS
5 mM
Table 2.2: Combinations of serum and glucose concentrations tested in Krebs­Ringer
Bicarbonate Buffer (KRBH) and DMEM for optimal insulin secretion. For content and
concentrations of KRBH see appendix C
2.2.3
Seahorse Mito Cell Stress Test Therapeutics
In order to determine the right concentration of Oligomycin and FCCP, different concen­
trations of the two therapeutics were tested in combination, for all three cell lines.
On day 1, 105 of cells were seeded in a Poly­D­lysine coated Agilent Seahorse XF24 Cell
culture microplates in all wells except A1, B4, C3 and D6, which served as blank controls,
and incubated in 37°C at 5% CO2 over night. Furthermore, one Agilent Seahorse XFe24
Extracellular flux assay cartridge was prepared by adding 1mL of Agilent seahorse XF
calibrant to every well, submerging the sensors before incubating the cartrigde at 37°C in
a CO2­free incubator over night.
On day 2, the cells were checked for health under a microscope and counted on a Celigo
5 channel (Nexcelom Bioscience) cell counter for normalization, before gently washing
them with PBS and adding 1mL of XF assay medium (see tabel 2.3 for content). The
plate was incubated at 37°C in a CO2­free incubator for 1 hour.
In the mean time, the ports of the cartridge were filled with ranging concentrations of
Oligomycin (0.5­2.5µM) in port A, FCCP (0.125­2.0µM) in port B, and Rotenone/Antimycin
A (0.5µM) in port C, leaving port D empty (the concentrations refers to the final concen­
tration in the well), and the cartridge were put into the Agilent Seahorse XFe24 Analyzer
to calibrate.
After 1 hour of incubation, the cells had a final change of medium, with a final volume
of 500µL in each well. When O2 and pH were calibrated, the plate was inserted and the
assay run on Seahorse Program 1 (see appendix C. This assay was repeated for all three
cell lines.
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
19
==PAGE:28==
Compound
XF assay
XF assay 1
XF assay 2
XF DMEM Medium
✓
✓
✓
Glucose
10 mM
5.6 mM
0 mM
Na­Pyruvate
1 mM
1 mM
1 mM
Glutamine
2 mM
2 mM
2 mM
Table 2.3: Constituents of medium solutions used for Seahorse mito cell stress test assay
2.3
Gene Expression Analysis
2.3.1
RNA Extraction
In order to measure the relative gene expression after an experiment, RNA was extracted
from the cells by removing the medium from the wells of the culture plate and adding
1mL of ice cold TRIzol® reagent to each sample, then the plate was shaken gently for 1
minute at room temperature. When the cells had loosened from the bottom, the TRIzol,
now containing the cells, was tranferred to an Eppendorf tube (after this step the cells can
be stored at ­20°C until needed). To each sample, 200µL of chloroform was added and
shaken vigorously, before leaving it on ice for 20 minutes. During this time the tubes were
shaken occasionally, and subsequently centrifuged for 30 minutes at 15.000 G at 4°C. The
aqueous top layer was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube, while the bottom layer was
discarded. 500µL of isopropanol was added to each sample before incubating at ­20°C
for 30 minutes. Afterwards the samples were centrifuged for 30 min at 15.000 G at 4°C
leaving a small pellet at the bottom. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was
washed with 1 ml of 75% ethanol. The samples were spun for 30 seconds before removing
the remaining ethanol. They were then left to dry before the RNA was dissolved in 20µL
RNase free water and heated to 50°C for 10 minutes. Yield and purity was determined
by measuring the 260/280 nm absorbance ratio by NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer.
Samples were diluted to approximately 1000ng/µL before storing at ­20°C.
2.3.2
cDNA Synthesis
Sample volume equivalent to 500ng of extracted RNA were transferred to a PCR tube
together with 4µL 5x qScript cDNA supermix. Finally, water was added to reach final
volume of 20 µL. The content was mixed and run on program 1 (see appendix C) on a
T100 TM thermonal cycler. After end program, the cDNA was stored in ­20°C until use.
This procedure was repeated for all samples.
2.3.3
Primers
All primer pairs were designed prior to this study and ordered from TAG Copenhagen
(Denmark). The primer sequences are listed in appendix C. All primers were combined
in a primer mix containing 5µM or 10µM of the forward and reverse primers.
20
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:29==
2.3.4
Primer Test by PCR
The primer test was run as a temperature gradient across 8 samples per primer on the
same template of mouse pancreas RNA.
All reagents from table 2.4 except the primer mix was prepared for each sample and was
transferred to a BIO­RAD 96­well Semi­skirted PCR plate, 19µL per well. 1µL of one
primer mix was added to all wells in a column, and mixed well, this was repeated for all
primer set. The plate was spun shortly to bring all content to the bottom and remove
bobbles, before running program 2 (see appendix C) on a T100 TM thermonal cycler.
PCR
x1
cDNA
1.00µL
Primer mix 10µM
1.00µL
Phusion Taq 5u/µL
0.20µL
5x Phusion HF Buffer
4.00µL
H2O (Nuclease free)
13.80µL
Total
20.00µL
Table 2.4: PCR master mix
2.3.5
Gel Electrophoreses
In order to determine the optimal annealing temperature for each primer, a 2% agerose
gel, containing GelRed® Nucleic Acid Stain, was cast. When hardened the gel was moved
to a electrophereses chamber and covered with 0,5x TBE Buffer.
2µL of 6X Orange DNA dye were added to 20µL of PCR product and mixed by gently
pipetting up and down. 10µL sample was transferred to a well in the gel (1 PCR sample
in each well). 3µL of GeneRuler 100bp DNA ladder, prepared as specified by the manu­
facture, was added to an empty well, before covering the chamber with a lid and running
the gel at 50V for roughly 60 minutes. Afterwards, the gel was removed from the tub and
inspected under UV light.
2.4
Stimulation Experiment
To investigate which effect viral infections have on the cells in combination with high glu­
cose concentrations, an experiment simulating viral infections was setup, using Poly(I:C)
recognized by TLR3, and R837 the TLR7 agonist. In addition, Tolbutamide was subse­
quently used to simulate high glucose concentrations.
106 cells were seeded in each well of a TC plate Cell+ F 6­well culture plate and incu­
bated over night. The next day the cells were washed with PBS, given 1 mL of fresh
growth medium and stimulated with either 50µg/mL Poly(I:C) or 10µg/mL R837.
After 6 hours, the cells were washed once with PBS and starved for 1 hour in KRBH
containing 0.1% BSA. During starvation, the cells were incubated under normal growth
conditions. Afterwards, the KRBH was aspirated, and 1mL of KRBH containing 0.1%
BSA and 5.6mM glucose and 50µM Tolbutamide (or a corrosponding volume of DMSO)
was added and incubated for 25 minutes, before harvesting with TRIzol as previously de­
scribed, for subsequent RNA extraction. The experimental set­up is shown in figure 2.1.
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
21
==PAGE:30==
All combinations of treatments can be seen from table 2.5.
Figure 2.1: Created with BioRender.com
Poly (I:C)
Tolbutamide
DMSO control
Alpha cell
Beta cells
Raw cells
Alpha cell
Beta cells
Raw cells
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Imiquimod (R837)
Tolbutamide
DMSO control
Alpha cell
Beta cells
Raw cells
Alpha cell
Beta cells
Raw cells
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Control
Tolbutamide
DMSO control
Alpha cell
Beta cells
Raw cells
Alpha cell
Beta cells
Raw cells
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 1
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Replicate 2
Table 2.5: Plate set­up
22
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:31==
The entire assay was repeated in order to harvest the cells for protein extraction. This was
done by aspirating the KRBH after stimulation with Tolbutamide or DMSO, then adding
200µL of protein lysis buffer, and transferring it to an Eppendorf tube. During this as­
say, supernatant samples were harvested after the 6­hour ligand stimuli period, and right
before harvesting the cells, in order to measure NO­ and insulin concentrations.
2.4.1
BCA ­ Protein Concentration determination
In order to determine the protein concentration in the samples from the experiment de­
scribed above, the protein samples were testet with a PierceTM BCA Protein Assay. First
the standards were prepared diluting the Albumin standard to final concentrations of 2000,
1500, 1000, 750, 500, 250, 125, and 25µg/mL. Then 25µL of each standard and sam­
ple were pipetted into the wells of a 96­well microtitter plate (Greiner), and subsequently
200µL of the BCA working reagent, prepared from 50 parts BCA reagent A and 1 part
BCA reagent B, was added. The plate was incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes and then set
to cool to room temperature for 5 minutes before measuring the absorbance at 562nm on
a CLARIOstar plus plate reader.
2.4.2
Nitric Oxide Assay
The Griess Reagent System NO assay was performed immediately after the supernatant
samples were taken. First, a standard reference curve was prepared from a 100µM ni­
trite solution. This was done by making a 2­fold dilution series in matrix buffer, ranging
from 100µM to 1.56µM (see figure 2.2). To a 96­well microtitter plate (Greiner) 50µL of
each concentration was added to a designated well as shown in figure 2.2. Matrix buffer
containing no nitrite solution served as a blank control. Furthermore, 50µL of sample
were transferred to the remaining wells (in duplicates). Then 50μl of Sulfanilamide Solu­
tion were added to all wells as quickly as possible and the plate were incubated at room
temperature for 10 minutes protected from light. Afterwards 50µL of NED solution were
added likewise, before incubating at room temperature protected from light for another 10
minutes. The absorbance was measured at 540nm on a CLARIOstar plus plate reader
within 30 minutes. The results were normalized to the protein concentration.
Figure 2.2: Dilution series of the NO­assay [63]
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
23
==PAGE:32==
2.4.3
Insulin Assay
To measure how effective Tolbutamide treatments were, the insulin secretion was de­
termined by using the Mercodia Mouse Insulin ELISA assay. Previous measurement of
insulin secretion of the beta cells, showed very low levels, hence why I did not dilute the
samples in RIN­buffer, before running the assay.
First the enzyme conjugate 1X solution was prepared, by diluting enzyme conjugate 11X
solution 1:11 with conjugate buffer. Then 10µL of all calibrator controls, samples and blank
controls were added to a designated well in an ELISA plate, in duplicates and 100µL of
the enzyme conjugate 1X solution was added to each well, before covering the wells and
incubating the plate for 2 hours at room temperature shaking at 500rpm. After 2 hours,
the wells were washed 6 times with wash buffer prepared from 21X wash buffer diluted
1:21 in H2O ­ During the wash prolonged soaking was carefully avoided. After the last
wash, 200µL Substrate TMB was added to each well, and the plate was incubated for 15
minutes at room temperature protected from light. Then 50µL Stop Solution was added
quickly to each well and mixed by shaking. The optical density was measured at 450nm
within 30 minutes. The results were normalized to the protein concentration.
2.4.4
Quantitative PCR
All reagents from table 2.6 except cDNA were mixed in an Eppendorf tube in amounts
corrosponding to the number of samples and replicates. 8µL per well of the mixture was
transferred to a MicroAmpTM optical 96­well reaction plate. Then 2µL cDNA was trans­
ferred to each well (each sample was run in triplicates). The content of the wells were
mixed and the plate was spun shortly, to bring the content to the bottom of the wells.
Subsequently, the plate was run on program 3 (see appendix C) on a QuantStudio 7Pro.
qPCR
x1
cDNA
2.00µL
Primer mix 5µM
1.00µL
Sybr master mix 5x
2.00µL
H2O (Nuclease free)
5.00µL
Total
10.00µL
Table 2.6: qPCR master mix
2.5
Mitochondrial Cell stress test
To determine the amount of stress, the cells were under during ligand and Tolbutamide
stimulation, they were tested in a Seahorse Mito Cell Stress Test assay.
On day 1, the culture plates and cartridge were prepared as described in section 2.2.3.
Assay 1 set­up: On day 2, the cells were washed with 1 mL PBS before adding 500µL of
fresh growth medium. The plate was then devided into three groups; one control group;
one stimulated with 50µg/mL Poly(I:C); and one stimulated with 10µg/mL R837 and incu­
bated for 5 hours at 37 °C in 5% CO2. After 5 hours the plate was moved to an CO2­free
incubator and incubated for another hour. The cells were now washed once with 1mL XF
24
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:33==
assay 1 medium described in table 2.3 before adding 440µL of fresh XF assay 1 medium
to the wells. The cells were then counted in a Celigo 5 channel reader for normalization.
In the mean time, the cartridge ports were filled with 50­100µL of desolved therapeutics
and put into the Agilent Seahorse XFe24 Analyzer to calibrate.
The order and final concentration were the following: Port A: XF assay 1 medium, Port B:
Oligomycin (1.5µM), Port C: FCCP (2µM), Port D: rotenone/antimycin A (0.5mM).
After end calibration, timed with 6 hours of ligand stimulation, the assay was run, using
Seahorse Program 2 listed in appendix C
Assay 2 set­up: This set­up of assay 2 was almost identical to assay 1, however, the
cells were washed and the assay was run in assay 2 medium. This was done to starve
the cells for 1 hour, before stimulating with tolbutamide, which was added to the cells from
Port A, during the assay.
The order and final concentrations of drugs added to the cartridge was the following: Port
A: 5.6mM glucose + 50µM Tolbutamide (or corrosponding volumes of DMSO), Port B:
Oligomycin (1.5µM), Port C: FCCP (2µM), Port D: rotenone/antimycin A (0.5mM).
After end calibration, timed with 6 hours of ligand stimulation, the assay was run on sea­
horse program 2. (All reagents were dissolved in XF assay 2 medium)
2.6
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analytsis of RNA expression was performed using GraphPad Prism version
9.2.0 (GraphPad software). All groups were tested for normal distribution by the D’Agostino–
Pearson and Anderson Darling test and analysed by Two­way ANOVA. Where relevant a
two­tailed unpaired Students t­test was performed.
The cell lines, their respective treatment and the investigated genes were set as fixed
variables. If the interaction between the cell line and the treatment was not significant,
the interaction term was removed from analysis.
All results were depicted with mean levels standard error of mean (SEM) in GraphPad
Prism version 9.2.0 (GraphPad software). Significance was designated with following:
* P ≤0.05, ** P ≤0.01, *** P = ≤0.001 and **** P ≤0.0001, while P­values regarding
treatment­ and cell differences were written on the figure.
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
25
==PAGE:34==
3
Results
3.1
Using Poly­D­Lysine to increase adherence
The Poly­D­lysine was used on all surfaces where alpha cells should adhere, as it in­
creased attachment dramatically (see figure 3.1).
To reduce risk of contamination, a
switch was done to special culture flasks (TC Flask, Cell+, vented Cap) and plates (TC
plate cell+ F) from Sarstedt AG&Co. The flasks and plates showed similar adherence
properties, without the risk of contamination. The Poly­D­lysine coating was still used on
special assay plates, such as the Agilent Seahorse XF24 Cell culture microplates.
(a) Non­coated plate
(b) Coated plate
Figure 3.1: Alpha­cell destribution in culture plate with and without Poly­D­lysine coating.
Figure a shows poor attachment of cells. The dark area left of the center is large clumps
of cells that are detached from the bottom and large areas are not covered with cells.
Figure b shows an even distributed mono­layer of cells.
3.2
Determining ligand concentrations in order to ensure
immune response
In order to determine the optimal stimulation time, RAW cells were treated for 4 and 6
hours with either of the two ligands. The results are shown in figure 3.2 and show a
higher expression of tlr7 after 6 hours of stimulation, compared to 4 hours. When looking
at tlr3 expression after stimulation with Poly(I:C) 6 hours treatment also gave the high­
est expression level. This was supported by the literature, thus 6 hour stimulation, was
concluded as the optimal stimulation time.
26
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.2: The optimal time for ligand stimulation. All gene expression were normalized
to the gene expression of the control set to 1 (not shown)
3.3
Using Tolbutamide to simulate high glucose
concentrations in order to induce insulin secretion
A preliminary GSIS study was done to clarify the optimal Tolbutamide and Diazoxide con­
centration and insulin expression in the beta cell line for this study. The results from the
insulin ELISA assay unfortunately showed little to no content of insulin in the samples (See
table D.1, appendix D). Only beta cells starved for 1 hour in KRBH containing 0.1% BSA
and no glucose, and then stimulated with 50µM Tolbutamide for 25 minutes in KRBH con­
taining 0.1% BSA and 5mM glucose showed an insulin concentration higher than 3ng/mL,
with a concentration of 6.05ng/mL. That is significantly less than what is reported in the
literature [64]. Based on multiple studies [50, 64, 65, 66, 67], performing GSIS assays
by similar set­ups, it was decided to stimulate with Tolbutamide as described above, and
exclude Diazoxide stimulation from the experiment.
Subsequently when using this stimulation method, insulin concentrations were practically
non­existing, as background correction resulted in negative absorbance values. I there­
fore measured insulin concentrations from beta cells stimulated in high glucose (25mM)
for two hours in KRBH containing 0.1% BSA, which showed no differences compared to
cells stimulated with Tolbutamide (data not shown). This suggests that the beta cells were
not able to secrete insulin at measurable levels.
3.4
Measuring NO Concentrations to Determine Cell Stress
NO production is upregulated by proinflammatory cytokines. By investigating NO con­
centrations after ligand stimulation in the absence and presence of Tolbutamide, this
could give an indication if beta cells handle infections worse in high glucose environments
compared to alpha cells. Furthermore, NO concentration could indicate if the cells were
stressed in a deadly manor upon ligand stimulation. However, both samples taken after
ligand stimulation and after Tolbutamide stimulation, resulted in absorbance readings at
level with the blank control, indicating that NO was not produced in either of the cell lines
during stimulation.
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
27
==PAGE:36==
3.5
Gene Expression
3.5.1
The effect of DMSO on gene expression
Tolbutamide used to simulate high glucose concentrations was diluted in DMSO. Thus,
DMSO was added to all control groups, in volumes corresponding to that of Tolbutamide.
This was done to secure, that effects observed from Tolbutamide treatment, was cause
from Tolbutamide and not DMSO. In addition, gene expressions between DMSO stimu­
lated cells and non­stimulated cells were compared.
The results can be seen in figure 3.3, and shows no significant differences between the
two treatments after analysis by a two­tailed unpaired Students t­test. When looking at
the gene expression for tlr7, the expression level is similar for the two treatments across
all three cell lines. Furthermore, there does not seem to be a trend indicating that the
DMSO treatment should increase or decrease gene expression. By exclusively looking
at the RAW cells across all five genes there might seem to be a difference between the
non­treated cells and the DMSO treated cells. However, the variance for many of these
samples are large, thus no significant differences are observed. Based on these data,
it was concluded that DMSO did not have an effect on gene expression, hence why the
non­stimulated controls was excluded from the data analysis of gene expression.
Figure 3.3: Gene expression of tlr7, tlr3, oas1, mda5, and isg15 with and without DMSO
stimulation. (Gene expression of isg15 for beta cell without DMSO is not available)
3.5.2
Imiquimod (R837) affects tlr7 gene expression in all cell lines
Comparison of the relative expression of tlr7 across the three cell lines were investigated
after ligand stimulation. In figure 3.4A the results show a strong, significant reduction in
gene expression after stimulation with R837 compared to the non­stimulated control for
28
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:37==
all three cell lines. This reduction in gene expression was also observed in cells treated
with Tolbutamide subsequently to ligand stimulation.
Furthermore, when comparing the cells stimulated with Tolbutamide to the DMSO control
group, an overall reduction in tlr7 expression is seen. However, the data also shows that
the expression is not further reduced by Tolbutamide, after R837 stimulation. Moreover,
as expected, stimulation by Poly(I:C) did not affect tlr7 expression.
While treatment clearly has an effect on tlr7 expression, there is no significant difference
between the three cell lines within the respective treatment groups. However, there is
an overall significant difference between the cells, showing beta cells to have the highest
expression of TLR7, while macrophages has the lowest.
Figure 3.4: Gene expression of tlr7 after treatment with Poly(I:C) or R837 compared to
the control. Figure A shows cells treated with DMSO subsequently to ligand stimulation.
Figure B shows cells stimulated with Tolbutamide subsequently to ligand stimulation.
3.5.3
Poly (I:C) increases TLR3 expression in all cell lines
tlr3 expression was changed significantly upon stimulation and figure 3.5 shows an up­
regulation after stimulation with Poly(I:C). Generally, the data also showed a significant
difference in expression between the three cell lines. However, when comparing the cells
within the treatment groups, the statistical analysis only reveal one significant difference,
the one between beta­ and RAW cells stimulated with Poly(I:C) as illustrated in figure 3.5.
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.5: Gene expression of TLR3 treated with Poly(I:C) or R837 compared to the
control. The cells were treated with DMSO subsequently to ligand stimulation.
In contrast to tlr7, Tolbutamide does not seem to affect the basal level of tlr3 expression
in the cells. However, as it can be seen from figure 3.6, the tlr3 expression looks to be
reduced, but only during Poly(I:C) stimulation. This trend was not significant after taking
into account the False Discovery Rate (FDR), yet, for comparison of treatment with DMSO
or Tolbutamide for beta cells stimulated with Poly (I:C) the P­value was 0.0389.
Like for tlr7, tlr3 was only affected by its specific ligand, while R837 did not stimulate tlr3
expression.
Figure 3.6: The effect of tolbutamide on TLR3 expression
30
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:39==
3.5.4
Strong OAS1 response during ligand stimulation
oas1, one of the genes of the 2’­5’A pathway, was investigated in this study and was
found to be significantly upregulated in all cell lines after stimulation with either of the two
ligands. However, as it can be seen from figure 3.7 there was no difference in expression
levels between the three cell lines.
Figure 3.7: Gene expression of oas1 after treatment with Poly(I:C) or R837 compared to
the control. The cells were treated with DMSO subsequently to ligand stimulation.
Alpha­ and beta cells treated with Tolbutamide subsequently to Poly(I:C) showed a signif­
icant downregulation of oas1 expression compared to DMSO treated cells (Figure 3.8).
Nonetheless, this reduction in OAS1 expression is most likely caused by the reduction
in tlr3 expression seen in figure 3.6, as there is no difference between any of the control
groups. Like for tlr7, Tolbutamide does not have an effect after treatment with R837, with
the exception of the RAW cells. However, the SEM for this sample is to large for the
difference to be significant.
Figure 3.8: The effect of Tolbutamide stimulation on OAS1. ns = not significant
3.5.5
Significantly higher MDA5 response in alpha cells compared to beta
cells and macrophages
The results seen in figure 3.9 shows a highly significant (P<0.0001) upregulation of mda5
in alpha cells. Despite not being significant, the results indicate upregulation in beta­ and
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
31
==PAGE:40==
RAW cells as well. The data furthermore show a significant difference between alpha­
and beta cells and alpha­ and RAW cells in the two treatment groups stimulated with Poly
(I:C) or R837. There was no significant difference between beta­ and RAW cells. There
was also no difference between the cells in the control group, but by looking at figure
3.9, there is an indication that alpha cells also have a higher expression of mda5 without
stimulation.
Figure 3.9: Gene expression of mda5 after treatment with Poly(I:C) or R837 compared to
the control. The cells were treated with DMSO subsequently to ligand stimulation.
Across all three cell lines Tolbutamide generally does not seem to affect the expression
level of mda5 (see figure 3.10). However, though not significant (P=0.1989), there is a
trends across the control groups, giving a small indication that Tolbutamide could increase
mda5 expression in the absence of viral infections.
Figure 3.10: The effect of Tolbutamide stimulation on MDA5
3.5.6
isg15 expression is regulated evenly by Poly(I:C) and R837
Poly(I:C) upregulates the isg15 expression significantly all three cell lines, while only alpha
cells upregulate isg15 significantly after R837 stimulation. Figure 3.11 indicates that alpha
cells upregulate isg15 equally after stimulation by either of the two ligands. This trend
also occures in beta cells. On the contrary, RAW cell seem to express isg15 differently
32
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:41==
depending if they are stimulated by Poly(I:C) or R837, with Poly(I:C) inducing the highest
expression.
Figure 3.11: Gene expression of isg15 after treatmed with Poly(I:C) or R837 compared to
the control. The cells were treated with DMSO subsequently to ligand stimulation.
In figure 3.12 neither alpha­ nor beta cells seems to be affected by Tolbutamide in regards
to isg15 expression during any of the treatments. However, the results could suggest that
Tolbutamide reduce isg15 expression in RAW cells after Poly(I:C) stimulation. Again, the
large SEMs on RAW cells stimulated with Poly(I:C) and DMSO result in a non­significant
difference, thus indicating that ISG15 expression is not affected by Tolbutamide.
Figure 3.12: The effect of Tolbutamide stimulation on ISG15
3.6
Cell stress
3.6.1
Ligand stimulation affect OCR in cell lines
The OCR for all three cell lines after stimulation by one of the two ligands, Poly(I:C) or
R837, compared to an unstimulated control showed no significant differences between the
treatments, when looking at basal respiration, maximal respiration and spare capacity on
its own. However, there still seems to be a trend in the data, proposing that stimulation with
R837 increases the OCR in both alpha­ and RAW cells. Figure 3.13 shows an increase in
basal respiration for both alpha­ and RAW cells when treated with R837. These two cell
lines have an even higher increase in OCR when measuring maximal respiration, which
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
33
==PAGE:42==
subsequently results in an increase in spare capacity compared to Poly (I:C) stimulation or
the control. Furthermore, the statistical analysis did show a significant difference in RAW
cells, between R837 and the control (P­value=0.0025) as well as R837 and Poly(I:C)
treated cells (P­value=0.0080), when grouping the three OCRs. The beta cells show
the opposite effect of R837. As OCR seem to decrease at both basal and maximum
respiration after R837 stimulation. However, the spare capacity still increases compared
to the control and Poly(I:C) stimulated cells.
Figure 3.13: The effect of Ligand stimulation on OCR. All data was normalized to 50%
confluence.
The spare capacity has also been calculated in percent, describing the increase from
basal respiration to maximum respiration. By doing so, it is possible to compare the dif­
ferent cell lines despite the naturally different levels of oxygen consumption. The results
show no significant differences between the three cell lines regarding spare capacity.
Though, as illustrated by figure 3.14 RAW cells tend to have a higher spare capacity than
alpha­ and beta cells, with P=0.0553 and P=0.0650, respectively.
Figure 3.14: Spare capacity of cells stimulated by ligands.
34
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:43==
3.6.2
The effect of DMSO
Even though DMSO did not have an effect on gene expression, the results shown in
figure 3.15, suggest an effect on OCR. The two­way ANOVA analysis revealed a signifi­
cant difference between DMSO treated cells and the control, with a P­value of 0.0361 in
alpha cells. However, after comparing the two treatments within the respective respira­
tion groups and correction for FDR, no significance were observed. The beta cells did
not show any significant differences between the two treatment groups, while RAW cells
showed a significant decrease in OCR of the maximum respiration after treatment with
DMSO. This decrease in maximum respiration also caused a significant downregulation
in the spare capacity of the cells, as illustrated in the figure.
Figure 3.15: The effect of DMSO on OCR
3.6.3
Basal respiration
The basal respiration may be affected by Tolbutamide treatment. In the control group
of the alpha cells shown in figure 3.16, Tolbutamide treatment seems to decrease the
OCR of the cells. This is a trend shown across all three cell lines. The same effect is not
observed in cells treated with either of the two ligands prior to Tolbutamide stimulation. By
comparing the three individual graphs in figure 3.16, it is clear that the basal respiration
measured in OCR (pmol/min) was lower in RAW cells compared to the two islet cell types.
Figure 3.16: OCR at basal respiration
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
35
==PAGE:44==
3.6.4
Maximum respiration
The maximum respiration was measured after addition of FCCP, causing the cells to con­
sume oxygen at an ”unlimited” rate. The maximum respiration in the alpha cells was not
affected by neither ligand stimulation, nor Tolbutamide, as it is shown in figure 3.17. In
the beta cells, Tolbutamide did seem to affect the maximum respiration in the control,
by decreasing the ORC. In cells stimulated with R837, it was DMSO which decreased
OCR, however neither of these results were significant. In RAW cells, Tolbutamide tend
to increase maximum respiration compared to DMSO treatment, and furthermore ligand
stimulation seemed to increase OCR compared to the control, however, neither difference
were significant.
Figure 3.17: OCR at maximum respiration
3.6.5
Spare Capacity
The spare capacity of the cells is calculated as a difference between the basal and max­
imum respiration, indicating how much faster the cells can respirate. Figure 3.18 shows
that neither ligand nor Tolbutamide has any big effects on the spare capacity. In RAW
cells, however, Tolbutamide tend to increase the spare capacity compared to DMSO.
This trend might be derived from the increase in maximum respiration observed above.
Figure 3.18: The percentage spare capacity
When looking at the percentage increase in OCR from basal to maximal respiration, it is
possible to compare the effect of the different treatments across cell lines. Figure 3.19
shows a generally higher spare capacity in RAW cells compared to alpha­ and beta cells,
across all treatment combinations. The alpha­ and beta cells, however, has a convinc­
ingly similar spare capacity (see figure 3.14) across all three treatments subsequently
stimulated by DMSO.
36
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.19: The percentage spare capacity.
For cells subsequently treated with DMSO, the effect of treatment was P=0.9226, and cell
difference P=0.0208.
For cells subsequently treated with Tolbutamide, the effect of treatment was P=0.0706,
and cell difference P=0.0021.
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
37
==PAGE:46==
4
Discussion
There is a well established understanding that environmental factors play a critical role
in T1D development. In this study it has been investigated how different cell types react
upon viral infections, simulated with Poly(I:C) and R837. Furthermore, Tolbutamide was
used to simulate a high glucose concentration for the cells, in order to determine if a
high glucose environment in combination with a viral infection, as it could be the case in
pancreatic islets, could cause a dysregulation of the innate immune sensor systems.
In this study Tolbutamide was tested on a beta cell line in order to investigate the effect
on insulin secretion and determine the optimal treatment time and concentration. Tolbu­
tamide replaced high glucose concentrations, as Tolbutamide is known to maximize insulin
secretion. Tolbutamide and Diazoxide, the latter minimizing secretion, should therefore
have been used to identify the extremes regarding insulin secretion in beta cells, and
this data should then serve as guidelines for determining glucose concentration for sub­
sequent GSIS studies with high and low glucose. However, as described in the results,
the beta cells did not secrete measurable levels of insulin during this treatment, making it
impossible to distinguish between the effect of Tolbutamide and Diazoxide.
The beta cell line used in this study is an insulinoma cell, created to stably secrete insulin.
The lack of insulin secretion could therefore indicate, that the cells had lost the ability to
produce or secrete insulin. This could be a results of old cells and/or a high passage num­
ber, as these factors were unknown when the current study was initiated. However, beta
TC­6 cells has previously been shown to maintain high insulin production and secretion
for more than 55 passages or more than a year in culture [68].
Cells can indicate stress in many different ways. During infections, the induction of proin­
flammatory cytokines can mediate cell death, when reaching high enough concentrations
[40]. One of the mechanisms envolved is the production of NO which can therefore be
used as a measurement of inflammation. In order to confirm that Tlr3 and Tlr7 stimu­
lation by the ligands used in this study did not stress the cells in a deadly manor, NO
concentration were measured. The lack of NO production in the cells indicated that lig­
and stimulation did not stress the cell enough to initiate cytokine­induced apoptosis. This
result, however, could not enlighten if there were any differences in stress­levels of the
cells during stimulation.
A mitochondrial cell stress test assay was chosen to research further how the cells reacted
to the stress factors in the experimental set­up, and this assay did bring some enlightening
results. After R837 stimulation, the basal respiration tended to increase for both alpha­
and RAW cells, indicating an increase in oxidative phosphorylation and thus an increase
in ATP­requiring processes. Beta cells, which generally consume more oxygen than the
other two cell lines, decreased the OCR after stimulation with Imuquimod. This could
indicate that due to high insulin synthesis, upregulation of innate immune responses trig­
38
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:47==
gered by Tlr7 activation, comes at a cost for the constantly insulin producing beta cells.
For unknown reasons, Poly(I:C) stimulation of Tlr3 did not seem to have the same effect
on the oxidative phosphorylation as Imuquimod.
This mitochrondrial stress test assay brings a lot of information about different types of
respiration, one of which is the spare capacity. Spare capacity brings indications of how
fast the cells respirate under given condition compared to their maximum capacity. Fur­
thermore, the percentage spare capacity makes it possible to compare the metabolic
pressure across cells with completely different respiration rates. Interestingly, the per­
centage spare capacity of alpha and beta cells are almost identical, despite the large
difference in their general respiration rates. This could indicate that the cells are under
equal amounts of stress during viral infection. Moreover, based on their higher spare ca­
pacity, macrophages seem to handle infections better, which could potentially be derived
from the fact that they are immune cells with the soul purpose of recognising and degrad­
ing pathogens.
However, the spare capacity can be a misleading number to look at on its own. A reduc­
tion in both basal and maximum respiration can lead to an unchanged spare capacity; the
same is true for cells increasing both basal and maximal respiration. This can lead to the
conclusion that the cells handle the stress factor identically, while in reality, they show
opposite reactions patterns.
Figure 4.1: Mitochondrial respiration showing two sets biological duplicates of beta cells.
Red is not stimulated prior to the assay, while green is stimulated with Poly (I:C). The dots
illustrate time point for measurements, with three measurements between each treatment.
While the Agilent Seahorse XF mito cell stress test assay used in this study is a great way
for investigation of the mitochondrial respiration, some issues need to be overcome to gain
streamlined data. The red lines in figure 4.1 illustrates that the OCR for two identically
treated cell populations can be extremely different. After replication of the experiment,
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
39
==PAGE:48==
the data showed similar results for the green lines, while the red lines, which is the control
group not stimulated with a ligand, Tolbutamide or DMSO, showed a third and fourth re­
sult, this time much more similar to the green group. One possible explanation of this big
difference could be that the cell cycles of the two cell populations are out of sync, caus­
ing one group to consume oxygen at a much higher rate than the other. By comparing
all replicates from the mitochondrial stress test assay (not shown), the data indicates a
large variation in the unstimulated controls, while Poly(I:C) stimulated cells seem to have
an OCR close to 600pmol/min. This could suggest that all ligand­stimulated cells need
to react to the stimulation, thus synchronizing the cell cycles of the different cell popula­
tions, resulting in a much more similar respiration. The question is therefore if this issue
is something that can and needs to be handled but it is definitely something one needs to
consider when setting up the assay.
The big variation between to identical cell populations does cause some large SEMs,
which diminish the significant differences that might be present between differently treated
cell groups. An increase in number of replicates could reduce this issue, as it would en­
able pinpointing and removal of outliers from the data set. The large variations is also, to
some extend, caused by low cell confluence in the wells. Despite Poly­D­lysine coating
of the culture plates, cell adherence was an issue due to many wash steps and changes
of medium during the assay. This means, that despite an optimal (based on manufac­
turing recommendations) cell confluence in the wells before starting the assay, the loss
of cells during pre­treatment causes and uneven and too low confluence at time of first
measurement.
In this study, a significant decrease in tlr7 expression was observed upon stimulation with
R837. This result was unexpected as previous tests with stimulation of Tlr7 by the same
ligand had shown an increase in expression of the receptor. However, the cells from
the stimulation experiment was harvested after 6 hours of ligand stimulation, 1 hour of
starvation in KRBH and 25 minutes of stimulation with Tolbutamide or DMSO. Therefore,
the ligand was not present in the medium for the duration of the last 85 minutes before
harvest. It is therefore possible, that the cells had time to downregulate the receptor after
the ligand was removed, to prioritize upregulation of downstream immune genes, initiated
by activation of Tlr7. This claim is potentially backed up by the effect of Tolbutamide on
Tlr7. In the control­ and Poly(I:C)­stimulated groups, Tolbutamide reduced the expression
of tlr7 across all three cell lines. However, in the R837­stimulated group, the expression
was not reduced further by Tolbutamide, suggesting that the cells had already reduced
TLR7 expression to a minimum.
The statistical analysis did not show any differences in the expression level of tlr7 between
the three cell lines. However, the mitochondrial cell stress test assay did show some dif­
ferences between the cells after stimulation of Tlr7. These two results could suggest that
tlr7 was in fact upregulated in the stimulation experiment, which was also confirmed by
the subsequent upregulation of oas1 and mda5. They also suggest that despite similar
expression levels of tlr7 in the three cell lines, the downstream pathways were activated
40
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:49==
differently upon stimulation with R837. This could cause stronger or weaker immune re­
sponses and might help to explain why beta cells are more sensitive towards infection
than alpha cells.
tlr3 expression levels where shown to differ between the three cell lines, with beta cells
having a lower expression level than alpha­ and RAW cells. Yet, this result was only
significant between beta­ and RAW cell after Tlr3 activation by Poly(I:C). This difference
could indicate that beta cells do not recognize dsRNA as efficiently as alpha cells and
macrophages, thus having a harder time clearing the infection. This explanation is backed
up by expression levels of the mda5 and isg15 genes discussed later.
Tolbutamide also affected tlr3 expression, it did so by decreasing it. Yet this effect was
similar for all three cell lines, suggesting a general dysregulation of TLR3 during viral
infections in high glucose environments.
Tlr3 activation did also mediate a subsequent immune response by activating the 2’­5’A
pathway, illustrated by upregulation of oas1. Also the reduction in oas1 expression after
stimulation with Tolbutamide seems to be directly derived from tlr3 activation. This trend
recur for the expression of oas1 in RAW cells, which also seem to be derived from their
strong expression of tlr3.
Even though Tlr3 and Tlr7 are both membrane proteins present in the endosome, their
basal expression level and regulation upon stimulation seems to be very different. While
tlr7 was downregulated after activation and subsequent removal of the ligand, this was
not the case for tlr3. One explanation could be that Poly(I:C) is a more robust ligand than
R837, thus resulting in a longer lasting stimulation, after being removed from the medium.
In addition, Poly(I:C) was also present in higher concentration than R837, suggesting
higher concentrations remained in the cells after removal. Furthermore, it is known from
the determination of the ligand stimulation time (see figure 3.2), that tlr7 shows a sudden
upregulation after 6 hours of stimuli, compared to 4 hours, which was not the case for
TLR3 that showed a more gradual increase over time. This could suggest that tlr7 has a
more rapid and shorter response time compared to tlr3.
Another explanation could be, that upregulation of the downstream 2’­5’A pathway re­
sults in activation of RNase L that cleaves ssRNA, and is able to produce both ssRNA
fragments as well as dsRNA duplex structures [69]. Thus, it is possible that these dsRNA
fragments can cause or prolong activation of TLRs. Yet, if these cleaved fragments cause
strong immune responses through either Tlr3 or Tlr7, it would have been expected that
tlr3 was also upregulated after R837 stimulation and vice versa.
The upregulation of downstream innate immune responses with R837 might be due to
the TLR7 cascade as well as retinoic acid­inducible gene I (RIG­I), another cytosolic PRR
that preferably recognises ssRNA. Szabo et al [70] showed in a study on plasmacytoid
DCs, that Rig­I could be activated in an IFN­independent manner. If this can translate
into the cell lines used in this study, the upregulation of oas1, mda5 and isg15 seen af­
ter stimulation by R837, could be caused in a IFN­dependent (Tlr7) and IFN­independent
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
41
==PAGE:50==
manner by an upregulation of rig­I, a target that unfortunately was not included in this
study. This could also be the case for TLR3. The upregulation of downstream innate im­
mune responses after Poly(I:C) stimulation might be through the Tlr3 cascade or through
Mda5 activation within the cytosol. This means that even though the results in this study
show a similar expression pattern of oas1, mda5 and isg15 for both R837 and Poly(I:C),
further investigation needs to be done into whether it is an IFN­dependent response e.g
through Tlr3 or Tlr7 or an IFN­independent response e.g through Mda5 or Rig­I.
While beta cells upregulate oas1 as efficiently as alpha cells, alpha cells showed a sig­
nificantly higher expression of mda5 compared to the other two cell lines. The fact that
mda5 is upregulated drastically compared to tlr3 and tlr7 could indicate that alpha cells
respond to viral infections by efficiently clearing them, instead of preventing the infection
altogether; a hypothesis that has also been suggested by Marroqui et al. [40]. The high
expression level of mda5 within the alpha cells compared to beta cells therefore suggest
a more efficient clearing of the infection, which could presumably prevent chronic infec­
tions. While the alpha cells has a significantly higher expression level of MDA5, beta­
and RAW cells did, however, also upregulate mda5 upon ligand stimulation. One could
therefore hypothezis that a mutation in this gene causing downregulation in prediabetic
AB+ individuals, as shown by Pedersen et al [23], could result in a chronic infection of
the beta cells, thus compromising viability, cause autoimmunity, and progression towards
T1D.
Activation of both Tlr3 and Tlr7 and Mda5 initiates an innate immune response leading
to the transcription of IFNα and IFNβ that in turn stimulate the transcription of ISGs, in­
cluding isg15. This was also reflected by the results of isg15 expression in this study.
The higher expression of isg15 in alpha cells, presumably caused by mda5 activation,
substantiates the claim that alpha cells efficiently clears infection, as conjugation of Isg15
to newly synthesised protein, by ATP­dependent enzymatic reactions, leads to its degra­
dation [71]. This process, being ATP­dependent, could also explain why the basal­ and
maximum respiration in alpha cells are increased. Furthermore, the reduction in beta cell
respiration and the lower isg15 induction could indicate, why beta cells do not mediate
viral eradication as efficiently as alpha cells.
42
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:51==
5
Conclusion
This study wanted to investigate the responsiveness of the 2’­5’A pathway components
upon stimulation of different innate immune receptors by their ligands. The immune cas­
cades were examined in three cell lines in order to compare the T­cell­targeted beta cells
to alpha cells. The genes studied here, were chosen based on results from Pedersen et
al. [23], showing dysregulation in prediabetic individuals and T1D patients.
The results support the hypothesis that alpha cells handle viral infections better than beta
cells, due to a stronger activation of innate antiviral immune responses. During R837
stimulation, alpha cells appear to increase oxidative phosphorylation, thus synthesising
ATP which is required during viral degradation. Also the stronger expression of mda5 and
isg15 in alpha cells, support this hypothesis. Only tlr7 and oas1 showed similar expres­
sion levels in all three cell lines upon stimulation by either ligand. Stimulation by Poly(I:C)
revealed that TLR3 had the lowest expression level in beta cells, while both alpha and
RAW cells showed higher expression levels. Also, Poly(I:C) strongly induced mda5 and
isg15, and the high expression in alpha cells compared to beta cells led to the hypothe­
sis that not only do alpha cells handle viral infection better than beta cells, they do so by
clearing virus more efficiently.
The effect of Tolbutamide was also investigated in this study, but did only seem to affect
TLR expression, but not downstream genes. Therefore, further research on the effect of
Tolbutamide needed to understand its effect.
Finally, the results from this study support the hypothesis that alpha cells are more effec­
tive in clearing virus, compared to beta cells, which can help explain why beta cells are
more sensitive towards infections.
Finally, the results obtained in this study, in combination with the results presented by
Pedersen et al. [23], could suggest that the difference between the innate antiviral im­
mune sensing system in alpha and beta cells are even greater in AB+ individuals, than
initially thought. If an individual predisposed to T1D that has entered stage 2, with CD4+
an CD8+ T cells in the periphery of the islets of Langerhans, gets an enterovirus, this
could help explain why peripheral tolerance towards beta cells are lost, while alpha cells
are kept safe.
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
43
==PAGE:52==
Bibliography
1.
Carstensen B, Rønn PF, and Jørgensen ME. Prevalence, incidence and mortality of
type 1 and type 2 diabetes in Denmark 1996–2016. 2020 May; 8:e001071. DOI:
10.1136/bmjdrc-2019-001071. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjdrc-2019-
001071
2.
Green A, Hede SM, Patterson CC, Wild SH, Imperatore G, Roglic G, and Beran D.
Type 1 diabetes in 2017: global estimates of incident and prevalent cases in children
and adults. Diabetologia 2021 Oct; 64:2741–50. DOI: 10.1007/s00125-021-05571-8.
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-021-05571-8
3.
Marroqui L, Perez­Serna AA, Babiloni­Chust I, and Santos RSD. Type I interferons
as key players in pancreatic ­cell dysfunction in type 1 diabetes. 2021 :1–80. DOI:
10.1016/bs.ircmb.2021.02.011. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.ircmb.2021.
02.011
4.
Regnell SE and Lernmark Å. Early prediction of autoimmune (type 1) diabetes. Dia­
betologia 2017 May; 60:1370–81. DOI: 10.1007/s00125-017-4308-1. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-017-4308-1
5.
Intensive Diabetes Treatment and Cardiovascular Disease in Patients with Type 1
Diabetes. New England Journal of Medicine 2005 Dec; 353:2643–53. DOI: 10.
1056/nejmoa052187. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa052187
6.
Burrack AL, Martinov T, and Fife BT. T Cell­Mediated Beta Cell Destruction: Au­
toimmunity and Alloimmunity in the Context of Type 1 Diabetes. Frontiers in En­
docrinology 2017 Dec; 8. DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2017.00343. Available from: https:
//doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2017.00343
7.
Ziegler AG, Rewers M, Simell O, Simell T, Lempainen J, Steck A, Winkler C, Ilonen
J, Veijola R, Knip M, Bonifacio E, and Eisenbarth GS. Seroconversion to Multiple
Islet Autoantibodies and Risk of Progression to Diabetes in Children. JAMA 2013
Jun; 309:2473. DOI: 10.1001/jama.2013.6285. Available from: https://doi.org/10.
1001/jama.2013.6285
8.
Ferraro A, Socci C, Stabilini A, Valle A, Monti P, Piemonti L, Nano R, Olek S, Maffi
P, Scavini M, Secchi A, Staudacher C, Bonifacio E, and Battaglia M. Expansion of
Th17 Cells and Functional Defects in T Regulatory Cells Are Key Features of the
Pancreatic Lymph Nodes in Patients With Type 1 Diabetes. Diabetes 2011 Sep;
60:2903–13. DOI: 10.2337/db11-0090. Available from: https://doi.org/10.2337/db11-
0090
9.
Willcox A, Richardson SJ, Bone AJ, Foulis AK, and Morgan NG. Analysis of islet
inflammation in human type 1 diabetes. Clinical & Experimental Immunology 2009
Feb; 155:173–81. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2008.03860.x. Available from: https:
//doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2249.2008.03860.x
10.
Atkinson MA and Eisenbarth GS. Type 1 diabetes: new perspectives on disease
pathogenesis and treatment. The Lancet 2001 Jul; 358:221–9. DOI: 10.1016/s0140-
6736(01)05415-0. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(01)05415-0
11.
Kondo K, Ohigashi I, and Takahama Y. Thymus machinery for T­cell selection. Inter­
national Immunology 2018 Nov; 31:119–25. DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxy081. Available
from: https://doi.org/10.1093/intimm/dxy081
12.
Jaberi­Douraki M, Pietropaolo M, and Khadra A. Predictive Models of Type 1 Dia­
betes Progression: Understanding T­Cell Cycles and Their Implications on Autoan­
tibody Release. PLoS ONE 2014 Apr; 9. Ed. by Herrath MG von:e93326. DOI:
44
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:53==
10.1371/journal.pone.0093326. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0093326
13.
Murphy K and weaver C. T­cell­Mediated Immunity. Janeway’s Immunology. Gar­
land Science, 2017 :268–9
14.
ElEssawy B and Li XC. Type 1 diabetes and T regulatory cells. Pharmacological
Research 2015 Aug; 98:22–30. DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.04.009. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2015.04.009
15.
McLaughlin RJ, Spindler MP, Lummel M van, and Roep BO. Where, How, and
When: Positioning Posttranslational Modification Within Type 1 Diabetes Pathogen­
esis. Current Diabetes Reports 2016 May; 16. DOI: 10.1007/s11892-016-0752-4.
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11892-016-0752-4
16.
Lummel M van, Duinkerken G, Veelen PA van, Ru A de, Cordfunke R, Zaldumbide A,
Gomez­Touriño I, Arif S, Peakman M, Drijfhout JW, and Roep BO. Posttranslational
Modification of HLA­DQ Binding Islet Autoantigens in Type 1 Diabetes. Diabetes
2013 Dec; 63:237–47. DOI: 10.2337/db12-1214. Available from: https://doi.org/10.
2337/db12-1214
17.
Lernmark Å and Alshiekh S. Type 1 Diabetes. Encyclopedia of Immunobiology. El­
sevier, 2016 :159–67. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-12-374279-7.15001-5. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-374279-7.15001-5
18.
ZHANG L and EISENBARTH GS. Prediction and prevention of Type 1 diabetes melli­
tus. Journal of Diabetes 2011 Mar; 3:48–57. DOI: 10.1111/j.1753-0407.2010.00102.x.
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1753-0407.2010.00102.x
19.
Monos DS and Winchester RJ. The Major Histocompatibility Complex. Clinical Im­
munology. Elsevier, 2019 :79–92.e1. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-7020-6896-6.00005-3.
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-7020-6896-6.00005-3
20.
Turner D. ES07.02 The human leucocyte antigen (HLA) system. Vox Sanguinis
2004
Jun; 87:87–90. DOI: 10.1111/j.1741- 6892.2004.00438.x. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-6892.2004.00438.x
21.
Pociot F and Lernmark Å. Genetic risk factors for type 1 diabetes. The Lancet 2016
Jun; 387:2331–9. DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(16)30582-7. Available from: https://doi.
org/10.1016/s0140-6736(16)30582-7
22.
Walker LSK and Herrath M von. CD4 T cell differentiation in type 1 diabetes. Clin­
ical and Experimental Immunology 2015 Jul; 183:16–29. DOI: 10.1111/cei.12672.
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1111/cei.12672
23.
Pedersen K, Haupt­Jorgensen M, Krogvold L, Kaur S, Gerling IC, Pociot F, Dahl­
Jørgensen K, and Buschard K. Genetic predisposition in the 2′­5′A pathway in the
development of type 1 diabetes: potential contribution to dysregulation of innate an­
tiviral immunity. Diabetologia 2021 May; 64:1805–15. DOI: 10.1007/s00125-021-
05469-5. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-021-05469-5
24.
Panarina M, Kisand K, Alnek K, Heilman K, Peet A, and Uibo R. Interferon and
Interferon­Inducible Gene Activation in Patients with Type 1 Diabetes. Scandinavian
Journal of Immunology 2014 Sep; 80:283–92. DOI: 10.1111/sji.12204. Available
from: https://doi.org/10.1111/sji.12204
25.
Antvorskov JC, Josefsen K, Engkilde K, Funda DP, and Buschard K. Dietary gluten
and the development of type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia 2014 May; 57:1770–80. DOI:
10.1007/s00125-014-3265-1. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-014-
3265-1
26.
Bach JF. The hygiene hypothesis in autoimmunity: the role of pathogens and com­
mensals. Nature Reviews Immunology 2017 Oct; 18:105–20. DOI: 10.1038/nri.
2017.111. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1038/nri.2017.111
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
45
==PAGE:54==
27.
Kondrashova A, Seiskari T, Ilonen J, Knip M, and Hyöty H. The ‘Hygiene hypoth­
esis’ and the sharp gradient in the incidence of autoimmune and allergic diseases
between Russian Karelia and Finland. APMIS 2012 Nov; 121:478–93. DOI: 10.
1111/apm.12023. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1111/apm.12023
28.
Filippi C and Herrath M von. How viral infections affect the autoimmune process
leading to type 1 diabetes. Cellular Immunology 2005 Feb; 233:125–32. DOI: 10.
1016/j.cellimm.2005.04.009. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellimm.2005.
04.009
29.
Xia Y, Xie Z, Huang G, and Zhou Z. Incidence and trend of type 1 diabetes and
the underlying environmental determinants. Diabetes/Metabolism Research and Re­
views 2018 Oct; 35:e3075. DOI: 10.1002/dmrr.3075. Available from: https://doi.
org/10.1002/dmrr.3075
30.
Chakrabarti A, Jha BK, and Silverman RH. New Insights into the Role of RNase L in
Innate Immunity. Journal of Interferon & Cytokine Research 2011 Jan; 31:49–57.
DOI: 10.1089/jir.2010.0120. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1089/jir.2010.0120
31.
Abdul­Cader MS, Senapathi UDS, Ahmed­Hassan H, Sharif S, and Abdul­Careem
MF. Single stranded (ss)RNA­mediated antiviral response against infectious laryn­
gotracheitis virus infection. BMC Microbiology 2019 Feb; 19. DOI: 10.1186/s12866-
019-1398-6. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12866-019-1398-6
32.
Murphy K and weaver C. Innate Immunity: The First Line of Defense. Janeway’s
Immunology. Garland Science, 2017 :59–73
33.
Heaton SM, Borg NA, and Dixit VM. Ubiquitin in the activation and attenuation of
innate antiviral immunity. Journal of Experimental Medicine 2015 Dec; 213:1–13.
DOI: 10.1084/jem.20151531. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20151531
34.
Tan X, Sun L, Chen J, and Chen ZJ. Detection of Microbial Infections Through In­
nate Immune Sensing of Nucleic Acids. Annual Review of Microbiology 2018 Sep;
72:447–78. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-micro-102215-095605. Available from: https://doi.
org/10.1146/annurev-micro-102215-095605
35.
Whitney Sinclair MO. Enterovirus. 2021. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/books/NBK562330/
36.
Qaisar N, Jurczyk A, and Wang JP. Potential role of type I interferon in the pathogenic
process leading to type 1 diabetes. Current Opinion in Endocrinology & Diabetes
and Obesity 2018 Apr; 25:94–100. DOI: 10.1097/med.0000000000000399. Available
from: https://doi.org/10.1097/med.0000000000000399
37.
McNab F, Mayer­Barber K, Sher A, Wack A, and O’Garra A. Type I interferons in
infectious disease. Nature Reviews Immunology 2015 Jan; 15:87–103. DOI: 10.
1038/nri3787. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1038/nri3787
38.
Wendt A and Eliasson L. Pancreatic ­cells – The unsung heroes in islet function.
Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology 2020 Jul; 103:41–50. DOI: 10.1016/j.
semcdb.2020.01.006. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2020.01.006
39.
Zhou Q and Melton DA. Pancreas regeneration. Nature 2018 May; 557:351–8.
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-018-0088-0. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
018-0088-0
40.
Marroqui L, Lopes M, Santos RS dos, Grieco FA, Roivainen M, Richardson SJ, Mor­
gan NG, beeck AO de, and Eizirik DL. Differential cell autonomous responses de­
termine the outcome of coxsackievirus infections in murine pancreatic and cells.
eLife 2015 Jun; 4. DOI: 10.7554/elife.06990. Available from: https://doi.org/10.
7554/elife.06990
46
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:55==
41.
Lee Y, Wang MY, Du XQ, Charron MJ, and Unger RH. Glucagon Receptor Knockout
Prevents Insulin­Deficient Type 1 Diabetes in Mice. Diabetes 2011 Jan; 60:391–7.
DOI: 10.2337/db10-0426. Available from: https://doi.org/10.2337/db10-0426
42.
Lawlor N, Youn A, Kursawe R, Ucar D, and Stitzel ML. Alpha TC1 and Beta­TC­6
genomic profiling uncovers both shared and distinct transcriptional regulatory fea­
tures with their primary islet counterparts. Scientific Reports 2017 Sep; 7. DOI:
10.1038/s41598-017-12335-1. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-
12335-1
43.
ATTC ATCC. Alpha TC1 clone 6, CRL­2934. 2021. Available from: https://www.
atcc.org/products/crl-2934
44.
Zhang C, Han X, Yang L, Fu J, Sun C, Huang S, Xiao W, Gao Y, Liang Q, Wang
X, Luo F, Lu W, and Zhou Y. Circular RNA circPPM1F modulates M1 macrophage
activation and pancreatic islet inflammation in type 1 diabetes mellitus. Theranostics
2020; 10:10908–24. DOI: 10.7150/thno.48264. Available from: https://doi.org/10.
7150/thno.48264
45.
Taciak B, Białasek M, Braniewska A, Sas Z, Sawicka P, Kiraga Ł, Rygiel T, and Król
M. Evaluation of phenotypic and functional stability of RAW 264.7 cell line through
serial passages. PLOS ONE 2018 Jun; 13. Ed. by Roberts DD:e0198943. DOI:
10.1371/journal.pone.0198943. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0198943
46.
ADA ADA. The History of a Wonderful Thing We Call Insulin. 2019 Jul. Available
from: https://www.diabetes.org/blog/history-wonderful-thing-we-call-insulin
47.
Fu Z, Gilbert ER, and Liu D. Regulation of Insulin Synthesis and Secretion and Pan­
creatic Beta­Cell Dysfunction in Diabetes. Current Diabetes Reviews 2013 Jan;
9:25–53. DOI: 10.2174/157339913804143225. Available from: https://doi.org/10.
2174/157339913804143225
48.
Meyts PD. Insulin and its receptor: structure, function and evolution. BioEssays
2004; 26:1351–62. DOI: 10.1002/bies.20151. Available from: https://doi.org/10.
1002/bies.20151
49.
Norman AW and Henry HL. Pancreatic Hormones. 2015 :109–39. DOI: 10.1016/
b978-0-08-091906-5.00006-9. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-08-
091906-5.00006-9
50.
Henquin JC. Regulation of insulin secretion: a matter of phase control and amplitude
modulation. 2009 Mar; 52:739–51. DOI: 10.1007/s00125-009-1314-y. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-009-1314-y
51.
Banerjee P, Mondal S, and Bagchi B. Effect of ethanol on insulin dimer dissociation.
The Journal of Chemical Physics 2019 Feb; 150:084902. DOI: 10.1063/1.5079501.
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5079501
52.
Petersen MC and Shulman GI. Mechanisms of Insulin Action and Insulin Resistance.
Physiological Reviews 2018 Oct; 98:2133–223. DOI: 10.1152/physrev.00063.2017.
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00063.2017
53.
Castiello FR, Heileman K, and Tabrizian M. Microfluidic perfusion systems for se­
cretion fingerprint analysis of pancreatic islets: applications, challenges and oppor­
tunities. Lab on a Chip 2016; 16:409–31. DOI: 10.1039/c5lc01046b. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1039/c5lc01046b
54.
George P and McCrimmon R. Diazoxide. 2012 Jan; 29:36–7. DOI: 10.1002/pdi.
1655. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1002/pdi.1655
55.
Agilent­Technologies. Agilent Seahorse XF Cell Mito Stress Test Kit. 2019. Available
from: https://www.agilent.com/cs/library/usermanuals/public/XF_Cell_Mito_Stress_
Test_Kit_User_Guide.pdf
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
47
==PAGE:56==
56.
Agilent. Seahorse XFe24 Analyzer. 2021. Available from: https://www.agilent.com/
en/product/cell-analysis/real-time-cell-metabolic-analysis/xf-analyzers/seahorse-xfe24-
analyzer-740878
57.
Nolfi­Donegan D, Braganza A, and Shiva S. Mitochondrial electron transport chain:
Oxidative phosphorylation, oxidant production, and methods of measurement. Re­
dox Biology 2020 Oct; 37:101674. DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2020.101674. Available
from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2020.101674
58.
Zhao RZ, Jiang S, Zhang L, and Yu ZB. Mitochondrial electron transport chain, ROS
generation and uncoupling (Review). International Journal of Molecular Medicine
2019 May. DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2019.4188. Available from: https://doi.org/10.3892/
ijmm.2019.4188
59.
Symersky J, Osowski D, Walters DE, and Mueller DM. Oligomycin frames a com­
mon drug­binding site in the ATP synthase. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 2012 Aug; 109:13961–5. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1207912109. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1207912109
60.
Kane MS, Paris A, Codron P, Cassereau J, Procaccio V, Lenaers G, Reynier P,
and Chevrollier A. Current mechanistic insights into the CCCP­induced cell survival
response. Biochemical Pharmacology 2018 Feb; 148:100–10. DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.
2017.12.018. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcp.2017.12.018
61.
Heinz S, Freyberger A, Lawrenz B, Schladt L, Schmuck G, and Ellinger­Ziegelbauer
H. Mechanistic Investigations of the Mitochondrial Complex I Inhibitor Rotenone in
the Context of Pharmacological and Safety Evaluation. Scientific Reports 2017 Apr;
7. DOI: 10.1038/srep45465. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1038/srep45465
62.
Huang Ls, Cobessi D, Tung EY, and Berry EA. Binding of the Respiratory Chain
Inhibitor Antimycin to the Mitochondrial bc1 Complex: A New Crystal Structure Re­
veals an Altered Intramolecular Hydrogen­bonding Pattern. Journal of Molecular Bi­
ology 2005 Aug; 351:573–97. DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2005.05.053. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2005.05.053
63.
Promega. Griess Reagent System Technical Bulletin. 2021. Available from: https:
//dk.promega.com/-/media/files/resources/protocols/technical-bulletins/0/griess-
reagent-system-protocol.pdf?rev=8b478e337acd43be863d7787c80ea1c6&sc_lang=en
64.
Alberti A, Karamessinis P, Peroulis M, Kypreou K, Kavvadas P, Pagakis S, Politis PK,
and Charonis A. ERp46 is reduced by high glucose and regulates insulin content in
pancreatic ­cells. American Journal of Physiology­Endocrinology and Metabolism
2009
Sep; 297:E812–E821. DOI: 10 . 1152 / ajpendo . 00053 . 2009. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.00053.2009
65.
Huang Q, You W, Li Y, Sun Y, Zhou Y, Zhang Y, Liu D, Zhan S, Zhu Y, and Han
X. Glucolipotoxicity­Inhibited miR­299­5p Regulates Pancreatic ­Cell Function and
Survival. Diabetes 2018 Aug; 67:2280–92. DOI: 10.2337/db18-0223. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.2337/db18-0223
66.
Cho JH, Lee KM, Lee YI, Nam HG, and Jeon WB. Glutamate decarboxylase 67
contributes to compensatory insulin secretion in aged pancreatic islets. Islets 2019
Mar; 11:33–43. DOI: 10.1080/19382014.2019.1599708. Available from: https://doi.
org/10.1080/19382014.2019.1599708
67.
Niu B, Li C, Su H, Li Q, He Q, Liu L, Xue Y, Shen T, and Xia X. Glucagon­like peptide­
1 receptor agonist exendin­4 protects against interleukin­1­mediated inhibition of
glucose­stimulated insulin secretion by mouse insulinoma cells. Experimental and
Therapeutic Medicine 2017 Jul; 14:2671–6. DOI: 10.3892/etm.2017.4803. Available
from: https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2017.4803
48
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:57==
68.
Knaack D, Fiore DM, Surana M, Leiser M, Laurance M, Fusco­DeMane D, Hegre
OD, Fleischer N, and Efrat S. Clonal Insulinoma Cell Line That Stably Maintains
Correct Glucose Responsiveness. Diabetes 1994 Dec; 43:1413–7. DOI: 10.2337/
diab.43.12.1413. Available from: https://doi.org/10.2337/diab.43.12.1413
69.
Siddiqui M, Mukherjee S, Manivannan P, and Malathi K. RNase L Cleavage Products
Promote Switch from Autophagy to Apoptosis by Caspase­Mediated Cleavage of
Beclin­1. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 2015 Jul; 16:17611–36. DOI:
10.3390/ijms160817611. Available from: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms160817611
70.
Szabo A, Magyarics Z, Pazmandi K, Gopcsa L, Rajnavolgyi E, and Bacsi A. TLR
ligands upregulate RIG­I expression in human plasmacytoid dendritic cells in a type
I IFN­independent manner. Immunology & Cell Biology 2014 May; 92:671–8. DOI:
10.1038/icb.2014.38. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1038/icb.2014.38
71.
Perng YC and Lenschow DJ. ISG15 in antiviral immunity and beyond. Nature Re­
views Microbiology
2018
May; 16:423–39. DOI: 10 . 1038 / s41579 - 018 - 0020 - 5.
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-018-0020-5
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
49
==PAGE:58==
A
Appendix
Machine
Name
Company
Celigo
Celigo 5 channel
Nexcelom Bioscience
Cell Centrifuge
Centrifuge 5702 R
Eppendorf
Luna Cell Counter
LunaTM
fl
Dual
Fluorescence
Cell
Counter
logos
NanoDrop
NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer
Thermo scientific
PCR machine
T100TM thermonal cycler
Bio­RAD
Plate reader
CLARIOstar plus
BMG labtech
qPCR machine
QuantStudio 7Pro
Applied
biosystems
by
Thermofisher Scientific
Seahorse
Seahorse XFe24 Analyzer
Agilent
Table A.1: Machines used in this study.
Name of assay
Name of Kit
Company
Insulin Elisa kit
Mouse Insulin ELSA
Mercodia
Mitochondiral
stress
test
Seahorse XF cell mito stress test kit
Agilent Technologies
NO kit
Griess Reagent system
Promega
Protien kit
BCATM protein assay kit
Termo Scientific
Seahorse cartridge
Agilent Seahorse XFe24 Extracellular
flux assay kit
Agilent Technologies
Table A.2: Assay kits used in this study.
50
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:59==
Item Name
Company
6X Orange DNA loading Dye
ThermoFisher Scientific
10X TBE Buffer
invitrogenTM
Agarose
invitrogenTM
Bovine serum albumin
Sigma aldrich A7030
Cell star® cell culture flasks
Greiner
Cell star® cell culture plate
Greiner
Chloroform
Sigma Aldrich C2432
Diazoxide
Sigma Aldrich D9035
Dimethyl Sulfoxide (DMSO)
Sigma Aldrich D2650
GeneRuler 100bp DNA ladder
ThermoFisher Scientific
GelRed® Nucleic Acid Strain (10,000X,Water)
Biotium
GHP acrodisc® 25mm syringe filter
ThermoFisher Scientific
Gibco 1X DMEM
ThermoFisher Scientific
Gibco FBS, qualified, Fetal bovine serum
ThermoFisher Scientific
Gibco PBS pH 7.4 (1X)
ThermoFisher Scientific
Gibco Poly­D­Lysine
ThermoFisher Scientific
Gibco Trypan Blue Stain
ThermoFisher Scientific
HaltTM Protease & phosphatase inhibitor cocktail X100
ThermoFisher Scientific
Hard­shell high Profile 96­well semi­skirted PCR plates
BIO­RAD
HEPES
Lonza BioWhittaker 17­737E
Imiquimod R7837
InvivoGen
invitrogen RNase free water
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Isopropanol (2­propanol)
Sigma Aldrich I9516
LightCycler FastStart DNA Master plus SYBR Green I
Roche
LUNA Cell counting slides
Saveen Werner / logos
MicroAMPTM optical 96­well reachtion plate
Applied biosystems
Gibco Non­Essential Amino Acids Solution (100X)
ThermoFisher Scientific
Polyinosinic–polycytidylic acid sodium salt (Poly(I:C))
Sigma Aldrich P0913
PowerUpTM SYBRTM Green MasterMix
ThermoFisher Scientific
qScript cDNA supermix
Quanta Bio
Agilent seahorse XF calibrant
Agilent technologies
Agilent Seahorse XF24 Cell culture microplates
Agilent Technologies
Seahorse XF 1.0 M Glucose Solution
Agilent Technologies
Seahorse XF 200mM Glutamine Solution
Agilent Technologies
Seahorse XF DMEM Medium, pH 7.4
Agilent Technologies
Seahorse XF 100mM Pyruvate solution
Agilent Technologies
Seahorse XF cell mito stress test kit
Agilent Technologies
TC Flask T75, Cell+, vented Cap
Sarstedt AG & Co.
TC plate Cell+ F
Sarstedt AG & Co.
Nalgene TM rapid­flowTM75mm filter unit
Thermo scientic
Tolbutamide
Sigma Aldrich T0891
TRIzol ® reagent
Ambion by Life Technologies
Trypsin ­ EDTA solution
Sigma Aldrich SLCH8830
Table A.3: Chemicals, therapeutics and other equipment used in this study.
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
51
==PAGE:60==
B
Appendix
Abbriviation
Name
2’­5’A
2’­5’A oligoadenylate pathway
AB
Autoantibody
AB­
Autoantibody negative
Ab+
Autoantibody­positive
APC
Antigen prensenting cell
AUR
Sulphonylurea receptor
CAR
Coxsackie­adenovirus receptor
CARD
Caspase recruitment domain
DAF
Decay accelerating factor
DC
Dendritic cell
dsRNA
Double­stranded RNA
ETC
Electron transport chain
FCCP
Carbonyl cyanide­p­trifluoromethoxyphenylhydrazone
GADA
GAD65 autoantibody
GSIS
Glucose stimulated insulin secretion
HLA
Human leukocyte antigen
IA­2A
Insulinoma­associated antigen­2 autoantibody
IFN­γ
Interferon­γ
IKKε
kappa B kinase­ε
IL
Interleukin
IMS
Intermembrane space
iNOS
Inducible nitric oxide synthase
IRAK
Interleukin­1 receptor­associated kinase
IRF
IFN regulatory factor
IAA
Insulin autoantibody
JAK
Janus kinase
K_ATP
ATP­sensitive potassium
K_ir
Inwardly rectifying potassium
KRBH
Krebs­Ringer bicarbonate buffer
LPS
Lipopolysaccaride
MAVS
mitochondrial antiviral­signaling protein
MyD88
Myeloid differentiation primary response protein 88
NK
Natural killer
NOD
Non­Obese Diabetic
OCR
Oxygen consumption rate
OSCP
Oligomycin sensitivity­conferring protein
PAMPs
Pathogen­associated molecular patterns
PCR
Polymerase chain reaction
Poly(I:C)
Polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid
PRR
Pattern recognition receptor
PTM
Posttranslational modification
QH_2
Ubiquinol
qPCR
Quantitative PCR
R837
Imuquimod (R837)
rER
Rough endoplamic reticulum
52
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:61==
Continuation of table B.1
Abbriviation
Name
RHIM
Receptor­interacting protein 1 homotypic interaction motif
RIG­I
Retinoic acid­inducible gene I
RIPK1
receptor­interacting serine/threonine­protein kinase 1
SRP
Signal recognition particles
ssRNA
Single­stranded RNA
SUR1
Sulfonylurea receptor 1
T1D
Type 1 diabetes
T2D
Type 2 Diabetes
TAK1
transforming growth factor β­activated kinase 1
TBK1
TANK­binding kinase 1
TBK1
TANK­binding kinase 1
TCA
Tricarboxylic acid
TCR
T­cell receptor
TGF­β
transforming growth factor β
Th1
CD4+ type 1 helper cells
TIR
Toll/IL­1 receptor
TLR
Toll­like receptor
TNF
Tumor necrosis factor
TRAF
Tumor necrosis factor receptor–associated factor
TRIF
TIR­domain­containing adapter­inducing interferon­β
TYK
Tyrosine kinase
ZnT8A
Zinc transporter 8 autoantibody
ΔΨ
Mitocondrial membrane potential
Table B.1: Abbriviations
End of table
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
53
==PAGE:62==
C
Appendix
C.1
Krebs­Ringer bicarbonate buffer
Compound
Concentration (mM)
NaCl
118,5
KCl
4,74
MgSO4 x 7H2O
1,19
KH2PO4
1,19
NaHCO3
25
CaCl2 x 2H2O
2,54
HEPES
10
BSA*
0,10%
H2O
Solvent
Table C.1: KRBH
*BSA was not included in the stock solution of KRBH, but was added at 0.1% (W/V)
concentration when present, unless specified otherwise
54
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:63==
C.2
PCR programs
Program 1: cDNA
25°C
5 min
42°C
30 min
85°C
5 min
4°C
Infinit hold
Table C.2: Program used for cDNA synthesis.
Program 2: Gradient
Step
Temperature
Time
1. Initial denaturation
98°C
1 mi
2. Denaturation
98°C
10 sec
3. Annealing
56­64°C
10 sec
4. Extension
72°C
15 sec
Go back to step 2 (x45)
5. Final exstension
72°C
10 min
6. Cooling
4°C
Infinite hold
Table C.3: Program used for primer test.
Program 3: qPCR
Step
Temperature
Time
Ramp Rate
1. Initial denaturation
95°C
10 min
3.95°C/S
2. Denaturation
95°C
10 sec
3.95°C/S
3. Annealing
60°C
10 sec
2.2°C/S
4. Extension
72°C
15 sec
3.95°C/S
Go back to step 2 (x5)
Melt curve
5. Start
60°C
1 min
2.2°C/S
7. End
95°C
1 sec
0.1°C/S
8. Hold
4°C
Infinite hold
­
Table C.4: The temperature in step 3 is primer specific, but was in most cases 60°C.
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
55
==PAGE:64==
C.3
Primers used in this study
Name
Sequence
Trun (ºC)
ID*
GAPDHfor
GTC GTG GAG TCT ACT GGT GTC
54­60
Mm.GAPDH
GAPDHrev
GAG CCC TTC CAC AAT GCC AAA
Mm.GAPDH
ISG15for
TCT GAG CAT CCT GGT GAG GA
64
Mm.ISG15
ISG15rev
CAG CCA GAA CTG GTC TTC GT
Mm.ISG15
MDA5for
AGG AAG TAC AAC GAA GCC CTA C
60
Mm.MDA5
MDA5rev
CCT CGT CAT CAC TCT TGT CG
Mm.MDA5
OAS1for
ATC AGC CGT CAA TGT CGT GT
62
Mm.OAS1a+g
OAS1rev
CTT GAG TGT GGT GCC TTT GC
Mm.OAS1a+g
RNL ex1for
AGC TCC TCT TTG TTC TGT CTG GTT
64
Mm.RNL_ex1
RNL ex1rev
CCT GAG CAA TCT TCA CCT CCT
Mm.RNL_ex1
TLR3for
CCT CTT GAA CAA CGC CCA AC
>58
Mm.TLR3
TLR3rev
TCG AGC TGG GTG AGA TTT GTC
Mm.TLR3
TLR7for
TGA ATA TGC ACG GAG CTG CA
58­64
Mm.TLR7_kp
TLR7rev
GGC AGT CTG CAT TCA AAG GC
Mm.TLR7_kp
YWHAZfor
TGC GTG ACA TCT GCA ACG AT
>60
Mm.TLR7_kp
YWHAZrev
TGA CTG GTC CAC AAT TCC TTT CT
Mm.TLR7_kp
Table C.5: List of primers used in this study. All primers are written from 5’ to 3’, run
temperature (Trun) and ID Primers purchased from TAG Copenhagen a/s.
56
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:65==
C.4
Seahorse Programs
Time
Injection
Injection time
Equilibration
24 min
Oligomycin
24 min
24 min
FCCP
48 min
24 min
Rot/AA
1 hour 12 min
Table C.6: Seahorse program 1
Period
Time
Injection
Injection time
Equilibration
12 min
­
­
Starvation
48 min
­
­
Stimulation
24 min
Tolbutamide/DMSO
1 hour
Stress Test Assay
24 min
Oligomycin
1 hour 24 min
24 min
FCCP
1 hour 48 min
24 min
Rot/AA
2 hours 12 min
Table C.7: Seahorse program 2
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
57
==PAGE:66==
D
Appendix
D.1
Insulin ELISA data
Starvation
Medium
Treatment
Conc.(µM)
Incubation
Insulin (ng/mL)
30 min
K1 + K2
tolbutamide
25
15 min
n.a.
30 min
K1 + K2
tolbutamide
50
15 min
n.a.
30 min
K1 + K2
tolbutamide
25
25 min
0,19
30 min
K1 + K2
tolbutamide
50
25 min
2,44
30 min
K1 + K2
control
25
25 min
n.a.
60 min
K1 + K2
tolbutamide
25
15 min
1,83
60 min
K1 + K2
tolbutamide
50
15 min
n.a.
60 min
K1 + K2
tolbutamide
25
25 min
2,1
60 min
K1 + K2
tolbutamide
50
25 min
6,05
60 min
K1 + K2
control
0
25 min
n.a.
60 min
D1 + D2
tolbutamide
25
15 min
2,36
60 min
D1 + D2
tolbutamide
50
15 min
2,59
60 min
D1 + D2
tolbutamide
25
25 min
n.a.
60 min
D1 + D2
tolbutamide
50
25 min
1,61
60 min
D1 + D2
control
0
25 min
n.a.
60 min
K1 + K2
Diazoxide
100
1h
0,103
60 min
K1 + K2
Diazoxide
200
1h
0,326
60 min
K2 + K2
Diazoxide
100
1h
0,549
60 min
K2 + K2
Diazoxide
200
1h
0,313
60 min
K3 + K4
Diazoxide
100
1h
0,472
60 min
K3 + K4
Diazoxide
200
1h
0,457
60 min
K4 + K4
Diazoxide
100
1h
0,372
60 min
K4 + K4
Diazoxide
200
1h
0,148
60 min
D1 + D2
Diazoxide
100
1h
n.a.
60 min
D1 + D2
Diazoxide
200
1h
0,138
60 min
D2 + D2
Diazoxide
100
1h
0,616
60 min
D2 + D2
Diazoxide
200
1h
0,579
60 min
K1 + K2
Diazoxide
100
2h
0,572
60 min
K1 + K2
Diazoxide
200
2h
0,581
60 min
K2 + K2
Diazoxide
100
2h
n.a.
60 min
K2 + K2
Diazoxide
200
2h
0,18
60 min
K3 + K4
Diazoxide
100
2h
0,094
60 min
K3 + K4
Diazoxide
200
2h
0,153
60 min
K4 + K4
Diazoxide
100
2h
0,3
60 min
K4 + K4
Diazoxide
200
2h
0,437
60 min
D1 + D2
Diazoxide
100
2h
0,313
60 min
D1 + D2
Diazoxide
200
2h
0,112
60 min
D2 + D2
Diazoxide
100
2h
0,196
60 min
D2 + D2
Diazoxide
200
2h
0,475
60 min
D3 + D4
Tolbutamide
50
25 min
0,232
60 min
D3 + D2
Tolbutamide
50
25 min
0,186
60 min
K1 + K2
Tolbutamide
0
0
0,626
60 min
K2 + K2
Tolbutamide
0
0
0,342
58
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
==PAGE:67==
Continuation of table D.1
Starvation
Medium
Treatment
Conc.(µM)
Incubation
Insulin (ng/mL)
60 min
K3 + K4
Tolbutamide
0
0
0,427
60 min
K4 + K4
Tolbutamide
0
0
0,675
60 min
D1 + D2
Tolbutamide
0
0
0,488
60 min
D2 + D2
Tolbutamide
0
0
0,318
60 min
D3 + D4
Diazoxide
100
2h
0,23
60 min
D3 + D4
Diazoxide
200
2h
1,111
60 min
D4 + D4
Diazoxide
100
2h
0,052
60 min
D4 + D4
Diazoxide
200
2h
0,19
60 min
K1 + K2
DMSO
2µL
2h
0,311
60 min
K2 + K2
DMSO
2µL
2h
n.a.
60 min
K3 + K4
DMSO
2µL
2h
0,208
60 min
K4 + K4
DMSO
2µL
2h
0,431
60 min
D1 + D2
DMSO
2µL
2h
0,332
60 min
D2 + D2
DMSO
2µL
2h
0,238
60 min
D3 + D4
DMSO
2µL
2h
0,18
60 min
D4 + D4
DMSO
2µL
2h
0,224
60 min
K1 + K2
control
0
2h
0,156
60 min
K2 + K2
control
0
2h
0,138
60 min
K3 + K4
control
0
2h
0,25
60 min
K4 + K4
control
0
2h
0,251
60 min
D1 + D2
control
0
2h
0,144
60 min
D2 + D2
control
0
2h
0,141
60 min
D3 + D4
control
0
2h
0,225
60 min
D4 + D4
control
0
2h
0,617
60 min
K2 + K2
tolbutamide
50
25 min
1,496
60 min
K3 + K4
tolbutamide
50
25 min
0,398
60 min
K4 + K4
tolbutamide
50
25 min
0,425
60 min
D4 + D4
tolbutamide
50
25 min
0,369
Table D.1: Insulin concentrations
End of table
Dysregulation of Innate Antiviral Immune Pathways in the Progression of Type 1 Diabetes
59
==PAGE:68==
Bartholin
Insituttet,
Rigshospitalet
Copenhagen Biocenter
Building 2, 3rd floor
Ole Maaløes Vej 5
2200 Copenhagen N
Tlf. 35 45 57 17
