==PAGE:1==
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
Scheduling of Shelf Cranes
Master Thesis by Joakim Nilaus Hven
DTU Management
Department of Management Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
Scheduling of Shelf Cranes
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
Joakim Nilaus Hven
Supervisor:
Assoc. Prof. Dario Pacino
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Drawings by:
Ulrik Nilaus Hven
Published by:
DTU, Department of Management Engineering, Akademivej, Building
358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Management Engi­
neering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of operations research,
including integer programming and meta­heuristics.
Joakim Nilaus Hven ­ s193169
Signature
Date
ii
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Container terminal systems’ level of efficiency is critical for the reliability of the shipping
container supply chain. Factors such as inflation in the demand and requirements on en­
vironmental sustainability on the transportation of goods using shipping containers puts
increasingly more pressure on the operations occurring at the container terminals, and
it is therefore important to explore and analyze novel ideas on how to optimize these.
In this thesis, the new Hybrid Container Storage system that reiterates the way shipping
containers are stored at container terminals has been reviewed using methods from the
field of operations research. To this effort, two mathematical Mixed Integer Programming
models of varying complexity have been derived describing the physical requirements
presented upon scheduling tasks performed by the container­moving shelf cranes within
the new storage system. This scheduling problem is named the Shelf Crane Schedul­
ing Problem (SCSP). As a consequence of the high combinatorial complexity imposed by
the models, three different heuristic solution methods build on the Local Search, Iterated
Local Search and Tabu Search meta­heuristic approaches, respectively, have been de­
veloped to satisfy the need of computing near­optimal schedules for the shelf cranes in a
short amount of time. Having proved that the mathematical models derived are capable
of solving the well­known Flexible Job­Shop Scheduling Problem (FJSSP) as well, the
models have been tested on both generated instances of the SCSP and on benchmark
instances of the FJSSP, to which the solution methods showed good potential. Being the
first study of its kind in researching and analyzing optimization­based details for the new
storage system, this thesis concludes that the tools developed are a solid foundation for
the newly defined mathematical problem. Furthermore, these tools have been shown to
be capable of computing a range of performance measures, making it possible for the
industry to evaluate the efficiency of switching to the Hybrid Container Storage system at
the container terminals.
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Today’s container terminal processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Hybrid container storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Components of the HCS system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.2
Container supply chain life cycle in the HCS system . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.3
Optimization problems within the HCS system
. . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Outline of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Literature Study of Prior Research
9
2.1
Quay Crane Scheduling Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Mixed Rural Postman Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Flexible Job­Shop Scheduling Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3.1
Mathematical formulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3.2
Heuristic solution methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4
Literature review output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
Mathematical Models and Heuristic for the SCSP
17
3.1
Pre­modelling discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2
Mathematical modelling of the SCSP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2.1
General model setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2.2
The Single SCSP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2.3
The Multi SCSP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3
Heuristic solution methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.3.1
General heuristic elements and components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.3.2
Local Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3.3.3
Iterated Local Search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
3.3.4
Tabu Search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
3.4
Modelling and heuristic summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4
Performance Testing
43
4.1
Test setup and tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.2
Test data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.3
Test execution and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.3.1
Exact solver performance on the SCSP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.3.2
Heuristic solver performance on the SCSP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.3.3
Exact solver performance on the FJSSP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.3.4
Heuristic solver performance on the FJSSP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5
Discussion
57
6
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
63
A Collected Test Results
65
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Shipping containers have been, current are, and continuously will be a critical tool used
for the transportation of goods and cargo across the world. These steel boxes have in
decades played a huge part in the success of the maritime transportation industry, and
they will continue to do so in the future. If we look at the amount of goods transported
across the world , it has been computed that approximately 90% (Economic Co­operation
and Development 2021) of this is done by sea, and that around 60% (Nagurney 2021) of
it is containerized cargo. These numbers are big, and the world as of today is therefore
heavily reliant on this mean of transporting cargo. With the global COVID­19 pandemic
a shortage of containers has happened as a consequence of the global supply chain
challenges, to which the demand on the remaining available containers has increased
and thus has led to shipping price inflation (Murray 2021). It has therefore become clear
that it is crucial that the industry keeps up with the demand by developing new methods
of handling the containers at any stage in the transportation process, and by this attempt
to remove any bottlenecks that might occur.
Looking at a container’s supply chain life cycle from when it is ready to be shipped and
until it arrives at its destination, it goes through a lot of stages and processes. This can
be anything from the truck transporting the container to a container terminal close to the
waters, to the quay crane lifting up the container and placing it on a container ship, to
the stage where the container is put on a train in a different country ready to be trans­
ported inland. With all of these different workflows involved in the transportation of the
container from point A to point B, feasibility­wise we zoom in and look at the point in the
transportation process that connects transportation on land and at sea. Here, we find that
the container terminals on the ports are the link between these. Hence, the container
terminals are an important part in the over­all integration of the workflows needed to get
the container to its destination, given it has to be transported both on land and at sea. It
must therefore be possible to analyze the processes occurring at the container terminal
in the attempt of identifying any bottlenecks where time can be saved or processes can
be optimized.
Given that there has been developed a new system for storing and handling the containers
in the yard area of a container terminal, the goal of this thesis is to analyze this new
system and derive mathematical models capable of describing the functionality of it. This
is done through the identification of critical constraints, which state the feasibility of given
schedules for the machines within the system. Following this, a set of heuristic solution
methods will be developed for attaining near­optimal schedules for said machines. The
quality of the models derived will be determined through a range of tests using the heuristic
solution methods, to which we will attempt to draw a conclusion on the feasibility and
optimization of using the new storage system.
1.1
Today’s container terminal processes
Container terminals around the world are all (more or less) standardized and use the
same infrastructure. This implies that the operations occurring at the container terminals
are given by a common pattern, which is roughly illustrated in fig. 1.1. Here it is shown that
the handling of containers is done in many stages through the use of different vehicles
and machines. It is worth mentioning how the operations are divided into those at seaside
(the quay area), at the yard area, and at landside (the truck and train area). At seaside
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
1
==PAGE:10==
of the container terminal, vessels dock at the quay where quay cranes (QCs) load and
unload containers from the vessels. Each container is transported from the quay area to
the yard area by a yard truck or by an Automated Guided Vehicle (AGV). At the yard area,
the container is given a storage position and placed there by a gantry crane. Finally, at
landside, a yard truck or an AGV transports the container between the yard area and the
truck and train area, where the container can begin its journey inland. This process flow
can be described in a likewise manor for a container arriving at the container terminal at
landside, and which has to be placed on a vessel at seaside.
Figure 1.1: Operations and components at a common container terminal (source: Meisel
2009 figure 2.5)
From this we notice that even though we have zoomed in on a part of the full container
supply chain life cycle, a lot of infrastructure is required for the container to be moved from
sea to land, or vice versa. As will become apparent from the literature study of chapter 2,
a lot of effort has been put into the optimization the QCs’ workflow at seaside, to which
the movement of and operations performed by the QCs have become more efficient. If
we instead look at the operations happening in the yard area of the container terminal,
namely where the containers are stored while waiting to be transported further on, the
storing method itself has not been revisited for a long time. How it works today is that
a container is assigned a stack within a block, where it is placed for storage by a gantry
crane. Here, the container will either be placed on the very top of the stack (or on the
ground if the stack is empty) or below one or more containers. In the latter case, the
containers at the top must be removed from the stack before the new container can be
placed in its designated spot in the stack. Afterwards, the removed containers will either
be put back on the stack or remain at their new positions. On the other hand, if a container
is to be fetched from the storage system, it will either be at the top of a stack, ready to be
fetched, or below one or more containers. If it is not on the top of its stack, then all of the
containers above it must be moved to another location before the container of interest is
accessible and ready to be fetched. These operations of moving the containers around
are called reshuffling, and they can take an unnecessarily long time to execute. Hence,
reshuffling of containers could potentially be a process worth revisiting and attempted
optimized.
In the following section, we will see how a company has done their attempt at redesigning
and ­defining the system at the yard area in the hopes of effectuating the processes within.
2
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Hybrid container storage
Even though the method of storing containers at container terminals has been standard­
ized across the world and has shown to be reliable, it is never to late to explore other
storage methods in the hopes of discovering a more efficient setup. In recent years, the
company named BOXBAY has done exactly this, to which they have developed a new
system that is a complete redesign of the current one (BOXBAY 2021). In brief terms, the
main difference lies in the usage of shelves to store the containers on. With this, instead
of having the containers stacked on top of each other, they are allocated individual com­
partments in the shelf system from where they are fully accessible at any time. Having
the ability to access any container at any point in time without the need of reshuffling other
containers is a feature that potentially can reduce the makespan of container terminal op­
erations, and with this increase the throughput of containers. It is by these arguments that
this redesign of container storage is of great interest to be explored and analysed. There­
fore, we will take a look at how this system works by breaking up all of its components,
and then try to point out the elements that could have high impact on the effectiveness of
the yard area processes.
To begin with, it is important to note that modifying the way of storing the containers implies
that the entire workflow with containers in the yard area of a container terminal must be
revisited, e.g. how to fetch the containers from the shelves and how to integrate the
system with the machines and vehicles operating in the transport areas. Hence, the new
storage method makes it a condition to implement a new system with new components
throughout. In the following, we call this new system the Hybrid Container Storage (HCS)
system.
1.2.1
Components of the HCS system
Breaking down the HCS system into its different components, we see that it consists of
two types of cranes, an underground rotating re­positioning system, and aisles of shelves.
Each of these are illustrated in fig. 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Components of the HCS system (Landside crane (A), shelf crane (B), pallet
circulation system (C), and shelf system (D))
At ground level, or rather just below ground level, a rectangular rail system is build, which
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
3
==PAGE:12==
hosts a number of pallets (see fig. 1.2 (C)). Each pallet is capable of carrying a container
along the rails. This is done by the pallets being moved in the same direction around the
tracks, which, in turn, integrates the other components of the HCS system to each other.
These systems we call Pallet Circulation Systems (PCSs).
Next, at ground level and at the end of each PCS, are a series of landside cranes (see
fig. 1.2 (A)). These cranes are stationary, hence there are a fixed number of them at
each of the PCSs. These cranes are the link between the containers going to and from
the landside, i.e. the truck and train area, and the yard area. Hence, they can pick up
outgoing containers from pallets in the PCS and place them on trucks and AGVs, and,
likewise, pick up incoming containers from the trucks and AGVs and place these on pallets
in the PCSs.
Figure 1.3: Pallet Circulation System below the shelf system within the HCS system
On top of the PCSs, the shelves are placed (see fig. 1.2 (D)). Here, they are oriented to be
perpendicular to the longer sides of the PCSs, and parallel to the road hosting the trucks
and AGVs between the yard and truck and train areas (see fig. 1.3). As fig. 1.3 and 1.4
show, the shelves come in pairs, making up an aisle with one shelf system at either side
and a set of rails in between. For a shelf, it can be of any length and of up to 11 storeys
high (measured in container heights), resulting in a large number of compartments that
can hold one container each (see fig. 1.5).
Finally, the cranes moving along the rails in each aisle are the shelf cranes (see fig. 1.2
(B)). These cranes are the connection between the incoming and outgoing containers at
seaside, as well as the incoming and outgoing containers at landside, i.e. on the PCSs.
A shelf crane is thus capable of picking up containers from a PCS or at seaside and place
them in designated shelf compartments for storage, and pick up containers from shelf
compartments for drop off either at seaside or on a pallet in a PCS.
From the above description we note that there has been no mention of the number of each
4
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.4: Aisles of the HCS system
Figure 1.5: A shelf system within the HCS system
component present in the HCS system. This is due to the fact that it is highly modular
and customizable and thus can be of any size and configuration (see BOXBAY 2021). By
this, it is given that any one shelf crane can access the pallets of one or more PCSs, and
likewise any one PCS can have its pallets be accessed at any aisle above its location, ac­
cording to the chosen HCS configuration. As a noteworthy example of the customizability
of the HCS system is that there can be more than one shelf crane in the same aisle. Fur­
thermore, the fact that the HCS system is modular is a very important feature of it, since
it allows for it to be constructed at any container terminal, at which it is customized to fit
this terminal’s dimensions and needs.
1.2.2
Container supply chain life cycle in the HCS system
Having described the HCS system in its entirety, we have build a foundation for under­
standing how each of the components work individually and together. Though, having a
focus on the workflows revolving around the handling of containers within the system, we
will describe this part of the supply chain life cycle of a container in further detail.
When a container arrives at the yard area we call this an incoming container operation.
Such operation will either be at the seaside or landside of the storage system. Depending
on which side it arrives from, there are a couple of different scenarios of how the container
is processed in the system. These are as follows:
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
5
==PAGE:14==
Arriving at seaside, the container will be placed at the end of an aisle from where it will be
picked up by a shelf crane. From here, one of two things can happen:
1. Either the container has to be stored in the shelf system for later pick­up, to which
the shelf crane places the container in its designated shelf compartment, or
2. the container has to go directly to the landside for further transportation, to which
the shelf crane places the container on a pallet in a PCS. Then, the PCS rotates the
pallet such that the container can be picked up by a landside crane and placed on
a truck or AGV for further transportation.
On the other hand, if the container arrives at landside by truck or AGV, the container is
picked up by a landside crane and placed on a pallet in a PCS. The PCS rotates its pallets
until the container can be picked up by the shelf crane that has access to the destination
of the container. From here we also have two different scenarios:
1. Either the container has to be stored in the shelf system for later pick­up, to which
the shelf crane places it in its designated shelf compartment, or
2. the container has to go directly to the seaside of the container terminal, to which the
shelf crane places it at the end of its aisle for pick­up by a truck or AGV.
Given that some containers will be stored within the system for some time, a final set of
operations arise, namely the ones we call outgoing container operations. Here a container
located in a shelf compartment is picked up by a shelf crane, which then either follows the
process of passing the container on to the seaside or to the landside as described above.
It is, of course, also possible to do a simple repositioning of a container from one shelf
compartment to another, though such movements correspond to the reshuffling explained
above and are the type of movements the HCS system attempts to eliminate the need for.
Hence, we from this point on assume that these reshuffling operations are not relevant to
consider. Collecting all of the different operations, fig. 1.6 illustrates the process flow of
each of them in a Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) diagram.
1.2.3
Optimization problems within the HCS system
With the above operations of the containers in the HCS system described, it has become
clear that several sequential operations are performed in order to service a single con­
tainer. These operations are themselves easy to perform, but when we recall that there
is a large demand on such operations at any given time, it suddenly becomes a combi­
natorial problem of determining which containers to serve when, by which machines and
cranes, and in what order. All of these decisions boil down to the scheduling of the var­
ious moving components in the HCS system. It is a given that all of these need to work
in conjunction with each other, though scheduling the combined movement of all at one
time is a very complicated task. As an example from the current operations happening at
container terminals, at seaside one can attempt to schedule the berth of vessels, position­
ing of quay cranes and operations of the quay cranes for a vessel at the same time. This
has shown to be extremely complicated to do, hence these tasks are usually split up and
solved separately, before the resulting schedules are merged. By this reasoning, we will
not try to tackle the task of scheduling all of the moving components of the HCS system at
the same time, but instead split up the problem into scheduling the different components
separately. Hence, it is a task of scheduling the following:
• The order and arrival times of trucks and AGVs to be serviced by the landside cranes
• The order and rotation of the pallets on a PCS given a schedule for the incoming
and outgoing containers
6
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.6: BPMN diagram of all possible operations on containers in the HCS system
• The movement pattern of the shelf cranes given a set of sequences of containers
to be handled
Having split up the scheduling task into three parts does not necessarily mean that the
task of scheduling all of them one by one and merging these together is an easy problem.
Therefore, we will narrow it down to a single component to focus on. Our choice of com­
ponent is the shelf cranes within the shelf system, since these are the integration between
seaside and landside container operations, as well as being the source of access to the
compartments in the shelf system. With that said, it is therefore our task to analyze the
operations of the shelf cranes and attempt to effectuate these in one way or another.
In this thesis, we will therefore attempt to build mathematical models of varying complex­
ity capable of determining feasible schedules for the shelf cranes. In doing so, we will
make necessary assumptions and define various parameters in order to live up to the
operations to be carried out in the real­world HCS systems. Given that the models will be
formulated as mixed integer programs, finding solutions, i.e. schedules, for instances of
sizes reflecting the real­world practices is expected to be very time consuming (or even
infeasible). Therefore, schedules will be constructed using heuristic solution methods that
we develop for solving the scheduling problem to near­optimality within a reasonable time
frame.
1.3
Outline of the thesis
In chapter 1 we have introduced the current standards for container terminal operations
as well as a new take on how the operations can be carried out in the yard area of the
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
7
==PAGE:16==
container terminal. For this new take, the HCS system has been defined and explained
with all of its components and operations, and the problems of scheduling the various
moving components have been explained. Here, the task of scheduling the movement of
the shelf cranes has been chosen as the task to be addressed in this thesis. A literature
study of relevant scheduling problems is carried out in chapter 2 where these are to be
studied for their mathematical formulations, and if any one of them is relatable to our prob­
lem, the literature study is extended by studying various heuristic solution methods used
to solve the given problem. Following this, a full derivation of two mathematical models
of varying complexity is done in chapter 3. Furthermore in the same chapter we look into
solving our scheduling problem to near­optimality using meta­heuristics, to which we will
start by developing a simple heuristic solution method followed by two more, which are
more thorough in their search for a near­optimal solution. A comprehensive set of tests for
the built solution methods will be carried out in chapter 4, where we execute tests on small
to large problems in order to attempt to simulate various real­world scenarios. If any of
the mathematical problems explored in the literature study relates to and is solvable with
methods developed for our problem, the test study will be extended to include compar­
isons between the two problems. With the results computed and knowledge found about
our problem, chapter 5 discusses the advantages (or lack thereof) of the HCS system,
how the tools developed in this thesis can be used by the industry, and where to go next
with this system and its mathematical field of study. Finally, chapter 6 concludes on the
content of this thesis.
8
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:17==
2
Literature Study of Prior Research
In connection with the fact that the HCS system is a newly developed system, not much
literature exists on the subject. As a matter of fact, the only literature that exists is given
by a high­level explanation of the system on BOXBAY 2021. Therefore, we will instead
attempt to locate and analyze literature related to the operations occurring at container
terminals using the currently implemented systems, specifically regarding the movement
and scheduling of cranes. We will, furthermore, analyze research literature describing
real­world problems, which consist of elements in their requirements or structure that are
relatable to our problem. All of this is done both in relation to the mathematical descriptions
of the problems as well as the heuristic solution methods used to attain good solutions to
each of them.
In general, all of the literature to be analyzed in this chapter is within the field of study of
operations research. Hence, they revolve around the description of real­world problems
using mathematical equations with the goal of identifying the feasibility and quality of pos­
sible solutions to the given problems. In this field of study a lot of different problems have
already been described, to which it is worth noting that they usually are created without the
use of units on the values within. Thus, if two problems can be described by the same set
of mathematical equations, then it is sufficient to derive such for only one of them, since
the other’s description follow directly. With that said, we attempt to locate research about
one or more real­world problems, which consists of requirements or builds a structure that
can be related to our problem. If such exist, it should therefore be possible to draw par­
allels between the problems at hand and, with this, help us in both deriving the required
mathematical equations for our problem as well as determining viable meta­heuristics and
heuristic solution methods for solving said equations by computing near­optimal, feasible
solutions. As it turns out, there are some problems described in the literature, which are
relatable to ours. These are the Quay Crane Scheduling Problem (QCSP), the Mixed Ru­
ral Postman Problem (MRPP), and the Flexible Job­Shop Scheduling Problem (FJSSP).
Literature on each of these topics is covered and reviewed in the following sections.
2.1
Quay Crane Scheduling Problem
At the quay area of the container terminals, where vessels dock at the quay and quay
cranes load and unload containers from them, three different mathematical problems
arise: The assignment of berth space and time to vessel, the assignment of quay cranes
to the vessels that are docked, and the scheduling of quay cranes regarding the opera­
tions of loading and unloading containers to and from the docked vessels. Even though
it seems like these problems should be solved together by being highly connected to one
another, in practice they are usually solved in sequence, giving rise to them being viewed
as independent (Meisel 2009). Therefore, several research papers have been written
about just one of them as an individual problem. In doing so, we are able to isolate the
literature review to just one of them and focus our attention there. For the study of this
thesis the third problem is the one of interest, i.e. the scheduling of quay cranes in the so
called Quay Crane Scheduling Problem (QCSP).
In the QCSP, a number of quay cranes are assumed positioned in a single row together
with a set of vessels that are docked at the quay. Each vessel consists of a number of
holds, each of which has to be serviced by a quay crane. Service on a hold has a given
processing time that need not be the same between holds. In this setting, most instances
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
9
==PAGE:18==
have the number of quay cranes be strictly less than the total number of holds to be
serviced, hence this gives rise to the problem of scheduling when each hold should be
serviced by a quay crane. Here, the problem is then to ensure that all vessels have had
all of their holds serviced fully within the shortest amount of time. The time spent from the
first hold having work started on it to the last hold being completely serviced is defined as
the makespan of the schedule.
Within the definition of the QCSP there are some constraints that the literature chooses
to address and include in different ways. These are the notion of non­crossing of quay
cranes, whether preemption of jobs is allowed, and whether all vessels in the problem
instance are at the quay throughout the time period or if some vessels arrive or depart
during the time period. In brief terms, these constraints can be described as follows: Non­
crossing of quay cranes relates to the fact that the quay cranes are all placed on the same
set of rails, which run in a straight line. Thus, it is physically impossible for the quay cranes
to cross each other and with this change the order of their relative positions, which, in turn,
limits the movement possibilities of the quay cranes. The notion of preemption relates to
whether a quay crane can stop servicing a hold before it is completely serviced, and
then let another quay crane take over later on to finish the job. If preemption is allowed,
it will introduce a lot more flexibility to the resulting schedule, though at the same time
increase the number of possible solutions and thus the complexity of finding an optimal
schedule. Finally, if the vessels to be services are not all at the quay during the entirety
of the schedule’s makespan, schedules must comply with earliest start times as well as
latest completion times for the service of holds, which increases the set of requirements
on the resulting schedule.
The QCSP was first discussed in Daganzo 1989, where he allowed preemption of the
jobs on the holds but did not take non­crossing constraints into consideration. Such non­
crossing constraints have later seen different implementations, the easiest inclusion be­
ing together with a restriction on the movement direction of the quay cranes. With this
is meant that the quay cranes’ movement was reduced to be unidirectional, to which the
non­crossing constraints’ requirements are satisfied by ensuring that a quay crane only
moves when the adjacent quay crane is finished servicing its current hold. Such imple­
mentation was first used in Lim et al. 2002, where a dynamic programming algorithm for
solving the instances was developed in Andrew Lim, Rodrigues, and Xu 2004. It has
later been proven in Andrew Lim, Rodrigues, and Xu 2007 that the dynamic programming
algorithm is at most a factor of 2 away from the optimal makespan, and that their back­
tracking algorithm is able to compute optimal solutions for medium­sized unidirectional
instances. Besides the discoveries in Lim et al. 2002, Kim and Park 2004 also made their
independent research on non­crossing constraints. Later studies vary in referring to either
authors as being the pioneers of addressing the non­crossing constrains to the problem.
Moving away from the unidirectional requirement of the quay cranes, Zhu and A. Lim 2006
defines the QCSP without restricting the directional movement of the quay cranes. They
additionally introduce a branch­and­bound algorithm for solving the problem. The latest
development in modelling of the QCSP is seen in Sun et al. 2021, where the authors ad­
dress the extension to the QCSP by including vessel stability considerations. In the paper,
the unidirectional approach to the non­crossing of the quay cranes is used, mainly due to
the previous developed results on the existence of exact solution methods. A mathemat­
ical model is derived for the problem together with a logic­based Benders decomposition
solution method for attaining exact solutions, which shows promising in solving the QCSP
with vessel stability constraints.
Having described the origin of the QCSP and the latest research on the subject, we reflect
10
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:19==
on whether this is sufficient inspiration for the study of our problem of scheduling shelf
cranes. To begin with, the idea of non­crossing constraints is definitely to be noted. The
physical construction of the HCS system has shelf cranes placed side­by­side on the same
set of rails, which is exactly how the quay cranes are placed in the QCSP. Therefore, we
are likely to take inspiration from the research mentioned above in this regard. This is also
the case for the idea of scheduling the jobs with or without preemption. With that said,
there is, however, a limitation of the QCSP that influences our ability to draw parallels from
it to our problem. The limitation is that the jobs completed in the QCSP are stationary,
meaning that while a quay crane works on a hold, the quay crane remains in the same
position during this process. This is not the case for our problem, namely because a task
in this problem includes the repositioning of a container both horizontally and vertically,
hence the shelf crane will move away from its initial position during execution of this task.
Consequently, we cannot relate the scheduling of shelf cranes fully to the formulations
of the QCSP, and thus we will extend our literature study to analyze other mathematical
problems.
2.2
Mixed Rural Postman Problem
Following the review of research literature regarding the QCSP, which is developed for
operations that actually occur at container terminals, we turn our attention to problems that
are not describe specifically for such operations. We begin by looking at the possibility of
describing our problem as a tour that has to be traversed through a network. In doing so,
there is one specific problem that comes close to our needs, this being the Mixed Rural
Postman Problem (MRPP).
Given a graph consisting of a number of vertices together with a set of edges and a set
of arcs (these being directed edges) connecting the vertices, the MRPP is given as the
problem of determining a tour within the graph, which is required to include a subset of
the edges and arcs. Hence, it is the problem of having the ”postman” start at a vertex and
then move along the edges and arcs of the graph such that she traverses the required
edges and arcs at least once and then returns back to the starting vertex. With this, it is
desired to find the shortest tour satisfying these requirements. If the graph only consists
of edges, and thus the set of arcs is empty, the problem is simply called the Rural Postman
Problem (RPP).
The RPP and MRPP were first introduced in Orloff 1974, where the RPP is the only one
of the two to be described as having deterministic solution methods. As for the MRPP,
the author did not have any knowledge of existing exact solution methods, and instead
mentions that heuristic techniques are obvious candidates for solving the MRPP. Orloff
1974 furthermore introduces another problem called the Mixed General Routing Problem
(MGRP), which is a generalization of the classic Travelling Salesman Problem as well as
the MRPP. The MGRP is a generalization of the MRPP by extending the problem to also
include a set of required vertices, i.e. vertices that must be visited on the resulting tour
around the graph. Given that the MGRP has been shown to be NP­hard in A. Corberán,
Romero, and J. M. Sanchis 2003, it has been relevant to explore different formulations of
it in the hopes of achieving better bounds on the optimal solution of a problem instance.
Angel Corberán, Mota, and José M. Sanchis 2006 explores two such different formulations
of the MGRP, which are equivalent in their integer formulations, though for which their LP
relaxations attain different lower bounds on the optimal solution. The main difference
between the two formulations lie in the choice of decision variables. Here, the second
formulation addresses traversal of an edge by using two decision variables to allow for
the indication of the direction it was traversed. Finally, it is concluded that using this
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
11
==PAGE:20==
second formulation with two variables for each edge attains better bounds, though at a
cost in computational execution time. The polyhedra of the two formulations as well as
exact and heuristic solution methods are further explored in Corberán and Laporte 2014.
As a consequence of the MRPP being a special case of the MGRP, the formulations of the
MGRP can be used for describing instances of the MRPP too, hence one could attempt
to use the researched formulations in solving this type of problem.
The relation between the MRPP and the problem of scheduling shelf cranes lies in the
fact that in the latter a number of containers each have to be moved from one location
to another and thus the problem can be seen as a graph constructed as follows: The
vertices are defined as the containers’ start and end positions with arcs located between
each pair of such positions for each container. The edges are then placed between any
two vertices not related to the movement of the same container. The required arcs are
then the ones going from the start position of a container to its destination, to which all
arcs are said to be required arcs. This construction gives rise to an instance of the MRPP.
It is thus possible to describe our problem completely using either of the two formulations
given in Angel Corberán, Mota, and José M. Sanchis 2006. Though, there is one very
critical detail that must not be forgotten regarding our problem of scheduling shelf cranes:
It is a problem that requires the formulation to be able to handle multiple shelf cranes (or
postmen). This is not the case for the MRPP, which is why our problem cannot be solved
fully using the arguments and formulations derived for the MRPP. Consequently, it is in
our interest to investigate yet another type of mathematical problem, though this time one
that is not within the scope of networks and graphs, but rather in the domain of scheduling
machines.
2.3
Flexible Job­Shop Scheduling Problem
The next type of problem we look into is in the domain of machine scheduling. This
type of problem has been viewed from many angles and with varying setups and sets
of requirement. One of the most common ones is known as the Flow­Shop Scheduling
Problem (FSSP), which is centered around the need of completing a number of jobs using
a set of machines. Each of the jobs consists of the same number of tasks as the number
machines, to which the tasks are to be processed on the machines of the same index.
Furthermore, the tasks of a job are required to be processed in the order of increasing
index, which, in turn, has the machines queued to process the tasks of a job in sequence.
Given that there are more than one job and the tasks within each job can have different
processing times, the challenge is then to schedule the processing of the tasks on the
machines such that the makespan in minimized.
Scheduling of machines has been researched for decades and the problem defined as
the FSSP has its introduction in S. M. Johnson 1954 where it is not mentioned by name,
though the problems explored are exactly cases of the FSSP. Following this research, an
interest in the job­shop type of scheduling was spawned, which as an example is seen
from the elaborate research in Conway, Maxwell, and Miller 1967. On the topic of the
FSSP, one must acknowledge that it has been extended to a number of different problems.
One such extension to the FSSP is the Job­Shop Scheduling Problem (JSSP). In the
JSSP, the machine each task can be completed by is not necessarily given from similar
indices between the machine and the task, hence the order of the machines required to
complete the tasks of a job can be different from the order required in the FSSP. Extending
the problems even further, the JSSP can be modified to have each task be able to be
completed by any one machine in a subset of the machines, giving rise to a much more
flexible problem. Being more flexible, this extension has been given the name of the
12
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:21==
Flexible Job­Shop Scheduling Problem (FJSSP). One thing to note about these different
scheduling problems is that the FSSP has been proven to be NP­hard in Garey, D. S.
Johnson, and Sethi 1976, implying that both the JSSP and the FJSSP are NP­hard too. By
this and the fact that the FJSSP can be deployed on many different real­world problems, it
has therefore been of interest for many year to explore the possibilities of how to formulate
the FJSSP as well as how to solve it using heuristics.
Before diving into the different results achieved by previous researchers, it is worth not­
ing whether or not this problem is relatable to ours. To begin with, we recall that in the
HCS system there are both incoming and outgoing containers. Since it can be assumed
that each container arrives on or is designated to a specific PCS, we can view these as
individual jobs. Namely, for all incoming containers on a given PCS, these will arrive in a
specific order, hence a precedence sequence of the tasks of moving containers is defined.
Likewise, all outgoing containers assigned to the same PCS can be assumed to have a
priority, and thus this also allows us to define a job with a precedence sequence for the
tasks (containers) within. Next, given that the shelf cranes move along a set of rails par­
allel to the shelf system, it is possible for most shelf cranes to process the movement of
a given container, unless this container is located at the outer edges of the shelf system,
making it only accessible to the outermost shelf cranes. With this we have a definition of
the subset of shelf cranes (machines) able to move each container (perform each task).
Combining all of this we see that the FJSSP is highly relatable to the scheduling of shelf
cranes in a HCS system. With this argument, we continue looking into the formulations
and heuristics for the FJSSP discovered in previous research.
2.3.1
Mathematical formulations
Many formulations of the FJSSP have been derived through the years, to which Demir and
Kürşat Işleyen 2013 attempts to compile a list of these and state the general differences
between them (see table 1 in Demir and Kürşat Işleyen 2013). In doing so, five formu­
lations using identical performance measures are chosen for further analysis, and they
are split up into three categories according to their usage of decision variables. These
categories are the sequence­based variables, the precedence variables, and the time­
indexed variables. In the paper, one formulation falls under the first category, three under
the second category, and one under the third category. Sequence­based variables relates
to the individual machines having a sequence assigned to them consisting of the jobs that
can be processed on said machine. Here, the sequence computed thus gives rise to the
scheduling of the jobs on the machine. Precedence variables varies from the sequence­
based ones by having a binary decision variable state whether two jobs are performed on
the same machine and, if so, in which order they are processed. One should note, that
having a precedence variable indicating the order of two jobs on the same machine does
not state whether these jobs follow immediately after one another, e.g. there could be
a third job being processed between the two jobs to which the decision variable’s value
would not change. Finally, the time­indexed variables are given by having a binary deci­
sion variable for each time step, job and machine, which takes the value one, if this jobs
is processed on this machine in the given time step. By this definition, it is immediately
noted that such construction is expected to introduce a large number of decision variables
compared to the other formulations.
Following the presentation and description of each of the five formulations, a comparison
study is carried out, where the models are tested on ten small­sized and ten medium­sized
randomly generated instances. From the test results it is seen that the second model M2,
this being the first of the formulations using precedence variables, is outperforming the
others over­all. This being both in terms of objective values obtained, in the number of
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
13
==PAGE:22==
decision variables generated by the formulation, and in the CPU time spent solving each
test instance. Regarding the number of decision variables, it is seen that a large number
of these are produced by the time­indexed variable formulation as expected. It is further
mentioned that the difference in performance between the precedence variable based
models is largely due to the two other models being non­linear. Finally, it is concluded
that precedence variable based formulations are recommended for the FJSSP, though
this could vary when including set­up times or other additional factors for the models.
Given the previous statement about how the FJSSP is relatable to our problem, the for­
mulations researched in Demir and Kürşat Işleyen 2013 are plentiful in giving inspiration
to the modelling purposes of this thesis. With that said, we now look into prior work done
regarding heuristic solution methods for solving the FJSSP.
2.3.2
Heuristic solution methods
Due to the fact that the FJSSP is NP­hard and that it extends the applicable spectrum
of the JSSP (Mehdi et al. 2016), the research done for computing viable heuristic so­
lution methods for it is broad and explores many different meta­heuristics. One of the
first heuristic solution methods derived was using a tabu search algorithm in Brandimarte
1993. Given that the FJSSP can be described as consisting of a routing and a scheduling
problem combined (Brandimarte 1993), in this paper the scheduling of flexible job shops
or similar problems are categorized in one of two solution approaches: A concurrent ap­
proach, in which the routing and scheduling parts of the problem are solved simultane­
ously, and a hierarchical approach, in which the routing and scheduling problems are split
into subproblems and solved in sequence. With the knowledge of the possible split of the
FJSSP into two subproblems, the author derives two different hierarchical tabu search
approaches for solving the FJSSP, both of which show promising learnings in regards to
what further development on the subject should be capable of achieving.
Moving ahead to more recent years, Mehdi et al. 2016 briefly addresses the results of the
past decades of heuristic developments for the FJSSP, followed by going into detail with
a few selected ones as well as a new take on the challenge. Though, the author explores
the multi­objectives FJSSP (MO­FJSSP), which has multiple performance measures com­
bined in its objective function, the results of the paper are, however, still applicable to our
discussion given that it is the constraints of the mathematical problem formulation that are
our main point of interest. The meta­heuristics discussed in Mehdi et al. 2016 are
• a tabu search (TS), being trajectory­based,
• a generic algorithm (GA), being population­based, and
• a harmony search (HS), being music­inspired population­based.
As an introduction, all three approaches are described conceptually, followed by the au­
thor going into detail about the various elements needed to solve the problem. With this,
each meta­heuristic is described for its implementation for the FJSSP, to which a com­
putational study is carried out. Here the algorithms are tested on the FJSSP instances
developed in Brandimarte 1993, and the results are then compared to each other as well
as being put up against other meta­heuristic algorithms developed in prior research. The
results show that the HS algorithm is the best performing of the three approaches cov­
ered in the paper, and that the artificial bee colony algorithm proposed in Zhou et al. 2012
was the best over­all. Looking at the TS algorithm, it reached the same best solutions for
some of the instances, and for all but one of the remaining it achieved values very close
to the best ones found between all algorithms. The GA only performed slightly better than
the TS. With this, it is thus concluded that for the MO­FJSSP of the paper that all three
14
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:23==
meta­heuristics showed promising results, and that the, at that time, novel HS approach
derived could be worthwhile exploring further in future research.
Following the research and heuristic overview in Mehdi et al. 2016, an even more elab­
orate overview has recently been published in Li and Gao 2020. In this chapter, over
one hundred papers have been reviewed for their solution methods to the FJSSP, both
exact, heuristic and meta­heuristic. These are divided into sections according to their
type of solution method, where each of them is addressed in brief terms. Being such an
elaborate study, we leave it to the reader to examine Li and Gao 2020 themselves, and
instead conclude that the FJSSP has seen a lot of development in the previous years,
to which exact, heuristic and meta­heuristic solution methods of varying complexity have
been tested and compared.
2.4
Literature review output
In summary, the literature review above has explored three different mathematical mod­
elling problems, two of which have been for their problem formulations and the last for its
problem formulation as well as solution methods. The QCSP showed not to be sufficiently
related to the problem we wish to solve, though it did introduce us to the so called non­
crossing constraints and the notion of preemption, both of which will be required for to be
addressed in the models we are to derive. Next, the MRPP was shown to be a network
based take on the problem, to which a viable formulation exists. This will, however, not
be utilized in the study to follow due to it describing the tour for only a single entity, hence
it lacks the possibility of having multiple entities scheduled at the same time. Finally, the
FJSSP was explored and here showed good potential in its mathematical formulations.
By this fact, it will be this problem’s prior modelling work that we will take inspiration from
in the next chapter. Furthermore, given the elaborate development of solution methods
for the FJSSP, we are likely to take inspiration from these too.
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:25==
3
Mathematical Models and Heuristic for
the SCSP
As it has been made clear from the literature study in chapter 2, the derivation of mathe­
matical models and specialized heuristics for a given problem is no simple task and it can
take many iterations to reach viable solutions. These iterations might even look at differ­
ent approaches to the problem, and thus there is no implicit method of choosing which
direction to go in. With that said, we will therefore lay out the basics for our problem before
we begin deriving any model or heuristic.
First and foremost, recall that the problem we are interested in solving for the HCS system
is the scheduling of the shelf cranes, i.e. we intent to create a model that can determine
whether a schedule for said shelf cranes is feasible and, if so, give it a performance score
through an objective function. Furthermore, we recall that the HCS system is modular,
hence it can be of many different sizes and configurations and thus can consist of multiple
aisles each with a number of shelf cranes within. By the fact that the aisles and their
respective shelf cranes are independent of each other, we here argue that it is sufficient
for us to look at only a single aisle at a time. Furthermore, we also note the symmetry of
the shelf systems in an aisle (see fig. 1.4), to which we argue that it is not only sufficient
for us to look at a single aisle, but even more so to look at a single shelf system within an
aisle. With that said, this is what we will do from this point forward.
Having argued for the above, next we increase the level of detail on the explanation of
the HCS system from section 1.2 such that we are able to define all elements needed
for us to derive a mathematical model. Looking at a single shelf system, we have that it
can be placed above a number of PCSs, which the shelf cranes can access (see fig. 3.1).
As illustrated in fig. 3.1, each PCS is given by the two points that the cross section of it
captures. It is from these points the shelf cranes integrate with the PCS by being able to
pick up and drop off containers there. Next, if we look at a given point in time, a number
of containers will already be in various shelf compartments of the shelf system, some of
which has to stay for later retrieval, and some of which are scheduled to be fetched at this
time (see fig. 3.1). For our purposes, we will only be interested in the ones about to leave
the shelf system, hence when we in the following derivation mention a container in a shelf
compartment, it is one that is scheduled to be fetched.
Figure 3.1: Cross section of an aisle, showing a shelf system with containers to be fetched
(green) and to be left in storage (red), and three PCSs with their two integration points
each (yellow).
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
17
==PAGE:26==
Related to the repositioning of containers, we note that all PCSs are carousels of pallets,
hence containers can both enter and leave the system using them. With this it is thus
given that for each PCS in a given HCS system configuration, two jobs exist: An incoming
container job and an outgoing container job. This, in turn, gives rise to the number of jobs
our models must handle for any given HCS system configuration.
As a final note before we go into the details of deriving the mathematical models of the
HCS system, we define the name of the problem that we are to solve. Given that we intent
to derive a schedule for the shelf cranes in the HCS system, we call the problem the Shelf
Crane Scheduling Problem (SCSP).
3.1
Pre­modelling discussion
Along with the requirement of a deeper understanding of the problem to be solved, the
literature study in chapter 2 also taught us that the choice of modelling direction highly im­
pacts the resulting model’s flexibility and complexity. In section 2.2 we saw that choosing
to model the SCSP as a MRPP will not allow us to compute schedules for multiple shelf
cranes in a HCS system configuration. Though a MRPP inspired model would be able
to determine schedules for a single shelf crane, the possibility of having multiple shelf
cranes is an important feature of the HCS system. Therefore, we will not take a MRPP
approach.
Next, recall that we in section 2.1 concluded that the QCSP models were scheduling
stationary tasks, which is not what a SCSP instance consists of. With that, we cannot use
similar model techniques to achieve our goal. Though, there were two sets of constraints
that were introduced in the literature of the QCSP that will be relevant for us. These were
the non­crossing constraints and the constraints regarding preemption of tasks. Both of
these will need to be addressed in the following models, hence we might take inspiration
from those presented in the QCSP formulations.
Finally, looking at the outcome of section 2.3, we saw that the SCSP is very related to
the FJSSP. With this, it is important to note the different modelling methods presented,
namely in the choice of decision variables. It was concluded that the best performing
FJSSP model between five selected models was one using precedence variables. By
this result, we will use this type of variables in our models. Additionally, we will also take
inspiration from the general modelling approach regarding the constraints, given that the
setup between machines and tasks is so relatable.
Besides what has just been mentioned, one thing that the research literature for all of the
three problems have in common is that they all have been developed over many years. As
an example, the FSSP, JSSP and FJSSP have been discussed and explored for over half
a century, and in this time a lot of different mathematical formulations as well as exact and
heuristic solution methods have been developed. These have been through an ongoing
test and improvement phase, to which the current methods are better than some of the
earlier work completed. By stating this, we must acknowledge the novelty of the SCSP.
Given that the problem has not been researched as of the time of releasing this thesis,
we should explore it as a new problem and with the limited research as back­up. In the
following derivations, we will therefore develop the generic SCSP model in two steps:
First, we derive a simple model, which is capable of scheduling a single shelf crane for
a SCSP instance, and, secondly, we expand upon this to derive the full model, which
is capable of scheduling any number of shelf cranes for any SCSP instance. By taking
this approach, we make sure to take all assumptions and requirement of the problem into
consideration throughout while increasing the understanding for the problem and reducing
18
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:27==
the risk of not being able to handle edge case instances.
3.2
Mathematical modelling of the SCSP
With the extended understanding of the shelf system of an HCS system configuration,
we turn our attention to the derivation of mathematical models capable of determining
feasibility and quality of any shelf crane schedule. In order to derive these, we begin by
introducing a short vocabulary regarding the models.
Given that shelf cranes’ schedules are to be determined, they will be performing a series
of tasks. It is thus only natural to use the word task about the repositioning of a container.
If it is important for the context of a section in the following, we mention containers to be
fetched as outgoing tasks and containers that enter the shelf system as incoming tasks.
For the tasks we furthermore note that each of these have a duration, to which is meant
the time it takes to move the container from its origin to its destination. These two positions
will furthermore be mentioned as the endpoints of a task. Next, for all tasks of the same
type (incoming or outgoing) related to the same PCS, the set of these define a job. It
is thus given that a job consists of a final number of tasks to be carried out. Just as for
the tasks, if the context requires it, then the job will be prefixed with incoming or outgoing
accordingly. Finally, we recall that the full duration of a schedule is given by the makespan.
3.2.1
General model setup
Having introduced the vocabulary above, we now move along to determining the assump­
tions that we choose to follow in our derivations and computations of schedules. Following
this, we define some parameters and sets that will be used throughout.
Model assumptions
The very first assumption we make is that the problem is solved on a static instance,
i.e. looking at a specific point in time a still picture is taken of the shelf system and the
status’ of the jobs, from which the resulting schedule will be determined. It would also be
possible to relax this assumption to look at a dynamic system instead, though such would
likely introduce increased complexity to the models and heuristic solution methods to be
derived. By this argument, it has been decided that it is the static case that we address
in this study.
Next, when talking about the containers to be repositioned within the makespan of a
schedule, it is important to recall that this is only concerning containers that enter or leave
the shelf system. With that said, it is therefore assumed that no task given relates to the
repositioning of a container between two shelf compartments nor between two PCSs. It
is therefore given that each container moves between a shelf compartment and a PCS
integration point. It is furthermore assumed that the origin and destination of any con­
tainer is determined prior to the computation of a schedule. In relation to this, it is also
assumed that shelf compartments can be incident to being an endpoint for at most one
task. Another assumption regarding the tasks is that we do not allow for preemption of
tasks. By this we do not allow for tasks to be completed partly, nor to be completed using
more time than expected, e.g. by the shelf crane not moving in a direct line from the task’s
origin to its destination.
Turning our attention to the PCSs, it is assumed that each of these define an incoming and
an outgoing job. Though, no assumptions are made on the number of tasks within each
of these, hence a PCS can define one or two empty jobs for some problem instances.
For the PCS defined jobs, it is furthermore assumed that any incoming task has its origin
endpoint as the left integration point and any outgoing task has its destination endpoint
as the right integration point. Though it is possible to relax this assumption, it is chosen
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
19
==PAGE:28==
to be included for its reduction in model complexity. Another assumption about the PCSs
is about the availability of an empty pallet for an outgoing container as well as the next
incoming container being ready for pickup. Since it is possible to circulate the pallets on
a PCS while a shelf crane moves, and the number of pallets on the PCSs is configurable,
we assume that there is no waiting time or delay for the shelf cranes when they arrive
at a PCS with an outgoing container or when they arrive for the pickup of an incoming
container.
Next, for the shelf cranes, the first assumption is that they are each given a position from
where they start at in the beginning of the schedule. With this said, there will be no
assumption on the first task a shelf crane must perform at the beginning of a schedule.
Next, it is clear from the context of the HCS system that the shelf cranes will be spending
time picking up and placing down containers. Though, given that these operations can be
assumed to take constant time for any container, the time spent on pick­up and drop­off
of containers will be neglected in the schedules computed. As a consequence of this, it
is important to note that this makes the makespan computed for any schedule a lower
bound on the actual makespan of the same real­world operations. In general, all time
spent moving a shelf crane between two positions will be computed using the Euclidean
distance between the positions. Hence, we assume that the shelf cranes move at equal
constant speed, such that the travel distances can be converted to travel time through
a linear mapping. Given that all travel distances are converted through the same linear
map, we assume the travel time is equal to the travel distance, to which one can scale
this accordingly following the derivation of the schedule. Regarding the movement of
the shelf cranes, we assume that they cannot move outside of the footprint of the shelf
system. This assumption is not necessary when a single shelf crane is in the system, but
it becomes relevant once there are two or more shelf cranes instead. In such instance, the
tasks’ endpoints, respectively, define the accessibility to these for each of the shelf cranes,
respectively. This is done by stating an assumed width of a shelf crane, to which this can
be compared to the shelf crane index and the endpoint’s shelf compartment column index.
Throughout this thesis, we will assume that a shelf crane has width equal to the width of
a shelf system column, and, furthermore, that no safety distance is required between
adjacent shelf cranes. This setup allows for adjacent shelf cranes to be at adjacent shelf
columns at the same time. Collecting this, the accessibility of tasks for each shelf crane
can be determined directly from the endpoints of the tasks and the index of the shelf
cranes, respectively. One final assumption about the shelf cranes is that each of them
can at most complete one task at any one time, hence a shelf crane cannot carry two
containers at the same time.
Model requirements
Having stated the assumptions, we move on to determining the requirements to be met.
Given that we derive two models of varying complexity, we determine the requirements
for the simple model first, and then expand on these for the generic model.
For the case of there being only one shelf crane in the HCS system, the first requirement
is that for any job, all of its tasks must be completed exactly once at some point in time.
To this it is further required that when a task is started it must be completed fully right
away, which, in turn, is equivalent to preemption not being allowed. Given that there is
only a single shelf crane present, this also implies that at most one task can be carried
out at any one time by the shelf crane. Next, given that a job consists of a sequence
of tasks with a predetermined precedence order, these must be completed according to
this. Though, there is no requirement stating that tasks from different jobs cannot be
completed intertwined, e.g. by doing one task from one job, then one task from another,
20
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:29==
and then back to the next task of the first job. Next, in relation to the distance measures
defined earlier, it is required that the travel distance between tasks is taken into account
when determining the start times of tasks. The last requirement for this case is that the
objective value of the model equates to the makespan of the resulting schedule.
Next, we expand the above for the additional requirements for the generic model. From
the requirements above, the requirement that a shelf crane at most can perform one task
at a time will here be extended to be required for every shelf crane in the system. Though,
if there are multiple shelf cranes present, it is allowed for them to work at the same time,
as long as their working paths do not intersect or in other ways are in conflict. This we
require since it otherwise would make one or more tasks take longer than expected, which
could be seen as preemption of the tasks in question. In relation to this, it is required that
shelf cranes are only assigned to tasks that they can access. This requirement is implicit
from the assumption on the same topic stated in section 3.2.1. Furthermore, it is required
that shelf cranes never collide nor cross over. Hence, for the generic model we require a
set of non­crossing constraints for the shelf cranes. And, finally, if a shelf crane is blocking
the access to a task for another shelf crane, then this must move to the side before the
task can be accessed and processed by the assigned shelf crane.
Model parameters and sets
For the models and heuristic solution methods to be derived, a set of parameters as well
as a set of sets will be used throughout. These parameters and sets are introduced here.
First of all, for a SCSP instance we are given a number of PCSs and, by this, a number of
jobs. All jobs are collected in the set J, where we index a job by the letters g and h. Next,
each job g ∈J consists of a number of tasks, ng ≥0, hence we define this set of tasks by
Ig = {i1, i2, . . . , ing}.
(3.1)
For each set Ig it is assumed that the indexing of the tasks is according to the precedence
order in which the tasks have to be completed. Hence, we will be able to use the indices
of jobs to determine the precedence constraints of a model. Furthermore, when indexing
tasks of jobs, this is either done using the letters i and j. Note, the subscript of the tasks
will only be included if important for the context, e.g. when constraining two tasks of the
same job. Besides the jobs and their tasks, a finite number of shelf cranes will be given.
We collect these in the set K of size |K| = m ≥1, to which we index the respective shelf
cranes using letters k and l. Note, if the SCSP instance consists of only one shelf crane,
this index will be omitted everywhere it would otherwise be present for clarity.
Next, it is given that each task has a duration. For task i ∈Ig, we state the duration of
this by dg,i ≥0. Besides the durations of tasks, a travel distance mas to be accounted
for when a shelf crane moves about the shelf system. More precisely, when a shelf crane
moves from the destination endpoint of one task to the origin endpoint of another task.
As stated previously, we here compute the distance as the Euclidean distance between
the two endpoints. With this, we therefore define the distance as distg,i,h,j ≥0, where
the subscripts state that it is the travel distance from the destination of task i ∈Ig to
the origin of task j ∈Ih. Note that the case of g = h is possible from this definition, to
which distg,i,h,j = distg,i,g,j states the travel distance between two tasks of the same job.
For the values of dg,i and distg,i,h,j we note that no shelf crane index is given on either.
This is implicit from the shelf cranes having equal constant speed, to which such index is
redundant. Now, one place where the shelf crane index cannot be omitted is when looking
at where the shelf cranes start at in the beginning of a schedule and their distances to the
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
21
==PAGE:30==
origin endpoint of any task, respectively. Being that each shelf crane start at different
positions in the shelf system, another distance matrix is defined. The distance from the
start position of a shelf crane k ∈K to any task i ∈Ig with g ∈J we define as given by
dist_startg,i,k ≥0.
One final parameter to be introduced is a big­M parameter, which is to be used for in­
activating certain constraints. The parameter is given as M ≥0 and is assumed to be
sufficiently large.
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the triangle inequality, where moving from A to B is shortest
along c, since c ≤a + b.
Throughout the derivations of the models we will be taking advantage of one particular
feature given that we are working with plane geometry and euclidean distances. This
feature is the triangle inequality. Namely, assume we are given two points in our shelf
system we wish to move between. Then the straight line between the two points is shorter
in distance than if we move to an intermediate point along the way (see fig. 3.2). This
will, as an example, be used when defining bounds on decision variables by using the
knowledge of the system.
With the above parameters and sets defined, it is now time to derive our first mathematical
model.
3.2.2
The Single SCSP
The first mathematical model to be derived is the one that models the case where only a
single shelf crane is present in the HCS system. This is of interest both since it is the most
basic configuration for the HCS system and also due to the fact that this configuration
removes a lot of complexity. The latter reason is, for example, due to there being no
requirement of non­crossing constraints nor assignment of tasks to shelf cranes.
We begin by defining the decision variables of the model. The first one is a continuous
variable that is meant to take the value of the makespan of the schedule. By convention,
this is defined as Cmax ≥0. Next, given that we intent to use precedence variables, for
any task i ∈Ig of job g ∈J we define a continuous decision variable tg,i ≥0 representing
the start time this task. Finally, we define a set of variables for keeping track of the order
in which tasks are carried out. Here, we take inspiration from model M2 in Demir and
Kürşat Işleyen 2013, where a similar set of variables are defined. However, we will not
include an index for the machine (shelf crane) performing the task, since there is only one.
The decision variables are then given by
xg,i,h,j =





1
, if task i ∈Ig is performed before task j ∈Ih for
g, h ∈J with g ̸= h
0
, otherwise
(3.2)
22
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:31==
For the x­variables above, note that we only define these for g ̸= h. This will be sufficient,
since for g = h, the two tasks i and j are required to be performed in the job’s task order,
hence we are able to match such requirement by using the t­variables accordingly. With
the decision variables defined, we move on to define the objective function of the model.
Given that we wish to compute schedules of the shortest makespan possible, the objective
function will be given by
min Cmax
(3.3)
hence we minimize the makespan. Next, we will derive the constraints of the model.
Since we are minimizing the makespan of the schedule, a lower bound on this should be
present as a constraint. Here, we recall the definition of the makespan being the time at
which all tasks have been completed. Hence we have the constraints given by
Cmax ≥tg,ing + dg,ing
∀g ∈J
(3.4)
where we bound Cmax from below by the completion time of the last task in every job.
Next up, we define the constraints bounding the value of the t­variables according to the
initial position of the shelf crane at the beginning of the schedule. This is done by using
the distance matrix defined for exactly this, namely the dist_startg,i matrix. We get that
tg,i ≥dist_startg,i
∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig
(3.5)
Following this, we define the precedence constraints, these being the required task order
of the tasks of each job. To this, we use the t­variables together with the task durations
to derive the constraint family given by
tg,i + dg,i + distg,i,g,i+1 ≤tg,i+1
∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig\{ing}
(3.6)
One thing to note from the constraints of (3.6) is the inclusion of the distance between
tasks i and i + 1. Since the shortest distance between the destination endpoint of i and
the origin endpoint of i+1 is the given by the straight line between the two points, which is
exactly equal to distg,i,g,i+1, bounding on the start time of i + 1 by adding this value is the
tightest lower bound on this task’s start time. Note that this being the shortest distance is
given directly from the triangle inequality. Note further that (3.6) only is concerned about
tasks from the same job. Therefore, we must derive a family of constraint about tasks
from different jobs, such that we remove the possibility of assigning multiple tasks to be
completed at the same time. Using the t­variables, we can do a similar trick as before,
though here we need to include the information of the x­variables to capture the order in
which the two tasks in question are performed. We get
tg,i + dg,i + distg,i,h,j ≤th,j + M(1 −xg,i,h,j)
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih : g ̸= h
(3.7)
Given that for each pair of tasks i ∈Ig and j ∈Ih for g, h ∈J with g ̸= h there is a
requirement on one to be performed before the other, there are two x variables defined
for these, namely xg,i,h,j and xh,j,g,i. With this, it is therefore possible for us to state the
above constraints, where two constraints are created for such pair of tasks. Here, one of
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
23
==PAGE:32==
them will then have to be inactivated, which is done using the big­M notation. Though,
as of right now, no constraints have been stated for the values of the x­variables, hence
it is possible for both of the x­variables corresponding to the pair of tasks i and j to take
the value zero, and thus inactivating both constraints given by (3.7). By this fact, we must
define a set of constraint ensuring that exactly one of the above constraints is active at
any one time. This is done by the following
xg,i,h,j + xh,j,g,i = 1
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih : g ̸= h
(3.8)
One thing to note for the constraints of (3.6) and (3.7) is that the combination of these
results in the model satisfying the no­preemption requirement. This is seen by the fact that
once a task is started, no other task is able to begin before the current task is completed.
Even though this allows for a task to be processed over a time period that exceeds the
duration of it, the fact that we are minimizing the makespan makes the schedule favor not
utilizing this feature.
With the above constraints derived, we collect these into a mathematical model followed
by arguing that it satisfy all of the required constraints of section 3.2.1 given the assump­
tions from the same section. We have the model given by
min Cmax
(3.9)
subject to
Cmax ≥tg,ing + dg,ing
∀g ∈J (3.10a)
tg,i ≥dist_startg,i
∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig (3.10b)
tg,i + dg,i + distg,i,g,i+1 ≤tg,i+1
∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig\{ing} (3.10c)
tg,i + dg,i + distg,i,h,j ≤th,j + M(1 −xg,i,h,j)
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih : g ̸= h (3.10d)
xg,i,h,j + xh,j,g,i = 1
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih : g ̸= h (3.10e)
Cmax ≥0
(3.10f)
tg,i ≥0
∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig (3.10g)
xg,i,h,j ∈{0, 1}
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih : g ̸= h (3.10h)
To begin with we note that (3.10c) ensures that the task order of each job is satisfied by
restricting the start time of later tasks to be after their predecessors. Next, the combi­
nation of the constraints of (3.10c)­(3.10e) has the model satisfy the requirement of no
two tasks can be performed at the same time and that when a task starts, it is completed
fully. Hence, the requirement of preemption not being allowed is met. Furthermore, these
constraints also define bounds on all t­variables, to which all tasks of all jobs are assigned
a starting time, and thus they all are completed at some point during a resulting schedule.
The constraints of (3.10b)­(3.10d) have all of the travel distance measures included in
them, which ensures the schedules take travel time of the shelf crane into account from
start to finish. And, finally, (3.10a) bound the value of Cmax such that the objective value
of a schedule is exactly equal to the makespan of it.
By the above we have argued that the model of (3.9) and (3.10) satisfy all of the given
requirements, and thus it is a valid formulation of the Single SCSP. With that said, we
have not stated anything about the size or performance of it yet, and therefore cannot
draw any conclusions on its performance when modelling instances of the Single SCSP
using exact solvers on it. This we will test in chapter 4.
24
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:33==
3.2.3
The Multi SCSP
Following the derivation of the Single SCSP we turn our attention to the more general case
where multiple shelf cranes can be present at the same time. We name this the Multiple
SCSP and note that such an instance introduces a lot more complexity to the problem by
the additional requirement given in section 3.2.1.
Given that we have derived a model for the Single SCSP above, we expand on this in
order to achieve a model for the Multiple SCSP. To begin with, we will be reusing the same
decision variables here as given by (3.10f), (3.10g) and (3.10h). Though, for the xg,i,h,j­
variables, we are now also defining these for g = h for reasons that will be explained later
on. For the different variables included so far, these will not be sufficient for our needs.
This is due to the very first requirement that states that all tasks must be completed exactly
once. With this, it will therefore be necessary for us to know which shelf crane a task
is assigned to, such that we can remove the possibility of the other shelf cranes being
assigned to the same task. Therefore, we define a new set of variables by
ug,i,k =
{
1
, if task i ∈Ig of job g ∈J is performed by shelf crane k ∈K
0
, otherwise
(3.11)
With these variables we will thus be able to know which shelf crane perform which tasks.
Having defined the variables, we move on to the objective function of the model. Given
that the goal of the model still is to minimize the makespan, and we are required for the
value of the objective function to take exactly this value, we reuse the one of (3.9) and
have the objective function given by
min Cmax
(3.12)
Next, looking at the constraints of the model, we go through each of them iteratively just as
for the Single SCSP model. Note, given that some constraints in the following derivations
are present in the model of the Single SCSP we still introduce them again here for clarity.
The first set of constraint we define are lower bounds on the makespan given by the
completion time of the last task of any job. We have that
Cmax ≥tg,ng + dg,ing
∀g ∈J
(3.13)
Next, since each task of each job is required to be performed exactly once, we must
restrict the assignment of tasks accordingly. This is done by the following:
∑
k∈K
ug,i,k = 1
∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig
(3.14)
Additionally, given that not all shelf cranes can gain access to all tasks, e.g. the origin
endpoint is not reachable by the shelf crane, we must restrict the assignment of tasks by
not allowing task i ∈Ig of job g ∈J to be performed by shelf crane k ∈K, if this shelf
crane cannot access i. For this, we first define a set for each shelf crane given by
Ak =
{
(g, i) ∈J × Ig | task i ∈Ig of job g ∈J is accessible
by shelf crane k ∈K
}
(3.15)
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
25
==PAGE:34==
Using this definition we are able to reformulate the above statement to be that for shelf
crane k ∈K if (g, i) /∈Ak for some task i ∈Ig of job g ∈J, then this task is not allowed
to be assigned to k. Hence, we have the constraint family
ug,i,k = 0
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig : (g, i) /∈Ak
(3.16)
Given that the schedule will be derived from the shelf cranes’ positions upon starting and
completing tasks, and thus using the relative distances to those tasks, it is important to
know where in the system the shelf cranes are to begin with. This is important since it
allows us to determine the very first tasks to be completed by any shelf crane, and thus
the first part of the schedule. Therefore, we define the following constraints in order to
respect these starting positions
tg,i ≥dist_startg,i,kug,i,k
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig
(3.17)
Note that we multiply the constant on the right­hand­side by the corresponding u­variable.
This is done such that we do not bound the value of tg,i by distance measures connected
to the shelf cranes not performing the task. Next, recall the definition of the x­variables,
for which if xg,i,h,j = 1, then tg,i ≤th,j. With this, we are able to derive the constraints
ensuring that no task is done preemptively, and that the task order within jobs is satisfied.
This will furthermore ensure that no shelf crane can perform two tasks at the same time.
First, we have the following
tg,i + dg,i ≤tg,i+1
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig\{ing}
(3.18a)
tg,i + dg,i + distg,i,g,i+1 ≤tg,i+1 + M(2 −ug,i,k −ug,i+1,k)
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig\{ing}
(3.18b)
This set of constraints restricts the start time of task i + 1 ∈Ig to be no earlier than
whenever task i ∈Ig is complete for g ∈J. Furthermore, if it is the same shelf crane
k that performs both tasks, i.e. if ug,i,k = ug,i+1,k = 1, then a travel distance between
the two tasks is accounted for. Next, if we instead look at tasks i ∈Ig and j ∈Ih from
different jobs g ̸= h that are performed by the same shelf crane k ∈K, then either i must
be performed before j, or the other way around. Hence, we must have that xg,i,h,j = 1
and xh,j,g,i = 0, or xg,i,h,j = 0 and xh,j,g,i = 1. With this, we can derive the constraints
given by
tg,i + dg,i + distg,i,h,j ≤th,j + M(3−ug,i,k −uh,j,k −xg,i,h,j)
∀k ∈K, ∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih : g ̸= h
(3.19)
From these constraints we restrict the start time of task j to be no earlier than after task i is
complete plus the additional travel time to the start of task j. Note, that these constraints
are inactivated if the two tasks are not performed by the same shelf crane, and if they are,
then only one of the two variants (i before j or j before i) is active due to the argument
above.
26
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:35==
With the definition of the x­variables, we must bound these accordingly such that they
take their expected values. We have that
M(1 −xg,i,h,j) ≥tg,i −th,j
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih
(3.20a)
Mxg,i,h,j ≥th,j −tg,i
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih
(3.20b)
With these constraint, we thus force the value of xg,i,h,j to be either 0 or 1, if tg,i ̸= th,j.
Though, if that is not the case, i.e. tg,i = th,j, then the constraints of (3.20a) and (3.20b)
do not eliminate the possibility of xg,i,h,j = xh,j,g,i = 0. This is an issue, since it in that
case is possible for the same shelf crane to be assigned both tasks and let them have
identical start times. But this is a violation to the requirement on the limit of how many
tasks each shelf crane can perform at a time. Therefore, we are required to include the
following constraints in order to ensure that at least one of the two x­variables takes the
value 1, if the two tasks are assigned to the same shelf crane. We get that
xg,i,h,j + xh,j,g,i ≥1 −M(2 −ug,i,k −uh,j,k)
∀k ∈K, ∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih
(3.21)
Having defined a handful of constraints already, we collect them here for clarity and shortly
recap what has been derived so far. We have the following:
Cmax ≥tg,ing + dg,ing
∀g ∈J
(3.22a)
∑
k∈K
ug,i,k = 1
∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig
(3.22b)
ug,i,k = 0
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig : (g, i) /∈Ak
(3.22c)
tg,i ≥dist_startg,i,kug,i,k
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig
(3.22d)
tg,i + dg,i ≤tg,i+1
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig\{ing}
(3.22e)
tg,i + dg,i + distg,i,g,i+1 ≤tg,i+1 + M(2 −ug,i,k −ug,i+1,k)
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig\{ing}
(3.22f)
tg,i + dg,i + distg,i,h,j ≤th,j + M(3 −ug,i,k −uh,j,k −xg,i,h,j)
∀k ∈K, ∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih : g ̸= h
(3.22g)
M(1 −xg,i,h,j) ≥tg,i −th,j
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih
(3.22h)
Mxg,i,h,j ≥th,j −tg,i
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih
(3.22i)
xg,i,h,j + xh,j,g,i ≥1 −M(2 −ug,i,k −uh,j,k)
∀k ∈K, ∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih
(3.22j)
Cmax ≥0
(3.22k)
tg,i ≥0
∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig
(3.22l)
ug,i,k ∈{0, 1}
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig
(3.22m)
xg,i,h,j ∈{0, 1}
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih
(3.22n)
Combining all of the constraints defined so far, we have a model that bounds the makespan
by (3.22a), ensures the assignment of all tasks to exactly one shelf crane by (3.22b), and
that no shelf crane is assigned to inaccessible tasks by (3.22c). The start positions of the
shelf cranes and their distances to any task from there are captured in (3.22d) giving rise
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
27
==PAGE:36==
to the initialization of the resulting schedule. Furthermore, task order is respected within
a job, preemption of tasks is not possible, and shelf cranes cannot work on more than
one task at a time by (3.22e)­(3.22g). And, finally, the assignment of the x­variables is
handled according to the variable definition by (3.22h)­(3.22j).
It is worth pointing out that from what has been derived so far the positions of the shelf
cranes relative to each other has not yet been addressed, hence requirements such as
those related to non­crossing are not handled in the above. If it was the case that relative
position requirements were not expected by the model, then what we have in (3.22a)­
(3.22n) would be sufficient in determining schedules for the shelf cranes. Though, for our
generic model we intent to satisfy all schedule requirements stated in section 3.2.1, which
includes non­crossing constraints. Therefore, we will address this in the following.
Given that the schedules we build revolves around the time points and by which shelf
crane each task is performed, we do not have concrete information of the whereabouts of
the shelf cranes in the system other than at the start and the end time of a task. The lat­
ter being given by the requirement of no preemption and immediate completion of tasks.
Therefore, we cannot handle non­crossing constraints through requirements on the hori­
zontal positions directly. Instead, we will attempt to use the accessibility of tasks, or rather
the lack thereof, at the same point in time to address the required non­crossing feature.
In order to do this, we first introduce the notion of pairwise­blocking tasks, to which we get
knowledge about which tasks that cannot be performed simultaneously, given that they
are assigned to shelf cranes satisfying some criteria. We define pairwise­blocking tasks
as follows:
Given two tasks i ∈Ig and j ∈Ih of jobs g, h ∈J performed by shelf cranes k, l ∈K,
respectively, with k < l. Notice that the difference in k and l implies that k is positioned
relative to the left of l. Then i and j are said to be pairwise­blocking, if their horizontal
paths intersect, or if the shelf crane performing the first of the two tasks has its destination
endpoint being in the way of the other shelf crane (see fig. 3.3 (top­left)). As an example of
the latter, assume that k performs task i first, where the destination endpoint of task i is to
the right of any of task j’s origin and destination endpoints. Then by k being positioned to
the left of l, k must move to the left of the leftmost endpoint of task j before l can perform
j (see fig. 3.3 (top­right)).
With this definition we further define two sets containing pairs of tasks satisfying it:
BL =


(g, i, h, j) ∈J × Ig × J × Ih |
task i ∈Ig is performed before task
j ∈Ih for g, h ∈J and i and j are
pairwise­blocking



BR =


(g, i, h, j) ∈J × Ig × J × Ih |
task j ∈Ih is performed before task
i ∈Ig for g, h ∈J and i and j are
pairwise­blocking



(3.23)
Here, the sets of (3.23) are named with superscripts L and R, each indicating whether it
is the left or the right task of the tuple that is performed first. By this, these sets contain
information about whether two tasks performed by different shelf cranes will have the shelf
cranes be in the way of each other or not. It is worth noting that the split into BL and BR
is intentional, since there can be instances where if one task pair is in one of the sets, it
is not necessarily also in the other. As an example, looking at fig. 3.3 (top­left), if task i is
28
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.3: Pairwise­blocking tasks i ∈Ig (red) and j ∈Ih (blue) (top), and the expected
movement pattern of shelf cranes k and l (black), if i is performed before j (bottom).
performed before task j, then shelf crane k has to move to the left upon finishing task i in
order to make way for shelf crane l (as shown in fig. 3.3 (bottom­left)). On the other hand,
if task j is performed before task i, then l is already out of the way of k upon finishing task
j, hence task i can be performed right away and does not require k to wait for l to move
away first.
With above definition and explanation of pairwise­blocking tasks and how they influence
the movement patterns of the shelf cranes, it is natural to introduce the notion of clearance
distance. By this is meant the distance a shelf crane has to move in order to make way for
another shelf crane. Since the order in which two tasks of a pairwise­blocking task tuple
(g, i, h, j) is performed specifies the required movement of the shelf cranes, we define two
different distance matrices; clearance distance to the left, cL, and to the right, cR. Hence,
for a given pair of tasks, if i ∈Ig is performed by k ∈K before j ∈Ih is performed by
l ∈K for k < l, then the value of cL
g,i,k,h,j,l defines the distance k has to travel to the left
before l can move to the start of j and initiate this task. Notice that for the indexing of
cL (and cR) we include the shelf crane indices. This is due to the possibility of k + 1 < l,
meaning that there are one or more shelf cranes in between k and l. In such case, the
clearance distance must be increased to account for the additional shelf cranes needed
to move before the second task is accessible and can be carried out.
Following the definition of BL, BR, cL and cR, we are ready to derive constraints which
have the schedule respect the movement of the shelf cranes given that pairwise­blocking
tasks are present in the system. They are given by
tg,i + dg,i + cL
g,i,k,h,j,l ≤th,j+M(3 −ug,i,k −uh,j,l −xg,i,h,j)
∀k, l ∈K,∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih : k < l, (g, i, h, j) ∈BL
(3.24a)
th,j + dh,j + cR
g,i,k,h,j,l ≤tg,i+M(2 −ug,i,k −uh,j,l + xg,i,h,j)
∀k, l ∈K,∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih : k < l, (g, i, h, j) ∈BR
(3.24b)
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
29
==PAGE:38==
These constraints state that if shelf crane k performs task i ∈Ig and shelf crane l performs
task j ∈Ih where k < l and i and j are pairwise­blocking, then either task i must be
performed first and the clearance distance must be travelled by k before task j can start,
or vice versa. Note that at most one of the two constraints can be active at a time for
given indices k, l, g, h, i and j, and that they furthermore are inactive whenever the shelf
cranes in question are not the ones performing the given tasks.
Taking a step back, we began introducing the notion of pairwise­blocking tasks when
talking about the requirement of non­crossing constraints for the shelf cranes. Following
the derivation of (3.24), it is therefore time to argue that this has been achieved by these
constraints. First of all, it is given that it is never in favor of the schedule to have a shelf
crane handle tasks that are further away from it compared to another shelf crane’s relative
distance to said tasks. Hence, it is only when shelf cranes encounter tasks that have paths
that are close to each other or overlapping that interference or collision of the shelf cranes
becomes a reality. Though, such cases are exactly the ones that are within the scope of
(3.24), to which either shelf crane is required to move away from the other before a task
can be carried out. Note that this is achieved by the travel time given by the clearance
distance, hence a delay in the start time of the second task. With this, the collision and
crossing of the shelf cranes is avoided by the incentive of the model to circumvent as many
clearance distances (time delays) as possible. However, if it is necessary to include such
clearance distance in a solution, then the schedule accounts for the time needed in order
to move the shelf cranes out of each other shelf cranes’ way, and therefore crossing of
the shelf cranes is not a possibility.
Given that this was the last set of constraints to be derived according to the requirements
to the model, we collect everything here and show the full mathematical model for the
Multiple SCSP. The model is as follows:
min Cmax
(3.25)
subject to
30
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:39==
Cmax ≥tg,ing + dg,ing
∀g ∈J
(3.26a)
∑
k∈K
ug,i,k = 1
∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig
(3.26b)
ug,i,k = 0
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig : (g, i) /∈Ak
(3.26c)
tg,i ≥dist_startg,i,kug,i,k
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig
(3.26d)
tg,i + dg,i ≤tg,i+1
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig\{ing}
(3.26e)
tg,i + dg,i + distg,i,g,i+1 ≤tg,i+1 + M(2 −ug,i,k −ug,i+1,k)
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig\{ing}
(3.26f)
tg,i + dg,i + distg,i,h,j ≤th,j + M(3 −ug,i,k −uh,j,k −xg,i,h,j)
∀k ∈K, ∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih : g ̸= h
(3.26g)
M(1 −xg,i,h,j) ≥tg,i −th,j
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih
(3.26h)
Mxg,i,h,j ≥th,j −tg,i
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih
(3.26i)
xg,i,h,j + xh,j,g,i ≥1 −M(2 −ug,i,k −uh,j,k)
∀k ∈K, ∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih
(3.26j)
tg,i + dg,i + cL
g,i,k,h,j,l ≤th,j + M(3 −ug,i,k −uh,j,l −xg,i,h,j)
∀k, l ∈K, ∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih : k < l, (g, i, h, j) ∈BL (3.26k)
th,j + dh,j + cR
g,i,k,h,j,l ≤tg,i + M(2 −ug,i,k −uh,j,l + xg,i,h,j)
∀k, l ∈K, ∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih : k < l, (g, i, h, j) ∈BR
(3.26l)
Cmax ≥0
(3.26m)
tg,i ≥0
∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig
(3.26n)
ug,i,k ∈{0, 1}
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig
(3.26o)
xg,i,h,j ∈{0, 1}
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih
(3.26p)
Given that the model has a lot of different constraints, we here go through the requirements
of the Multiple SCSP model one­by­one and briefly recap how the constraints meet these
requirements. To begin with, all tasks of all jobs are assigned to one shelf crane each by
(3.26b), but they are not assigned to a shelf crane that cannot access the tasks by (3.26c).
The combination of (3.26b)­(3.26j) makes sure that all tasks are performed exactly once,
that preemption of tasks is not allowed, that the required task order within jobs is held,
and that the travel distances between tasks are accounted for. (3.26a) gives rise to the
value of Cmax, which, in turn, is equal to the makespan of the schedule. And, finally, the
last requirement of the non­crossing of shelf cranes is satisfied by (3.26k) and (3.26l).
One final requirement of the model that we have not touched upon directly in the above
derivations is related to the case where there is only a single shelf crane in the system.
For such case, the model for the Multiple SCSP was expected to be capable of handling
this with similar results as we can achieve if we instead used the model for the Single
SCSP. Assuming we have been given such a problem instance where there is only one
shelf crane present, then this shelf crane can access all containers in the HCS system and
therefore all tasks of all jobs are contained in the respective Ak set. Hence, the shelf crane
will be assigned to all of the tasks, making constraints (3.26b) and (3.26c) trivial. This
further implies that all u­variables take the value 1, which, in turn, reduces the constraints
of (3.26d) and (3.26f)­(3.26g) to be exactly as in the Single SCSP model. As for (3.26e),
this becomes dominated by (3.26f) and thus has no influence. Next, constraints (3.26h)­
(3.26j) determining the value of the x­variables becomes equivalent to the one of (3.10e)
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
31
==PAGE:40==
by the fact that whenever g = h, these are not used in the other constraints. Finally, the
constraints of (3.26k) and (3.26l) become empty constraint families, since there is only
one shelf crane and thus no constraints are defined for the problem instance by these
constraint families. Hence, we have now argued that the model above is equivalent to the
one derived for the Single SCSP, given the problem instance has only one shelf crane.
In conclusion, the mathematical model given by (3.25) and (3.26) lives up to all of the
requirements given and thus achieves the goal of being able to state the feasibility and
makespan of any shelf crane schedules for the HCS system.
Consequently, we have thus reached our goal of deriving two mathematical models of
varying complexity for the SCSP. Now, given that the models have been derived using
inspiration from the M2 model for the FJSSP in Demir and Kürşat Işleyen 2013, we will
briefly argue whether an instance of the FJSSP is solvable using the Multiple SCSP model
derived above. In order to do this, there are a few parameters within the SCSP model that
have to be adjusted. First of all, we note that there is no notion of travel distance between
tasks in the FJSSP, hence these would be set to zero. This reduced the left­hand­side
on a few of the constraints as well as makes the constraint families of (3.26e) and (3.26f)
identical, hence we remove one of them. Furthermore, no two tasks are pairwise­blocking,
hence BL = BR = ∅and the constraint families of (3.26k) and (3.26l) are empty such
that these constraints will be left out. Next, the accessibility sets for each machine will be
defined by the tasks each machine can process and not by the physical accessibility of the
machines to the tasks. Finally, the durations of the tasks are required to include another
subscript, namely a machine index, since tasks can have different durations depending
on which machine it is that processes the task. If we make these modifications, the model
would look as follows:
min Cmax
(3.27)
subject to
Cmax ≥tg,ing + dg,ing ,k
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J
(3.28a)
∑
k∈K
ug,i,k = 1
∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig
(3.28b)
ug,i,k = 0
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig : (g, i) /∈Ak
(3.28c)
tg,i + dg,i,k ≤tg,i+1
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig\{ing}
(3.28d)
tg,i + dg,i,k ≤th,j + M(3 −ug,i,k −uh,j,k −xg,i,h,j)
∀k ∈K, ∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih : g ̸= h
(3.28e)
M(1 −xg,i,h,j) ≥tg,i −th,j
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih
(3.28f)
Mxg,i,h,j ≥th,j −tg,i
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih
(3.28g)
xg,i,h,j + xh,j,g,i ≥1 −M(2 −ug,i,k −uh,j,k)
∀k ∈K, ∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih (3.28h)
Cmax ≥0
(3.28i)
tg,i ≥0
∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig
(3.28j)
ug,i,k ∈{0, 1}
∀k ∈K, ∀g ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig
(3.28k)
xg,i,h,j ∈{0, 1}
∀g, h ∈J, ∀i ∈Ig, ∀j ∈Ih
(3.28l)
From this model we see that it would, in fact, be possible to solve instances of the FJSSP
32
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:41==
with the Multiple SCSP model. By this fact, we can therefore utilize the knowledge of the
FJSSP being NP­hard, as we argued in section 2.3, to state the the SCSP is NP­hard too.
Combining the knowledge of being able to solve FJSSP instances with the SCSP model
and that this is of a high level of complexity, when we are to test the SCSP model in chap­
ter 4, we look at the results captured for the FJSSP in previous research in order to set the
expectations to the performance of our models. Given that exact solution methods are
rarely used to solve instances of the FJSSP, and that these only are able to converge for
small­sized instances, we expect that exact solvers are only able to converge for smaller
problem instances of the SCSP too. With that said, we are therefore interested in devel­
oping heuristic solution methods for attaining near­optimal solutions within a reasonable
time frame. Such solution methods will be developed in the next section.
3.3
Heuristic solution methods
As stated, the SCSP is expected to be a hard problem to solve to optimality, and thus we
turn our attention towards meta­heuristics and heuristic solution methods. In this section
we introduce the elements and components required for developing a heuristic solution
method. These are then developed such that we can choose a simple meta­heuristic
algorithm to develop first. Our first choice will be a Local Search (LS) meta­heuristic
algorithm. We choose to start with a simple LS meta­heuristic, since this will allow us
to analyze and discuss the feasibility of the components developed. Such argument will
be determined through analysis and expectancy evaluation of algorithm convergence. If
we argue that the components are indeed feasible to use, we move on to developing two
different heuristics, both of which are iterative, but where only one of them is memory
based. Here, it is the Iterated Local Search (ILS) and Tabu Search (TB) meta­heuristic
approaches that will be used.
Having stated that we wish to develop heuristic solution methods based on meta­heuristic
approaches that are not necessarily that complicated nor exploit the general structure of
a solution fully, it seems fitting to give an argument as to why we do this. Given that the
SCSP is a completely new mathematical problem that has had its very first mathemati­
cal model derived in the previous section, there has yet to be developed any non­exact
solution method for it. By this it should therefore be obvious that analyzing the problem
for the simplest of meta­heuristic solution methods will be the best initial step in gaining
knowledge on the subject. Here, it is both knowledge on whether a simple algorithm can
converge within reasonable time, and also knowledge of whether commonly used heuris­
tic structures are feasible for the problem at hand. With such learnings, we will then be
able to iteratively develop more sophisticated heuristic solution methods, to which we in
this study limit it to two such methods, and leave it for later researchers to develop even
more.
3.3.1
General heuristic elements and components
The elements and components that need to be defined and developed all relate to a
solution to the given problem, and they are summarized by this list
• The problem at hand
• The instance of a problem
• Solutions and candidate solutions to the problem instance
• The solution representation
• The solution performance measure
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
33
==PAGE:42==
• The method for deriving an initial solution
• The neighbourhood function and the definition of a neighbouring solution
• The step function
• The acceptance criteria
• The termination criteria
In the following, we will define and develop these while we use the naming convention
given in Pacino 2021.
Problem definition and representation of solutions
The problem, of cause, is the SCSP to which we must assume that an instance of this
problem is given. To be more formal, we write Π for the problem and π for the instance of
the problem. Hence, we have that π ∈Π. For the problem instance, a lot of solutions s ∈π
might exist, though it is only some of these that are so called candidate solutions. Here,
we refer to a candidate solution as being a solution that satisfy a set of criteria, which in our
case are the constraints of the problem. This can be a bit confusing at first, but if we get
the solution representation determined, we can make it more comprehensible. In order to
determine how we wish to represent a solution to the SCSP, recall that the problem is about
scheduling shelf cranes’ movement in order for them to carry out a number of tasks. Thus,
it should be possible to use the knowledge of which shelf crane that performs which tasks
to create the scheduled movements. With that said, we choose to represent a solution s
by a number of lists Tk, one for each shelf crane k ∈K. Here, Tk then consists of the
sequence of tasks to be performed by k, where the tasks are in the order of execution.
Hence, we can write this solution representation conceptually up as
T1 = [(job, task), (job,task), . . . , (job, task)]
T2 = [(job, task), (job,task), . . . , (job, task)]
T3 = [(job, task), (job,task), . . . , (job, task)]
...
Tm = [(job, task), (job,task), . . . , (job, task)]
(3.29)
where each (job, task)­tuple is a task of a given job that the respective shelf crane has
been assigned to carry out. More formally, we write
s = [T1, T2, . . . , Tm] .
(3.30)
As an example, we could have there be two shelf cranes and two jobs each with three
tasks. Then a solution could be given by
T1 = [(1, 1), (1, 3), (2, 1)]
T2 = [(2, 2), (1, 2), (2, 3)]
(3.31)
Circling back to the notion of a candidate solution, the solution represented in (3.31) is
not a feasible solution to the SCSP. This we can tell by the fact that the first shelf crane at
some point will be waiting for the second shelf crane to complete task 2 of job 1, while at
the same time shelf crane two will be waiting for shelf crane one to complete task 1 of job
2. First of all, this is called a deadlock, and, secondly, in this situation it is not possible to
34
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:43==
satisfy the constraints of the model, since it expects the start times of the tasks to satisfy
both t1,2 < t2,1 and t2,1 < t1,2, which is not possible. With this, we thus have created a
solution s ∈π which is not a candidate solution. However, if we rearrange the tasks to be
T1 = [(1, 1), (2, 1), (1, 3)]
T2 = [(2, 2), (1, 2), (2, 3)]
(3.32)
where the second and third tasks of the first list are swapped, it will now be possible to
satisfy all constraints of the model. Because of this, we then call the solution of (3.32) a
candidate solution. The set of such candidate solutions we define as S(π), and we are
therefore interested in exploring elements of this set.
The cost function
Besides knowing how to represent a solution to the problem instance and how to deter­
mine whether it is a candidate or not, we also need a method of determining a value of
the given solution’s performance. Here, we will opt to using the objective function of the
model, and thus the makespan of the schedule as the performance measure. By the nam­
ing convention stated in Pacino 2021, we call the performance of a solution s for problem
instance π the solution cost, and define the cost function by Cost(π, s). Now, in order
to compute this cost, we must define the actual schedule for s since it is currently only
given by its representation, hence a number of lists of tasks. Therefore, we are required
to develop the Cost­function such that it computes a shelf crane schedule from the infor­
mation given in the solution representations, and with this determines the makespan of
the schedule.
Given that the essence of the SCSP is to determine exactly one such shelf crane schedule,
the choice of how the Cost­function builds this has great influence on the performance of
the entire heuristic solution method. With this in mind, the function to be developed will
be a bit complex, hence we will develop a set of helping sub­functions first, and then use
these within the resulting Cost­function. To begin with, we introduce the intuition behind
the way we intent to build a schedule from a solution representation.
Given that the schedule to be build has to satisfy the requirements of section 3.2.1, we
will construct it with these in mind. In particular, we will be very observant in satisfying the
order the tasks have to be performed in for each job and the non­crossing requirements of
the shelf cranes. The schedule will therefore be constructed step­by­step, where we look
at the next tasks to be carried out by each of the shelf cranes, and from these choose as
many tasks as possible that can be performed at the same time. Here, it is then important
that we only consider tasks, which do not skip ahead according to the precedence re­
quirements and which do not interfere with each other by being pairwise­blocking. When
we have picked the tasks to be performed, these will be added to the end of the schedule,
and clearance distance is added to the schedule of the shelf cranes not performing tasks
at this point in time, if needed. Since the schedule is defined for each of the shelf cranes,
a waiting period will be added to the end of all of the shelf cranes’ schedules such that
they have schedules of equal length. With this, we will then repeat the process of finding
the largest number of tasks that can be performed simultaneously, add these accordingly,
and so on. By the end, we will have constructed a schedule for all of the shelf cranes,
which we can evaluate for its makespan and, thus, its performance.
With the intuition of the Cost­function described, we move on to defining and developing
the sub­functions that will be used in the Cost­function.
The first sub­function to be developed is one that finds the next tasks to be considered to
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
35
==PAGE:44==
be scheduled. This is done through looking at the next tasks of each shelf cranes’ task
list, and here evaluate whether this is allowed to be processed yet. This evaluation is
done by comparing the task to its job’s next task to be scheduled. If these are the same,
then the task is qualified for scheduling at this point in time. Doing so for all of the next
tasks of all of the shelf cranes gives rise to a set of tasks that we define by
Q =


(g, i) ∈Tk |
(g, i) ∈J × Ig is the next task to be
completed by shelf crane k ∈K
and satisfies task precedence of g



(3.33)
The function performing the above process we call getNextTasks, where it is given suf­
ficient input parameters.
The next sub­function to be developed is one that is able to determine all different combi­
nations of tasks in Q, where no two tasks are pairwise­blocking. Hence, this function will
help us find a set of tasks to be scheduled, which do not interfere with each other, and
consequently makes us comply with the non­crossing requirements of the shelf crane
schedule. We call the function getNonBlockingSubsets(π, Q), and develop it as follows:
Given the set Q of possible tasks to be scheduled next, the power set of this is computed.
Note here, that the power set consists of all possible subsets of Q. For each of these
subsets, every pair of tasks is checked for whether they are pairwise­blocking or not. If
no such pairs are present in the current subset, this subset will added to a set of subsets
Qs. Once all possible subsets of Q have been checked, the resulting set of subsets Qs is
returned for further processing. One thing to note about Qs is that it will never be empty,
since any subset consisting of only one task automatically satisfy the requirements of
there being no pairwise­blocking tasks present in the subset.
The final sub­function takes the set Qs as input and locates the largest subset within it.
Here, ties are broken by choosing the first subset of the size compared to. We define this
largest subset Q∗and call the sub­function getLargestNonBlockingSubset(Qs).
With the sub­functions developed, we are ready to use these in developing the Cost­
function. Since the Cost­function is to compute the schedule given a solution represen­
tation, it will be an iterative process. Hence, it will be handy to have a number of objects
defined for various bookkeeping assignments. We define these by next_task_of_crane,
has_next_task and next_task_of_job, respectively, for keeping track of the next task to
be scheduled, whether jobs have more tasks to be scheduled and which such next task
of a job is, respectively. These will be initialized to begin with together with an object
to contain the constructed schedule. Following this, the iterative process of finding the
largest number of tasks that can be performed simultaneously and adding these to the
schedule starts. This will then be done continuously until all tasks have been scheduled
accordingly. For clarity, we collect the Cost­function process in algorithm 1.
Building an initial solution
Next up is the function for computing an initial solution. The output of this function gives
rise to the point in the solution space where the heuristic algorithm starts, hence it is
the first component which can have an important impact on the outcome of an execution
of the algorithm. Since we have the power to choose exactly the function design we
want, we could go with something like a randomly generated solution. Here we should
mention that the solution a random generator creates is not guaranteed to be a candidate
solution, though this can be fixed by either having the function generate a new solution in
a loop until it randomly creates a candidate solution, or by developing a function that can
”fix” a non­candidate solution by transforming it into an actual candidate solution. Even
36
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:45==
Algorithm 1 Cost function for the SCSP
Require: Feasible candidate solution given by its representation s for the problem in­
stance π ∈Π
1: procedure Cost(π, s)
2:
Initialize schedule
3:
Initialize next_task_of_crane
4:
Initialize has_next_task and next_task_of_job
5:
while More tasks are left to be scheduled do
6:
Compute Q = getNextTasks(π, s, next_task_of_crane, next_task_of_job)
7:
Compute Qs = getNonBlockingSubsets(π, Q)
8:
Compute Q∗= getLargestNonBlockingSubset(Qs)
9:
Update the schedule with the tasks of Q∗
10:
Remove the tasks of Q∗from the shelf cranes’ task lists
11:
Update next_task_of_job and has_next_task accordingly
return The schedule and its makespan
though we by this can generate a feasible starting solution for the algorithm to work with,
it might not be the best approach since it there are a lot of requirements defined by the
SCSP model and thus the chance of generating a candidate solution is reduced. Instead,
we will develop what is called a construction heuristic, which is a function that given the
problem instance builds a candidate solution through an iterative process consisting of
deterministic choices. One such process could be to add all tasks of the first job to the
first shelf crane, all tasks of the second job to the second shelf crane, and so on. Though
this could build candidate solutions for the problem instance, these might not be as good
as they could have been. Therefore, we will use a different approach. Our choice is to
use one that is commonly used for the Travelling Salesman Problem, namely the Nearest
Neighbour method.
The Nearest Neighbour method for the SCSP will be defined as shown in algorithm 2. In
general, we intent to construct the task lists for all shelf cranes simultaneously by adding
the ”nearest” task of a shelf crane to its respective task list in an iterative loop. As shown
in the algorithms, we do this by first initializing the shelf crane task lists, crane_tasks_list,
as being empty lists together with initializing two different bookkeeping lists for the jobs,
has_next_task and next_task_of_job. These two lists, respectively, hold information
on whether a job has more tasks left to be added to a shelf crane task list and, if so,
which task is the next in line, respectively. Next up a list of lists, crane_neighbours_list,
is created, which has knowledge of the neighbouring tasks to any shelf crane. Here, a
neighbouring task is defined as a task that is the next in line for its respective job and
which is accessible to the shelf crane in question. Hence, for all tasks that are next in line
for all jobs are evaluated for whether they are accessible to the shelf cranes, and they
are then added to the lists corresponding to the shelf cranes that can access these tasks.
Besides being added to the lists, the distance from where the shelf cranes are, according
to their last task in their lists, is collected for each neighbouring task such that these can
be compared. From this point on, a loop is executed iteratively until all tasks have been
assigned to a shelf crane. Within this loop, all neighbouring tasks are compared for their
distance to the shelf cranes’ positions and the one with the shortest distance is picked.
If ties occur between neighbouring tasks, the one with the lowest index is chosen. This
task is then added to the respective shelf crane’s task list followed by the lists holding
information about the job the task is part of is updated for whether it has more tasks left
and, if so, which this is. The final step of the loop is that the neighbouring task lists are
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
37
==PAGE:46==
updated, since a task has been assigned and the shelf crane it was assigned to needs
its entire neighbouring task list revisited. Finally, when all tasks have been assigned to a
shelf crane, the resulting task lists for the shelf cranes is returned by the function.
Algorithm 2 Nearest Neighbour construction heuristic for the SCSP
Require: Problem instance π ∈Π
1: procedure NearestNeighbour(π)
2:
Initialize crane_tasks_list
3:
Initialize has_next_task and next_task_of_job
4:
Initialize crane_neighbours_list
5:
while More tasks are left to be assigned to a shelf crane do
6:
Find the task closest neighbouring task
7:
Add the task to the shelf crane’s task list
8:
Update next_task_of_job and has_next_task accordingly
9:
Update the shelf crane’s neighbour list
10:
Update the other shelf cranes’ neighbour list according to the assigned task
return The shelf crane task lists
Since it has been mentioned that we intent for the construction heuristic of choice to build
a candidate solution to the given problem instance, we should include an argument as
to why the solution returned by the function defined by algorithm 2 is a candidate solu­
tion. In order to do this, we need to recall that the solution returned is only a solution
representation and thus not a schedule per se. To make this solution representation into
a schedule, the cost function of algorithm 1 is to be used to create the schedule given by
the task lists, i.e. the solution representation. If the cost function is capable of doing this
and a schedule is produced, then we know that it is feasible to π, and thus the solution
returned by algorithm 2 is, in fact, a candidate solution. Now, since the tasks of the jobs
are added one by one following the precedence order, it is possible to compute a feasible
schedule by having all shelf cranes but the one that had the first task added wait until this
task is complete, and then do the same thing for the second task that was added, and so
on. Doing this for all tasks results in a schedule where all tasks are performed one­by­one
and only one at a time. Though this schedule is likely to be inefficient, it is indeed feasible,
hence the solution created by algorithm 2 is a candidate solution.
Neighbouring solutions, acceptance and algorithm termination
With the construction heuristic developed, we now have access to a function that builds
an initial candidate solution to the problem instance. By ensuring we can attain one such
solution, the next component to be introduced is the neighbourhood function and, with
this, the definition of a neighbouring solution. So if we are given a candidate solution s,
it is of interest to explore some or even all of the other candidate solutions that can be
found by making a small adjustment to s. This set of other candidate solutions is called the
neighbourhood of the current solution and it is found through the neighbourhood function,
N(π, s). Now, the small adjustment that is made must be defined for our problem, to
which we choose the following: For the current candidate solution, moving one task from
one place to another defines a neighbouring solution. By this is meant that we pick any
task from any shelf crane’s task list and move it to all other possible positions within all
of the different shelf cranes’ task lists. Note, if one such move results in a non­candidate
solution, this solution is not a neighbouring solution. This is done for all tasks within the
task lists, and it results in generating the neighbourhood of the current candidate solution.
Once the neighbourhood N(π, s) of the current candidate solution s is computed, we wish
to be able to go through each of these neighbouring solutions and evaluate which one of
38
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:47==
them is performing the best. Finding this is done using the Cost­function, to which the best
neighbouring solution is denoted s′. The process of finding s′ is called the step function
and is given by Step(π, N) where N = N(π, s). After taking a step in the neighbourhood
of s to get s′, these solutions will be compared to see if we wish to update s to become
s′ or not. This is done using the acceptance criteria, which in our case will be a com­
parison of the costs of the two candidate solutions. Hence we compute the truth value
of Cost(π, s′) < Cost(π, s). Note that the orientation of the strict inequality here is given
as such since the SCSP is a minimization problem. If the inequality is satisfied, then we
accept s′ and update the current candidate solution to this.
From the list above, there is only one component left to be defined, which is the termina­
tion criteria. Given that it is a heuristic approach we are taking for finding a good candidate
solution to the problem instance, it is common practice to use execution time as the ter­
mination criteria as given in Pacino 2021. By this is meant that a time limit is defined
and it is the within this that the algorithms can run. When the time limit is reached, the
best candidate solution found is then returned. The termination criteria is captured in the
function given by Terminate(π).
With the above components given, we are ready to develop our first heuristic solution
method, a Local Search procedure.
3.3.2
Local Search
As previously stated, we will be developing a small series of heuristic solution methods,
the first one being a Local Search (LS) heuristic. In general, the LS meta­heuristic is
not a very complicated one, and it can be described by the pseudo­code of algorithm 3.
Here, an initial candidate solution is created to begin with followed by the execution of
a looped process. Within this, we compute the neighbourhood of the current candidate
solution in which we find the best neighbouring candidate solution. If this neighbouring
candidate solution is better than the current one, we accept it by moving to it, and repeat
this procedure. On the other hand, if the neighbouring candidate solution is not better, we
terminate the algorithm and return the current candidate solution.
Algorithm 3 Local Search heuristic for the SCSP
Require: Problem instance π ∈Π
1: procedure LocalSearch(π)
2:
Create initial candidate solution s ←NearestNeighbour(π)
3:
while not Terminate(π) do
4:
Compute best neighbouring candidate solution s′ ←Step(π, N(π, s))
5:
if Cost(π, s′) < Cost(π, s) then
6:
Update s ←s′
return s
For this algorithm we notice that once it reaches a local minimum compared to the neigh­
bouring candidate solutions’ objective values, the algorithm cannot escape this local min­
imum and consequently returns the solution of the local minimum as the best solution
found. By this, it is given that the LS algorithm only searches a local part of the entire
solution space, to which it therefore cannot guarantee that the local minima it dives into
contains any relatively good solutions. Though, with that said, it can be very efficient in
locating a locally optimal solution, and hence be fast at achieving convergence. The LS
algorithm we build will therefore be ideal to test whether or not we are able to achieve con­
vergence for the given test instances. If we are able to achieve this, this will be argument
enough for testing the more complex heuristic solution methods we develop.
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
39
==PAGE:48==
3.3.3
Iterated Local Search
The next heuristic solution method to be developed is using the meta­heuristic called
Iterated Local Search (ILS). As it can be expected from the name of this meta­heuristic, it
utilizes local search in an iterative process. For our purposes, we will therefore be re­using
the LS algorithm developed above in the algorithm to be developed here.
In general, the ILS meta­heuristic solution method can be written as given in algorithm 4.
Here we see that the algorithm has an initial candidate solution build using the construction
heuristic of choice, followed by performing local search on it. The resulting candidate
solution is then stored as the best solution found so far. From this point on, the iterative
process of the ILS approach starts. Now, recall that the LS algorithm explores a local
minimum of the solution space and is not able to escape this. Given that it most likely
would be the same local minimum we would end up in by only modifying the solution very
little, a perturbation is made to the current candidate solution in the attempt of locating a
candidate solution in another part of the solution space. If the perturbation is successful
in this, a new locally optimal candidate solution can thus be explored by performing local
search here, and it could be that this is better than the current best solution. If so, then
the new locally optimal solution is stored as the new best solution found so far, and a new
perturbation can be performed. Doing so until the execution time limit is reached gives
rise to the entirety of the ILS algorithm.
Algorithm 4 Iterated Local Search heuristic for the SCSP
Require: Problem instance π ∈Π
1: procedure IteratedLocalSearch(π)
2:
Create initial candidate solution s ←NearestNeighbour(π)
3:
Improve s with Local Search to get the best solution s∗←LocalSearch(π, s)
4:
while not Terminate(π) do
5:
Compute a new candidate solution s ←Perturbate(π, s∗)
6:
Improve s with Local Search s′ ←LocalSearch(π, s)
7:
if Cost(π, s′) < Cost(π, s∗) then
8:
Update the best solution s∗←s′
return s∗
Given that the ILS is highly dependant on the choice of perturbation made on the candidate
solutions, it is recommended that we choose this method to match the problem at hand.
With this, we should look at what could make for a big change in a solution with focus on
how this affects it, and then how to carry this out given the way a solution is represented.
Since a solution to the SCSP is a schedule for the shelf cranes, the type of perturbation
we are looking for is one where the assignment of tasks are relocated from one shelf
crane to another. Because the shelf cranes have to satisfy non­crossing constraints,
and therefore are required to move out of the way of each other, making a shelf crane
responsible for carrying out another shelf crane’s tasks is expected to disrupt the existing
schedule a lot. In doing this, we should therefore be likely to get a solution, which is in
a completely different part of the solution space. By this argument, we therefore choose
define our perturbation method as follows, where the intention is to swap a number of
tasks between two shelf cranes’ task lists.
From the set of shelf cranes K, two are picked at random. For each of these, a random
index in chosen within the range of the two shelf cranes’ task lists, and the tasks at these
indices are then picked to be swapped. Here, a decision is to be made of how many tasks
from the indices and forward that should be swapped, e.g. the first three tasks of each
40
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:49==
list. This parameter will in our case be set to three, though we might test for other values
in chapter 4. In the task picking process there is, however, one thing to take into account,
this being that the tasks to be swapped must be accessible to the other shelf crane. If
this is not the case, then the other shelf crane violates the accessibility requirement of the
model. Therefore, in choosing the tasks to be swapped, a check will be made regarding
this requirement. Another requirement that has to be met and which could cause issues
is the precedence of the tasks from the same jobs. With this is meant that in performing
a swap of tasks, the position in the task list where the new set of tasks are placed might
cause a violation of the precedence constraint. We choose to handle this by looking at
the position where the tasks are to be placed and checking for any such violation. If a
violation occurs, the tasks are moved ahead one index and checked again. This is done
until no precedence constraints are violated, which in the worst case would be to place
the tasks at the end of the shelf crane’s task list.
With this description of the perturbation method of choice, all components of the ILS al­
gorithm have been developed and the heuristic is ready to be tested.
3.3.4
Tabu Search
The final meta­heuristic solution method that we choose to develop for the SCSP is the
one known as Tabu Search (TS). This meta­heuristic is a bit different from the previous in
the fact that it has a memory of the steps that have been taken previously in the approach
towards better candidate solutions. This memory is kept in a list called the tabu list, and
it can have any length depending on the parameter setup of the algorithm. The length
of the tabu list then determines how many steps are remembered, i.e. kept in memory.
Before going into the details of the algorithm, we illustrate the TS meta­heuristic algorithm
in algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5 Tabu Search heuristic for the SCSP
Require: Problem instance π ∈Π
1: procedure TabuSearch(π)
2:
Create initial candidate solution s →NearestNeighbour(π)
3:
Copy s as the current best solution s∗←s
4:
Initialize the tabu list tabu ←[ ]
5:
while not Terminate(π) do
6:
Find best non­tabu solution s, move ←getBestNonTabuNeighbour(π, s, tabu)
7:
Update the tabu list tabu ←updateTabuList(π, tabu, move)
8:
if Cost(π, s) < Cost(π, s∗) then
9:
Update s∗→s
return s∗
In algorithm 5 we see that the NearestNeighbour construction heuristic is used to create
an initial solution, which we also copy as the best solution found so far. Besides this, the
tabu list is initialized as an empty list. Within the while­loop, the neighbourhood of the
candidate solution s is computed, and the best non­tabu neighbouring solution is moved
to. Here, a tabu neighbouring solution is one that is reached by doing a move, which
is tabu in the current iteration. Following the move to the best non­tabu neighbouring
solution, the move performed is recorded in the tabu list. If the tabu list is at its maximum
length, the oldest move is discarded to make room for the newly performed move. Finally,
if the neighbouring solution is better than the best solution we have found yet, it takes this
solution’s place.
Looking at the functionality of algorithm 5, it has similarities to the one of algorithm 3 in
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
41
==PAGE:50==
the way moves are made. This is due to the choice of neighbourhood structure, which is
the same between the two algorithms. The difference therefore lies in the memory of the
tabu list, which allows for the possibility of the algorithm escaping local minima and, with
this, explore more of the solution space.
In the literature for the FJSSP that was analyzed in chapter 2, we saw that the TS meta­
heuristic was used for this problem and that it achieved very good results when compared
to the benchmarks. By this, we therefore expect that the TS algorithm will perform rela­
tively good on the tests to follow.
3.4
Modelling and heuristic summary
Throughout the sections of this chapter, we have been working with ways of formulating
and solving the SCSP. First up, we got a deeper understanding of the operations of the
shelf cranes and for these we defined the assumption and requirements needed for us
to compute schedules for them. In section 3.2.2 we developed a simple model capable
of determining feasible schedules for HCS system that are configured with only one shelf
crane. This was later expanded in section 3.2.3, where the generic model for scheduling
shelf cranes of any HCS system configuration was derived. Following the derivation of
the mathematical models, we turned our attention towards heuristic solution methods in
section 3.3. There we build the foundation of elements and components for the heuristic
approaches and used these in developing three different methods of varying complexity.
The argument of there being no prior solution methods for the problem was stated here
to give reason for the development of multiple heuristic solution methods. In the next
chapter, we will be testing the mathematical models for their ability to be solved using an
exact solver, and we will furthermore do extensive tests on the heuristic solution methods
such that we can get knowledge on the performance and capabilities of these.
42
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:51==
4
Performance Testing
In chapter 3 we derived two mathematical models as well as three heuristic solution meth­
ods for the SCSP. These have yet to be tested for their performance, which is what this
chapter revolves around.
4.1
Test setup and tools
The tests that we will be executing in the following sections aim at determining a range
of things. First, we wish to determine for which sizes of test instances an exact solver
is able to converge and achieve an optimal solution. For the instances where it is not
possible, we instead wish to define a lower bound on the optimal solution, which can be
used for comparison with heuristically build solutions. Next, the three different heuristic
solution methods will be executed on the same range of test instances, for which we will
measure their performance in the attained best solutions by comparing these between
the heuristics and with the results achieved by the exact solver. When it comes to the ILS
and TS heuristics, it has previously been explained how these have a parameter each,
which are of interest to test different values for. For the TS it is the length of the tabu list
that we wish to adjust to take different values, and for the ILS it is the number of tasks to
be swapped between each of the shelf cranes’ task lists. For both heuristics, we will be
executing tests using 3 different values. They are as shown in table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Parameter values for the ILS and TS heuristics
ILS
TS
No. tasks swapped per shelf crane
Tabu list length
Setup #1
2
25
Setup #2
3
50
Setup #3
4
100
All of these tests will not only be carried out for a range of SCSP test instances, but also
for a set of benchmark test instances for the FJSSP. This is done since the SCSP has
been argued to be able to solve FJSSP instances as well, and thus we should be able to
compare the performance of our models and heuristics to those of current research arti­
cles. Following the test executions, the results of the tests will be collected and illustrated
in appropriate tables and plots to which we will attempt to draw any conclusions.
From the tests to be executed, we expect to see that the exact solver will have a hard
time computing an optimal solution to the instances of medium to large size, and that it
only is able to get lower bounds of low quality for these. The latter we expect due to
the number of big­M constraints in the Multiple SCSP model, which usually has a great
impact on the lower bounds computed. For the smaller instance sizes, however, we do
expect the exact solver to reach an optimal solution. Furthermore, for the tests executed
with the exact solver on the FJSSP instances, we expect to see similar or slightly worse
performance by our model compared to the results of the newest research papers.
As for the heuristic solution methods, given that they are in the more simple category
of meta­heuristics, we first of all expect for all of them to converge on all test instances.
Next, we expect them to attain near­optimal solutions for all small SCSP test instances,
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
43
==PAGE:52==
and relatively good solutions for the medium to large sized test instances. The reason
for us not expecting near­optimal solutions for the medium to large sized test instances is
due to the combinatorial complexity of these combined with the time limit set for the test
executions. When executed on the FJSSP benchmark instances, we do not expect for
the heuristic solution methods to reach similar solution quality as in resent research, but
instead that they will attain feasible solutions to the problem.
Comparing the results of the heuristics, we expect the LS to perform the worst, this being
due to it only searching the solution space once in the area of its initially given candidate
solution. Next, we expect the performance of the TS and ILS heuristics to be relatively
close to each other, though with the ILS being the better of the two. Even though the
search method of the two are comparable, the ILS will have a higher probability of reaching
different parts of the solution space with its incorporated perturbation method, and thus
has a higher chance of locating better candidate solutions. Between the different setups
of the parameters given in table 4.1, we would expect for the larger tabu list length limits
to be better due to the amount of combinations of shelf crane schedules. As for the ILS’s
number of tasks swapped from each shelf crane’s task list, we expect that the fewer tasks
swapped will be preferred. This we do since we expect the swap that occurs has more
impact on the strength of the perturbation than the number of tasks it carries over has.
Before we go into the details of the test data being used and the actual results of the test
executions, we briefly mention the details revolving around the actual implementation of
the methods and on which system they have been executed on. For the implementation
of the mathematical models and heuristics, the programming language called Julia (Ju­
lia 2021) in version 1.5 is used. For solving the test instances with exact methods, the
commercial Gurobi solver (Optimization 2021) is used together with the package called
JuMP (JuMP 2021), whereas the heuristic approaches are programmed as algorithms
and procedures. The computer used for executing the tests on is a 2017 MacBook Pro
with a 2.3 GHz Dual­Core Intel Core i5 processor, 8 GB of 2133 MHz LPDDR3 memory,
and an Intel Iris Plus Graphics 640 1536 MB graphics card, and the computer is running
the macOS Big Sur version 11.6 operating system.
4.2
Test data
For the tests to be executed, a range of test data sets are required, these giving rise to
the problem instances to be solved. As it has previously been described, the Multiple
SCSP model in section 3.2.3 was derived using some inspiration from a formulation of
the FJSSP, and with this we argued how the Multiple SCSP model is capable of solving
instances for the FJSSP too. With that said, we will therefore build our test data sets
using a similar technique as done for a set of benchmark test instances used for the
FJSSP. Here, we specifically refer to the test instances developed in Brandimarte 1993
of names mk1 through mk10, which have been used in several research articles to test
the performance of FJSSP solvers. Table 4.2 gives an overview of the content and size
of each of these test data sets.
From the test instances of table 4.2 we notice how all of them are defined with more jobs
than machines (only mk6 does not follow this convention), and they span over medium to
large sizes. For the smallest instance, mk1, we see that 10 jobs are defined with 5­7 tasks
each which have to be completed among 6 machines. Comparing this to the HCS system
as we have defined it, this equates to there being 5 PCSs (each with an incoming and an
outgoing job) and 6 shelf cranes. For the HCS system, we would argue that this number
of shelf cranes is in the larger end of the spectrum, both since the more shelf cranes in the
systems the higher the level of complexity of the model, and since we expect there to be
44
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:53==
Table 4.2: Test instances created in Brandimarte 1993 (source: Behnke and Geiger 2012)
Instance
Jobs
Machines
Tasks in jobs
Machines pr. job
Task durations
mk1
10
6
5 . . . 7
3
1 . . . 7
mk2
10
6
5 . . . 7
6
1 . . . 7
mk3
15
8
10
5
1 . . . 20
mk4
15
8
3 . . . 10
3
1 . . . 10
mk5
15
4
5 . . . 10
2
5 . . . 10
mk6
10
15
15
5
1 . . . 10
mk7
20
5
5
5
1 . . . 20
mk8
20
10
5 . . . 15
2
5 . . . 20
mk9
20
10
10 . . . 15
5
5 . . . 20
mk10
20
15
10 . . . 15
5
5 . . . 20
reduced efficiency when there are more shelf cranes than PCSs. Because of this, when
we define the test instances for the SCSP the number of shelf cranes will not exceed this
number. From the test instances, we furthermore notice how the instances either have a
specific number or a range of numbers stating how many tasks each job consists of. It
is also shown for the tasks what range their durations are required to be within. These
factors allows for the data to cover a number of scenarios for the FJSSP, hence we argue
that using a similar strategy in defining the test instances for the SCSP is preferred.
When developing the test instances for the SCSP, it is not only of interest to have instances
of small, medium and large size, but also everything in between. By this is meant that
we will define instances for 4­12 jobs in increments of 2 representing an increase of the
number of PCSs. We start at 4 since it is expected for a shelf system to have at least two
access points for pick­up and drop­off of containers, and we end the range at 12 since
having more than 6 PCSs parallel to each other would make the physical size of the HCS
system incredibly big. Next, we choose to have different ranges of the number of tasks
in each job, where we vary from very few (2­5 tasks) to many (10­15 tasks). Choosing
instances in these ranges allows for simulating scenarios of low and high pressure on the
HCS system, respectively. Likewise, we define the task durations to be either within a
short range, simulating a set of containers which makes sense to store close together, or
within a large range, simulating scenarios where the storage system has a lot of occupied
shelf compartments. Similar for all test instances is that they will be randomly generated
whilst satisfying their respective setup. This is done such that more variations of scenarios
can be simulated. One final note about these test instances is in relation to the number of
shelf cranes within each of them. Instead of choosing a static number of shelf cranes for
each, they will all be executed for a fitting range of shelf cranes, i.e. few shelf cranes (1­3)
in the smaller instances and more (2­6) shelf cranes in the larger instances. Collecting all
of this, table 4.3 shows an overview of the SCSP test instances and the parameters used
for generating them, respectively.
When looking at the test instances defined in table 4.3 we note that these can be split
into small (#1­3), medium (#4­9), and large (#10­15) instances. For each of these, we
have made sure to include both instances where the jobs have few, a bit more, or many
tasks. However, the latter is not present for the small instances due to the number of tasks
relative to the number of jobs. In the following test study, when talking about a specific test
instance from table 4.3 with a specific number of shelf cranes, we will give the instance
name a suffix of _k, where k is replaced with the number of shelf cranes.
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
45
==PAGE:54==
Table 4.3: Test instances for the SCSP
#
Instance
Jobs
Shelf cranes
Tasks in jobs
Task durations
1
scsp_02_01
2
1 . . . 2
4 . . . 6
20 . . . 80
2
scsp_04_01
4
1 . . . 3
3 . . . 6
20 . . . 50
3
scsp_04_02
4
1 . . . 3
2 . . . 5
40 . . . 100
4
scsp_06_01
6
1 . . . 4
4 . . . 7
50 . . . 150
5
scsp_06_02
6
1 . . . 4
6 . . . 10
20 . . . 80
6
scsp_06_03
6
1 . . . 4
6 . . . 10
50 . . . 150
7
scsp_08_01
8
2 . . . 5
5
10 . . . 200
8
scsp_08_02
8
2 . . . 5
5 . . . 12
10 . . . 100
9
scsp_08_03
8
2 . . . 5
5 . . . 12
40 . . . 200
10
scsp_10_01
10
2 . . . 6
5
10 . . . 200
11
scsp_10_02
10
2 . . . 6
15
10 . . . 200
12
scsp_10_03
10
2 . . . 6
10 . . . 15
50 . . . 200
13
scsp_12_01
12
3 . . . 6
3 . . . 10
10 . . . 100
14
scsp_12_02
12
3 . . . 6
5 . . . 7
10 . . . 200
15
scsp_12_03
12
3 . . . 6
10 . . . 15
50 . . . 200
4.3
Test execution and results
Having defined the test instances above, we move on to executing the range of tests
specified in section 4.1. Test results are documented in tables and plots with data points
illustrated in the order of increasing objective value, enhancing clarification and readability.
4.3.1
Exact solver performance on the SCSP
To begin with, the Gurobi solver has been used for solving the SCSP instances to opti­
mality and it was given a time limit of 10 minutes. This time limit was chosen to illustrate
what the solvers can achieve if they are given a large amount of time to solve the in­
stances compared to the amount of time they would have been given in the real­world,
where we expect 5 minutes to be given. From these tests, the resulting lower and upper
bounds were computed, and we collect these in table 4.4­4.6, and for these note that for
the instances with a single shelf crane, both the Single SCSP and Multiple SCSP models
were tested. From the tables we see that the exact solver was able to find an optimal
solution to all of the small test instances (this is shown by the lower and upper bounds
being equal), though not for any of the medium and large test instances. For the medium
sized instances, the solver was able to compute feasible solutions to all of them, hence
the presence of upper bounds, whereas for the large instances the solver only managed
to compute a feasible solution to all but some of those with four to six shelf cranes. Be­
tween the medium and large instances we see that the difference between the lower and
upper bounds increased with the instance size, and that the lower bound values tended
not to be improved during execution the larger the test instance becomes. The latter is
seen by the identical lower bound values across the same instance for different numbers
of shelf cranes. As it has been mentioned previously, the presence of big­M constraints
in the models is a hindrance for the generation of lower bounds, when an optimal solution
cannot be reached within the time limit. Therefore, we argue that the values of the lower
bounds for the medium to large sized test instances are not valid to compare with once
we have have computed the test results using the heuristic solution methods.
46
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:55==
Table 4.4: Lower and upper bounds computed for small instances of the SCSP according
to the number of shelf cranes in the HCS system
1 (Single)
1 (Multi)
2
3
LB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
# 1
985
985
985
680
680
# 2
1035
1035
1035
555
555
420
420
# 3
2295
2295
2295
1225
1225
1045
1045
Table 4.5: Lower and upper bounds computed for medium instances of the SCSP accord­
ing to the number of shelf cranes in the HCS system
1 (Single)
1 (Multi)
2
3
4
5
LB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
# 4
2555
2350
5620
1730
3135
1570
2825
1560
2545
# 5
1830
1765
4570
1105
2330
1010
1595
955
1355
# 6
2800
2785
7365
2040
4390
1880
3585
1905
3335
# 7
1710
3575
1425
3200
1285
3270
1325
3205
# 8
1305
4420
1090
3090
1010
2560
1035
2175
# 9
1725
6900
1650
6155
1595
5855
1535
6180
4.3.2
Heuristic solver performance on the SCSP
Next up, we ran the heuristic solution methods, i.e. the LS, ILS and TS heuristics, on the
SCSP test instances. All of these were given an execution time limit of 5 minutes in order
to match the expected frequency of updates to the jobs being carried out in real­world
scenarios. Furthermore, from table 4.1 the parameter value setup #2 has randomly been
chosen as the parameter set for the ILS and TS heuristics. Given that the LS and TS
heuristics are deterministic in their construction, we only ran these once, whereas for the
ILS, which is non­deterministic, we ran this 3 times and report the average across these
runs. Note that the TS is said to be deterministic only because of its construction specified
in section 3.3.4. The results of these test executions are shown in fig. 4.1­4.3. We refer
the reader to tables A.1, A.4 and A.5 in appendix A for the exact numbers computed.
From fig. 4.1 we see that the three heuristic solution methods achieved identical results
on most of the small test instances. It is only for the test instances scsp_004_01_2 and
scsp_004_02_2 that we see any differences, and these are very minor. Hence, we argue
that the heuristics performed equally well on the small test instances. Next, looking at
the plots of fig. 4.2, which show the results for the medium sized test instances, we begin
to see a trend between the heuristic solution methods’ performance. We notice that the
ILS attained lower values of Cmax for most of the test instances. If we only look at the
differences between the ILS and TS heuristics, the ILS managed to be upwards of 21%
better than the TS for the medium sized test instances. For the large sized test instances,
we see a similar trend where the ILS was performing better than the TS and LS heuristics,
as shown in fig. 4.3. Here, the difference between the TS and ILS heuristics was upwards
of 41%. It was only for the largest of instance sizes that this trend was no longer present,
but instead we see results that were closer to each other between all three heuristics.
For these instances, we also see that the TS occasionally performed better than the ILS,
though only by at most 4%.
Following the tests above, where we combined the results of all three heuristics, we moved
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
47
==PAGE:56==
Table 4.6: Lower and upper bounds computed for large instances of the SCSP according
to the number of shelf cranes in the HCS system
2
3
4
5
6
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
# 10
1465
4215
1425
3160
1440
3075
1450
2985
1550
3230
# 11
3535
21525
3470
20700
3460
­
3515
­
3580
­
# 12
3415
15600
3415
15655
3415
15435
3415
­
3415
­
# 13
1260
3590
1260
3005
1260
2525
1260
2040
# 14
1880
6795
1805
5870
1725
5430
1680
10185
# 15
3075
20610
3075
­
3075
­
3075
­
scsp_004_01_3
scsp_004_01_2
scsp_002_01_2
scsp_002_01_1
scsp_004_01_1
scsp_004_02_3
scsp_004_02_2
scsp_004_02_1
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Cmax
LS
ILS
TS
Figure 4.1: Solution values obtained by the LS, ILS and TS heuristics on the small SCSP
test instances.
on to testing the TS and ILS heuristics separately and with different parameters. This we
did to compare the different parameter setups and, with this, attempt to draw conclusions
towards the best choice of parameters for the heuristics we have constructed.
First up, we tested the TS heuristic. As shown in table 4.1, we tested this heuristic solu­
tion method for three different tabu list lengths, which should have affected how well the
heuristic descended into as well as escaped from local minima. For clarity, we here ad­
dress the heuristic with different tabu list lengths as TB25, TB50 and TB100, respectively.
Just as for the tests executed for the exact solver, we executed the heuristics on every test
instance for the SCSP with a time limit of 5 minutes. The results are collected in tables
A.2, A.6 and A.7 in appendix A, and we illustrate these results in fig. 4.4­4.6. From the
plots and tables we see that the three sizes of tabu list did not have much influence on the
performance of the heuristic. For the small test instances, all results were identical, and
for the medium test instances only a few showed differences between TB25 versus TB50
and TB100, where it alternated between TB25 being better than TB50 and TB100, and
vice versa. It is first for the large sized test instances that we see notable differences in
the performance. In fig. 4.6 (left) we see four instances where TB25 was 12 −16% worse
than TB50 and TB100, and, conversely, in fig. 4.6 (right) we see six instances where TB25
was upwards of 7% better than TB50 and TB100. If we instead compare the performance
between TB50 and TB100, we see next to no difference between the two for all small,
48
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:57==
scsp_006_02_4
scsp_006_02_3
scsp_006_02_2
scsp_008_02_5
scsp_006_01_3
scsp_006_01_4
scsp_006_01_2
scsp_008_02_4
scsp_008_01_5
scsp_008_01_4
scsp_008_01_3
scsp_008_01_2
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
Cmax
LS
ILS
TS
scsp_006_02_1
scsp_006_03_3
scsp_006_03_4
scsp_006_03_2
scsp_008_02_3
scsp_008_02_2
scsp_006_01_1
scsp_008_03_4
scsp_008_03_3
scsp_008_03_5
scsp_006_03_1
scsp_008_03_2
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
Cmax
LS
ILS
TS
Figure 4.2: Solution values obtained by the LS, ILS and TS heuristics on the medium
SCSP test instances.
scsp_012_01_6
scsp_012_01_5
scsp_010_01_4
scsp_010_01_5
scsp_012_01_3
scsp_010_01_2
scsp_010_01_6
scsp_010_01_3
scsp_012_01_4
scsp_012_02_5
scsp_012_02_4
scsp_012_02_6
scsp_012_02_3
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
Cmax
LS
ILS
TS
scsp_010_03_5
scsp_010_03_3
scsp_010_03_4
scsp_010_03_6
scsp_010_02_6
scsp_012_03_4
scsp_010_02_3
scsp_010_02_5
scsp_010_02_4
scsp_012_03_6
scsp_012_03_3
scsp_012_03_5
scsp_010_03_2
scsp_010_02_2
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
Cmax
LS
ILS
TS
Figure 4.3: Solution values obtained by the LS, ILS and TS heuristics on the large SCSP
test instances.
all medium and the smallest of the large sized instances. It is only for the largest sized
instances where they showed any signs of differentiation, where it is TB50 that performed
the best, here with 1 −6% improvement compared to TB100.
Next, we executed the same tests for the three parameter setups of the ILS as we did for
the TB. However, instead of changing a list’s length limit we here changed the number of
tasks that are swapped from each shelf crane’s task list to the other’s. The parameters of
choice are given in table 4.1, and we here mention the heuristics and their setup by ILS2,
ILS3 and ILS4, respectively. The results of the tests are collected in tables A.3, A.8 and
A.9 in appendix A, and we illustrate them in fig. 4.7­4.9.
The results computed by the tests for the ILS with different parameters show that no
difference was seen for the small test instances (see fig. 4.7). For the medium sized
instances, fig. 4.8 show that the fewer number of tasks swapped was preferred, which
is seen by the fact that the ILS2 performed better than both ILS3 and ILS4 in several
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
49
==PAGE:58==
scsp_004_01_3
scsp_004_01_2
scsp_002_01_2
scsp_002_01_1
scsp_004_01_1
scsp_004_02_3
scsp_004_02_2
scsp_004_02_1
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Cmax
TS25
TS50
TS100
Figure 4.4: Solution values obtained by the TS heuristic using different tabu list lengths
on the small SCSP test instances.
scsp_006_02_4
scsp_006_02_3
scsp_006_02_2
scsp_008_02_5
scsp_006_01_3
scsp_006_01_2
scsp_008_02_4
scsp_006_01_4
scsp_008_01_4
scsp_008_01_5
scsp_008_01_3
scsp_006_03_4
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
Cmax
TS25
TS50
TS100
scsp_008_01_2
scsp_006_03_3
scsp_006_02_1
scsp_006_03_2
scsp_006_01_1
scsp_008_02_3
scsp_008_02_2
scsp_008_03_4
scsp_008_03_3
scsp_008_03_5
scsp_006_03_1
scsp_008_03_2
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
Cmax
TS25
TS50
TS100
Figure 4.5: Solution values obtained by the TS heuristic using different tabu list lengths
on the medium SCSP test instances.
instances by 2 −12% as well as by noting that the ILS3 performed better than ILS4 in a
range of instances by 1−12%. For the results of the large test instances shown in fig. 4.9,
the parameter setup that performed the best was not that easy to state due an alternation
between all three parameter setups. Between the smaller of the large test instances, we
see more fluctuation in the results than otherwise, whereas for the larger of the large test
instances, most of these had the three setups perform relatively equally.
Following the tests on the performance of each of the heuristic solution methods, we
aimed for having a closer look at some of the SCSP test instances to see how the number
of shelf cranes in the HCS system would impact the makespan of the resulting shelf crane
schedule. Given we have argued that the ILS2 heuristic performed the best over­all, we
used this for the tests to be executed here. Next, we chose the instances to be tested on,
to which our choices were scsp_04_02, scsp_08_03, and scsp_12_03. We chose these
since they represent low, medium and high pressure on the HCS system, respectively,
and thus should give us a good indication of how the number of shelf cranes in the HCS
50
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:59==
scsp_012_01_6
scsp_010_01_6
scsp_010_01_5
scsp_012_01_5
scsp_012_01_3
scsp_012_01_4
scsp_010_01_4
scsp_010_01_2
scsp_010_01_3
scsp_012_02_5
scsp_012_02_4
scsp_012_02_6
scsp_012_02_3
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
Cmax
TS25
TS50
TS100
scsp_010_03_5
scsp_010_03_6
scsp_010_03_3
scsp_010_03_4
scsp_010_02_6
scsp_010_02_5
scsp_010_02_3
scsp_012_03_5
scsp_012_03_3
scsp_012_03_4
scsp_010_02_4
scsp_012_03_6
scsp_010_02_2
scsp_010_03_2
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
Cmax
TS25
TS50
TS100
Figure 4.6: Solution values obtained by the TS heuristic using different tabu list lengths
on the large SCSP test instances.
scsp_004_01_3
scsp_004_01_2
scsp_002_01_2
scsp_002_01_1
scsp_004_01_1
scsp_004_02_3
scsp_004_02_2
scsp_004_02_1
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Cmax
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
Figure 4.7: Solution values obtained by the ILS heuristic using different number of tasks
swapped on the small SCSP test instances.
system would affect these scenarios.
Executing the ILS2 heuristic on the three test instances for the number of shelf cranes
specified in table 4.3, we achieved the results shown in fig. 4.10. From the plots we see a
different reaction to each of the three scenarios. For the small test instance representing
low pressure on the HCS system we see from fig. 4.10 (top­right) that the makespan de­
creased as the number of shelf cranes increased. This was, however, not the case for the
large test instance representing high pressure on the HCS system, since we in fig. 4.10
(bottom) see that the makespan increased as the number of shelf cranes increased. Fi­
nally, for the medium sized instance representing a medium pressure on the HCS system,
the makespan decreased as we added more shelf cranes to the system, however only to
a certain point at which the makespan started to increase.
4.3.3
Exact solver performance on the FJSSP
Having executed a range of tests on the SCSP test instances, we here moved on to testing
the exact solver on the benchmark instances of the FJSSP. The exact solver was once
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
51
==PAGE:60==
scsp_006_02_4
scsp_006_02_3
scsp_006_02_2
scsp_008_02_5
scsp_008_02_4
scsp_006_01_3
scsp_006_01_4
scsp_008_01_3
scsp_006_01_2
scsp_008_01_4
scsp_008_01_2
scsp_006_03_4
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
Cmax
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
scsp_006_03_3
scsp_006_02_1
scsp_006_03_2
scsp_008_02_3
scsp_008_02_2
scsp_006_01_1
scsp_008_03_4
scsp_008_03_5
scsp_008_03_3
scsp_008_03_2
scsp_006_03_1
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
Cmax
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
Figure 4.8: Solution values obtained by the ILS heuristic using different number of tasks
swapped on the medium SCSP test instances.
scsp_012_01_6
scsp_012_01_5
scsp_012_01_4
scsp_010_01_5
scsp_010_01_3
scsp_010_01_4
scsp_012_01_3
scsp_010_01_2
scsp_012_02_6
scsp_012_02_5
scsp_012_02_4
scsp_012_02_3
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
Cmax
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
scsp_010_03_3
scsp_010_03_5
scsp_010_03_4
scsp_010_03_6
scsp_010_02_6
scsp_012_03_3
scsp_012_03_4
scsp_010_02_3
scsp_010_02_5
scsp_010_02_4
scsp_010_02_2
scsp_012_03_5
scsp_012_03_6
scsp_010_03_2
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
Cmax
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
Figure 4.9: Solution values obtained by the ILS heuristic using different number of tasks
swapped on the large SCSP test instances.
again given a time limit of 10 minutes to solve the instances, and we recorded the lower
and upper bounds computed in this time frame. The values computed are then compared
to those presented in table 4 in Behnke and Geiger 2012, these being the best known
lower bounds in the literature. All of these results are shown in table 4.7.
From table 4.7 we see that the exact solver managed to compute lower bounds for the
FJSSP instances modelled with the Multiple SCSP model that were of different quality.
In two instances, namely mk4 and mk6, the lower bound computed were equal to those
stated in the literature, though for the majority of the instances the lower bound was a lot
lower than those of the literature. First of all, these lower bounds were not to be seen as
better than those of the literature, even though the values are less in comparison. When
we instead compared the upper bounds of the same instances, these were of greater
values than the best known. Therefore, when we combined these findings it was given that
the results achieved using the SCSP model were of a larger range between the bounds,
and thus were of poor quality. This was, however, to be expected, since the model of
52
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:61==
1
2
3
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
No. shelf cranes
Cmax
1
2
3
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
No. shelf cranes
Cmax
1
2
3
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
No. shelf cranes
Cmax
Figure 4.10: Performance of the ILS2 heuristic on the scsp_04_02 (top­left), scsp_08_03
(top­right) and scsp_12_03 (bottom) test instances for different numbers of shelf cranes.
the SCSP is more complex with its increase in the number of constraints. Hence, the
solver was expected not to find better bounds than those of the literature in the same
amount of execution time. We furthermore see an increase in complexity by the fact that
the exact solver was not able to find any feasible solution to mk10 within the time limit.
Lastly, for the instances mk1 and mk2 we see that the lower bounds were of larger value
than those found in the literature, and that the solver for mk1 found an optimal solution.
Here it is important to recall that the SCSP model was proven to be able to solve any
FJSSP instance to feasibility, and therefore not necessarily to optimality. Given that the
SCSP model does include additional constraints, there is therefore the possibility that the
resulting optimal schedule to an FJSSP instance is the best for the SCSP model, however
not the best for a model designed for solving the FJSSP specifically. By this, we therefore
argue that the results computed for these two test instances are of good quality compared
to the best known bound in the literature.
4.3.4
Heuristic solver performance on the FJSSP
Next, we will be executing each of the heuristic solution methods on all of the ten bench­
mark test instances of table 4.2. For the ILS and TS heuristics, we do it for all three
sets of parameters to see what difference this makes on the heuristic performance on the
FJSSP instances compared to the SCSP instances. The results of the test executed on
the heuristic solution methods are collected in table 4.8, where the numbers in bold are
the best found within the same heuristic solution method. From this table we see that the
LS performs worse in all instances compared to the best performance of any of the ILS
and TS setups. It is only for the instance mk8 that we see a difference, though a small
one. Looking at the performance between each of the different ILS setups, it is the ILS2
setup that performs the best over­all, however we do see some alternation in which one
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
53
==PAGE:62==
Table 4.7: Lower and upper bounds on the FJSSP test instances
SCSP model
Best known
LB
UB
LB
UB
mk1
40
40
36
39
mk2
25
28
24
26
mk3
137
212
204
204
mk4
48
65
48
60
mk5
83
198
168
172
mk6
33
75
33
58
mk7
90
169
133
139
mk8
237
580
523
523
mk9
200
599
299
307
mk10
141
­
165
197
of the setups that is the best as well as the occasional similarity between the results. As
for the TS setups, there are several instances where two or three of them achieve the
same results, and some where the difference is as small as a single unit. Between the
three setups, it is the TB25 that performs the best, however only by a small margin.
Table 4.8: Best solution values found on the FJSSP test instances using various heuristic
solution methods
LS
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
TB25
TB50
TB100
mk1
112
71
66
76
90
90
90
mk2
78
48
51
51
67
67
67
mk3
539
374
405
422
573
507
500
mk4
157
117
108
102
145
133
133
mk5
286
216
218
224
246
246
246
mk6
333
286
304
282
333
334
334
mk7
403
236
244
239
372
383
383
mk8
1014
1014
1014
1014
1034
1073
1130
mk9
1210
1238
1183
1215
998
1018
1030
mk10
1264
1295
1264
1256
1169
1157
1157
Picking out the best performing setups identified above, we compare the results achieved
to those of the literature. Here we note that it is no longer the lower bounds which we are
comparing to, but the upper bounds. This is due to the fact that we are computing feasible
solutions to the FJSSP, hence it is more relevant to compare our obtained candidate
solution to those obtained in the literature. Table 4.9 shows the results achieved, where
the computed values and their difference to the best known values are presented. From
the data in this table, we first of all note that it is the ILS2 heuristic solution method that
performs the best in all but two test instances. For most of the instances, we see that the
difference between the best known upper bound and the best upper bound found using
our solution methods is just below two times the value. Given that the heuristic solution
methods are simple and not designed with the FJSSP in mind, we argue that these results
are reasonable. For the instance not being within twice the value of the best known they
are a lot bigger, here with 2­5 times the value. Looking at the definitions of these test
instances in table 4.2, we note that they all have a lot of machines capable of carrying out
54
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:63==
Table 4.9: Comparison between best known lower bounds and computed solutions to the
FJSSP
Best known
LS
ILS2
TB25
LS
ILS2
TB25
mk1
39
112
71
90
187,18%
82,05%
130,77%
mk2
26
78
48
67
200,00%
84,62%
157,69%
mk3
204
539
374
573
164,22%
83,33%
180,88%
mk4
60
157
117
145
161,67%
95,00%
141,67%
mk5
172
286
216
246
66,28%
25,58%
43,02%
mk6
58
333
286
333
474,14%
393,10%
474,14%
mk7
139
403
236
372
189,93%
69,78%
167,63%
mk8
523
1014
1014
1034
93,88%
93,88%
97,71%
mk9
307
1210
1238
998
294,14%
303,26%
225,08%
mk10
197
1264
1295
1169
541,62%
557,36%
493,40%
every task, and that they all consist of jobs with a large volume of tasks. Hence, it is for
the larger of the test instance that the difference in performance is increasingly notable.
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:65==
5
Discussion
Throughout this thesis, we have been studying a new method for storing shipping contain­
ers at container terminals. The Hybrid Container Storage (HCS) system was introduced
in chapter 1, and we learned that this novel take on the storage problem of shipping
containers at container terminals could be a viable replacement to the existing system.
By this argument, we asked ourselves whether the storage problem posed by the HCS
system, called the Shelf Crane Scheduling Problem (SCSP), could be formulated as a
mathematical model and, if so, whether it is solvable and possible to optimize by exact
methods or if heuristic approaches are required. In chapter 3, two mathematical mod­
els of varying complexity were derived, proving that the new storage problem is, in fact,
able to be modelled, and that the generic model is an extension to the existing Flexible
Job­Shop Scheduling Problem (FJSSP). The latter further gave rise to the development
of three different heuristic solution methods. With the knowledge achieved, the models
were tested in chapter 4 using exact and heuristic solution methods on instances of both
problem types, where the exact ones only showed to be useful for small instances. The
heuristic solution methods, however, showed promising for all instance sizes.
The fact that the SCSP can be formulated as a mathematical model means that we have
found a method for determining whether a schedule for the shelf cranes within the HCS
system is feasible or not. Hence, it is hereby possible for a person or computer to compute
feasible schedules or test the feasibility of a given schedule using the models derived, to
which these schedules have the shelf cranes satisfy all physical requirements posed by
the system. Furthermore, the existence of a generic mathematical model for the problem
allows for any user to specify the performance measures and weights of these as the
user so desires, and with this measure the quality of any feasible schedule. Next, with the
heuristic solution methods developed and tested, we proved that the scheduling problem
can have good and feasible solutions computed within a short amount of time. Such so­
lutions are required to be possible to compute rapidly, since the scheduled processes at
a container terminal are revised frequently and thus the operators expect there to be an
answer regarding how to move forward without much or any delay. Therefore, the results
of the heuristic solution methods mean that the HCS system is feasible to implement when
considering the scheduling problems within, and that the best number of shelf cranes to
integrate in an aisle can be determined through simulation. The fact that the heuristic
solution methods converged quickly further implies the viability of studying and develop­
ing more advanced heuristic approaches in future research. As the SCSP showed to be
extremely complex and thus hard to solve, the approach of solving the SCSP instances to
optimality using exact solvers is not feasible nor recommended. Tests executed using the
exact solver of choice agreed with this statement, which therefore supports the expected
complexity of the scheduling problem. Finally, when describing the details, components,
and process flows of the HCS system, the extensively researched problem called the Flex­
ible Job­Shop Scheduling Problem (FJSSP) was found to be relatable to the scheduling
requirements posed by the SCSP, to which the model derivation took inspiration from
FJSSP models. Given that the SCSP follows the same kind of setup as the FJSSP,
though with a number of extended assumptions and requirements, the generic model de­
rived for the SCSP was proven to be able to solve instances of the FJSSP too, assuming
that parameter adjustments were made accordingly. By this, it should therefore be pos­
sible to reiterate some of the research done within the field of study of the FJSSP to the
SCSP, and, with this, help this new field of study in its future research.
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
57
==PAGE:66==
Given that there was no prior studies to look for when researching the SCSP and the
HCS system, different mathematical problems were analyzed for inspiration instead. As
we learned in section 2.1, the current container terminal processes give rise to the so
called Quay Crane Scheduling Problem (QCSP), which schedules the movement of quay
cranes that are placed in a similar way as the shelf cranes of the HCS system. Though this
problem was related to container terminal operations revolving around a type of crane, it
was only the non­crossing constraints introduced by the QCSP problem that was of in­
terest and inspiration. Thinking ahead, two different modelling techniques were identified
as being good candidates for our modelling needs. First up, the potential of building the
model as a network with arcs representing the tasks to be carried out was reviewed. An­
gel Corberán, Mota, and José M. Sanchis 2006 formulates two different models for the
Mixed General Routing Problem (MGRP), which showed to be viable sources of inspi­
ration. The choice, however, did not land on this type of modelling technique, since the
models proposed for the MGRP are only able to model and simulate the movement of a
single entity, which does not satisfy our needs. The next modelling technique revolved
around scheduling the processes performed by a set of machines. Here, the Flow­Shop
Scheduling Problem (FSSP) and specifically its extension to the FJSSP showed to share
a wide range of similarities to the SCSP. By this fact, the precedence variable based mod­
elling technique presented in Demir and Kürşat Işleyen 2013 was used as inspiration to
determine a feasible set of decision variables as well as general constraints for the SCSP.
In doing so, not only was the SCSP able to be modelled to solve its own instances, but
it was furthermore proved to be able to solve instances of the FJSSP too. Given that the
FSSP has been shown to be NP­hard in Garey, D. S. Johnson, and Sethi 1976, imply­
ing that the FJSSP is NP­hard too, supports the expected complexity of the SCSP, since
the SCSP model is even more general than the FJSSP. Therefore, the results of using
heuristic solution methods instead of exact solvers on the FJSSP motivated the choice
of solution methods explored for the SCSP. Given that Brandimarte 1993 addressed that
trajectory­based meta­heuristics, namely the Tabu Search, could be used for finding near­
optimal solutions for the FJSSP, a similar approach was followed in this study. Here, we
took further inspiration from Mehdi et al. 2016 and developed three different heuristic so­
lution methods and compared the results of these when tested on instances of the SCSP.
For the FJSSP it was further noticed that most research articles used the test instances
defined in Brandimarte 1993 as benchmarks. By this fact, the SCSP model and its heuris­
tic solution methods was also tested on the same set of FJSSP benchmark instances such
that a comparison could be made.
Throughout the development of this study it has been a challenge to answer the questions
posed. This has mainly been due to the lack of information about the HCS system as a
whole, where only a single website containing high­level information is available. The
company, who has developed the HCS system, was approached for obtaining detailed
information of the system, however they never responded to any of our messages. Fur­
thermore, the fact that there is no research published on the subject prior to the release of
this study has made the identification of relevant research articles difficult. For those that
were located, only few of them were possible to draw parallels and inspiration from, and as
a consequence of this, most of the results of this study are completely novel. Next, when
it came to the modelling part of the study, many iterations were made in the attempt to
derive one that was close to being feasible, and even when it was thought that the model
was complete, more edge cases showed up and forced the modelling process to be ex­
tended. The main challenge in modelling the physical requirements of the shelf cranes’
movement was the inclusion of non­crossing constraints. To begin with, the non­crossing
constraints used in the QCSP showed not to be of any use in our models, since these
58
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:67==
revolved around static processes and tasks. Therefore, a completely new approach was
required to be developed. Following the extended time spent on modelling the SCSP, the
derivation of a clever and thorough heuristic solution method was not viable due to the
lack of time and the lack of existing research on the topic. Consequently, the heuristic
solution methods to be developed had to be of a lower level of complexity.
From the literature study, derivations and tests carried out throughout this thesis, we have
discovered ways of expressing the physical requirements posed by the HCS system. With
this, we have been able to develop methods of computing schedules for the processes
within the HCS system, mainly revolving around the movement of the shelf cranes, and
for these give them a measure of performance and quality. These new tools have made
it possible to simulate any setup and configuration of a HCS system, and by this allowed
for the determination of whether this setup is to be preferred or if adjustments to it could
result in better throughput and reduction of process delays. Having access to such data
will, in turn, allow for the comparison to existing systems and thus the evaluation of the
potential benefits of changing them to the HCS system instead. Another important feature
of the models derived are their similarities to the existing models and general problem of
the FJSSP. These similarities imply the fact that prior research released for this other
mathematical problem can with a high likelihood be translated over to the problem of this
thesis. Such a discovery can have great impact on the speed of the progression of future
research on the topic of the HCS system’s ins and outs. Given that this study is the
first of its kind when it comes to exploring the processes and scheduling problems posed
by the HCS system, the results presented are yet to be compared to other research on
the subject. The models derived do solve the problem of determining feasible schedules
for the shelf cranes, and the heuristic solution methods are capable of computing feasible
schedules in a short amount of time. Therefore, the results presented build the foundation
of the research on the subject, and thus gives rise to directions in which future research
can expand on the problem knowledge. To this, we suggest that different heuristic solution
methods are explored, which take inspiration from other meta­heuristic approaches such
as the Genetic Algorithms or Large Neighbourhood Search, and in which the general
structure of the SCSP is exploited even further.
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:69==
6
Conclusion
Customers of the modern world demand innovative and efficient supply chain manage­
ment, where cargo transportation is a competitive differentiation for many companies. It
is therefore critical that the present transportation supply chain methods keep up with the
changes in the demand by continuously updating and reiterating their internal processes
and systems. This is achieved through researching and engineering novel approaches,
and for these analyzing the trade­offs of shifting towards such directions and solutions.
The newest take on the maritime transportation industry’s stationary storage systems lo­
cated at container terminals presented in this study has had tools developed capable of
interpreting the most critical moving component within the system. Such tools thus allow
for the industry to simulate and evaluate the best configurations of the newly introduced
Hybrid Container Storage system and with this determine the potential efficiency of it. If
the measures show to be promising for the individual container terminal, additional algo­
rithmic tools have been developed allowing for computing feasible and usable schedules
for the shelf cranes within the storage system. A consequence of the novelty of the stor­
age system, the amount of publicly available technical and analytic research on the topic
is hard to come by. However, given that the Shelf Crane Scheduling Problem has been
proven to have great relation to the highly researched Flexible Job­Shop Scheduling Prob­
lem, the combination of prior research of the latter together with the results of this thesis
builds the foundation of a new field of study, which has its potential direction of future
research ensured to be greatly supported.
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
Economic Co­operation, The Organisation for and Development (2021). Ocean shipping
and shipbuilding. url: https://www.oecd.org/ocean/topics/ocean-shipping/ (visited on
12/08/2021).
Nagurney, Anna (2021). Our economy relies on shipping containers. This is what happens
when they’re ’stuck in the mud’. url: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/10/global-
shortagof-shipping-containers/ (visited on 12/08/2021).
Murray, Brendan (2021). International Shipping: Globalization In Crisis. url: https://www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-10-14/how-supply-chains-broke-sparking-global-
shortages-quicktake (visited on 12/10/2021).
Meisel, Frank (2009). Seaside operations planning in container terminals. eng. Physica­
Verlag.
BOXBAY (2021). BOXBAY ­ Container High Bay Stores (HBS). url: https://www.boxbay.
com (visited on 12/01/2021).
Daganzo, CF (1989). “The Crane Scheduling Problem”. eng. In: Transportation Research
Part B­methodological 23.3, pp. 159–175. issn: 18792367, 01912615. doi: 10.1016/
0191-2615(89)90001-5.
Lim, A et al. (2002). “Crane scheduling using tabu search”. eng. In: 14th Ieee Interna­
tional Conference on Tools With Artificial Intelligence, Proceedings, pp. 146–153. issn:
23750197, 10823409. doi: 10.1109/TAI.2002.1180799.
Lim, Andrew, Brian Rodrigues, and Zhou Xu (2004). “Approximation schemes for the
crane scheduling problem”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Sub­
series Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 3111,
pp. 323–335. issn: 16113349, 03029743. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-27810-8_28.
– (2007). “A m­parallel crane scheduling problem with a non­crossing constraint”. eng. In:
Naval Research Logistics 54.2, pp. 115–127. issn: 15206750, 0894069x. doi: 10.1002/
nav.20189.
Kim, Kap Hwan and Young Man Park (2004). “A crane scheduling method for port con­
tainer terminals”. eng. In: European Journal of Operational Research 156.3, pp. 752–
768. issn: 18726860, 03772217. doi: 10.1016/S0377-2217(03)00133-4.
Zhu, Y. and A. Lim (2006). “Crane scheduling with non­crossing constraint”. eng. In:
Journal of the Operational Research Society 57.12, pp. 1464–1471. issn: 14769360,
01605682. doi: 10.1057/palgrave.jors.2602110.
Sun, Defeng et al. (2021). “An exact algorithm for the unidirectional quay crane scheduling
problem with vessel stability”. eng. In: European Journal of Operational Research 291.1,
pp. 271–283. issn: 18726860, 03772217. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2020.09.033.
Orloff, C. S. (1974). “A fundamental problem in vehicle routing”. In: Networks 4, pp. 35–64.
Corberán, A., A. Romero, and J. M. Sanchis (2003). “The mixed general routing polyhe­
dron”. eng. In: Mathematical Programming, Series B 96.1, pp. 103–137. issn: 14364646,
00255610. doi: 10.1007/s10107-003-0391-9.
Corberán, Angel, Enrique Mota, and José M. Sanchis (2006). “A comparison of two dif­
ferent formulations for arc routing problems on mixed graphs”. eng. In: Computers and
Operations Research 33.12, pp. 3384–3402. issn: 1873765x, 03050548. doi: 10.1016/
j.cor.2005.02.010.
Corberán, Ángel and Gilbert Laporte (2014). Arc Routing: Problems, Methods, and Appli­
cations. SIAM.
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
63
==PAGE:72==
Johnson, S. M. (1954). “Optimal two­ and three­stage production schedules with setup
times included”. eng. In: Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 1.1, pp. 61–68. issn: 19319193,
00281441. doi: 10.1002/nav.3800010110.
Conway, R.W., W.L. Maxwell, and L.W. Miller (1967). Theory of scheduling. eng. Addison­
Wesley Publishing Company, 294 s.
Garey, M. R., D. S. Johnson, and Ravi Sethi (1976). “The Complexity of Flowshop and
Jobshop Scheduling”. In: Mathematics of Operations Research 1.2, pp. 117–129. doi:
10.1287/moor.1.2.117. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1287/moor.1.2.117. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1287/moor.1.2.117.
Demir, Yunus and S. Kürşat Işleyen (2013). “Evaluation of mathematical models for flexi­
ble job­shop scheduling problems”. eng. In: Applied Mathematical Modelling 37.3, pp. 977–
988. issn: 18728480, 0307904x. doi: 10.1016/j.apm.2012.03.020.
Mehdi, Gaham et al. (2016). “Meta­heuristics approaches for the flexible job shop schedul­
ing problem”. eng. In: Operations Research/ Computer Science Interfaces Series 60,
pp. 285–314. issn: 1387666x. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-23350-5_13.
Brandimarte, P. (1993). “Routing and scheduling in a flexible job shop by tabu search”.
eng. In: Annals of Operations Research 41.1­4, pp. 157–183. issn: 15729338, 02545330.
doi: 10.1007/BF02023073.
Zhou, Gang et al. (2012). “An effective artificial bee colony algorithm for multi­objective
flexible job­shop scheduling problem”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (in­
cluding Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinfor­
matics) 6839. Ed. by De­Shuang Huang et al., pp. 1–8. issn: 16113349, 03029743. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-25944-9_1.
Li, Xinyu and Liang Gao (2020). “Review for Flexible Job Shop Scheduling”. eng. In: Ef­
fective Methods for Integrated Process Planning and Scheduling, pp. 17–45. doi: 10.
1007/978-3-662-55305-3_2.
Pacino, Dario (2021). Lecture notes in 42137 Optimization using metaheuristics: Improv­
ing solutions.
Julia (2021). The Julia Programming Language. url: https : / / julialang . org/ (visited on
12/20/2021).
Optimization, Gurobi (2021). Gurobi Optimizer. url: https://www.gurobi.com/products/
gurobi-optimizer/ (visited on 12/20/2021).
JuMP (2021). JuMP. url: https://jump.dev/ (visited on 12/20/2021).
Behnke, D. and Martin Josef Geiger (2012). “Test Instances for the Flexible Job Shop
Scheduling Problem with Work Centers”. In: Arbeitspapier.
64
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
==PAGE:73==
A
Collected Test Results
As a result of the many tests that have been executed for the SCSP model and heuristic
solution methods a range of data has been gathered. In this appendix, we therefore
present some of the tables that would make for a less enjoyable reading of chapter 4.
The first three tables include the computational data points achieved through executing
tests using the three heuristic solution methods on the SCSP test instances. The data
points in tables A.1, A.4 and A.5 are those used in fig. 4.1­4.3.
Table A.1: Best candidate solution objective values found using heuristics on small SCSP
test instances
1
2
3
LS
ILS
TS
LS
ILS
TS
LS
ILS
TS
# 1
1025
1025
1025
785
785
785
# 2
1115
1115
1115
710
655
710
605
605
605
# 3
2435
2435
2435
1525
1525
1485
1325
1325
1325
The second set of tables include the data points of executing the TS heuristic with its three
parameter setup given in table 4.1, and the content of tables A.2, A.6 and A.7 are used in
the plots of fig. 4.4­4.6.
Table A.2: Best candidate solution objective values computed using the TS heuristic for
small instances of the SCSP according to the number of shelf cranes in the HCS system
1
2
3
TS25
TS50
TS100
TS25
TS50
TS100
TS25
TS50
TS100
# 1
1025
1025
1025
785
785
785
# 2
1115
1115
1115
710
710
710
605
605
605
# 3
2425
2435
2425
1485
1485
1485
1325
1325
1325
The final set of tables A.3, A.8 and A.9 presents the data points achieved upon executing
the ILS heuristic with its three parameter setups on the SCSP test instances. These data
points are the ones used in fig. 4.7­4.9.
Table A.3: Best candidate solution objective values computed using the ILS heuristic for
small instances of the SCSP according to the number of shelf cranes in the HCS system
1
2
3
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
# 1
1025
1025
1025
785
785
785
# 2
1115
1115
1115
650
655
680
605
605
605
# 3
2435
2435
2435
1525
1525
1485
1325
1325
1325
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
65
==PAGE:74==
Table A.4: Best candidate solution objective values found using heuristics on medium SCSP test instances
1
2
3
4
5
LS
ILS
TS
LS
ILS
TS
LS
ILS
TS
LS
ILS
TS
LS
ILS
TS
# 4
6020
6020
5930
4080
3755
3805
3865
3735
3665
3955
3560
3955
# 5
4700
4700
4700
2870
2870
2870
2365
2145
2500
2535
1865
2255
# 6
7625
7625
7625
5085
4695
5275
4775
4385
4695
4795
4075
4425
# 7
4575
4045
4625
4440
3820
4105
4310
3785
4090
4100
4100
4140
# 8
6035
5130
6095
5875
4815
5695
4265
3455
3890
3850
3155
3780
# 9
7830
7410
7280
6650
6360
6735
6665
6345
6660
7310
5950
6920
Table A.5: Best candidate solution objective values found using heuristics on large SCSP test instances
2
3
4
5
6
LS
ILS
TS
LS
ILS
TS
LS
ILS
TS
LS
ILS
TS
LS
ILS
TS
# 10
5145
5030
5400
5790
3955
5590
4920
3715
5060
5105
3965
4615
5540
3675
4200
# 11
18450
17455
17320
16300
15485
15100
16425
16415
16655
16465
15880
15210
15335
15335
15305
# 12
17690
17465
17985
14400
13805
13810
14950
14120
14385
13650
13245
13585
15430
14020
13810
# 13
5165
4210
4370
6055
4005
4410
4755
3240
4370
3860
3005
3670
# 14
7950
6700
8555
7515
6275
7285
6680
6035
6565
7835
6720
6845
# 15
16815
16155
16580
15535
15615
15915
17285
16900
16465
16670
16785
16540
==PAGE:75==
Table A.6: Best candidate solution objective values computed using the TS heuristic for medium instances of the SCSP according to the number
of shelf cranes in the HCS system
1
2
3
4
5
TS25
T50
TS100
TS25
T50
TS100
TS25
T50
TS100
TS25
T50
TS100
TS25
T50
TS100
# 4
5930
5930
5930
3805
3805
3805
3665
3665
3665
3955
3955
3955
# 5
4700
4700
4700
2870
2870
2870
2500
2500
2500
2400
2255
2255
# 6
7625
7625
7625
5180
5275
5275
4695
4695
4695
4325
4425
4425
# 7
4625
4625
4625
4205
4105
4105
4090
4090
4090
4140
4140
4140
# 8
6110
6095
6095
5965
5695
5695
3895
3890
3890
3605
3780
3780
# 9
7925
7280
7280
6735
6735
6735
6660
6660
6660
6920
6920
6920
Table A.7: Best candidate solution objective values computed using the TS heuristic for large instances of the SCSP according to the number
of shelf cranes in the HCS system
2
3
4
5
6
TS25
T50
TS100
TS25
T50
TS100
TS25
T50
TS100
TS25
T50
TS100
TS25
T50
TS100
# 10
5400
5400
5400
5400
5590
5590
5035
5060
5060
4615
4615
4615
4200
4200
4200
# 11
17385
17320
17320
15510
15100
16075
16455
16655
17030
15230
15210
15795
14690
15305
15550
# 12
17985
17985
17985
13910
13810
13810
14360
14385
14385
13350
13585
13585
13440
13810
14565
# 13
5105
4370
4370
5265
4410
4410
5010
4370
4425
3670
3670
3670
# 14
8160
8555
8555
7180
7285
7210
6565
6565
6565
7530
6845
6845
# 15
15840
16580
16580
16060
15915
15915
15385
16465
17245
16625
16540
16840
==PAGE:76==
Table A.8: Best candidate solution objective values computed using the ILS heuristic for medium instances of the SCSP according to the number
of shelf cranes in the HCS system
1
2
3
4
5
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
# 4
6020
6020
6020
3870
3755
3725
3495
3735
3865
3510
3560
3545
# 5
4700
4700
4700
2870
2870
2870
2060
2145
2180
1805
1865
1880
# 6
7625
7625
7625
4735
4695
4765
4175
4385
4655
4245
4075
4350
# 7
3970
4045
4150
3695
3820
3755
3845
3785
3940
3815
4100
3565
# 8
5340
5130
5765
5295
4815
5050
3390
3455
3650
2915
3155
3260
# 9
7075
7410
7485
6395
6360
6470
6030
6345
6350
6440
5950
6315
Table A.9: Best candidate solution objective values computed using the ILS heuristic for large instances of the SCSP according to the number
of shelf cranes in the HCS system
2
3
4
5
6
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
ILS2
ILS3
ILS4
# 10
5125
5030
5145
3785
3955
4220
3935
3715
3825
3795
3965
3870
3920
3675
4180
# 11
16065
17455
16225
15810
15485
15100
15985
16415
16155
15905
15880
15465
15120
15335
15135
# 12
17425
17465
17240
13130
13805
13430
14375
14120
13575
13500
13245
13090
14775
14020
14285
# 13
4165
4210
3960
3315
4005
3675
3225
3240
3740
3160
3005
3420
# 14
6435
6700
7460
6365
6275
6295
6215
6035
6195
5875
6720
6260
# 15
15260
16155
16180
15515
15615
15535
16275
16900
15455
16670
16785
16670
==PAGE:77==
Hybrid Container Storage Optimization
69
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
