==PAGE:1==
M.Sc.Eng. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
An Automatised Workflow to Study
Mechanistic Indicators for Driver Gene
Prediction with Moonlight
Astrid Brix Saksager (s164491)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Department of Health Technology
Section of Bioinformatics
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
Email: healthtech-info@dtu.dk EAN no. 5798000427822
==PAGE:3==
An Automatized Workflow to Study
Mechanistic Indicators for Driver Gene
Prediction with Moonlight
Project type:
Master’s thesis
ECTS points:
30
Project period:
02.08.21 - 02.01.22
Author:
Astrid Brix Saksager
s164491
Education:
Bioinformatics and Systems Biology (MSc)
Place of Education:
Technical University of Denmark
Department:
Department of Health Technology
Section & Group:
DTU Bioinformatics - Cancer Systems Biology
Supervisors:
Elena Papaleo,
Associate Professor, DTU Health Technology
Mona Nourbakhsh,
phd student, DTU Health Technology
Nikola Tom,
Post Doc, DTU Health Technology
January 2, 2022
Astrid Brix Saksager
Date
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, a great thanks to my supervisor Elena Papaleo for always being
encouraging and available for questions and guidance. I’d like to extend my thanks to
my co-supervisor Mona Nourbakhsh, who could always able to create a clear focus and
make the project seem more manageable through her calmness. Many thanks to my
second co-supervisor Nikola Tom for his always sharp observations and perspectives on
my work. Further, I wish to thank the entire Cancer Systems Biology group on DTU
and the Danish Cancer Society Research Center for making me feel very welcome and
included.
I would like to extent my gratitude to my family, who has supported me and helped
me with everything from a bit of extra shopping to taking care of my horse in times of
pressure. A special thank you to my father, who conscientious spent a good part of his
Christmas holidays on reading and correcting my thesis. Finally a thanks to my friends
and roommates, who have made my time as a student great fun, and when the days got
long the bag-in-box-committee had my back.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Prediction of tumor suppressors and oncogenes, also called driver genes, is an essential
step in understanding cancer development and discovering potential novel treatments.
Moonlight is a R package used to predict driver genes by analysing differentially ex-
pressed genes in tumor cells. It is necessary to incorporate supporting evidence, mecha-
nistic indicators, of these predictions to minimise the number of false positives. Such a
mechanistic indicator could be a driver mutation in the gene or its regulatory region.
The aim of the project is to automatise this analysis by adding a new function to
the R package, that will present the results in a clear and understandable way, while
maintaining the user-friendly structure of Moonlight. The function presented in this
project can distinguish driver and passenger mutations through an implementation of
the predictor CScape-somatic. The input data is in the format used by The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA).
A pilot project investigating basal-like breast cancer was carried out in order to test and
demonstrate the new functionalities of Moonlight. 366 driver genes were predicted by
Moonlight, and 70 oncogenes and 31 tumor suppressors contained at least one driver
mutation. It was concluded that other layers of mechanistic indicators must be imple-
mented in Moonlight in order to find supporting evidence for all driver genes.
The code is available at: https://github.com/ELELAB/mutations_basal_like
==PAGE:6==
Resumé
For at kunne forstå hvordan cancer udvikler sig og dermed opdage potentielle nye behan-
dlingsmuligheder, er det vigtigt at kunne identificere tumorsupressorgener og onkogener
(drivende gener).
Moonlight er en R-pakke, som benyttes til at søge efter drivende
gener ved at analysere differentielt udtrykte gener i kræftceller. I denne forbindelse er
det nødvendigt at opnå yderligere evidens for de fundne drivende gener ved at benytte
mekanistiske indikatorer, med henblik på at undgå falske positiver. En sådan mekanis-
tisk indikator kunne være en drivende mutation i genet eller dets regulatoriske område.
Formålet med projektet er at automatisere denne analyse ved at tilføje en ny funktion
til R-pakken, som præsenterer resultaterne på en klar og forståelig måde, og samtidig
bibeholder Moonlights brugervenlige struktur. Funktionen, der er udviklet i dette pro-
jekt, kan skelne mellem drivende mutationer og passager-mutationer gennem en im-
plementering af programmet CScape-somatic. Data for input er i samme format som
benyttet af The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).
Den nye funktionalitet i Moonlight blev undersøgt og testet i et pilotprojekt vedrørende
”basal-like” brystkræft. Moonlight fandt 366 drivende gener, heraf indeholdt 70 onko-
gener og 31 tumorsupressorgener mindst én drivende mutation. Det kan konkluderes, at
det er vigtigt at implementere lag med mekanistiske indikatorer i Moonlight for at opnå
yderligere evidens for alle drivende gener.
Koden er tilgængelig på https://github.com/ELELAB/mutations_basal_like
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
BC
Breast Cancer
BP
Biological Processs
BRCA 1
Breast Cancer type 1 susceptibility protein
CADD
Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion
CHASM
Cancer-specific High-throughput Annotation of Somatic Mutations
CNV
Copy-number variant
COSMIC
Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer
CPTAC
Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium
DEA
Differentially Expression Analysis
DEG
Differentially Expressed Genes
DMA
Driver mutation analysis
DNA
Deoxyribonukleinsyre
DNP
Di-nucleotide polymorphism
DRDG
Dual-role driver genes
ENCODE
Encyclopedia of DNA Elements
ER
Estrogen Receptor
FEA
Functional enrichment analysis
GNOMAD
Genome Aggregation Database
GRN
Gene Regulatory Network Analysis
HER2
Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
IGR
Intronic Region
Indel
Insertion-deletion
LumA
Luminal A
LumB
Luminal B
MAF
Mutation Annotation Format
MB
Mutational Burden
mRNA
messenger Ribonucleic Acid
MuSiC
Mutational Significance in Cancer
OCG
Oncogene
ONP
Oligo-nucleotide polymorphism
PAM
Prediction analysis of Microarray
PredCID
Predictor for Cancer driver frameshift InDels
SIFT
Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant
SNP
Single Nucleotide Polymorphism
SNV
Single Nucleotide Variant
==PAGE:8==
vi
Abbreviations
TCGA
The Cancer Genome Atlas
TNBC
Triple-negative breast cancer
TNP
Tri-nucleotide polymorphism
TRRUST
Transcriptional Regulatory Relationships Unraveled by
Sentence-based Text mining
TSG
Tumor Suppressor
TSS
Translation Start Site
URA
Upstream Regulatory analysis
USCS
University of California, Santa Cruz
UV
Ultra Violet
VCF
Variant Call Format
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Acknowledgements
ii
Abstract
iii
Resumé
iv
Abbreviations
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Genetic and Epigentic Alterations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2.1
Genetic alterations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.2
Epigenetic alterations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Driver Genes and their Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.1
Driver genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.2
Prediction of driver genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.3
Predicting oncogenes and tumor-suppressors . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.4
Moonlight in practice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3.5
CScape-somatic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.4
COSMIC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5
The Cancer Genome Atlas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.6
Basal-Like Breast Cancer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.7
Project Aims
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Methods
15
2.1
Development of the Driver Mutation Analysis Function . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.1
Mutation scoring with Cscape-somatic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.2
Level of consequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.1.3
Regulatory elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.1.4
External packages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.1.5
Transcription factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2
Pilot Project: Basal-Like Breast Cancer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.1
Data collection and preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.2
Mutation analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Results & Discussion
26
3.1
The Driver Mutation Analysis Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.1
Required input format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.2
Dataflow: What happens inside the function . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
3.1.3
Output of the function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.4
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.5
Considerations about the MAF as input . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Verification of Mutation as Mechanistic Driver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.1
Selecting a prediction tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.2
Implementing a prediction tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Discussion of CScape-Somatic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4
Perspective on Moonlight
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.5
Case study: Basal-like breast cancer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.5.1
Mutation Analysis Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.5.2
Exploring the selected driver genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Perspectives
46
4.1
Future Work with Variants and the DMA()
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Other Layers of Evidence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Experimental Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Conclusion
49
A
Mutect2 Specifications
50
B
Moonlight Scoring
51
C
Level of consequence
53
D
DMA: Pseudo code
55
E
List of Outliers
56
F
Maftool Visualisations
57
G
Additional Plots
60
H
Driver Mutated Genes
62
I
TRRUST data on driver genes
64
Bibliography
66
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Cancer
Cancer is a well-known and wide-spread disease, and can in many cases lead to prema-
ture death. In 2020 it is estimated that 19 million people were diagnosed with cancer
and almost 10 million people died because of cancer [1]. It is today in many (especially
developed) countries the number one cause of premature deaths. Cancer is not a single
disease, it is a term for a whole class of diseases, which all cause a group of cells to
grow uninhibited without purpose. This group of cells is termed the tumor and the cell
type and place in the body is the cancer type, e.g. a type of breast cancer is called
ductual carcinoma, which means that the cancer is placed in the milk ducts origin in
the ephilial cells [2]. Tumors are not necessarily cancerous, sometimes tumors do not
grow and spread or only do it very slowly, then they are benign [3]. Cancerous tumor
are malignant, these cells do not only grow uninhibited, they can also break away from
their original tissue and spread throughout the body - the tumor metastasis. Metastasis
will generally result in a poorer prognosis for the patient.
There is today a wide range of different types of treatments, often tailored to the indi-
vidual cancer type and patient. Treatments are for instance chemotherapy, radiation,
surgery or immunotherapy, or usually a combination of several methods. A growing
field of study is defining the molecular intrinsic subtypes of cancer. When the specific
traits are uncovered treatment can be individualised and specific molecular targets can
be selected. In the end this can improve patient prognosis and quality of life. [4]
The cause of cancer is still not fully understood, but a clear picture of risk factors are by
now established. Both hereditary and environmental factors, such as smoking, alcohol
consumption, obesity, UV radiation and infections are important. The changes inside
the cells caused by these factors are highly individual and there is rarely a single cause
of cancer. Even though all tumors are unique, it has been found that all cancers do
show some of the same traits. These are called the hallmarks of cancer [5]. Hanahan
and Weinberg have in two papers in 2000 and 2011 condensed the many traits of cancer
into ten hallmarks, see Figure 1.1. These hallmarks are often used to assess the impact
of genetic, molecular or cellular changes seen in cells in relation to cancer.
1.2
Genetic and Epigentic Alterations
In this section the different types of alterations both within and beyond the genome will
be presented. A short description of the classifications, nomenclature and the alterations
role in cancer is included.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: The 10 hallmarks of cancer presented by Hanahan and Weinberg 2011
[5].The figure is modified with Biorender.com
1.2.1
Genetic alterations
Genetic alterations is a term used to cover the many different types and sizes of mu-
tations. The term mutation describes a change in a genome compared to a reference
genome that sets a standard for the genome. This term is increasingly replaced with
the term variant, especially in oncology. Both terms are, however, interchangeable and
both will be used in this thesis. One type of mutation is the single nucleotide variant
(SNV), a change of one nucleotide to another. Sometimes the term single nucleotide poly-
morphism is used instead. Polymorphisms are by convention considered variants which
are rare, but recurring above a certain threshold in a population (generally above 1%).
This thesis will use SNV as a general term, and the term SNPs when polymorphisms
are named so in databases or by tools, even if they are not compared to a background
population. Other variants are insertions and deletions of one or more nucleotides in
the genome, see Figure 1.2.
The largest mutations are called structural variants, when big parts of chromosomes are
deleted, inserted, inverted or translocationed from one chromosome to anther. Some-
times a chunk of the chromosome is repeated one or several time. These duplications
can vary, and are referred to as copy-number variations [6]. In general structural vari-
ants are defined as having a size of 1 kb or more. The largest of these variants are called
chromosomal abnormalities. These are seen in e.g. Downs syndrome, which is a result of
an extra copy of chromosome 21 [7]. See Figure 1.2. This project will not explore these
structural variants. Instead the focus will be on the smaller types of mutations; the
SNVs and small deletions and insertions - referred to as indels. Because these mutations
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Genetic and Epigentic Alterations
3
Figure 1.2:
A schematic illustration of structural variants (right) and the smaller
variants SNVs and indels (left). For SNVs and indels the effect in on protein level is
exhibited. Created with Biorender.com
are small they will be situated within very specific regions of the genome, compared to
structural variants, which can stretch across many genes and regions.
Mutations can be named according to their position and, if they are in a coding region,
their effect.
Therefore, it is necessary to distinguish between the coding region and
the non-coding region. The coding region is the part of the DNA which is translated
to protein, while the non-coding is the remaining genome. The latter could represent
for instance regulatory regions, such as promoters, enhancers or silencers placed up- or
downstream of the genes. It could also be intronic regions which are transcribed, but
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
spliced out before translation into protein. The genomic position is then the class of the
non-coding variant. If variants are found in a coding region they are classified according
to their effect on the protein. For instance, a SNV in a coding region could change an
amino acid to a stop-codon, thereby altering the protein. These mutations are called
nonsense variants, see table 1.1 for an overview.
Table 1.1: An overview of different types of mutations.
*Frameshift and In-frame
mutations must be at least partly in the coding region.
Variant Classification
Biological Effect
Genomic Position
Variant Type
Missense
A substitution that changes the amino acid
Coding
SNV
Nonsense
A codon turns into a stop-codon
Coding
SNV/Indel
Nonstop
A stop-codon is lost
Coding
SNV/Indel
Silent
A substitution that does not change the amino acid
Coding
SNV
In-frame
An insertion or deletion that does not change the reading frame
Coding*
Indel
Frameshift
Insertion or deletion changing the reading frame of the gene
Coding*
Indel
Inversion
A stretch of DNA is inverted
Non-Coding & Coding
-
Duplication
DNA is abnormally copied
Non-Coding & Coding
-
Translocation
Part of the chromosome is transferred to another chromosome
Non-Coding & Coding
-
Finally, variants are categorised as either germline variants or somatic variants depend-
ing on which cell line they are seen in.A somatic cell is a cell specialising in a part of the
body, for instance a liver cell. Variants in these cells will arise during a persons lifetime.
Variants in the germline cells, sperm and egg cells, are mostly inherited from persons
parents. The germline variants are therefore found in all cells throughout the body.
Most variants in both germline and somatic cells are generally found to be harmless, but
sometime even small variants trigger larger changes in the cell, ultimately causing cancer
[8]. It is easy to imagine how alterations in the coding region of the genome can affect
protein structure and/or function, thereby causing damage to the balance in the cell and
possibly contribute to cancer. The effect is less intuitive for non-coding variants, but
they can, however, in a number of ways contribute to cancer. For example, a mutation
in the promoter region could alter the binding ability of a transcription factor. The
poorer it binds, the less it transcribes and the amount of protein falls, which in return
can tip the balance in the cell towards oncogenic behaviour [9, 10]. The coding region
is only approximately 2% of the genome and it is therefore essential also to consider
non-coding areas in the investigation of oncogenic mutations. [11]
1.2.2
Epigenetic alterations
Epigenetics controls the differentiation of cells and is the reason that cells do not express
the same phenotype, even though the same genetic material is available to all somatic
cells. One type of epigenetic mechanisms is the methylation of DNA. The methyl groups
can be added to cytosine and adenine. The binding abilities of proteins changes with
DNA methylation. For instance, high methylation in a promoter region can lead to
silencing of genes, because the transcription factor capacity to bind is lessened [12]. It
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Driver Genes and their Prediction
5
has been shown in multiple studies that differential DNA methylation is connected to
cancer development [13].
Another epigenetic alteration which can affect cancer development is the change of chro-
matin accessibility. Any given genomic area will a given fraction of the time be occupied
by nucleosomes. The density of these nucleosomes will determine the accessibility of the
chromatin for proteins, e.g. transcription factors [14].
1.3
Driver Genes and their Prediction
1.3.1
Driver genes
As alterations stack up in the genome, the changes can eventually be enough to drive
the carcinogenesis. The specific alterations in the genome or epi-genome will vary from
patient to patient. However, some genes are often altered and play major biological
roles in progressing the cancer forward. These genes can be the same across all can-
cers, but more often they vary with the cancer type or even subtype. A gene which is
seen highly mutated across most cancers is for example TP53. Genes which drive the
tumor progression forward are called driver genes. Driver genes can be categorised as
either oncogenes (OCG) or tumor suppressors (TSG) [8]. An oncogene is a gene which,
when activated by alteration, increases the selective growth advantage of the cell. A
tumor suppressor is a gene which, when inactivated by alteration, increases the selective
growth advantage of the cell in which it resides. An oncogene is often associated with a
gain-of-function alterations, which are usually dominant mutations. On the other hand
a tumor-suppressor regularly have recessive loss-of-function mutations [8, 15].
Some genes can act as either OCG or TSG depending on the biological context. They
are dual role driver genes and are thought to be key players in the differentiation of
cancer subtypes. A study by Shen et al. (2018) showed that the mutational pattern
of dual-role driver genes resembled oncogenes, while they had expression patterns as
tumor-suppressors [16, 15].
Driver genes are highly relevant to identify because they can explain how the cancer
has emerged. Once, this is uncovered it can be decided which countermeasures there
can be taken against the cancer. These driver genes are investigated as drug targets.
Alternatively they can potentially be used as biomarkers to distinguish subtypes, which
will increase the precision of the prognosis for the patients. [4]
1.3.2
Prediction of driver genes
An expanding field withing cancer and bioinformatics is the prediction of driver genes.
It is important to realise that there is not a single definition of driver genes which fits
all predictors. In this project the definition will be as described in Section 1.3.1.
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
A large number of predictors exist with many approaches and focal points. These pre-
dictors can be sub-grouped in a multitude of ways. It could be based on the features
they utilise, the output they provide, the type of method or algorithm, or the biological
content they present [17, 18]. One of the earliest approaches, still widely used today,
focuses on predicting driver and passenger mutations. The general idea is that many
mutations in cancer do neither directly nor indirectly give any growth advantages to the
cell. These mutations acts as passenger mutations. Some mutations do have an impact
on cancer progression. These are driver mutations. [8]
A number of different methods has been developed to identify driver and passenger
mutations. The first methods implemented utilised mutational frequency; some used
statistics and others used machine learning.
The statistical approach compared fre-
quency of mutations in a cancer cohort to background mutation rates and from this
estimated driver mutations, e.g. MuSiC [19]. This approach has expanded into machine
learning models, incorporating many other types of features, including but not limited
to, considerations of the gene network like HotNet2 or VarWalker [20, 21] or the differ-
ent clustering and patterns of mutations as seen in OncoDriverClustL [22]. Common for
the above-mentioned tools is that they cannot predict driver mutations in non-coding
regions.
Another method to distinguish driver and passenger mutations focuses on the structural
and functional impact of a mutation in a coding region. These types of tools, for instance
SIFT, MutPred, PolyPhen and Chasm, usually incorporate information about protein
sequence homology or structure and functional domains of the protein [23, 24, 25, 26].
Because the field of driver gene prediction started in and is so closely related to driver
mutations, there is not necessarily a clear distinction between the two concepts. Ac-
cording to some definitions a driver gene cannot exist if it does not have any driver
mutations. Of course the next question would then be: how many mutations are needed
for the gene to be a driver? This is an essential question, because there are vast differ-
ences between cancers. Some cancers, often pediatric malignancies like leukemia, have a
very low mutational burden (MB), while others, like melanoma, have much higher MB
[27].
Other predictors do not (solely) use mutations as a starting point for driver gene pre-
diction. This third approach relies on multi-omics data. This is a group of tools with
far more diverse methods, which are not easily described collectively. Several of these
tools start by investigating the gene expression levels, because changes here will be a
reflection of some of the changes in the genome or epi-genome. Two predictors which
use this are DriverNet and Moonlight [28, 16]. Both of these tools incorporate networks
of gene-interactions and identifies driver genes. Other data such as methylation, copy
number variation or clinical data can also be considered. A new predictor, based on
multi-omics, called CScape was presented in 2017. Cscape predicts driver mutations,
not genes. Some argue that if a driver gene does not contain any driver mutations, it
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Driver Genes and their Prediction
7
should be named differently in order to avoid confusion. Vogelstein et al. suggested in
2013 to denote such genes epi-driver genes and otherwise mut-driver genes [8]. These
terms will, however, not be used in this project.
It is of course important to understand how well a given driver prediction performs. A
study conducted by Chen et al. (2020) [29] compared 31 different driver prediction meth-
ods, including their specificity and sensitivity. They concluded that the top performers
had one thing in common: They were all designed or trained to be cancer-specific. Very
few others reviews have compared performance between these predictors. It is therefore
not easy to conclude which tools are the state of the art in this field.
1.3.3
Predicting oncogenes and tumor-suppressors
The predictors of driver gene can be also categorised according to their ability to predict
the type of driver gene, oncogenes and tumor-suppressors. Only a few predictors can
actually do this, for example 20/20+, LOTUS, GUST and Moonlight [30, 31, 32, 16].
Again there is a variety of concepts at play in the different predictors. This section is
written to present a few of the methods used in the field.
The 20/20 (+) method was introduced by Vogelstein et al. in 2013 [8] and extended by
Tokheim et al. (2016) [30]. The general idea is based on the notion that oncogenes will
mutate at the same amino acid position recurrently, while tumor suppressor mutations
are mostly protein-truncating. An oncogene will then be classified when >20% of the
mutations are missense at a recurrent position, and when >20% are inactivating muta-
tions the gene is a tumor suppressor.
GUST is one of the tools which have a frequentist approach. It is focused on protein
coding somatic mutations. GUST finds significantly mutated genes and then classifies
the genes by the principle that oncogenes tend to be gain-of-function and tumor sup-
pressors tend to be loss-of-function. So, the gene is an oncogene when there is positive
selection of missense mutations, and a tumor suppressor when there is sign of negative
selection of protein-truncating mutations [32].
Similar for the two, 20/20(+) and GUST, is that they both base their divisions on the
type of mutation occurring in the gene. LOTUS has a different method. LOTUS is
a machine-learning approach, which combines mutational frequency, functional impact
and pathway-based information. It then distinguishes between OCGs and TSGs based
on known driver genes in the particular type of cancer. LOTUS also considers driver
genes known from other types of cancer based on cancer similarity [31].
Moonlight is a quite distinct predictor in several areas. The main difference from most
of the other tools is that it can predict driver genes completely without mutational
data. The prediction is based on gene expression levels, the genes’ network and the
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
biological processes the genes are connected to. The latter is an especially important
part, as specific biological processes becomes highlighted and these can be essential in
understanding the cancer progression. This way of prediction will help to describe the
biological mechanisms underlying the cancer and also to identify the individual genes’
role in its progression. By evaluating each gene’s and it’s gene network association with
different biological processes and reference this with the expression level, Moonlight can
predict driver gene type: oncogene or tumor-suppressor. These predictions are context
specific.
This means that the differential expression patterns seen between types or
subtypes of cancer will be reflected to different driver annotations for possibly the same
gene. In this way Moonlight predicts genes with a dual driver role across cancers.
1.3.4
Moonlight in practice
In this section MoonlightR and some of its main functions will be described. The finer
details on how exactly some of the calculations are done can be seen in Appendix B.
Moonlight is an R package, published in 2020 on R/Bioconductor [16]. Moonlight is
designed to predict driver genes based on gene expression levels compared across normal
and tumor samples. The general structure of the package is shown in Figure 1.3.
As a prerequisite to MoonlightR, a cohort of patients with cancer is chosen and a dif-
ferentially expressed analysis (DEA) is run. This analysis is not an integrated part of
Moonlight, but there are many other packages specialised to do this type of analysis. In
the paper by Colaprico et al. (2020) the TCGAbiolinks is suggested with the function
TCGAnalyze_DEA and in Nourbakhsh 2020 the limma package was used [33, 34, 35, 16].
Once the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) are established with log2 fold change
(logFC) the first part of Moonlight can begin. The functional enrichment analysis is
based on a Fishers exact test and a predetermined list of genes belonging to each biolog-
ical process (BP) 1. The function calculates the probability of each BP to be enriched
considering the number of DEGs which are connected to the BP. Further, a Moonlight
process z-score is calculated for each BP. A process is considered significantly enriched
when the |moonlight process z-score| ≤1 and FDR-score ≥0.01 [16]. See Appendix B,
Figure B.1
In order to dive deeper into the data the user can continue the exploration with the gene
regulatory network analysis (GRN). This function considers the network of the genes
that the DEGs are a part of. It calculates the mutual information (MI) between all the
genes from the original tumor samples and all the DEGs. For each DEG a network of
connected genes is produced from the MI values. It is essential to understand that MI
is not a measure of correlation, the connected gene do therefore not necessarily have
the same direction of expression. For each gene the significantly connected genes are
1As of 2021 these lists are under revision
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Driver Genes and their Prediction
9
extracted from this analysis.
The next step has two modes: A machine-learning approach and an expert-based ap-
proach.
Both use the gene network produced from GRN. The upstream regulatory
analysis will in both cases calculate a moonlight gene z-score for each DEG in each bio-
logical process, see Appendix B. The higher the gene z-score score [0 : ∞[ the more the
genes connected to the gene in question are in accordance with effect on the biological
process. For instance, two connected genes could be respectively up and down regulated.
If the upregulated gene has an increasing effect on proliferation, and the downregulated
gene has a negative effect on proliferation, the moonlight process z-score will increase
for the gene in proliferation.
The final function is the Pattern Recognition Analysis (PRA). This function will identify
the oncogenes and tumor-suppressors. Here two biological processes with opposite effect
on cancer are selected, for instance Proliferation and Apoptosis. Then all the genes’
moonlight gene z-scores for the two processes are evaluated. If a gene has a moonlight
score above one in, e.g. proliferation, and a score below minus one in apoptosis, the
gene will be classified as an oncogene. Vice versa for a tumor suppressor.
Figure 1.3: The Moonlight pipeline. [Modified from Coloprico et al. (2020) [16]]
Moonlight is an eﬀicient tool to predict driver genes. However, as is also stated in [16],
the driver genes are not truly considered drivers until a second layer of evidence could
be annotated to the gene. This second layer of evidence should help to understand what
the underlying reasons for the particular driver pattern seen in the cancer type. The
evidence used is chromatin accessibility, copy number variations, DNA methylation and
mutations. These underlying mechanisms, genetic or epigentic, are referred to as Mech-
anistic Indicators, see Figure 1.4. The investigation of mechanistic indicators are not
yet fully incorporated and automated within the MoonlightR package, but is for now up
to the user to consider.
In a study by M. Nourbakhsh [34] the moonlight pipeline was run on expression data from
breast cancer. More than 2500 driver genes was found for the basal-like subtype alone.
This result shows the magnitude of work, which will follow after the end of the pipeline.
It will not be possible to curate each gene individually. By adding functionalities to
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Introduction
Figure 1.4: Moonlights driver gene discovery and their mechanistic indicators. Illus-
tration from Colaprico et al. (2020) [16].
the package, the analysis of mechanistic indicators could be streamlined and run for all
driver genes and help prioritise further investigations on the driver genes.
1.3.5
CScape-somatic
In this thesis CScape-somatic will be incorporated into MoonlightR. It will therefore be
presented here. CScape-somatic is a driver mutation predictor published by Rogers et
al. in (2020) [36].
Through integrative single kernel learning mutations likelihoods of being cancer driver
mutations are quantified and given a confidence level. First a forward feature selection is
used to minimise the number of features to train on. Then the best model is chosen from
a leave-one-chromosome-out cross-validation principle. The original features represented
a wide base of biological data, ranging from genetics and epi-genetics to networks and
gene expression. After the feature selection the models were evaluated on their balanced
accuracy between drivers and passenger mutations and gradient boosting were applied.
The method was supervised learning utilising data from COSMIC database, see Section
1.4. Here pathogenic somatic mutations with a recurrence of eight for non-coding and
seven for coding, were used as true positives. The rare somatic variants with a recurrence
of one are considered the negatives. The article is therefore based on the assumption
that recurrent somatic SNPs 2, restricted to cancer samples in general, are enriched for
driver mutations, while rare somatic SNPs are more likely to be passengers. However,
it should be taken into account that this will not be true in all cases.
The forward selection resulted in a non-coding model five with feature groups: Conserva-
tion, local mutation frequency, distance from gene features and two related to sequence:
GC content and sequence uniqueness. The resulting model for the coding regions used
all of the feature groups mentioned for the non-coding model and two additional features:
The functional elements and the spectrum groups 3.
2CScape-somatic uses SNPs instead of SNVs
3Spectrum features capture information about disruption surrounding a mutation in the sequence
==PAGE:21==
1.4 COSMIC
11
Because the distribution across all genomic regions are not equal between drivers and
passengers, rare somatic variants are only included when they are within a window of
10,000 bases of highly recurrent variant in the coding region, and 1000 bases in the non-
coding region. In the paper by Rogers et al. (2020) it is shown that CScape-somatic
outperfoms CADD and FunSeq2 [36].
The program scores each mutation with a number between zero and one, where one
is highly likely a driver mutation and zero a passenger. The thresholds suggested by
Rogers can be seen in Table 1.2.
Table 1.2: CScape-somatic scores’ threshold for classifying a driver mutation.
Score
Annotation
Confidence
>0.89 [Coding]
>0.7 [Non-coding]
Driver
High Confidence
>0.5
Driver
Low Confidence
<0.5
Passenger
Neutral
1.4
COSMIC
In order to increase the understanding of cancer several initiatives have been taken to
systematically compile data from cancer. Such an initiative is COSMIC: The Catalogue
Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer, which is the worlds largest and most comprehensive
source for curated and peer-reviewed somatic information [37].
The database contains a curated catalogue of consensus mutations and a catalogue of
consensus genes. The consensus mutations have been collected in an effort to identify
driver mutations for different types of cancers in the coding region. For these selected
mutations metrics such as ClinVar significance and variant frequencies in normal popu-
lations with gnomAD is used. The gene consensus catalogue is the collection of driver
genes and their implication in cancer. They have been divided into to two groups, Tier
1 and Tier 2. The former have a high level of evidence for their impact on cancer and al-
terations which change the activity promoting oncogenic behaviour of the gene product.
Tier 2 genes also have strong indications for their role in cancer, but with less available
evidence. Where possible the genes have been connected to the hallmarks of cancer.
Both of these catalogues are continuously updated. [37]
1.5
The Cancer Genome Atlas
Another initiative for collaboration across studies of cancer is The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) [38].
This is a large project started in 2006 and with over 20,000 samples
collected from cancer patients it is one of the largest and most widely used databases
within cancer research. This database collects data from cancer patients, and includes
genomic, epigenomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic data.
==PAGE:22==
12
1 Introduction
Much of this data is freely accessible to download, but the patient-specific files are
sometimes protected and can only be accessed with permission. To overcome this, much
of the data has also been compiled into larger project files with little possibility of identify
the patient, while still containing the biological information.
In this project we will not use the full scope of TCGA datatypes, instead the main
focus will be on the mutational data. In general the variant call format (VCF) is widely
used for mutational data. These files essentially describe the chromosome, the variant
position, the reference nucleotide and the mutant nucleotide.
But, since a VCF file
in the TCGA database is patient-specific, they are rarely publicly available. Instead
the TCGA provides a Mutation Annotation Format (MAF) file, generated on project
levels. Because TCGA processes these files there can be introduced a bias. This will
be discussed later in this project. The TCGA’s process to create a Somatic Aggregated
MAF file is as follows, starting from cleaned sequence alignment files. The data is treated
in four steps [39]:
1. Somatic Variant Calling Workflow. Differentiating between germline and somatic
variants. There are several different tools, e.g. GATK’s Mutect2.
2. Variant Call Annotation Workflow. Biological context is inferred by:
• VEP: Variant Effect Predictor [40]
• External mutation databases (See Appendix A)
3. Somatic Aggregation Workflow. Merges multiple annotated VCFs into a single
MAF file.
4. Masked Somatic Aggregation Workflow.
• Removes columns/variants that could contain germline information
• Keeps only the most critically affected transcript, in case there are multiples
transcripts
• Removes low quality variant calls
It is not revealed in any detail exactly how the filtering is applied in the final step.
The MAF file is an example of where the term SNP is preferred over SNV. A list of the
variant classifications and types can be seen later in Section 2.1.2 Table 2.2.
Finally it should be noted that all VCF files are generated on the newest reference
genome GRCh38 (or hg38).
1.6
Basal-Like Breast Cancer
In 2020 breast cancer was accountable for 24.5% of all cancer incidence and 15% of the
cancer related deaths in women world wide [1].
==PAGE:23==
1.7 Project Aims
13
Breast cancer can be divided into different subtypes. There are different approaches
on how these subtypes are classified. The traditional practice is similar to how other
tumors are assessed; size, nodal status, metastasis status, histologic typing (growth
pattern) and grading. For breast cancer the tumors are further classified according to
immunophenotype. The tumors are tested to see if they express the growth-receptors
ER, PR and HER2 on the cell surface [41]. The different combinations of expression of
these receptors have shown strong correlations with prognostic ability. Breast cancer is
a good example of a cancer where the treatment is becoming more personalised every
year. Already in 1998, it was determined by Rahman and Stratton that if women carried
mutations in the genes BRCA1 or BRCA2 it would give a 45-65% risk of getting breast
cancer before the age of 70 [42]. Screening for these genes are today implemented for
selected groups of patients and their relatives in Denmark. Another example of personli-
sation is the drug trastuzumab. This targets the HER2-receptor and can therefore only
be used in HER2-positive patients [43]. Many drugs target these growth receptors. This
is problematic for the triple-negative type, which does not express any of the receptors.
This is one of the reasons triple-negative patients have the poorest prognosis presently.
In 2000 Perou et al. suggested a new classification method based on RNA-sequencing
[44]. In 2009 Parker et al. found five molecular intrinstic subtypes, based on the expres-
sion level of 50 genes and risk predictions [45]: Luminal A, luminal B, HER2-postive,
basal-like and normal-like. It has later been shown that these correlate to some degree
with the immunophenotyping, but not entirely. For instance triple-negative consists of
81% of basal-like [46]. The normal-like is often not considered as a true subtype, but sim-
ply samples with a large over-representation of normal cells, giving a distorted picture
[46]. The large difference between basal-like/triple-negative and the other subtypes have
caused some to argue that it should be treated as an entirely different type of cancer
[47]. Subtyping is important because the subtype will be an essential part in deciding a
treatment plan. For instance, many drugs are targeting the mentioned growth receptors,
and will subsequently have no effect for triple-negative patients [47].
Basal-like breast cancer is the intrinstic subtype with the poorest prognosis on a five
year basis [45]. Not many drug targets have yet been suggested for this subtype. One
exception is the transcription factor Twist-BRD4, proposed by Cao et al. (2018) [48]. It
is therefore essential to find new therapeutic drugs for this subtype.
In TCGA there exist over 9000 samples from breast cancer, which have all been subtyped
with the PAM50 method, and it is therefore a good data source for investigating basal-
like breast cancer.
1.7
Project Aims
The purpose of this project is to find mechanistic indicators by creating an automatised
workflow in Moonlight. The workflow should be streamlined and help increase the re-
producibility of cancer research with Moonlight. Moonlight predicts driver genes based
on genes’ expressional patterns. This project further should help to advance the under-
==PAGE:24==
14
1 Introduction
standing of underlying molecular mechanisms causing the patterns. A particular aim at
identify mechanistic indicators supporting a change in transcriptional levels of the cell.
Specifically this project will focus on mutations as a mechanistic indicator. The goal
is to create a user-friendly R function, which can be incorporated into the Moonlight
pipeline, adding an additional layer of evidence to the predicted driver genes, in order
to minimising the number of false positives. For the mutations this means to identifying
driver and passenger mutations. Finally the project will include an analysis of a selec-
tion of driver genes found in basal-like breast cancer, where a driver mutation have been
identified.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
Methods
In this section the methods used to develop the extension to Moonlight are described.
This includes a description of the requirements of the function, the tools and the data
needed, and a description of the tools and data which was finally selected and used.
For a full discussion of the final advantages and disadvantages of the tools chosen, see
Section 3.2. A large part of this chapter is based on literature studies, testing tools and
R packages, and discussions with other users, senior scientists and main developers of
Moonlight.
2.1
Development of the Driver Mutation Analysis
Function
In this section the outline for the function for automated integration of mutational data
and how it will be used in relation to Moonlight is described. The extension will be a
new function in Moonlight, which works separately from other functions in Moonlight,
and it will therefore not modify the existing functions, see Figure 2.1. The main idea
is that it should work as an optional addition to gain new insights into the predictions.
The function should be able to take specific mutations found in a cohort of patients with
the same type of cancer and associate these mutations to specific genes, especially the
predicted driver genes. The function must be able to distinguish between relevant and
irrelevant mutations and help filter and prioritise the mutations. The function will be
called Driver Mutation Analysis, shortened DMA. The code was written entirely in R,
using the Tidyverse format.
Figure 2.1: The general idea of how the new driver mutation analysis function (DMA)
work in relation to the existing moonlight functions.
The first step in the project was investigating the input format of the mutation file.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Methods
From TCGA there is primarily two file formats available with mutational data: VCF
files and MAF files. It was decided to use the latter, Mutation Annotation Format, see
considerations in Section 3.1.5. The next step was to decide how the mutations should
be annotated. Four main abilities were determined (see Figure 2.2):
1. Distinguish between driver and passenger mutations
2. Find regulatory elements which overlap with a mutation
3. Determine the level of consequence of the mutation in the central dogma
4. Integrate the mutational information with Moonlights driver gene predictions
The MAF file was examined for information, and it was clear that an extra tool was
needed to access the driver status of the mutation. The most preferable tool would be an
R package, therefore it was investigated which possibilities existed on Bioconductor or
CRAN. It was further investigated which tools were already used in our research group,
these were e.g. OncodriveCLUSTL, CScape-somatic and CADD. Other tools considered
were selected mainly from the evaluated tools in the reviews by Chen et al. (2020) [29]
and Khalighi et al. (2020) [17]. Four primary features were needed in order for a tool
to be considered for implementation:
1. The tool should predict driver mutations (not genes) explicitly, preferably with a
score so the mutations could be compared and prioritised
2. The input to the function should be either a MAF file or be derived from a MAF
file
3. The code should be open-source, and feasible to implement into R
4. The tool should preferably be able to score all mutations in the entire genome
These features were investigated by reading publications, code documentation and test-
ing tools of interest. Because most tools were dismissed based on the above set criteria,
there was no need to compare performance quantitatively between two or more tools.
In the end CScape-somatic was chosen, see details on this in Section 3.2.
2.1.1
Mutation scoring with Cscape-somatic
In order to annotate each mutation found in the differentially expressed genes the tool
Cscape-somatic was introduced. Cscape-somatic is a public online server. It can also be
downloaded as a python script with two tables containing scores for every SNV possible
in the human genome, the only exceptions being the X and Y chromosomes, which are
not included. One table for the coding regions and one table for the non-coding region,
see example in Table 2.1 [36]. CScape-somatic was incorporated into R by translating
the main script from python to R. The main task of this script was to access the tables
at the right genomic position and specific variant allele, and then translate the score to
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Development of the Driver Mutation Analysis Function
17
Figure 2.2: The annnotations DMA() must be able to perform. The top left panel is
a representation of a MAF file. The stars are mutations in a genome and the ovals are
the genes closest to the mutation. First the mutations are divided into passengers and
drivers. Then the regulatory elements are added to the data. The consequence of the
type of mutation is annotated to either the proteins structure, the level of transcription
or level of translation. Finally data is cross-referenced with the Moonlight driver genes.
Created in Biorender.com
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Methods
a prediction based on the thresholds as suggest by Rogers et al. (2020) [36], see Table
1.2.
In the original source code a function called tabix, which is part of samtools was called
to index the tables. The R equivalent of this called Seqminer v. 8.0 was used instead.
Table 2.1: An example of how one of the CScape-somatic scoring tables looks like for
three positions.
Position
Reference
Nucleotide
A
T
G
C
Chr1:1
A
-
0.7
0.2
0.4
Chr1:2
T
0.4
-
0.4
0.1
Chr1:3
C
0.9
0.1
0.5
-
2.1.2
Level of consequence
The CScape-somatic tool scores SNPs according to their cancer driver effect. However,
it does not explicitly explain which part in the central dogma it affects. To counter this
three new tables were made. Each contained the variant classification in the rows and
the variant type in the columns, see Table 2.2. The values are binary values, reflecting
if this category of mutation had the possibility of affecting either transcriptional levels,
translational levels or the protein structure or function. The tables for translation and
protein structure can be seen in Appendix C, Table C.1 and Table C.2. The tables were
derived from basic biological knowledge and literature studies.
Figure 2.3: The genomic structure of eucaryotic DNA
The types of variants found in MAF format can be: single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP), insertion (INS), deletion (DEL), di-nucleotide polymorphism (DNP), tri-nucleotide
polymorphism (TNP) and oligo-nucleotide polymorphism (ONP). Though the term is
polymorphism it is in this case considered equivalent to variant, see Section 3.3 for a
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Development of the Driver Mutation Analysis Function
19
discussion on this.
The classifications are also equivalent to the terms found in a TCGA MAF. The 5’Flank
region is 2500 bp upstream of the 5’untranslated region (5’UTR), which starts just
upstream of the transcriptional start site (TSS). The splice site is the two nucleotides
which consist of the actual site of intron/exon splitting, while the splice region is the
area immediately next to it. See Figure 2.3.
Table 2.2: Possible effect of the type and class of variant on transcriptional level. The
values are to be understood as [1]: there can be an effect, [0]: no effect is possible, [NA]:
this mutation type combination is not possible.
Type/Classification
SNP
INS
DEL
DNP
TNP
ONP
5’Flank
1
1
1
1
1
1
5’UTR
1
1
1
1
1
1
TSS
1
1
1
1
1
1
Missense
0
NA
NA
0
0
0
Nonsense
1
1
1
1
1
1
Nonstop
0
0
0
0
0
0
Splice Site
1
1
1
1
1
1
Splice Region
1
1
1
1
1
1
Silent
0
NA
NA
0
0
0
In Frame Deletion
NA
0
0
0
NA
0
In Frame Insertion
NA
0
0
0
NA
0
Frameshift Deletion
NA
0
0
NA
0
NA
Frameshift Insertion
NA
0
0
NA
0
NA
Intron
1
1
1
1
1
1
3’UTR
1
1
1
1
1
1
3’Flank
1
1
1
1
1
1
IGR
1
1
1
1
1
1
The reason for the annotations of some of the mutations:
1. Every mutation upstream of the gene might hit a promoter
2. When a nonsense mutation happens, nonsense mediated decay of the mRNA is
initiated [10]
3. Introns and splice-sites also contain binding sites of miRNA
4. Every mutation downstream of the gene might change the miRNAs binding and
stabilisation of the mRNA
5. Intergenic regions are often involved with regulation of gene transcription
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Methods
2.1.3
Regulatory elements
After the main scoring tool (CScape-somatic) had been implemented, it was decided to
include more annotations. The next annotation included was promoter areas. These
genomic areas have been located in many projects, and so it was a question of accessing
the data. The data must therefore:
1. Be freely available to download and distribute
2. Contain promoter regions in the human genome
3. Contain genomic position in the format of chromosome number, start and end
position
4. The file must have a reasonable size
5. Preferable be mapped to the GRCh38 reference genome
6. Preferable contain information on which gene(s) the promoter controls
From the project ENCODE (Encyclopedia of DNA Elements) two files were found that
to a reasonable degree fulfil the requirements listed above. In the function two files were
used: One containing reference sets of promoter regions and one containing enhancer
regions in the human genome. They come from the same fileset with accession number
ENCSR294YNI, released on 16-june-2020.
The file types are bed bed6 and have the
accession numbers ENCFF140XLU (promoters) and ENCFF212UAV (enhancers). All
data from ENCODE are derived from experimental studies [49].
2.1.4
External packages
A few R packages were used as part of the function. Most of these were used as practical,
computational tools (see full list in 3.1). Two packages have a biological aspect as well
and will therefore be mentioned here. The first package is the R/bioconductor package
MafTools. It is an R package specifically designed to analyse and visualise MAF files [50].
It contains several useful functions for this project, especially the functions concerning
summarisations of the full MAF file in various visualisations. These will give the user a
good overview of the general outlook of their input file. It should be noted that MafTools
also contains a function which is the driver prediction tool OncoDriveClust. This was
not used as it is an outdated version of the tool. The initial function, is the read.maf().
This function takes a TSV file and returns a special MAF-object. This object is the
input to most of the functions in the toolbox for instance plotMafSummary().
The second package was liftOver.
This is a Bioconductor/R package based on the
UCSC browser track [51]. It can change the genomic coordinates between assemblies in
==PAGE:31==
2.1 Development of the Driver Mutation Analysis Function
21
conjunction with the UCSC browser track. In connection with this package two chain-
files hg19ToHg38.over.chain.gz and hg38ToHg19.over.chain.gz were downloaded from the
USCS browser [Kent2002].
2.1.5
Transcription factors
During this thesis, the idea to incorporate gene biological functions emerged. Specifically
if a gene is a transcription factor. In the long term it is envisioned that the transcription
factors are annotated and their network of targets are combined with the Moonlight
pipeline.
However, due to the limited time of the project, this must be a future study. But the
locating of a data source for transcription factors was initiated in this thesis. The data
requirements are:
• Free to download and distribute
• Use Hugo symbols
• Be for the human genome
• Contain transcription factors, their target and mode of regulation
The dataset chosen was therefore from TRRUST (Transcriptional Regulatory Relation-
ships Unraveled by Sentence-based Text mining) [52]. The dataset was downloaded on
the 2nd of November 2021. The data was released on 16-april-2018 and contains 795 TFs.
Among other things it contains transcription factors, their targets and shared targets.
However, this data integration is still a work in progress. It is therefore not currently
included in the automated workflow of Moonlight. See Section 4.1.
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Methods
2.2
Pilot Project: Basal-Like Breast Cancer
This section describes how the small case-study of basal-like breast cancer was conducted.
The case-study is based on data collection and results from prior studies.
A short
summary of the data collection, processing and analysis leading up to this project is
therefore included.
2.2.1
Data collection and preprocessing
The data used in this project has already to a large extent been collected and analysed
for driver genes with Moonlight in two other projects. The first project was a Master the-
sis by M. Nourbakhsh 2020 [34], see Figure 2.4 project 1. Here breast cancer data of all
intrinsic subtypes were retrieved from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) through the
R/Bioconductor package TCGABiolinks, version 2.14.0. Both gene expression data and
mutational data were downloaded. The datasets were from the TCGA-BRCA project,
containing data from ’primary solid tumors’ and ’solid tissue normal’. Only females were
retained. The two datasets were then treated differently due to the different nature of
the datatype. The mutational data were further filtered to only contain samples which
had been annotated with the somatic variant calling tool Mutect2 [33].
The gene expression data had outliers removed, were normalised to GC content and
sequence depth, and lastly genes with low expression were filtered out. Then the differ-
ential expression analyses (DEA) between breast cancer subtypes and normal (control)
samples were carried out using the limma-voom pipeline from the R/Bioconductor pack-
age limma, version 3.42.2. [35].
Both the gene expression and the mutational data were then grouped into the breast
cancer subtypes using PanCancerAtlas_subtypes(), in which each sample is annotated
with a molecular subtype. The breast cancer subtypes have been classified according to
PAM50 signatures.
The DEA of the BRCA basal-like resulted in a dataset containing in total 6511 genes. In
the second project by A. Saksager [53], this geneset was further subsetted, so that it only
contained DEGs which were uniquely up- or downregulated compared to the four other
subtypes; Luminal A, Luminal B and HER2. This was done in order to find the driver
genes unique for basal-like breast cancer. The subset then only contained 1456 genes,
and it was from this set the driver genes were predicted with the moonlight pipeline, see
Figure 2.4 project2. Moonlight was run as follows:
1. Functional Enrichment Analysis: FEA(). The output does not directly influence
the remaining pipeline. Based on an investigation of the functional enriched pro-
cesses and their genes, the BPs were chosen as proliferation of cells and apoptosis
and were used in the URA-function. The moonlight process score was calculated
for each BP in this step.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Pilot Project: Basal-Like Breast Cancer
23
Figure 2.4:
The data processing which occurred before this project.
Project one
was part of M. Nourbakhsh’s Master Thesis. Project two was a student project by A.
Saksager [34, 53]. This project used three files resulting from these two projects: The
basal-like mutation data, the basal-like expression data and the driver genes predicted
from the reduced basal-like expression data.
2. Gene Regulatory Network analysis: GRN(). This function was run with the set-
tings DiffGenes = True and kNearest = 3. The network of genes was estimated
with calculations of mutual information.
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Methods
3. Upstream Regulatory Analysis: URA(). This function was used with the expert-
based approach, using the two biological processes proliferation of cells and apop-
tosis. The moonlight gene z-score was calculated in this step.
4. Pattern Recognition Analysis: PRA(). The genes, which networks showed the
expected pattern regulation compared to their effect on the biological function,
were now selected as oncogenes and tumor-suppressors.
2.2.2
Mutation analysis
This study contains a pilot project where the developed mutation analysis function is
run on basal-like breast cancer data. The project is based on the data from the above-
mentioned studies. The Driver Mutation Analysis (DMA) needs three inputs: Mutation
data, differential expression data and a list of driver genes. The inputs are illustrated
in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: The input into new Driver Mutation Analysis function, continued from
Figure 2.4, with the differentially expressed genes (yellow) and the mutational data
(red).
The mutation file and differential expression file for basal-like breast cancer, downloaded
in project 1 were used. Further, the driver genes from project 2 were used as input, Figure
2.4. This means that the driver genes are only derived from a reduced set of DEGs and
are not the full set of driver genes. Because of time constraints it was necessary to have
a clear focus, which could be provided with a shortened list of driver genes. The DEGs
and mutation data were in the end based on 171 different samples and there were a total
of 366 driver genes.
The DMA function was run (for a full overview of the function see Section 3.1).
After the initial results were established by the DMA function, two areas were investi-
gated. The first area explored how well the function’s annotations covered the basal-like
breast cancer data. The second area focused on individual genes and mutations high-
lighted from the output of the DMA. All plots were created with R version 4.1.1.
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Pilot Project: Basal-Like Breast Cancer
25
2.2.2.1
Visualisations
The distribution of the number of mutations in the DEGs and in the NonDEGs was
visualised in two plots. The main part of the data was visualised in a regular barplot,
but some highly mutated outliers were moved to a dotplot. The outliers selected for this
plot had values above the 0.999-quantile.
A heatmap of the driver genes annotated driver mutations were created with the R
package TidyHeatmap version 1.3.1, which utilises the R package Complexheatmap
2.2.0 [54, 55]. The frequencies of driver/passenger/unclassified mutations in the two
types of driver genes (OCG/TSG) were also found. A calculation for driver mutations
can be seen in the following.
Frequency = # Driver mutations in OCGs
# OCGs
Frequency = # Driver mutations in TSGs
# TSGs
These calculations were repeated for passengers and unclassified mutations.
An investigation of the promoters and enhancers placement in the genomic regions was
conducted. First a plot of counts were made. The counts were normalised according to
the total number of mutations in each genomic region. An example for 5’UTRs can be
seen below:
Frequency = # 5’UTRs with promoter annotation
Total number of 5’UTRs mutations
2.2.2.2
Investigation of individual driver genes
Specific driver genes and their mutations were investigated. From the output table of
the DMA, containing all DEGs and their mutations, the genes which (a) had at least one
driver mutation and (b) potentially could have an effect on transcription, were extracted.
The genes were investigated with Uniprot including full name, function and a list of GO
terms. The genes were then checked against the COSMIC database for consensus gene
status and possible hallmarks of cancer. The general expression pattern in breast tissue
was also recorded. Finally all genes were searched in TRRUST to establish transcription
factors.
When a gene was deemed of special interest based on the above research, the gene’s role
in cancer, and especially basal-like breast cancer, was explored in the literature.
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3
Results & Discussion
In this chapter a new function is added to MoonlightR and the results of a pilot project
investigating Basal-like breast cancer will be presented. The first section describes in
detail the structure, input and output of the function Driver Mutation Analysis. Then
follows a discussion of the abilities and limits of the function. The second section presents
specific genes of interest found in relation to basal-like breast cancer.
3.1
The Driver Mutation Analysis Function
The central part of this thesis has been to construct a new function to the R package
MoonlightR, which could add a mutational layer of evidence to the predicted driver
genes. This function will now be presented as DMA, Driver Mutation Analysis.
The code has been written in the ’tidyverse’ style suggested by Wickham and Grolemund
2016 [56]. Even though the rest of the MoonlightR package does not follow this style of
writing, it was chosen because it will ease future development of the project, as the main
developers are all familiar with it and it is designed to be easy to read. The code can
be found on github at https://github.com/ELELAB/mutations_basal_like and the
pseudocode can be found in Appendix D. The code consists of a main script, DMA, and
a number of small helper-functions in addition to the R translation of CScape-somatic.
The DMA’s dependencies are Tidyverse 1.3.0, MafTools 2.0.16, Seqminer 8.0, liftOver
1.8.0, fuzzyjoin 0.1.6 and GenomicRanges 1.36.0.
3.1.1
Required input format
DMA takes several input files: A MAF-file, a RDS object with the differentially ex-
pressed genes, and a RDS object with the predicted driver genes from the PRA-function.
Because the DMA is not oﬀicially incorporated into Bioconductor yet, the two files con-
taining the CScape-somatic scores must be provided with a path. In the future the
scoring-tables will be part of the package and can be called without user input. Here is
an example of the function call:
1 DMA(MafFile = myMutations.tsv,
2
DEGs = myDifExpGenes.RDS,
3
Drivers = pra_drivers.RDS,
4
results_folder = '/my/path/to/results',
5
coding_file = '/cscape/tables/css_coding.vcf',
6
noncoding_file = '/cscape/tables/css_noncoding.vcf.gz')
The MAF file must be provided as a TSV, and, as a minimum, contain the following
columns: Hugo_Symbol, Chromosome, Start_Position, End_Position, Variant_Classification,
==PAGE:37==
3.1 The Driver Mutation Analysis Function
27
Variant_Type, Reference_Allele, Tumor_Seq_Allele1, Tumor_Seq_Allele2.
The RDS object containing the differentially expressed genes must contain a list of
genes, while additional annotations such as the logFC, p-values or average expression is
optional, but if found will be stored. The predicted driver genes are expected to be an
RDS file containing a list of two: One with the tumor suppressors genes (TSG) and one
with oncogenes (OCG), both lists with their Moonlight gene z-score included.
3.1.2
Dataflow: What happens inside the function
Figure 3.1 shows a flowchart of the details inside the DMA. The DMA function begins
with a merge of the mutational data and differentially expression genes based on the
Hugo Symbols of the genes. The mutations which do not map to a DEG will be removed.
The DEGs with no mutation are, however, preserved.
Once the mutations of interest are determined, each mutation is scored with CScape-
somatic. To do this the genomic positions are first lifted to NCBI build GRCh37 with
the helper-function
liftMAF(). It was decided to lift the entire file and not just the
SNPs, even though the indels cannot be scored with CScape-somatic. The reason is if
something is wrong with the chain-files it will be easier to re-do the lift of entire output
later, rather than picking out mutations individually. Once lifted, the SNP mutations
are scored through the cscape-somatic_query.R function. The scored mutations will be
outputted to the results folder at this stage in the function.
Next the scores from CScape are translated into either driver or passenger mutations.
Mutations without a score are categorised as ’Unclassified’. This will be the case for
indels, mutations in the X or Y chromosome, or when the reference nucleotide does not
match the CScape reference at the given position. Then the positions are lifted back
the GRCh38 reference genome.
Then the extra annotations are added. First the possible level of consequence in the
central dogma is added to each mutation based on the tables mentioned in Section 2.1.2.
The mutation can have consequences on multiple levels, e.g. a nonsense mutation can
affect both transcription levels and the protein structure.
Then the Moonlight driver genes are inserted based on the Hugo Symbols. If a gene
is not a driver the value will be NA. Finally, the regulatory regions - enhancers and
promoters - are included. The position of the mutations are cross-referenced with the
position of the regions using the fuzzyjoin-package. This package has a function specifi-
cally designed to eﬀiciently find overlaps between genomic regions. If a match is found
the name of the region is added as ’Annotation’, and the annotated region’s start and
end position are also added.
Next the output tables are finalised, see Figure 3.1. The ”DEGs table with mutations
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Results & Discussion
Figure 3.1: The general structure of the DMA function. The orange boxes are the
input, the green boxes are the output and the blue region is the interior of the function.
and annotations”, is cleaned of any temporary columns and then written to the result
folder. The ”Driver gene mutation summary” is created by filtering to only driver genes.
For these genes the total number of mutations, driver, passenger and unclassified mu-
tations are summed. Further, the sum of mutations affecting each layer of the central
dogma is calculated.
Finally, the maftools package is used on the entire MAF file. The read.maf converts
the TSV file into a MAF object. The function plotmafSummary, the rainfallplot and
somaticInteractions functions are run. The plots are written to the results folder.
==PAGE:39==
3.1 The Driver Mutation Analysis Function
29
3.1.3
Output of the function
The DMA function outputs four CSV files and three plots. All outputs are placed in
the ’results-folder’ specified by the user.
The first output of DMA is a CSV file in the same output format as CScape-somatic
would output, if it was run completely separately. This file is called Cscape_output_raw.csv.
It contains the chromosome number, the genomic position, the reference allele and fol-
lowed by the mutant (regardless of the strand and whether it is a hetero or homozygote
mutation). Then comes the scores. Each mutation will have either a coding score or
a non-coding score depending on its position in the genome. The last column contains
a remark. This remark denotes the confidence levels, see Table 1.2, if the scoring was
successful. If the scoring was unsuccessful it will give the error message.
The second output of DMA is a table in a CSV file named ”DEGene_All_Mutation
_Annotations.csv”. It contain all information generated in the function for the differen-
tially expressed genes, both the ones with and without mutations. All columns from the
DEG file and the MAF file are retained.
The third output is also a CSV file, containing a summary of the the mutations con-
nected to the driver genes, ”DEGene_Mutation_Summary.csv”. For each gene the total
number of mutations and how they are distributed as drivers, passengers and unclassi-
fied mutations are given. The number of mutations that can possibly affect the levels of
transcription, translation and protein structure are also given per gene. For each gene
the driver type (OCG/TSG) is noted.
The three maftools plots are called ”PlotSumMAF.png”, ”PlotRainfallMAF.png” and
”PlotSomaticInteractionsMAF.png”
The first function generates a file with 6 different plots, the second a rainfall plot of
the sample with the highest number of mutations, and the last plot visualises mutually
exclusive, co-occurring and altered genesets, see example in Appendix F.
3.1.4
Performance
In the pilot project of basal-like breast cancer the DMA() was run on a external server
with Ubuntu 14.04 LTS. The server has 20 physical cores and 128 GB ram. For the
project a MAF file with the size of 41 MB (containing
27,000 mutations).
It ran
approximately for 8 minutes and used around 15 MB.
In this project new datafiles have been added to the MoonlightR package. Their sizes
are as follows:
• Cscape-somatic table coding: 632 MB
• CScape-somatic table noncoding: 46 GB
• ENCODE promoters: 650 KB
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Results & Discussion
• ENCODE enhancers: 18MB
The sizes of the consequence-tables are negligible.
3.1.5
Considerations about the MAF as input
The type of input file was chosen from a practical point of view. First and foremost,
it is possible to download such files from TCGA with the R package TCGAbiolinks,
just as the expression data for the other part of the Moonlight pipeline. Moonlight was
developed to investigate cancer types or subtypes on disease level, not to find patient-
specific drivers. Therefore it is not meaningful to use VCFs in this project, as they
are by definition patient-specific and often protected due to GDPR. It will also lighten
the workflow in development and for the user to handle only a single file. The MAF
files from TCGA, however, also have some downsides The primary being it has already
been through an extensive pipeline which among other things filter out wide selection
of mutations, see Section 1.5. These are mainly mutations with low quality or placed in
non-coding regions with no known regulatory effect. Therefore it should be considered
that using a MAF file can give a biased view of the mutations. It is diﬀicult to asses
exactly how large the bias is since the TCGA does not provide enough detail. It was
concluded that the benefits outweighed the costs.
3.2
Verification of Mutation as Mechanistic Driver
One of the main goals in this project was to find a mechanistic indicator behind the
change in expression levels seen in the identified driver genes. The mutations can only
serve as a mechanistic indicator, in case they are classified as driver mutations, e.g.
having a large impact on the gene. In the MAF file from TCGA, there already exists
annotations that estimate this impact: PolyPhen, SIFT and VEP. However, when these
columns were investigated closely, two main issues were identified. Firstly, the annota-
tions were often missing, either completely or in part. This is because all three tools
are concerned only with the impact on protein structure and function, and not muta-
tions falling outside of this scope. These annotations are thus not useful at this stage in
the project where the main focus is on regulatory regions. It should also be mentioned
that these predictors were not developed to identify cancer related mutations, but to
identify impacts of mutations in general [40, 25, 23]. Secondly, the impact categories
of each method were completely correlated with the variant classification, for instance
when a nonsense class was seen, VEP always scored it ’High Impact’. The annotation
therefore does not give any information which could not be extracted from existing data.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Verification of Mutation as Mechanistic Driver
31
3.2.1
Selecting a prediction tool
The selection of a fitting mutation predictor to incorporate into Moonlight was a com-
plex process with many aspects to be considered. Such considerations were both on
methodical and practical levels, including but not limited to, the level of prediction
(driver mutation or driver gene), which regions they considered in the genome, and prac-
ticalities with code availability and implementation into R. Some predictors could easily
be dismissed as poor choices. All tools which based on their prediction on protein struc-
ture and function were not useful, because these tools never would be able to estimate
mutations in non-coding regions.
A few predictors, such as LARVA, only predicts in the non-coding region and would
therefore also be problematic. Although a combination of two tools, one for coding and
one for non-coding, could be a solution, it was considered an inferior solution: The two
tools would not necessarily be based on the same method, making a direct comparison
diﬀicult. Furthermore the project would rapidly become more complex.
The predictors based on frequencies were in general more likely too fit with our pipeline.
A main issue with many of these tools, such as MutSigCV, MuSiC or DriverML is that
they output driver genes. These tools directly assume driver gene status, not showing
the intermediate step identifying the individual mutation as a driver or a passenger. Had
the prediction been genes, it would become a comparison of two predictors gene lists,
where the layer of mutational evidence still would not be obviously visible.
Several of these types of tools also require multiple input files. MuSiC, for instance,
not only requires mutations in a MAF file, but also BAM files and a set of ‘regions of
interest’, besides clinical data. Implementation of such tools will in the end require much
more work for the user, and did not fit well within the Moonlight philosophy, such as
being compatible with TCGA.
3.2.2
Implementing a prediction tool
A frequently occurring problem was the code availability and general complexity. Some
publications purposing new predictors e.g driverSubNet, simply lack publication of the
code, thereby rendering it useless to anyone else [57]. Luckily this is not a widespread
problem. However, an occurring problem is that multiple predictors are accessible only as
web-servers. In many contexts this is a nice and practical way to present a bioinformatic
tool, but it is not helpful for this project, where the source code needs to be part of a R
package.
In cases where the source code could be downloaded, the format and language could be a
barrier for implementation. None of these predictors were written (entirely) in R, which
means there were two options: Either the program was left as it was and a way to call
it from within R was found or the program should be translated into R. Through the
R package ‘Reticulate’ the former method was for instance possible, when the original
language was Python. A translation to R was only a reasonable option if there were few
scripts and functions, and the complexity was not too great.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Results & Discussion
3.3
Discussion of CScape-Somatic
The choice of tool for classifying the somatic mutations fell on CScape-somatic. CScape-
somatic works well for this project for several reasons. Firstly, contrary to some of the
tools mentioned in the previous section, it accesses both coding and non-coding regions
in the genome. As the non-coding regions to a high degree are involved in regulation of
transcription it was essential to this project to also have a scoring method for non-coding
regions. Secondly, it was feasible to implement CScape into R. CScape-somatic does not
require the user to run an long line of scripts of functions in order to get results. As
explained in Section 1.3.5, the scores are already generated for every position, it is just
a question of accessing the table at the right position.
CScape does have a few distinct disadvantages, mainly that it only scores SNVs. It is not
likely that an update from CScape will contain indels, as they have infinite possibilities
of construction, whereas there can only be three changes of SNVs at each position in the
finite genome. To cover the indels another tool will eventually have to be implemented.
Another disadvantage is that because the scores are pre-calculated, it might be necessary
to keep the tables updated continuously. This will have to be done manually.
CScape-somatic also has the slight disadvantage that it uses the reference genome
GRCh37. MAF files from TCGA uses, as a default, NCBI build GRCh38. This problem
was overcome by lifting the positions in the MAF to the old build, but every time this
is done there will be a small loss of information.
A small definition issue with CScape-somatic should be commented. Rogers et al. (2020)
refer to Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs). Polymorphisms are by convention
considered variants which are rare, but recurring above a certain threshold in a popu-
lation (generally above 1%). However this does not seem to be a concern in the paper
[36] and the term ’polymorphism’ seems to be equivalent with ’variant’.
It should also be noted that CScape-somatic is a descendant of CScape. All optimisation
and feature selection was performed in the development of the first version. This means
that the method was actually optimised on germline, not somatic, mutations and the
optimisation was not redone for CScape-somatic[36, 58].
Neither CScape nor CScape-somatic were included in the study which compared 31
different predictors. However, the predecessor to CScape was FATHMM-MKL. This did
quite poorly and only scored 0.65-0.7 in both sensitivity and specificity, as compared
to the cancer-specific version FATHMM-cancer, which had scores well above 0.75 [29].
In general the cancer-specific predictors had a better performance. This indicates that
CScape-somatic probably would perform better than FATHMM-MKL.
In the article by Rogers et al. (2020), it is stated that CScape-somatic outperforms
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Perspective on Moonlight
33
CADD and FunSeq2. But because it is such a new tool it is not mentioned in any re-
views of driver predictors and has not been directly compared and evaluated consistently
against other tools. The measurement of performance in the field of driver prediction
is a big issue for several reasons. First of all, the definitions of passengers and drivers
vary quite a bit. This will eventually flavour their predictions in certain directions [59].
Passengers are by some defined from their effect, neutral or deleterious, while others use
only the recurrence of the variants. Some predictors use only experimentally verified
variants as the driver set, while others again base it on recurrence, often with different
thresholds. Numerous other fields have a gold standard on which predictions can be
benchmarked. But for driver genes the experimentally verified genes are highly limited
in numbers.
To overcome this problem Tokheim et al. (2016) suggested an evaluation method where
they avoided using a golden standard. They demonstratedtheir method by evaluating
six different predictors [30].
Another issue found generally in predictors are confounders, as outlined by Raimondi et
al. (2021) [59]. They point out that driver mutations are often by definition mapped to
driver genes, and passengers to non-drivers. In order to test this hypothesis Raimondi et
al. created data sets based on different definitions and tested twelve different predictors,
including FATHMM-cancer. FATHMM-cancer did quite well, but the performance fell
when it was tested on a cleverly designed dataset where each gene had both driver
and passenger mutations. As mentioned there does seem to be a distinct difference in
performance between the different FATHMM models. These weaknesses in FATHMM
should also be expected to appear in CScape to some degree, since no counter measures
have been taken.
3.4
Perspective on Moonlight
A large problem with most driver predictors starting from genome level is that not all
information is carried directly in the genome. Many other processes are controlled via
other biological systems, e.g. epigenetics. Moonlight was therefore built using another
approach, transcription levels. The idea is that these levels actually reflect the conse-
quences of genetic or epigenetic changes, not just the changes themselves.
However, the same argument could also be raised against this approach. Just because
the transcription level is changed, it does not mean the translation of the protein occurs
correctly or in the same ratio as in healthy cells. Nor does Moonlight catch the genes
which are not changed at a transcriptional level, but instead have alterations inside the
protein. This could mean that the function of the protein is altered or broken. It is
therefore desirable that Moonlight, long term, should be able to incorporate proteomics.
This has not been possible in the past due to limited studies and data in this area.
However, large projects targeting proteomics in cancer are forthcoming. For instance,
Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) which was launched in 2011,
and today contains almost 4000 samples - freely available [60].
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Results & Discussion
This future incorporation of proteomics is the reason several mutations, for instance
coding variants like missense, are kept in the mutation analysis developed in this project,
even though they cannot affect transcription.
==PAGE:45==
3.5 Case study: Basal-like breast cancer
35
3.5
Case study: Basal-like breast cancer
A small case study was conducted along with development of the mutation function. In
this section the results of the DMA function and a continued investigation of some of
the driver genes will be presented.
3.5.1
Mutation Analysis Results
The first step of the mutational analysis is filtering of the mutations related to genes
which are not differentially expressed. As seen in Figure 3.2 there are excluded 8430
genes and almost half of the mutations. This leaves 9115 mutations across 6511 genes
for the downstream analysis. We also note that 2740 DEGs have no mutations at all. A
visualisation of the DEGs’ LogFC and mutations can be seen in Appendix G.
Figure 3.2: A. The number of different genes in the MAF file (green) and the number
of the differentially expressed genes (yellow). B. The total number of mutations in the
MAF-file (green), and out of these the number of mutations related to the DEGs (blue).
In Figure 3.3A the distribution of number of mutations is shown.
The distribution
is quite similar for both groups, considering that there is only approximately half the
number of DEGs compared to nonDEGs. There are slightly more DEGs which have one
mutation, but besides this the nonDEGS have a higher number of mutations. In Figure
3.3B the outliers for the upper 0.999-quantile are shown. The outliers are also fairly
evenly distributed and both groups have a single gene with more than 100 mutations,
TTN and TP53. These two genes are commonly seen with high mutation in pan-cancer
studies and will therefore not be discussed further [61]. All outliers are listed in Appendix
E.
Another output of the DMA function were visualisations from the MafTools. These
figures summarise all the mutations, not just the mutations concerning the differentially
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Results & Discussion
Figure 3.3: (A) is a density plot showing the distribution of the number of mutations
in DEGs and nonDEGs. (B) Shows the outliers not included in subfigure A. There are
12 outliers with 16-24 mutations, MUC16 has 36, TNN has 102 and TP53 has 158
expressed genes and driver genes. Figure 3.4 reveals quite clearly in the variant classifi-
cation barplot, that the MAF file is not a raw file of mutations, but that many mutations
have been filtered out. This is evident from the big over-representation of missense mu-
tations as compared to e.g. the completely missing classes from intergenic regions. In
the barplot visualising the variant type, however, we see (as expected) a higher occur-
rence of SNPs than indels. This bodes well for the prediction of driver mutations, as
only SNPs can be annotated in this version of DMA. The full output of the maftools
summaries can be seen in Appendix F.
Figure 3.4: Two barplots illustrating the distribution of the variant classification and
variant type in the full MAF file.
Finally, the results of the CScape-somatic annotations can be seen in Figure 3.5. The
frame-shift and in-frame indels are all unclassified, due to the limits of Cscape. There is
==PAGE:47==
3.5 Case study: Basal-like breast cancer
37
also quite a few missense mutations which are not annotated. Some of these are probably
in the X and Y chromosomes, but this should be examined in detail in the future. The
few TSS mutations are all drivers. Otherwise there are more passengers in all classes
than drivers.
Figure 3.5: Distribution of how the variant classes were annoated by CScape-somatic
3.5.1.1
Mutated driver genes
In this section it is discussed to what extent CScape-somatc could annotate driver muta-
tions in driver genes. In Table 3.1 the ten driver genes with the highest number of driver
mutations are listed. This is an extract of DEGene_Mutation_Summary from DMA().
In total Moonlight found 366 driver genes, divided between 94 tumor suppressors and
272 oncogenes. Not all of these driver genes had mutations, only 50 (53%) tumor sup-
pressors and 151 (56%) oncogenes were mutated. There can be two reasons for drivers
being without mutations. Either they are epi-drivers changes are caused by epigenetics,
as suggested by Vogelstein et al. (2013 )[8], or they are influenced by other genes which
are in turn mutated e.g. a transcription factor.
The driver genes had in total 331 mutations in the oncogenes and 124 in the tumor sup-
pressors. Through the CScape-somatic annotations, it is now possible to dismiss some of
these mutations as irrelevant for cancer progression. 37 OCGs and 11 TSGs had only pas-
senger mutations, which leaves 70 OCGs and 31 TSGs with at least one driver mutation.
Table 3.1 also contains a few other columns: Transcription, Translation and Protein.
These columns are counting how many of the mutations that have a potential to affect
the transcription level, translational level or the protein structure/function. For instance,
a mutation placed in a non-coding region will not affect the protein structure. The only
one of these columns which is relevant to this project is transcription. However, it was
deemed important in the long run to include these two categories because the extension
of Moonlight at a later stage will integrate proteomics data, see Section 3.4.
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Results & Discussion
Table 3.1: An excerpt of the summary table from the DMA. The driver type is the
classification by Moonlight, the Driver, Passenger and Unclassified are referring to the
mutations, these numbers sum to the total mutations. The Transcription, Translation
and Protein are the sum of the mutations which could potentially affect the levels of the
transcription and translation and the structure and function of the protein.
Hugo_Symbol
Driver_type
Total
Mutations
Driver
Passenger
Unclassified
Transcription
Translation
Protein
COL6A5
TSG
11
4
2
5
1
0
9
COL5A1
OCG
7
3
4
0
0
0
5
ECE1
TSG
3
3
0
0
1
0
2
EFCAB6
OCG
3
3
0
0
0
0
2
SGSM1
TSG
3
3
0
0
0
0
3
XPOT
OCG
3
3
0
0
0
0
3
ZBTB8B
TSG
4
3
1
0
0
0
4
ACOX2
OCG
4
2
0
2
0
0
2
ARL15
TSG
2
2
0
0
1
1
1
CASQ1
TSG
2
2
0
0
0
0
1
To get an overview of how successfully CScape-somatic had annotated the driver genes
a heatmap was created, Figure 3.6 1 2 . The driver genes with no mutations are not
part of the visualisation. There does not seem to be any distinct patterns across the
driver types. In the unclassified row it can clearly be seen that there is quite a few
genes with mutations which are unclassified. Additionally, some of these genes only have
unclassified mutations and will be omitted in this analysis. Lastly and most importantly,
the heatmap shows that there are many driver genes which have driver mutations. These
are the genes which now have a second layer of evidence for being driver genes.
It can be diﬀicult to see in the heatmap if there is any difference between oncogenes and
tumor suppressors as regards to the distribution of driver and passenger mutations. This
is more clear in Figure 3.7, which shows the frequencies of each mutation type divided
by the total number of each driver type. For instance, 35% of the oncogenes contain a
driver mutation on average, while 45% of the tumor suppressors have a driver mutation
on average. Approximately half of both oncogenes and tumor suppresssors have passen-
gers. It is diﬀicult to derive any conclusions on the differences between OCGs and TSGs
as long as so many mutations are still unclassified.
In order to see how the driver mutations seen in Figure 3.7 are distributed in the different
variant classes in oncogenes and tumor suppressors Figure 3.8 was created. In most
variant classes tumor suppressors have more drivers, except at splice-sites, where non
are found in TSGs. There is a distinct difference between the non-coding regions, as both
3’UTR, 5’Flank and 5’UTRs occur at around twice the frequency in TSGs compared to
OCGs. The equivalent plot with the pure counts can be seen in Appendix G, Figure
G.3.
1The gene names can be seen in the online version on github
2Please note, the colors indicating the numbers are not consistent across rows, e.g. the white in the
driver row is zero, but zero in unclassified is slightly purple. This is due to a error in the R package.
==PAGE:49==
3.5 Case study: Basal-like breast cancer
39
Figure 3.6: The heatmap shows the driver genes and their number of annotated mu-
tations.
The top-annotation displays the driver type, tumor suppressors (blue) and
oncogenes (yellow). The bars illustrate the total number of mutations per gene, while
the log2 fold change (logFC) is shown ranging from red to green. The heatmap only
shows a selection of genes.The driver genes which have no mutations at all are not visu-
alised.
3.5.1.2
Promoters and enhancers
The DMA function adds the annotations ’promoter region’ and ’enhancer region’ to a
mutation if it is placed inside such a region.
In order to understand how much ad-
ditional information this provides, the visualisations in Figure 3.9 were created. This
figure shows the overall distribution of the two annotations placed in different genomic
regions of the differentially expressed genes. In a few cases a mutation was placed inside
several enhancer regions. There were no cases where they were placed in both enhancer
and promoter regions, nor in two promoter regions. From the sheer number of mutations
shown in Figure 3.9, it is clear that most are hitting inside the exons (e.g. missense mu-
tations), but this is only due to the skewed MAF file’s original distribution of mutations,
see Appendix F. When the frequency of variant classifications is compared to the total
number of mutations in each class, a different pattern emerges, see Figure 3.10.
As expected, upstream 5’UTRs and 5’flanks contain an over-represented share of the
promoters, in concordance with the fact that promoters usually are placed shortly up-
stream of the gene they control, see Figure 3.10. The two translation start sites with
mutations were both covered with a promoter region, respectively NVL and ATP1A2.
None of these are moonlight drivers, although ATP1A2 was heavily downregulated with
a logFC of -7.7. This promoter pattern increases the confidence in the data and these
mentioned sites would likely be true promoters for the genes. The sixteen mutations
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Results & Discussion
Figure 3.7: The frequency of the passengers, drivers and unclassified mutations in the
two types of driver genes, oncogenes (OCG) and Tumor suppressors (TSG). These do
not sum to one.
Figure 3.8: The distribution of driver variants in variant classifications in Oncogenes
and Tumor suppressors
at 3’UTRs and the one in 3’flank could also possibly contain a true promoter region if
the gene was placed on the (-) strand and would therefore have a promoter downstream,
when read on the (+) strand.
It could be argued that the upstream (5’UTRs and 5’flanks) mutations which are not cov-
ered with a promoter region, should be dismissed in this project, since they are unlikely
to have an effect on transcriptional levels. The remaining promoter sites e.g. splice sites,
missense etc. are unlikely to belong to the gene, as a promoter should not be placed
downstream of the TSS. It is therefore clear that most of the promoter sites cannot be
mapped back to the genes they control. To overcome this, a different dataset,where the
gene annotation is already included, is needed.
==PAGE:51==
3.5 Case study: Basal-like breast cancer
41
Figure 3.9: Distribution of the enhancers and promoters genomic position in the variant
classifictions. The category ’Enhancer, Enhancer’ are the times when a mutation is in a
position where two individual enhancers are placed.
Enhancers are diﬀicult to place in relation to genes as they are often found linearly far
away from the gene they influences. The result of this can also be seen in Figure 3.10B.
The enhancers are fairly uniformly distributed, with a few exceptions e.g.
Nonstop.
There does not seem to be any obvious biological meaning to this. It has therefore been
decided in the future to remove the enhancers from the DMA function, since nothing
can be understood from this annotation. . In the future it might be considered to have
these mutations, if they are drivers, kept in a separate table so the connection to the
enhancer region is not lost, but not associated with the genes they happen to be close to.
3.5.2
Exploring the selected driver genes
This section is dedicated to exploring the driver genes predicted by Moonlight.
In this project the focus has been to implement a layer of mutational information onto
driver genes. Many of the driver genes have already been investigated to some degree
in a previous project [53]. That project investigated the OCGs and TSGs which had a
hallmark of cancer annotated in COSMIC. Therefore will this exploration be based on
different selection of genes.
The selected gene set consists of 27 genes, listed in Table 3.2 (more details can be found
in Appendix H). These genes are all driver genes (fifteen oncogenes and twelve tumor
suppressors), with at least one driver mutation which potentially should be able to alter
the transcription level of the gene. Four of the genes were part of the TRRUST database,
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Results & Discussion
Figure 3.10: A. Promoter frequency. B. Enhancer frequency. Both calculated against
the overall number of mutations in their respective variant classification. The framed
numbers are the total number on which the frequency is calculated.
two as transcription factors (NR4A2 and SOX9) and the other two as targets (C4B and
LCT), see complete annotations on these in Appendix I. In the following section a presen-
tation and discussion of the relevance of these genes to cancer and specifically basal-like
breast cancer will be given.
The first gene is the oncogene ANKRD40, ankyrin repeat domain 40. The details about
the function of this gene are not yet completely elucidated. The gene is down-regulated
and one driver mutation has been found in the 3’-UTR. In COSMIC a mutation at this
position has been seen once before in cells from the urinary tract, the alteration was, how-
ever, from cyanine to adenin, not to guanine. In a study by Kunitomi et al. (2020), the
gene LAMC1 in endometrical cancer cells were knocked-out and as a result ANKRD40
was under-expressed [62]. In this project LAMC1 was also downregulated and had four
mutations, one classified as a missense driver mutation. This means it would be placed
in a protein coding region, possibly altering the function of the protein. It is there-
fore possible that the LAMC1 protein binds more poorly, lowering the expression of
ANKRD40. In the Kunitomi study a correlation between an over-expression of LAMC1
and poorer prognosis in endometrical carcinoma was found. This is in contrast to the fact
that the basal-like cancer has the poorest prognosis but LAMC1 is under-expressed here.
A second gene of interest is the oncogene Dynein light chain roadblock-type 2, DYNLRB2.
In our study of basal-like tumors it is generally under-expressed. It is involved with
microtubule movement and is takes part in cell division. In a study by Sabine et al.
(2010) [63], a handful of genes were found to be good predictors of how likely it was that
ER positive tumor responded to pre-operative everolimus treatment. One of these genes
were DYNLRB2. When it was down-regulated it was correlated with poor drug response.
Everolimus is used in treatment of ER positive, HER-negative patients. Based on these
findings it cannot be suggested to treat basal-like breast cancer with Everolimus.
In another study of ductual carcinoma in situ (a usually noninvasive breast cancer) the
==PAGE:53==
3.5 Case study: Basal-like breast cancer
43
Table 3.2: The 27 driver genes, which also have a driver mutation. The COSMIC
classification ’mouse’ means that the gene has been shown to have oncogenic behaviour
in mice cells, but have not yet been seen or tested in human cells.
Hugo Symbol
Driver
Type
logFC
Moonlight
Gene z-score
Variant
Classification
Annotation
TF
COSMIC
Classification
ANKRD40
OCG
-1,04
2.17
3’UTR
Enhancer
Mouse
PSME4
TSG
1,22
1.20
3’UTR
Enhancer
Mouse
RHOBTB2
OCG
-1,10
0.996
5’Flank
Enhancer
TPCN1
OCG
-1,27
1.74
3’UTR
Enhancer
C4B
OCG
-1,88
1.67
5’Flank
COA7
TSG
1,07
0.724
3’UTR
GPATCH4
OCG
1,11
0.957
Splice_Site
HTR3A
OCG
1,21
1.46
5’UTR
Target
LARP4B
OCG
1,06
1.30
Nonsense
Consensus Tier 2
LCT
OCG
2,26
1.17
3’UTR
Target
Mouse
MAPK4
OCG
1,19
0.795
5’UTR
NR4A2
TSG
-1,55
1.31
Nonsense
Yes
SOX9
OCG
1,07
1.02
3’UTR
Yes
Mouse
SULF1
OCG
-1,66
1.25
3’UTR
TMEM65
TSG
1,32
0.854
3’UTR
Mouse
ZNF99
TSG
-2,27
0.789
3’UTR
ARL15
TSG
-1,44
0.789
5’UTR
Promoter
Mouse
DYNLRB2
OCG
-2,39
1.06
5’UTR
Promoter
PAPSS1
OCG
1,10
0.767
5’UTR
Promoter
POLR2J
TSG
1,01
0.933
5’UTR
Promoter
ECE1
TSG
-1,17
0.506
Intron
Promoter
Mouse
EYS
TSG
-1,46
1.46
Intron
CHN2
TSG
-1,45
0.642
Intron
Enhancer
Mouse
NUDT5
OCG
1,40
0.256
Intron
RANBP3L
TSG
-2,27
0.589
Intron
RUNX2
OCG
-1,28
1.13
Intron
Promoter
Yes
SMAP2
TSG
-3,65
0.483
Intron
Enhancer
Mouse
difference between pure samples and samples with a component of invasive carcinoma
was tested. It was found that some genes, including DYNLRB2, had significantly low-
ered copy number variants in the mixed samples [64]. Copy number variants is a good
example of another mechanistic indicator that could be added to Moonlight. The differ-
ential expression seen for the gene might not be caused by the driver mutation found
at the promoter site in this study. Upregulation of DYNLRB2 has been connected to
hypoxia in cells [65]. Hypoxia is involved with several of the cancer hallmarks such as
inducing angiogenisis and evading growth suppressors [66]. Because the gene is downreg-
ulated in basal-like breast cancer, it is possible that it is dual-role driver gene, though
this was not suggested in Nourbakhsh 2020 [34].
A third gene, PAPSS1 (Bifunctional 3’-phosphoadenosine 5’-phosphosulfate synthase 1),
was previously shown to be upregulated in TNBC and suggested as a potential biomarker
[67]. In this basal-like dataset it is also shown to be upregulated and an oncogene. This
could be related to the fact that the promoter just upstream of the gene contains a
driver mutation. According to Segaert et al. (2019), PAPSS1 may play an important
role in estrogen-independent cell growth. [67]
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Results & Discussion
The only gene of the 27 drivers with driver mutations, which had any consensus an-
notation was LARP4B (La ribonucleoprotein domain family member 4B). It has been
associated with glistoma and colorectal cancer, but as a tumor suppressor. The driver
mutation from this study is of course a SNV (nonsense). It did, however, also have two
other mutations, one silent driver and an unclassified frame-shift insertion. In COSMIC
a frame-shift deletion was associated with LARP4B. This gene is also a possible dual-
role driver gene.
Table 3.1 shows the driver genes with the highest number of mutations. A good example
of a gene where the mutational layer of evidence cannot explain the heavy negative
logfold change is COL6A5.
For this gene there is eleven mutations where four are
drivers, four mutations are unclassified and two are passengers. But when the mutations
are examined more closely they are all within the coding region, e.g. missense, silent
or frame-shift mutations, and cannot change the transcription level. The one exception
is an insertion causing a nonsense mutation. This mutation could start the nonsense
mediated decay of the transcripts, ending in a lowered level of gene expression [68].
Because it is an insertion CScape-somatic did not annotate its driver status. The driver
mutations found in the coding region are still very relevant to a cancer study, as they
will very likely change the protein structure and/or function. The protein acts as a cell-
binding protein and is associated with cell adhesion.This biological process is connected
to the fact that cancer cells’ contact inhibition is suppressed [5].
In lung cancer it was found by Duan et al.
(2020) that low expression of COL6A5
was correlated with poor prognosis, which is in accordance with basal-like breast cancer
having the poorest prognosis. Further Duan et al. suggested a range of SNPs which
were significant to risk assessment in lung cancer. [69] None of these SNPs were seen in
this study.
The gene was classified by Moonlight as a tumor suppressor, due to the logFC which
could instead be explained by epi-genetic changes. Interestingly this gene was found to
be a dual-role driver by Nourbakhsh [34], as it was an oncogene in Her2 breast cancer.
Finally we return to the TWIST1 transcription factor, mentioned in section 1.6. In this
basal-like study, the TWIST1 gene is differentially downregulated with a LogFC of -4.22.
Although this transcription factor was not found as an oncogenic driver by Moonlight,
its target RUNX2 was found to be an oncogene. It is repressed by TWIST1, according
to TRRUST. Further, as can be seen in Table 3.2, the driver mutation found for RUNX2
is actually placed in a promoter. It is, however, not clear if this promoter belongs to
RUNX2, as the mutation is also annotated to be inside an intron. If the binding site
of TWIST1 is mutated, it is not certain that medicine targeting TWIST1 will have any
effect.
The main take away is that by prioritising driver genes based on a mutational level of
evidence connected to transcription changes, a gene set different to the ones explored in
Nourbakhsh’s and Saksager’s previous projects were discovered [34, 53]. It does seem
==PAGE:55==
3.5 Case study: Basal-like breast cancer
45
that the genes predicted by Moonlight to a large extent can be connected to oncogenic
behaviour and the hallmarks of cancer. It is clear that more mechanistic indicators are
needed in order to explain deviations seen for the genes in this study compared to similar
studies
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 4
Perspectives
This project has started the work of extending the Moonlight package, but there is still
much more to be done.
4.1
Future Work with Variants and the DMA()
The function presented here can and should be extended in several directions. The most
obvious drawback of the predictor is its incapability to estimate driver status of indels.
To overcome this it is suggested that the tool PredCID should be included in a similar
way as CScape-somatic. PredCID is a tool which predicts cancer driver frameshift indels
[70]. The main issue that could not be solved within the time limits of this project, was
to acquired a licence for PredCID, and until that problem is solved it is not deemed
worthwhile to start the implementation of PredCID.
Another tool which was not fully explored was MyVariant [71]. This tool exists as an
R package and can with positional information of a mutation access a large database.
This will be useful for examining the coding regions, because many scores of mutations
affecting protein function and structures have been compiled. MyVariant was not im-
plemented for two reasons. The first reason is that when it was tested on some of the
mutations from basal-like breast cancer, none of the 20 mutations tested gave any re-
sults. Late in the project it was discovered that the R package needed the positions to
be mapped to GRCh37, which was why the test did not reveal any results. Even though
the web server had switched to GRCh38. The second reason is that not all mutations
are scored, (and they are mainly coding) so the tool did not quite fulfil the requirements.
If this was to be implemented at a later stage it would also be prudent to consider the
performance, as it could be quite time-consuming to call MyVariant for every variant. A
solution could be to only use the function for the driver mutations, or potentially only
driver mutations found in the driver genes.
Another line of work, which was begun but not finished, was the implementation of tran-
scription factors with data from TRRUST. Transcription factors are important because
they are directly involved with the level of transcription. Therefore information about
differentially expressed TFs or mutations can disrupt the TFs functionality, a binding
site or their own promoter is essential. The benefit of implementing such information
was seen for the RUNX2 gene and its connection to the TWIST1 transcription factor.
Finally there is COSMIC. It would be desirable to have information about driver con-
sensus for both for gene and mutation in Moonlight from COSMIC. However, COSMIC
is heavily protected so even though the raw data can be downloaded it cannot be dis-
tributed. It was therefore not possible to make this annotation. The next best thing is
to have the COSMIC id for mutations in the table, and these are already to some ex-
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Other Layers of Evidence
47
tent annotated in a TCGA MAF file. These numbers are sometimes outdated and even
when they are not the numbers cannot direct one to clear information about whether
the mutation is consensus. To access that information it is necessary to search by gene
name.
Finally it should be mentioned that the COSMIC consensus mutations only consist of
coding-mutations.
In this paper it was concluded that the annotation for enhancers are not meaningful
at this stage. However, if the enhancer sites could be connected to a gene or a whole
regulatory network it would be a great improvement. It is possible that the webpage
HACER (Human ACtive Enhancer to interpret Regulatory variants) contains the nec-
essary information. This should be investigated further, before the complete dismissal
of enhancers [72]. The distinctive fact about this database is that it connects enhancers
to transcription factor binding sites. Another resource of possible interest, which was
not explored in this thesis, is the database dbInDEL (a database of Insertion/Deletion
Variants in Enhancer) [73].
Finally, in should be mentioned that before the function can be published as a part of
Moonlight, it should go though a more rigorous testing on different MAF files, as there
might be variations that have not been considered. Especially since the basal-like breast
cancer MAF file was downloaded from TCGA almost 18 months prior to the end of this
project.
4.2
Other Layers of Evidence
This project has solely focused on driver mutations as mechanistic indicators of the
driver genes predicted by Moonlight. However, there are many other indicators which
should be implemented, in order to cover enough of the biological mechanistic to get
a clearer picture of cancer driver landscape. Moving forward the next indicator could
be methylation data. This can also be found and downloaded for the same samples as
used in this project from TCGA. The MoonlightR and the TCGAbiolinks packages can in
combination already download and find the differentially methylated genes. Synthesising
this information with the existing moonlight pipeline is therefore the last step missing
in order to complete this mechanistic indicator.
Another mechanistic indicator, mentioned in Section 1.3.4, is chromatin accessibility.
It is also possible to retrieve this data with TCGABiolinks, and it was shown to by
Colaprico et al. (2020) that meaningful biological conclusions can be derived by adding
this layer [16]. This is not yet an automated analysis in the MoonlightR package. As
mentioned, the gene DYNLRB2, have previously been seen with copy-number variations.
This is a good indication that copy-number variations are also a required mechanistic
indicator to include in MoonlightR. Copy-number variant data are also available on
TCGA.
These mechanistic indicators are suggestions to immediate extension to Moonlight and
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Perspectives
it is not complete list. Especially if Moonlight was adjusted to also examine proteomics
data, could many other layers of evidence be suggested.
4.3
Experimental Work
On a final note, it should be mentioned that no matter how good predictions of driver
genes and driver variants become, they cannot stand alone. It is important to remember
that laboratory work must follow in order to finalise the validation of any driver gene
or variant. Predictions today already rely on the laboratory work which have found the
true positives and the larger the basis of experimentally validated genes and variants is,
the better the predictions will be.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
In this project the work to find mechanistic indicators of Moonlight driver genes was
initiated. A mutational layer of evidence was successfully implemented into Moonlight
through a R function. The function can identify driver and passenger SNVs by CScape-
somatic, and categorise the mutations to according to their potential to cause changes
in the transcription level, translation level, or protein structure or function. It works as
an extension to the current Moonlight pipeline.
A pilot study was conducted on basal-like breast cancer. Moonlight had predicted 366
driver genes and of these 70 oncogenes and 31 tumor suppressor genes contained at least
one driver mutation. 27 driver genes was found to be able to influence the transcription
level. Indels could not be annotated with CScape-somatic and therefore some driver
genes with mutations were not annotated.
The analysis revealed that more layers of mechanistic indicators must be implemented
in Moonlight, in order to find supporting evidence for all driver genes.
==PAGE:60==
APPENDIX A
Mutect2 Specifications
Commands Shell:
1 java -jar GenomeAnalysisTK.jar \
2 -T MuTect2 \
3 -R <reference > \
4 -L <region > \
5 -I:tumor <tumor.bam> \
6 -I:normal <normal.bam> \
7 --normal\_panel <pon.vcf> \
8 --cosmic <cosmic.vcf> \
9 --dbsnp <dbsnp.vcf> \
10 --contamination_fraction_to_filter 0.02 \
11 -o <mutect_variants.vcf> \
12 --output_mode EMIT_VARIANTS_ONLY \
13 --disable_auto_index_creation_and_locking_when_reading_rods
Variant annotation workflow databases:
GENCODE v.22
sift v.5.2.2
ESP v.20141103
polyphen v.2.2.2
dbSNP v.146
Ensembl genebuild v.2014-07
Ensembl regbuild v.13.0
HGMD public v.20154
ClinVar v.201601
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX B
Moonlight Scoring
Here is an deeper explanation of the two moonlight scores than mentioned in the intro-
duction of this thesis.
There are two moonlight scores, the moonlight process z-score and the moonlight gene
z-score. The first is calculated as part of the Functional Enrichment Analysis. The
algorithm for calculating across all differentially expressed genes are written in Figure
B.1. The value of y is found as follows:
ykj = 1
| (Lkj = Increased & logFC(k) > 0) or (Lkj = Decreased & logFC(k) < 0)
ykj = −1 | (Lkj = Increased & logFC(k) < 0) or (Lkj = Decreased & logFC(k) > 0)
ykj = 0
| (Lkj = Affected & logFC(k) = 0)
where Lkj is the literature annotated effect for each gene k and each biological process
j. Only the genes which overlaps between the DEG and the genes in the particular BP
are evaluated, the total number of these genes is represented by N. Then the moonlight
process score is determined for each BP. The gene k connected to gene i, can be un-
derstood as the mutual information between these two genes is above the threshold for
significance and they are therefore in the same network.
Figure B.1: A shows the moonlight process z-score, B. shows the calculation for the
moonlight gene z-score. This figure is from a student project by A. Saksager [53].
In Figure B.2 an example of how a moonlight gene z-score is calculated for one gene
X in two different biological processes, proliferation and apoptosis. The genes A:E are
connected to X. The blue genes are up-regulated and the red genes down-regulated.
==PAGE:62==
52
B Moonlight Scoring
Figure B.2
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX C
Level of consequence
The Tables used in the DMA function to estimate which mutation type and class can
possibly influence the transcription level, translational level or protein structure/func-
tion.
Table C.1: Possible effect on Translational level
Type/Classification
SNP
INS
DEL
DNP
TNP
ONP
5’Flank
0
0
0
0
0
0
5’UTR
1
1
1
1
1
1
TSS
1
1
1
1
1
1
Missense
0
NA
NA
0
0
0
Nonsense
0
0
0
0
0
0
Nonstop
1
1
1
1
1
1
Splice Site
0
0
0
0
0
0
Splice Region
0
0
0
0
0
0
Silent
0
NA
NA
0
0
0
In Frame Deletion
NA
0
0
NA
0
NA
In Frame Insertion
NA
0
0
NA
0
NA
Frameshift Deletion
NA
0
0
0
NA
0
Frameshift Insertion
NA
0
0
0
NA
0
Intron
0
0
0
0
0
0
3’UTR
1
1
1
1
1
1
3’Flank
0
0
0
0
0
0
IGR
0
0
0
0
0
0
==PAGE:64==
54
C Level of consequence
Table C.2: Possible effect on Protein structure or function.
Type/Classification
SNP
INS
DEL
DNP
TNP
ONP
5’Flank
0
0
0
0
0
0
5’UTR
0
0
0
0
0
0
TSS
1
1
1
1
1
1
Missense
1
NA
NA
1
1
1
Nonsense
1
1
1
1
1
1
Nonstop
1
1
1
1
1
1
Splice Site
1
1
1
1
1
1
Splice Region
1
1
1
1
1
1
Silent
0
NA
NA
0
0
0
In Frame Deletion
NA
1
1
NA
1
NA
In Frame Insertion
NA
1
1
NA
1
NA
Frameshift Deletion
NA
1
1
1
NA
1
Frameshift Insertion
NA
1
1
1
NA
1
Intron
0
1
1
0
0
0
3’UTR
0
0
0
0
0
0
3’Flank
0
0
0
0
0
0
IGR
0
0
0
0
0
0
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX D
DMA: Pseudo code
The full code can be found at https://github.com/ELELAB/mutations_basal_like.
1 If Results -folder does not exits
2
Create results -folder
3 Load data
4 Remove mutations from nonDEGs
5 Temporarily remove DEGs with no mutation
6 Lift to GRCh37
7 Change format of tibble to fit CScape
8 Select SNPs only
9 Run CScape-somatic function
10 Write Cscape output to results -folder
11 Merge with indels
12 Liftover to GRCh38
13 Add additional annotations by merging on Hugo Symbol
14
Add consequence level
15
Add moonlight drivers
16
Add enhancer and promoters
17 Summarise the counts for driver, passenger an unclassified mutations per
driver gene
18 Summarise the counts for transcription , translation and protein effects
per driver gene
19 Merge the two summaries
20 Clean main tibble
21 Write summary and full tibble to results -folder
22 Read tibble to maf-format
23 Run maftools functions to create plots
24 Save plots in results -folder
==PAGE:66==
APPENDIX E
List of Outliers
Gene
# Mutations
Type
TP53
158
nonDEG
TTN
102
DEG
MUC16
36
nonDEG
RYR2
24
nonDEG
CCDC168
24
DEG
FAT3
24
DEG
SYNE1
23
DEG
OBSCN
22
nonDEG
USH2A
22
nonDEG
MUC4
21
nonDEG
SPTA1
21
DEG
APOB
20
DEG
DNAH14
20
DEG
DST
20
DEG
HMCN1
19
DEG
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX F
Maftool Visualisations
Figure F.1
==PAGE:68==
58
F Maftool Visualisations
Figure F.2:
Rainfall plot of the mutations in the Sample TCGA-BH-A180G-01A-
A12B-09. The x-axis is the genomic placement with the chromosomes marked with a
grey vertical line. The y-axis is the distance between the mutation and the one prior to
it on a log-scale.
==PAGE:69==
F Maftool Visualisations
59
==PAGE:70==
APPENDIX G
Additional Plots
Additional visualisations of the results from the DMA-function run on basal-like breast
cancer data from TCGA.
Figure G.1: The LogFC of all DEGs and their number of mutations in each gene
Figure G.2: The Log fold change of only the tumor suppressors and oncogene against
the number of mutations in each gene
==PAGE:71==
G Additional Plots
61
Figure G.3: The driver variants distribution of the number variant classifications in
Oncogenes and Tumor suppressors
==PAGE:72==
APPENDIX H
Driver Mutated Genes
==PAGE:73==
H Driver Mutated Genes
63
Table H.1: Results of the 27 driver genes with transcription driver mutations
Hugo Symbol
Uniprot
Protein name
Driver Type
logFC
Variant
Classification
Position
Annotation
Transcription
Factor
Connectivity
COSMIC Hallmarks
Strand
COSMIC
Expression
in breast tissue
Over/Under %
ANKRD40
Ankyrin repeat domain-containing
protein 40
OCG
-1,04
3’UTR
50695946
Enhancer
Mouse
Negative
17 / 4
PSME4
Proteasome activator complex
subunit 4
TSG
1,22
3’UTR
53865013
Enhancer
Mouse
Negative
10 / 0
RHOBTB2
Rho-related BTB domain containing
protein 2
OCG
-1,10
5’Flank
22995860
Enhancer
Positive
13 / 2
TPCN1
Two pore channel protein 1
OCG
-1,27
3’UTR
113297178
Enhancer
Positive
2 / 0.7
C4B
Complement C4-B
OCG
-1,88
5’Flank
32011026
Positive
-
COA7
Cytochrome c ocidase assemly factor 7
TSG
1,07
3’UTR
52687676
Negative
-
GPATCH4
G patch domain-containing protein 4
OCG
1,11
Splice_Site
156598420
Negative
25 / 0.3
HTR3A
5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 3A
OCG
1,21
5’UTR
113975254
Target
Positive
5 / 0
LARP4B
La-related protein 4B
OCG
1,06
Nonsense_Mutation
829719
Consensus Tier 2
Negative
13 / 0.7
LCT
Lactase-phlorizin hydrolase
OCG
2,26
3’UTR
135788242
Target
Mouse
Negative
5 / 0
MAPK4
Mitrogen-activated protein kinase 4
OCG
1,19
5’UTR
50663889
Positive
1.6 / 0
NR4A2
Nuclear receptor subfamily 4
group A member 2
TSG
-1,55
Nonsense_Mutation
156326731
Yes
Negative
3 / 0
SOX9
Transcription factor SOX-9
OCG
1,07
3’UTR
72126126
Yes
Mouse
Positive
8 / 0
SULF1
Extracellular sulfatase Sulf-1
OCG
-1,66
3’UTR
69659203
Postive
1.8 / 0
TMEM65
Transmembrane protein 65
TSG
1,32
3’UTR
124313951
Mouse
Negative
23 / 0
ZNF99
Zinc finger protein 99
TSG
-2,27
3’UTR
22757057
-
Negative
8 / 0
ARL15
ADP-ribosylation factor-like protein 15
TSG
-1,44
5’UTR
54310486
Promoter
Mouse
Negative
2 / 0
DYNLRB2
Dynein light chain roadblock-type 2
OCG
-2,39
5’UTR
80541041
Promoter
Positive
3 / 0
PAPSS1
Bifunctional 3’phosphoadenosine
5’-phosphosulfate syntase 1
OCG
1,10
5’UTR
107720187
Promoter
Negative
8 / 0
POLR2J
DNA-directed RNA polymerase II
subunit RPB11-a
TSG
1,01
5’UTR
102478861
Promoter
Negative
6 / 0
ECE1
Endothelin-converting enzyme 1
TSG
-1,17
Intron
21290212
Promoter
Mouse
Negative
3 / 0
EYS
Protein eyes shut homolog
TSG
-1,46
Intron
65304652
Negative
0.6 / 0
CHN2
Beta-chimaerin
TSG
-1,45
Intron
29480051
Enhancer
Mouse
Positive
3.5 / 0
NUDT5
ADP-sugar pytophosphatase
OCG
1,40
Intron
12167887
Negative
15 / 0
RANBP3L
Ran-binding protein 3-like
TSG
-2,27
Intron
36268203
Negative
5.8 / 0
RUNX2
Runt-related transciption factor 2
OCG
-1,28
Intron
45422530
Promoter
Yes
Positive
3 / 0
SMAP2
Stomal membrane-associated protein 2
TSG
-3,65
Intron
40414064
Enhancer
Mouse
Positive
4.8 / 0
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX I
TRRUST data on driver genes
Table I.1: TRRUST on target LCT
Transcription Factor
Target
Mode of Regulation
CDX2
LCT
Activation
HNF1A
LCT
Activation
HOXC11
LCT
Unknown
POU2F1
LCT
Activation
Table I.2: TRRUST data on target C4B
Transcription Factor
Target
Mode of Regulation
SP1
C4B
Unknown
Table I.3: TRRUST on transcription factor NR4A2
Transcription Factor
Target
Mode of Regulation
NR4A2
APOM
Unknown
NR4A2
CRH
Unknown
NR4A2
CXCL8
Unknown
NR4A2
MMP1
Repression
NR4A2
SLC6A3
Unknown
==PAGE:75==
I TRRUST data on driver genes
65
Table I.4: TRRUST data on transcription factor SOX9
Transcription Factor
Target
Mode of Regulation
SOX9
AMH
Activation, Unknown
SOX9
AR
Activation
SOX9
BEST1
Activation
SOX9
CDK4
Activation, Repression
SOX9
CDKN1A
Activation, Repression
SOX9
COL2A1
Activation, Repression, Unknown
SOX9
DCC
Activation
SOX9
DCT
Unknown
SOX9
HES1
Activation
SOX9
KLF4
Unknown
SOX9
MIA
Activation
SOX9
MITF
Unknown
SOX9
NES
Unknown
SOX9
NR5A1
Activation, Unknown
SOX9
POU3F2
Repression
SOX9
PRAMF
Repression
SOX9
RXFP2
Activation
SOX9
SF1
Unknown
SOX9
SHH
Unknown
SOX9
SOX10
Repression
SOX9
TYR
Unknown
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
[1]
Hyuna Sung et al. “Global Cancer Statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN Estimates of
Incidence and Mortality Worldwide for 36 Cancers in 185 Countries.” In: CA: A
Cancer Journal for Clinicians 71 (3 May 2021), pages 209–249. issn: 0007-9235.
doi: 10.3322/caac.21660 (cited on pages 1, 12).
[2]
CB Moelans and Diest PJ van. “Breast: Ductal carcinoma.” In: Atlas of Genetics
and Cytogenetics in Oncology and Haematology (3 March 2013). issn: 1768-3262.
doi: 10.4267/2042/48766 (cited on page 1).
[3]
Alsha Patel. “Benign vs Malignant Tumors.” In: JAMA Oncology (2020). doi:
10.1001/jamaoncol.2020.2592. url: www.cancerresearchuk.org/what-is-
cancer/how-cancer-starts/ (cited on page 1).
[4]
Sarah E Jackson and John D Chester. “Personalised cancer medicine.” In: Interna-
tional Journal of Cancer 137 (2015). doi: 10.1002/ijc.28940 (cited on pages 1,
5).
[5]
Douglas Hanahan and Robert A. Weinberg. “Hallmarks of cancer: The next gen-
eration.” In: Cell 144 (5 2011), pages 646–674. issn: 00928674. doi: 10.1016/j.
cell.2011.02.013 (cited on pages 1, 2, 44).
[6]
J. Sebat et al. “Large-Scale Copy number Polymorphism in the Human Genome.”
In: Science 305 (2004). url: www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/305/
5683/525/ (cited on page 2).
[7]
Genetic Alliance. The New York-Mid-Atlantic Consortium for Genetic and New-
born Screening Services. Understanding Genetics: A New York, Mid-Atlantic Guide
for Patients and Health Professionals. Volume Appendix F. Genetic Alliance, July
2009 (cited on page 2).
[8]
Bert Vogelstein et al. “Human genome sequencing.” In: American Association for
the Advancement of Science (2013), pages 1546–1558. issn: 00368075. doi: 10.
1126/science.1235122. url: https://www.sciencemag.org/lookup/doi/10.
1126/science.233.4770.1246-b (cited on pages 4–7, 37).
[9]
Kerryn Elliott and Erik Larsson. “Non-coding driver mutations in human cancer.”
In: Nature 21 (2021). doi: 10.1038/s41568-021-00371-z. url: https://doi.
org/10.1038/ (cited on page 4).
[10]
Kok A. Gan et al. “Identification of single nucleotide non-coding driver mutations
in cancer.” In: Frontiers in Genetics 9 (FEB February 2018). issn: 16648021. doi:
10.3389/fgene.2018.00016 (cited on pages 4, 19).
[11]
Glenn A. Maston, Sara K. Evans, and Michael R. Green. “Transcriptional regula-
tory elements in the human genome.” In: Annual Review of Genomics and Human
Genetics 7 (2006), pages 29–59. issn: 15278204. doi: 10.1146/annurev.genom.7.
080505.115623 (cited on page 4).
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
67
[12]
Gerd P. Pfeifer. “Review: Defining Driver DNA Methylation Changes in Human
Cancer.” In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 388 (2018), pages 539–
547 (cited on page 4).
[13]
Yu Liang, Cheng Zhang, and Dong Qiu Dai. “Identification of differentially ex-
pressed genes regulated by methylation in colon cancer based on bioinformatics
analysis.” In: World Journal of Gastroenterology 25 (26 2019), pages 3392–3407.
issn: 22192840. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v25.i26.3392 (cited on page 5).
[14]
Sandy L. Klemm, Zohar Shipony, and William J. Greenleaf. “Chromatin acces-
sibility and the regulatory epigenome.” In: Nature Reviews Genetics 20 (4 April
2019), pages 207–220. issn: 14710064. doi: 10.1038/s41576-018-0089-8 (cited
on page 5).
[15]
Libing Shen, Qili Shi, and Wenyuan Wang. “Double agents: genes with both onco-
genic and tumor-suppressor functions.” In: Oncogenesis 7 (3 2018). issn: 2157-9024.
doi: 10.1038/s41389-018-0034-x. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41389-
018-0034-x (cited on page 5).
[16]
Antonio Colaprico et al. “Interpreting pathways to discover cancer driver genes
with Moonlight.” In: Nature Communications 11 (1 2020). issn: 20411723. doi:
10.1038/s41467-019-13803-0. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
019-13803-0 (cited on pages 5–10, 47).
[17]
Sirvan Khalighi, Salendra Singh, and Vinay Varadan. “Untangling a complex web:
Computational analyses of tumor molecular profiles to decode driver mechanisms.”
In: Journal of Genetics and Genomics 47 (10 October 2020), pages 595–609. issn:
18735533. doi: 10.1016/j.jgg.2020.11.001 (cited on pages 6, 16).
[18]
Shimin Shuai, Steven Gallinger, and Lincoln Stein. “Combined burden and func-
tional impact tests for cancer driver discovery using DriverPower.” In: Nature Com-
munications 11 (2020). doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-13929-1 (cited on page 6).
[19]
Michael S. Lawrence et al. “Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search
for new cancer-associated genes.” In: Nature 499 (7457 2013), pages 214–218. issn:
00280836. doi: 10.1038/nature12213 (cited on page 6).
[20]
Mark D.M. Leiserson et al. “Pan-cancer network analysis identifies combinations
of rare somatic mutations across pathways and protein complexes.” In: Nature
Genetics 47 (2 January 2015), pages 106–114. issn: 15461718. doi: 10.1038/ng.
3168 (cited on page 6).
[21]
Peilin Jia and Zhongming Zhao. “VarWalker: Personalized Mutation Network Anal-
ysis of Putative Cancer Genes from Next-Generation Sequencing Data.” In: PLoS
Computational Biology 10 (2 2014). issn: 15537358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.
1003460 (cited on page 6).
[22]
Claudia Arnedo-Pac et al. “OncodriveCLUSTL: A sequence-based clustering method
to identify cancer drivers.” In: Bioinformatics 35 (22 2019), pages 4788–4790. issn:
14602059. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz501 (cited on page 6).
==PAGE:78==
68
Bibliography
[23]
Pauline C. Ng and Steven Henikoff. “SIFT: Predicting amino acid changes that
affect protein function.” In: Nucleic Acids Research 31 (13 July 2003), pages 3812–
3814. issn: 03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkg509 (cited on pages 6, 30).
[24]
Vikas Pejaver et al. “Inferring the molecular and phenotypic impact of amino acid
variants with MutPred2.” In: Nature Communications 11 (1 December 2020). issn:
20411723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-19669-x (cited on page 6).
[25]
Ivan A. Adzhubei et al. “A method and server for predicting damaging missense
mutations.” In: Nature Methods 7 (4 April 2010), pages 248–249. issn: 15487091.
doi: 10.1038/nmeth0410-248 (cited on pages 6, 30).
[26]
Hannah Carter et al. “Prioritization of driver mutations in pancreatic cancer using
cancer-specific high-throughput annotation of somatic mutations (CHASM).” In:
Cancer Biology and Therapy 10 (6 September 2010), pages 582–587. issn: 15384047.
doi: 10.4161/cbt.10.6.12537 (cited on page 6).
[27]
Zachary R. Chalmers et al. “Analysis of 100,000 human cancer genomes reveals
the landscape of tumor mutational burden.” In: Genome Medicine 9 (1 April 2017).
issn: 1756994X. doi: 10.1186/s13073-017-0424-2 (cited on page 6).
[28]
Ali Bashashati et al. “DriverNet: uncovering the impact of somatic driver mu-
tations on transcriptional networks in cancer.” In: Genome biology 13 (12 2012),
R124. issn: 1474760X. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-12-r124 (cited on page 6).
[29]
Hu Chen et al. “Comprehensive assessment of computational algorithms in pre-
dicting cancer driver mutations.” In: Genome Biology 21 (1 February 2020). issn:
1474760X. doi: 10.1186/s13059-020-01954-z (cited on pages 7, 16, 32).
[30]
Collin J Tokheim et al. “Evaluating the evaluation of cancer driver genes.” In: 113
(50 2016). doi: 10.1073/pnas.1616440113. url: www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.
1073/pnas.1616440113 (cited on pages 7, 33).
[31]
Olivier Collier Id et al. “LOTUS: A single- and multitask machine learning algo-
rithm for the prediction of cancer driver genes.” In: (2019). doi: 10.1371/journal.
pcbi.1007381. url: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007381 (cited
on page 7).
[32]
Pramod Chandrashekar et al. “Somatic selection distinguishes oncogenes and tu-
mor suppressor genes.” In: Bioinformatics 36 (6 2020), pages 1712–1717. issn:
14602059. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz851 (cited on page 7).
[33]
“TCGAbiolinks: an R/Bioconductor package for integrative analysis of TCGA
data.” In: Nucleic Acids Research 44 (8 2015), page 71. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1507.
url: https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/44/8/e71/2465925 (cited on
pages 8, 22).
[34]
Mona Nourbakhsh. “Prediction of tumor suppressors, oncogenes, and dual role
driver genes in breast cancer subtypes.” Technical University of Denmark, Quan-
titative Biology and Disease Modeling, 2021 (cited on pages 8, 9, 22, 23, 43, 44).
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
69
[35]
M. E. Ritchie et al. “limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-
sequencing and mircroarray studies.” In: Nucleic Acids Research 43 (7 2015) (cited
on pages 8, 22).
[36]
Mark F. Rogers, Tom R. Gaunt, and Colin Campbell. “CScape-somatic: Distin-
guishing driver and passenger point mutations in the cancer genome.” In: Bioin-
formatics 36 (12 March 2020), pages 3637–3644. issn: 14602059. doi: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/btaa242 (cited on pages 10, 11, 16, 18, 32).
[37]
John G. Tate et al. “COSMIC: The Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Can-
cer.” In: Nucleic Acids Research 47 (D1 January 2019), pages D941–D947. issn:
13624962. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1015 (cited on page 11).
[38]
U.S. Department of Health et al. TCGA: The Cancer Genome Atlas. 2021. url:
https : / / portal . gdc . cancer . gov/ (visited on August 30, 2020) (cited on
page 11).
[39]
TCGA GDC data portal. DNA-Seq Analysis Pipeline. December 2021. url: https:
//docs.gdc.cancer.gov/Data/Bioinformatics_Pipelines/DNA_Seq_Variant_
Calling_Pipeline/#dna-seq-analysis-pipeline (cited on page 12).
[40]
William McLaren et al. “The Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor.” In: BioMed Cen-
tral (2016) (cited on pages 12, 30).
[41]
Julia Y.S. Tsang and Gary M. Tse. “Molecular Classification of Breast Cancer.” In:
Advances in Anatomic Pathology 27 (1 2020), pages 27–35. issn: 15334031. doi:
10.1097/PAP.0000000000000232 (cited on page 13).
[42]
Nazneen Rahman and Michael R Stratton. THE GENETICS OF BREAST CAN-
CER SUSCEPTIBILITY. 1998, pages 95–121. url: www . annualreviews . org
(cited on page 13).
[43]
Sandra M. Swain et al. “Pertuzumab, trastuzumab, and docetaxel for HER2-
positive metastatic breast cancer (CLEOPATRA): end-of-study results from a
double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 study.” In: The Lancet On-
cology 21 (4 April 2020), pages 519–530. issn: 14745488. doi: 10.1016/S1470-
2045(19)30863-0. url: http://www.thelancet.com/article/S1470204519308630/
fulltext % 20http : / / www . thelancet . com / article / S1470204519308630 /
abstract % 20https : / / www . thelancet . com / journals / lanonc / article /
PIIS1470-2045(19)30863-0/abstract (cited on page 13).
[44]
C M Perou et al. “Molecular portraits of human breast tumours.” In: Nature 406
(2000). url: www.stanford.edu/molecularportraits/ (cited on page 13).
[45]
Joel S. Parker et al. “Supervised risk predictor of breast cancer based on intrinsic
subtypes.” In: Journal of Clinical Oncology 27 (8 2009). https://ascopubs.org/doi/figure/10.1200/J
pages 1160–1167. issn: 0732183X. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.18.1370 (cited on
page 13).
[46]
Roy Rl Bastien et al. “PAM50 breast cancer subtyping by RT-qPCR and concor-
dance with standard clinical molecular markers.” In: BMC Medical Genomics 5
(2012). issn: 17558794. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-5-44 (cited on page 13).
==PAGE:80==
70
Bibliography
[47]
Aleix Prat et al. “Clinical implications of the intrinsic molecular subtypes of breast
cancer.” In: The Breast 24 (2015), S26–S35. issn: 15323080. doi: 10.1016/j.
breast.2015.07.008 (cited on page 13).
[48]
Jingying Cao et al. “Twist promotes tumor metastasis in basal-like breast cancer
by transcriptionally upregulating ROR1.” In: Theranostics 8 (10 2018), pages 2739–
2751. issn: 18387640. doi: 10.7150/thno.21477 (cited on page 13).
[49]
Carrie A. Davis et al. “The Encyclopedia of DNA elements (ENCODE): Data
portal update.” In: Nucleic Acids Research 46 (D1 January 2018), pages D794–
D801. issn: 13624962. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1081 (cited on page 20).
[50]
Anand Mayakonda et al. “Maftools: Eﬀicient and comprehensive analysis of so-
matic variants in cancer.” In: Genome Research 28 (11 November 2018), pages 1747–
1756. doi: 10.1101/GR.239244.118 (cited on page 20).
[51]
Bioconductor Package Maintainer. “liftOver: Changing genomic coordinate sys-
tems with rtracklayer::liftOver.” In: (2021). <b>R package version 1.18.0</b>.
url: https://www.bioconductor.org/help/workflows/liftOver/ (cited on
page 20).
[52]
Heonjong Han et al. “TRRUST v2: An expanded reference database of human and
mouse transcriptional regulatory interactions.” In: Nucleic Acids Research 46 (D1
January 2018), pages D380–D386. issn: 13624962. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1013
(cited on page 21).
[53]
Astrid Brix Saksager. “Prediction of Driver Genes in Breast Cancer using Gene
Expression Data.” Denmarks Technical University, June 2021 (cited on pages 22,
23, 41, 44, 51).
[54]
Mangiola S. and Papenfuss A. “tidyHeatmap: an R package for modular heatmap
production based on tidy principles.” In: Journal of Open Source Software 5.52
(2020), page 2472. doi: 10.21105/joss.02472. url: https://doi.org/10.
21105/joss.02472 (cited on page 25).
[55]
Zuguang Gu, Roland Eils, and Matthias Schlesner. “Complex heatmaps reveal
patterns and correlations in multidimensional genomic data.” In: Bioinformatics
(2016) (cited on page 25).
[56]
Hadley Wickham and Garrett Grolemund. R for Data Science. O’Reiley, 2016
(cited on page 26).
[57]
Di Zhang and Yannan Bin. “DriverSubNet: A Novel Algorithm for Identifying Can-
cer Driver Genes by Subnetwork Enrichment Analysis.” In: Frontiers in Genetics
11 (2021). issn: 16648021. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.607798 (cited on page 31).
[58]
Mark F. Rogers et al. “CScape: A tool for predicting oncogenic single-point mu-
tations in the cancer genome.” In: Scientific Reports 7 (1 December 2017). issn:
20452322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-11746-4 (cited on page 32).
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
71
[59]
Daniele Raimondi et al. “Current cancer driver variant predictors learn to recognize
driver genes instead of functional variants.” In: BMC Biology 19 (1 December 2021).
issn: 17417007. doi: 10.1186/s12915-020-00930-0 (cited on page 33).
[60]
Nathan J. Edwards et al. “The CPTAC Data Portal: A Resource for Cancer Pro-
teomics Research.” In: Journal of Proteome Research 14 (6 June 2015), pages 2707–
2713. issn: 15353907. doi: 10.1021/PR501254J. url: https://pubs.acs.org/
doi/pdf/10.1021/pr501254j (cited on page 33).
[61]
Ji Hye Oh et al. “Spontaneous mutations in the single TTN gene represent high
tumor mutation burden.” In: npj Genomic Medicine 2020 5:1 5 (1 January 2020),
pages 1–11. issn: 2056-7944. doi: 10.1038/s41525-019-0107-6. url: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41525-019-0107-6 (cited on page 35).
[62]
Haruko Kunitomi et al. “LAMC1 is a prognostic factor and a potential therapeutic
target in endometrial cancer.” In: Journal of Gynecologic Oncology 31 (2 2020).
issn: 20050399. doi: 10.3802/jgo.2020.31.e11 (cited on page 42).
[63]
Vicky S. Sabine et al. “Gene expression profiling of response to mTOR inhibitor
everolimus in pre-operatively treated post-menopausal women with oestrogen receptor-
positive breast cancer.” In: Breast Cancer Research and Treatment 122 (2 July
2010), pages 419–428. issn: 01676806. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-0928-6 (cited
on page 42).
[64]
Shaoxi Liao et al. “Differential copy number aberrations in novel candidate genes
associated with progression from in situ to invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast.”
In: Genes Chromosomes and Cancer 51 (12 December 2012), pages 1067–1078.
issn: 10452257. doi: 10.1002/gcc.21991 (cited on page 43).
[65]
Brita Singers Sørensen et al. “Proteins upregulated by mild and severe hypoxia in
squamous cell carcinomas in vitro identified by proteomics.” In: Radiotherapy and
Oncology 92 (3 September 2009), pages 443–449. issn: 01678140. doi: 10.1016/j.
radonc.2009.05.019 (cited on page 43).
[66]
Kai Ruan, Gang Song, and Gaoliang Ouyang. “Role of hypoxia in the hallmarks
of human cancer.” In: Journal of Cellular Biochemistry 107 (6 August 2009),
pages 1053–1062. issn: 07302312. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22214 (cited on page 43).
[67]
Pieter Segaert et al. “Robust identification of target genes and outliers in triple-
negative breast cancer data.” In: Statistical Methods in Medial Research 29 (2019)
(cited on page 43).
[68]
Gonçalo Nogueira et al. “Nonsense-mediated RNA decay and its bipolar function
in cancer.” In: Molecular Cancer 20 (1 December 2021). issn: 14764598. doi: 10.
1186/s12943-021-01364-0 (cited on page 44).
==PAGE:82==
72
Bibliography
[69]
Ying Duan et al. “Collagen type VI ￿5 gene variations may predict the risk of
lung cancer development in Chinese Han population.” In: Scientific Reports 10 (1
December 2020). issn: 20452322. doi: 10.1038/S41598-020-61614-X. url: /pmc/
articles/PMC7081318/%20/pmc/articles/PMC7081318/?report=abstract%
20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7081318/ (cited on
page 44).
[70]
Zhenyu Yue, Xinlu Chu, and Junfeng Xia. “PredCID: prediction of driver frameshift
indels in human cancer.” In: Briefings in bioinformatics 22 (3 May 2021). issn:
14774054. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbaa119 (cited on page 46).
[71]
Jiwen Xin et al. “High-performance web services for querying gene and variant
annotation.” In: Genome Biology 17 (1 May 2016). issn: 1474760X. doi: 10.1186/
s13059-016-0953-9 (cited on page 46).
[72]
Jing Wang et al. “HACER: An atlas of human active enhancers to interpret reg-
ulatory variants.” In: Nucleic Acids Research 47 (D1 January 2019), pages D106–
D112. issn: 13624962. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky864 (cited on page 47).
[73]
Moli Huang et al. “DbInDel: A database of enhancer-associated insertion and dele-
tion variants by analysis of H3K27ac ChIP-Seq.” In: Bioinformatics 36 (5 March
2020), pages 1649–1651. issn: 14602059. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz770
(cited on page 47).
