==PAGE:1==
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Ap­
proach in the Enterprise Software Market
Master Thesis
DTU Business Analytics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Mar­
ket
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
Sergio Hernández López
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, , , 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months, Department DTU Management, at the
Technical University of Denmark, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Business
Analytics, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
ii
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:5==
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Sergio Hernández López, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
iv
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Pivots and Lean startup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Business models and Software startups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Statement of the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Objectives of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.7
Proposed research methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.8
Scope, assumptions, limitations, and delimitation of the research . . . . . .
7
1.9
Significance of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.10 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Literature review
9
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Business Model Canvas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Types of Business Models of Software Startups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Lean startup approach and customer Development model . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Software Startups
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.6
Types of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) in software startups . . . . . . 15
2.7
Entrepreneurial pivoting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.8
Different stages of start up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.9
Conceptual Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.10 Reasons for using ESSSDM funnel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.11 Chapter summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3
Methodology
21
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Research method and design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3
Target population and sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.4
Data collection instrumentation and procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.6
Trustworthiness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.7
Ethical considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.8
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Results
25
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Sample and data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Founders’ Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.4
Groupings of the respondents according to their background
. . . . . . . . 26
4.5
First Iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.6
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.7
Changes in the business model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
v
==PAGE:8==
4.8
Discussions of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5
Conclusion and recommendations
39
5.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
A Bibliography
41
B Interviews Sources
46
vi
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The enterprise software market is considered competitive and volatile in nature. Thus,
firms in this market must seek for ways of maintaining their competitiveness through piv­
oting. Pivoting is anchored on the idea of lean startup framework where by organization
continuously review their operations to ensure that they are consistent with the business
environment. This chapter presents an introduction to lean startups and pivoting. It pro­
vides a statement of the problem, which justifies the need for conducting this study. It
also describes the objectives of this study alongside the research questions formulated
to guide the study. A discussion of the scope, assumptions, limitations, and delimitation
of the study are provided in this section. The chapter concludes with a discussion of the
significance of this study and an outline of the paper’s organization in the chapters that
will follow.
1.1
Background of the study
Marmer et al., (2012) highlights that, up to 90% of all startups fail. One of the main reasons
that cause enterprise software startups to fail is that, they avoid to acquire knowledge on
their potential customers. They also fail to look after their hypothesis hence takes the
option of persevering in a case where they are supposed to change direction (Giardino et
al., 2014). Online grocery shopping is a perfect example of such incidences. At the end
of the 20th century, approximately $800 million was raised at Webvan for the provision of
an online solution including same­day delivery. Even though the company managed to go
public, they declared bankruptcy only two years after their launch (Blank, 2003). Tesco
on the other hand has been able to successful establish an online services of grocery
shopping (Delaney­Klinger, 2003).
From these two examples, a question arises concerning the difference between the two
cases if the two companies co­existed at the same time. Tesco examined if there was a
demand by consumers despite the fact that they lacked the newest websites, computer
systems and warehouses (Hirakubo & Friendman, 2002). Webvan on the contrary took
the initiative of building automated warehouses, buying a fleet of trucks for delivery and
increased the number of employees before conducting a validation of the hypothesis and
the target market (Blank, 2003). As a result, Webvan did not manage to build a customer
base required to compensate the massive upfront investment.
From the example of the two cases, it can be highlighted that customer involvement could
have played a significant role in the survival of a startup (Crowne, 2002; Ries, 2011). An­
other example, is that during its development stages, Youtube, one of the software giants,
underwent a number of changes prior to becoming stable. Youtube was forced to change
its business model owing to the needs of their customers. The company initially began as
a dating platform where customers uploaded short video of themselves. However, cus­
tomers were reluctant to upload the short video of them even after being offered money
(Bajwa et al., 2017). The founders eventually changed the concept and opted to open the
platform for all video types. Currently, Youtube is the largest video platform in the world.
Youtube is therefore an example of pivoting that has occurred in the software industry.
From the examples above, achieving what Ries (2011) referred to ‘product­market fit’ is
a challenge to most software startups. The ‘built it and they will come’ old paradigm is
no longer applicable. Founders have to ensure that they discover the customer segment
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
1
==PAGE:10==
that is most promising for the business (Ries, 2011; The Economist, 2014). Apart from
achieving the product­market fit, software startups are also faced with other significant
challenges. The challenges can be in relation to financial difficulties, technology uncer­
tainty, customer­related difficulties and team­related challenges.
Many Software Startups take the decision of changing their business model along the
way and this is referred to as a pivot. A study conducted by Snihur & Clarysse (2020)
investigated the process of developing organizational identity by an organization. The
findings of their study indicated that new venture pivoting is dependent on the ability of
an organization to crystalize role of individual members in line with the identity of the
organization. Similarly, an organization can take the option of sticking to their plans, which
is called iterating or persevere. The choice of either iterating or pivoting is continuous
and requires reconsidering if the business model’s hypothesis is still valid or requires
adjustments. To summarize understanding the concept of pivots and startups can help in
answering the research questions effectively.
1.2
Pivots and Lean startup
A pivot is a change in a strategy designed to test a hypothesis that is fundamental towards
a business model, a product, or a growth engine (Ries 2011). It is often considered as
the result of learning that is validated, another crucial concept in the lean startup used in
testing business hypotheses and measuring the results. The process of pivoting can be
challenging based on the initial organizational milestones. Thus, some startup ventures
may resist to pivot. For instance, software startups often neglect the validated learn­
ing process. These startups also avoid pivot when needed, which is why most startups
fail (Giardino, Wang Abrahamsson, 2014). Despite some startups resisting pivot, it is
considered a crucial strategy for the survival of software firm, alongside its growth and
sustainability. According to Ries (2011), there are ten different types of pivot:
1. Zoom­in: a type of pivot where a single product’s feature is turned into the whole
product itself.
2. Zoom­out: a pivot where the product is turned into one feature of a product that is
larger since the initial product is insufficient to address the needs of customers.
3. Customer segment: a pivot where a startup uncovers diverse segmentation of cus­
tomers compared to the one initially anticipated while attempting to solve the correct
problem.
4. Customer need: a pivot where a startup notices that the problem that is being solved
is not crucial towards customers hence makes a discovery of other problems that
are of more importance.
5. Platform pivot: turning an application into a platform where users can create its own
content or vice versa.
6. Business architecture: switching the architecture of a startup such as aiming at high
margin, low volume rather than putting focus on mass market.
7. Value capture: changing the method of capturing the value of a startup.
8. Engine of growth: a pivot that involves making changes that are significant towards
the growth strategy for the purpose of seeking rapid growth in profits.
9. Channel pivot: identification of more effective ways of reaching customers as com­
pared to the previous strategy
2
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:11==
10. Technology pivot: delivering similar solutions using completely different technolo­
gies.
There is a difference in the influencing factors of business model innovation in firms that
are incumbent. For instance, there can be a significant influence of founders in a startup
compared to incumbent firms where the founders might only get involved as sharehold­
ers or leave the company entirely. Additionally, rather than triggering a market change,
a startup might have chosen the wrong business model due to a lack of experience in
the market. Business model innovation is associated with many benefits, including in­
creased financial performance (Aspara, Hietanen Tikkanen, 2010). It also enables a firm
to strengthen its strategic position and enhance its power of attracting new customers.
1.3
Business models and Software startups
Startups and pivoting are linked. Thus, to understand the concept of pivoting and how
they are vital to the success of a startup, it is crucial to understand the characteristics of
a startup. Startups are frequently operating in a market that is highly volatile and make
attempts of solving a problem whose solution is not well known (Bajwa et al., 2016). They
are usually new organizations that do not have a history of operation and in search of a
business model that is profitable, repeatable and scalable. In the context of this study,
a software startup mainly puts focus on the deployment and implementation of software
services and products that are innovative.
Any stratup have a Busines Model, which gives a description of the manner in which a
firm organizes itself for the creation and distribution of value in a way that is profitable
by providing an outline of the revenues, profits, costs and architecture related with the
business enterprise that is delivering the value (Teece, 2010). In the context of a software
startup, it implies that a Business Model (BM) is capable of capturing the value that is cre­
ated through services and products that are software­based to acquire a match between
the BM and technological innovation; identified throughout the process of developing the
BM.
Without a BM that is well­defined, startups lack the capability of capturing technological
innovation value. In environments that are dynamic where there are constant changes
in technologies, Business Models are unstable. Thus, software startups that have a BM
that is viable and scalable often require iteration of the BM that is in existence due to
network positions, evolving technologies or upcoming competitors (Foss & Saebi, 2017).
The process is referred to as Business Model Innovation (BMI). As a result, software
startups are able to react to unpredictable and major changes that occur in their business
environment, including the discovery of BMs that are fundamentally different in the existing
business via BMI. These changes force the sartup to modify something in its business
model, a process that is called pivoting.
Pivoting is considered a vital concept in lean startups. It is a concept of a startup that
puts focus on the Build­Measure­Learn (BML) loop. The concept comprises three steps:
turning the idea into a product, measuring its effects, and learning from the obtained re­
sults. This type of learning is called validated learning (Ries, 2011). Testing is conducted
for every hypothesis related to the business model. A decision is then made on whether
to iterate or pivot. Different business models undertake pivoting decisions based on the
underlying conditions. Over the past few decades, business model innovation (BMI) and
business models (BM) have received increased attention from academics and practition­
ers. Scholars have discussed about business models and have realized several results.
Amit and Zott (2001) found that business models are a unifying unit that leads to value
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
3
==PAGE:12==
creation emanating from various sources. They argued from various perspectives and
concluded that there is no single theory that can explain the value creation ability of a
startup.
The business model concept is anchored upon key ideas in business strategy creation
and is based on theoretical backgrounds. It is based on the value chain concept and soft­
ware startups can use the models to underpin their value creation. It has been identified
that a business model is a source of competitive advantage hence a crucial tool in the cur­
rent competitive environment (Amit Massa, 2011). Thus, because business models are
based on competitive advantages, the resource­based theories can help in underpinning
their potential for value creation. Moreover, the models are based on choices such as
competitive strategy, and vertical integration about the company’s boundaries. Business
models act as a system that constitutes the company’s architectural foundation. Through
systems theory, a software startup can be viewed as a system with different levels of
complexity among the subsystems (Morris, Schindehutte, Allen, 2005).
IBM global study in 2008, 70% of leaders in the public sector and business executives
stated that their organizations believe in BMI to create additional value to their enterprises
(IBM, 2008). Business model innovation is reserved for large, multi­national corporations
and new ventures, and small firms. In the case of a startup, ’pivot’ is the innovation
of the business model and can be primarily attractive because it is associated with a
quick decision­making process and ease of implementation towards young firms (Santos,
Spector Van Der Heyden, 2009). Additionally, startups are more likely to be confronted
by business model innovation as compared to incumbent firms. There is a low probability
of creating a first business model that would work immediately with no errors in a high
uncertainty environment.
Advancements in technology are considered a vital aspect in the growth of an economy
since industries develop through commercializing, developing, and innovating the tech­
nologies that are still emerging. On the other hand, entrepreneurship is composed of
diverse domains, software startups being one of them. In today’s era, software startups
have gradually become rampant and among the essential economy drivers alongside in­
novation. Each month new business startup is established across the globe. Even though
some of these startups might be inexperienced, immature, and young, the products in­
volved disrupt traditional markets and pressurize the well­established actors. Spotify,
Airbnb, and Uber are examples of startups that have been established and proliferated.
These startups are perfect examples of pivoting that has occurred in the software mar­
ket. They offer new business models, new products, and new business value increased
speed and with a technology cutting the edges. They ensure that their customers are
continuously talked to undercover gaps in the offers that exist and iterate while conduct­
ing experiments that would enable them to acquire business models that are scalable and
repeatable. These businesses are willing to immediately pivot when the businesses are
not proving to be viable.
This explains why large and established organizations cannot rely on traditional ways of
advancement in this age of disruption. The traditional advancements focused on the lead
time, cost efficiency, quality improvement, and time reduction (Rejeb et al., 2008). Con­
sequently, Corporate Managements are now investigating different methods that would
enable them to maintain their leading positions with the hope that they will be able to ac­
quire innovative products alongside new values of customers towards the market, similar
to what is done in startups. There has also been an increase in the use and awareness of
the lean startup approach amongst the software startup community. Like various prece­
4
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:13==
dent methods, consultants and practitioners have driven lean startup development and
promotion almost entirely. The lean approach began in software startups but eventually
gained much attention in large organizations such as BM, Intuit, and General Electric. A
survey conducted recently by Krisner (2016) found that 82% of the 170 corporate exec­
utives under study used some lean startup elements in various contexts. Another study
conducted by Marijarvi et al. (2016) reported the experiences of numerous companies
in Finland concerning the development of new software through internal startups. Sev­
eral large companies were found to adopt the lean startup approach, hoping to innovate
software products successfully.
According to Ries (2011), large companies can also benefit from the core ideas behind
the lean startup. Minimizing the obstacles for a lean startup will be significant towards
supporting software product innovation benefit from the associated opportunities. As a
result, there is a need to gather evidence to understand the inhibitors and enablers of
lean internal startups in large organizations. Empirical and scientific studies concerning
the leveraging of the lean startup approach for innovation of software are minimal. As a
result, a question arises on the factors that motivate entrepreneurs to pivot or iterate lean
startups for their software products.
Software product innovation involves creating and introducing new software products to
a new market or one that is in existence (Lippoldt Stryszowski, 2009). The develop­
ment of the new product is done to respond to either a market opportunity or technology.
New technologies are used to improve current or completely new functionalities, for in­
stance, using cloud computing to store files online. The development of different products
is mainly triggered by the unmet needs of customers from the existing solutions. They are
also developed to address new customer needs, which emerge later. Innovation is con­
ducted mainly on the production process (Feller & Fitzgerald, 2000). The software pro­
cess innovation involves implementing new tools, processes, or methods for developing
the software, such as object­oriented development.
The innovation of products in the software industry, influenced either by software or hard­
ware development, leads to various strategic challenges for the companies. Shifting from
mainframe to personal computers led to a new market for the standalone operating sys­
tem. Microsoft, a new startup during the time, emerged and presented a new operating
system referred to as DOS. However, the popularity of mobile devices has increased at­
traction for new startups to develop diverse mobile applications with the inclusion of new
mobile operating systems (Bonaccorsi et al., 2006). Large and high­tech organizations
perform activities related to innovative activities using a dedicated and specialized entity;
the RD departments. When the technology becomes more complex and advanced, RD
is required to bring more innovative products.
Many people know twitter as being the most famous platform for microblogging. However,
few people know that the platform was once a podcast service provider during its startup
phase in 2005 (Carlson, 2011). The same applies to Instagram, which was a social check­
in application back in its early days. It was referred to as Burbin, and it combined features
of a photo share app alongside a game. This implies that very few software startups get
their business or products right immediately, and most of them do not finally have what
they initially started with. This is because the software intends to build edge products and
fast­growing under the conditions of business uncertainty and extreme technology. To
obtain a sustainable business model, software startups change their direction relentlessly
or opt to make a pivot in the Lean startup approach.
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
5
==PAGE:14==
1.4
Statement of the problem
Knowing the importance of pivoting in order to build a business model that is able to
capture value, a new question araises for the entrepeneurs: What should be changed
in the business model and when? Currently, a gap exists concerning the identification
of different triggering factors of pivots in the software market. The enterprise software
startup is nascent in nature. The business environment is uncertain and unpredictable
which requires the entrepreneurs to change their business models to fit the market situa­
tion to remain competitive. As it has been explained before, pivoting is one of the major
strategies that software ventures can adopt during the time of uncertainty but there is no
certainty that the organization will succeed after pivoting. Shi et al. (2014) conducted a
study on enterprise software startups development. Among the few studies that exists
concerning software startups, the authors conducted an investigation on them by linking
entrepreneurism and information system literature. Additionally, Unterkalmsteiner et al.
(2016) carried out an agenda in research that covers the wide spectrum of the current
needs of software startup industry.
Lack of in­depth decisions of pivoting was found as one of the major points, the authors
confirmed the existence of a research gap in the field of software startups, despite the
success of software startups being linked to pivots. Some of the questions brought to
light from Unterkalmsteiner’s (2016) research agenda have been answered partly. Addi­
tionally, the research agenda needed to make an attempt of getting to the bottom of pivots’
relationships during diverse cycles of product development. there is the need of investi­
gating when entrepreneurs are supposed to make the decision of either moving forward
with their business idea or when to pivot. There are few empirical studies in existence
concerning pivot due to the nascent nature of software startups. Therefore, this study
attempts to fill this gap in knowledge by examining pivots in startups of software prod­
ucts and the factors that trigger entrepreneurs to pivot during software product startups.
There is a need to research the pivot process in software startups since most studies have
paid attention to startups in other market sectors. There are rare empirical and scientific
studies that have paid attention to the leverage of lean startups for the development.
1.5
Objectives of the study
Given that different entrepreneurs will choose to either pivot or iterate depending on var­
ious metrics, this study investigates the factors that make entrepreneurs pivot or iterate
in their lean startups for their software products. Some of the metrics that entrepreneurs
focus on, which makes them hesitate to pivot, might not be able to reflect the status
of the venture; either because they are wrong or should be applied in a different busi­
ness model. As a result, this study also aims at categorizing the factors that make en­
trepreneurs choose to either pivot or iterate depending on the importance. Through this
study, a determination will also be made concerning the data­driven factors and those
feelings of the entrepreneur. The study will categorize the factors depending on their fa­
vor towards the pivot decision. To this point, the main research question that is brought to
light in this study is: What is the most common factor for pivoting software startups? The
main objectives of this study are, therefore:
1. To investigate the factors that make entrepreneurs either pivot or persevere lean
startups for their software products.
2. To analyze when, from the diverse stages of product development, a startup pivot.
3. To investigate why a startup will decide to persevere instead of pivot.
6
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:15==
1.6
Research questions
Based on the problem discussed in the previous section, this research study aimed at
identifying the factors that lead to pivoting decisions in the software market. Startups are
surrounded by uncertain conditions with various challenges (Andries, Debackere Looy,
2013). While venturing into the market, entrepreneurs are not certain of the outcomes.
They have no knowledge of what customers perceive as valuable. This implies that the
startup might undergo some changes to ensure that it fits the needs of the customers.
An entrepreneur might also make the decision of iterating depending with the market
situation. Thus, the major research question is.
• RQ1: What is the most common factor for pivoting in software startups? From
this research question, it will be possible to discover the factors that push software
entrepreneurs into taking the decision to either pivot or persevere.
• RQ2: When do software startups pivot? It is essential to understand the stages of
software startup which are mostly likely to make an entrepreneur take the decision
of either iterating or pivoting. The possibility of pivoting or iterating varies with the
type of product under development. As a result, understanding the stage at which
a software startup pivot is significant towards identifying if the pivot was worth it or
not. Through this research question, it was possible to identify the stages of software
development where pivoting is likely to occur.
• RQ3: Why do software startups resist pivot? During the development of a software
product, it not guaranteed that an entrepreneur will take the decision of pivoting for
the venture to be successful. Some software startups might fail to pivot and still
be successful. As a result, this research question aimed at investigating some of
the factors that would make software startups entrepreneurs take the decision of
iterating rather than pivoting.
1.7
Proposed research methodology
This study adopted a qualitative approach of study where data has been collected from
secondary data sources. These sources are interviews made to multiple startup founders
where they talked about its business and the roadmap they have followed to succeed. The
target interviews of the study was those that were about founder entrepreneurs within the
enterprise software market. A framework of the factors that explain the pivoting deci­
sions in startups has been used using data from the podcast interviews. Simple statistics
alongside content analysis were used to analyze the collected data. The data collected
from the interviews is analyzed and the results compared to some of the results obtained
in the podcast interviews and conclusions drawn based on the research questions and
objectives.
1.8
Scope, assumptions, limitations, and delimitation of the
research
The current study intends to fill the gap concerning business model innovation in startups
with specific reference to pivoting. It focuses on understanding the concept of software
entrepreneurship in the lean startup approach and entrepreneurial pivoting by startups.
Therefore, the study seeks to validate the type of pivots pursued by software startups
alongside the factors that triggered the pivots. To achieve the objectives of this study,
a qualitative methodology was adopted in this study. Several assumptions are made in
this study. It is assumed that the data collected to achieve the objectives of this study is a
representation of the whole software startup environment. It was also assumed that using
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
7
==PAGE:16==
twenty one podcasts was appropriate for this study. The interviewed founders were also
from the relevant sectors related to the software market. A sample group that is large
and more diversified professionally could have provided increased insights concerning
the topic under study. Another limitation of the podcasts is that due to the fact that the
interviews were led by someone else, the questions and answers could have not been
100% aligned with the learning objectives.
1.9
Significance of the study
The results of this study will be significant in diverse ways. This study will be among the
few studies that have empirically investigated the pivot reasons in software product star­
tups. The results of this study will be significant towards different entrepreneurs who wish
to venture into the software market. These entrepreneurs will acquire an understanding of
the relevant factors that can allow pivoting. They will also be able to understand whether
to pivot or iterate depending on the progress of the startup. The results of this study will
also be significant towards other entrepreneurs as they will understand that not all factors
of pivoting apply to all business models.
This study will be significant towards diverse stakeholders within the software market. It
will equip them with insights on determining the progress of their business. This implies
that, by analyzing the factors that are necessary for a pivot, other entrepreneurs in the
software market can be able to identify if their businesses are on the right track and if
they should iterate or pivot. This will be significant towards improving the way businesses
are conducted in the software market. It will also enhance the development of different
software applications hence improving the way businesses are conducted in the present
day and era. This will be of significant impact on improving the global economy.
1.10
Summary
This chapter has provided background information concerning lean startups in the soft­
ware market. According to the studies that have been conducted in the past, attention has
been paid to lean startups in diverse technologies. There is limited research concerning
lean startups related to the software market both in large and small firms. Consequently,
there is the need to investigate the factors that lead entrepreneurs into pivoting. There is
also the need to determine which factors are the best for supporting pivoting. The study
results will be significant towards diverse entrepreneurs who wish to venture into the soft­
ware market. It will enable them to determine the factors that will best suit pivoting. During
the data collection process, it is assumed that the case study and the answers provided
through the survey are an appropriate representation of the software market. The rest of
the paper is organized as follows: chapter two brings to light related work to the subject
of discussion; chapter 3 discusses the research approach adopted in this study. Chapter
4 presents the findings of the study in detail and is discussed further in chapter 5.
8
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:17==
2
Literature review
2.1
Introduction
The literature review is critical in any research study because it provides a critical review
of the works of other scholars about the research topic. Through the literature review,
the researcher is able to learn about several findings other scholars found about the topic
and identify the gaps in literature that can guide the research. The chapter is divided into
subsection that relate to the research topic and they are provided as follows.
2.2
Business Model Canvas
A business model is a “concise representation of how an interrelated set of decision vari­
ables in the areas of venture strategy, economic and architecture are addressed to cre­
ate sustainable competitive advantage in defined markets” (Morris, Schindehutte Allan,
2005). It provides a description the logic of an organization delivering, capturing, and
creating value (Hirvikoski, 2014). A business model must be simple, easy, and easily un­
derstandable. However, the complexity should not be oversimplified. A business model is
a new analytical innovation unit Stahler (2020) which can indeed be viewed as a method
of narrating an interesting story for aligning employees concerning the value type they
should create in a certain organization. Various scholars have made proposals concern­
ing diverse models of addressing the business of an organization. For instance, Alt &
Zimmermann (2001) makes a consideration of six elements of business: mission, struc­
ture, process, revenues, legal issue, and technology.
Initially, the idea of BMC was to create a shared language that would present companies,
entrepreneurs and organizations with the opportunity of describing and adjusting business
models so as to crate options that are strategic. Eventually, new ventures and innovations
would be enhanced (Osterwalder, Pigneur & Clark, 2010). BMC enables organizations
to design business models (Fritscher & Pigneur, 2014). It is a tool and method of visual
modeling which allows the companies to capture the essence of business model of com­
panies. It is composed of nine diverse building blocks and is used in the making of notes
to each block. The building blocks of a BMC includes (Osterwalder et al., 2010):
• Customer segments: It represents the group of people or compapnies that will be
willing to pay for the value of the product or services that the startup offers.
• Revenue streams: It defines the method in which the company is getting money in
exchange for the product or service.
• Channels: In this block, it is analyzed how the startup will reach to the customers.
• Value proposition: This is the block that connects the two sides of the canvas. It
is where the value that the product or service provides to the customers, where it
defines how their problem is solved.
• Key activities: It represents the activities that the members of the startup has to do
in order to reach the goals.
• Cost structure: In this block all the costs needed to operate the organization are
displayed.
• Key partnerships: Here are displayed the most important partners, being compa­
nies, persons or organizations that are relevant for fulfilling the strategic goals.
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
9
==PAGE:18==
• Key resources: It defines the human, technological, intellectual or physical resources
that are needed for operating the company.
• Customer relationships: It describes the type of relation that the startup will have
with its customer.
The core of a BMC is to give a description of the most crucial constructs of a business
and a canvas portrays it in a visualized way. Moreover, the business model can serve
as a focusing tool for organizations when it is supported by a set of rules that originate
from decisions made by the entrepreneurs at the proprietary level (Morris, Schindehutte
& Allan, 2005).
A BMC that is complete will provide information necessary to the business model of the
company. It always represents a certain period of time so it can show the past, the current
and future situation so that when changes are made in the strategies, the Business Model
Canvas also changes. According to Grigin, Demir and Muhtaroglu (2013), BMC has been
adopted widely as a global tool and is being used by companied like PG and Nestle are
using it for generating strategies to acquire new streams of revenue. The companies
have been able to change their perspectives from product­oriented view to a wide thinking
that addresses the models through BMC. Lean startup is effective towards developing a
viable business model. Consequently, the subchapter that follows provides a detailed
description of the customer development process alongside the lean startup approach.
2.3
Types of Business Models of Software Startups
Among the core of the success of a startup and that of a business are business models. A
good business model starts from the knowledge and insight of the user, the target market,
the consumer and the the motivation, hence attaining goals and success in the business
(Magretta, 2002). In the software industry, there are various types of business models
which include:
1. Marketplace: a business model that connects buyers and sellers on a platform that
is centralized and proprietary.
2. Aggregator: a business model where populated and unorganized sectors like taxis
and hotels are organized and the service provided under one brand.
3. On­demand: based on the demands of consumers (Fahland et al., 2009). The
service system provides immediate response when there are customers seeking,
requiring or making orders.
4. Reverse auction: model of business where the price for service provision is men­
tioned by buyers who are price­sensitive (Eisenmann et al., 2013). If the price is
accepted by the seller, buyers must make a commitment towards the terms of the
seller.
5. Crowdsourcing: a model in which organizations or people acquire services and
goods alongside ideas, micro­tasks, voting and finances from a relatively open (Fugel­
lah, 2000), large and evolving group of participants.
6. SaaS: in this model a software piece is hosted on a cloud infrastructure and a
monthly fee paid for the software access to be acquired (Fugellah, 2000).
7. E­commerce: a model of business where consumers and businesses are presented
with an opportunity of making purchases or selling products online (Eisenmann et
al., 2013)
10
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:19==
2.4
Lean startup approach and customer Development model
The lean startup is a business model that entrepreneurs can employ to pivot their enter­
prise software startups. The approach teaches enterprises how to steer, when to turn,
and when to preserver and grow the business to a maximum level (Ries, 2011). This
method is a principled approach towards new product development. Many startups begin
with the idea about what the customers need and then develop the product to their satis­
faction. The entrepreneurs than spend time perfecting the product. The startup fails when
they do not gather information from the prospective customers if the product is interesting.
Therefore, pivoting becomes an important strategy to help the startups turn by changing
their business model or approach to product development. The lean startup process is
summarized in the figure below.
Fig 1: Lean Development Process (Ries, 2011)
Through the lean startup approach, companies can create order not chaos by offering
tools to test the vision continuously. Andries, Debackere, & Van Looy, (2013) article pro­
vides that startups confronted with uncertainty can develop their business model through
experimentation. As a result, the lean startup approach was brought to light as a new
method of consulting entrepreneurship. It carries the potential of product innovation in a
situation that is extreme, where the problem alongside the solutions is known (Ries, 2011).
Rather than outing emphasis on the business plan, the lean startup approach advocates
for iteratively building the product and delivering fast to the market to acquire feedback
early. However, since customers are always unknown at the beginning of the process,
the entrepreneur also does not know what they are expected to perceive as value. There­
fore, entrepreneurs should identify and validate the problem that they have the intention
to solve and make a discovery of their customers (Blank, 2017). The customer develop­
ment model is the basis of the lean startup approach. The figure below represents the
customer development model.
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
11
==PAGE:20==
Fig2: Customer Development Process (Blank, 2017)
The customer development model is composed of four steps: discovery of customers,
customer creation, customer validation, and organization building. The customer devel­
opment model was presented by Blank (2017). The model offers help for the develop­
ments and improvement of startups for success by gaining a better understanding of the
involved customers. The first two steps focus on the customers’ values, while the last
two focuses at creating a market for the product that has been developed and scale the
business. Specifically, the first step of the customer development model seeks to identify
the segments of customers and how they value the problem that the proposed service or
product attempts to solve. The second step makes an attempt of proving a market for the
proposed service or product that responds in a positive manner towards the problem. The
third step focuses on scaling the market through the creation and driving of the demands
of customers. On the other hand, the fourth step focuses explicitly on transforming the
startup from an organization of making discoveries and learning a machine that executes
the business.
This model gives lessons on putting focus and scaling something that has been previously
proven to work. Based on this model, lean startup is a process structured towards vali­
dating the hypothesis of a business through the method of engineering. An entrepreneur
begins a feedback loop to perceive customers’ values, turning the business idea into a
product. This can be achieved through the development of a minimum viable product
through the use of agile methods. The agile methods are used as a tool for collecting
feedback from customers concerning the product. The provided feedback enables the
entrepreneur to learn whether they should become preservers on the business idea that
has been proposed or take the option of pivoting to an entirely new direction or perish the
business idea (Eisenmann et al., 2013). Table 1 summarizes the components alongside
characteristics involved in startup.
12
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:21==
Startup
component
Characteristics
Description
Institution
• Small team.
• Low experience in the
team.
• Lack of resources.
• Flat organization.
• New company.
• Not self­sustained.
• Rapid evolution.
• A little history of working
.
Physical,
human,
and
economic
re­
sources are minimal, and being with a low
number of individuals. The developmen­
tal team is formed by less experienced
people and students who have graduated
recently.
The company was created recently and is
founders­centric. Everybody in the com­
pany is accorded significant responsibili­
ties with little need of high management.
Startups require external funding for sus­
taining their activities. There is no basis
of organizational culture initially and aims
at scaling and growing rapidly
Extreme
uncertainty
• High risks.
• Time pressure.
There is an extremely high rate of failure
in startups Release fast and work under
pressure.
Innovation
• Highly reactive.
• One product.
• Third­party
depen­
dency.
Given that startups lack resources for
building their startups, they rely heavily on
external solutions.
The activities of the
company revolve around one service or
product only. They have the capability of
reacting quickly to changes in the under­
lying technology, development, and mar­
ket.
Table 1: Components in a startup
The current study concerning the methodology of lean startup focuses on the applica­
tion of the method in a standalone context towards the newly developed product. Ries
(2011) proposed a poor startup method is a top­rated tool for startups involving technology.
The initial model was built upon three principles: using open­source and free software or
cheap platform development, agile methodologies of software development, alongside
the customer development method proposed by Blank. Using effective and affordable
tools of conducting analysis was added to the model as the fourth fundamental principle.
These principles focus on cheaply developing a minimum viable product which can test
customers’ needs in an empirical manner.
Since its proposal, the lean start approach has been redefined by Ries (2011), but the main
philosophy has not changed. Coleman (2008), Centrally raises the build­measure­learn­
loop in the methodology. The loop provides guidance for startups to acquire products
from ideas, measure the responses provided by customers and acquire lessons from the
collected information. For the lean startup approach, this is a crucial part and a repetition
of the process is conducted severally. Additionally, an application of a similar process of
learning is done towards the product and tests the business model’s assumptions. There
are long traditions in curriculum, course, alongside teaching the research and develop­
ment methods (Bosch et al., 2013).
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
13
==PAGE:22==
In education related to engineering, the learning outcomes that are achieved, the design
of the curriculum and the methods of teaching are a subject to a scientific discourse that
is continuous. Given that the focus of this research study was on pivoting in the field of
software startups, the part that follows deals with the definition of software startups before
elaborating more on pivoting.
2.5
Software Startups
Startups are defined by Ries (2011) as a human institution that is designed for the creation
of a new service or product under conditions of uncertainty and are extreme. Based
on this definition, a startup has three components: institution, innovation, and excessive
tension. A startup revolves around building an institution and managing activities like
culture, recruitment, and coordination. A startup is differentiated from other businesses
since innovation is the key driver of the company’s success. It works under extreme
uncertainty, given that the future path remains unclear about both the market and the
product. In the software startups context, Sutton (2000) describes the characteristics of
the software startups as follows: Having limited resources, youth and immunity, dynamic
and having multiple influences.
According to Sutton (2000), the founders of software startups are believed to be young
and with limited experience. They are immature in the process of development and the
management of organizations. The startups have limited resources whereby the avail­
able resources are used to get the product out, seeking alliance and promotion. In the
early phases, companies dealing with software startups get pressured both externally and
internally. To enter a market that is the existence or a new market, software companies in
most cases develop products that are innovative technologically. As a result, disruptive
technologies are required. A recent study conducted by Paternoster et al. (2014) reveals
no agreement concerning what a startup is made up of. The study also brings to light 15
diverse characteristics of startups.
Implementing methodologies to control and structure startup development activities is a
primary challenge for engineers (Coleman, 2008). Generally, managing the development
of software can be attained by introducing software processes. The processes can be
defined as a coherent set of policies, technologies, organizational structure, and artifacts
needed to conceive, develop, maintain, and deploy a software product (Fuggella, 2000).
In the context of a startup, software engineering is faced with multifaceted and complex
obstacles in understanding how to manage the process of development. The nature of
startups is flexible and creative. They are also reluctant towards the introduction of bu­
reaucratic measures or processes that might hinder their natural attributes. Additionally,
they have limited resources and wish to support the development of products rather than
establish the processes.
Software startups can be a challenging endeavor. a systematic mapping study conducted
by Peternoster et al. (2014) indicates that the contextual features that are frequently re­
ported concerning a software startup are high flexibility and reactiveness, uncertain con­
ditions, general lack of resources, intense time pressure alongside tackling markets that
are dynamic and growing fast. Software startups are constantly dealing with several chal­
lenges which emerge from diverse aspects of the business. Some of these challenges
include the development of software products that are technologically innovative and need
novel development techniques and tools, defining minimum viable products towards cap­
turing and evaluating risky assumptions which may fail the concept of a business (Gia­
rdino et al., 2015) alongside discovering an appropriate strategy of conducting business
towards delivering value.
14
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:23==
The prospects concerning evidence­based software engineering have encouraged re­
searchers to undertake systematic reviews of literature and mapping studies. According
to the study conducted by Zhang and Babar (2011), it is reported that 148 systematic map­
ping studies and systematic literature reviews were published between 2004 and 2010.
However, up to that time, none of the published reviews investigated software engineer­
ing in the startup context. However, the thoughts that have been conducted regarding
software engineering both in small and large companies are relevant to this study. A
study conducted by Pino et al. (Huang & Mark, 2000) investigated the process of soft­
ware adoption and improvement in small and medium­sized enterprises. The study points
out that among the reviewed SMEs, very few of them achieved the pursued certifications.
The study, therefore, concluded that standard­driven are unsuitable for small companies
and not initiatives of tailored improvement. The study results are in line with the findings
of the study conducted by Staple et al. (2010). The survey conducted by Taticchi et al.
(2009) also observes the same situation in managing business performance measures.
Their review identifies a lack of performance measures and management (PMM) models,
explicitly adapted to small and medium enterprises with the speculation that non­adoption
from the fear of benefits and costs is incomprehension.
A study conducted by Thorpe et al. (2006) focused on reviewing the literature concern­
ing using knowledge within SMEs. Entrepreneurs and managers are crucial resources
in an organization since they are the drivers of knowledge creation. The knowledge is
encoded best in organized routines, which allow widespread sharing in an organization.
Providing enough structure is the main challenge that allows the creation and sharing of
knowledge to scale without limiting learning and creativity. Another study conducted re­
garding software development in the context of SMEs is that by Rosenbusch et al. (2007).
Ries (2011), with inspiration from the lean principles of Toyota, presents a new approach
to innovation and entrepreneurship; the lean startup approach. Like earlier mentioned,
lean startups focuses on the efforts that are capable of creating value towards customers
alongside waste elimination during the phase of development. However, given that cus­
tomers are not known in most cases, their perception of what is valuable is also unknown.
After reviewing the relevant literature concerning software startups, the following part pro­
vides a definition of pivoting alongside a discussion of the relevant literature concerning
entrepreneurial pivoting.
2.6
Types of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) in software
startups
KPIs are the measures of performance. They are the key result indicators that determine
how a business has performed in the past (Marr, 2012). Through these indicators, a
business is able to determine what they are supposed to do and how to radically increase
their performance. In the software industry, some of the KPIs include:
• Product validation: this is measure of performance where the willingness of cus­
tomers to recommend a company’s service or product to other customers is mea­
sured (Stoop, 2009).
• Sales channel validation: this is a measure of performance where software startups
identify the effectiveness of the sales channel being used (Stoop, 2009). This can
be done through customer validation.
• Technology validation: this is a type of KPI where a startup confirms that the incor­
poration of component technologies into a complete system solution (Marr, 2012).
The process also confirms if technical targets have been met under the conditions
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
15
==PAGE:24==
of realistic operation.
2.7
Entrepreneurial pivoting
According to Snihur, & Clarysse (2021), pivoting is defined as “a substantive transforma­
tion of a company’s business model to create or maintain a competitive advantage”. It
is necessary in nascent markets as organization look for viable business model under
the conditions of higher uncertainty about the underlying technology, market needs and
product meaning. Snihur, Y., & Clarysse, B. (2021) further argued that new ventures
in nascent markets have to change their strategy quickly to conform with the changing
business environments through a process called continuous morphing. Zuzul, & Tripsas,
(2020) showed how Yahoo which operates in the nascent markets transformed quickly
into content provider from the search engine soon after startup because of high uncer­
tainty and ambiguity in the market. After some years, the company again changed into a
web portal when competition became stiff. Lycos Company also used the similar process
to gain competitive advantage. Zuzul, & Tripsas, (2020) indicated how new ventures in
the competitive air tax market continuously adjusted their business model to match the
changing business environment.
Recent literature has also showed some challenges that organization in competitive mar­
kets can face when pivoting. According to Grimes, (2018) the common challenges ven­
tures can face due to pivoting relate to the expectation of the entrepreneurs, users, cus­
tomers and investors. The study further found that the entrepreneurs can resist pivots
because of strong identification with their original ideas as an emblem of self­esteem.
However, persisting with a project that is losing is a social endeavor which has the possi­
bility of either increasing costs of failure towards the entrepreneur alongside other stake­
holders (Kier, McMullen & Kuratko, 2021).
Pivoting has roots in the methodology of lean startup. According to Ries (2011), pivoting is
a significant change, a correction in the structure course designed to test a fundamentally
new hypothesis concerning an engine growth, business model, or product. At the phases
of launching and incepting a startup, it undergoes several changes in its business model
alongside the techniques catching their value because of scarcity in resources and con­
ditions in the external market. As a result, companies adopt the lean startup approach.
Startups are defined as a group of individuals who are talented and are attempting to
grab an opportunity by changing a prospect into a product (Schaffer, Weking & Stahler,
2010). In Ries’ (2011) New York Times bestseller, ’pivot’ is brought to light. It appears in
the context of business models in the world of academics. The book focuses on whether
a startup should make the decision of pivoting or persevere. However, there have been
vast amounts of articles and blog posts that reference ’pivots,’ but they are based on the
view of practitioners with a lack of support from academic work.
Since pivoting refers to a correction in the course structure, the concept of business model
innovation and business model development have not been carefully differentiated. By
recognizing the relationship between both concepts, Scheneider and Spieth (2013) em­
phasize that business model development puts focus on increasing innovations while
business model innovation focuses on exploiting and exploring the opportunities in the
external environment of a business model. Based on Ries’ (2011) definition, pivoting can
be seen as a concept of business model innovation.
Ries (2011) highlights that entrepreneurs need to pivot occasionally to ensure that they
acquire lessons from the needs of their customers, their preferences, and problems for
product or service development that is in line with the market. Only a few studies con­
16
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:25==
ducted in the past have touched concerning pivoting in startups. Through the provision of
evidence from failures from two software startup in the real world, Giardino et al. (2010)
brings to light the conclusion that ignoring the process of learning and avoiding a pivot
has the capability of being considered the reason why software startup have the potential
to fail. Bosch et al. (2013) bring to light an alternative of either pivoting or perseverance.
Their study presents a model of software development for the early stages of software
startups. However, the study does not put its primary focus on the investigation of pivots
in software startups.
Another study conducted by Van der Van and Bosch (2013) sheds light on pivots in a soft­
ware product startup in broader overviews. The study performs a comparison between the
differences and similarities of decisions of software architecture alongside pivot decisions.
According to the survey, a pivot is a decision in business only and does not primarily put
focus on how a software startup pivots during its life cycle. Another study in close relation
to this was the one conducted by Teho et al. (2009). The study explains how pivots can
change the hypothesis of a business in a lean startup model. The study identified sev­
eral pivot types such as platform pivots, zoom­out, and customer segment. However, the
study fails to provide evidence on how the type of pivots was identified alongside linking
the lean canvas model and the specified pivot types. According to Nguyen­Duc et al.
(2018), diverse pivot types occur in various phases of the lifecycle of a startup. A startup
undergoes diverse developmental stages during the lifecycle, including their working pro­
totypes, concept in development, functional product that has high growth, functional prod­
uct that has limited, and the product’s nature (Bosch et al., 2009). The stages of product
development give this opportunity to acquire an understanding contextualized concerning
pivots in the software startup market.
Pivoting is, in most cases, regarded as a synonym for change. It, however, does not
revolve around making an introduction of any change and deciding upon anything. Few
studies are in existence concerning pivoting in software startups (Paternoster et al., 2014).
The survey conducted by Bosch et al. (2013) brings to light an alternative of pivoting by
introducing a model of software development for software startups in their early stages.
Another study conducted by Van der Van and Bosch (2013) gives a description of the
pivots that have been made in software startups and couples the pivots with decisions
related to architecture. In this study, a comparison between software architecture deci­
sions and pivots is brought to light. Based on the results of the study, decisions related to
software architecture are a factor that triggers decision making while all focus of software
architecture and pivots differ.
Another study conducted by Hirvikoski (2014) gives insights into how software startups
have pivoted historically with Facebook, Twitter, and Google examples. In this enterprise,
business model innovation played a major role in their success. Business model innova­
tion is the key strategy to firm performance. It is considered by many scholars as the
vehicle for cooperate transformation and renewal. To summarize the literature review, it
is evident that to develop a strong identity helps ventures to attract new workforce and in­
vestors. However, it is not known whether organizational identity hinders pivoting in com­
petitive and volatile markets. Investigation in large companies suggests that substantial
change can be prolonged and challenging. Some of the characteristics of new ventures
include limited resources, unsettled business models. These characteristics can be con­
sidered as the major causes of pivoting. The lean startup framework can be considered
the major issue in pivoting although it is not well known whether it can be applied in enter­
prise software firms. Although little research has been conducted concerning the factors
that make software stsrtups to pivot, there are some studies having a relationship with
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
17
==PAGE:26==
this topic.
A study conducted by Hauch and Nourbakhsh (2018) found that some of the things that
motivate entrepreneurs to pivot are lack of customers, lack of profit, low revenues, obso­
lete technology alongside problems resulting from stakeholder. These factors however
vary with the industry within which a startup operates. For the case of the software in­
dustry, this study will identify the factors that make software entrepreneurs change their
decisions. Additionally, pivoting does not occur at any stage of a software startup. Among
the stages that are likely to face pivoting decisions are refinement, scaling (Hauch and
Nourbakhsh, 2018), from idea to MVP and from concept and research. A pivoting decision
is likely to occur any of the stages or in between the mentioned stages.
2.8
Different stages of start up
In this study there are different stages of startups. Like any business the lifecycle of the
startups exist. Typically there are six stages of startups. They are discussed here below:
1. The first stage is concept and research in which the entrepreneurs look for informa­
tion about what the prospective customers need and they think of fulfilling the need
(Paschen, 2017).
2. The second stage is commitment in which the venture puts the research into prac­
tice. The company creates a prototype and develops the process of staring product
development.
3. The third stage is traction which is the first year of the startup. The stage begins
by getting the idea about the product and getting the target customers. Most en­
trepreneurs mistake traction with growth. This can lead to failure and the best way
to treat traction for software enterprise companies is to start growing the customer
base.
4. The fourth stage is refinement in which the company looks for feedback from the first
adopters. Here the startup can begin pivoting to make sure the company aligns with
the market environment to remain competitive. The fifth stage is scaling in which the
company focuses on growing the customer base. The company focuses on growing
its staff to ensure they give the customers what they need at the bests time. Just
like refinement scaling requires the company to take considerable awareness about
its process (Paschen,2017).
5. The last step is becoming established in which the company becomes stable and
begins to compete with others I the software enterprise. During the research pro­
cess, the research will inquire about the process the software enterprises employed
when they are growing.
2.9
Conceptual Framework
To answer the research questions of this study, the ESSSSDM is used as the conceptual
framework for the study. This subchapter provides a description of the Early Stage Soft­
ware Startup Development Model (ESSSDM) alongside a justification on why the model
was chosen as a conceptual framework for this study.
2.9.1
The Early Stage Software Startup Development Model (ESSSDM)
According to Bosch et al., (2013), the software startups founders encounter challenges in
following lean and agile models of development in practice. Their research addresses the
challenge of identifying when an idea is worth scaling. Consequently, they propose the
18
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:27==
ESSSDM extending models that have been established already such as the methodology
of lean startup. The ESSSDM offers guidance that is more practical for startups during
the process of making decisions. This is mostly true for the Software Startups’ defined
stages alongside the exit criteria for every single stage.
The ESSSDM is composed of three major parts which include: generation of ideas, pri­
oritized ideas backlog and funnel. The phase of idea generation provides a description
of techniques like customer interviews for idea generation in the phase of pore­startup.
Having a backlog is important as it makes it possible for a comparison to be conducted
and priorities set for various ideas that are in parallel. The funnel phase, the modified ver­
sion of Ries’ (2011) build­measure­learn cycle is used in the validation of an idea in four
diverse stages. Among the four stages, each stage is composed of two diverse question
sets. The first set aims at validating the purpose while the second stage, the exit criteria
gives guidelines for making a decision on when to proceed to the next stage. Figure 3
below demonstrates the ESSSDM
Figure 3: The ESSSDM funnel (Bosch et al., 2013)
Validating the problem is the first stage of the funnel phase. The purpose of this stage is to
confirm whether potential clients want the problem to be solved. The problem is identified
at this stage, the root of the problem identified and an analysis made on whether the
problem is big enough to make the business out (Bosch et al., 2013). The exist criteria
of the first stage are when most of the customers highlight that they want the problem
solved, are willing to take part in testing the solution and are willing to make payments for
the solution (Bosch et al., 2013). Upon approval of the idea in the first stage, the second
stage involves validating the solution. The purpose of the second stage is to acquire
lessons on how the problem identified has to look like. The stage involves answering the
question on the features needed for the minimum viable product (MVP), the early adopters
and the worth of the solution towards customers (Bosch Et al., 2013). The exit criteria for
this stage are when most of the clients highlight that they have a belief that the solution
will solve the problem identified, the clients are willing to conduct a test on the MVP and
the clients are willing to make payments for the MVP.
Validating the MVP large­scale is the third stage of the Funnel phase. The purpose of
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
19
==PAGE:28==
this stage is to test further the MVP using a huger number of customers. This stage
identifies whether the MVP has reached market fit, identifies whether a viable path exists
to early adopters and identify if the business model is suitable for the product (Bosch et
al., 2013). The exit criteria are when the MVP has passed all the tests that are relevant,
when inbound channels are developed and the repeatedly deliver early adopters into the
conversion funnel and wen the MVP produces a Customer Lifetime Value (CLV). At the
end of each stage of the Funnel phase, there is a pivoting decision, putting the idea on
hold persevering. Given that the ESSSDM works with various ideas in parallel, an idea
can be put on hold rather than entirely abandoning it.
2.10
Reasons for using ESSSDM funnel
Bosch et al.’s (2013) model is a comprehensive model for software startups with an inclu­
sion of diverse stages of development. It also offers guidance in the process of making
decisions of product development of software startups. As a result, this study will make
use of some parts of the ESSSDM to measure the stages that pivots occurred and the
different factors that led to the pivoting decision. The whole model will not be applied in
this study because its application is beyond the scope of this study.
The first and second steps which are idea generation and backlog are irrelevant in the
context of this study. As aforementioned, the step of ide generation revolves around the
finding of the initial hypothesis while the backlog stage revolves around making a com­
parison and prioritizing numerous hypotheses. The focus of this study is on the third step
which is the funnel; with the four stages discussed above alongside the build­measure­
learn loops. Each stage of the funnel phase defines the guidelines for the decision on
whether to abandon, pivot or persevere an idea or MVP.
2.11
Chapter summary
The literature review chapter has discusses various theories that underpin the research
study. The literature regarding lean startup for software enterprises and the need to pivot
have been discussed in detail. The theoretical framework that will guided the study and be
used as the conceptual framework has also been described fully. The following section
will provide a detailed methodology for the research. The procedures the researcher
employed in collecting analyzing and presenting the results are discussed in the following
chapter.
20
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:29==
3
Methodology
3.1
Introduction
Research methods play a significant role in research studies because they provide guide­
lines and processes that can be used by the researcher in the achievement of the study’s
objectives. The choice of the method of research is significant because failing to make
the correct choice might make that the data collected is biased. Collecting biased data
might hinder the researcher from attaining the right conclusions of the study.
The purpose of this qualitative study was to investigate the factors that make entrepreneurs
to pivot or iterate and to determine them. In this chapter, a detailed description of the re­
search methodologies adopted in this research study is provided. It provides a description
of the research strategy and design alongside the method used to recruit participants. It
proceeds by describing the process of data collection, the technique of data analysis.
3.2
Research method and design
According Polit and Hungler (1999), research design is an outline or a blueprint for carrying
out a study in a way that maximum control is exercised over. While making a choice
on the research method to be used in a study, the researcher should ensure that the
method aligns well with the purpose of the study and be appropriate towards examining
and addressing the research question (Neubauer et al., 2019). According to Kallet (2014),
the choice of methodology to be used in a study must reflect the procedures that are used
in the collection and analysis of data through the justification of the reasoning behind the
processes and methods used during the critical phase of data collection. The phases
include planning, collection and data analysis.
By providing a rationale for the method that is adopted in a study provides an under­
standing of the research findings alongside their importance towards the research, it also
provides an explanation towards the importance of the methodology towards achieving
the goal of the study and confirms ultimately the validity of the proposed study. According
to Creswell (2014) a qualitative approach of study has emerged as the most commonly
used for carrying out research studies. A qualitative research allows the researcher to
look deeply into the topic of study and at the same time probe new information (Levy et
al., 2016). A qualitative research also allows the researcher to increase their knowledge
given that the results of the study are in most cases original and information that is un­
known is not put into consideration. Adopting a qualitative method of study supports the
development of predetermined results and also gives the researcher the opportunity of
examine the beliefs, emotions and behaviors of human beings.
An exploratory research is the most appropriate method to use when the study involves
discovery of new knowledge (Beall 2011). Consequently, a qualitative research method
was deemed appropriate for this study. The purpose of this study was to uncover the fac­
tors that lead to pivoting by entrepreneurs in the software market. The study also sought
to investigate the best factors for pivoting decision and determining if the factors vary de­
pending with the business modelCORREGIR, EN LOS RESULTADOS NO SE VERIFICA
ESTO. In this type of study, a detailed examination of the phenomena is conducted and
various relationships established. Exploratory research design was employed because
the researcher visits the phenomena and documents it. Thus, detailed reasoning is pre­
sented in relation to diverse behaviors and occurrences within the study subject.
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
21
==PAGE:30==
Another advantage of selecting exploratory research design is because exploratory study
gives a detailed description of the traits related to a certain population or phenomena
under study. According to Kallet (2004), an exploratory study puts focus on the study’s
‘what’s’ rather than the ‘whys. ’It gives a description of the demographic segment’s nature
but fails to know the reason for the phenomena to take place. Additionally, the variables’
nature alongside their behaviors was not in the researcher’s hands as stated by Creswell
(2014). An exploratory study was considered as the most appropriate towards uncovering
the information that is yet to be explored concerning pivoting decisions in the software
market.
3.3
Target population and sample
After selecting an appropriate method of conducting a research study, it is essential for
the research to define the sampling data of the study. Secondary data has been used
in this research for being analyzed and interpreted. Interviews in form of podcasts and
reports carried out on Software entrepreneurs in diverse organizations within the world
were deemed relevant for providing information that was used in this study. The interviews
that are chosen to the study must meet a certain established set of criteria which defines
which one is going to be included in the efforts of the research.
Using secondary data as the principal source of the data in the research has de advantage
that the startups of the founders that participated in these external interviews are more
successful that the ones that could have been got in other way. From the other hand, one if
the downsides of using this type of sources is that the data could have been misunderstood
and taken out of context. This is an important point to take in consideration when making
the conclusions.
3.4
Data collection instrumentation and procedures
There are numerous methods of data collection in a qualitative research: observations,
interviews, textual and visual analysis and focus groups. This study adopted the use
of secondary sources of data collection. Interview podcasts already published online in
entrepreneurship interviews were used for data collection. Most of the interviews are in
the format of podcasts, which are digital audio programs that are focused of diverse top­
ics. They are usually available for free download. Podcasts are increasingly becoming
a popular method of consuming information in the present day. Given that podcasts are
secondary sources of data collection, they are associated with a number of advantages.
They are time­saving and they offer a huge amount of data which could have taken the
researcher a long time to collect. For this study, a framework of the factors that explain
pivoting decisions in startups was created using the data collected from podcast inter­
views.
3.5
Data analysis
Data analysis is the process that involves searching and arranging data and thereafter
presenting insights that are relevant for enhancing the researcher’s knowledge with rela­
tion to the data that is collected in the research. The process of data analysis involves
combining all the data that is retrieved during the process of data collection. Data analysis
is an important part of a research study since it presents the researcher with an opportunity
of classifying data in a manner that allows them to answer the research questions. This
process is vital because it allows the researcher to achieve the desired results. Analysis
of qualitative data is accompanied with a number of negative connotations as compared
to other parts of a research study. This is mainly attributed to the fact that qualitative
22
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:31==
data is normally recorded in the form of feelings, opinions, descriptions and word with
few numbers as compared to a quantitative research study. This is an interesting area
of research where many findings can be discovered about how entrepreneurs make its
decisions. Nevertheless, it is out of the scope of this project.
There exist various techniques of data analysis in relation to a qualitative study. For the
case of the current study, content analysis alongside simple statistics was used the data
collected through online podcasts. Before the analysis, the collected data underwent val­
idation to ensure that the process of data collection undertaken had met the standards
set prior to the onset of the study. Validation involved screening for confirming that the
selected interviews were the intended ones. Discrepancies were also removed by clean­
ing.
Content analysis is a data analysis method whereby the data collected in categorized into
themes and sub­themes for reasons of compatibility (Bebois, 2019). Content analysis
is appropriate because it aids the researcher in the reduction and simplification of the
collected data. It also helps the researcher to acquire results that are appropriate for
measurement. The collected data is structured in a manner that meets the objectives of
the study. However, content analysis is associated with high risks of misinterpretations
by the researcher. The content analysis adopted in this study included transcription of the
podcasts followed by coding. The themes which were discovered from the podcasts were
quantified and the presence of the meanings and relations ships of particular words and
concepts analyzed. The transcribed podcasts were read for identification of outstanding
themes which were then recorded in a table.
The main research questions informed the whole process of content analysis. The use
of provisional coding has been suggested by Saldana (2016) CORREGIR, SI HEMOS
HECHO ESTO, SER MAS ESPECIFICOS CON EJEMPLOS for allowing the researcher
to create codes basing on the codes that are retrieved from literature review. The codes
can then be modified, expanded or removed at the data analysis stage. Themes emerged
from the process of coding which helped the researcher to determine patterns within the
collected data. The themes were defined and a detailed analysis created for easy under­
standing by the reader.
3.6
Trustworthiness
Trustworthiness is defined as certainty level in the methods adopted in a research study,
the data collected and the interpretation of the data towards ensuring the quality of the
study (Connelly, 2016). According to Palinkas et al. (2015), a research could be subjec­
tive since the results of the study can be impacted by individual perspectives and personal
experiences. Most qualitative studies accept Lincoln and Guba’s (1985) criteria of mea­
suring trustworthiness. The requirements of the criteria involve transferability, credibility,
dependability and conformability. Continued field engagement and using triangulation for
data and methods help in validating the acquiring credibility and trustworthiness of a re­
search study. In a qualitative study, transferability is supported by the researcher through
the provision of a description that is detailed in the content of the study, the people being
studied, the location alongside total transparency concerning analysis (Connnely, 2016).
For the case of this study, transferability was established through the provision of a clear
understanding concerning the target population under study, data collection, sample pop­
ulation alongside the data analysis techniques adopted in the study.
Conformability is the extent at which the findings of the study are consistent and can be
repeated. Conformability is achieved by maintaining detailed notes, maintaining an audit
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
23
==PAGE:32==
trail of analyzing data alongside having a peer­debriefing meeting. (Connely, 2016). In
this study, personal notes were taken from the beginning of the study up to completion to
help prevent personal bias and keeping an audit trail of all the processes. Dependability
is the strength of data over time and conditions which imply that an experience’s exam­
ination can be the same over a certain period of time but changes occur in conditions.
Conelly (2016) also recommends the use of audit trails and peer debriefings in support of
dependability.
3.7
Ethical considerations
Research ethics are prevalent towards any research study given that protecting the dignity
and safety of participants is paramount. Consequently, it is vital to obtain ethical approval
prior to conducting a research study. For the purpose of effectively achieving the objec­
tives of this study, adherence to certain research ethics was required for the protection
of the respondents. Silverman (2018), highlights that research ethics are moral virtues
which are responsible in the governance of the manner in which studies are conducted
by researchers.
Levy et al. (2016) highlights that the job of the researcher is to ensure that the researcher
abodes to the code of ethics which have been mandated by the Belmont Report which is
the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of their University alongside federal regulations. Jus­
tice, beneficence and autonomy are the core values of the Belmont Report which are in
support of the protection of human subjects that take part in a research study (Bromley et
al., 2015). As a researcher, it was necessary to adhere to all the procedures, policies and
standards that are applicable and mandated by faculty and acquire appropriate approval
prior to data collection. Given that the study did not involve direct interaction with hu­
man subjects, no measures were undertaken for human protection. However, secondary
sources of data are also accompanied with some ethical considerations. Participants in
the secondary sources require some protection. Given that the identity of the intervie­
wees in the podcasts is public, there was no need to keep their identity anonymous. Their
consent is presumed. However, it was ensured that the use of the data did not result in
any distress or damage.
3.8
Summary
A qualitative exploratory research methodology was used in this study. The methodology
presents the researcher with an opportunity of exploring deeply the research topic and
creating new ideas. The problem under investigation was the factors that lead to pivoting
decision by software startups entrepreneurs. The purpose of the study was in line with the
proposed research questions. An exploratory approach was deemed appropriate since
the aim of the study was to find effective factors for making a pivoting decision. The
results of the study will be effective towards helping software entrepreneurs while making
a pivoting or iterating decision. A purposive sampling technique was used to select a
sample of 21 podcasts which were used as a source of data in the study.
24
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:33==
4
Results
4.1
Introduction
For the study to be completed properly, the data collected should be analyzed properly for
the research question to be answered. As highlighted in chapter three, the interpretation
of the collected data is carried out in descriptive form. In this chapter, the analysis, pre­
sentation and interpretation of the data collected in brought to light. The analysis of data
is based on the qualitative data collected from the online podcasts. The data analysis is
carried out based on the objectives of the study.
4.2
Sample and data collection
This chapter provides the presentation ,analysis, and the discussion of the results that
were obtained from 21 external interviews. The major aim of this study was to investigate
when the software enterprises decide to pivot and how lean startup framework is the
best for software startups. The researcher gathered the information from entrepreneurs
through podcasts. From the external sources, 14 categories has been identified in the
interviews, regarding pivoting in the software enterprise startups. The main idea was to
know the best frameworks they choose, whether they have pivoted, or not and the reasons
for not pivoting. The qualitative data that was obtained from interviews was categorized
into various categories and the themes that were obtained were compared and analyzed
qualitatively to draw conclusions about pivoting. The analysis of the results was based
on the ESSSDM funnel framework.
4.3
Founders’ Background
4.3.1
Decision maker
In this category of interview questions, the project sought to gain more insights concern­
ing the company with which the podcast interviewee worked with and their roles in the
enterprises. It is relevant to know who the decision maker in the startup is to later under­
stand better the context of the company, were could be interesting to see if the founder’s
studies affect in the company goals and decisions. Information concerning the products
offered by the company, the business model of the company, people in charge of decision
making, and the product value of the company was obtained. Table 4.1 below shows a
summary of the results that were obtained with respect to this category of podcast inter­
viewee. This category of questions was effective towards obtaining insights on diverse
business models related to the software industry. They were also necessary for gaining
insights on the different types of startups in the software industry.
Most of the participants in this study were software developers and engineers. The table
below provides a summary of the roles the participants held in their enterprises. It is also
relevant to note that 20 out of 21 founders took the role of CEO in the company, except
one that was the Growth Manager. With this information, we can highlight that most of the
founders in startups take the position of the CEO in the company. Which it also makes
sense, because a founder use to develop a strong relationship with the built organization,
being more willing to take a role whose decisions have an impact in the company vision.
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
25
==PAGE:34==
#
Category
Respondent’s studies
1
2­A
Computer games programming
2
2­B
Computer engineer
3
2­C
Visual artist
4
2­D
Politics reporter
5
2­E
Software developer
6
2­F
Software developer
7
2­G
Software engineer
8
2­H
Business analyst
9
2­I
Software engineer
10
2­J
Telecom engineer
11
2­K
Business
12
2­L
Structural designer
13
2­M
Mathematics
14
2­N
Full stack developer
15
2­O
Software engineer
16
2­P
Web designer
17
2­Q
Business
18
2­R
Business
19
2­S
Computer engineer
20
2­T
Marketing
21
2­U
Software developer
Table 2: Participant’s studies
4.4
Groupings of the respondents according to their
background
During the case study interviews, the respondents answered the interview questions and
various patterns emerged. It was evident from the outcome of the transcripts that the
respondents who have similar roles in their enterprises provided similar responses which
made it easier to categorize them together for easier analysis. The transcript has been
rewieved from the respondents and selected those with similar responses were grouped
together and assigned alpha­numeric codes. The respondents who had technical knowl­
edge on software development were categorized together as 3­A respondents for easier
analysis. Those who had business skills were also grouped together as shown in the
table below.
26
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:35==
Category
Background
Frecuency
3­A
• Software developer
• Computer engineer
• Software engineer
• Telecom Engineer
• Web Designer
• Computer Games
• Programming
• Full stack developer
12
3­B
• Business
• Business analyst
• Marketing
5
3­C
• Mathematician
• Structural Engineer
2
3­D
• Visual artist
• Politics reporter
2
Table 3: Grouping of the participant categories
The categorization of the respondents made it easier to transcribe their respondents and
analyze them easily. From the transcription various themes emerged that helped in mak­
ing conclusions about lean startup for software enterprises and the reason they pivot. It
is clear from the above table that the majority of the participants were founders with a
technology background (Game Programing, Computer Engineer or Software Engineer).
They were followed by founders with business oriented education by 23.8%.
Finally, the rest of the diverse backgrounds were represented by 19% of the total partici­
pants. It has been also found that 95% (19 out of 20) have university studies The above
results show that a sample that will provide relevant information about software enterprise
startups has been selected because they understand the trends in software enterprises
and what is needed to inform their pivoting efforts. Choosing the right interviews leads
to the generation of accurate information that can inform decision making regarding piv­
oting for survival in the highly competitive industry faced with continuous changes due to
technological advancement. As technology advances, new solutions are developed and
for the organization to survive it must reconsider its original business objectives to make
decisions whether to pivot or not.
During qualitative data analysis the researcher was able to identify categories from the
interview transcripts. As such the researcher was able to determine 6 categories that
were crucial in software enterprises lean startups. The categories include the following:
• Initial product offering
• Value proposition
• Business model
• Pivots
• Changes involved
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
27
==PAGE:36==
• Motive for change
• When startup pivot
4.5
First Iteration
4.5.1
Initial product
Regarding the products they offer, the goal was to know what the companies provides and
whether it lies in the category of software startup. From the investigation the researcher
was able to gather information from software companies. All the participants worked with
software enterprise organizations which make it evident that the data gathered is rele­
vant to the research objective regarding pivoting in the software enterprise organizations.
Identifying the initial product helps to understand better the business model of the startup.
The table below summarizes the services the companies offer.
What is the initial product or service that
you offer?
Frecuency
Grouping tool
6
Website hosting service
1
Education platform
2
Scraping tool
4
Social media automation tool
2
Fintech app
1
E­commerce app
1
Content generation app
1
Stock watching
1
Marketing tool
2
Table 4.2 Services the startups provide
From the interview it was evident that all the companies provide value for its customers
because their software solutions made it easier for the customers to conduct business on­
line. Although they charged small fees for the services they received, the services made
it easier for them to achieve what they needed satisfactorily. According to the ESSSDM
framework, the first step is validating the problem by knowing if the customers need the
problem solved. From the interviews, it became evident that the entrepreneurs provide
the solution to make something simple, simplify the process, offer quality services, provide
better understanding, and make business operations easier. This proved that software
start­ups consider the needs of the customers and provide them with the software prod­
ucts they need to be successful.
28
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:37==
4.5.2
Initial value proposition
The table below shows various value propositions that software startups want to deliver.
Most often software startups focus on the value proposition to be successful in the in­
dustry. Under the value proposition categories, several themes were identified and are
summarized in the table below.
Category (Value proposition)
Frecuency
Make something more simple
8
Save time
9
Save money
2
API
2
Total
21
Table 4: Value proposition themes
The software entries startups industry is very competitive and the organizations operating
in the industry need to understand the industry so that they can develop the necessary
strategies that will help them succeed. The main focus of many software startups is the
value they provide to their targeted customers (Terho, Suonsyrjä, Karisalo, & Mikkonen,
2015). Value proposition was one of the things that wanted to bee understood from the
interviews so that the new startups can learn how they can create startups that will be
successful. Software startups have become a commoditized business and small and
medium sized enterprises are price focused. Making something more simple is the main
value propositions that revolves with software startups. Saving time was the followed
most common value that startup products provide. These enterprises developed solutions
that helped the customers to save time by providing them with easier and faster ways of
conducting their activities through their platforms. Terho, Suonsyrjä, Karisalo, Mikkonen,
(2015) argued that a software enterprise can succeed in the competitive industry if they
help customers to achieve their need.
The value proposition of the SaaS startups were 50% making something more simple,
13.3% provided an API, 13.3% help to save costs and 41.7% helped to save time. The
rest of the business model categories also provided a mixed value proposition. The only
business model where the 100% of its respondents said that their value proposition was
the same was in the case of the aggregator. Which make sense because an aggregator
usually gathers people that can provide a concrete service, saving time to the user that
needs that service.
With this information, we can say that there is not relation between the SaaS business
model and the value proposition, meaning that different SaaS provide different values
to their customers. There is an indication that other business models, like aggregators,
could have a more fixed value proposition.
This is useful for new entrepreneurs that plan to build a new startup with an aggregator
business model helping them to focus in provide that value to the customer as soon as
possible in their user lifetime. That means that their MVP should only be focus on saving
time to the potential customer, and in general terms, forgetting the rest of the features.
Reaspondent 2­A stated “We created systems that would allow the customers to take 20
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
29
==PAGE:38==
hours on what could have taken 200 hours to accomplish the mission. Furthermore, the
enterprises focus on staying lean because of the software startup cost sensitivity”.
Another aspect that the software enterprise focuses on is simplicity. Small and medium
sized business normally does not have internal support or training organization. The
organizations are often focused on cost saving rather than caring about the complexity of
the system.
Respondent 2­G claimed that “Ease to use and support is vital than the feature robustness
and enterprises that started with robustness decide to pivot to make it easier for target
customers to use the service easily”. However, respondent’s 2­J, and 2­L argued that the
small and medium sized enterprises may not focus on the ease of use but cost savings.
Other enterprises pivoted because they wanted to save time to their users. When the
system works faster or provided the customer with an opportunity to complete the task
faster through the service the software enterprise provides, the company can boost its
sales. Giardino et. al (2014) argues that value proposition of saving time can increase
conversions up to 90%. From the podcast interviews, it was evident that respondent
category 3­A, 3­B, and 3­C said they pivoted because they wanted to save them time and
maximize the profits. Category 3­B respondents said that conversion of up to 90% is a
large increase in the company’s revenue and it can assist in making difference between
the financial success and failure of the software enterprise startup which was consistent
with Blank (2013) research. The API based startups are growing faster in the recent
time. Five respondents said that they provided value to their customers via application
programming interface (API). The API is a high­growth company that delivered its services
through programming applications. Software as a service has lowered the total cost of
ownership for adopting software, solving scaling challenges and takes away the burden
of issues with local hardware; the company is thus focused on its business while reducing
the burden of IT operations. SaaS adoption is increasing ubiquitous and about 73% of
the software enterprises have at least one application already in the cloud (Blank, 2013).
From the interviews, the researcher found that 5 enterprises pivoted and started to offer
their customers API as a way of offering value proportion.
4.5.3
Business Model category
Business models are crucial for successful creation of a software startup because without
a model, the enterprise is likely to lose or fail to reach its goal (Schneider, Spieth, 2013).
The business model is the roadmap that guides the enterprise to know where it will put its
service or product to provide solutions to the customer problems. The table below shows
the various business models that software enterprises employ.
Respondent 2­G said that “Building a solid business model is crucial because a model
helps determine the success or the failure of the enterprise”. Following the Osterwalder’s
Business Model Canvas, the business models can be very diverse, existing multitude of
parameters and factors that affect the company output. That is why, in order to simplify it,
the business models have been categorized.
30
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:39==
BM Category
Frecuency
Marketplpace
2
Aggregator
2
On­demand
­
Reverse auction
­
Crowdsourcing
­
SaaS
15
E­commerce
2
Table 5: Business model categories
Although there are many business models in softwate startups, the results from the inter­
view reveals that the entrepreneurs who were interview used three major business models
in their enterprises. The models that emerged from the interviews include:
• SaaS
• E­commerce
• Marketplace
• Aggregator
From the data above, SaaS is the most common business in the analyzed interviews,
which represents 71.4% of the businesses of the interviews. These numbers are above
with the market estimations if they are compared with the figures like Gartner give in her
press release, were 19.76% of established technology companies are SaaS. This fact
may lead us to think that founders from the 3­A group, as it will be explained below, tend
to apply their technical knowledge in their companies, being a SaaS product the most
common approach, despite the fact that it is estimated that 92% of SaaS business fail
within 3 years (Chekalin 2021).
Taking in consideration the founders background, it is interesting to see that entrepreneurs
with technical or computer science related studies have founded a startup which is based
on a SaaS business model, where 11 out of 12 founders form the 3­A group are man­
aging a SaaS product. This implies that founders prefer to develop a product that they
understand and feel comfortable with, where not having a technical background can be­
come a barrier for building a SaaS, preferring to opt for less technical products with an
e­commerce approach.
The other founder backgrounds categories do not highlight for any business model in
particular, that may lead us to think that other backgrounds like coming from business,
do not care so much in applying a specific technology but in finding a solution for the
customer problem.
Category 3­A and 3­B respondents indicated that their enterprises that used SaaS as the
business model provided their solutions to the customers through the cloud, helping them
save money and time. This is because most of the SaaS companies are backed with a
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
31
==PAGE:40==
cloud infrastructure, due to the fact that allows to start a business with less resources and
it is usually easier to scale up.
Respondent 2­K reported that “Building a simple SaaS product is one of the lean ap­
proaches that we use to provide solutions to the customer programs profitably”.
On the other hand, respondent 2­C and 2­L admitted that their enterprises use e­commerce
model to conduct their businesses effectively. E­commerce business model is a crucial
strategy for many enterprises (Schneider, & Spieth, 2013). The main component of this
model is identifying the target market and then selecting thee­commerce business model
because they models are many which include B2B, B2C, C2C and others. E­commerce
business model is increasing over the past decades and a software startups should use
the best model regarding the target market. Software enterprise may decide to pivot if
the e­commerce business model is not solving the problem they intend to solve or it is not
profitable (Schneider, Spieth, 2013). For instance, the respondents indicated that they
changes from B2C business model to B2B model to save costs and time and increase
sales revenue.
4.6
Goals
4.6.1
Key performance indicators
Key performance indicators are critical for the successful launch of software startup. The
respondents from the podcast interviews revealed that they used the following key per­
formance indicators in their efforts to setup startups and pivot.
KPI Category
Frecuency
Product validation
13
Sales channel validation
5
Technology validation
3
Table 6: KPI Categories
The third category was the key performance indicators. From the interview, the researcher
found that key performance indicators that the software enterprises used to gauge their
performance in the market included product validation, sales channel validation and tech­
nology validation. Some of the 3­A category respondents argued that they used KPI that
measures the product validation to analyze the performance of its service performance
in the enterprise industry. Based on the business the enterprise is doing, various metrics
can be used evaluate the performance of the service. The three major performance indi­
cators that are used to confirm product validation include the conversion funnel, product
activation and customer retention.
A sales funnel is a system that is used to guide the customer though a process to purchase
the service or product (Murtagh et al., 2020). A maximized sales and conversion tunnel
that offers the target set amount of leads is a clear indicator that the products or service
the company is offering fits the market. It is critical for software startup to monitor the
progress of the number of unique visitors, downloads, and trials as important metrics
that are particular to the service or product. Another metric is product activation. The
activation informs the enterprise the number of visitors engaging with the website. Product
activation has many metrics include clicks, time on website, pages viewed, subscriptions
or trial signup. Higher activation rate means that the software enterprise has found the
32
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:41==
right audience for the service and that the marketing efforts are effective. Validating the
product is tandem with the ESSSDM framework whereby the enterprise swipes through
four stages of validating the product before releasing it to the market. The stages are
meant to ensure that the product enters the market successfully because failure will lead
to losses.
Contrary, subpar rate shows that there is no enough perceived value for the service the
enterprise offers. Also, product activations can be measure by customer retention which
gives insights of repeat purchases, referrals and satisfaction rating. Sales channel valida­
tion is another key performance indicator that the researcher found from the study. Sales
channel validation can help measure the performance of the service. This includes the
distribution channels and the way customers receive their products. Faster flow of prod­
ucts or services indicates that the service provided has met the right market while slow
distribution could mean the enterprise has not found the right niche and needs to pivot.
Another KPI that the interviews used to evaluate the performance of their service is the
technology validation.
The respondent 2­K, and 2­F said that “Technology validation confirms that the compo­
nent technologies can be incorporated into the entire system solution and the system
performance and operation are achieved under the projected operating situations”.
Thus, by checking is the technologies software enterprises use in offering solution can in­
dicate the effectiveness of the enterprise. Technology validation relies on the data that is
gathered to see if the targets are met. Technology validation has some challenges which
include measuring sustainability and the circular economy. Three respondents indicated
that the used technology validation as KPI in measuring the success of their enterprise.
This key performance indicator is vital because software enterprises must target the cus­
tomer segments that will enable them to get high sales revenue. For instance, some were
forced to change from B2C model to B2B model to earn a stable income because deal­
ing with other enterprises is more profitable than dealing with individual customers. For
instance, one respondent stated that they pivots to tangle because they believed that the
revenues that can generate from the software solution is higher than the current founder
job.
4.7
Changes in the business model
4.7.1
Pivot Employed
Each enterprise pivots in a way that fits its current needs. This category will be relevant to
see if different software startups choose different pivots based on the company activities.
The table below shows various types of pivots for software startups.
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
33
==PAGE:42==
KPI Category
Frecuency
Zoom­in
0
Zoom­out
0
Customer segment
5
Customer need
3
Platform Pivot
0
Business architecture
0
Value capture
0
The engine of growth
1
Channel Pivot
6
Technology Pivot
4
No Pivot
2
Total
21
Table 7: Types of pivots
Several pivot categories exist but in this study, the research found that the enterprises
have at one moment changed the way they conducted their business to fit the market
needs and changing trends. For instance, five respondents provided that they have al­
tered customer segment when they found that their business were not solving the prob­
lems they intended.
Startup pivot is not an easy aspect because the enterprise must make the decisions
whether to preserve or pivot their operations (Kirtley, & O’Mahony, 2020). It is so hard to
pivot because of various reasons which include vanity metrics, lack of clear hypothesis,
and the enterprise are hard to reject an idea before it had a real chance to prove itself.
The researcher was able to identify some startup pivots from the interviewees. Partici­
pants who reported that their enterprises have undertaken customer segment pivot, the
company had the right product but it was selling to the wrong people. Thus, the company
decided to pivot to target the new types of consumers. This occurs when the company
depletes the founder’s user base and expands to the main stream uses with different pref­
erences. Serving the right customers can increase the company profitability and sales
revenue. One of the respondents said that the company had undergone platform pivot,
which occurs when the company has an application but it decided to become a platform
for others to build their own products and applications (Kirtley, & O’Mahony, 2020).
In this research the enterprise decided to create a dedicated application that solved the
end user’s needs directly. Value capture is another pivot that the researcher noticed from
the interviews (Snihur, & Clarysse, 2021). This pivot enables the enterprise to change
the startup to make money differently. This is important particularly for monetization sites
34
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:43==
where the enterprise decides to offer the service freely instead of selling to make money
from ads or partnerships. Participant 2­D said that they created a website to provide peo­
ple with a collection of political news freely but make money through ads. The researcher
also found that some of the enterprises employed channel pivot which involves how the
customers get the product. The organizations pivot to deliver the product to the customers
through a different channel either to sell to customers directly or when the company has
traction (Snihur, & Clarysse, 2021).
From the results, 6 out of 6 sales channel pivots, 2 out of 2 no pivots and 4 out of 5
customer segment pivots were made by SaaS companies. Similar disperse results are
got when we check that are the pivot types in the other different business models cat­
egories. That indicates that the business model has no relation with the pivot that the
startup founder may do.
Similarly, if we make this comparison taking in consideration the founders’ background,
from the group 3­A, four pivoted in the sales channel, two did not pivot, two pivoted in the
customer segment, two pivoted in the customer need and two pivoted in the technology
they use. At the same time from the group 3­B, two pivoted in the customer segment,
one in technology, 1 in the engine of growth and one in the sales channel pivot. This
also indicates that the founders’ background may not be related with the pivot decisions,
meaning that is the market and the KPI’s the ones that truly hints the right decision that
has to be made in order to success.
Respondent 2­A, 2­H, 2­B, 2­Q and 2­L reported that they employ channel pivot to target
their potential customers effectively. On the other hand, respondent of category 3­A re­
ported to have adopted technology pivot to enhance their businesses. Technology pivot
entails providing the customers the same product using a different technology. The new
technology often offers better performance and better price.
Respondent 2­E was software developed who narrated “Our enterprise decided to pivot
because the feature we provide online was complicated and robust and customers had
difficulties navigating the platform to get the service they needed”. In their case, the right
pivot was not try to make it easy for the current users, but change the type of users that
want to use it, which ended up that they were more agile navigating though the platform.
4.7.2
Reasons for pivoting
The motive to change was another category that the researcher identified from the in­
terviews. The researcher focused on several motives and the findings of the research
are presented in the table below. The process of pivot is challenging because it involves
changing the initial objectives of the business. Thus, the managers and entrepreneurs
must clearly study the market to ensure that when they pivot they meet their goals.
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
35
==PAGE:44==
Reasons
Frecuency
Lack of customers
12
Non­profitable
1
Revenue two low
5
Found something else more profitable
0
Obsolete technology
1
Stakeholder problem
0
No Pivot
2
Table 8: Reasons for pivoting
From the results, it can be seen that the lack of customers is the reason of why the 57%
of the startups pivoted, followed by having a low revenue by 23.8%. This is reasonable,
because early­stage companies use lack of customers due to their novelty in the market.
From the interviews, some of the 3­A respondents said that they decided to pivot because
they realized that the feature robustness was complex, and the target customers did not
enjoy the service. Thus, they pivoted to ensure ease of use and support to maximize their
profits. Where eight of the 3­A group pivoted because of lack of customers, one did not
pivot, one was because of the revenue was too law and one because the business was
not profitable.
Respondent 2­P argued “When software enterprises learn that the customers are having
trouble using their platform, they decide to change the platform to make it user friendly”.
This is a strong argument for changin the technology used or fogure out if the startup is
targeting the right customer.
4.7.3
When software startups Pivot
The figure below shows the summary results from the podcast interviews regarding the
time enterprises decided to pivot.
36
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:45==
When they pivot
Frecuency
Concept and research
0
From the idea to MVP
4
Traction or validation
5
Refinement
6
Scaling
4
Established
0
No pivot
2
Total
21
Table 9: Startup stages
Research provides that the startup can decide to pivot when there are new ideas where the
entrepreneur explores all their opinions. This category of interview questions was formu­
lated to help to understand the context that would answer the second research question
and the third one. It can be highlighted that most software start­ups in the research study
applied changes at the stage of transitioning from idea to MVP. As it can be seen in the
results, the stage in which the startups pivoted is very versatile.
Some of the areas identified from the interviews where they decide to pivot include concept
and research, from the idea to MVP, traction or validation and refinement. Some can
decide to pivot when scaling and others when they are established. Essentially, 2­G and
2­R respondents said that they decided to pivot during refinement which was the highest
number of respondents indicating that many software startups pivot during refinements.
Paschen, (2017) argues that at the time of divergence, the startup must make conscious
decisions to pivot and to stop supporting the original idea and start supporting the new
idea.
There has not been found any relation between the business model categories or the
founder’s background with the stage the startup pivoted. That can indicate that startups
are continuing pivoting regardless the stage they are in.
4.8
Discussions of Results
The results have indicated that software enterprises can be as profitable as other organi­
zation when the entrepreneurs are keen to identify what works better. Software enterprise
industry is competitive and the entrepreneurs must select the business model that will
provide them with the opportunity to deliver the solution they intend to meet the customer
needs.
The main reason identified from the interviews is that organizations decide to pivot be­
cause the market is diminishing, the competition is increasing market share, being harder
to get more customers, and when the product no longer serves the need of the customers.
This can be a slow process of death for a small business. Most often, many organizations
do not realize the need to pivot something in their business until it is too late which is a
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
37
==PAGE:46==
common problem for software enterprises. Failure to see the need to change is the main
cause of high rate of software enterprise failures. Typically, a pivot for many entrepreneurs
means rethinking of the original business model. When one which once worked, it is time
for the enterprise to move to a different plan and generate money differently (Van der Van,
& Bosch, 2013). During the change, it can be anxious for the company, but it should be
the time when the entrepreneur reexamines its business and look more broadly the solu­
tions to the customer problems. The Pivot thus, provides an opportunity for the startup to
refine and refocus the enterprise on customer value, needs, and expectations.
In the proves of thinking of changing or pivot the organization musts use the Early Stage
Software Startup Development Model (ESSSDM) framework which guides the startup on
how to pivot effectively. The model will help the organization to validate the problem facing
the startup, then validate the solution before validating the MVP in the small scale and in
the large scale. The model is an important tool that provides guidance in the process
of making decisions for products development of software startups. The main reason for
software enterprises to pivot is because what worked formerly has stopped working or will
not continue to work always. The passionate attachment to the initial idea that gave birth
to the software enterprise is often not sufficient to keep the enterprise viable in the face
of increased competition. Van der Van, Bosch, (2013) argue that the abilities and skills
that are needed to get the business from the ground are not necessary the same abilities
that are necessary to keep the company operating successfully. Some startups fail tom
grow from startup to ongoing business because the fail to continually pivot.
From the study, it is clear that the software startups, should rely on lean startup to remain
profitable. The organization must continually change their process and products or service
to ensure they are delivering the solution they promise their customers.
38
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:47==
5
Conclusion and recommendations
5.1
Conclusion
This chapter provides a summary of the study results and whether the research objectives
were achieved. From the study, it was evident that lean startup is the best strategy for
software enterprise startups. Software enterprises operate in a highly competitive industry
which makes them keen when entering the industry (Bajwa, 2020). They must follow the
process of a startup which is explained by the available frameworks.
A startup pivot takes place when a company changes its business strategy or model to ac­
commodate the changes in the industry, customer needs, and other factors that affect the
bottom line. Pivoting is considered the process of the startup changing direct or indirect
feedback into a change in the business model (Bajwa, 2020). Software startups normally,
decide to pivot to provide value to the customers. Thus, the value proposition is one of
the major reasons software enterprises decide to pivot. Value proposition means offering
the customers what they need. In this case, the value proposition that the research found
that made the software enterprise pivot include saving money, saving time, and making
something simple. The target customer in the software enterprises may find it hard to use
the software solutions because of the complexity of the system (Edison, Wang, & Abra­
hamsson, 2015). Thus, the entrepreneurs decide to pivot to provide the customers with
something easier to use or simply to enhance their effective operations.
Pivots are important for software enterprises but not every pivot is fundamental to the
entire enterprise. The startups always do not have to pull all the resources together to
make something radical. The entrepreneur looks at the value the pivot will bring and
then make decisions using the business model framework to decide whether to change
or not. The areas they look at before changing are problem validation, solution validation,
MVP validation on small scale, and MVP validation on large scale (Pant, Yu, Tai, 2017).
Following the model, the software enterprise is likely to successfully pivot.
Software enterprise decides to pivot when one product service is performing better than
others around it. The enterprise can decide to pivot to find a possible solution to support
that single aspect exclusively. The enterprise may enter the process of trimming its prod­
uct offering to extract more value out of the capital and the time invested in the enterprise
(Pant, Yu,
Tai, 2017). When the company identified one feature in the business that
the customers enjoy the company considers pivoting and building around the product to
maximize the sales revenues. When the business is not financially viable, the manage­
ment considered pivoting as a way of improving the business. Startup founders normally
have sentimental stakes in their enterprises. Founding a startup follows one’s idea and
motivation to see that the idea is realized which makes the pursuit personal. Despite the
idea, the business must run profitably and when it is running out of money, the founders
need to shift the idea to something that can be profitable. Thus, the founders can shift to
something financially viable.
Reflecting on the startup will help the entrepreneurs determine the reference point for the
pivot. The reaction to pivot can go back to the business model and if possible the company
can decide to change the model to be competitive in the industry. Another reason why
software enterprises pivot is the unresponsiveness of the market the way it was intended.
In software enterprises, the prospect of getting the product or service to the market is
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
39
==PAGE:48==
interesting. In situations the product or service does not resonate with the customers as
projected, it becomes the cause to pivot.
The company can decide to change the business model to deliver better value to the tar­
get customers. The entrepreneurs take the strides to generate interest in the solutions
which can implies lowering the price, focusing on developing further features, or chang­
ing the target market (Pant, Yu, Tai, 2017). Ultimately, the entrepreneur must make the
customers see their product or service in a new light. Competition in the market forces
software enterprises to pivot (Lee, Mackenzie, Smith, Box, 2020). The startup real is a
competitive ground where enterprises outperform each other frequently due to the adop­
tion of new technologies. When other enterprises in the same niche are doing better than
one company, the entrepreneur finds the reference point to pivot. The industry can be
crowded where many companies claim a significant market share. The company should
consider it appropriate to change their operations to appear different because of the cause
for pivoting. In this situation, the pivot should be drastic and the enterprise should radi­
cally alter the company and how it operates (Lee, Mackenzie, Smith, Box, 2020). The
company may be forced to change the product or service, the customers, and the sales
strategy.
Pivoting to challenge the competition means becoming different from the rest of the com­
petitors by providing new services that add value and solve the customer’s problems.
Lee, Mackenzie, Smith,
Box, (2020) denoted that software enterprises pivot because
they want to provide the customers with something different. The SaaS enterprises con­
tinually pivot to offer the customers new ways of attaining their needs. When the startup
has been operating for a while and the entrepreneur is unhappy with the trajectory the
business is taking, they consider pivoting. The startup founders may have changed their
goals or found a lucrative niche.
Finally, pivoting is not an easy decision to take lightly because what should be done re­
quires effort to the end. It implies being honest with the business and making appropriate
decisions that will make the change successful. The company must examine the busi­
ness and then decide which pivot to adopt to offer the business value they want to deliver
to the customers. Normally, pivoting is a humbling process that requires the organization
or the founders to swallow their bride and understand where the startups heading, and
decide the drastic course of action.
5.2
Recommendations
From the research results, it can be recommended that software enterprises adopt lean
startups because of the unpredictability of the industry. The lean startup will help the
enterprise to change its way of operations to save money, save time, or deliver something
different that meets the needs of the customers (Bajwa, Wang, Duc, Abrahamsson, 2017).
Moreover, the founders of software enterprises should not be rigid when the idea they
envisaged during the startup is not offering the prospects it intended. The company should
consider changing the business model or a given feature in the enterprise offering to make
it profitable and serve the customers accordingly. Future research should be conducted
to understand where each software enterprise should pivot and what type of pivot should
be implemented based on the way the enterprise is performing in the industry.
40
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:49==
A
Bibliography
Alt, R., & Zimmerman, H.D. 2001. Introduction to special section on business models.
Electronic Markets, 11(1): 3­9.
Amit, R., & Zott, C. 2001. Value creation in e­business. Strategic Management Journal,
22: 493­520
Amit, R., and C. Zott. (2012). ”Creating Value Through Business Model Innovation.” MIT
Sloan Management Review 53(3) :1–25.
Andries, P., Debackere, K., & Van Looy, B. (2013). Simultaneous experimentation as a
learning strategy: Business model development under uncertainty. Strategic entrepreneur­
ship journal, 7(4), 288­310.
Aspara, J., J. Hietanen, and H. Tikkanen. (2010). ”Business model innovation vs repli­
cation: financial performance implications of strategic emphases.” Journal of Strategic
Marketing 18(1) : 39–56
Bajwa, S. S. (2020). Pivoting in Software Startups. In Fundamentals of Software Startups
(pp. 27­43). Springer, Cham.
Bajwa, S. S., Wang, X., Duc, A. N., & Abrahamsson, P. (2017). “Failures” to be celebrated:
an analysis of major pivots of software startups. Empirical Software Engineering, 22(5),
2373­2408
Bajwa, S.S., Wang, X., Duc, A.N., Abrahamsson, P. (2016) How Do Software Startups
Pivot? Empirical Results from a Multiple Case Study. Lect. Notes Bus. Inf. Process.
240, 169– 176 Bansal, P., Smith, W., & Vaara, E. (2018). New ways of seeing through
qualitative research. Academy of Management Journal, 61(4), 1189­1195.
Beall, G. (2002). Exploratory research remains essential for industry. Research Technol­
ogy Management, 45(6), 26­30.
Blank, S. (2013). Why does the lean startup changes everything. Harvard Business
Review, 91(5): 64
Blank, S., (2007). The Four Steps to the Epiphany ­ Successful Strategies for Products
that Win. Cafepress.com
Bonaccorsi, A., Giannageli, S., Rossi, C., (2006). Entry Strategies Under Competing
Standards: Hybrid Business Models in the Open Source Software Industry. Management
Science 52 (7), 1085–1098.
Bosch, J., Veen, V. D., & Salvador, J. (2013). Pivots and Architectural Decisions: Two
Sides of the Same Medal?. Chalmers Publication Library (CPL), 310­317.
Bromley, E., Mikesell, L., Jones, F., & Khodyakov, D. (2015). From subject to participant:
Ethics and the evolving role of community in health research. American Journal of Public
Health, 105(5), 900­908. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2014.302403
Campbell, D. & Stanley, J. (1963). Experimental and quasi­experimental design for re­
search. Rand McNally.
Carlson, N. (2011). ”The real history of Twitter,” Business Insider, [Online]. Available:
http://businessinsider.com/how­twitter­was­founded­2011­4/
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
41
==PAGE:50==
Clarke, J., Thorpe, R., Anderson, L., & Gold, J. (2006). It’s all action, it’s all learning:
action learning in SMEs. Journal of European Industrial Training.
Coleman, R. O. G. (2008). An investigation into software development process formation
in software startups, Journal of Enterprise Information Management 21 (6) 633–648.
Connelly, L. M. (2016). Trustworthiness in qualitative research. Medsurg Nursing, 25(6),
435.
Creswell, J. (2014). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods ap­
proaches (4th ed.). Sage Publications, Inc.
Creswell, J. (2014). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods ap­
proaches (4th ed.). Sage Publications, Inc.
Creswell, J. W., & Creswell, J.D. (2017). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and
mixed methods approaches. Sage Publications, Inc.
Creswell, J., & Poth, C. (2018). Qualitative inquiry & research design: Choosing among
five approaches (4th ed.). Sage Publications, Inc.
Cusumano, M. (2010). Cloud computing and SaaS as new computing platforms. Com­
munications of the ACM, 53(4), 27­29.
De Reuver, M., & Haaker, T. (2009). Designing viable business models for context­aware
mobile services. Telematics and Informatics, 26(3), 240­248.
Demil, B., & Lecocq, X. (2010). Business model evolution: in search of dynamic consis­
tency. Long range planning, 43(2­3), 227­246.
Dudovskiy, J. (2018). Qualitative data analysis. Research Methodology.
Edison, H., Wang, X., & Abrahamsson, P. (2015, May). Lean startup: why large software
companies should care. In Scientific Workshop Proceedings of the XP2015 (pp. 1­7).
Etikan, I, Musa, S., & Alkassim, R. (2016). Comparison of convenience sampling and
purposive sampling. American Journal of Theoretical and Applied Statistics, 5(1), 1­4.
Feller, J., Fitzgerald, B., (2000). A Framework Analysis of the Open Source Software
Development Paradigm. In: ICIS 2000 Proceedings. pp. 58–69
Foss, N.J., Saebi, T. (2017). Fifteen Years of Research on Business Model Innovation:
How Far Have We Come, and Where Should We Go? J. Manage. 43, 1–28.
Fuggetta, A. (2000). Software process: A roadmap, in: Proceedings of the Conference
on The Future of Software Engineering (ICSE), ACM, 2000, pp. 25–34
Fusilier, M., Durlabhji, S., & Al­Salem, A. (2014). Technology and Business Aspects of e­
Business Education retrieved from: http://www.ijbhtnet.com/journals/Vol_4_No_5_October_2014/10.pdf
Giardino C, Bajwa SS, Wang X, Abrahamsson P (2015) Key challenges in early­stage
software startups. XP, Helsinki, Finland, LNBIP, pp 52–63
Giardino, C., Paternoster, N., Unterkalmsteiner, M., Gorschek, T., & Abrahamsson, P.
(2015). Software development in startup companies: the greenfield startup model. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, 42(6), 585­604.
Giardino, C., Unterkalmsteiner, M., Paternoster, N., Gorschek, T., & Abrahamsson, P.
(2014). What do we know about software development in startups?. IEEE software,
31(5), 28­32.
42
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:51==
Giardino, C., Wang, X., Abrahamsson, P.(2014). Why early­stage software startups fail:
A behavioral framework. In: Software Business. Towards Continuous Value Delivery.
Springer, 27­41
Grimes, M. G. (2018). The pivot: How founders respond to feedback through idea and
identity work. Academy of Management Journal, 61(5), 1692­1717.
Hathaway, R. S. (1995). Assumptions underlying quantitative and qualitative research:
Implications for institutional research. Research in higher education, 36(5), 535­562.
Hirvikoski, K. (2014). Startups pivoting towards value. Data­and Value­Driven Software
Engineering with Deep Customer Insight, 1.
IBM. ”The enterprise of the future; Global CEO study.” (2008). IBM United Kingdom Lim­
ited. https://www­935.ibm.com/services/uk/gbs/pdf/ibm_ceo_study_2008.pdf
Johnson, M. W., Christensen, C. M., & Kagermann, H. (2008). Reinventing your business
model. Harvard business review, 86(12), 57­68.
Kallet, R. (2004). How to write the methods section of a research paper. Respiratory
Care, 49(10), 1229­1232.
Khanna, D., Nguyen­Duc, A., & Wang, X. (2018, June). From MVPs to pivots: a hypothesis­
driven journey of two software startups. In International Conference of Software Business
(pp. 172­186). Springer, Cham.
Kier, A. S., McMullen, J. S., & Kuratko, D. F. (2021). How Venture Team Recommenda­
tions Influence Undue Entrepreneurial Persistence: The Impact of Self­Regulation and
Experience. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 10422587211049740.
Kirtley, J., & O’Mahony, S. (2020).
What is a pivot?
Explaining when and how en­
trepreneurial firms decide to make strategic change and pivot. Strategic Management
Journal
Krishnan, V., Ulrich, K. T., (2001). Product development decisions: A review of the liter­
ature. Management Science 47 (1), 1–21.
Lee, A., Mackenzie, A., Smith, G. J., & Box, P. (2020). Mapping platform urbanism:
Charting the nuance of the platform pivot. Urban Planning, 5(1), 116­128.
Levy, D., Livingood, R., & Maranga, K. (2016). Perspectives of qualitative research meth­
ods. Words of Wisdom, LLC.
Linberg, K. R. (1999). Software developer perceptions about software project failure: a
case study. Journal of Systems and Software, 49(2­3), 177­192. Marijarvi, J., Hokka­
nen, L., Komssi, M., Kiljander, H., Xu, Y., Raatikainen, M., Seppanen, P., Heininen, J.,
Koivulahti­Ojala, M., Helenius, M., Jarvinen, J., (2016). The Cookbook for Successful
Internal Startups. DIGILE and N4S
Lippoldt, D., Stryszowski, P., 2009. Innovation in the Software Sector.OECD.
Mathiassen, L. (2017). Designing engaged scholarship: From real­world problems to
research publications. Engaged Management Review, 1(1), 2.
Morris, M., Schindehutte, M., & Allen, J. (2005). The entrepreneur’s business model:
toward a unified perspective. Journal of business research, 58(6), 726­735.
Murtagh, D., Skyman, A., Rydberg, B., & Eriksson, P. (2020). Odin/SMR product val­
idation and evolution report. Technical report, Chalmers 20 University of Technology,
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
43
==PAGE:52==
Department of Space, Earth and Environment, available at: http://odin. rss. chalmers.
se/static/documents/PVER.pdf (last access: 24 April 2021).
Neuman, D. (2014). Qualitative research in educational communication and technology:
A brief introduction to principles and procedures. Journal of Computing in Higher Educa­
tion, 26(1), 68­86. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12528­014­9078­x
Nowell, L., Norris, J., White, D., & Moules, N. (2017). Thematic analysis: Striving to meet
the trustworthiness criteria. International Journal of Qualitative Methods.
Pant, V., Yu, E., & Tai, A. (2017, November). Towards Reasoning About Pivoting in Star­
tups and Large Enterprises with i. In IFIP Working Conference on The Practice of Enter­
prise Modeling (pp. 203­220). Springer, Cham.
Paschen, J. (2017). Choose wisely: Crowdfunding through the stages of the startup life
cycle. Business Horizons, 60(2), 179­188.
Paternoster, N. C. Giardino, M. Unterkalmsteiner, T. Gorschek, and Abrahamsson, P.
(2014). Software development in startup companies: a systematic mapping study. Infor­
mation and software technology 56(10): 1200­1218
Rejeb, H. B., Morel­Guimaraes, L., Boly, V., Assi´elou, N. G., (2008). Measuring Inno­
vation Best Practices: Improvement of an Innovation Index Integrating Threshold and
Synergy E￿ects. Technovation 28, 838–854
Ries E (2011) The lean startup: how constant innovation creates radically successful
businesses. Penguin Group, London
Ries, E. (2011). The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innova­
tion to Create Radically Successful Businesses. Crown Business
Saldana, J. (2016). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Sage Publications,
Ltd.
Santos, J., B. Spector and L.Van Der Heyden. (2009). ”Toward a Theory of Business
Model Innovation within Incumbent Firms” INSEAD Working Paper No. 2009/16/ST/TOM
Schaffer, N., Weking, J., & Stähler, O. (2020). Requirements and Design Principles for
Business Model Tools. In AMCIS.
Schneider, S., & Spieth, P. (2013). Business model innovation: Towards an integrated fu­
ture research agenda. International Journal of Innovation Management, 17(01), 1340001.
Shepherd DA, Wiklund J, Haynie JM (2009) Moving forward: balancing the financial and
emotional costs of business failure. J Bus Ventur 24(2):134–148
Snihur, Y., & Clarysse, B. (2021). Sowing the seeds of failure: Organizational identity
dynamics in new venture pivoting. Journal of Business Venturing, 106164.
Sosna, M., Trevinyo­Rodríguez, R., & Velamuri, S. (2010). Business model innovation
through trial­anderror learning: The Naturhouse case. Long Range Planning, 43(2), 383­
407
Sutton, S. J. M. (2000). The role of process in a software startup. IEEE Software, 17 (4):
33­39
Teece, D.J. (2010). Business models, business strategy and innovation. Long Range
Plann. 43, 172–194
44
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:53==
Terho, H., Suonsyrjä, S., Karisalo, A., & Mikkonen, T. (2015). Ways to cross the rubicon:
pivoting in software startups. In International Conference on Product­Focused Software
Process Improvement (pp. 555­568). Springer, Cham.
Turner III, D. W. (2010). Qualitative interview design: A practical guide for novice investi­
gators. The qualitative report, 15(3), 754.
Van der Van, J. S., & Bosch, J. (2013). Pivots and architectural decisions: two sides of
the same medal? What architecture research and lean startup can learn from each other.
In Proceedings of Eight International Conference on Software Engineering Advances (IC­
SEA’13), Venice, Italy (pp. 310­317).
Zhang, H., Babar, M. A., & Tell, P. (2011). Identifying relevant studies in software engi­
neering. Information and Software Technology, 53(6), 625­637.
Zuzul, T., & Tripsas, M. (2020). Start­up inertia versus flexibility: The role of founder
identity in a nascent industry. Administrative Science Quarterly, 65(2), 395­433.
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
45
==PAGE:54==
B
Interviews Sources
https://www.indiehackers.com/interview/how­i­launched­and­grew­my­startup­by­500­during­
the­covid­crisis­d526999b35
https://www.indiehackers.com/interview/how­i­launched­and­grew­my­startup­by­500­during­
the­covid­crisis­d526999b35 https://share.transistor.fm/s/daae3382
https://www.indiehackers.com/interview/how­i­went­from­near­bankruptcy­to­running­an­
88k­mrr­business­5a4f6c56fd
https://www.indiehackers.com/interview/making­8k­mo­by­solving­the­information­problem­
in­politics­2596e13e40
https://share.transistor.fm/s/0401203e https://share.transistor.fm/s/0401203e
https://www.failory.com/interview/upvoty
https://www.indiehackers.com/interview/how­reinventing­spreadsheets­got­me­to­4k­customers­
in­under­1­year­a60bf20fdc
https://www.indiehackers.com/interview/how­i­turned­my­freelance­frustrations­into­a­4k­
mrr­app­2f14778400 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XRbw0­H8pm8
https://www.indiehackers.com/interview/how­i­grew­my­business­to­six­figures­with­seo­c7719a77c7
https://www.indiehackers.com/interview/why­expanding­my­products­helped­me­reach­40k­
mrr­ca2526bf01
https://www.indiehackers.com/interview/how­building­better­ai­makes­my­marketing­easier­
daa3b95374
https://www.indiehackers.com/interview/how­we­found­profitability­in­an­ultra­specific­niche­
d10b0dd604
https://www.indiehackers.com/interview/how­weve­grown­in­a­competitive­space­by­eating­
our­own­dogfood­9c76002091
https://www.indiehackers.com/interview/the­story­of­convertkit­from­0­to­968­000­in­monthly­
revenue­2fcb58f1fa
https://producthackers.com/es/podcast/transformando­educacion­platzi/?utm_source=twitterutm_medium=so
platzi
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rqTnpZXC8u8 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V7bD3ta­
FYg
https://www.indiehackers.com/interview/no­code­many­competitors­heres­how­i­still­make­
10k­mo­42a0fba013
https://www.indiehackers.com/interview/how­i­grew­my­app­to­14k­mo­by­using­other­apps­
data­506709a593
46
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
==PAGE:55==
The Lean Startup Framework: A Practical Approach in the Enterprise Software Market
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
