==PAGE:1==
Antimicrobial dental implants by
nanostructured surfaces
by
Martin Voss, s163970
MSc in Physics and Nanotechnology
Technical University of Denmark
Master’s Thesis
Supervisors: Paul Michael Petersen and Yiyu Ou.
Hand-in date: January 2, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The formation of nanostructures on dental yttria stabilised zirconia (YSZ) was studied with the
intent of developing antibacterial surfaces. To achieve this, a fast and aﬀordable fabrication process
was developed, consisting of a masking step and a wet etching step performed in a clean room lab.
All processes were evaluated using Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to inspect the fabricated
structures. Surface smoothness was measured using optical and stylus proﬁling.
8 mol% yttria stabilised zirconia was obtained and prepared to achieve smooth surfaces applicable
for clean room work. Each step of the process was optimised to achieve the best nanostructures
suitable for rupturing bacteria. The mask was made of Au nanoparticles, as Au is noble and stable
in most chemical etchants. The ideal parameters for the mask was examined to form the particles
with the optimal shape and size to allow for etched structures to form around them. It was found
that depositing 12 nm gold and annealing it at 800 ℃for 3 minutes gave the best mask. Particles
of around 220 nm in diameter with 4 per square micron formed, which would give ideal structures
assuming isotropic etching around the nanoparticles.
Diﬀerent concentrations of hydroﬂuoric acid (HF) solutions were used to chemically etch the zirconia
surface. It was found that a minimum of 20 % HF was necessary to etch at room temperature.
Etching for several hours resulted in etching around grains at the surface, instead of the expected
isotropic etching on the exposed surface. Despite large eﬀorts, it was not succeeded to ﬁnd a chemical
solution with a controlled etch rate, making the mask superﬂuous. The surfaces were still successfully
processed with nanoscale structures formed by the intergranular etching. The etching left octahedral
crystal precipitate on the surface.
These are thought to be YF3 crystals, a byproduct from the
etching. Removing these would allow for the etched surface with fabricated nanoscale roughness to
be used for preliminary antibacterial testing to analyse the surfaces for antibacterial eﬀect.
I
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Materials and methods
5
2.1
Antimicrobial surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Microbe types and infectious problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Types of antimicrobial surfaces in nature and science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3
Dental materials and bactericidal eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Overview of available fabrication methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
Physical vapour deposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.3
Annealing - thermal heat treatment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.4
Chemical etching on dental ceramics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Characterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.1
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.2
Surface proﬁling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.3
Wettability/contact angle measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Fabrication Process
27
3.1
Step 0 - polishing and cleaving
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Step 1 - Cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Step 2 - Thin ﬁlm deposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Step 3 - Rapid Thermal processing/Annealing (RTP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5
Step 4 - Wet etching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Experiments and results
31
4.1
Fabrication of nanostructured titanium surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Surface morphology of lapped zirconia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Gold mask formation on zirconia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4
Etching YSZ substrates for nanostructuring surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.5
Processing single-crystal YSZ substrates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.6
Half-covered YSZ substrate for etch rate estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5
Conclusion
63
6
Outlook
65
A Appendix
66
A.1 Supplementary information
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
II
==PAGE:4==
1
INTRODUCTION
January 2, 2022
1
Introduction
Current antibiotic situation
Throughout history, a few selected items are often brought up as the most important inventions
of the modern world.
Among technological developments, the printing press, electric light, and
radio signalling are mentioned. In the health and medical industry, penicillin and antibiotics are
often mentioned as the most important invention of modern med-tech. Plagues or pandemic crises
have brought civilization to their knees, killed millions, and caused an abrupt halt in progress of
societies. The cause has often been bacterial outbreaks, lack of hygiene, poor medical and/or sanitary
conditions. With the help of penicillin and other antibiotics, living conditions have become much
better, with increased lifetime, fewer illnesses and improved overall health [1]. Between technological
progression to improve hygiene and living conditions, the treatments for a variety of infections and
diseases have also improved. Today, most infections can be treated with some sort of antibiotics, and
even deadly viruses like the ﬂu now has a much lower mortality rate [2].
Figure 1: Map of global distribution of the death expectancy in 2050 caused by infections and illness
related to antimicrobial resistance. Image taken from [3].
This is the result of a constant advancement involving materials, agents and surfaces that are capable
of repelling or killing microorganisms present in various parts of our daily life.
It is relevant in
all devices and ﬁelds, such as desktop and oﬃce supplies, food packaging, kitchen, and bathroom
surfaces, mobile phones, and, maybe most importantly, in hospitals and medical industries. Here,
the sanitary standards must be extremely high to avoid bacterial environments among already ill
people and surgically treated patients. Most of the materials in the above-mentioned ﬁelds are not
intrinsically inhibiting antibacterial properties, meaning that modiﬁcations to them are required. For
many years, antibiotics have been used as an agent to remove bacteria, disinfecting the surfaces when
good hygiene is necessary (for example washing medical equipment before use) [4]. A severe problem
arises as bacteria forms bioﬁlm, which makes bacterial colonies much harder to eradicate, making
the antibiotic have limited eﬃcacy. Failing to remove the bacteria with antibiotics can cause the
bacteria to develop antibiotic resistance, which unfortunately is a phenomenon becoming much more
common as antibiotics are continuously used. In fact, use of antibiotic agents has caused signiﬁcant
Page 1 of 73
==PAGE:5==
1
INTRODUCTION
January 2, 2022
concern, as widespread antibiotic usage has been connected to the several multi-drug resistant strains
of infectious diseases setting the modern human’s number one defence system at risk of becoming
ineﬀective [5].
Currently, several million people are infected with antibiotic-resistant infections every year across the
world, causing almost a million deaths annually. This number is expected to go up to 10 million in
2050, if the methods and materials are used at a continuous rate [3]. An illustration of the expected
world situation in 2050 is shown in ﬁgure 1. Not only this, but with the current Covid-19 situation,
the world has never been as focused on improving and developing methods to improve antimicrobial
eﬃcacy. General hygiene needs improvement, and reduction of the tendencies to develop antibiotic
resistance among dangerous and problematic infections.
A recent review by the U.S Department of Health, states that there no longer are talks about a post-
antibiotic era to come - we are already living in it [6]. Instead of expecting these former miracle drugs
to continue providing the easy settlement they have done for so long, it is time to start looking for
new and more stable solutions. Luckily, many people have been busy reducing this incomprehensible
threat. One method has been to use UV-exposure as a disinfectant. UV-exposure on the surfaces has
been demonstrated as a viable approach for disinfecting surfaces, as UV light with speciﬁc wavelengths
can kill the microorganisms eﬀectively [7]. The drawback of this approach is costs, durability, required
training and increased hazards of using the equipment, as incorrect use of UV-exposure can cause
both short- and long-term eye- and skin damage. Despite it being a potent candidate to replace the
use of antibiotics, a more permanent, aﬀordable, and stable approach is necessary.
Antimicrobial surfaces as permanent solution
A solution ﬁtting these criteria is to engineer surfaces to make them inherently antimicrobial. Going
away from the active agents that bacteria can develop resistive strains against, and instead shap-
ing and forming surfaces to automatically repel any microbes potentially living and multiplying on
them. Modiﬁcation of surfaces consists of changing their wettability, surface geometry, roughness,
structure, and various other approaches. The collaborative existence of all these techniques and so-
lutions, provides the necessary tools to cover as many areas as possible. Several studies have shown
great antimicrobial eﬃcacy by altering the surface morphology, creating nanostructures for bacterial
rupturing, forming smooth or rough surfaces for unfavourable bacterial attachment, or using alloys
and compounds that are incompatible with bacteria [8][9][10]. Sharply formed nanostructures can be
used to rupture the cell walls upon contact, and thus kill the bacteria upon attachment.
Great incentives have been done to develop and fabricate antimicrobial materials and surfaces that
are inspired by nature, where insects and other animals - such as cicadas, dragonﬂies, geckos, and even
sharks - have nanoscale features on their extremities (skin, wings, hands etc.). These have shown
to be antimicrobial eﬃcacious towards bacteria within their living habitat [12][5]. From nature’s
own evolutionary development, scientists are collecting information on what types of bacteria are
eradicated by diﬀerent types of nanostructures, making databases of surface properties intended for
diﬀerent antimicrobial purposes [8]. Consequently, all features are not equally eﬀective against all
bacteria. In fact, bacteria exist with diﬀerent structures, and behaves very diﬀerently on similar
surfaces. People have tried to collect all this information as well as characterise what structures are
beneﬁcial to speciﬁc types of bacteria to combine all incentives over multiple research ﬁelds [13].
Dental implants and implementation of nano structured surfaces
An area of research with requirements of fabricating these surfaces is the implant industry. Not only
are biocompatible antibiotics to ensure disinfected implants upon surgery limited, but it is also an
area with a very high cost - and mortality rate - when the disinfection fails. These problems are
typically indicated by the term ”Healthcare Associated Infections (HAI)”, which relates to infections
people catch, while they are being treated for another condition. Several million episodes of HAIs
are reported annually [14], and it has thus become a global health milestone to reduce HAIs. Low
practical methods to reduce HAIs have been implemented, such as correct and frequent hand hygiene
practices by all staﬀand patients and employing standard sterile techniques when performing surgery
Page 2 of 73
==PAGE:6==
1
INTRODUCTION
January 2, 2022
Figure 2: Photographs and SEM images of surfaces of diﬀerent insect wings, demonstrating the
naturally occurring nanostructures research are mimicking. Images inserted depict water droplets on
the surfaces of the wings, annotated with their water contact-angle. Image is taken from [11].
etc. [15]. More long term and impactful solutions proposed are to create implants with autonomous
antimicrobial systems, utilising the surface structuring mentioned above, which will reduce a large
factor of any microbial life at the implant interface. This will increase the success rate of implants to
be integrated into patients, and potentially save many lives.
Depending on the functionality, implants are made of diﬀerent materials. In most cases, titanium and
its various alloys are used, as they provide a strong and stable structure, long durability, and good
biocompatibility. This have been used for bone implants as well as dental implants for several decades
[16]. The downside of using it as dental implants is the lack of cosmetic appeal a metallic tooth has.
Several designs and techniques have been used to overcome this. Dental implants have been made
in several parts, where the inner root is made of titanium and the outer crown by a more cosmetic
appealing material. There have been reported uses of gold, titanium dioxide, chromium, and many
other alloys within the range of these. One of the more prominent materials is zirconia (zirconium
oxide). While titanium has been there since the emerge of dental implants, zirconia was only started
to be used in the 1970’s. Zirconia is biocompatible, hypoallergenic, corrosion resistant and have good
osseointegration [17]. In other words, it is a good material for dental implants. It is also aesthetically
pleasing, having a hue very close to normal enamel, meaning it is easy to process into a tooth replica.
A drawback is the lack of research done to them, making the implants less ﬂexible (ﬁguratively) and
more expensive. Zirconia is also more brittle, technically being more prone to breaking (although
neither zirconia nor titanium really breaks due to tensile stress under normal conditions).
This
large list of advantages with few drawbacks has accelerated the research into improving the material
manufacturing and design. Compared to titanium, which is being used in multiple industries over
decades, it is only recent that zirconia is being recognised as a versatile material in multiple industries.
Dental implants are often aﬀected by bacteria forming bioﬁlm in the form of plaque or caries. To
avoid this, developing surface structures that make dental implants more bactericidal, allowing for a
higher success of implants to coalesce with the tissue and be integrated into the body without any
infectious problems. Fabricating and processing nanostructures is a ﬁeld of study which have existed
for a long time. It has commonly been done and used in the semi-conductor industry, but is more
and more often seen in other compartments, such as medical, mechanical, and health-care device
fabrication. From this, a lot of information can be extracted. Both, what types of structures that can
be fabricated, and what the appertaining possibilities, costs, drawbacks, and dangers are of diﬀerent
methods.
Page 3 of 73
==PAGE:7==
1
INTRODUCTION
January 2, 2022
Nanofabrication is typically separated into additive and subtractive fabrication. The former involves
adding structures on top, the latter is removing material such that structures form on the substrate.
To make nanostructures in dental materials, the structures must necessarily consist of the same ma-
terial as the rest, or the surface, of the implant. Thus, subtractive fabrication seems most prominent.
Several techniques exist and are often found in lab facilities called cleanroom labs. Normally, sub-
tractive fabrication consists of either chemical etching processes, dry (or vaporous) etching processes,
or some sort of physical forming, such as sputtering, mechanical and/or laser cutting, imprinting etc.
The typical trade-oﬀwith any of these methods lies within a balance between cost, resolution, and
process time. The higher resolution and faster process time, the more expensive the method. Some
methods are not scalable to a size where it makes sense to consider them for fabrication of industrial
quantities of e.g., dental implants. This means that not only is it necessary to determine a way to
fabricate nanostructures on dental implants to improve bactericidal eﬀects, but it also needs to be of
methods that a relative fast and scalable to a cost where it makes sense to introduce it into this ﬁeld.
Recent studies have shown that dental materials such as titanium and zirconia can be chemically
etched using Hydroﬂuoric acid (HF) [18][19][20]. For the titanium, purposes varied between surface
roughening and nano structuring of the surfaces, while zirconia was etched to obtain rougher surfaces.
The intend was to either improve osseointegration/cell-binding, antimicrobial eﬀects, or both. While
titanium is versatile and easy to work with, having a lot of diﬀerent processes tested on it for other
industrial purposes and being a chemically reactive metal, zirconia processing is rather new and
unexplored. The studies reported in literature are merely etch tests with purpose of doing inter- and
intragranular etching to make the surface rougher and improve adhesion of implant through improved
wettability conditions. This technique is a good starting point, as wet etching is the cheapest and
fastest method to do subtractive fabrication while still potentially achieve nanoscale structures. It
merely requires the substrate to be immersed in the eﬀective etchant and rinsed to stop the process.
Where zirconia etching is yet to be explored is to fabricate designated micro- and nanostructures
on its surface. By using masking materials (materials that are unaﬀected and stable in the used
chemical etchant) speciﬁc areas can be etched and shapes can be formed. Using these techniques to
structure zirconia can be a quick and accessible way to engineer surfaces for antimicrobial purposes
and increase the success rate of dental implants avoiding infectious problems. With this scope, and the
current world situation assessed regarding infectious problems, antibiotic resistance and low success
rate on dental implants, this research project will focus on developing a fabrication process to develop
nanostructures on zirconia surfaces with antimicrobial eﬀects for dental implant uses. Recent work
at DTU have already developed processes to structure titanium that showed up to 99 % bactericidal
eﬃcacies on bioﬁlm tests. Implementing this novel disinfection technology to zirconia can reduce the
usage of antibiotics and mitigate the associated antibiotic resistance problems for a material in rapid
prosperity in the dental industry.
Page 4 of 73
==PAGE:8==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
2
Materials and methods
2.1
Antimicrobial surfaces
In terms of disinfectant properties, one distinguishes between antibacterial and antimicrobial. While
often used interchangeably in daily speech, there is a clear distinction between the two.
While
antibacterial only covers destruction or inhibition of bacterial growth, antimicrobial covers bacteria,
as well as fungi and viruses. Other types of microbes exist (such as algae, archaea protozoa etc.),
but these three are the main concern when it comes to infectious- and health problems. The three
types of microbes react and behave very diﬀerently to anti agents intended for one or some of them.
In the case of endeavours with antimicrobial properties, it can be hard to control selectivity towards
speciﬁc microbes. This also means that some beneﬁcial microorganisms can be aﬀected negatively
by otherwise good-intended antimicrobial eﬀorts. In this project, the exact types of microbes and
organism in which the structures will show inhibiting eﬀects for are initially unknown, and thus, it
makes more sense for the surfaces to be classiﬁed as potentially antimicrobial. For dental implants,
there are some microbes that are more frequent to occur and cause problems than others, forming
plaque and caries. Initial tests done on surfaces for analysis of antimicrobial eﬃcacy are usually
done with simple bacteria such as E. coli and Staphylococcus. Testing on these bacteria will give
indications of antibacterial properties. Later tests on more complex and complicated microbes can be
accomplished to prove further utilisation of the surface structuring and speciﬁc use cases of diﬀerent
structures.
Antimicrobial surfaces can reduce the extent of attachment and proliferation of microbes and can be
classiﬁed in two diﬀerent categories. Antimicrobial fouling and ”microcidal” surfaces. While the for-
mer concerns the repelling of microbial organisms from attaching onto surfaces through unfavourable
conditions on the surfaces, the latter is focused on killing or inactivating the organisms through
chemical mechanisms or agents [21]. In an extensive study covering surface designs for antibacterial
materials [22], a larger classiﬁcation of antibacterial incentives and techniques are covered. Here,
three main categories are divided into a total of 15 approaches to engineer surfaces that achieves
antibacterial properties. To name a few relevant to this study, there are wettability, mechanical in-
teraction, nano structuring, roughness, and anti-fouling. The categories are presented nicely in ﬁgure
3. The chemical, or microcidal surfaces are typically achieved by surface coatings, polymerisation,
functionalisation and/or derivatisation. Adding thin layers of materials with intrinsic antimicrobial
properties or coatings of non-adhesive and self-evaporating surfaces are ways of achieving microcidal
eﬃcacy. The disadvantage of these methods are the components added on top, changing the physical
properties of the surface and might limit the compatibility of the substrate to be utilised in some
sensitive ﬁelds.
This project will mainly focus on physical characteristics, engineering the surface topography to
achieve eﬀective and durable surfaces with antimicrobial properties. The incentive to avoid using
chemical agents or mechanisms has generally increased globally due to recent discoveries of antimi-
crobial resistances developed by microbes. Especially in medical and health departments, antibiotic
resistance (AMR) has been reported, which can be detrimental. World Health Organisation (WHO)
estimates 350 million deaths due to AMR by year 2050 [23], resulting in nearly 10 million deaths a
year. Thus, a lot of research regarding antimicrobial eﬀects are looking at ways these properties can
be achieved, especially in health technology and medicine, without using any form of antibiotics or
other chemical agents. This is where surface texturing and nano structuring plays a large role. There
is a large demand to have such surfaces implemented in hospitals, medical industry and even in home
environments and everyday conditions. The importance of ensuring sterilisation of all aspects of the
healthcare sector can save many lives by avoiding medical and hospital associated infections. These
already account for over 100.000 deaths in the US alone [24], and as mentioned will only become
worse as AMR manifests for several bacteria. Multiple areas must be investigated. Among others,
making stationary surfaces antimicrobial, such as tables, ﬂoors, doors, and equipment. Further goals
would be to have soft materials such as bed linens and clothing in and around hospitals and doctors
to also have these desired properties. A last and important area to mention is equipment involved
with surgery. This is both the medical equipment used to operate, but also parts and implants being
surgically implemented inside the body.
Page 5 of 73
==PAGE:9==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
Figure 3: Graphical overview of proposed categories and techniques to achieve antibacterial surface
properties. Of shown, especially nano-structuring, mechanical interaction, roughness and wettability
are mechanisms studied and utilised in this project. Figure is taken from [22].
Microbes, and especially bacteria, forms bioﬁlms as they grow on surfaces. Bioﬁlms are slimy, extra-
cellular matrices, in which several microbes combine and thrive. Single microbes are not very resistant
or resilient, but once they form bioﬁlm it becomes a much harder task to break them down. In fact,
they even show tendencies to develop shelter from antibiotics and physical removal of bacteria [25].
In daily settings, bioﬁlms are typically seen on teeth as dental plaque. Plaque can cause tooth decay
and infections. Reducing microbial stability on surfaces will greatly reduce the growth of bioﬁlms. If
microbes cannot grow or live on a surface, it will not be able to produce and develop a bioﬁlm with
surrounding organisms. The success of a bioﬁlm greatly depends on a larger population of microbes
[26]. Thus, even a reduction in microbial multiplication can increase the time and reduce the chance
of which bioﬁlms are formed.
To understand the importance of antimicrobial surfaces, a short introduction to types of bacteria
in medical and human environment (to which it is desired to eradicate) is presented. To follow, an
overview of diﬀerent antimicrobial surfaces - natural and synthetic - is covered. A description of the
materials typically used to achieve these properties as well as their applicability in implant industry
settings is examined to give an idea of what options are available. Lastly, a presentation of zirconia,
the material used in this project is given to explain the use of it in the dental industry as well as the
reason for desires of antimicrobial eﬀect on this exact material.
2.1.1
Microbe types and infectious problems
As mentioned above, several types of microbes exist. When it comes to eﬀorts of keeping surfaces free
and clean, it mostly concerns viruses, bacteria, and fungi. Fungi is mold and yeast and are part of
the eukaryotic organisms (characterised by a nucleus enclosed withing a nuclear envelope). Bacteria
are typically mentioned as a bad thing, but modern research have shown that many ”good” and
Page 6 of 73
==PAGE:10==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
even necessary bacteria exist. Especially regarding the intestinal ﬂora, on the skin and surrounding
critical organs and living functions for humans and other mammals [27]. Bacteria are single cell
organisms that eats what is around them to survive. As discussed, they have tendencies to develop
large matrices of bioﬁlms when accumulated in larger populations. They also develop anti-mechanisms
against antibiotics, evolving and making them resistant to the chemical and environmental conditions
used to otherwise eradicate them. This is both a good feature as it allows for necessary bacteria to
survive in changing conditions but is also the reason that bacteria develop AMR and becomes immune
to the treatments, we use to avoid infections. Viruses are considered parasites. They are preying on
their hosts, and only negative/bad viruses have been discovered. Currently, especially the Covid-19
virus has shown how an entire global civilisation has been brought to their knees over the existence
of such microbes. viruses are 100x smaller than bacteria, typically in the range of 10s to 100s of
nanometres, where bacteria are typically half a micron wide and a couple micron long (naturally
depending on shape - some are elongated, others are spherical).
For surface topography to have any signiﬁcant eﬀect on the microbes, the size of the structures must
be on the same scale as the microbes. Clearly, if micron-spaced structures are fabricated on a surface,
viruses in the size of 20-50 nm will locally experience the surface as ﬂat (maybe tilted but not rough).
As the intend of the project is to make structures in the higher end of nanoscale to ﬁt with the size
of bacteria, it is optimistic to expect any eﬀect of the surface structures on the smallest of viruses.
Since the work will focus on zirconia, which is considered mainly to be used as a dental implant,
the most important microbes to evaluate are bacteria, as the main problem with dental implants are
growth of bioﬁlm and bacterial infections [28][29]. Reports are that up to 90 % of all implants show
sign of inﬂammation and 50 % of all implants show signs of irreversible tissue destruction caused by
bioﬁlm accumulation and infections in the surrounding gum tissue over the implant lifetime.
Bacteria come in diﬀerent sizes and shapes. The distinction between them originates from their cell
structure, especially related to their outer cell wall. This becomes especially relevant from a perspec-
tive of making antimicrobial surfaces, as the diﬀerent bacterial surfaces exhibit varying behaviour
with regards to surface adhesion, wettability, and tensile strength. In general, bacteria are divided
into two main sub-classes called gram-positive, gram-negative - and a third named mycobacteria.
The latter being a grey area, having properties of both former ones and not distinctly diﬀerent from
either. Examples of the three bacterium types are E. Coli, P. Gingivalis and salmonella as gram-
negative, Staphylococci and Streptococci as gram-positive and M. Tuberculosis and M. Leprosy are
Mycobacteria
The gram-negative cell wall consists of an outer membrane linked by lipoproteins to a thin polymer
layer called peptidoglycan (PG), located between the inner and outer cytoplasmic membranes. The
PG is a few nm thick. The outer membrane contains porins and lipopolysaccharide molecules. The
porin allows for small hydrophillic molecules to cross the membrane. The PG is what gives the cell-
wall structural strength and balances the osmotic pressure. The gram-positive cells are a lot simpler.
The PG layer here is instead 30 to 100 nm, more than 5 times thicker than for the gram negative.
The PG layer of the gram-positive cell contains 2 diﬀerent acids that ensures normal function of
the bacteria. The gram-positive bacteria is thus less complicated but more structurally rigid than
the gram negative bacteria [30]. The mycobacteria cell wall is much thicker than other bacteria.
It consists of and inner and outer layer which surrounds the plasma membrane. The outer layer
contains proteins and lipids (fat). The inner layer contains the PG, as well as mycolic acids and
the arabinogalactan, which are all covalently bonded into a hydrophobic complex.
The outcome
of this structure is that the mycobacteria wall is thicker, wax-like in texture and hydrophobic [31].
As of 2017, no published studies have been done in antibacterial surfaces with intent of speciﬁcally
eradicating mycobacteria [8]. The structures are illustrated in ﬁgure 4, clearly showing the diﬀerences
in complexity and structure of the diﬀerent bacteria types.
While the most problematic source of inﬂammations and infections in and around dental implants is
P. Gingivalis (causing gingivitis periodontal disease etc.), several other bacteria, both gram-positive
and gram-negative types are found on oral surfaces. These are then transported to the gastrointestinal
tract, colon, or other intra- and extra-bodily surfaces, where they can cause infections and serious
diseases. An ideal antimicrobial surface thus works eﬀectively against most bacteria structures, even
the ones designed for dental implants.
Page 7 of 73
==PAGE:11==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
Figure 4: Illustrations showing a) the structure of a prykaryotic cell. The cell walls for b) gram
negative, c) gram positive and d) mycobacteria. Image taken from [8].
2.1.2
Types of antimicrobial surfaces in nature and science
The methods and mechanisms to eradicate each class of bacteria, or even each speciﬁc bacterium
can be very diﬀerent. In nature, many animals, insects, and plants exhibit bactericidal eﬀects due to
nanostructures naturally occurring on their extremities. The discovery of this type of morphology and
their antimicrobial capabilities have given rise to hundreds of studies and experiments, replicating,
and improving on these nanotechnologies found in nature. Systematic reviews have been conducted
to categorise and collect information on types of surfaces and attempted to reverse engineer them
[32][21]. Some have made theoretical elaborations and simulated eﬃcacy and potency of existing
surfaces [13][9], while others have taken all this information and tried with a more experimental
approach to ﬁt it with use cases of (dental) implants by replicating them on implant materials such
as titanium [10][33]. In comparison with ﬁgure 3, all these studies only covers a small segment of
the many potential ways of achieving antimicrobial eﬃcacy. It is important to highlight that not
one method is better than others. A variety of methods is necessary, so a suitable technique can
be implemented for each speciﬁc case. What can be said positively about nano structuring is, that
once fabricated on a stable surface, the structures are permanent. Of course, surfaces deteriorate,
but in comparison to most chemical solutions, these are non-volatile, durable, and often harmless to
surroundings, making it versatile to use in most areas.
In 2017, Tripathy et al. ([8]) released a study covering a large range of nanostructures observed on
insects and lizards and similar structures fabricated in synthetic materials. The study also contains
wettability analysis of each of them, notifying the water contact angles, as well as their bactericidal
eﬃcacy, reporting what microbes/bacteria was used in the associated study. Examples of the naturally
occurring structures is seen in ﬁgure 5. The surfaces were coated in a few nanometres of gold to
improve resolution and conductivity for the electron microscope images.
The surfaces were then
used to do antimicrobial testing, and still showed similar results as without the gold. This indicates
that it indeed is the surface structures (and not the surface chemistry) that is responsible for the
bactericidal eﬀects. In the same review, a list of nanostructures synthetically fabricated in inorganic
material is presented. It mainly consists of silicon variations, titanium and titania alloys, and polymers
alike PMMA and polystyrene.
Especially silicon and polymers are materials typically seen and
worked with in nanoscale structuring due to their presence in clean room fabrication and relevance
in microﬂuidics and semi-conductors. Titanium and titania are a bit more interesting in terms of
Page 8 of 73
==PAGE:12==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
biomedical applications. This is often used for implants, surgical equipment, and around medical
machinery. It has also been reported to show antibacterial eﬀects without structuring it, but the
magnitude of it seems limited and not enough to achieve suﬃcient eﬃcacy [34].
Figure 5: Collection of naturally occurring nano-features on diﬀerent animals found in nature. Their
bactericidal eﬀects and contact angles are collected in [8], which also references the original author
of each picture.
There are several ways to achieve and produce nanostructures, and it comes down to the substrate
material, use conditions and necessary scalability of the procedure to determine what method is the
right way. Controlled nanofabrication is often seen in clean room or other semi-conductor produc-
tion labs. In here, many ways and methods exist to manufacture nanostructures in a large variety
of samples and sizes. Examples are ion beam deposition, acid etching, peroxidation, anodization,
crystalline deposition, and lithography [10]). It usually comes down to (wet/dry) etching, deposition,
imprinting or lithography, where many speciﬁc subcategories exist within each ﬁeld. Dry etching
and lithography usually allow for well-deﬁned structures. This comes with a drawback of high cost
and slow production time. In comparison, wet etching is super quick and relatively low cost. The
process simply consists of immersing the substrate into a chemical etchant. Masks, protection layers
and surface pre-processing can be done to modify the results. The result strongly depends on the
relation between reactant and etchant, and depending on the substrate composition and uniformity,
can also be hard to control. The advantage is that massive surface areas can be treated simulta-
neously. The drawback is the loss of control for speciﬁc segment, and thus the results can only be
Page 9 of 73
==PAGE:13==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
given with a relatively high uncertainty and margin of error. Deposition is mostly for uniform layer
formation. With the right material and deposition technique, small nanoparticles can be formed and
deposited directly on the surface. Other techniques involve a deposition of a smooth layer and then
post-processing to form the desired nano structures - similar to how the gold mask will fabricated in
this project. This is covered more extensively in section 2.2.
This gives a large range of options to fabricate and modify surfaces to have the right antimicrobial
properties.
The decision of which to choose requires that the available methods match with the
materials desired to work with. If structures within a large range of sizes and aspect ratio are needed,
then wet etching is a great choice to get quick and good results. This is also often used at industrial
plants and factories in large scale baths to either etch or treat large metal plates. If the accuracy,
position, and resolution of the structures are very important, the right approach is usually with
some of the more reﬁned methods. As seen in ﬁgure 5, naturally occurring surfaces often comes in
very symmetric forms, but with visible room for error. Luckily, the same paper also reports good
eﬃcacy of many other structured surfaces with less patterned or repeating surfaces. This is a good
indication that less restrictive requirements to the fabrication of the nanostructures can still achieve
antimicrobial properties, thus making it more accessible for multiple purposes.
2.1.3
Dental materials and bactericidal eﬀects
To overcome the burden of plaque and caries induced infections related to dental implants and
surgeries, an intensive interest has emerged to develop antibacterial surface treatments, containing
surface modiﬁcation and coatings, of dental and orthopaedic materials. unlike surface disinfection,
environmental antimicrobicity and general good hygiene, the success of antibacterial eﬃcacy for
dental implants relies heavily on the strength and biocompatibility of the implant. The implant must
be stable and non-toxic once implanted and demonstrate the same strength and durability as non-
treated implant would. For this reason, it is important that the solution proposed bases on materials
and structures that are comparable to current dental technologies. In a recent study comparing the
stability of diﬀerent dental materials, they list the most common ones [35]. These are commercially
pure titanium in grade I to IV, as well as diﬀerent titanium alloys containing aluminium, steel and/or
carbon. Cases of dental implants made of stainless steel, cobalt chromium alloys and gold alloys
are also mentioned, but of lesser use and sometimes for pieces related to the surrounding structure.
For ceramics, Alumina, bioglass, carbo-silicon mixtures and zirconia are the most frequently used
ones. Some polymers are also used, such as PMMA, polyethylene, polysulfone etc. These are not
often used for entire teeth, but instead as cosmetic coatings or internal stabilisers in the entire
implant structures. Titanium is the golden standard, being used for almost a century, where zirconia
has gained popularity in the recent years due to its cosmetic looks and similar stability. All these
materials are inherently biocompatible. Although some metals can develop allergies, these adverse
eﬀects are a rare occurrence. Ceramics do not develop any allergies and are thus safer to use on all
patients regarding of their medical history but are less versatile and familiar compared to titanium.
There is a list of requirements dental materials must fulﬁl to be considered a prominent candidate for
implants [36]. The modulus of elasticity should be comparable to bone (18 GPa) to ensure uniform
distribution of stress at the implant and minimise movement at the interface. It should have high
tensile, compressive and yield strength to avoid fracturing and improve functional stability, as well
as high fatigue strength to prevent brittle fracturing under cyclic loading. A minimum ductility of 8
% is required for contouring and shaping of the implant by standards. It should also be either bio-
tolerant, bio inert or bio-compatible. Lastly, it must be resistant to corrosion and avoid cytotoxicity of
corrosion products. commercially pure titanium ﬁts all these requirements with only minor changes
in form of alloying. titanium also forms a stable oxide layer on its surface after heat treatment,
encapsuling and stabilising the already mechanically strong implant.
To achieve bactericidal eﬃcacy in the implant, the fabrication must be compatible with these mate-
rials. Either by depositing or forming the structures on top or fabricating the structures directly in
them. A recent study by R. Bai et al. did a screening of several metallic agents as direct antibacte-
rial surface treatments for dental materials reported in literature [37]. Using silver, gold, zinc, and
copper (and others), nanostructures, thin-ﬁlms and surface dopants were added on common implant
materials to analyse and verify antibacterial eﬃcacy. Most of these surfaces were reported as dental
Page 10 of 73
==PAGE:14==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
implants, but apart from one, they were all done on titanium and Ti-alloys. The general results are
quite successful in terms of antibacterial eﬀects, reporting both E. coli, S. aureus and even the more
relevant P. Gingivalis bacteria to be eradicated or prevented from growing bioﬁlms on the treated
surfaces. The intents were to create nanostructures deposited or formed directly on the surface, while
others were just a thin ﬁlm of metals with inherent bactericidal eﬃcacies. The drawback of many of
these results are within the stability and - especially - the potential toxicity of the metallic agents.
Despite the good results of antibacterial surface treatments, most of the solutions analysed in the
paper had poor or no biocompatibility. Some of the proposed solutions were to coat the fabricated
structures in a biocompatible thin ﬁlm, but at this point the process becomes very complex, ex-
pensive, and prone to failure. These solutions also fail to exert mechanical stability, as most of the
structures will not be stable, and the ease of use and inexpensiveness is also neglected. Despite that,
it still shows several good suggestions and conclusions can be drawn to types of structures, materials,
and potential solutions to achieve the desired eﬀects through other methods.
The advantage of working in titanium is that most parameters, applicable alloys, physical properties,
and fabrication methods are already well understood. Many studies have researched the options to ei-
ther imitate previously discovered bactericidal structures, or fabricate entirely new structures directly
in titanium [9][38][8]. Due to the incentives to develop these antibacterial properties from physical
properties at the current state, most studies focus on titanium. In most cases, this information can
also be directly transferred to fabrication and structuring processes from other purposes/ﬁelds of
nanofabrication and apply it to titanium surfaces with antimicrobial intents. Limited research has
been done on zirconia. Mechanically, the two materials are similar, but chemically they behave very
diﬀerent. As one is a metal and the other a ceramic, many chemical and physical fabrication tech-
niques are either not applicable or at least not yet understood for dental zirconia. Few studies have
done some research on structuring zirconia, but it has only been to roughen the surface for improved
dental adhesion and osseo-integration [39][40].
Thus, no published research has yet analysed the
potential and eﬀect of nano structuring zirconia surfaces for antimicrobial eﬀects.
Dental zirconia
Before evaluating the available and applicable fabrication techniques to engineer zirconia to demon-
strate bactericidal properties, an assessment of dental zirconia and its properties is conducted. Zirco-
nia, or zirconium oxide (ZrO2), has been used in dentistry since the 1970s. Zirconium is a transition
metal found in small amounts in the earth crust as zircon minerals. It is silver-white in colour in
its pure form, but is white and opaque in its ceramic form. Zirconia is found in diﬀerent crystalline
phases. It undergoes phase transformation from monoclinic to tetragonal at 1170 ℃, cubic at 2370
℃before melting at 2690 ℃. When zirconia is cooled down back to room temperature, the material
destabilises and breaks into smaller pieces. Using yttrium oxide (yttria) to stabilise zirconia, the
tetragonal and cubic phases can be kept stable at room temperature. This material is called yttria
stabilised zirconia (YSZ) and is the most used ceramic in the dental industry.
Yttria substitutes with one of the zirconium atoms in the unit cell and works as a binding impurity.
Yttria has a slightly larger unit cell than zirconia, making the unit cell asymmetric and increases
interatomic bonding between crystals. YSZ stabilisation is visualised in the phase-diagram in ﬁgure
6, showing how the temperature and mol% inﬂuences the crystal structure. Industrial and dental
zirconia is normally stabilised with 3 to 10 mol% yttria.
At room temperature it forms in the
tetragonal crystal phase. Heat treating this forms yttria stabilised tetragonal zirconia polycrystalline
(Y-TZP), also just called YSZ. Like steel reﬁning, polycrystalline structures demonstrate much higher
bending and compression strength, low porosity, and mechanical stability. This aligns YSZ with the
mechanical requirements of dental implant materials [41]. Due to tetragonal beads forming in the
material post processing, defects are compressed, preventing their propagation. This gives zirconia a
high fracture resistance, which is a must for implants as they receive cyclic loading over many years.
Page 11 of 73
==PAGE:15==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
Figure 6: Phase-diagram of yttria stabilised zirconia as function of mol% of yttria dopant and tem-
perature. Once heated up to a given temperature, YSZ stabilises at the crystal structure of the
heated temperature where pure zirconia breaks apart after cooling.
When zirconia implants are made, the base is heated up to over 1000 ℃to both form and harden
the ceramics [17]. The heating rate is done at up to several 100 ℃a minute, followed by a cool
down in normal atmosphere. This indicates that yttria stabilised zirconia is stable at high heat and
temperature gradients. This is valuable information, as a part of the fabrication process in the project
revolves heating and cooling down zirconia substrates at temperatures up to 1000 ℃depending on the
outcome the gold mask formation. There are reports of 8 mol% YSZ not being completely stabilised
in the Y-TZP phase over 1000 ℃when kept at high temperatures for a long time in fuel cells usage
[42], but for this purpose and temperature range, this is not a problem.
The technical speciﬁcation of dental zirconia comes down to both the chemical alloy and the processing
of how it is fabricated.
The speciﬁc zirconia used in this project is an 8 mol% blend of yttria
stabilised multiphase zirconia. The exact crystal structure is unknown, but as it is prepared like
dental materials, it should be a tetragonal zirconia polycrystalline structure.
The exact crystal
structure can be analysed using X-Ray Diﬀraction (XRD) if necessary. From the manufacturer, it is
reported to be stable at up to 2000 ℃, bulk density of 6.05 g/cm3 and ﬂexural strength of 1000 MPa.
The hardness is estimated to 89 GPa and the elastic modulus is 200 Gpa. These values are suﬃcient
for dental ceramic usage but could also be a bit too hard and potentially brittle compared to bone.
Since the project revolves around preliminary test of nano structuring the surfaces of dental zirconia,
the most important properties are that it shows chemical similarity. This should be identical, as
the substrates consists of the same blend as dental ceramics do. Performance of the used zirconia
substrates will be evaluated as they are exposed to diﬀerent environments and fabrication processes
during the project.
2.2
Fabrication
The general goal of the fabrication is to be aﬀordable and rapid while achieving durable, nanostruc-
tured, and antibacterial surfaces, making it more commercially available for dental implant. The
fabrication is done within the clean room at DUT. The clean room consists of several machines
and methods that allows for high precision fabrication of nanostructures. These methods can fabri-
cate well-deﬁned and well-positioned nanostructures in and on hard substrates. While many of the
Page 12 of 73
==PAGE:16==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
techniques can achieve results with high resolution and throughput, they are often comprised of com-
plicated processes like resist coating, pattern drawing, and lift-oﬀof the residue. Instead, this project
focuses on making nanostructures through a simple chemical (wet) etch process. Here, the substrate
is simply immersed into a chemical solution, and removed after a predetermined duration, where the
surfaces will be etched. For polycrystalline samples, this process is typically isotropic. To ensure the
right formation and to control the etched areas, a mask can be deposited on top. In this project, a
few nanometres gold is used, which can be sputtered or evaporated on the substrate surface. The
gold is then heat treated to form small nano islands by a dewetting process[43][44]. An overview of
the methods as well as an in-depth explanation of the working principles behind each step will be
outlined in this section.
2.2.1
Overview of available fabrication methods
When designing a process ﬂow for a speciﬁc fabrication, it is important to consider the cost and
scalability of the chosen techniques. A common assessment engineers fail to do is to consider the
necessity and complexity of each step compared to the requirement for the ﬁnal product. Instead, due
to the availability of advanced equipment, the process is over-engineered, where time and resources
are wasted due to unnecessarily complex and expensive fabrication steps.
Since the goal of the
antimicrobial dental surface design is to be commercially available, the cost and availability of the
fabrication is very important. Despite several delicate fabrication methods accessible in the clean
room, it is crucial that the minimum viable method is used to achieve the desired results.
As
mentioned previously, chemical etching is a subtractive fabrication process which requires very little
preparation of the sample and can be easily upscaled for industrial implementation. As a contention
for the use of wet etching, comparisons with similar procedures demonstrates the compromise done
when ”settling” with this technique. The approach of either subtractive or additive fabrication, is
sometimes referred to in the nanofabrication industry as top-down or bottom-up. These implies that
you either start from a block and removes parts to achieve the desired structure or use several smaller
building blocks that you add together – consisting of either ﬁlm, coatings, molecules etc. [45]. As
the research concerns nano structuring the zirconia itself, the possible methods are within top-down
or subtractive fabrication. Thus, the review of available methods is within this category. Some of
the most common fabrication techniques are visually presented in ﬁgure 7. Wet and dry (reactive
ion) etching, laser ablation, mechanical cutting, UV etching, and imprinting are shown as possible
methods. For each of them there are various versions of how they are executed, whether the ion or
chemical etchant is varied, the laser power and wavelength changed, or mechanical cutting is done in
rotary movements versus lateral punching to name a few [46].
One impractical approach would be moulding. Nano moulding is practically impossible on a complex
surface.
A dental implant would be diﬀerent in form and shape for each individual patient and
moulding the surface would require a mold or mask perfectly designed for each of them. Besides, due
to the strength and rigidity of zirconia, pressing or punching into it is not an option. This restricts
the potential to use nano-imprint techniques This is mostly done in polymers and can be used to
analyse surface structures which can later be fabricated in zirconia, but not for the YSZ fabrication
itself. It is often done on an added substrate or coating in part of a bottom-up development process,
where a polymer is added on top, moulded, and cured either by cooling or UV-polymerisation.
Laser-ablation or other types of laser-assisted fabrication methods have achieved incredibly good
resolution due to the inventions of the femto-second lasers. Depending on the substrate, these lasers
can reach ablation resolution in the double-digit nanometre scale. Generally, the advantage of using a
femto-second laser is the avoidance of damage in the surrounding material while cutting at a speciﬁc
target, caused by the very short pulses that thus induct lower energy into the substrate. The large
drawback is the high cost of the system and the very slow processing. For the laser process, etched area
needs to be exposed by a focused laser beam for some time. With an exposure area of e.g., 10x10 nm2,
covering just a square millimetre will easily take hours or days, depending on the system. This might
be a way to perform single-sample precise fabrication for thorough analysis of dedicated structures,
but it will never become scalable to an extent where the surface of an implant, or something even
times smaller could be manufactured in a reasonable time at a reasonable cost. Similar techniques
such as E-beam/photolithography, X-ray lithography and focused ion beam etching are all similar
Page 13 of 73
==PAGE:17==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
Figure 7: Types of subtractive fabrication to develop negative structures. These are typical ways
to structure surfaces. Combined with masking, local structures can be formed. Molding process is
sometimes combined with photo-structuring to form what is also referred to as imprinting, speciﬁcally
nano-imprint lithography.
variations where either positive or negative resist/substrate material can have nanostructures ”drawn
out”. But this single-pixel approach is simply too slow and expensive to scale up, despite having
resolution in the 1–2-digit nanometre scale.
Dry etching, also called reactive ion etching (RIE) is the method closest to wet etching in terms of
processing. A plasma, or etchant gasses, are introduced to the surface of the substrate and reacts
with the surface, removing mass of the bulk substrate in the gaseous phase. The by-products are then
removed from the sample through the surrounding gas and expelled through the vacuum system. The
plasma is generated under vacuum by an electromagnetic ﬁeld, allowing for high energy ions to attack
the substrate surface and react with it. As this method is mostly used in the semi-conductor industry,
studies of potential dry etchants mostly revolve around silicon-based materials, III-V materials, and
selected metals such as Al, Cr, and Ti. Due to the nature of the geometry of such systems, the
requirements to the surface alignment are quite large. As the plasma is contained on top of the
sample, having complex and rounded surfaces such as a dental implant would make it very diﬃcult
to achieved homogeneous dry etching results. Furthermore, the need for a vacuum system makes it
more complicated and expensive to drive the process, and the scalability is limited. Compared to wet
etching, dry etching tends to etch along the edges of the mask, where wet etching creates undercut
structures under the mask as illustrated in ﬁgure 7. This would also change the requirements for
the mask design. The resulting shapes would instead of cones become pillars. The stability of a
pillar becomes a lot smaller as the diameter would have to be narrower to have sharp tips, making
the surface structures more prone to failure and breaking. Despite that, the etch rates reported are
in the nm/minute range, making it a reasonably fast fabrication method. The main drawbacks are
simply the current designs of dry etching equipment barely allows for any variation in substrate form,
making only wafer-like shapes and ﬂat structures possible to be processed. An advantage of the wet
etching is the masking material. most etchants used have no eﬀect on noble metals, meaning that
gold is a potential candidate for masking in wet etching processes. Not only is gold incredibly well
studied, but it is also cheap and easy to manufacture thin-ﬁlms and particles to use as masks. Dry
etching requires a layer of photoresist instead. This is usually made by coating a surface in a resist,
which is then developed in a stereo-lithography system and cured by a hardening process. Not only
is it a more complicated process, the machinery necessary also have much higher demands for the
environment they are used in (clean-room vs laboratory) and are more expensive to access and utilise.
Page 14 of 73
==PAGE:18==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
The advantage is, on ﬂat substrates, that photo-resist mask can be controlled with a higher precision
than gold particle masking caused by dewetting from heat treatment. Thus, a more well-deﬁned
pattern can be formed with photoresist, but at the cost of higher cost and complexity. A drawback
from both masking techniques is the need for ﬂat surfaces. The photoresist is spin-coated, meaning a
surface should be ﬂat and uniform to achieve a homogeneous layer necessary to develop it correctly
afterwards. The gold is usually evaporated on a surface. This is a ballistic method, meaning that
everything in line of sight is covered. If the surface of a round shape needs to be coated, diﬀerent
methods are required.
Wet etching works by immersing the sample into the etchant. As the chemicals are surrounding the
substrate, all sides and surfaces are attacked evenly and simultaneously. This makes wet etching
suitable for dental implants, as – regardless of shape and form - they can be processed evenly on
the entire surface. The etching process is also simple. Samples are immersed in a bath with the
etchant to initiate the process, and a bath with water to stop it.
The process can be scaled by
increasing the size of the bath. Wet etching is inherently a dirty method, setting the bar for the
process environment very low thus it does not require ﬁne-tuning of the surrounding environment
or vacuum. Due to hazardous chemicals, the process requires ventilation in form of a fume-hood
and/or protective equipment. Since the chemical etching is a relatively volatile and dirty process, the
requirement for a clean room is not necessary. If the etching can be done under safe circumstances
and without any reactive chemicals as unwanted contamination, the process can be conducted in any
environment. A drawback is the uncontrolled and sporadic nature of chemical etching. Depending
on the concentration of the etchant solution, the process can vary in smoothness and homogeneous
over large surfaces. If some parts of the target substrate are structurally diﬀerent than others, the
etching can attack these areas faster or slower, and cause dissymmetric etching results over a larger
area. Controlling the etching on a large scale is diﬃcult as it depends highly on the uniformity of the
substrate. for a single-crystal silicon wafer, this is trivial, but for dental implants, which are often
manufactured by heat-pressing a powder into the desired form, irregularities can exist and impact
the etching results.
With that perspective, while not being a perfect method, wet etching is the cheapest and most
accessible of the existing fabrication methods discussed. If a fabrication process using this as the
main step can be developed, it would be the least costly way to implement antimicrobial eﬃcacy to
dental implants without disrupting the economics of an already well-established industry too much
and be an aﬀordable way to save lives. The entire process ﬂow of the intended fabrication consists of
three steps. These will be presented and discussed below. In general, the technologies are widespread
and commonly used for fabrication on both research and industrial scale. The machines used in the
clean room are designed for higher precision. This can give expectedly better results compared to
large scale industrial setups. Albeit that, the conclusions and expected performance is very similar
and does not prevent realistic conclusions to be drawn.
2.2.2
Physical vapour deposition
Physical vapour deposition (PVD) is a fabrication technique that are used to produce thin ﬁlms and
coatings typically in the nanometre scale. The ﬁlm is created by heating up a target material thus
creating a vapour ﬂux towards the sample. The vapour then reaches the sample and condensates on
the surface which forms a thin ﬁlm. There are several techniques which are encompassed by PVD, e.g.,
Thermal/electron-beam evaporation, sputtering, and laser ablation deposition. The methods diﬀer
in the way the vapour ﬂux is generated from the target material. Generally, PVD is separated in
sputtering- and thermal methods. Depending on the complexity of the system, several target materials
can be vaporised at the same time, and gasses can be introduced to the chamber to chemically modify
the vapour. In general, it is required that the entire setup is kept under vacuum. This is for the
vapour to ﬂow freely as well as the deposition to form a smooth ﬁlm. In the case of electron-beam
evaporation, the beam itself also requires vacuum to reach the target material from the electron gun
undisturbedly. By controlling the deposition rate and conditions, smooth and uniform ﬁlms can be
fabricated down to sub-nanometre resolution. Furthermore, thicknesses of a few nanometres and up
to several micrometres can be created easily. This makes PVD a good tool to fabricate ﬁlms for many
purposes, being cosmetic optical coatings, conductive ﬁlms or as a part of layered nanostructures.
Page 15 of 73
==PAGE:19==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
Figure 8:
Simple schematic of a PVD system for e-beam evaporation.
The material in the
hearth/crucible is heated up using an electron beam focused on top of the material by a magnetic
ﬁeld. This heats the source materials which in turns generate the vapour ﬂux. The thin ﬁlm is then
formed on the substrate as the material condenses upon impact. A shutter can be used to ensure
proper vapour conditions before starting to deposit. A QCM (Quarts crystal microbalance) can be
used to monitor the deposition rate and stop it immediately. Figure is taken from [47].
Several diﬀerent materials can be fabricated to thin ﬁlms with PVD. This includes, but is not limited
to, metals, alloys, compounds, and even some organic materials [48]. For this project, gold thin
ﬁlms of a few nanometres were to be fabricated. In the DTU clean room, this is done easiest using
electron-beam evaporation. Electron-beam evaporation utilises high-energy electron beams (several
kV) which are focused on the target material. This bombardment of electrons on the surface causes
an energy transfer from the electrons to the material, heating it up locally in the process. When
the material is suﬃciently heated, it starts to melt or sublimate. A vapour will be produced and
evaporate ballistically from the target surface. Substrates in the line of sight of the vapour ﬂux will
be coated. Due to the nature of the method, ﬂat substrates are the best to coat, as rough or complex
structures is hard to coat evenly with a unidirectional vapour ﬂux, as well as complex geometries and
3-dimensional structures can have cavities not in line of sight of the vapour.
The Electron beam evaporation system at the DTU clean room is a Temescal FC-2000 made by
Ferrotec. It can hold up to 4 wafer samples at a time in the rotational hula and have space for 6
diﬀerent metals in the hearth inside the vacuum chamber targets at the same time. An ion beam
of noble gas can be used to sputter-clean the samples prior to deposition, or to create roughness as
a pre or post process step on ﬁlms. The system only allows for one material to be evaporated at a
time, which is suﬃcient for the purpose of this project. The system is separated in a load lock and a
main chamber. This allows for quick attainment of vacuum in between loading of samples, as only a
small part of the system needs to be pumped down during sample loading while the rest is kept under
vacuum. The load lock is pumped down using a dry pump and the main chamber a cryo pump. The
distance between the source and the sample is approximately 70 cm, and the ﬁlament is kept at 6
kW (up to 10 kV and 600 mA) to generate the electron beam. For Au, the deposition rate should
not be less than 5 ˚A/s. This can mean that the ﬁnal thickness of gold, especially if the ﬁlm is only
a few nanometres thick, has a relatively high deviation from the desired thickness (as 0.5 nm/s for
e.g., 3 nm means only a fraction of a second oﬀ, is a deviation of several %). At thicker ﬁlms, this
becomes less of a problem. The deposition is stopped by a shutter shield between the target and the
samples. With the small plate samples used in the project, the system allows for 48 zirconia plates
to be loaded and coated at a time. The disadvantage is that the system does not allow for diﬀerent
parameters to diﬀerent samples. This means that, while testing the optimal thickness, a new batch
must be loaded every time a new thickness or recipe is to be tested.
Page 16 of 73
==PAGE:20==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
Figure 9: To the left: The Temescal FC-2000 system which is available in the DTU clean room. To
the right: A close up of the load lock with the sample holders placed on the hula, as well as sample
holder plates and clips.
In terms of thickness accuracy, a Quartz Crystal Monitor (QCM) is utilised. The QCM is calibrated
with the vapour ﬂux which follows the inverse-square law. If the vapour ﬂux is known at a given
distance from the crucible/hearth the amount of deposited material can be determined at any other
distance. The QCM is a sensitive piezoelectric resonator device. Its oscillation frequency is dependent
on change of mass. The vapour ﬂux is determined by calibrating the QCM for the deposited material,
where its change in oscillation frequency translates to a change in mass, which can then be transformed
to a rate of deposition. The correlation between change in frequency and change in mass is deﬁned
by the Sauerbrey equation:
∆f = −
2f 2
0
A√ρqµq
∆m = −Cf∆m,
(1)
where ∆f is the change in frequency, f0 is the resonant frequency, A the area of the crystal, ρq in the
density of quartz and µq is the shear modulus of quartz. If the frequency change is small, ∆f
f0 < 2%,
it is generally accepted that Sauerbrey’s equation can be used to determine the thin ﬁlm deposition
rate Placing the QCM anywhere in between the crucible and the substrate allows for the deposition
rate to be determined by the inverse-square law. From this, the thickness of the deposited thin ﬁlm
can be controlled.
2.2.3
Annealing - thermal heat treatment
Depending on the size of scale and intended purpose, annealing covers several topics. In metallurgy,
annealing is the process of heating materials to change its physical properties. It is usually conducted
by applying thermal energy to the material, which allows for breaking of atomic bonds and diﬀusion
of migrating atoms inside the metal [49]. This is useful for metal pieces that are fabricated or welded
with a lot of internal stress, as the diﬀusion allow dislocations/lattice vacancies to redistribute and
eradicate until it reaches an equilibrium with lower internal stress. The process is thermodynamically
spontaneous and governed by Fick’s law of diﬀusion, but it is very slow at room temperature [49].
Increasing the temperature of the materials accelerates the process. For macroscopic fabrication,
heating and cooling are applied with intent of controlling properties such as smoothness, grain size
and purity of metals. The behaviour of the heated material can be predicted from the composition
of the substrate and the phase diagrams of the metals/alloys.
Page 17 of 73
==PAGE:21==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
In thin ﬁlm and semiconductor device and nano fabrication, annealing is used to (re)-crystallise and/or
repair thermally or chemically deposited thin-ﬁlms (by for example PVD). This is typically called
furnace annealing. The purpose is usually to introduce dopants, change substrate interfaces/surfaces,
change state of ﬁlm, repair layers from rough fabrication or drive materials/dopants into substrates by
diﬀusion. Furnace annealing is associated with long and stable process times, where wafers/substrates
are kept at high temperatures for hours or even days. A diﬀerent process has been invented, which
allows for more eﬃcient heating and control, making heat treatment at 1000 ℃in a matter of seconds
possible.
This is called Rapid thermal processing/annealing (RTP) [50].
While not suitable for
large scale fabrication, an RTP machine typically heats a single wafer by lamps, hot chucks, or hot
plates for a short and high throughput heating process. While it introduces more thermal stress and
worse temperature control, the eﬃciency of the process can make quick processing and analysis of
parameters much more available. The intents and outcomes are the same as for furnace annealing,
but especially for the dopant diﬀusion, it is possible to cause higher concentrations to appear at lower
depths of the substrate, as the short time does not allow for as deep diﬀusion paths of the dopants.
Using this for thin-ﬁlm fabrication and processing, thin layers of alloys and metals can be deposited
and thermally altered with low to no eﬀect on the bottom substrates, as long as the substrates are
stable at the processing temperatures.
Heat treatment of gold thin ﬁlms
For the intent of this project, the RTP process is used to heat treat Au thin ﬁlms to incite agglom-
eration of gold causing particles to form on the zirconia surfaces. When thin ﬁlms are deposited,
especially with PVD methods, a lot of intrinsic stress and structural deformities occurs in the ﬁlm.
This is usually caused by the rather violent and uncontrolled evaporation of particles arriving at the
substrate surface during deposition, preventing it from forming crystalline phase. Diﬀerent analyti-
cal models have been proposed to explain the evolution of ﬁlm growth, but what is important is to
understand is that the complex composition of substrate, ﬁlm material and deposition parameters
aﬀect the resulting thin ﬁlm [51]. The ﬁlm can both form in a crystallised (epitxially grown) and
amorphous state, based on the substrate to ﬁlm lattice match. Annealing, or RTP of metal thin
ﬁlms thus releases the internal stress through plastic and elastic eﬀects, which partially collapses the
boundary network of surface protrusions, promotes processes of relaxation driven by surface diﬀusion
and general bulk and grain boundary diﬀusion [43].
Figure 10: Illustration of nanoisland/particle formation from a gold thin-ﬁlm after being heated up
on a substrate surface. The parameters shown are the components of Young’s equation, explaining
contact angle depending on surface energy of the metal, the substrate and the interface.
This process been extensively analysed on Au by some studies [52][53], understanding the agglomera-
tion (also referred to as dewetting) process of gold thin ﬁlms forming particles (islands) on substrate
surfaces through annealing. As the thin ﬁlm has its temperature increased, diﬀusion and relaxation
happen according to Fick’s law as mentioned previously. At higher temperatures, the metal can move
around on the substrate surface, accumulating in smaller, localised islands. This occurs as the surface
energy is reduced and it is thus more favourable for the metal thin ﬁlm to do so. The speciﬁc shape
and size of the particle comes down to the temperature of the RTP process as well as the surface
energies of the substrate, the metal crystal structure, and the interface match. An example of this is
seen in ﬁgure 10, showing the development from a gold thin ﬁlm to a particle on a given substrate.
Page 18 of 73
==PAGE:22==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
The relation between shape and contact angle are described mathematically by Young’s equation
[54]:
γI −γS = −γMcosθc,
(2)
where θc is the contact angle at the equilibrium state, γI is the surface energy of the interface, γS
the surface energy of the substrate, and γM the surface energy of the metal.
Depending on the
combination of substrate and metal, this can be determined analytically, or, for complex systems,
initial experiments can quickly assess estimated outcomes of combinations of substrates and ﬁlm
materials. For gold, several studies of the behaviour and formation of gold particles on diﬀerent
substrates under diﬀerent annealing conditions have been done [55][43][56]. None of these have been
done on zirconia, but results are very similar for non-metallic materials, giving evidence that zirconia
and gold interface will behave similarly.
Studies show that, depending on temperatures, annealing can either sinter/smoothen the surfaces,
typically seen at lower temperatures, and cause the agglomeration which happens at higher temper-
atures. Especially study was conducted on solid- and liquid-state spontaneous dewetting of gold on
silicon carbide substrate [56]. That is, formation of gold nanoparticles by annealing the thin ﬁlm
to temperatures slightly above and below the melting point of gold (1064 ℃) and measuring the
resulting structure of the particles. Here it was found that thin-ﬁlms of 10s of nanometres Au forms
ball-shaped particles by heating up the gold. The main driving force is reported to be minimisation of
surface free energy on all interfaces. The process is expressed in multiple steps, starting with groove
formation between locally, more stable areas of the ﬁlm. Then, creation of holes by contact between
grooves and substrate. Edge retraction (visually looking like hole extension) of the ﬁlm, caused by
curvature gradients on the ﬁlm, causes material to transfer towards the central area of the locally
stable part of the ﬁlm, which now is formed into local islands. These hill like islands will retract and
shape into smaller, local particles with contact angles depending of the surface energy of the interfaces
(see eq. 2) with lower surface free energy than the ﬁlm initially had. In the work on titanium by A.
Abbaspourmani, gold thin ﬁlms of 3-5 nm were deposited and annealed afterwards. This forms clear
particles post-annealing, which is replicated as part of the analysis on titanium and presented in the
result section of the report.
This information serves a baseline for the intent of using RTP for gold particle formation on the
Zirconia substrates. In the clean room, the RTP process is done on the RTP Jipelec JetFirst by
SEMCO technlogies (referred to as Jipelec). The Jipelec heats up single samples of up to 300 mm
in diameter by several halogen lamps exerting thermal energy allowing for a thermal gradient of up
to 80 K/s. The heating chamber contains 12 infrared halogen lamps. The chamber can be pumped
down to vacuum to avoid diﬀusion of trace gasses, and several types of gas inlets can be equipped
to do controlled doping or chemical altering of samples during annealing. Nitrogen can also be used
to purge the chamber and avoid oxygen at the sample.
The temperature is controlled by either
a thermocouple or a pyrometer, depending on the range of temperatures worked at. As mentioned
earlier, temperature control is not perfect for the typical RTP setups, but it serves as a clear indication
of the working temperature during processing.
2.2.4
Chemical etching on dental ceramics
The last and most important step in the process is chemical etching step. This is where the nanos-
tructures are formed and is the only step that actively changes and forms the zirconia substrate.
the outcome of this process will be the determining factor of how the structures will look and the
most important to optimise. A chemical/wet etching process involves multiple chemical reactions
that consumes the original reactants and produce new, which dissolves in the etching medium and
are moved away from the surface.
The steps involved in a wet etch process is typically a Diﬀu-
sion step of the active etchant, a reaction step at the substrate and a ﬁnal diﬀusion step. The ﬁrst
diﬀusion step is the liquid etchants movement to the surface structures. The reactive step follows,
where a reduction-oxidation reaction entails oxidation of the material followed by a dissolving of the
substrate material. The ﬁnal diﬀusion step is the developed by-products of the reaction that diﬀuses
away from the surface. Wet etching is used in many industries, both inside and outside clean room
and for various purposes. It is used to e.g., expose a metallic surface, to etch structures, cavities, or
Page 19 of 73
==PAGE:23==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
holes or to form aesthetic or purposeful surface features. Wet etching is a rapid fabrication method
that dissolves material in all areas exposed to the etchant. Despite that, cavities and depths can be
approximately controlled by ﬁxing the exposed areas to a known size. This is typically done with a
mask. The mask must be stable in the etchant, allowing for a limited option of materials that can
be used. If strong acids, such as HCL, HF or BHF (buﬀered HF) are used, noble metals like gold
or other stable like chromium are suitable mask materials. The etching is usually isotropic, meaning
that it etches away equally fast in all directions. This will cause undercutting under the mask and
can be problematic if not accounted for.
HF is the most common etchant used, while other materials are etched in hydrogen peroxide, nitric
acid, potassium hydroxide or a solution containing multiple of the mentioned etchants. The process is
typically used in the semi-conductor industry, meaning that silicon and its corresponding oxides and
nitrides are mostly worked with, while other metals such as titanium and aluminium are often used as
well. Due to the crystallography of silicon, which often being worked with in single-crystal wafers, it
does not etch isotropic. Because of the asymmetry in the crystal structure of silicon, diﬀerent crystal
facets etch at diﬀerent rates. For example, KOH, which etches in the <100> crystal direction 400
times faster than in the <111>, giving high selectivity and much diﬀerent exposed surfaces compared
to an isotropic etch. The amount of undercutting and anisotropicy is diﬀerent for each material and
used etchant. Generally, for grain-like structured materials or multi-crystalline wafers the etching
will be isotropic. An unpredictable deviation in uniformity can be caused by a combination of the
etch rate for diﬀerent exposed facets at the given etch area and the local solution diﬀusion rate of
the reactants and by-products.
Within a chemical etch setup, several parameters are relevant. Mainly temperature, chemical con-
centration, and diﬀusion at the sample surface. Etch rate is strongly temperature dependent. The
reaction controlling the etch follows a typical Arrhenius temperature dependent rate, given as:
k = Ae
−Ea
kBT ,
(3)
where k is the rate constant, T is the absolute temperature, Ea the activation energy, kB the Boltz-
mann constant and A a prefactor. This means that a higher temperature will speed up the reaction
process. This can both be used to change the etch rate by manipulating the temperature or needs
to be monitored to ensure constant etching under changing conditions (e.g., a reaction heating up
the solution medium). The chemical concentration will directly inﬂuence how much of the reactive
etchant is available at the surface. Increasing the concentration of etchant will proportionally increase
the etch rate. If the concentration is too low, the etchant might become saturated very quickly, while
if it is too high, etching can become uncontrollable and cause dislodging of mask and large local
diﬀerences in etch results.
Connected to the chemical concentration is the diﬀusion at the surface. It is necessary that reactants
are constantly available at the surface in a suﬃcient concentration to continue the reaction at the
desired rate. A way to ensure this is to agitate the solution. This can have a big inﬂuence on the
results, as reaction products otherwise remain near the surface and prohibit etchant from diﬀusing
to the surface. It is common to distinguish between rate limited or diﬀusion limited reaction. Rate
limited reaction is the preferred condition, as it is easier to control and more repeatable. This is not
always possible to achieve. For example, when working with HF in the DTU clean room, it is not
allowed to heat up or agitate a solution containing considerate amounts of HF. Thus, if the reaction
is suﬃciently fast, the surface will quickly be covered in reaction products and the etching rate will
be slowed down and change over the duration of the etching. If a mask is deposited on top, like the
gold mask intended to use in this research project, it can alter the wettability of the surface. The
mask can reduce the diﬀuse rate and create local surface dewetting eﬀects, keeping the etchant from
reaching the surface. This can modify or reduce the etch rate but should be possible to account for
by performing the etch with and without a mask and compare the results.
When etching metals like titanium, oxidising agents can be added to the solution with advantage. A
chemical like hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) will oxidise the metal locally and make it more susceptible
to chemically react with an etchant such as HF. This requires design of the solution in terms of
concentrations and ratios between the active etchant and the oxidising agent to optimise the reaction
rate and selectivity. Another option is to add nitric acid (HNO3) to a HF solution, which completely
Page 20 of 73
==PAGE:24==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
Figure 11: Illustration of surface interaction for a rate limited reaction versus a diﬀusion limited
reaction.
While the rate limited reaction is easier to control, it can be hard to avoid products
accumulate at the boundary between etchant and substrate surface. This can be reduced by agitating
the solution, but doing so can cause unpredictable changes to the etch rate or interfere with the mask.
changes the etch reaction, and the by-product of titanium etching goes from titanium tri ﬂouride
(TiF3) to hexaﬂuorotitanic acid (H2TiF6). Which have a higher etch rate than a simple HF solution
will. The advantage of titanium is that it has been studied extensively, and thus most reactions
are discovered and understood. The expected etch rate can often be looked up in tables or derived
from the small deviations in an original setup from one of the many documented ones reported in
literature.
Table 1: Table containing YSZ mol% and etching parameters reported in published literature of
etch experiments on zirconia. The results are evaluated empirical, as none of the studies measured
quantitative etch rates. A full table with each set of parameter stated can be found in appendix A.1.
Reported etch parameters of YSZ etch experiments published in literature
Yttria (mol%)
HF conc. (%)
Temp. (℃)
Duration (min)
Result
Source
3 to 8
5, 10, 20 or 40
20 or 75
10
No eﬀect to
visible grain etch
at high temp.
and conc.
[57]
4 to 9
10 or 48
25 or 80
1 to 1440
No eﬀect to
large craters at high
temp. and conc.
[39]
5 to 8
5, 10 or 40
N/A
1 to 15
No eﬀect to
visible eﬀect at
high conc.
[20]
3
5, 20 or 40
25
30 to 120
No eﬀect to
visible eﬀect at
high conc.
[58]
Zirconia behaves diﬀerently. Several recent studies have reported that high strength alumina- and
zirconia-based dental ceramics cannot be etched with hydroﬂuoric acid because of their high crystalline
phase content [39]. The zirconia based dental ceramics are usually yttria stabilised zirconia, which is
tetragonal zirconia containing small amounts (typically 3-10 mol%) of yttria to keep it in this crystal
Page 21 of 73
==PAGE:25==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
form at room temperature. Despite this, etching analysis have been done on both pure and dental
zirconia [59][58]. Some of the parameters used in published studies are show in table 1. HF was used
in diﬀerent concentrations at diﬀerent etch times and temperatures. A single study proposed that
adding methane sulfonic acid (MSA) can improve the etch rate of HF on YSZ [19]. Otherwise, only
pure HF solutions were used, and concentration and temperature were varied. The reported etch
results vary between barely visible at low concentration and temperature, to somewhat visible but
slow at high concentration (40 % HF) and at temperatures around 100 ℃. Despite mixed conclusions,
the sentiment seems to be, that HF is a viable candidate for Zirconia etching. Albeit a slow etching
process, with the only numbers reported to be a few ˚A/minute in etch rate, the YSZ should be
chemically etchable in high concentrations of HF. since Zirconia is already oxidised, it does not make
sense to mix in any oxidising agent, but other chemicals could have a positive eﬀect to the selectivity
and rate of etching, similar to the reported use of MSA. Agitating and heating the solution can also
improve etch rate, but this will not be possible for this project. As gold is perfectly stable in HF,
this is a useful material to use as mask for the etching process. What can happen, especially if you
agitate the solution, is that the mask starts to fall oﬀas the etching undercuts the mask particles
and dislodges them from the surface. It should thus be monitored along the etching process, that the
mask stays on during the etching process.
2.3
Characterisation
The fabricated surfaces are subject to post-manufacturing characterisation. Many tools both in- and
outside the clean room allow for an extensive analysis of several aspects of the processed structures.
A general at-hand tool to immediately inspect surfaces are electron microscopes. These allows for a
quick assessment of large areas in micro- and nano scale resolution to determine whether the intended
outcome of each process step was achieved. To get quantitative data on surface topography, proﬁler
equipment is usually used. Optical proﬁling is ideal for a quick and fast measurement at micro-meter
range, while stylus proﬁling can achieve sub-micron resolution but requires more preparation of the
sample. If even smaller features are of interest, atomic force microscopy (AFM) can be considered.
Surface Identiﬁcation of surface and sample content can be necessary to assess in samples. This can
be done with methods such as XPS and EDS. If crystallographic information is necessary, XRD can
be used to clarify the states of a sample as well as the crystal structure and unit cell size. SEM is
generally a suﬃcient tool for qualitative analysis. As this project aims to make a proof-of-concept
to fabricate nanostructures on zirconia, most of the data analysis will be suﬃciently characterised
by imaging the surface. If more speciﬁc and controlled surface morphology is achieved, quantitative
measurements should be done.
2.3.1
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
Small features in the range of micro- and nanometres are impossible to detect and distinguish with the
naked eye. Optical microscopes are also not enough, as they are limited in resolution by the diﬀraction
limit, giving a minimum resolvable distance of a few hundred nanometre in ideal conditions. The
limit is caused by the relatively long wavelength of visible light, or any other generated photons used
in optical microscopy (typical UV or visible). Instead of using light, one can use accelerated electrons
as source of illumination, as these reach wavelengths up to 100,000 times shorter than visible light
photons. Electrons at energies of 10 to 30 keV, gives wavelengths in the picometre range (determined
from the Planck-Einstein relation), giving a much higher resolution in terms of the diﬀraction limit.
This is where electron microscopy draws its beneﬁts. Utilising acceleration voltages in the kV range,
high-end electron microscopes can achieve resolutions corresponding to clear images at 500,000×
magniﬁcation, but other practical issues limit it. These issues revolve focusing of the electron beam,
as well as interaction between the sample and beam at, what is called the interaction volume.
The speciﬁc type used for this project, is a scanning electron microscope (SEM). The SEM works by
sweeping the electron beam over the sample at a high rate by directing it with a magnetic scan coil.
The signal is counted at each point of the surface, at a resolution set by the system detector. The
information collected depends on the material properties, such as mass, conductivity, and surface
texture.
From ﬁg.
12, the usual components and typical setup of a conventional SEM can be
Page 22 of 73
==PAGE:26==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
Figure 12: Diagram of a SEM. It shows the typical and important components in a conventional
SEM. The diﬀerent detectors and ﬁlament varies over diﬀerent systems, as well as the actual lens
setup. The overall build up is similar in most systems. Diagram taken from [60].
seen. The Diagram illustrates the path of the electron beam, and how it is condensed, collimated,
and focused through the beam tube.
From the top, the electron beam is generated by applying
a potential diﬀerence over a conductive ﬁlament.
This is typically a ﬁeld emission gun (FEG),
although simple things as wolfram ﬁlament can do it too. This process extracts electrons, which are
then accelerated downwards by placing an anode below the ﬁlament. The beam is narrowed down
through an aperture before passing the magnetic condenser lenses, which mainly focuses and aligns
the beam to avoid astigmatism and spherical/chromatic aberration. The largest error comes within
the optimisation of astigmatism and beam collimation, which normally has done for each image, as
the electron beam is easily disturbed. The beam then travels through a deﬂection coil which directs
the beam around on the scanned surface, while the objective lens and ﬁnal aperture focuses the beam
down before it reaches the sample.
Around the sample are several detectors placed within the sample chamber. Diﬀerent detectors are
used to collect diﬀerent signals that are generated from the interaction of the electron beam with the
sample. Figure 13a shows an overview of the generated signals and detectable outcome of a high-
kV electron beam hitting a generic sample. For a SEM, usual detectors utilised are for secondary
electrons (SE), back-scattered electrons (BSE) and an x-ray detector. The typical position of these,
within the chamber, can be seen on ﬁgure 12. While the generation of these signals happens close to
the surface, it is relevant to understand how deep and wide within the sample the signal is generated
at.
This is illustrated in ﬁgure 13b, which shows that secondary electrons are generated from a
few nanometers depth, while back-scattered electrons and x-ray signals are generated from several
microns all the way up to millimetres of depth of a sample. The actual depth depends on the sample
material, conductivity, and electron beam voltage. For most purposes, a balance between high signal
and low noise must be chosen, where are stronger electron beam gives better contrast but also creates
a larger interaction volume and thus more noise.
The signals can be used to extract diﬀerent information about the sample. Secondary electrons are
good to get high resolution images about topological features. Edges will light up, as there are more
surface to escape from, and trenches will look darker. From this, if the sample is made of a somewhat
uniform material, the signal should be similar from all ﬂat areas. If this is not the case, BSE signal
Page 23 of 73
==PAGE:27==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
can be used. BSE occurs from interaction between incoming electrons and the nuclei of the sample.
The signal is thus correlated to the Z-number of the atoms in the sample (see, the size of the nuclei).
The BSE detector can then be used to generate images of samples containing diﬀerent materials of
diﬀerent atom numbers. It will not detect single atoms in a molecular composition, as the resolution is
not high enough. Instead, if for example two pieces of diﬀerent metal are welded together, the heavier
one will look brighter at the interface. The last signal typically detected in a SEM is characteristic
(a)
(b)
Figure 13: a): Shows the diﬀerent signals generated from the electron beam interacting with the
sample. b): A picture of the interaction volume related to SEM. this is an idealised schematic of
where the detected signals are generated in the sample. The depths on b) is also only for illustrative
purposes to emphasise what is on the surface and what is from within the sample. ﬁgures are taken
from [60][61].
X-ray. This is detected by an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy detector (EDS for short). The
X-ray signal is generated from the electrons bombarding the sample and exciting electrons out from
their orbitals and create holes.
The holes are then ﬁlled with decaying electrons from the outer
orbitals and a photon is emitted. This photon has energy in the X-ray regime, at a speciﬁc energy
characteristic for each material. The photons then work as a ﬁngerprint for individual materials, as
all materials produce diﬀerent photons. Measuring and comparing the photons with a database, a
map of the materials contained within the sample can be made. A weight % can also be determined
within a reasonable accuracy, but it of course depends on the uniformity of the material composition
across the measured area and the rest of the sample. This means that a well-equipped SEM can
measure material composition, atomic weight contrast of near surface composition and topological
maps of the top surface.
The SEM’s used for this work is the Supra series from Zeiss. The two available models are the 40V
and the 60V. Common for the two is that they have an eucentric stage and are capable at doing
images at variable pressures, allowing for better discharge of non-conductive samples. This can be
necessary for samples like zirconia, as it is an insulating material and thus the electron beam can
cause the sample to charge and generate disturbances in the image. Both models oﬀer a working
distance of several centimetres down to a few millimetres, and an electron beam range from 1 to
30 kV, albeit a few kV is often more than necessary to analyse nanostructures on a surface. It is
mainly due to the increased size of the interaction volume when raising the voltage that makes high
electron voltages unnecessary. The ideal voltage depends on the sample but comes down to a balance
between signal and interaction volume. One SEM is placed outside the clean room, and two of them
are placed inside the clean room.
Page 24 of 73
==PAGE:28==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
2.3.2
Surface proﬁling
Surface proﬁling is a technique of topographical characterisation of a samples surface. It is used to
determine textural variations in the range of micrometre scale down to single atom lattices. The
normal purpose is to quantify the roughness of the surface, but can also be used to detect defects,
conﬁrm fabricated surface morphology, or detect features not visible to the naked eye. It is usually
done with a proﬁlometer, which comes in a contact and a non-contact form. Contact proﬁlometry
ranges from a simple stylus (mechanical) proﬁler, down to AFM and STM techniques that can mea-
sure single-atoms and unit cell crystal lattices under the right conditions. The mechanical stylus
proﬁler works by dragging a physical probe tip over the surface and detect the structures it encoun-
ters. It works in the range from millimetre to nanometres. Non-contact methods are often optical
proﬁlometers. These uses light instead of a mechanical probe. Several techniques are available, but
the general working principle is optical interference, where confocal apertures, focus lenses and phase
detection allows for a translation of reﬂective surfaces into a height map. While optical proﬁlometry
is much faster, as it can scan an entire area simultaneously, stylus proﬁlers usually have much higher
resolution.
Both techniques are limited by sample shape, size, and surface structure. For example, deep grooves
are not measurable by a mechanical stylus tip, as it will get caught on the edges and give a smooth
readout of the real proﬁle. Similarly, light can be trapped in slim grooves, diﬀract or phase shift and
either reduce the signal or make it read out incorrectly. Thus, it can sometimes help to use multiple
methods to ensure coherent measurements and correct conclusions on the surface morphology on
several orders scales. There are many ways speciﬁc optical systems are designed to measure surface
topography speciﬁcally designed for diﬀerent features, materials, and resolution requirements [62],
but the general principle is that the sample surface is exposed to a light source, and the behaviour
and interaction with the surface is recorded and translated by software into a 3D map of the top
layer.
Figure 14: a) Schematic of the working principle of the optical proﬁler used for the project.
b)
illustration of a stylus proﬁler measuring the surface, showing how the tip does not measure the same
as the original proﬁle due to features being smaller than the tip radius.
For the project, an optical proﬁler and a stylus proﬁler was used to characterise the surface topography
related to lapping and polishing of the sample surfaces.
The optical microscope is a Proﬁlm3D
from Filmetrics. It works using interferometry in one of two modes. The ﬁrst and simple mode is
Vertical scanning interferometry (VSI). A while light source is used in conjunction with movement
perpendicular to the sample to accurately determine sample position. The light is sent from the light
source through an interferometric objective - which splits the light sending half to the sample and the
other half to a reference mirror. The light is the reﬂected back from both the sample and the mirror,
where it recombines on its path back to the detector. The two signals will now have a diﬀerence in
phase. This phase shift will cause the light to interfere with itself, creating dark and light fringes,
which is the characteristic interference pattern used to validate an optimal focus on the surface. A
Page 25 of 73
==PAGE:29==
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
January 2, 2022
schematic of this is shown in ﬁgure 14. The interferometer is designed so that the greatest contrast
of the fringes indicates a perfect focus condition. Through perpendicular movement, the surface is
scanned vertically, and the height corresponding to the point of the greatest contrast on each part of
the surface is recorded and linked to the position of the Z-movement system.
The other method is Phase shifting interferometry (PSI). It is similar to VSI but uses a few key
diﬀerences which allow for higher precision. First, the white light source is passed through a ﬁlter,
narrowing down the wavelength range and thus improving the accuracy of reﬂected signal by an
expansion of the correlogram that the system detects from the interference pattern.
The second
has to do with how the software analyses the data. After a scan is made, the software of the VSI
measurement selects the best intensity value for each pixel over all frames measured. This allows to
generate an image collected over multiple, large-ranged parts of an entire scan. For the PSI method,
the analysis consists of completing the scan and then pick the same ﬁnite range of frames for each
pixel. This heavily limits the Z-range, but also removes uncertainties that may appear from stitching
together measurements from multiple frames. For that reason, the PSI method can only scan over a
few microns, while the VSI method can cover from 50 nm to 10 mm. The system has a relatively large
discrepancy in resolution between the X/Y and Z axis. The X/Y resolution is around 1 µm, while
- depending on the surface reﬂectivity and conditions, can achieve down to double-digit nanometre
resolution. In general, this tool is not used to do high-resolution measurements, but is instead used
to get a quick overview of surfaces that might be too rough to successfully use contact proﬁlometry
to measure the topography.
The stylus proﬁler used is a Dektak 150 surface proﬁler from Veeco. It works by dragging a diamond
stylus over the surface, keeping it in contact vertically while moved laterally across the sample. It
can measure small surface variations in vertical position by the contact force between the tip and the
surface. The resolution is around 10 nm in the horizontal direction and can be a single nanometre and
even sub-nanometre in the vertical direction. This is governed by the surface robustness, the stylus
diameter, and the force sensitivity. Since the stylus is in contact with the sample, contamination from
either can be placed on the other. Furthermore, dragging of the stylus over the surface can damage
it, if the surface is soft enough. The tracking force is usually in the range of 1 to 50 milligrams, so it
should not have any impact on the zirconia surfaces. A feedback loop monitors the measured force
on the stylus. As suﬃcient force is applied to the tip, it moves up until it again moves freely. The
position is then fed to a software that registers the height at the given point. Due to the nature of the
method, it is slow, as each individual point needs to be measured. It is thus more common to make
line scans instead, achieving a general topographical image of the surface in each direction. This is
usually enough to determine whether the desired smoothness has been achieved.
2.3.3
Wettability/contact angle measurement
The physics behind the contact angle measurement is the same that which dictates the formation of
gold particles. The surface tension and interface forces at the boundaries between a 3-phase system.
It is typically between a solid, which is the substrate of interest, a gas - normally atmospheric air,
and a liquid - which is the subject to analysis of its contact angle on the solid. The Gas can be
substituted with another liquid, typically using oil and water. The simplest of measurements are
static contact angles. Here, a droplet sits on the substrate surface and the three-phase boundary is
not moving. This gives a discrete value of contact angle and indicates the wettability of the surface.
For the measurement to be valid, the surface requires some homogeneity, as results might vary a lot
at diﬀerent areas of the surface. The contact angle is used to determine the surface tension and is
a good indicator of foreign objects ability to stay on the surface – such as bacteria on an implant
surface. Static angle measurements are based on Young’s equation which was presented previously.
Adhesive forces between the liquid and solid causes the drop to spread out, while cohesive forces cause
the droplet to ball up. It is the balance between these forces that determines the wettability at the
boundary. For water, the typical distinction for surface wettability is hydrophilic (contact angle below
90 °) and the liquid will spread over a large area of the surface, or hydrophobic (contact angle above
90 °) and the liquid will minimise contact with the surface and form a compact droplet. For example,
the gold island formation shown in ﬁgure 10 is a representation of a hydrophilic surface. There is
Page 26 of 73
==PAGE:30==
3
FABRICATION PROCESS
January 2, 2022
a strong correlation between natural antimicrobial eﬀects and low wettability (hydrophobicity) [13],
and thus it is an interesting measure to have for a surface engineered with bactericidal purposes.
Figure 15: Wetting behaviour of solid substrates: (a) Young, (b) Wenzel, (c) Cassie-Baxter, and (d)
intermediate state between Wenzel and Cassie regimes. Image taken from [63].
For complex surfaces, like nanostructured or roughened surfaces, Young’s equation is no longer exact.
While still being a good ﬁrst approximation of a surface’s behaviour, other models have been intro-
duced to consider the eﬀects on small-scale features of surfaces. These are the Wenzel, Cassie-baxter
and the intermediate Cassie to Wenzel transition model [64]. Figure 15 shows examples of these
three, as well as a comparison to the Young’s model. These models can be used to determine contact
angles for non-ideal surfaces. They are also the background for an extensive study for a theoretical
model to predict antimicrobial eﬃcacy of diﬀerent nanostructures [13].
The Wenzel’s model is typically suﬃcient to describe the wetting of bacteria. It is based upon Young’s
model, elaborating on the contact angle depending on the diﬀerence between the cross-section of the
droplet and the actual contact area governed by the total surface area underneath. It is described by
the following equation:
cos(θ*) = rcos(θ),
(4)
where the introduction of the roughness ratio, r, which is deﬁned as the ratio of the area of the solid
surface to the apparent area is used to correct for the Young contact angle to the apparent contact
angle θ*. Taking this into account when determining wettability can be very useful and is normally
suﬃcient when measuring wetting angle to predict surface roughness and structure. Assuming ho-
mogeneous surface roughness, this can help predicting and determining the height and distribution
of structures on the surface. The simplest tool is an optical tensiometer for contact angle measure-
ments. It usually contains a camera, a droplet dispenser, a sample stage, and software to capture
and calculate the droplet and contact angle. This type of system is also called a drop shape analyser
and can be found at the clean room facilities. Using such equipment can give a quick and rough
estimate of the surface wettability post structuring. While it does not tell anything about speciﬁc
bactericidal eﬃcacy nor durability in implant environment, an increased contact angle can be a quick
conﬁrmation to an improved antimicrobial tendency of the surface, and a cheap tool to evaluate
surface morphology eﬀects on micro-scale subjects before doing expensive and extensive testing of
antimicrobial eﬀects with bacterial colonies in designated labs.
3
Fabrication Process
The fabrication process for the nanostructured zirconia surfaces builds and elaborates on the work
previously done by A. Abbaspourmani at DTU Photonics. This work focused on making similar
nanostructures on titanium surfaces as it is also heavily used as a (dental) implant material. To
verify the work, and to do clean room training whilst waiting for the Zirconia samples to be allowed
into the clean room, the processes previously done on Titanium were conducted. As the process ﬂow
for the two materials will be very similar, the steps are easily compared between the two. Methods
and materials are interchangeable with only minor (but important) details changed, such as etching
time, etchant concentration, gold layer thickness and annealing temperature.
Page 27 of 73
==PAGE:31==
3
FABRICATION PROCESS
January 2, 2022
Figure 16: Illustration of the process ﬂow and fabrication of the nanostructured zirconia surfaces.
a) the polished and cleaved zirconia plates are cleaned and prepared ﬁrstly outside the clean room
and then inside the clean room.
b) A few nm of gold is deposited on the zirconia plates by e-
beam evaporation. c) Samples are heated to dewet the gold and form an Au nanoparticle mask on
the surface. d) Samples are immersed into a HF solution to etch the surface and by that, create
nanostructures around the mask. e) Any leftover gold is removed by a KI-etch solution f) Surfaces
are cleaned and air-blowed, and the surfaces are ready. Sample height is not to scale.
As the purpose of the work done in this project is to create and optimise a fabrication process for nano
structuring zirconia surfaces, the methods and process ﬂow will not be presented here with speciﬁc
values. Instead, a general overview of each step will be done, whereto the optimisation of each step
will be discussed in later parts of the report, going over the individual experiments which lead to
the resulting parameters used for each step. Where it makes sense, estimated values and/or ranges
of used parameters will be mentioned. An illustration of the fabrication process progress on zirconia
is shown in ﬁgure 16. The substrate used to fabricate nanostructures are 8 mol% yttria-stabilised
zirconium oxide (8YSZ or just YSZ). The YSZ plates are manufactured by an external company, in
sizes of 50x50x1 mm. The purity and roughness of the plates are not reported from the manufacturer.
Digital images of the plate during diﬀerent process steps can be seen in appendix A.1.
3.1
Step 0 - polishing and cleaving
Before bringing the zirconia samples into the clean room for processing, the surfaces need to be
prepared by polishing them to a suﬃcient roughness and cleaving them into smaller (10x10x1 mm3)
pieces. As zirconia is a very hard material, normal tools like sandpaper and cutting tools does not
Page 28 of 73
==PAGE:32==
3
FABRICATION PROCESS
January 2, 2022
make the cut (although attempted by the workshop). Thus, polishing of the surfaces is being done
at an external company specialised in lapping of ceramic surfaces. Cleaving is done with a DISCO,
Automatic Dicing Saw (DAD 321) available at the clean room. A high-quality diamond blade is used
to cut the 50x50 mm2 large pieces of zirconia.
3.2
Step 1 - Cleaning
To ensure optimal and clean surfaces prior to any fabrication, several cleaning processes will be done
to the zirconia plates. An initial rinse in an acetone bath followed by an isopropyl alcohol (IPA) bath
is done to degrease the surfaces and remove organic material. Acetone is a strong solvent to dissolve
grease, and IPA is pure and leaves almost no residue when evaporating from the surface. This is
done, as the plates are handled manually both at the polishing workshop and the cleaving station,
leaving skin residue and potential polishing oils/materials. The plates are immersed for 10 minutes
in each bath. This is followed by a blow dry with N2.
After this process, the Zirconia plates are brought into the clean room. The Zirconia plates are cleaned
in a soap ultrasonic process.
This removes particles and ensures clean surfaces for the following
deposition step. A Triton X-100 detergent is used. This reduces the surface tension on the samples
and helps dislodging and removing particles. 25 plates are processed at a time. The ultrasonic bath
(at the clean room gowning area) is ﬁlled up with a few cm of DI water. A glass beaker is placed
in the water and ﬁlled approximately to the same height. This ensures that the samples are safe in
case they fall out of the holder. The water surrounding the glass beaker is to transfer the ultrasonic
vibrations to the samples. 20-30 drops of diluted Triton X-100 detergent is added to the glass beaker.
The sample holder containing the samples is placed in the beaker. The ultrasonic is started and left
on for 10 minutes. This follows a rinse in DI water in the rinse bath at the same work bench. Here
they are rinsed for another 10 minutes. After this, the samples are picked up one at a time, blow
dried with N2 and placed in the clean chip-box from the clean room. The Triton X-100 solution is
dumped and both baths are rinsed with DI water. The samples are now clean and ready for metal
deposition.
3.3
Step 2 - Thin ﬁlm deposition
The gold thin ﬁlm is deposited at the E-Beam Evaporator (Temescal) in the clean room. The machine
allows for diﬀerent deposition rates and layer thicknesses depending on the desired target material.
The gold ﬁlms are a few nanometres thick, so there are no quarrels with the limitations of the system
for this project. For gold, the Temescal needs a relative high deposition rate (± 5 ˚A/s) to create
uniform layers. This means that the deposition is fast (a few seconds) and the ﬁnal deposition might
be oﬀwith a few angstroms compared to the desired thin ﬁlm thickness. The variation of the layers
will thus be a few percentages from batch to batch.
The cleaned zirconia plates are loaded on a sample holder and the holder is placed on the hula. The
chamber is closed, and the vacuum pumping process is started. The recipe used on the Temescal
is the ”AuAlone.rec”, which has the correct target and pattern pre-set for a gold deposition. The
desired layer thickness is set, and the deposition rate is set to 5 ˚A/s. The recipe is started, and the
machine does everything here by itself. After each deposition, an ”actual thickness” measured by the
QCM can be extracted from the user interface and noted for each batch. The sample holders are
carefully taken out of the hula, and the gold covered zirconia plates are put back in the sample box
to avoid unnecessary contamination.
3.4
Step 3 - Rapid Thermal processing/Annealing (RTP)
To convert the Au thin ﬁlm into a mask of small, separated gold particles, the plates are annealed.
This is done for a few minutes at temperatures usually ranging from 300 ℃to 1000 ℃depending
on the substrate material and ﬁlm thickness. The RTP process is done on the Jipelec RTP in the
clean room. It uses halogen lamps to rapidly increase the temperature and two kinds of thermal
controllers (K-type thermocouples (TC) and optical pyrometer) to ensure the right temperature is
Page 29 of 73
==PAGE:33==
3
FABRICATION PROCESS
January 2, 2022
reached during the process. They each work best at diﬀerent temperature ranges, where the TC
works best below 500 ℃and the pyrometer above.
The samples are placed on a ”susceptor wafer” which ensures controllable and constant temperatures
during the process as well as giving a stable surface which does not react with the surrounding
atmosphere at high temperatures. Inlet of nitrogen can be used to purge the area around the samples
and avoid oxidising the surface. If possible, this should be avoided, as the nitrogen gas will be let in
at room temperature close to the thermocouple and can inﬂuence the temperature accuracy. Since
zirconia is a stabilised and oxidised material, purging the sample chamber is unnecessary.
A suitable recipe is selected (or created) on the Jipelec software, the susceptor wafer loaded with
samples is placed in the heating chamber, the chamber door is locked, and the process is started.
Depending on the time and temperature, a cool down process starts after the thermal heating.
Typically heat up times are a few minutes to reach the maximum temperature, 3 minutes of annealing
at max temperature, and 2 minutes of decreasing the temperature. Then follows the system cool
down. After the cool down, the chamber can be opened and the susceptor can be removed from the
chamber. The samples are carefully removed from the susceptor and placed back into sample box.
The zirconia plates are now coated with a mask of gold particles and are ready for characterisation
of mask properties or chemical etching for structuring of the surface.
3.5
Step 4 - Wet etching
The ﬁnal step to develop the nanostructures on the zirconia surfaces is to immerse the zirconia plates
into a solution of HF and H2O, which is expected to act as an isotropic wet etchant on zirconia. The
proportion and concentration of the solution are subject to change depending on the results of the
developed structures. Previous work shows that a mixture of 2:1:14 of 40% HF, H2O2 and H2O has
good selectivity for the substrate material and minimises gold etching when done on titanium. The
H2O2 is used to oxidise the titanium, making it more reactive to the etchant. As Zirconia is already
in a stable, oxidised state, it does not provide any signiﬁcant eﬀect to the process and will thus be
omitted from the solution. A large, HF-safe plastic beaker is used to make the solution. This is done
to guarantee similar concentrations for a set of etchings. The solution is then poured into a smaller
beaker where the etching is done. The solution is changed between each etching, as the substrate
is dissolved into the solution and can saturate the etchant as well as introduce contamination and
by-product particles at the substrate surfaces.
The zirconia plates are placed in a suitable plastic sample holder and immersed into the etchant.
After the desired etch time, the sample holder is removed from the solution and placed in a bath
with DI water. the bath is then continuously ﬂushed with DI water for a few minutes to ensure the
samples are free of any etchant.
To remove any gold residue on the surface, the samples are immersed in a potassium iodine (KI)
etchant. This reacts with the gold and dissolves it, leaving the zirconia surfaces free from any foreign
particles or materials. The samples are placed back in the DI water bath. and continuously rinsed
with water once more.
The zirconia plates are then removed from the DI water bath and individually blow dried with N2
before placed back in the sample box. The samples are now ready for characterisation in the SEM
or to be used for wettability or antibacterial testing.
Depending on the purpose of the etching (testing vs. mass production) the sample number size can
vary from a few (2-4) to an entire batch of 25 zirconia plates. In general, it is a good idea to ensure
that enough etchant is used, as complications with dissolved substrate in the solution is hard to
account for and should be minimised.
Page 30 of 73
==PAGE:34==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
4
Experiments and results
During the project, several experiments were conducted to optimise and facilitate the fabrication of
nanostructures on the zirconia surfaces. As described in section 3, the process is a relatively simple
one, with only 1 deposition, 1 pre-treatment heating, and a ﬁnal chemical etch step. The ﬁrst two
constitutes the development of gold particles. Analysis of size and shape, depending on temperature
of annealing and thin ﬁlm thickness of the gold deposition will be made. This analysis forms a basis
for the gold mask that will be used for the etching analysis. To avoid complicating parameters during
the currently unexplored ﬁeld of nano structuring zirconia surfaces, a single, or very few selections
of gold masks are used for the etch process. These will be selected depending on the uniformity,
distribution and particle size resulting from the ﬁrst two steps.
To verify the process working, as well as getting clean-room training whilst waiting for the zirconia
samples to be processed and prepared, the processes will be done on Titanium samples. This follows
the work by A. Abbaspourmani as previously mentioned. A short description of the process and
results are presented here. This gives a baseline of initial results which have been proven to work,
as well as a comparison of how each step can be conducted and optimised for zirconia, which is
relatively unexplored. Lastly, an evaluation of the etching process in terms of nano-structure type,
shape and size resulting from diﬀerent chemical solutions and etch times is described. As it is nearly
impossible to determine what exact shapes and sizes are ideal for antibacterial purposes, it will be
hard to determine what surfaces will be more prominent and thus desired. Instead, a comparison of
similarity with structures produced on titanium will be the initial goalpost for a ”successful” process
and ﬁnding a chemical solution with controllable etch rate for zirconia is of highest priority. This
is because they have already shown to be eﬃcient, reducing bacterial growth with up to 99 % on
the fabricated surface structures.
An evaluation of the nanostructures’ bactericidal eﬀect is only
clear through empirical tests, having the zirconia surfaces tested with bacteria grown on them and
comparing them to non-structured surfaces.
4.1
Fabrication of nanostructured titanium surfaces
Titanium can be fabricated and bought in diﬀerent qualities and purities, which changes the properties
and thus the utilisation of the titanium. Some of the alloys are separated into a grade system, where
each grade has speciﬁc purposes. Grade 4 Titanium is usually used in the medical industry [65].
It is rigid, has high corrosion resistance, is relatively resilient for a metal and can have both matte
and clear ﬁnishes depending on the surface treatment. This is the type of titanium that was used in
previous work which also veriﬁed the process steps that will be used for the zirconia. The titanium is
prepared in similar style as the zirconia, ﬁrst polishing the surfaces, cutting them into smaller pieces,
cleaning them, and lastly do the 3-step process creating the gold mask and etching the surrounding
metal surface. Images from each of the steps will be shown, as well as a comparison to previous
results in the experimental ﬁeld.
Surface inspection
The titanium samples are prepared similar to the zirconia samples. Larger plates are polished and
cut into pieces of 10x10x1 mm3, degreased, and cleaned. Initially, the surfaces are supposed to be ﬂat
and smooth. Due to the circumstances at the time, these samples were not lapped professionally, but
instead ground down and polished using diﬀerent grit levels of sandpapers. This leaves the surfaces
relatively smooth but does not guarantee nano-scale ﬂatness.
The Titanium surfaces are visualised in ﬁgure 17, showing low and high magniﬁcation images of
typical samples of how the Titanium surface looks like. The left image has an intentionally made
scratch (to diﬀerentiate between front and backside) which shows how the surface looks untouched
and that it can also be easily modiﬁed by mechanical forces. The roughness is not measured, but from
the contrasts and grains it clearly shows that the surface is not entirely ﬂat. This is not problematic,
as long as the roughness is on a scale where the desired structures can still be fabricated and measured
locally between the larger patches.
Page 31 of 73
==PAGE:35==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
(a)
(b)
Figure 17: Low- and high magniﬁcation SEM images of the Titanium surface. The left image is an
untreated surface with a scratch made on it. The scratch was made to identify the front side, and
shows that the surface can be altered by mechanical force. Micron-sized grains are present on the
surface. The right image shows the surface at much higher magniﬁcation. Here, nanometer scale
roughness is identiﬁed. It looks like grains have been dislodged oﬀthe surface during polishing, and
left their imprint on the surface.
Gold deposition on titanium
The next step was to ensure that gold is uniformly deposited on the titanium using the E-beam
evaporator in the clean room. Diﬀerent thicknesses were tried (2-10 nm). To verify the deposition
of gold on titanium to work, a few titanium samples were deposited with 5 nm gold and imaged
in the SEM right after. In theory, depositing a thin layer of gold on titanium or vice versa, gives
a uniform thin ﬁlm with high adhesion to the substrate layer [66]. It is typically used as wetting-
/adhesion layer, which generates an alloy that has strong oxidisation, allowing for good adhesion to
glass substrates [67]. Titanium can also reportedly diﬀuse into gold substrates, where the opposite
phenomenon is not very prone to happen.
The result of evaporating 5 nm gold on the titanium substrates are seen in ﬁgure 18. In comparison
to the pure titanium images, there is higher brightness and more contrast. This is purely an artefact
of the SEM settings, due to changes and improvement in imaging technique over the course of the
project. As seen, the surface topography stays unchanged, and a smooth layer of gold has distributed
nicely over the titanium surface. The grains are also covered, and no clear edges/aberrations are
created during deposition. As seen on ﬁgure 18 b), the surface have areas of 5 - 10 µm2 where it is
mostly ﬂat. These areas can be used to verify the eﬀect of the following steps of masking and etching,
but ideally these large grains were eradicated before continuing the process.
The gold is deposited at a rate of 5 ˚A/s. This is relatively high, compared to the thickness and takes
only 10 seconds for the 5 nanometres of gold to be deposited. It does not seem to have caused any
problem, as the layer seems smooth. To this point, the process is relatively simple. The preparation
of the samples and the gold deposition is similar regardless of layer thickness, and only changes are
in the deposition time which is already very short (once the machine is up and running). The total
fabrication time for cleaning and depositing is around 2 hours, and up to 2 batches can be prepared
at the same time.
Formation of gold nano-particles
To make the gold nanoparticles, the substrates are heated up by the RTP process described previously.
Here, temperature and time can be adjusted. Generally, the particles should be uniform, round and
evenly distributed on the surface, and ﬁnding the parameters to get that is necessary. Ideally, the
Au nanoparticles should be spaced and sized at the same scale as bacteria, as it would theoretically
Page 32 of 73
==PAGE:36==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
(a)
(b)
Figure 18: 5 nm Au evaporated on Ti substrates. The image brightness is an eﬀect of high brightness
settings during the imaging, compared to ﬁg 17. Similar to the pure titanium surface, the topography
is kept unchanged. Instead, it is seen that the gold deposition is smooth and follows the surface
morphology.
allow for nanostructures capable of puncturing and deform them. Putting more gold on top of the
substrates allows for larger particles to accumulate, but also requires higher temperature and/or
longer annealing to have migrate properly. Finding the right ratio for optimal shape and size is of
high priority and depends a lot on the stability of the substrate at higher temperatures. The gold
should agglomerate relatively quickly, so only a few minutes of annealing is done. Reducing the time
also decreases the potential of decomposition of the surface, as well as any migration or alloying to
occur between titanium and gold. The anneal time is set to 3 minutes. For the Jiepelec to function
properly, the ramping up and cooling down must take a few minutes as well. The cool down rate of
samples can also have detrimental eﬀects on the substrate [68]. This eﬀect is clearly larger at higher
temperatures and it not seen at all if samples are only heated to a few hundred degrees. As it has
been described in section 2.2.3, gold already starts to agglomerate at that temperature, thus it is
possible to keep the temperature relatively low and the surfaces stable.
The results of the ﬁrst test are seen in ﬁgure 19. The substrates were heated up to 300 ℃for 3
minutes, taking 2 minutes to reach the temperature and a total of 6 minutes to cool down. The
process chamber was kept at ambient pressure. In comparison to the images of the amorphous gold
ﬁlm in ﬁgure 18, the gold has clearly accumulated into smaller, localised islands on the surface. The
diﬀer in size from a few nm to a couple hundred and are random in shape and size. This is not ideal,
as this mask will leave an uneven and uncontrollable surface to etch and not generate the uniformly
patterned nanostructures as desired.
To improve on the initial result, the next batch is annealed at higher temperature to allow for the
gold-dewetting process to develop even further and hopefully agglomerate into larger, rounder, and
more spread particles. It was supposed to be heated up to 450 ℃, but due to problems with the recipe,
the gold coated titanium samples were heated up to 600 ℃. The heating and cool down time were
kept the same, and the maximum temperature was once again kept for 3 minutes. The results are
shown in ﬁgure 20, clearly showing an oxidised titanium surface. The high temperature has oxidised
and crystallised the top layer of the titanium pushed and moved the gold around and ”destroyed”
the substrate surface. The gold can be noticed a few places, especially in the top left and top right of
the high magniﬁcation image. The shape of the gold is nice and round, but due to the crystallisation
of the surface, the mask is no longer covering the surface, and the surface itself is unusable. Despite
it being hotter than desired, the result shows that 600 ℃is too high of a temperature to work with
titanium samples. It has also been reported that the top layer will peel and come oﬀif the titanium
was treated at too high temperatures. Whether it is a general issue for titanium plates or due to
the speciﬁc sample substrate used is not distinctly examined. This problem can hopefully be avoided
with the more stable and already oxidised zirconia surface.
Page 33 of 73
==PAGE:37==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
(a)
(b)
Figure 19: Overview and close up images post annealing. The surfaces were coated with 5 nm gold.
The RTP process was done for 3 minutes at 300 ℃. As seen to the left, the uniformity is great and
everything is covered. Unfortunately, as seen to the right, clear and round particles have not formed,
instead a pattern of small and large islands are scattered randomly on the surface.
(a)
(b)
Figure 20: Titanium with 5 nm gold annealed at 600 ℃for 3 minutes.
The surface has clearly
oxidised, created crystallised TiO2 on the surface and have moved and pushed the gold around.
Despite some gold particles noticeably having the right form (can be seen top left and bottom left of
the right image) the surface is broken and the mask has moved around and possible diﬀused into the
Ti as well.
Instead, to form particles better shaped and more suitable to be followed by a uniform etch, a thinner
layer of gold is deposited. The advantage of gold is that it is noble enough not to stay stable within
HF, so even a thin layer of small particles will stay unchanged by the etchant. But, with only 3 nm
of gold to form particles, they will be very small, and the resulting pattern consists of smaller and
closer placed particles, potentially forming smaller structures during etching.
The substrates covered with 3 nm gold are annealed at 300 ℃similar to the ﬁrst batch of samples.
With less gold on top, the resulting particles are a lot smaller. The result of the annealing is presented
in ﬁgure 21. While a few of the gold nano-islands are not round or well agglomerated, the majority
is. The particles are very small, all being smaller than 100 nm (at least the ones imaged on ﬁgure 21
b)) and most in the range of 5-50 nm. The spacing is also much smaller than 100 nm. Assuming the
surface would etch intrinsically, the structures would not be much bigger than the size of the gold
particles. As bacteria are typically a few microns in width and length, the expected size of these
structures is too small to really work as puncturing and piercing structures and will more likely work
Page 34 of 73
==PAGE:38==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
as a roughening. Despite that, the result of the fabricated gold mask is good. The gold pattern is
reasonable to the point where it can work as an etch mask and the surface is unchanged. For the
etching, the titanium substrates with 3 nm gold, annealed at 300 ℃will be used.
(a)
(b)
Figure 21: Titanium with 3 nm gold annealed at 300 ℃for 3 minutes. The particles are much more
localised and the surface is unchanged and stable. Some of the gold particles are still uneven in
shape, which can be partly contributed to the dewetting being incomplete and a rough substrate.
The particle diameters are all less than 100 nm.
Wet etching of titanium surfaces
The etching is done in the fume hood of the clean room, using a predetermined solution of HF, H2O2
and H2O. The HF acts as an etchant, where the H2O is simply to dilute and lower the concentration
and thus the reaction rate. The H2O2 is used to help oxidise the surface, making it more reactive to
HF. The solution is in the ratio of 2:1:14 for HF(40%):H2O2:H2O. This solution has been optimised
speciﬁcally to etch Titanium and creating nanostructures. Metal assisted chemical etching (MACE)
has been proposed as a part of the reason to use H2O2 and is a technique frequently used to create
tall nanopillars on silicon. The eﬀect would be the opposite, reducing the substrate underneath the
metal, causing etching to happen right underneath the gold particles and create holes instead of
pillars, and is mostly used for silicon etching [69].
Higher concentrations are too hard to control, as a few seconds variation in etch time alter the
results. For example, by breaking down the fabricated nanostructures. Research have shown that
etching times between 2 and 10 minutes are the best range to structure titanium surfaces [70]. This
was seen with previous etching results, where etch times from 2 to 10 minutes were done in steps of 1
minute to 30 seconds. These experiments indicated that a ﬁrst order of structures occur after a short
etching time, with aspect ratio varying depending on the surface quality and solution. After a few
more minutes, these structures seem etched away, and a new layer of structures occur - usually with
much lower aspect ratio. Weaker solutions might work, but at a slower rate. It also might change the
aspect ratio and/or resulting structures and cause irregularities due to low concentration of etchant
at the surface.
Page 35 of 73
==PAGE:39==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 22: Results of etching titanium substrates with a mask made of 3 nm gold. The etch time
is written on each image. A total of 3 samples of each etch time was made to ensure consistency of
results over multiple substrates. While hard to quantify, it is clear that distinct and diﬀerent patterns
emerge from each etch time. At 3 minutes, clear mountain-like structures covers the surface. At 5
minutes, it appears that the initial nanostructures are removed, and broad, ﬂat bumps emerges.
The ﬁrst etched batch had 3 samples done at three, four, and ﬁve minutes respectively for a total of
9 samples. 3 samples were used to verify uniformity of the results over multiple substrates. Despite
doing so, it is hard to quantify surface structures that are randomly scattered and distributed over
1 cm2, when only a few µm22 are imaged.
Each batch of 3 was made in a separate solution to
avoid accumulation of dislodged material and a saturated reactant. Selected images in high and low
magniﬁcation of the surface is shown in ﬁgure 22. First thing noticed is that the particles are still
present at the surface. The etching has not been enough to detach or etch them oﬀ(not that it
was intended). As seen, all gold is removed despite no eﬀorts to do so. If gold is left, it can be
etched oﬀwith a KI-etchant (as mentioned in section 3.5), but no gold was left even on the 3-minute
Page 36 of 73
==PAGE:40==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 23: Tilted views of the samples etched for 3 minutes, that look promising from the top-view
SEM images. At high magniﬁcation, the tips of the structures can be seen to be taller than initially
expected. The aspect-ratio is quite high, and some of the pillars/tips are very sharp.
etched samples. This indicates that the etching process has removed all titanium underneath the
gold, releasing the particle from its support substrate layer. this results in undesired etching of the
structures underneath the mask, reducing and removing the intended nanostructures. Despite the
mask being dislodged, the result of the surface etching is much rougher and more structured compared
to other examples of etched titanium for the same duration [70][38].
Looking at ﬁgure 22, a clear diﬀerence in pattern for the diﬀerent etch times is seen. The 3 minutes
samples show spike like structures spaced about 100 nm apart. The 5 minutes samples have much
more ﬂat structures, with large spacing between areas of rough and more ﬂat patches. It is suspected
that the etching has removed the nanostructures initially created, as the mask falls oﬀrelatively
quickly and thus leaves the structures exposed. Generally, the unwanted particles initially covering
the surface are much larger than the structures fabricated. It would of course be necessary to have a
surface without these particles for the smaller structures to have any eﬀect on the surface formation.
From the ﬁrst test, the samples etched for 3 minutes looks the most promising in terms of sharp,
tall nanostructures, with the highest aspect ratio and possible capabilities of piercing bacteria. A
closer inspection of these are shown in ﬁgure 23, containing tilted SEM-images of surfaces edged for
3 minutes. Especially at a closer view, it is clear some of the peaks are tall and sharp pillars with
high aspect ratio. They are about a hundred nanometre tall, judging from the scale bar of bottom
right image. Due to contrast and depth of view, it is hard to see all the structures and determine
a distribution of height and width. As the analysis was done mostly to get a qualitative look of
the process on titanium, but measurement techniques such as AFM or proﬁling could be used to
determined height variation between peaks and pits.
Despite some clear and visible structures, the etching results are not as expected or desired.
In
comparison, ﬁgure 24 shows some of the best results achieved using the same solution and etching
parameters (here, 4 minutes) as the experiment done here. The results and images are credited to
Page 37 of 73
==PAGE:41==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 24: Some of the etching results of titanium surfaces.
These substrates did not have the
particles/grains on top, and generally looks more stable and uniform.
All four images are from
diﬀerent batches etched for 4 minutes in a solution ratio of 2:1:14 of HF(40%):H2O2:H2O. The results
and images are credited to the work of A. Abbaspourmani.
The diﬀerence in results shows the
instability of this process and the need to reﬁne it.
A. Abbaspourmani, who did this work early in year 2021. From the looks of it, there are no or fewer
particles on these substrates, indicating they might be of better quality or structurally diﬀerent. The
height and aspect ratio also varies a lot over the diﬀerent samples, making everything from small
bumps to sharp needles with the same recipe. While both results show the potential of this method,
it also shows some need of better parameter control to ensure good and uniform results every time.
It was reported from this work, that batches normally looked the same over all samples, but diﬀerent
batches processed with identical parameters could result in large variety - similar to what is shown
with these images.
From these experiments, the mechanisms relevant to each step has been examined and can be used
to compare and elaborate on the etching results of zirconia. Titanium is used in many industries and
is not uncommon to work with in fabrication and clean room facilities (albeit not anywhere near the
extent of silicon). Thus, it is easy to bring into most processes and use to test stability and possibility
of functionality of the structures. That being said, the main purpose is to test whether this recipe
can be used or modiﬁed to work on zirconia and create similar results.
4.2
Surface morphology of lapped zirconia
The following sections will cover the diﬀerent experiments done on the YSZ substrates. Upon im-
mediate inspection of the received 8YSZ samples, it was clear that the supposedly polished surfaces
were not very well polished. Even under day light illumination, a groovy pattern in one direction is
seen on both sides of all the samples. Not only is this cosmetically displeasing, but the grooves can
Page 38 of 73
==PAGE:42==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
also accumulate dirt and be an indication of a very rough surface, both things making the substrates
inapplicable for the clean room. to verify this, one of the sample plates were inspected with SEM,
as well as an optical proﬁler system available at the clean room basement labs. The results of this
inspection is imaged in ﬁgure 25, showing a low- and high magniﬁcation SEM image, as well as a
surface measurement using the optical proﬁler. From the SEM images, it is clear to see that there
are both high roughness and a tendency of these lines also visible with the naked eye. However, it is
hard to say anything about the depth and width of these lines. There are also traces of what looks
like dislodged material and particles in both above- and sub-micron size. Using the Optical proﬁler,
a more quantitative inspection of the surface can be done. As the Optical Proﬁler generates an image
from detecting reﬂected light oﬀthe surface, it is diﬃcult to get a uniform and full image of a surface
with high roughness and deep grooves. The image generated has a lot of grey areas, these means
that no signal was detected. From the looks of it, and comparing to the SEM image, it seems that it
is a combination of large, rough structures on the tops and bottoms of the grooves could scatter the
reﬂection, as well as light being captured or scattered in-between groves, not allowing for the detector
to capture it.
Figure 25: a) + b) SEM images of the yttria stabilised zirconia as received from the manufacturer. c)
Collected data from a surface scan using the Filmetrics optical proﬁler. By inspection of the surface,
large grooves in one direction were visible on all the plates. SEM images conﬁrmed this, as well as
generally very rough surfaces. The optical proﬁler gave an indication of the magnitude of the grooves.
The grey areas on the image are areas where no light was reﬂected from, and thus indicating deeper
groves than measured by the system.
Page 39 of 73
==PAGE:43==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 26: Line scans measuring the proﬁle and roughness of the lapped zirconia plates. The long-
range, low-resolution image indicates that the plate is slightly bent. But as the top and bottom
only diﬀers with 400 nm over the span of 5 mm it is negligible. The short-range, high-resolution
measurement shows that the roughness on a local scale is below 50 nm.
Despite the proﬁling image being incomplete, enough information is gathered to conclude, that the
surfaces are too rough to bring into the clean room. The grooves can easily capture particles which
would be released inside machine of the clean room, and deposition techniques would not be able to
fabricate smooth layers.
As zirconia is a very strong material, normal sandpapering is not possible.
Due to clean room
regulations, it is not possible to have zirconia lapped on their machinery either. Instead, a third-
party company was brought into consideration, ﬁnding a candidate with the right diamond tools to
have the surfaces lapped smooth and ﬁne. The workshop from the Electrotechnology department at
DTU helped ﬁnding a suitable company to have all the zirconia plates lapped to a suﬃcient surface
ﬂatness. One sample was sent for immediate lapping so it could be measured and approved. A single
plate (of 50x50x1 mm3) can be diced into 25 sample substrates, so a lot of tests can be done even
with this single piece while waiting for the rest of the plates to be prepared. To inspect the surfaces
after lapping, a stylus proﬁler (Dektak 150 from Veeko) was used. Scans in both directions of the
surface were done to ensure that the surface did not have any irregularities in either orientation.
Scans of higher and lower resolutions were made to get an overview of the surface and simultaneously
determine the roughness on the micron-scale, which the fabrication will be done. The resolution of
the stylus proﬁler depends on the scan range. Since it works by pulling a tip over the surface, sharp
edges can be blurred, and narrow, deep cavities can be misinterpreted as triangular or less deep.
Examples of high- and low resolution measurements are shown in ﬁgure 26. What ﬁrst comes to
mind is the large bent measured over the surface on the long-range measurement. While it looks like
a lot, the reason is the scaling of the axes. The measured height diﬀerence of the plate is only 400
nm over the range of 5 mm. This is less than a hundredth of 1 % tilt, and thus does not matter
a lot. It is also suspected that the tilt could have been induced either during the fabrication of the
plate or caused by the mechanical ﬁxing of the plate during measurement. Regardless, the amount is
negligible, and does not factor into the experimental matter of the project. The short-range scan is
done with much higher resolution. Here, the height proﬁle indicates less than 50 nm variation over
500 µm. Depending on the scale and size of particles, this is almost negligible as well. As mentioned
previously, bacteria are on the µm scale, thus it is desired to make structures in that range. That
would mean, that the roughness accounts for less than 5 % of the structures size, assuming they are
fabricated to be ≈1 µm tall. For initial testing of this fabrication process, that is a small margin
of error. Realistically, getting much more ﬂat surfaces is diﬃcult (and expensive), thus doing so will
only be considered if determined necessary after etching experiments. The line-scan indicates a few
grooves of 20 - 30 nm on the surface, and otherwise only some roughness at one-digit nanometer scale.
This is a vast improvement to the grooves measured previously, as they were (to what the system
Page 40 of 73
==PAGE:44==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
was capable of) recorded to be around 10 µm deep.
To verify the structural changes and surface ﬂatness, the proﬁling was supplemented with SEM images
of the lapped surface. A close up and overview image is shown in ﬁgure 27. The overview shows
black spots, a few dents, and slim lines in all directions. The square-like bright area in the centre is
an artefact created by SEM due to the (insulating) surface charging up, as electrons of the SEM are
bombarding it. This charge phenomenon is a general problem imaging insulating surfaces in vacuum,
but a few tricks (varying the pressure, covering the surface in conductive material etc.) can be used
to avoid it, but does not alter the surface or the results of the processing of it.
The lines are, unlike before, now in several random directions. While the surface looks glossy by
the naked eye, these lines are clearly visible at high magniﬁcation. The lines are probably caused
by the particles present in the slurry used for lapping the surface. The depth and width correspond
to the size of which you would expect small diamond powder to be present in a polish plate for
ﬁne polishing. The small dents seen are probably small particles dislodged from the surface during
lapping or fabrication. Lastly, the black spots. Whether it consists of an alloy, a heavy material
or something conductive is hard to tell, but it is not made of the same material as the rest of the
substrate. Manufacturing plates like this is usually done by pressing a powder, consisting of the
mixture in the concentration designated for the ﬁnal product. That means that there can be a few
percentages of foreign particles and/or other stabilising materials the ensure the production goes
smooth. The origin of these spots can be determined using a variety of diﬀerent detection methods,
such as XPS or EDS.
Figure 27: Surface inspection SEM images of the lapped YSZ surfaces. To the left, an overview of
the surface at low magniﬁcation. Black spots appears on the surface. Whether it is residue from the
lapping slurry or defects in the substrate is unknown. Structurally, the look identical to the rest of
the surface, indicating the were there before lapping. To the right, a close up of the surface. Clear
lines in all directions can be seen. These were likely created by the small particles used to lap the
surfaces.
Taking a closer look at the surface on ﬁgure 27 b), the size and width of the grooves becomes more
apparent. They ﬁt nicely with the measured roughness from the stylus proﬁler, with widths less than
100 nm and varying depths. How inﬂuential these grooves will be to the deposition step is uncertain,
but these surfaces are very ﬂat, and much easier to work with, compared to the titanium surfaces
used for the preliminary experiments. The black spots might cause diﬀerences or abruptness in the
uniformity of the surface structures or mask particles formed on the surface, but as they are so widely
spread, it is not expected to be a problem. The large area in between the black spots and the grooves
is suﬃcient to have uniform surface areas large enough to have structures form on the intended YSZ
surface to be analysed.
Page 41 of 73
==PAGE:45==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 28: 3 nm of gold evaporated on YSZ plates.
Several samples were made to conﬁrm the
consistency of the layer over multiple samples. The square in the left image is due to charging of
the sample. Unlike on Ti, the gold seems to form an amorphous structure. This is likely due to the
stability and chemistry of zirconia as it is oxidised.
4.3
Gold mask formation on zirconia
With the lapped surface examined in terms of roughness and structure, the underlying foundation
on which the gold will be deposited has been characterised and evaluated to be suﬃciently smooth.
The next step is to deposit gold on top and understand the diﬀerent parameters inﬂuence on the
dewetting and agglomeration of the gold on top of the zirconia surfaces.
Following the work on
titanium, a ﬁlm of 3 nm of gold is deposited. To test a range of thicknesses, another deposition of 6
and 9 nm gold is done as well. For the 3 nm gold, the results are imaged by SEM and shown in ﬁgure
28. Unlike titanium, the gold here is forming an amorphous layer, covering the surface evenly. The
smoothness/topography of the gold is not very good compared to that of titanium. Comparing to
ﬁgure 18, where the gold was almost an invisible coating covering everything, the distinct pattern and
grainy structure makes it clearly visible here. The grains and patterns are a result of the deposition
creating a ﬁlm with a lot of internal stress and the vapour not being atomically homogeneous. This
is not at all an unfamiliar result, as several studies and most people working with silicon in the
clean room are aware that thin ﬁlms form a similar pattern when depositing gold on Si [71][72], also
from DTU [73], where the focus was to modify the layer chemically to become smooth. The higher
resolution image of ﬁgure 28, indicates that the gold layer is uniformly covering any grooves and edges
caused by the lapping. There are a few, small particles present. Whether these are contamination
from the gold evaporation process or were there previously but were not visible due to low resolution
of the charging YSZ surface is uncertain, but their presence is very limited and thus does not impact
the surface substantially.
Following this, the 9 nm gold layer was imaged. A representation of this is shown in ﬁgure 29 a),
contrastingly distorted by a charged-up area in the centre. The ﬁgure also shows an image of a 20 nm
thick gold ﬁlm deposited later in the project. Comparing to the 3 nm sample, the gold covers more
of the surface, and there are fewer and smaller cracks. The structure from the lapping is still visible,
indicating the deposition is smooth and even in thickness, even over the rough surface morphology
at increased ﬁlm thicknesses.
Exactly this, is the next thing tested in the process.
As mentioned previously, structures on a
similar scale as bacteria are sought for. To get this, and assuming intrinsic etching, The particles
would need to be at least a few hundred nanometer in diameter, and, depending on the desired
density, something similar in spacing in between. The previously fabricated structures on titanium
were less than 100 nm tall. Theoretically these are too small to puncture or rupture some bacteria,
at least following theoretical simulations done on similar nanopillars [13], but they can still show
antibacterial properties working through one of the other mechanism described in section 2.1. Seen
from the titanium, stability issues happen when heating the substrate at too high temperatures, and
Page 42 of 73
==PAGE:46==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 29: High resolution SEM images of 9 and 20 nm gold respectively, e-beam evaporated on
lapped YSZ substrates. The square in the center is due to charge-up on the surface. The structure
and uniformity of the gold is very similar despite one layer being twice as thick as the other. From
this, it seems that a much thicker layer will not complete the gold coverage. The 20 nm sample was
made later in the process after annealing experiments.
the gold does not agglomerate into round particles if the layer is too thick.
Taken from the results of the initial test and the available deposited gold layers, 3 diﬀerent thicknesses
were annealed at three diﬀerent temperatures. The 3, 6, and 9 nm at 400, 500 and 600 ℃respectively,
testing a total of 9 diﬀerent parameter sets.
Ideally, the largest possible particles at the lowest
necessary temperature should be used. Despite YSZ being theoretically stable at high temperatures,
heating up the manufactured substrates might introduce errors. The test was done with 2 samples of
each parameter combination, giving a total of 9 combinations and 18 samples to be annealed. Images
of each of them can be seen in ﬁgure 30, showing high-resolution SEM-images of all the patterns seen
over the diﬀerent parameters tested. Each images have the gold thickness and anneal temperature
stated on them. Interestingly, and as expected, the thin ﬁlm made of 3 nm gold dewets entirely and
accumulates into round shapes at 400 ℃, where it is only partially accumulated for 6 and almost not
at all for 9 nm. In fact, only at 600 ℃the 6 and 9 nm thin ﬁlms agglomerates into the round-shaped
particles desired to use as a mask. The forms and shapes are not perfectly spherical looking from
above, and the size also varies a lot. From a few of the images, it is noticed that the gold tends to
form smaller, aligned particles near and inside the grooves created by the surface lapping. This is
not a major concern, as the particles around the ﬂat areas seem homogeneously distributed in size
and position but can deviate measurements of average size towards a smaller mean. More images of
this phenomenon is shown in appendix A.1.
Following an extensive study done on agglomeration of gold particles on silicon-based substrates [43],
it is known that increasing the temperature on the gold should allow for stronger dewetting eﬀect.
This even more so, when heated up to temperatures above the melting point of gold. Unfortunately,
the clean room does not have equipment for temperature treatment above 1000 ℃. Based on results
of the thin ﬁlms on the zirconia, where it seems as the substrate is stable at higher temperatures and
gold particles forms nicely, higher temperatures for the annealing processes was tested. Along with
that, an increase in the ﬁlm thickness was also conducted. This was done to explore the potential
for even larger gold particles, which can increase the potential size of the post-etch structures. The
thickest layer done was a gold ﬁlm of 20 nm. The deposited layer is seen in ﬁgure 29 b). While
looking a denser, it structurally looks similar to the 9 nm ﬁlm. This is a positive at this point, as
we know it indicates both a homogeneous layer, it works for dewetting purposes and that it is the
expected result of depositing gold on such substrates. As the Jipelec in the clean room can go up to
1000 ℃, this is an upper limit for the annealing. This test directly indicates whether the substrates
are stable at those temperatures, setting a (practical) boundary for the annealing temperature for
this part of the process.
Page 43 of 73
==PAGE:47==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 30: Annealing results of diﬀerent gold thicknesses at diﬀerent temperatures. At 400 ℃the 3
nm gold forms round particles, while the 6 and 9 nm only underwent partial dewetting and is still
covering the surface in a more condensed pattern as the untreated gold thin ﬁlm. For the 6 and 9
nm, 600 ℃is required to form round particles. These are also a lot bigger than the 3 nm ones.
A set of samples were coated with 10 nm of gold. In sets of 3, they were then annealed to tem-
peratures from 700 to 1000 ℃in steps of 100, giving a total of 12 samples and 4 diﬀerent sets of
parameters. The outcome was very uniform over the diﬀerent samples annealed at same conditions.
The outcome is depicted in ﬁgure 31, showing one SEM image of each set of parameters tested. Unlike
the previous test, all the gold has dewetted, and isolated nano particles have formed. For the three
lowest temperatures, the gold particles look more faceted and cylindrical, where at 1000 ℃it seems
that the gold have formed spherical particles. This could indicate that the gold has been heated up
to or above the melting point, allowing it to dewet entirely and form shapes depending on the contact
angle between the two materials. This is clearly seen on tilted images of the gold particles, depicted
in ﬁgure 32. Here the shape of gold particles heated up to a high temperature (but still in the solid
face) versus gold particles formed closer to the melting point is clearly diﬀerent. The particles formed
at 800 ℃are more cylindrical, being ﬂat in the top and bottom, while the 1000 ℃treated ones are
more spherical in form. The sizes are roughly the same. The surfaces of the zirconia look very rough,
but this is because these samples were immersed in HF for an etching test before used to get these
tilted SEM images. Thus, these are not images qualiﬁed to verify the surface stability of YSZ at
high temperatures and are merely here to show the dimensions of the formed particles. From the
perspective of using the gold particles as a mask, the cylindrical particles are more useful. They have
a larger coating of the surface relative to their size, and theoretically should mask the underlying
substrate better and longer during etching. In comparison, the particles are also much larger than
for the gold ﬁlms of 3 nm, with several of them being larger than 200 nm (is easily distinguished from
the scale bar). This is nearing the size of which would be ideal for nanostructures of comparable size
to bacteria.
Page 44 of 73
==PAGE:48==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 31: Thin ﬁlms of 10 nm Au deposited on the YSZ substrates and annealed for 3 minutes at
diﬀerent temperatures. The parameters for each sample are noted on the images. There is a tendency
for the gold particles to become larger and more spaced out as temperature increases. At 1000 ℃,
the particles are almost spherical. The particles are following the expected tendencies seen in [43].
Regarding surface stability the surface, it is hard to say what eﬀect this heat and cool down has had
on the substrates based on the SEM images. For the 700 and 800 ℃it seems like the surfaces are
unchanged and that only the gold has been aﬀected by the temperature changes. For the samples
heated to 900 and 1000 ℃, it comes across as if there has started to develop smaller grains on the
surface. This is a typical phenomenon seen and utilised in metallurgy industry, when e.g., steel is
heat treated to modify and improve ductility and strength for diﬀerent uses. Whether the surfaces
are damaged, or it is just an eﬀect of a melting process of some of the outer material in the YSZ
substrate is hard to conclude, but it should be considered that these temperatures might be too
warm for the substrate to be stable. At least on the surface, which is the most important part not
to aﬀect before etching. Detection with XRD and EDS could be used to determine surface content
and crystallography of the surface. This could help determining whether any changes have occurred
during annealing.
Analysis of particle size in the gold mask
Knowing the substrates can endure the high temperatures, and the gold forms nanoparticles even
at 10 nm, it is necessary to make a more thorough and quantitative measurements of the mask
formation. To do so, several gold thicknesses were deposited and annealed at diﬀerent temperatures.
Each sample is then imaged in the SEM, using the SE2 detector, which gives a high and uniform
contrast between the gold and the YSZ substrate. An imaging software can then be used to determine
the area of each particle, and an average diameter of each of them can then be calculated. Using
this method and collecting from multiple samples, an average distribution of particle size for each
Page 45 of 73
==PAGE:49==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 32: SEM images of the formed gold particles from a 10 nm gold thin ﬁlm annealed to 800 and
1000 ℃at a tilted view. The diﬀerence in shape is clearly seen, as the 800 ℃annealed are more ﬂat
and cylindrical while the ones formed by heating to 1000 ℃are spherical. The surfaces are rough
due to HF etching experiments of these samples before imaging.
Figure 33: Step-by-step visualisation of the image processing done with ImageJ (software) to deter-
mine the particle size distribution. 1), SEM image taken with the SE2 detector for optimal contrast
between gold and zirconia. 2) A grey-scale threshold is used to remove anything darker than a colour
ﬁtting with the particles. The image is trimmed from the legend and down. 3) A built in particle
size function is used. A minimum size and roundness ﬁlter is used to remove all the noise captured
on the surface. Particles on the edge are also removed to avoid misinterpreted sizes from particles
cut out.
combination of thin ﬁlm thickness and anneal temperatures can be determined. From this, a decision
on the optimal parameters for the gold ﬁlm fabrication step should be obtainable, referring to the
considerations regarding size and density of the nanostructures related to bacteria sizes.
To determine the size of the particles from the SEM images, the image software ImageJ (im-
agej.nih.gov) is used. This allows for easy contrast manipulation, grey-scale ﬁltering, and particle
area extraction by built in tools speciﬁcally made for analysing scientiﬁc data images. An example
of how the ImageJ software is used is shown in ﬁgure 33. First, a SEM image taken with the SE2
detector (for higher contrast) is opened in the software. The pixel size is given by the SEM software
when capturing the image, so this information is directly fed to ImageJ. Then, a grey-scale threshold
is implemented to remove the background and only have the particles left. Notice here that this is
not perfect, as some of the particles have a bit of their area removed, and there are traces of noise
from the surface as well. For the last image, a particle analyser function in the software is used. Here,
minimum size and roundness requirements can be used to ﬁlter away noise in the form of incorrect
shapes and too small structure (like single-pixel dots). Furthermore, the particles on the edge of
the image are not counted in, as they would be measured as incorrect sizes. Since the software has
been calibrated for the pixel size of the image, the last step also directly calculates and writes out a
list of the particles and their area. Assuming the particles are cylindrical, using simple geometrical
assumptions between area and diameter of a circle, the size of the particles measured in diameter is
obtained. Doing this for a few samples of each set of parameters tested for the gold mask fabrication,
Page 46 of 73
==PAGE:50==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 34: Distributions of measured diameters (nm) of Au particles fabricated from a thin ﬁlm of
12 nm Au at 3 diﬀerent temperatures. The measurements show that the average and dispersion of
the diameter decreases when annealing temperature is raised. The histogram shows the number of
particles in separate intervals. The trend lines also shows a peak-shift towards smaller particles at
higher temperatures.
a comparison of diﬀerent annealing temperatures and thin ﬁlm thicknesses and their resulting particle
size in the formed mask can be done.
Samples from 3 to 18 nm gold thin ﬁlm in steps of 3 nm were made. For the thinner ﬁlms, only two
temperatures were tested, but for 12 to 18, 800, 900, and 1000 ℃were tested for each of them, similar
to the results shown in ﬁgure 31. A total of 3 samples were analysed for each set of parameters to
ensure consistency of results over multiple samples, and to be able to recognise a trend, if 1 sample
had behaved abnormally.
(If 1 is odd and 2 are identical, it is likely that the two indicates the
tendency). This gives a total of 27 tests at high temperatures and 18 tests at low temperatures. A
random area was then selected on each sample to produce an image similar to how the post-processed
SEM image looks in step 3 of ﬁgure 33, and the data for the area of the particles was extracted and
combined into a ﬁle with all the calculated diameters from each sample image. This will give a larger
population of particles to determine an average distribution of the resulting size after fabricating the
masks under diﬀerent conditions. More images could have easily been used, but this amount was
deemed suﬃcient to draw initial conclusions on the average size and distribution of the diameter.
A sample of the gathered data is presented in ﬁgure 34, showing the measured diameters of the gold
particles fabricated from a thin ﬁlm of 12 nm and annealed at diﬀerent, high temperatures. The box
plots shows that the distribution of size decreases as well as the average diameter of the particles
as temperature is raised. This is consistent with previous results on thinner gold ﬁlms as well as
the titanium - but now inspected in quantiﬁed matter. From this data, it becomes apparent that
the particles are approximately 200 nm on average. It is also seen that there are particles from the
size of around 100 nm all the way up to above 400 nm. Ideally, it would be more consistent and
less scattered. Looking at ﬁgure 33, the particles are seen to vary a lot in size, and it seems as the
grooves are making smaller particles accumulate within as mentioned previously. With more smooth
surfaces, it is expected that the distribution of particle diameters would be less scattered. While the
particle size becomes smaller at higher temperatures, it is by less than 10 %. Thus, it seems like, as
long as the gold particles dewets into localised islands, increasing the temperature does not change
the size signiﬁcant, and since it might damage the YSZ substrates, it should be avoided to increase
it as well.
The upper limit tested is gold ﬁlms deposited to be 18 nm thick. When annealed at 800 ℃, it does
not agglomerate into cylindrical particles. Instead, elongated and aberrant shapes are forming. At
900 ℃the problem is still apparent, and the particle distribution is varying a lot, with cluster-like
accumulation of the particles. With this in mind, as well as the previous remarks about the YSZ
surface appearing roughened after annealing at temperatures higher than 800 ℃and the size should
ideally be in the high end of nano-meter scale, using 18 nm might be a bit too thick to keep everything
as intended.
Whilst data was gathered for several temperatures for each thin ﬁlm thickness, presenting everything
(especially together) can look like a big mess. Instead, as seen in ﬁgure 36, a set of measured distribu-
Page 47 of 73
==PAGE:51==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 35: Images of 18 nm gold, annealed at 2 diﬀerent temperatures. At these temperatures the
gold does not accumulate entirely into local islands. Instead, some elongated particles are present on
the surface. They appear to be much larger than the particles made by annealing the 12 nm ﬁlm, as
seen in table 2.
tions of diameters for each gold thin-ﬁlm thickness is plotted together for comparison. In contrast to
the temperature comparison, changing the ﬁlm thickness makes a large diﬀerence to the ﬁnal particle
size. This makes good sense, as more material will result in larger islands when accumulated, while
higher temperature allows for increased localisation of the same amount of material. For gold ﬁlms
of 3 nm, the particles are all smaller than 50 nm. Compared to titanium, this was the thickest layer
possible to dewet entirely due to the heat stability of titanium. Here, it is seen that zirconia can with-
stand larger temperatures and thus allow for agglomeration of particles 10 times larger. The particle
size increases rapidly, but as seen the shape is not entirely round (or cylindrical) when increasing
the gold layer. Even for the 15 and 18 nm gold layer, small particles around 150 nm in diameter are
present. As seen previously, smaller particles are found around the surface, sometimes in grooves and
closer to larger particles. It is possible that, after longer process duration, gold ﬂoat around on the
surface and some of the islands impinges and combine.
The box plots represent the average, median, middle 50 % of the particles and the total range of size
in the particle distribution. Due to the nature of the large distribution of particle size, it is hard to
state a single value for the diameter connected to the parameters for the mask fabrication. Instead,
using the box plots, a range consisting of 50 % of the measured diameters closest to the median
will be used to indicate fabrication results. The trend is clear that most of the measurements are
centred around the median, almost following a normal distribution (which can also be seen in the
histograms of ﬁgure 34). Stating the range consisting of the middle half of the measurements is also
a good indication of what can be expected to see from the gold agglomeration, and since the process
is not more controllable in terms of gold smoothness and anneal temperature, as well as the ﬂatness
of the underlying substrate. Keep in mind that, with surfaces not having these grooves, the smaller
particles accumulating there would probably not occur, and the average would shift up in size.
The data of the analysis is combined in table 2. As the size of each image is known, the data can also
be used to estimate the number of particles per area, and thus an average covering/distance between
particles on the zirconia surfaces. The number of particles per area is not entirely correct. As the
edges are excluded in the consideration for particles, but not for the area, the number is a slight
under-estimation. Depending on the size, maybe a few percentages are excluded. In unit crystal
considerations, atoms on the edge of the crystal are partially counted (in halves, quarters etc.), but
here, as the particles on the edge are not identical, and are cut in diﬀerent ratios, they cannot just be
included partially. The error made is relatively small, albeit increasing for larger particles, but the
calculations are already broad estimations. As the objective is a comparison and not a precise value,
this error is negligible as the diﬀerent ﬁlm thicknesses results in very diﬀerent results.
Page 48 of 73
==PAGE:52==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 36: Box plots representing the particle diameter distribution (nm) after diﬀerent thin ﬁlm
thicknesses and annealing conditions. The parameters are described in the legend of the graph. The
temperature eﬀect on the particle diameter is less inﬂuential than the gold thickness. When the
temperature is suﬃciently high the dewetting eﬀect agglomerate particles in very diﬀerent sizes. The
distribution becomes more dispersed at thicker gold layers.
From the calculations of particle size and coverage in table 2, it is interesting to see how much the
number of particles per area changes as thickness increases. at 3 nm gold, the particles are smaller
than 20 nm on average and there are 1000 particles per square micron. For 9 nm it is down to roughly
20 particles per square micron but at the size of around 100 nm in diameter. The largest particles
created at 18 nm gold deposited, they agglomerate to around 400 to 450 nm on average. As seen in
ﬁgure 35, the 800 and 900 ℃samples did not form complete and round particles. Despite that, the
number of particles per area is roughly the same, implying that the particle formation has already
occurred at this point, and higher temperature only helps them accumulate further. From this, it
could be interesting to see if longer annealing temperature will allow for the particles to agglomerate
entirely and thus allow for larger, cylindrical/round particles.
From the results of the average diameters, the particle density and the surface condition post anneal-
ing, 12 nm gold annealed at 800 ℃will be used for the mask fabrication process. This decision was
reinforced after a meeting with the clean room responsible of the RTP Jipelec. Despite being able to
heat up to 1000, and even 1100 ℃, the system did not behave very well after being brought to 1000
℃. This led to a conclusion that it would be better to keep it lower, closer to 800 ℃. With another
system, it might be able to test even higher temperatures, but with how the gold shapes into spheres
instead of cylinders above the melting point, this might not even be desired. Longer annealing could
be a way to get better agglomeration, but as for now it is not necessary. With this settled, the next
and ﬁnal step is to analyse and optimise the wet etching process.
Page 49 of 73
==PAGE:53==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Table 2: Table of measured diameters for diﬀerent mask fabrication parameters. The number of
particles and measured areas are used to determine particle coverage per area. The optimal recipe is
highlighted in bold.
Measured and calculated distributions of diameters and density of particles
Parameters
Median (nm)
Range (nm)
Particles
Area
(µm2)
Particles per
area (µm−2)
3 nm 300 ℃
16
11 - 21
8878
12
740
3 nm 600 ℃
17
21 - 23
12616
12
1050
6 nm 300 ℃
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
6 nm 600 ℃
61
46 - 78
747
12
62
9 nm 600 ℃
107
72 - 147
980
48
20
9 nm 1000 ℃
94
69 -120
764
48
16
12 nm 800 ℃
221
181 - 259
1053
280
3.7
12 nm 900 ℃
214
180 - 250
1028
280
3.7
12 nm 1000 ℃
192
159 - 219
1059
280
3.8
15 nm 800 ℃
344
293 - 403
358
280
1.3
15 nm 900 ℃
336
285 -386
339
280
1.2
15 nm 1000 ℃
307
250 -360
298
280
1.1
18 nm 800 ℃
474
388 -550
154
280
0.55
18 nm 900 ℃
465
390 - 569
146
280
0.52
18 nm 1000 ℃
397
312 -454
158
280
0.56
4.4
Etching YSZ substrates for nanostructuring surfaces
As described in section 2.2.4 and discussed previously about the structure and stability of zirconia, it
is known that there are contradictory results to whether zirconia can be etched in HF due to the high
crystalline phase content [39]. Despite these claims, several studies have shown that zirconium oxide
can be etched by HF [19], albeit very slow (few ˚A/min). This is much slower than the experimental
results of titanium, showing structures of almost 100 nm to form after a few minutes.
To establish an initial idea of how the etching proceeds, a simple test is performed immersing a YSZ
sample into a solution identical the one used for titanium substrates for a couple minutes.
This
will give an indication of how fast the etching elapses and whether the solution ratio is suﬃcient
to fabricate nanostructures.
The titanium etch contained Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), which was
supposedly helping to oxidise the surface, making it less stable and increasing the selectivity/etch
rate through the exposed titanium. For this reason, since zirconia is already in a stable, oxidised
state, it probably does not make any sense to add. Since the solution is easily mixed, it will be
tried regardless, meaning the ﬁrst etch test will be the same HF:H2O ratio as the titanium etching
solution (1:7), having one with and another without H2O2 in the solution.
For the one without
H2O2, it corresponds to a 5 % HF solution. YSZ samples with deposited gold mask were etched for
4 minutes. This will give indications on how identical etch experiments aﬀect the zirconia compared
to titanium. After etching the samples, they are cleaned and brought to the SEM for visualisation.
The result of the etching is seen in ﬁgure 37, where an unetched reference, and two samples etched
for 4 minutes with and without H2O2 respectively are imaged. The sample had a gold mask on top
made by annealing 10 nm gold at 800 ℃. (This was used as these samples were already in the clean
room ready to be etched). The etching results show that not much have happened, and that there
are no clear diﬀerences between the two etch solutions.
This might be because the solution was too weak to have any signiﬁcant eﬀect regardless of the H2O2
content, but also there are no scientiﬁc support that it should help. The gold seems to have stayed on
top despite being in the etchant as well as water bath and blow dried. This is a good sign, showing
the stability of the mask used. the etching is isotropic seems questionable, as it more looks like that
it dislodges material on top and around presumed grain boundaries. The eﬀect seems very little and
almost no etching has happened compared to on titanium. From this experiment, it is decided to
leave out the hydrogen peroxide. It can be added again if a solution or duration is found to get more
prominent etching, and thus see if it makes any diﬀerence. Another important factor is that mixing
Page 50 of 73
==PAGE:54==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
HF and H2O2 is not something easily available in the clean room. If the solution is more concentrated,
they might react violently, and it is generally prohibited in the clean room. Thus, depending on the
necessary concentration of HF to etch zirconia, it might not even be an option to add the H2O2 to it.
Figure 37: Results of an initial etch test of the zirconia substrates. 1) Untreated for reference. 2)
Etched in a solution of 2:1:14 of HF(40 %):H2O2:H2O for 4 minutes. 3) Etched in a solution of 1:7
of HF(40 %):H2O for 4 minutes. Both of the etched samples seems unaﬀected by the etchant, only
slightly roughened on the surface.
Following these results, as well as other tendencies from similar experiments, it is tried to both
increase the solution ratio and the etch duration. At ﬁrst, increasing the HF content to a solution
of 20 % and 40 %. The latter being the purest concentration available in the clean room, thus not
diluting it. The etching was done on unmasked samples to get an overview of how the etchant behaves
and deconstructs the surface. The results of a 4 minute etch with both proposed solutions is depicted
in ﬁgure 38, showing a non-treated surface, a surface etched for 4 minutes in 20 % HF and a surface
etched for 4 minutes in 40 % HF. The surface looks more roughened using the strong solutions, but
the etch rate is still very low and structuring is not occurring at all. From the visible grooves still
present, it indicates that only a few nm, if any, has been etched oﬀthe surface. Instead, it seems
like inter-granular etching is causing cracks and variation to the surface morphology. With the 40 %
HF etching, crystal precipitate starts to appear on the surface. Some of these are highlighted with
red arrows on the image. Whether these are on top of the surface or grains within the morphology
is hard to tell from these images, but after closer visual inspection, it becomes apparent that these
crystals are octahedral in shape. Similar crystals have been reported to form after etching YSZ with
HF [58], where studies done with XPS and EDS revealed that the octahedral particles found on
their samples consisted of yttrium and ﬂuorine and responded with crystallic bonds corresponding
to yttrium triﬂuoride (YF3) which were precipitating on their surfaces. While being an undesired
by-product of the etching, it is aﬃrming to see that similar results have been reported from other
experiments and that it can be explained from the participating materials in the process.
Figure 38: Comparative results of 4 minutes etching on non-masked YSZ plates. Compared to the
untreated sample (1), both the one etched in 20 % and 40 % HF for 4 minutes have visible roughening
of the surface. It is clear from the present grooves that the etching has not gone very deep. for the
40 % etching, crystals start to form on the surface. Some of them are highlighted with red arrows.
Apart the occurrence of the octahedrally shaped particles, the etching is still very insigniﬁcant. Since
the particles only showed up on the 40 % HF etched sample, it is desirable to analyse whether the
Page 51 of 73
==PAGE:55==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
particles form only in higher concentrations of HF. The next etch is done with both 20 and 40 %
again, but now increase in the etch duration incrementally.
To ensure continuous etching of the
samples, a substrate etched for a given duration is done uninterruptedly, meaning that for each etch
duration a sample will be used. At ﬁrst, a solution of HF at 20 % was used to etch diﬀerent samples
for diﬀerent duration. The results of etching the YSZ substrates with a gold mask (made of 12 nm
gold annealed for 800 ℃) for 10, 40 and 120 minutes are shown in ﬁgure 39.
At ﬁrst glance it is seen that the gold mask is staying on through the entire process. Even after being
immersed in a strong acid for 120 minutes, forming the surface underneath and dissolving material
diﬀusing around the solution, the gold seems to be placed and distributed on the surface identical
to how it was formed initially. The etching does not seem to behave isotropically. While it was
noticeable from the short duration etch, it becomes clearly visible here that the etching is not at all
isotropic and seems to attack areas around what is presumably an underlying grain structure. After
40 minutes, some holes are starting to form randomly and, unexpectedly, they seem to even occur
around and below the gold. After 2 hours, not only holes, but clear cavities and craters are visible.
It seems as if some of the surface consists of grains that have been ﬂattened by polishing, and thus
are still in a strong crystalline phase which is less respondent to the etching. This then leaves a
rough surface consisting of cracks and gaps in between ﬂat and unchanged surfaces. Some of the gold
particles also seem to have ”fallen down” into the holes below, albeit this being hard to conﬁrm from
a top-view. The last point is seen on image of the 120 min etch at lower resolution. Here, precipitate
have clearly formed on the surface, similar to the 4 min etch in 40 % HF. This indicates that is it
not about the etching potency, but more about how much etching has elapsed. The surface here is
much rougher than the samples presented in ﬁgure 38, and correspondingly, more of the particles
have formed They are larger as well, about 1 µm wide.
Figure 39: Low- and high magniﬁcation images of YSZ surfaces covered with a gold mask and etched
with 20 % HF for diﬀerent duration. Etching was done for 10, 40 and 120 minutes. Gold mask was
made of 12 nm gold annealed at 800 ℃. Despite very long etching times (compared to titanium) it
still only roughens the surface. The gold mask seems unaﬀected by the etching indicating it works as
intended.
Since the (assumed) YF3 emerges on the surface regardless of HF ratio, an attempt to increase the
etch results by doubling etch time for the 20 % HF solution (to 4 hours) as well as trying to etch
samples with a 40 % HF solution for 40 minutes. Despite the particles precipitate on the surface, there
is a potential that longer and stronger etching can provide structures or depths large enough to have
sub-micron scale features in the zirconia, as intended. This was examined and is depicted in ﬁgure
40. Unfortunately following the same trend of non-intrinsic, random etching, the surfaces of both
Page 52 of 73
==PAGE:56==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
samples have these grain-boundary like structures exposed by the etching, while material deteriorate
around it and leaves for deeper holes both around and underneath the gold mask. Especially for the
sample etched for 4 hours, the structuring seems to go very deep and forming a lot of octahedral
particles. At this point, the etching is so deep and random, that there cannot be talked about any
”masking eﬀect” from the gold particles. The fact that they stay on shows good stability and proved
insight in the ability of gold to be used as an adhesive layer on top of the YSZ substrate. If the
solution was agitated, it is possible that the gold would fall oﬀentirely after some time, no longer
sitting on the surface.
Figure 40: Images of long etch experiments with 20 and 40 % HF solutions. 20 minutes for the 40 %
and 4 hours for the 20 %. As seen, the particle precipitate forming on the surface are approximately
the same size for both etch experiments, making it seem like they ”stabilise” around 1 µm3 in size.
But there are way more of them on the 4 hour etched substrate. It corresponds with the amount of
material etched, indicating that more mass loss results in more of the particles to form.
As mentioned, a study suggested etching rates in the ˚A/min range for HF solutions [19]. The solution
used in that study was a lot weaker (1 % HF). From the results, having the surface somewhat still
present after etching for up to 240 minutes, it seems that the etch rate is in the same order of
magnitude on stable YSZ crystals.
If the etching is in the ˚A/min range, it is still usable to do
nanostructuring of the YSZ surface, as the etching time can just be increased. The challenge here
is the non-intrinsic etching. Since large, uncontrolled cavities are formed randomly, it is impossible
to have pillars or pyramids fabricated in a controlled matter.
Whether the etching is deep and
underneath the gold is easier to see from a tilted view of the etched surfaces. Figure 41 shows four
surfaces of diﬀerent etch experiments and how the etching after a short time (10 min in 20 % HF) have
achieved nano-scale roughness and what seems to be untouched surface at the gold positions, and
after longer etching, most of the gold starts to move around and dislodge from the surface as material
etch away from underneath, diminishing the masking eﬀect. Neither of the tests shows tendencies of
Page 53 of 73
==PAGE:57==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
homogeneous or isotropic etching, and instead the surface just seems to be randomly roughened. At
extended etching duration, the formation of octahedral particles has extended to a point where it is
no longer possible to characterise the underlying surface structures.
Figure 41: Inspection of some of the diﬀerently etched surfaces from a tilted view. While a top-view
shows clear pores and grooves on the surface, tilted images gives a better understanding of how the
surface is textured around and underneath the gold. Inspection shows the gold moves around when
suﬃcient material has been removed underneath. Etch times and solutions are stated on each image.
Removal of etching precipitate
Despite the YSZ substrate etching uncontrollably, the roughened surface might still show capabilities
of antimicrobial eﬃcacy. To utilise this, it is necessary to be able to remove the octahedral (YF3)
particles accumulating on the surface. The gold is already removed easily by etching it in KI etchant
and is part of the proposed process for both the titanium and zirconia fabrication. The same study
that discovered and reported the presence of the octahedral YF3 particles post-etching of the YSZ
surfaces, also reported that they successfully removed them again.
This was done by clean the
samples for 5 minutes in an ultrasonic bath with a surface-tension reducing agent and DI water. The
available agent at the clean room is a diluted Triton X-100 soap. Some of the samples etched for the
longest duration are brought into an ultrasonic bath containing DI water and Triton x-100 soap for
30 minutes to try to remove the accumulated particles from the surface.
Page 54 of 73
==PAGE:58==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 42: Before and after images of the post-process cleaning done to remove the octahedrally
shaped particles from the surface. Cleaning consisted of 30 minutes in an ultrasonic bath containing
Triton x-100 soap and DI water. Samples etched the most are used to visualise whether the cleaning
has any eﬀect. Despite most of the gold being removed from the surface, it does not seem to help
with the particles. They are either too strongly bonded or chemically attached to the surface.
The result of the cleaning can be seen in ﬁgure 42. Unlike the referred study, it did not seem to
have any visible or signiﬁcant eﬀect regarding removal of the particles. Although it seems that fewer
particles are present on the ﬁrst and second sample, it might have to do with the imaged area.
Compared to the study, where 5 minutes of cleaning removed all the particles, this did not have the
eﬀect - despite cleaning for 30 minutes in the sonicator. This indicates that, despite being identical
in form, that it might not be the same type of precipitation formed, or that it could be bonded to
the surface. Whether it is one or the other, doing an EDS measurement on the surface is probably a
good idea, to determine the products and surface morphology. Since the particles were not removed,
Page 55 of 73
==PAGE:59==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
it is also necessary to come up with a solution to ﬁnd a way to remove the particles.
It is not
allowed to put other agents or solvents in the ultrasonic bath in the clean room, thus repeating the
cleaning procedure used by the previous study (ethanol and acetone) needs to be done at a diﬀerent
ultrasonic bath. In comparison, Triton soap should work just as well, or even better, comparing the
used chemicals and their properties.
Figure 43: Higher resolution SEM images of the YSZ samples post-processing and post-cleaning.
Despite a few of the gold particles still present, most of them have washed oﬀ. The images unveil the
small to no eﬀect the gold particles have on resulting in non-etched areas to create surface morphology
and height diﬀerences between exposed and covered areas.
Taking a closer look on the cleaned samples, seen in ﬁgure 43, it also becomes more apparent what
insigniﬁcant eﬀect the gold has had as a mask for the etching process. Although there might be areas
resembling round shapes where gold could have been covering, the result is not an unaﬀected surface
underneath. Instead, it looks roughened, albeit a little less. Despite that, the fact that the surface
morphology is completely random and that some of the gold moves into the deep pits created, it gives
indications that while the gold particles are stable in the HF solution and stays on the surface, it
does not work as a mask for this purpose.
4.5
Processing single-crystal YSZ substrates
During the project, it was advised by representatives of the clean room to acquire high quality, single-
crystal YSZ substrates with low roughness (Ra < 0.5 nm). These are much more expensive, and the
quality is beyond what would be used for dental implants, as that would normally be manufactured
from a sintered powder. The advantage is a clear and visible surface, with high uniformity and no
grains at the top surface. Especially the lack of grains clustered at the surface is interesting, as
the etching seems to attack inter-granulary rather than isotropically. Having a single-crystal surface
would mean that no intergranular etching can occur and instead it would reveal the etch rate on a
single exposed facet. Since the crystal structure of zirconia is symmetric, the etching will be similar
in rate regardless of crystal orientation (unlike silicon). This diminishes the requirements to speciﬁc
crystal orientation, as long as it is single faceted.
For this experiment, 25x25x0.5 mm3 YSZ plates doped with 8-13 mol% yttria were obtained. The
crystal orientation is <100> (±0.5°) and are polished on one side to a surface roughness of Ra <
0.5 nm. Visually, they are semi-transparent from the polished side, where the other substrates were
completely opaque. Compared to the other substrates, these costs 10 times more for the same amount
of material. Images of the surface as obtained and after cleaning are seen in ﬁgure 44. Due to the
surface ﬂatness (and charge eﬀects) the SEM can barely catch any textures on the surface despite the
potential of very high resolution. It is apparent that these substrates are extremely smooth. Despite
the convincing results from imaging the surface, using an AFM or stylus proﬁler would be a good
idea to have the actual surface smoothness characterised.
Page 56 of 73
==PAGE:60==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 44: Before and after cleaning of the 8-13 mol% YSZ <100> samples. The smoothness of the
surface is clearly visible here. Compared to the other substrates, it is impossible to spot any surface
textures. The SEM images becomes more blurred due to charge eﬀects and no textures on the ﬂat
surface.
Figure 45: SEM images of 12 nm gold thin ﬁlm evaporated onto the 8-13 mol% YSZ <100> substrate
and the particles formed by annealing it at 800 ℃. The structure is similar to the ﬁlm formed on
the more rough substrates. The formed particles are more uniform in size, presumable due by the
ﬂatness of the substrate surface.
Following the same procedure as for the other substrates, a gold thin ﬁlm is evaporated on top, and
annealed to form particles to use as the etch mask. The result of the deposition and annealing is seen
in ﬁgure 45 and the distribution of measured particles (following the same method as described in
the previous section) is shown in the histogram of ﬁgure 46. Similar to the previous substrates, the
gold form this amorphous non-uniform layer with visible cracks and grooves in. since the underlying
substrate is so smooth the gold does not have any visible edges or changes in height following the
sample. This also changes the outcome of the gold islands formed by annealing. Where the previous
substrate had lines of smaller gold particles agglomerating in the grooves of the surface, this have a
more evenly distributed gold dewetting. The outcome of this is larger particles on average, as well
as a more uniform distribution. Compared to the rough 8YSZ substrate (see table 2), the particles
here have an average size of 270 nm, 50 % of the particles closest to the mean lies between 230 and
310 nm, and only half as many particles were formed (logically, as larger particles with same amount
of material means fewer, as well), to a total of 2.0 particles per µm2. The outcome of this is also
presented in ﬁgure 46. Almost resembling a normal distribution, particles are spread evenly around
250-280 nm in diameter. This behaviour was mentioned and predicted earlier, but the actual eﬀect
is larger than expected. This is a more desirable outcome of the particle size regarding the expected
Page 57 of 73
==PAGE:61==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
nanostructure size after an isotropic etch around the mask.
Although these are nice results, the
problem of the previous substrate was not the size of the mask particles, rather the YSZ substrate
not etching in a desirable pattern.
Figure 46: Histogram of the measured particles following the same analysis method described in the
previous section. There are fewer and larger particles, caused by the smooth surface allowing the
gold to agglomerate uninterruptedly.
The next step is to analyse the etching of the new YSZ substrates.
As mentioned, the crystal
orientation is <100>, meaning that the facet exposed should be consisting of equidistantly spaced
Zr and O atoms in a ratio 1:2, with approximately 10 % of the zirconium being substituted with
yttrium atoms. Following the previous experiments, the etching was done in a 20 % HF solution for
120 minutes. For comparison, both a sample with and without the gold mask were etched, as well
as two samples of the old substrate with and without the gold mask for reference. This should allow
for more precise parameter control, avoiding potential changes from slight deviations in the chemical
solution and speciﬁc etch duration (despite a few seconds probably should not matter too much as
they are etched for 7200 seconds). First, looking at the new, non-masked YSZ substrate. SEM images
at top-view and tilted view of the etched surface is presented in ﬁgure 47. At ﬁrst glance, it looks
like the surface has gotten very rough from the etching. At a low resolution, the entire surface seems
ﬁlled with grainy nanosctructures. At closer inspection, these structures seem to be small bead-like
shapes covering the surface in a variety of nanoscale sizes. After some navigation around the surface,
ﬂakes were found lying on top. These ﬂakes were merely a few microns thick and seemed really
smooth on the top and had this rough pattern underneath, similar to what was observed around on
the surface. The origin of these ﬂakes and the pattern is a mystery from the look of these images.
Luckily, by inspection of the surface covered in gold particles, the expected answer was revealed. The
new substrate etched with a gold mask on is imaged in ﬁgure 48. One image shows a cluster of ﬂakes.
Zooming in on one of them revealed that the top is covered in the gold mask formed, perfectly intact.
A few of the octahedrally shaped particles are seen here as well. From a tilted view, it becomes clear
that the roughened surface structure is a result of a top-layer ﬂaking oﬀ. The ﬂake shows the gold
perfectly intact on top, while on the backside shows this bead-covered surface with the nano sized
beads on.
Page 58 of 73
==PAGE:62==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 47: The YSZ <100> substrate surface after 2 hours of wet etching in a 20 % HF solution.
At ﬁrst glance it looks like the surface has gotten very rough. Upon further inspection, ﬂakes of the
initial surface was found, these ﬂakes were a few micron thick and seemed almost untouched on their
upper surface. The exposed surface have these pillar-like micro-beads on it.
The interesting result here is that it seems to not at all be able to etch the top surface. Instead,
the very top is peeling oﬀafter processing the samples. Whether this instability has been brought
into the substrates during some pre-processing, or it is solely a result of the etching is not clear.
But, more importantly, the solution used to etch had almost no eﬀect on the exposed surface. This
resembles the results seen on the previous substrates. The grains did not seem to dissolve in the
etchant, and only lose material surrounding the grain-like structure was removed through the etching
process. Similarly, this single-faceted surface seems almost unaﬀected by the etching. From the tilted
point of view, slight roughness can be seen between the gold. From the top-point, it looks just slight
aﬀected, with darker shadows in between the gold particles. Due to the conductivity and nature of
YSZ, it is hard to get much clearer images of the exposed surface area and covering it in even a few
nanometres of metal to increase the resolution will cover the surface of interest. The presence of the
two octahedral particles indicates that some etching must have happened, having ﬂuoride and yttria
to react. Whether this is a result of etching from the top surface, or instead some of the exposed,
more detached parts of the surface revealed after ﬂaking. It can also be that HF only reacted with the
yttria, releasing a perfect layer of the substrate surface since the yttria was chemically removed from
the crystal structure. It would be interesting to measure what the content of the exposed surface is.
It is also a possibility that the way the substrate is manufactured allows for layers to ﬂake oﬀmore
easily, maybe thin layers are pressed together during formation of the crystal structure or a single
crystal is grown as the last few micron on top.
Page 59 of 73
==PAGE:63==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 48: The YSZ <100> substrate surface with a gold mask after 2 hours of wet etching in a 20
% HF solution. The top images shows ﬂakes forming on the surface and a zoom in on the ﬂakes,
conﬁrming these are pieces of the surface with the gold on. The bottom images shows how the ﬂaking
disrupts the underlying surface, creating structures underneath. It is clear that almost no etching
has occurred on the initial surface before ﬂaking oﬀ.
Regardless of the surface ﬂaking, it is apparent that the etching is not working very well on this
substrate. The gold mask stayed unaﬀected, but the material around the gold particles is barely
etched, Thus, if the surface ﬂakes oﬀbefore any etching occurs, the substrate is not very usable
for this process. It might be a good surface to use for other fabrication techniques, such as dry
etching, laser ablation or simple sputtering. It would be interesting to study the surface content and
morphology both before and after etching, to analyse if it really is a cubic YSZ <100> surface and
what is exposed underneath the ﬂakes causing these grainy structures to occur.
4.6
Half-covered YSZ substrate for etch rate estimation
An attempt to quantify the etch rate as well as verifying that the etching is not in fact removing
several layers of material and the mask simply falls and reattaches to the newly exposed surface
(although highly unlikely) is done. For this experiment, half of the substrate surface is covered in a
continuous mask and the entire surface is then etched. Subsequently removing the mask should then
reveal a sharp edge between the etched and unetched surface, and this step should be measurable
through either visual inspection with a proﬁling measurement tool. As seen, gold does not form a
perfect mask in its amorphous state. Instead, two other masks were used. A 200 nm chromium mask
and a 2.2 µm photo-resist mask. The experiment was done on the 8YSZ substrates as these were the
only ones with somewhat understandable etching results and the top layer not peeling oﬀ.
Page 60 of 73
==PAGE:64==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
Figure 49: Visualisation of the edge-step etch test. The small marks across the surface is where the
edge of the mask was as some residue is still left on it. The right side had been exposed to the etching
solution for 15 minutes, while the left side had presumably only been exposed for a few seconds to
a minute. Due to how the mask dislodged, it is hard to know the exact time diﬀerence, but visually
there is no etching diﬀerence. This aligns with previous results, that etching is really slow and does
not remove multiple layers.
The chromium mask was fabricated by evaporating 200 nm chromium on substrates half covered in
Kapton tape. Covering half the area in Kapton tape before deposition and removing it after leaves half
the surface with a chromium thin-ﬁlm and half the surface being the pure uncovered YSZ substrate.
The Chromium thin ﬁlm should be stable in HF, similar to gold. The photoresist mask was a bit
more complicated to fabricate and required assistance from a Dan Chip employee. First step was to
bake the YSZ substrates and cover them in an HMDS (hexamethyldisilazane) monolayer. HMDS is
used as an adhesion promoter for photoresists. Best results are obtained by applying HMDS from the
gas phase on heated substrates, hence baking it while applying. The substrates were then ﬁxed to the
centre of a silicon wafer, this ensures that the substrates can be used with the spin-coater equipment
in the clean room. A 2.2 µm resist layer was then spin-coated on top of the substrates. Half of the
surface was then exposed to UV light at the Heidelberg MLA100 maskless aligner. This ensures that
the photoresist is polymerised and adhered to the surface. The substrates are then brought to the
TMAH developer to dissolve the unexposed resist and uncover that part of the surface. This results
in a photoresist mask covering half the surface. Due to the square shape of the sample substrates,
the corners had thicker layers of photoresist formed during spin-coating. This did not dissolve or
disappear during the development of the photoresist. It is not pertinent to the test, as the area of
interest is the step created between the masked and unmasked area at the centre of the sample. The
substrates are removed from the silicon wafers, and they are ready for etch tests. 3 substrates of each
mask are fabricated for the test.
It was advised that both masks would have limited lifetime in a high concentration HF etchant. Thus,
etching in 20 % HF would only allow for a few minutes to 10 minutes before the mask will dislodge.
Since neither will dissolve in HF, they will instead scale oﬀwhen suﬃcient etchant has diﬀused in
underneath the mask, creating a lift-oﬀeﬀect. Both types of masked substrates were immersed in
the 20 % HF solution for up to 20 minutes. For the photoresist mask, it seemed to be scaling oﬀ
after around 15 minutes. It fell oﬀin one piece, exposing the surface and required for the substrates
to be removed from the etchant and rinsed. The chromium masked substrates started to ﬂake after 5
minutes, revealing more and more of the surface. By the end, approximately half of the surface was
uncovered in the mask, mostly around the edge of the substrate, leaving the centre still covered. All
Page 61 of 73
==PAGE:65==
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
January 2, 2022
the substrates were cleaned from the mask residue and rinsed using the usual cleaning process before
being brought to the available measurement equipment.
Ideally, the step would be measured with the stylus proﬁler or an AFM. Unfortunately, those were not
available at the time, and the experiment was done with short time left of the project. Instead, they
were brought to the optical proﬁler and SEM for visual inspection. The optical proﬁler did not show
any visible results, as the etching was probably on a scale less than measurable by the equipment.
In the electron microscope, no visible eﬀect of the etching was seen either. Figure 49 shows the step
transition between the etched (right) and unetched (left) surface. The surface looks untouched and
unaltered on both sides. The etched side had presumably been in contact with the etching solution
for 5-10 minutes more than the opposite side, but it is not entirely known as the mask probably
dislodged slowly. for 15 minutes etching in 20 % HF, it seems clear that all the same structural
lines and surface defects are present on both sides, and there is no diﬀerence between the two sides.
This, along with all the previous measurements, helps conﬁrming that the etching is very slow and
there are not multiple layers etching oﬀthe surface as the process elapses. Instead, as previously
expected, it really seems that the etching only removes a few Angstroms, and due to intergranular
etching, it paths way underneath the gold mask and eventually creates grooves and holes randomly
distributed around the grains on the surface. This will either let the gold mask sit uninterruptedly,
have it move once enough material is removed underneath, or fall oﬀor displace when the formation
of these octahedral crystals previously observed occur underneath or around the gold particles.
Page 62 of 73
==PAGE:66==
5
CONCLUSION
January 2, 2022
5
Conclusion
Throughout the project, several experiments and processes were done to develop and optimise a
method to fabricate nanostructures on zirconia surfaces for dental implants with antimicrobial prop-
erties. The work had its point of origin in emerging needs for physical bactericidal mechanisms that
can eradicate bacteria without causing antibiotic resistance to develop. The initial fabrication pro-
cess followed previous work conducted at DTU, creating nanostructures on titanium using a gold
thin ﬁlm to form a mask and a chemical solution to isotropically etch around the mask and thus
create nanoscale cones on top. The work was conducted inside the clean room of DTU, where several
training sessions for each process are required. During these training sessions, the titanium fabri-
cation process was replicated. The outcome of this was not ideal but came out similar to some of
the earlier results produced with this process. The titanium surfaces were very rough and ﬁlled with
particles, making it hard to distinguish etch results from already uneven surface structures. Despite
that, small, and sharp features were successfully fabricated by etching titanium for 3 minutes (seen
in ﬁgure 23) in a solution containing 2:1:14 of HF(40 %):H2O2:H2O, the size was around 100 nm in
height and 10-50 nm in width. Compared to the previous results seen in ﬁgure 24, the structures
are a bit smaller than the largest structures formed, but still follows the same pattern, having high
aspect ratio and sharp tips.
For the zirconia, since it had not been worked with in the clean room previously, every process had to
be developed for this material. There were also long waiting times to receive the samples, have them
permitted for the clean room, get the surfaces to a suﬃcient quality, and have the necessary training
to bring them to each machine. This caused a lot of down time taking focus away from the intended
work of the project. The initial zirconia samples used were 8 mol% yttria stabilised zirconia. These are
typical ceramics used in the dental industry. Poor surface smoothness was discovered after inspection
upon arrival. The samples were successfully lapped and polished, which resulted in roughness in less
than 25 nm on a scale over hundredths of microns. This roughness, while not perfect, is suﬃcient for
the intended purpose of fabricating a gold mask followed by a chemical etch and inspecting the eﬀect
of the etching process.
The next step was to form gold particles to produce a mask that can facilitate nanostructures to form.
The bottleneck of the titanium was the low temperature stability when annealed. This was not a
problem with zirconia. It seemed stable up to 1000 ℃. Unfortunately, the annealing equipment at the
clean room (RTP Jipelec) did not behave properly at these temperatures, and instead was advised to
not go above 800 ℃. Following previous studies [53], gold was successfully annealed to temperatures
below and above the melting point of gold, agglomerating gold particles by dewetting processes in the
liquid and solid phase. solid phase particle agglomeration created cylindrical particles, while liquid
phase gave spherical shapes. The former is more feasible for the purpose of creating nanostructures,
as a higher contact area with the YSZ surface means better masking and thus larger structures can
be formed during isotropic etching. The cylindrical particles formed at temperatures below 1000
℃, aligning with the temperature limit of the equipment. In steps of 3 nm, thicker gold ﬁlms were
deposited and annealed at 800 ℃. 12 nm was the thickest ﬁlm where the gold agglomerated into
uniform, round cylinder shapes. The 12 nm gold ﬁlm gave particles with an average size of 220 nm
in diameter and a coverage of 3.7 particles per square micron. With this, assuming isotropic etching,
structures of hundredths of nanometer should form with half a micron distance on average. This
is ideal for the nano-cones/spikes desired to fabricate for bactericidal eﬀects, as the nanostructures
should be on the same scale as bacteria - which is around 1 micron
For the etching process, diﬀerent etch solutions, concentrations and etch times were analysed. At ﬁrst,
following the same procedure as titanium, a 2:1:14 of HF(40 %):H2O2:H2O was used for 4 minutes.
Barely any etching was observed, which led to a radical increase in solution concentration of the HF.
The H2O2 was used to oxidise the titanium during etching but had no eﬀect on the already oxidised
zirconia. It was then removed from the solution. the zirconia samples were instead etched in 20 %
and 40 % HF solutions for a range of time periods. Despite etching for up to 4 hours in 20% HF, no
etching results were observed as expected. Instead of isotropically etching the material, it seemed that
intergranular etching occurs, and a grainy structure of the surface was revealed. Despite the gold mask
staying on top during the processing, the etching happens at random places, including underneath
the gold. This is clearly seen in ﬁgure 39 and 40. Unfortunately, despite having positive results with
Page 63 of 73
==PAGE:67==
5
CONCLUSION
January 2, 2022
the mask, the etching elapses in a way that seems uncontrollable, thus making the mask ineﬀectual.
Despite that, the surface was still successfully etched. While not being controlled nanostructures,
the surface might still show antimicrobial eﬃcacy. It was intended to test reduction of bioﬁlm on
zirconia surfaces with fabricated nanostructures. But this was not accomplished. Instead, the same
test could be done on the intergranular etched surfaces, and it might still show positive results.
Octahedral particles were forming on the surface as the etching proceeded. From other studies it
was seen that these particles were identiﬁed as Yttrium triﬂuoride (YF3) [58]. In this study, they
successfully removed the particles by immersing the samples in a sonic bath for 5 minutes. Using
the clean room sonic bath and triton x-100 soap, it was attempted to remove them on the etched
samples as well. Despite sonicating for 30 minutes the particles were still present on the surface. This
is undesirable as the precipitate is an unwanted by-product of the reaction and should not be present
on the surface.
Single-crystal YSZ substrates with the <100> facet and 0.5 nm roughness was acquired to test of
these had better results. After following the same process, a lower dispersion and higher average
of the gold nanoparticle size were measured. This was expected, as the surfaces are smoother and
allows for more uniform gold agglomeration. After etching, the top layer ﬂaked oﬀand unveiled a
very rough, grainy surface with bead-like particles on top. Images of the ﬂakes with the gold mask
on top was acquired, conﬁrming that the top layer had peeled oﬀand left a disordered surface on
top. Whether the manufacturing or etching was the cause of this ﬂaking is unknown, but either of
the process steps were unﬁt with the single-crystal substrates.
Page 64 of 73
==PAGE:68==
6
OUTLOOK
January 2, 2022
6
Outlook
Despite the unsuccessful results of fabricating nanostructures on the YSZ substrates, there are many
things that can be analysed with a larger range of equipment and more time available. The mask
formation seemed to be understood entirely and aligns with the expected results for gold annealing
reported in the literature. To verify the stability of the YSZ substrates post annealing, it could be
interesting to do some mechanical strength tests and compound analysis such as EDS and XPS before
and after annealing to verify that the substrates do not change through this processing step. Since
the etching process left more questions than answers, there are several things to investigate. Firstly,
doing mass loss measurements and AFM probing can help to narrow down and specify how much of
the surfaces has been etched away, and estimate an etch rate for the diﬀerent substrates. Doing XRD
and XPS of the surface could help to determine and understand what the octahedral precipitates
occurring on the surface consists oﬀ. From literature they seem to be YF3 crystals [58], but as that
study were able to remove them by cleaning, it might not be the same conclusion. As discussed
previously, several other studies have had success in improving the etch rate by heating the solution
and agitating it while etching. It could be interesting to apply for allowance or use a diﬀerent lab
where the temperature can be raised to 80-100 ℃, as other studies show an increase in etch rate by
5 to 10 times. The agitation might increase the etching as well but could introduce problems with
the stability of the mask. It might also be relevant to investigate other chemical etchants, such as a
solution combining HF and MSA, which was reported to have a higher etch rate.
The mono-crystal substrates showed very surprising results, with a micrometre thin layer of the single-
crystal YSZ which scaled oﬀthe surface and revealed a very rough and uneven surface underneath.
The initially exposed surface seemed unaﬀected by the etchant, although a few of the precipitate
crystals were observed. It could be interesting to do XRD and EDS of the surface to determine
whether it really is mono-crystalline, as well as to determine to composition ratio of yttria and
zirconia. After etching, with the newly exposed surface, doing another XRD could conﬁrm whether
the entire substrate is a mono-crystallic or not. Maybe consisting of a grown micron thick layer
on top of a diﬀerent substrate. If the behaviour of this substrate can be understood, it behaves
more stable and could be an interesting sample material to work on. The top surface, despite barely
aﬀected, seems to behave more homogeneous and isotropic to the etchant. If the scaling-oﬀissue
can be solved, the substrate could be used to do much more controlled etching experiments that can
clarify the etching behaviour of HF (or other solutions) on yttria stabilised zirconia.
The purpose of this project was to identify what nanostructures were possible to fabricate on zirconia
using chemical etching as the main fabrication process. These structures would then be tested for
antimicrobial eﬃcacy and determine what bacteria they are eﬀective against. Instead, the opposite
approach could be done.
Using some of the other, more delicate fabrication techniques, such as
dry etching, Focused ion beam etching or some lithography method could allow for more precise
and controlled processing. Using these methods could successfully fabricate structures speciﬁcally
designed to eradicate and kill bacteria and reduce bioﬁlm formation relevant to dental implants. This
could give an indication of what types of structures are necessary, narrowing down the unknown area
of this project (optimal fabrication process and desired nanostructures) from two ends at a time,
assessing the necessary challenges that needs to be solved in a more eﬃcient and rapid approach.
Albeit the desired results were not achieved, some structuring and roughening of the surfaces were
successfully fabricated. Although they do not represent the initially conceived design, they could still
exhibit antimicrobial eﬃcacy. As soon as a viable method to remove the precipitate has been devel-
oped, a batch of the highly scabrous surfaces could be sent to the external facility for antibacterial
testing. This might reveal interesting results about the surface structure, which could inhibit bacteri-
cidal eﬀects and anti-bioﬁlm forming surface properties in some of the other ways described in section
2.1. The substrates should be simultaneously analysed in terms of mechanical stability, to ensure that
the YSZ substrates have not subsides in strength after the intergranular etching observed.
Page 65 of 73
==PAGE:69==
A
APPENDIX
January 2, 2022
A
Appendix
A.1
Supplementary information
Figure 50: Images of diﬀerent states and conditions of the 8YSZ substrates during fabrication. The
top left image is a sample substrate as received from the manufacturer. Top right is after polishing.
Bottom left is after dicing (backside up) and bottom right are 2 samples with 12 nm gold on top.
One is annealed, making the gold almost transparent (due to the low coverage).
Page 66 of 73
==PAGE:70==
A
APPENDIX
January 2, 2022
Figure 51: Images of diﬀerent anneal conditions resulting in particles agglomerating on the surface
with focus on areas where small particles are forming in line along the grooves on the surface. For
the large scale of the entire sample, this does not matter much, but it deﬁnitely shifts the average
diameter towards smaller sizes.
Page 67 of 73
==PAGE:71==
A
APPENDIX
January 2, 2022
Figure 52: SEM images of gold masks made with diﬀerent thin ﬁlm thicknesses and annealing tem-
peratures. All images are taken with the same magniﬁcation. This help visualising the size diﬀerence
and particle distribution changing rapidly are thicker ﬁlms. At 1000 ℃the gold seems to melt and
form spherical particles according with the wetting of gold on an oxide substrate.
Page 68 of 73
==PAGE:72==
A
APPENDIX
January 2, 2022
Table 3: Full Table containing all the speciﬁc combinations of HF concentrations, temperarture and
duration of etch experiments done on YSZ reported and published literature of etch experiments on
zirconia.
Yttria amount
HF conc %
Temperature
Duration
Result
Source
3 to 8 %
5
Room Temp
10 min
Little to no eﬀect
[57]
3 to 8 %
10
Room Temp
10 min
Little to no eﬀect
3 to 8 %
20
Room Temp
10 min
Some eﬀect
3 to 8 %
40
Room Temp
10 min
Visible eﬀect
3 to 8 %
5
70-80 ℃
10 min
Little to no eﬀect
3 to 8 %
10
70-80 ℃
10 min
Visible eﬀect
3 to 8 %
20
70-80 ℃
10 min
Visible eﬀect
3 to 8 %
40
70-80 ℃
10 min
Visible eﬀect
4 to 9 %
9.5
25 ℃
1 h
Few dislodgements of grains
[39]
4 to 9 %
9.5
25 ℃
2h
More visible eﬀect
4 to 9 %
9.5
25 ℃
3 h
More visible eﬀect
4 to 9 %
9.5
25 ℃
24 h
Large craters as well
4 to 9 %
9.5
80 ℃
1 min
Few dislodgements of grains
4 to 9 %
9.5
80 ℃
3 min
More visible eﬀect
4 to 9 %
9.5
80 ℃
5 min
More visible eﬀect
4 to 9 %
9.5
80 ℃
30 min
Large craters as well
4 to 9 %
48
25 ℃
30 min
High roughness
4 to 9 %
48
25 ℃
60 min
Larger craters
5 to 8 %
5
N/A
1 min
No eﬀect
[20]
5 to 8 %
5
N/A
5 min
No eﬀect
5 to 8 %
5
N/A
15 min
No eﬀect
5 to 8 %
9.5
N/A
1 min
No eﬀect
5 to 8 %
9.5
N/A
5 min
Some eﬀect
5 to 8 %
9.5
N/A
15 min
Some eﬀect
5 to 8 %
40
N/A
1 min
Visible eﬀect
5 to 8 %
40
N/A
5 min
More visible eﬀect
5 to 8 %
40
N/A
15 min
Most visible eﬀect
3%
5
Room temp
30 min
No eﬀect
[58]
3%
5
Room temp
60 min
Little to no eﬀect
3%
5
Room temp
120 min
Little eﬀect
3%
20
Room temp
30 min
Little to no eﬀect
3%
20
Room temp
60 min
Little eﬀect
3%
20
Room temp
120 min
Some eﬀect
3%
40
Room temp
30 min
Visible eﬀect
3%
40
Room temp
60 min
More visible eﬀect
3%
40
Room temp
120 min
Most visible eﬀect
Page 69 of 73
==PAGE:73==
REFERENCES
January 2, 2022
References
[1] Claire Ninde. 200 years of public health has doubled our life expectancy. san juan basin public
health. San Juan Basin Public Health. April, 3:2017, 2017.
[2] Peter Doshi. Trends in recorded inﬂuenza mortality: United states, 1900–2004. American Journal
of Public Health, 98(5):939–945, 2008.
[3] Review on Antimicrobial Resistance (London). and Grande-Bretagne. Antimicrobial Resistance:
Tackling a Crisis for the Health and Wealth of Nations: December 2014. Review on antimicrobial
resistance, 2014.
[4] David Davies. Understanding bioﬁlm resistance to antibacterial agents. Nature reviews Drug
discovery, 2(2):114–122, 2003.
[5] C Campanac, L Pineau, A Payard, G Baziard-Mouysset, and C Roques. Interactions between bio-
cide cationic agents and bacterial bioﬁlms. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy, 46(5):1469–
1474, 2002.
[6] Steven L Solomon and Kristen B Oliver.
Antibiotic resistance threats in the united states:
stepping back from the brink. American family physician, 89(12):938–941, 2014.
[7] Aikaterini Argyraki, Merete Markvart, Camilla Stavnsbjerg, Kasper Nørskov Kragh, Yiyu Ou,
Lars Bjørndal, Thomas Bjarnsholt, and Paul Michael Petersen. Uv light assisted antibiotics for
eradication of in vitro bioﬁlms. Scientiﬁc reports, 8(1):1–9, 2018.
[8] Abinash Tripathy, Prosenjit Sen, Bo Su, and Wuge H Briscoe. Natural and bioinspired nanos-
tructured bactericidal surfaces. Advances in colloid and interface science, 248:85–104, 2017.
[9] Sabrina D Puckett, Erik Taylor, Theresa Raimondo, and Thomas J Webster.
The relation-
ship between the nanostructure of titanium surfaces and bacterial attachment. Biomaterials,
31(4):706–713, 2010.
[10] GK Thakral,
Rashmi Thakral,
Neeraj Sharma,
Jyotsana Seth,
and Pallavi Vashisht.
Nanosurface–the future of implants.
Journal of clinical and diagnostic research:
JCDR,
8(5):ZE07, 2014.
[11] Song Ha Nguyen, Hayden K Webb, Peter J Mahon, Russell J Crawford, and Elena P Ivanova.
Natural insect and plant micro-/nanostructsured surfaces: an excellent selection of valuable
templates with superhydrophobic and self-cleaning properties. Molecules, 19(9):13614–13630,
2014.
[12] Matthew J Hayes, Timothy P Levine, and Roger H Wilson. Identiﬁcation of nanopillars on the
cuticle of the aquatic larvae of the drone ﬂy (diptera: Syrphidae). Journal of Insect Science,
16(1), 2016.
[13] Tianqing Liu, Qianqian Cui, Qiqi Wu, Xiangqin Li, Kedong Song, Dan Ge, and Shui Guan.
Mechanism study of bacteria killed on nanostructures. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B,
123(41):8686–8696, 2019.
[14] Mainul Haque, Massimo Sartelli, Judy McKimm, and Muhamad Abu Bakar.
Health care-
associated infections–an overview. Infection and drug resistance, 11:2321, 2018.
[15] World Health Organization et al. Cleaning and disinfection of environmental surfaces in the
context of covid-19. 2020.
[16] Celeste M Abraham. Suppl 1: A brief historical perspective on dental implants, their surface
coatings and treatments. The open dentistry journal, 8:50, 2014.
[17] LUIZA NISTOR, M˘AD˘ALINA GR˘ADINARU, RADU RˆIC˘A, PETRE M˘AR˘AS, ESCU, MI-
HAELA STAN, HORIA MANOLEA, A Ionescu, and IREN MORARU. Zirconia use in dentistry-
manufacturing and properties. Current health sciences journal, 45(1):28, 2019.
Page 70 of 73
==PAGE:74==
REFERENCES
January 2, 2022
[18] Jianfei Liang, Shanshan Xu, Mingming Shen, Bingkun Cheng, Yongfeng Li, Xiangwei Liu,
Dongze Qin, Anuj Bellare, and Liang Kong. Osteogenic activity of titanium surfaces with hier-
archical micro-/nano-structures obtained by hydroﬂuoric acid treatment. International journal
of nanomedicine, 12:1317, 2017.
[19] Sriram Balasubramanian and Srini Raghavan. Wet etching of heat treated atomic layer chemical
vapor deposited zirconium oxide in hf based solutions. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics,
47(6R):4502, 2008.
[20] Beata Smielak and Leszek Klimek. Eﬀect of hydroﬂuoric acid concentration and etching dura-
tion on select surface roughness parameters for zirconia. The Journal of prosthetic dentistry,
113(6):596–602, 2015.
[21] Jafar Hasan, Russell J Crawford, and Elena P Ivanova. Antibacterial surfaces: the quest for a
new generation of biomaterials. Trends in biotechnology, 31(5):295–304, 2013.
[22] Wenlong Li, Eng San Thian, Miao Wang, Zuyong Wang, and Lei Ren. Surface design for antibac-
terial materials: from fundamentals to advanced strategies. Advanced Science, 8(19):2100368,
2021.
[23] P De Barro, S Chanel, and B Doherty. Superbugs’a far greater risk than covid in paciﬁc, scientist
warns— world news— the guardian [internet]. amp. theguardian. com. 2020.
[24] Sagheer A Onaizi and Susanna SJ Leong. Tethering antimicrobial peptides: current status and
potential challenges. Biotechnology advances, 29(1):67–74, 2011.
[25] Gerard J Tortora, Berdell R Funke, Christine L Case, Derek Weber, and Warner Bair. Microbi-
ology: an introduction, volume 9. Benjamin Cummings San Francisco, CA, 2004.
[26] Babak Momeni. Division of labor: How microbes split their responsibility. Current Biology,
28(12):R697–R699, 2018.
[27] Tatiana Venkova, Chew Chieng Yeo, and Manuel Espinosa. The good, the bad, and the ugly:
multiple roles of bacteria in human life. Frontiers in microbiology, 9:1702, 2018.
[28] Andrea Mombelli, Nada M¨uller, and Norbert Cionca.
The epidemiology of peri-implantitis.
Clinical oral implants research, 23:67–76, 2012.
[29] AD Pye, DEA Lockhart, MP Dawson, CA Murray, and AJ Smith. A review of dental implants
and infection. Journal of Hospital infection, 72(2):104–110, 2009.
[30] Milton RJ Salton and Peter Owen. Bacterial membrane structure. Annual Review of Microbiol-
ogy, 30(1):451–482, 1976.
[31] Mandana Rezwan, Marie-Antoinette Lan´eelle, Peter Sander, and Mamadou Daﬀ´e.
Breaking
down the wall: fractionation of mycobacteria. Journal of microbiological methods, 68(1):32–39,
2007.
[32] Jasmin Grischke, Joerg Eberhard, and Meike Stiesch. Antimicrobial dental implant functional-
ization strategies—a systematic review. Dental Materials Journal, 35(4):545–558, 2016.
[33] Sandrine Lavenus, Guy Louarn, and Pierre Layrolle.
Nanotechnology and dental implants.
International journal of biomaterials, 2010, 2010.
[34] Roya Dastjerdi and Majid Montazer. A review on the application of inorganic nano-structured
materials in the modiﬁcation of textiles: focus on anti-microbial properties. Colloids and surfaces
B: Biointerfaces, 79(1):5–18, 2010.
[35] Reham B Osman and Michael V Swain. A critical review of dental implant materials with an
emphasis on titanium versus zirconia. Materials, 8(3):932–958, 2015.
[36] Carl E Misch. Contemporary implant dentistry. Implant Dentistry, 8(1):90, 1999.
Page 71 of 73
==PAGE:75==
REFERENCES
January 2, 2022
[37] Rushui Bai, Liying Peng, Qiannan Sun, Yunfan Zhang, Lingyun Zhang, Yan Wei, and Bing
Han. Metallic antibacterial surface treatments of dental and orthopedic materials. Materials,
13(20):4594, 2020.
[38] Juan Ignacio Rosales-Leal, Miguel A Rodr´ıguez-Valverde, Giuseppe Mazzaglia, Pedro Jes´us
Ram´on-Torregrosa, Lourdes D´ıaz-Rodr´ıguez, Olga Garc´ıa-Mart´ınez, Manuel Vallecillo-Capilla,
Concepci´on Ruiz, and MA Cabrerizo-V´ılchez.
Eﬀect of roughness, wettability and morphol-
ogy of engineered titanium surfaces on osteoblast-like cell adhesion. Colloids and Surfaces A:
Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 365(1-3):222–229, 2010.
[39] Niyom Thamrongananskul, Chumphol Busabok, Sushit Poolthong, Motohiro Uo, and Junji
Tagami. Dental zirconia can be etched by hydroﬂuoric acid. Dental materials journal, 33(1):79–
85, 2014.
[40] Yongsang Lee, Kyung Chul Oh, Na-Hong Kim, and Hong-Seok Moon. Evaluation of zirconia
surfaces after strong-acid etching and its eﬀects on the shear bond strength of dental resin cement.
International journal of dentistry, 2019, 2019.
[41] Monika Saini, Yashpal Singh, Pooja Arora, Vipin Arora, and Krati Jain. Implant biomaterials:
A comprehensive review. World Journal of Clinical Cases: WJCC, 3(1):52, 2015.
[42] Benjamin Butz. Yttria-doped zirconia as solid electrolyte for fuel-cell applications. 2009.
[43] Potejana Potejanasak and Sethavut Duangchan. Gold nanoisland agglomeration upon the sub-
strate assisted chemical etching based on thermal annealing process. Crystals, 10(6):533, 2020.
[44] Andrzej Staﬁniak, Joanna Pra˙zmowska, Wojciech Macherzy´nski, and Regina Paszkiewicz. Nanos-
tructuring of si substrates by a metal-assisted chemical etching and dewetting process. RSC
advances, 8(54):31224–31230, 2018.
[45] Tania Betancourt and Lisa Brannon-Peppas. Micro-and nanofabrication methods in nanotech-
nological medical and pharmaceutical devices. International journal of nanomedicine, 1(4):483,
2006.
[46] Sabine Szunerits, Alina Vasilescu, Serban F Peteu, and Wolfgang Knoll.
Chapter nanoscale
architectures for smart bio-interfaces: Advances and challenges. 2011.
[47] Tahir Awan, Almas Bashir, Aqsa Tehseen, and Tax Exempt Orders. Chemistry of nanomaterials.
2004.
[48] P Ehrhart. Film deposition methods. Nanoelectronics and Information Technology—Advanced
Electronic Materials and Novel Devices, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, pages 201–221, 2003.
[49] Lawrence H Van Vlack. Elements of materials science and engineering, volume 351. Addison-
Wesley Reading, MA:, 1975.
[50] Stephen A Campbell. The science and engineering of microelectronic fabrication. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, USA, 1996.
[51] Lambert Ben Freund and Subra Suresh. Thin ﬁlm materials: stress, defect formation and surface
evolution. Cambridge university press, 2004.
[52] D Porath, Y Goldstein, A Grayevsky, and O Millo. Scanning tunneling microscopy studies of
annealing of gold ﬁlms. Surface science, 321(1-2):81–88, 1994.
[53] F Ruﬃno and MG Grimaldi. Formation of patterned arrays of au nanoparticles on sic surface by
template conﬁned dewetting of normal and oblique deposited nanoscale ﬁlms. Thin solid ﬁlms,
536:99–110, 2013.
[54] Young Thomas. An essay on the cohesion of ﬂuids. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 95:65–87,
1805.
Page 72 of 73
==PAGE:76==
REFERENCES
January 2, 2022
[55] GM Alonzo-Medina, A Gonz´alez-Gonz´alez, JL Saced´on, and AI Oliva. Understanding the ther-
mal annealing process on metallic thin ﬁlms. In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and
Engineering, volume 45, page 012013. IOP Publishing, 2013.
[56] F Ruﬃno and MG Grimaldi. Nano-shaping of gold particles on silicon carbide substrate from
solid-state to liquid-state dewetting. Surfaces and Interfaces, 24:101041, 2021.
[57] Hyo-Eun Kim, Myung-Jin Lim, Mi-Kyung Yu, and Kwang-Won Lee. Changes in bond strength
and topography for y-tzp etched with hydroﬂuoric acid depending on concentration and temper-
ature conditions. Medicina, 56(11):568, 2020.
[58] Quentin Flamant, Fernando Garc´ıa Marro, Joan Josep Roa Rovira, and Marc Anglada. Hy-
droﬂuoric acid etching of dental zirconia. part 1: etching mechanism and surface characterization.
Journal of the European Ceramic Society, 36(1):121–134, 2016.
[59] Abhishek Apratim, Prashanti Eachempati, Kiran Kumar Krishnappa Salian, Vijendra Singh,
Saurabh Chhabra, and Sanket Shah. Zirconia in dental implantology: A review. Journal of
International Society of Preventive & Community Dentistry, 5(3):147, 2015.
[60] Yougui Liao. Globalsino, 2021.
[61] James H. Wittke. Eﬀects of electron bombardment, 2021.
[62] Jean Bennett and Lars Mattsson. Introduction to surface roughness and scattering. Introduction
to Surface Roughness and Scattering by Jean Bennett, 1989.
[63] L Duta, AC Popescu, I Zgura, N Preda, and IN Mihailescu.
Wettability of nanostructured
surfaces. In Wetting and Wettability, pages 207–252. InTech Rijeka, 2015.
[64] Gene Whyman, Edward Bormashenko, and Tamir Stein.
The rigorous derivation of young,
cassie–baxter and wenzel equations and the analysis of the contact angle hysteresis phenomenon.
Chemical Physics Letters, 450(4-6):355–359, 2008.
[65] Gerhard Welsch, Rodney Boyer, and EW Collings.
Materials properties handbook: titanium
alloys. ASM international, 1993.
[66] Leon I Maissel, Reinhard Glang, and Paul P Budenstein. Handbook of thin ﬁlm technology.
Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 118(4):114C, 1971.
[67] William E Martinez, Giuliano Gregori, and Thomas Mates. Titanium diﬀusion in gold thin ﬁlms.
Thin Solid Films, 518(10):2585–2591, 2010.
[68] Orest M Ivasishin and Roman V Teliovich. Potential of rapid heat treatment of titanium alloys
and steels. Materials Science and Engineering: A, 263(2):142–154, 1999.
[69] Xiuling Li and PW Bohn. Metal-assisted chemical etching in hf/h 2 o 2 produces porous silicon.
Applied Physics Letters, 77(16):2572–2574, 2000.
[70] R Zahran, JI Rosales Leal, MA Rodr´ıguez Valverde, and MA Cabrerizo V´ılchez.
Eﬀect of
hydroﬂuoric acid etching time on titanium topography, chemistry, wettability, and cell adhesion.
PLoS One, 11(11):e0165296, 2016.
[71] Ibrahim Khalil, Chia-Man Chou, Kun-Lin Tsai, Steven Hsu, Wageeh A Yehye, and Vincent KS
Hsiao.
Gold nanoﬁlm-coated porous silicon as surface-enhanced raman scattering substrate.
Applied Sciences, 9(22):4806, 2019.
[72] Owen C Ernst, David Uebel, Stefan Kayser, Felix Lange, Thomas Teubner, and Torsten Boeck.
Revealing all states of dewetting of a thin gold layer on a silicon surface by nanosecond laser
conditioning. Applied Surface Science Advances, 3:100040, 2021.
[73] Lorenzo Leandro, Radu Malureanu, Noemi Rozlosnik, and Andrei Lavrinenko. Ultrathin, ul-
trasmooth gold layer on dielectrics without the use of additional metallic adhesion layers. ACS
applied materials & interfaces, 7(10):5797–5802, 2015.
Page 73 of 73
