==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
CANS Microservice Architecture
Microservice architecture for an open source
mobile health platform
Bence Burom (s192620)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This M.S.c.
thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree in Computer
Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, January 2, 2022
Bence Burom (s192620)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In modern healthcare, the virtual collection of a large number of patient information,
through digital phenotyping applications, can refine diagnosis and improve tailoring
of treatment. The abundance of data needed for medical relevance requires these
applications to have the ability to handle an increasing number of user interactions.
The complex non flexible architecture of a monolith solution, paired with a large
number of patients, can cause scaling issues. On the contrary, in a microservice based
design, services are managed and scaled independently and the load the system can
handle is greater.
Currently, Copenhagen Center for Health Technology (CACHET) has a monolith
backend application in place for handling the data storage needs for digital pheno-
typing. Future scalability concerns indicate the need of designing and implementing
a Microservice Architecture (MA), with the goal of increasing scalability, while also
providing a straightforward way to deploy and update the different services.
This thesis covers the process of analyzing the relevant projects and technologies
concerning scalability, in order to complete the design and implementation of a MA
capable of satisfing the scalability needs of CACHET in the future. An assessment
of the completed software is also made, by comparing the performances of both ap-
plication structures. To finalise, the achieved results are discussed, as well as the
limitations of this project and suggestions for possible future advancements.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincerest gratitude to my supervisors, Alban Maxhuni and
Jakob E. Bardram for the great guidance, competent feedbacks and motivation over
the course of the project.
Furthermore, I would like to thank the whole team of Copenhagen Center for Health
Technology (CACHET) for the opportunity to discuss and develop the results of this
thesis.
Besides them, I would also like to thank my amazing family and friends for the endless
support throughout my entire studies, especially my girlfriend, Catarina Dias, for her
never-ending positivity, encouragement and help.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Research goals and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Impact - innovation and application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Related Work
7
2.1
CANS Monolith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Turning monolith into microservices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Digital phenotyping applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Scaling microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Analysis
11
3.1
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Distributed system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Web development framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Data storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.6
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.7
Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Design
23
4.1
Current monolith solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Microservice architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Design summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Implementation
39
5.1
Study service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Deployment service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
Account service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4
Protocol service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.5
Data point service
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.6
File service
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.7
Collection service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.8
Consent service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.9
Gateway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.10 Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.11 Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
Evaluation
59
6.1
Test plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.2
Test cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.3
Evaluation overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7
Discussion
65
7.1
Evaluation of goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
8
Conclusion
71
Acronyms
73
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter introduces digital phenotyping and pin points the relevance of a Mi-
croservice Architecture (MA) for improving its outreach. The problem statement of
this thesis is also outlined in this section, as well as the research goals and methods,
and the impact of the assignment.
1.1
Background
In past few years, technological healthcare breakthroughs related to virtual care have
become more and more widespread. This adoption of technology in healthcare has
led to better diagnosis and treatment of patients. It enables health practitioners to
collect, store and retrieve data related to a patient’s health digitally. Above all, it
improves communication of patient information, which can often be the handicap
hindering better treatment options. But why did it take off so well?[1]
Digital data, captured in real time in real-world environments, grants access to
the personal experience of illness, which represents the key potential of virtual health.
The acquisition of this data is also know as Digital Phenotyping (DP). DP is defined
as the “moment-by-moment quantification of the individual-level human phenotype
in situ using data from personal digital devices”.[2] The patient data is collected from
personal devices such as smartphones or other wearable technologies. Collecting in-
formation about the patient and treating from a distance brings many benefits for
both parties, for example, regarding transportation, logistics, contamination with
other health problems, aggravation of existing health problems, delays in care and
preventive care. Ultimately, DP and other forms of virtual care bridge the gap be-
tween a patient and the medical staff, because they make both parties connect more
eﬀiciently.
A pertinent example of this facilitated communication by the continuous collection
of data is perhaps a mental health study, where the mood, anxiety and sleep patters
of patients are monitored by a smartphone application, over a long period of time.
The application would have the ability to perform real time assessment of the relevant
medical data, alert the doctors carrying out the study and recommend interventions
in real-time. Additionally, virtual collection of data allows for various types of medical
variables to be gathered simultaneously. This approach can be considered as the new
era of healthcare, [2, 3, 4].
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
The rise of virtual care solutions, was magnified by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic has shed light on the shortcomings of today’s healthcare
IT strategy.
The unprecedented amounts of network traﬀic, virtual health needs,
and sensitive patient data was not managed in a meaningful way, because innovative
software structures were not ready or even existent, which made access to healthcare
very delayed and costly. Given the situation, it became even more pressing that gov-
ernments, medical organizations and companies need to align their virtual strategies
with the changing needs of the population. Taking the north-American health system
as an example, in February 2020 less than 1 percent of primary care visits were con-
ducted via virtual health. In April of the same year, as the pandemic developed, the
number grew to 43 percent. This growth was also seen in healthcare providers across
the world and came to stay. Both patients and doctors have embraced a mindset of
virtualization of medicine, due to the many benefits that it brings, within and outside
the context of the world pandemic [5, 6].
To make this new paradigm a reality, it’s clear that medical organizations, study
developers and software companies need to invest in technologies that aid the transfor-
mation of traditional medical care into digital. The development of DP applications
requires an application that stores and manages the increasing amount of data col-
lected. Hence, it is essential to be able to handle a growing number of user interactions,
so scalability is key. To define the field of DP, there is an open source framework
called Copenhagen Center for Health Technology Research Platform (CARP) Core1.
CARP Core is an infrastructure-agnostic, cross-platform, open-source software frame-
work that supports the development of distributed data collection applications and
infrastructure for use in research studies.
Currently at Copenhagen Center for Health Technology (CACHET)2, using CARP
Core as a dependency, a monolithic application is in place to allow the creation and
management of research studies, as well as the collection and storage of participant
data.3. However, it has high coupling between its components. When it comes to
scalability, in case of a large number of users, it is harder to adjust the system to
handle the increased load.
Updating the application with new features results in
the redeployment of the entire project. This thesis builds on this monolithic back-
end application and focuses on the implementation of a MA to tackle the scalability
problems described above.
1https://carp.cachet.dk/core/
2https://carp.cachet.dk/
3https://carp.cachet.dk/cans/
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Problem statement
3
1.2
Problem statement
As mentioned in the previous section, DP is experiencing a major burst of popularity
recently. This trend is expected to continue in the future as well, since the world is
moving towards a more technological future. With this trend, existing systems need
to be prepared to handle an increased load of users. CACHET’s existing monolith
backend application, that is currently responsible for handing all incoming digital
data is not suitable for scaling in the future due to its inherent architecture.
The aim of this project is to develop a microservice architecture that is able to store
user data securely and to cope with scaling problems. The architecture created must
be based on the CARP Core Domain Model4 and extended with additional services
as needed. It must be as simple as possible to create and implement so that it is
accessible to any research centre or organization, regardless of its size.
For this goal, the following problem statement can be formed:
How can a microservice architecture be designed and implemented to
increase scalability, while also keeping in mind the deployment process
and usability?
This problem statement comes with the following sub-problems:
• How can scalability be achieved?
• How can a deployment process be set up?
• How can the different services be made to run independently?
• How can it be checked whether the solution is scalable?
1.3
Research goals and methods
The main goal of this project is to design and implement a microservice architecture
with the purpose of making user’s data handling and storage more scalable, in a
way that it is easy to deploy and update. Achieving this goal can be branched into
completing four tasks, that were announced in the Problem Statement and will be
clarified in the following subsections.
1.3.1
How can scalability be achieved?
Initially, the plan is to increase the load the system can handle. Both the communi-
cation between the different components and the infrastructure need to be prepared
4https://carp.cachet.dk/core/
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
for increased load. Despite the increased workload, latency should not increase sig-
nificantly and the amount of faults in the system should not rise. It is necessary for
the system to be able to tolerate these faults without compromising functionality.
The plan is to analyze and choose the correct technologies, that facilitate scalabil-
ity, while keeping in mind the time constraints of the project. It is important to
prepare the system for being easily scaled vertically or horizontally. Vertical scaling
is a method, which consists of assigning extra resources to a single node. On the other
hand, horizontal scaling means that the number of nodes increases and the load can
be split between them. The strategy is to design a system that is well prepared for
a big load of users on its own, while it is also possible for it to be scaled by these
two scaling techniques. The design will be verified by the actual implementation of
the software and the functionality will be tested by connecting it with CACHET’s
ecosystem.
1.3.2
How can a deployment process be set up?
The architecture should be prepared to be easily deployed on a server on demand.
For this, the different services will be run inside of docker containers and only the
container in question will be deployed. Consequently, the dependencies needed for
the service can be created in the container and moved as one. The solution for this is
a docker setup in each service, that is able to create and configure these containers.
1.3.3
How can the different services be made to run
independently?
The different services are to be designed in a way that they can run independently
from each other. This means that they should be loosely coupled to have the least
effect on each other. With containerized microservices it is possible to deploy and
manage individual services independently, without affecting services hosted on other
containers. This also includes the analysis and separation of the domain and imple-
mentation of interservice communication where needed.
1.3.4
How can it be checked whether the solution is scalable?
After the implementation of the software is ready, some tests need to be completed to
evaluate the system’s reaction to increased load. The way to test this improvement
is to simulate different amounts of users interacting with the system and see how it
reacts to the change. The same will be done using the current monolith as well. After
both backends are tested with different test cases, the result can be compared to see
how the scalability increased in the solution.
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Impact - innovation and application
5
1.4
Impact - innovation and application
There are many existing frameworks and technologies that are relevant for scalable
microservice architectures. The aim of this project is to research and employ them
in a meaningful way, in order provide a scalable solution for CACHET’s user data
handling and storage. The improvement generated by CACHET’s future MA is, that
the system will be able to handle a bigger load of user inputs. This in turn provides
the ability to support big scale medical studies and spread the benefits of digital
phenotyping to more people.
There is also a big emphasis on making it as easy
to deploy as possible, since CACHET is a small company with limited resources to
handle the deployment task.
1.5
Thesis outline
The upcoming chapters describe how a new microservice based software was designed
and implemented to fulfill the goal defined previously in the Problem Statement.
After the Introduction, the section entitled Related Work, depicts comparable or
related cases, where the technologies employed in this project were also implemented.
This section starts by looking at how digital phenotyping applications benefit from
being based on microservices and moves on to look closer at how the relevant software
are used in similar projects. To analyze means to divide a topic or concept down into
parts with the aim of inspecting and understanding it further. Hence, the Analysis
Chapter lists and explores the relevant underlying concepts required to understand
the selection of technologies. The chapter that follows is the Design chapter. In this
chapter the strategy for answering the research question at hand is illustrated. In
other words, the new MA and software tools are presented. Next, in the Implementa-
tion chapter the previously presented knowledge as structure is implemented step by
step to form the microservice solution. The Evaluation chapter contains the findings
from testing both the monolith and the MA solutions. The Discussion chapter comes
next, and it focuses on interpreting and evaluating what was found in the Evalua-
tion chapter. It also contains sections that represent connections to the future work
to be done, building from this assignment. Lastly, the Conclusion summarizes the
document and comments on the results, connecting them to the starting point.
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
This chapter outlines projects and case studies that are relevant to or share similarities
with the problem addressed in the thesis project at hand.
2.1
CANS Monolith
CANS monolith, is a web application developed by CACHET. This is one of the most
relevant related works, considering the aim of this thesis is to implement a software
that provides the same functionality as the CANS monolith. The monolith is built
with Spring Boot and uses Kotlin as a programming language. It also provides im-
plementation for the open source project CARP Core, that defines a great domain
for DP. The CANS monolith provides REpresentational State Transfer (REST) and
Remote Procedure Call (RPC) Application Programming Interface (API) endpoints
to expose the underlying functionality for clients. It has a modular monolithic ar-
chitecture, and high coupling between its components. By nature this architecture
has its share of benefits and drawbacks. One of these drawbacks is the limitation for
scalability.
In 2021, the conference paper from the 11th International Conference on Advanced
Computer Information Technologies mentions how, in the development of a transac-
tional business application, monolithic architectures can be too complex and hard
to introduce new technologies into. Furthermore, it is also stated in this paper that
monoliths have limited flexibility, so when it comes to scaling one part of the system
it is not possible to just scale the necessary part. Ultimately, the paper arrives at the
conclusion that using a MA for the development of the business application was more
eﬀicient, due to its flexibility for technological choices and independent management
of each service in regards of development, deployment and scaling. [7]
In 2019, the paper from the 18th International Conference on Www/internet
shows a comparison between implementing a web-based audience response system
with the two architectures. It was found that the monolithic system is both physi-
cally and financially limited in its scalability, while, with the replication of individual
services, the microservice application is able to adapt to varying loads. The main
issue with microservices is the inter-service communication overhead. Thus, as long
as the amount of user inputs is low, the monolith performed better. Furthermore,
this paper states that the Spring ecosystem is not ideal for developing microservice
applications. It is great for making the development process easier, but ultimately it
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Related Work
has its drawbacks. The paper provides evidence for these statements by performing
a detailed summary of performance tests, where error rate throughput and latency
for different amount of requests was measured.[8]
Finally, chapter three of the book Accelerating Development Velocity Using Docker
also compares the two architectures and arrives at the conclusion that a monolith is
hard to scale because of it’s complex nature, while a microservice can be scaled on
demand. [9]
All of these sources underline the fact that scalability can be increased with the
implementation of a MA. However, transforming a system into a MA doesn’t provide
better scalability on its own, it just provides the possibility for achieving it.
2.2
Turning monolith into microservices
The implementation of CACHET’s new MA required reusing the existing monolith,
to make the best use of resources.
Before executing this approach, sources with
similar tasks were consulted, in order to explore the most practical strategy. The
conference paperTransform Monolith into Microservices using Docker, recommends
first dividing the monolith into modules. This can be done by analyzing the domain
and also by separating the different layers of the application, such as business layer and
persistence layer. After this is done, there are n number of modules which are tightly
coupled. These n modules are converted into microservices until the monolith will
either disappear completely or become one small module, that is essentially another
microservice. The next logical step is to decouple these modules from each other by
implementing some kind of inter-service communication in between. Finally, after
this separation and decoupling is complete, the service is ready to run on its own. It
is suggested to run the service inside of a Docker container. According to the paper,
Docker provides a consistent environment for each service, regardless of the language
or technology of the service. It also helps with the management and deployment of
the mentioned services. [10]
The article Microservices migration patterns: Microservices migration patterns de-
scribes different patterns and strategies, that can help with migrating from a mono-
lithic architecture to a MA. In this article, the recommended initial step is to use
domain-driven design to identify the subdomains of the business, and start creating
the MA as a greenfield project.
The findings of this section helped navigate the design created in this thesis by
revealing that a MA can benefit from the existing parts of the preexisting monolith,
but that there should also be a certain amount of flexibility when developing it. [11]
2.3
Digital phenotyping applications
It is useful to look into some of the existing DP, in order to explore what kind of
technologies they rely on. However, as mentioned, the MA needs to build upon the
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Scaling microservices
9
existing ecosystem used at CACHET, so the purpose of this research is restricted to
the technological solutions for handling the business logic.
LAMP is a phenotyping platform focused on assessing mental health and diverse
healthcare needs. It was interesting to learn more about it in the Journal of Technol-
ogy in Behavioral Science. The data collected by this platform is stored securely on
a server, but it is not mentioned how the underlying business logic is implemented,
which would have been useful.[12]
DHLink is a microservice platform, with the purpose of supporting rapid microser-
vice development and data processing in mobile health. Perhaps, it can be a useful
addition in the future, since it has the ability to be integrated with other applications,
including the new MA developed in this project. The architecture of this platform is
shown on figure 2.1. [13]
Figure 2.1: DHLink microservice architecture.
2.4
Scaling microservices
It is important to remember that a MA is better suited to increase scalability when
compared to a monolithic architecture.
The master thesis Scaling in Microservice Architectures is about scaling MAs and
describes the different scaling techniques, that can be applied. The first technique
is the usual vertical and horizontal scaling combined with clustering. The features
of Docker Swarm can be utilised to manage multiple replicas of services and help
with load balancing and service discovery. Furthermore, it is also stated that a MA
can increase scalability in general, given that instead of one service handling all the
incoming requests and spending many resources, the requests are distributed to many
different services. Each service only receives and spends resources on the requests,
that are relevant for it.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Related Work
The next technique described is concurrency, meaning that multiple tasks can be
executed at the same time. This can be achieved by having replicas of the same
service and load balance the tasks on those replicas. It can also be done inside of
the same service, by choosing the right implementation, for example an asynchronous
framework. Caching is another option for helping scalability, it can be applied on
the server when a resource is accessed very often. Information can be stored in cache
in a separate system and read from there on demand, instead of the disk, leading to
better performance.
[14]
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis
This chapter provides an analysis of the relevant technologies and topics for developing
the proposed system.
3.1
Architecture
In order to analyse the improvement brought forth by the transition of the current
structure behind the CACHET web application into a more scalable architecture,
both the monolith and the MA need to be presented and compared.
3.1.1
Monolith
A monolith application is a single, self-contained software application in which all
components, including the user interface and the data access code, are tightly coupled
into a single program.
While a monolith service can be relatively simple to implement, test and deploy,
since all components of the application, including the user interface and the data
access, are all tightly coupled into a single program, there are many challenges that
can emerge as the application grows. Firstly, changes in the code require the entire
application to be deployed and different pieces of the application cannot be tested
independently. In addition, startup time of the application grows if the size of the
monolith application increases. Moreover, if there is a bug, since monoliths have sin-
gle points of failure, it can bring the entire service down. Maintenance concerns are
expected to grow as the application does. Lastly, updating frameworks and technolo-
gies means rewriting the entire application. [15]
3.1.2
Microservice
The previously mentioned drawbacks paved the way for developers to adopt a MA. A
MA is a monolith that is split into multiple independent but interconnected services.
The different microservices in an microservice based application can call upon different
softwares, incorporate their own architecture and can use individual databases, as
required.
Using diverse, better suitable databases and frameworks is a benefit of
the MA, since shared databases don’t really allow the services to be independent.
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Analysis
Disentangling a single application into multiple components makes understanding and
maintaining the code base a lot easier. This is expected to translate in faster start
up times. In conclusion, when using a MA there is more flexibility and innovation
possibilities, as different modules can be deployed independently of one another. This
modularity facilitates scaling and testing. [15]
However, adapting to a MA doesn’t come without its share of drawbacks. Some
complications are introduced with this architecture. Since it is a distributed system,
the services need to communicate with each other eﬀiciently, if needed. Another issue
is that each of the services needs to be managed independently. Every service needs
monitoring and maintenance and the dependencies need to be updated to the newest
versions from time to time. Another big question is logging and debugging. If there is
an issue that runs through multiple services, the developer would need to investigate
in a lot of different logs to find out the cause of the problem. A possible solution
would be merging all the logs from all the services into a common log file, but this
requires extra work. Finally, the last issue is related to versioning. Lastly, another
source of complexity is the fact that multiple services can depend on the same library
or package. Also, when an update is needed, it is necessary to make sure that the
updated service is still compatible with the other running services that use the same
library, but are not up to date.
To sum up, both architectural choices have their own benefits and drawbacks.
From the analysis of a MA it is clear that it has the potential to improve scalability,
when compared to the current monolith, and at the same time also bring flexibil-
ity, smaller deployment packages and a more understandable, smaller code base per
service. These advantages outweigh the above mentioned disadvantages.
3.2
Distributed system
A Distributed System (DS) is a computing environment that is comprised of multiple
software components distributed across various computing devices, but still run as
a single system.
The devices can either be in close proximity of each other and
connected by a Local Area Network (LAN), or located at a distance, connected by a
Wide Area Network (WAN). In a DS the goal is to build a network of decentralized
mainframes, personal computers, workstations, minicomputers, and couple them to
function as a single computer. Additionally, DS can run on hardware that is provided
by different stakeholders and each one can run on various operating systems and use
distinct communications protocols, that are independent from the underlying software.
As a result, DS represent an important advancement in computer science because they
allow for complex tasks to be completed, that could never be finished by one single
computer, using a combined effort.
In terms of advantages, the usage of DS instead of centralized systems reduces the risk
of having a single point of failure, which strengthens reliability and fault tolerance
of the system.
This aspect is connected to the redundancy of DS that is also a
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Web development framework
13
benefit. Using several machines that provide the same services means that a back up
device can replace one that is down and the tasks at hand are handled nonetheless.
Nowadays, as many small machines can be used in a DS, redundancy does not have
to imply an expensive amount of resources. Lastly, DS are inherently designed to be
scalable in near real-time, because additional computing resources can be spun up.
This translates in increased performance and reduced processing times, which are the
core aims of scaling. From this analysis of DS, in a scalability point of view, it is
evident that they can facilitate scalability and fault tolerance very well. [16, 17]
3.3
Web development framework
Web frameworks are necessary to handle Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP) re-
quests coming from clients in web applications and to communicate with the data
storage layer to persist data. The existing monolith uses a framework called Spring
boot. When implementing the new MA, it was practical and fitting to reuse a lot
of code from the monolith. Thus, frameworks related to scalability, added later on,
needed to be used in combination with Spring boot.
3.3.1
Spring Boot
The Spring framework is one of the most widely used frameworks for developing en-
terprise applications and it provides robust programming and configuration model.
It was created to simplify the more complex and diﬀicult application development
on the popular Java EE technology stack from Oracle. Unlike other frameworks, its
focus is on several areas of application functionality and on providing a wide range
of additional functions for them. The use of the Dependency Injection (DI) pattern
is one of the main advantages of Spring Framework. With DI it is much easier to
implement the functionality that applications need, and to develop loosely coupled,
more general classes.
There are many advantages coming with the use of Spring Framework, [18]:
• It is a framework that can be employed on all architectural layers used in the
development of web applications
• For class writing, a very lightweight Plain Old Java Object (POJO) model is
used
• Allows to freely link modules and easily test them
• Supports declarative programming
• There is no need to independently create factory and singleton classes
• Supports various configuration methods
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Analysis
• Provides middleware-level service.
Despite these advantages, there is an extensive preparation process needed to be
configured before using, which has contributed to the creation of Spring Boot. Spring
Boot streamlines the process of creating and deploying Spring application. It reduces
code length and simplifies web application development, by leveraging annotation
and boilerplate configuration. In other words, it is easier to create standalone appli-
cations with less configuration overhead. Dependency management is also improved,
for instance, to start using Spring Data Java Persistence API (JPA), for accessing a
database, it is only necessary to include the spring-boot-starter-data-jpa dependency
in the project to have full access to the database.
One important dependency is
spring-boot-starter-jdbc, Spring Boot automatically registers the DataSource, Enti-
tyManagerFactory, and TransactionManager beans and reads the database connec-
tion information from the application.properties file. Automatic configuration can be
completely overridden at any time by using user preferences. [18]
Furthermore, this framework allows developers to built and run microservices that
can iterate fast. It has many purpose-built features, which is why it has occupied
the software market on a large scale. The Spring Boot artifact may be run directly
in Docker containers. This is very useful to get when you need to quickly create
microservices. Also some developers argue that Spring Boot should not be used for
monolithic applications because it was designed to be lightweight and agile. The dis-
advantage of Spring Boot is that it creates a lot of unused dependencies, resulting in
a large deployment file. [18]
Looking at it from a scalability point of view, Spring Boot is a synchronous frame-
work.
In a synchronous application, tasks are performed one at a time and only
when the task is completed can the thread be unblocked. This is a handicap that
is not present in asynchronous operations, where the next task can be dealt with,
before the previous one finishes. The more substantial the number of blocking oper-
ations, which is commonly very high in I(input)/O(output) heavy web applications,
the more significant this handicap. Successively more occupied threads means more
unserved requests, which translates into latency, timeouts and wastes resources and
compromises the scalability of the applications. [18]
3.3.2
Asynchronous solutions
Two different solutions were considered to help with the limitations described above,
Spring Webflux and Vert.x. Both are asynchronous web frameworks and are known
to be reliable for development purposes. At first glance, the best choice would be
Spring Webflux, since it is already set that Spring Boot will be used, to decrease
development time. However, Vert.x is an extremely modular framework, meaning
that the developer decides which modules to choose and which are the useful ones,
for the needs of the application. These modules can be paired with Spring Boot to
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Data storage
15
provide a mixture of the two solutions easily. Another benefit of Vert.x are verticles.
Verticles are chunks of code that can be deployed and run by Vert.x. The benefits
are that these verticles receive requests from certain clients and process them and
they can be scaled on their own. Multiple verticle instances can be deployed from
the same verticle and they balance the incoming requests between each other. To
summarize, both Spring Webflux and Vert.x would be a great choice to develop the
asynchronous application needed, however Vert.x was chosen based on the desire to
learn a new framework. [19, 20]
3.4
Data storage
Data storage is an important aspect of developing web applications. There are multi-
ple Database Management System (DBMS) available and each of them have benefits
and drawbacks. These DBMS can be divided into two main categories, SQL databases
and NoSQL databases. From a scaling point of view, SQL databases can be scaled
vertically and NoSQL databases can be scaled horizontally. In this project the focus
is more on the service level rather than on the persistence level of implementation.
The choice of technology for data storage was based on what the already existing
monolith is using for data storage. The used database is PostgreSQL. It is one of
the most popular DBMS currently available. The following are the characteristics of
PostgreSQL:
• Data Types: It supports many data types such as documents, primitives, geom-
etry, structures etc.
• Data integrity: It ensures data integrity by introducing constraints and regu-
lating data you add. The possibility for invalid or orphan records is zero.
• Performance: The performance is boosted and optimized by powerful indexing
method DS, parallelization of read queries, multi-version concurrency control
and many other features of PostgreSQL.
• Disaster Recovery and Reliability: There is an option to backup of data to pro-
tect the most valuable information and also the use of sophisticated replication
options the data is always safe.
• Internationalization and Text Search: International character sets are supported.
There is a full-text search enabled to speed up finding process and PostgreSQL
also integrates case-insensitive and accent-insensitive collations.
• Support of non-relational data: This is one of the most important update of the
database. Support of JSON, XML, Hstore and Cstore documents can actually
turns Postgres into NoSQL database.
Another benefit is that it is easy to integrate it with Spring boot, so it can be used
out of the box. [21]
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Analysis
3.5
Deployment
The deployment of an application means, that from a local code base, the developers
need to put a running version of their code somewhere on a server, so the functionality
becomes accessible by others. The most well known approach to solve this task is
containerization. This means that the application can be packaged into a container
with all its dependencies and run there.
Later this container can be placed on a
server.
3.5.1
Docker
Docker is one of the most popular open source project that makes use of containers.
It is a tool designed to make the life of developers easier, by letting them develop in
their own choice of platform, without having to worry about what kind of operating
system the application will run on.
There are many advantages of Docker. The first is that it provides isolation for the
application with little overhead and it has a low memory footprint.
This feature
enables microservices to be set up in their independent containers. If the services
need to access some logic from each other they can easily communicate with the
other containers and run smoothly. It is also possible, to configure the more user
heavy services, to have more resources allocated to their container and scale them
vertically. Also, since Docker has a lightweight nature, many docker containers can
be running on a single machine. During deployment it can also be useful that the
containers are easy to shut down and a new container started in their place within
a few seconds, this way minimizing the downtime of the application. Another key
property about Docker is consistency. Consistency in this case means that a container
with a set configuration will run the same on all kinds of environments, as long as
the environment has enough resources to run the container. This is very important
for testing an application locally, or even better, on a test server before placing it
to the production server. As it can be seen from the above analysis of Docker, it
is a perfect solution to deploy and test the developed microservices. Furthermore,
there is a need to mention that the docker images can be either used alone or paired
with another technology that helps and advances deployments, such as Kubernetes
or Docker Swarm. [9, 22, 23]
3.6
Communication
Communication is an important aspect of distributed web applications. There are
two areas of communication relevant for the Analysis chapter. The communication
from the outside (between client and server) and the communication between the
different services.
==PAGE:27==
3.6 Communication
17
Web browsers and servers can communicate using TCP/IP. Besides TCP/IP, they
use a standard application protocol called HTTP, that supports web browser requests
and server responses. This is a well known form of communication between clients
and servers, so it won’t be reviewed in detail. It is important to mention that HTTP
is a synchronous form of communication, meaning that the sender is blocked until
a response is received. Secondly, it is not a connection based protocol, unlike most
approaches. Before every HTTP request the client needs to make a new connection
to the server.
There are many ways to implement internal communication between the microser-
vices. One possibility are the before mentioned HTTP requests, which is not a great
choice because of its blocking nature. Microservices need to be as decoupled from
each other as possible, and it is not practical to use synchronous communication be-
tween them. For these reasons, it is best to use an asynchronous solutions such as
RabbitMQ or Kafka.
3.6.1
Message brokers and Publish/Subscribe messaging systems
Message brokers are software modules that enable different systems, services, and
applications to exchange information and communicate with each other. Message
brokers translate messages between formal messaging protocols. This way, interde-
pendent services can directly communicate with one another, regardless of the plat-
form they are running on or the language they have been written in.
The task of a message broker is to validate, store, route and deliver messages to the
correct recipients. A sender can issue messages without knowing the location of the
consumers, or even without knowing any information about the consumers, like how
many of them exist or whether they are active or not. This is done by the brokers
playing the role of intermediates between other applications.
On the other hand, publish/subscribe is a message distribution pattern that lets
producers publish everything they want and consumers only access these messages
when they have the resources to process them.
Data engineers and scientists refer to publish/subscribe as a broadcast-style dis-
tribution method, featuring a one-to-many relationship between the publisher and
the consumers. [24]
3.6.2
Kafka
Apache Kafka is a distributed messaging system that can receive hundreds of megabytes
of data per second from thousands of data sources simultaneously and process it se-
quentially and incrementally. It is often used as a message broker solution, namely
a platform that processes and mediates communication between applications. Ad-
ditionally, it can be used for stream processing, web site activity tracking and met-
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Analysis
rics collection and monitoring as well. It provides three main functions to its users:
publishing and subscribing to streams of records, effectively storing those streams
chronologically and processing them in real time. [24, 25]
3.6.2.1
How does Kafka work?
In short, Kafka has four main components, which are Producer, Broker, Topic, and
Consumer. Producers send messages, known as records in Kafka, to specific topics.
Consumers, who subscribe to those topics, consume the messages. Topics are incor-
porated in a log which is a data structure on disk. Kafka appends records from the
producers to the end of a topic log. Messages are byte arrays of data in any format
and are kept only for a certain amount of time (retention limit) in ordered sequence
of records, in the logs. Since a key is attached to each message, it guarantees that
messages arrive at the correct partition. Kafka keeps all messages for a set period
of time. In other words, it does not try to track which messages are actually read
by consumers (dumb broker/smart consumer model). The broker is the actual Kafka
server, that handles all of the above mentioned storing and processing of messages.
[25]
3.6.2.2
What are the benefits?
Kafka relies upon a “pull-based” approach, meaning the server waits for the consumer
to actively read stored messages, or ”pull” them, and does not process them by itself.
This prevents tight loops when there is no message past the offset. A pull model is
fitting for Kafka because of its partitions. Kafka provides message order in a partition
with no contending consumers. This allows users to leverage the batching of messages
for optimized message delivery and higher throughput.
Batching of messages is an optional feature of the Kafka messaging system. With
this batching strategy of Kafka, it is possible to group or ”batch” messages going to
the same partition and also reading from the partition, and send them together in a
single request. This is ideal if delivery can be held back until the batch is complete.
Kafka’s partitioned log model allows data to be distributed across multiple servers,
making it very scalable. The fact that data streams are decoupled, decreases latency,
making it extremely fast. Partitions can be distributed and replicated across many
servers/nodes, they are better protected against server failure, making the data very
fault-tolerant and durable. [26, 24]
3.6.3
RabbitMQ
RabbitMQ is an open-source distributed message broker that enables low-latency
messaging. Just as Kafka, it is called “distributed” because the queues are distributed
across nodes.
However, RabbitMQ employs a “push-based” model, which means
that the server delivers the messages it receives to the consumer, immediately upon
arrival. It also works with a consumer configured prefetch limit, which implies that
==PAGE:29==
3.6 Communication
19
after a certain amount of unacknowledged messages, no more messages are sent by
the server until the consumer starts sending back some acknowledgments. Simply
put, RabbitMQ acts like a post oﬀice that accepts, stores, and transmits binary data
messages.
3.6.3.1
How does RabbitMQ work?
RabbitMQ is a general purpose message broker. It consists of a set of broker processes
that host “exchanges” for publishing messages to queues and for consuming messages
from them. Messages are distributed individually, quickly and processed in the order
in which they arrived in the queue. A smart broker/dumb consumer model is in place,
which implies that there is a consistent delivery of messages to consumers, at around
the same speed as the broker monitors the consumer state. [27]
3.6.3.2
What are the benefits?
The characteristics described above give this message broker technology the abil-
ity to combine multiple applications, execute complex routing to consumers and
to share loads between workers under high load (20K+ messages/second).
Thus,
RabbitMQ is fitting for web servers that need rapid request-response, for process-
ing high-throughput and reliable background jobs, as well as dependably handling
long-running tasks and communication/integration between and within applications.
[27]
3.6.4
Kafka vs. RabbitMQ
Even though both technologies bring upsides, one needed to be chosen for the com-
munication between scalable microservices.
While RabbitMQ uses the exchange queue topology, Kafka employs the publish/-
subscribe topology. Kafka sends messages through correct topics to the authorized
groups instead of sending messages to an exchange where they are in turn routed to
various queues that lead to consumers.
In terms of data flow, in RabbitMQ messages are created and sent by the producer
and received by the consumer. Apache Kafka uses an unbounded data flow instead,
where data continuously streams to the assigned topic.
When it comes to data usage, Kafka works with operational data, which indicated
that it works best in process operation, auditing and logging statistics, and system
activity.
Regarding messaging, in RabbitMQ messages are removed from the queue once they
are processed and acknowledged. Kafka is a policy-based log. It uses continuous
messages, which stay in the queue until the chosen retention time expires.
RabbitMQ’s design model employs the smart broker/dumb consumer model, where
the broker consistently keeps track of the status of messages delivered to consumers.
Kafka doesn’t monitor users, preserving all messages for a set amount of time, and
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Analysis
thus using the dumb broker/smart consumer model.
These differences translate into Kafka offering much higher performance than Rab-
bitMQ[27]. It can achieve high throughput (millions of messages per second) with
limited resources, which is crucial for the scalability aim of this project. There are
measures proving that Kafka has the best throughput while providing the lowest
end-to-end latencies up to the p99.9th percentile. However RabbitMQ also performes
extremeley good at lower throughputs and delivers messages at very low latencies[28].
Both technologies, would have been a suitable choice for the communication between
the services, but in the end, Kafka was chosen due to its better scalability perfor-
mance. Last but not least, the eagerness of the developer to learn more about a new
technology, in this case Kafka, also played a role in this decision.
3.6.5
Redpanda
Redpanda is a real-time streaming platform for mission critical workloads. [29] It
emerged to fulfill the needs of developing organisations that prefer to be Kafka com-
patible without any code changes and expect to have a big data problem in the
upcoming future. It is a faster rewrite of the Apache Kafka’s producer/consumer
model. The main reason why Redpanda became useful in this project is the fact that
it is easier to be used by developers, since it doesn’t have a Zookeeper and is fully
compatible with Kafka API’s. [30] Usually, a big data processing distributed system
demands a Zookeeper for coordinating nodes and metadata.[31] This is associated
with needing Zookeeper expertise. However, with Redpanda this third-party manage-
ment is not needed, due to the open source Raft algorithm that performs distributed
consensus. In addition to the absence of Zookeeper, the fact that Redpanda is non-
JVM based grants developers the possibility of not needing to have Java knowledge,
which is known historically as a driver of complexity.[31] Lastly, the fact that Red-
panda is fully compatible with the Kafka API is a useful trait that made Redpanda a
good choice in this project. An already existing project, developed to use Kafka can
easily migrate over from using another Kafka broker to Redpanda. [30, 31]
3.7
Scalability
Scalability refers to the ability of a system, in this case a web application, of handling
growth. A successful application needs to be able to accommodate, handle an increase
in users and load, which can be triggered as the application becomes more and more
popular.
Furthermore, performance also has to be taken into consideration. Despite heavy
load, the system must not crash and respond to requests within an acceptable dura-
tion, as to not disrupt the user experience.
The three main elements to consider when improving scalability are performance,
recoverability and uncomplicated management. Improving performance means load
==PAGE:31==
3.7 Scalability
21
balancing so that the saturation point is not reached with an increase in the number
of users/requests. Having a high recoverability means means that the system has
the ability to start working quickly after experiencing a failure.
Lastly, scalable
development should take this into consideration that web applications are in constant
development and code maintenance cant become a troublesome task. Code should be
organized eﬀiciently from the start and scaling should not disturb this organization
but rather shape it for ease of management. [32]
In the following subsections of the Analysis chapter, the design choices taken to
improve the capacity for scalability will be described.
3.7.1
Scalability models
When talking about scalability, you will often hear about two main ways of scaling –
horizontal or vertical.
Scale Vertically – Scale Up
When scaling a system vertically, more power is added to an existing instance. This
can mean more memory, more hard drives for data storage or more powerful proces-
sors. Vertical scaling is often said to be cheaper and simpler as it does not need any
significant changes to the application’s code, especially with the help of containers.
However, the major drawback of this approach is that it may not fix the issue
in the long term, as you can’t add more and more resources to a node forever. At
some point, there is an operating system limitation. A demonstration about vertical
scaling can be seen on figure 3.1
Figure 3.1: Vertical scaling.
Scale Horizontally – Scale out
On the other hand, when scaling your systems horizontally, more servers/nodes
are added to spread the load across multiple machines. In our case, this means deploy-
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Analysis
ing new containers with the application on the server. This is a slightly more complex
task as it is necessary to distribute the load evenly across the running instances. A
demonstration about horizontal scaling can be seen on figure 3.2
Figure 3.2: Horizontal scaling.
All in all, designing a horizontally scalable system is more reliable in the long
run, but the benefits of vertical scaling should also be utilized. In this project, the
strategy will be to make use of both.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Design
This chapter will provide details of how the MA was designed. For visual purposes,
first the current monolith will be shown how the current architecture looks. The next
section will detail the design of the MA. The design will start with an overview of the
whole architecture and then show some of the underlying structure and flow with class
and sequence diagrams. Another important design question is to understand which
service needs to communicate with other services, and show this interservice commu-
nication. One other important thing to mention is the project called Carp Core. Both
the existing monolith, and both the planned MA aims to provide infrastructure for
this project. This project provides the domain for the main components such as study,
deployment, protocol and account. It also gives all the interfaces for the underlying
business logic for the domain. For more details the project and documentation of Carp
Core can be found here https://github.com/cph-cachet/carp.core-kotlin.
4.1
Current monolith solution
Lets start with the current design of the existing webservice. It is designed to be a
modular-monolith application written in Kotlin using Spring Boot. It is deployed to
the Cans webserver as a docker container on the same network as the other containers,
that it needs to communicate with. These other containers contain a PostgreSQL
database and a RabbitMQ. The PostgreSQL is responsible for persisting all the data
of the application and the RabbitMQ is used for handling incoming data points,
processing email sends to different users and providing implementation for the Core
Eventbus. The Deployment Diagram on Figure 4.1 showcases the current deployed
monolith to production profile.
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Design
Figure 4.1: Deployment diagram of the monolith on CANS webserver.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Microservice architecture
25
It can be seen that it contains the before mentioned Carp Core components and
also a lot of additional ones, giving additional features for the users. All the compo-
nents are inside of a single application, and some of them has tight coupling between
them. From this diagram a first overview can be drawn about the services, that need
to be created as a separate in the MA.
4.2
Microservice architecture
The design of the MA starts with identifying all the services that build up this system.
The existing monolith is a good basis for this. Since the monolith also uses Carp Core
as a dependency, and aims to provide implementation for it, it is easier to understand
the logic of the Core components. It also contains the necessary logic for the other
services as well. The plan for the architecture can be seen on figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: MA overview.
There is a total of 8 planned service, namely, study service, deployment service,
protocol service, account service, data point service, file service, consent service and
collection service. All of the services are planned to communicate with a common
PostgreSQL database. All of the services are planned to be deployed in their own
separate containers. This way they can be scaled individually on demand, either by
increasing the resources for the given container, or by creating multiple instances
of the same service. It can also be seen that for the inter-service communication
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Design
a RedPanda docker container will be used.
Its job is to store the topics, receive
records from the producers and make it available for the consumers. Showing this
communication on this diagram would have been to complex, that it deserves its own
showcase. Finally, the last important service to mention would be the Api-Gateway.
The requests from the outside come in the form of HTTP requests and received and
communicated by each service through Rest API. The problem is, how does the client
knows which of the services are needed to be addressed with the specific request. It
would be cumbersome to keep track on the client side, about the url of each ser-
vice. This is where an Api-Gateway comes into the picture. With the help of the
gateway all the services can be reached from the clients, without any information
about their exact url. Every request comes to the gateway and it directs it to the
correct service and sends back the received response from the service to the client.
It also runs in its separate container and can be deployed with the rest of the services.
The next essential part of the design is the communication between the services.
The main services, that have coupling to each other are study service with deployment
service and deployment service with account service. This is due to the Core depen-
dencies and the design of the already given interfaces. The designed solution for this,
is to place the Redpanda container into the middle the services and direct the com-
munication through it. The best would be, to make all communication asynchronous,
because if we have synchronous communication between two services, it takes away
the ability that each service should be able to operate without any influence by other
services. In some cases this is not possible, as mentioned previously it is due to the
Carp Core interfaces and services. Some of the Core services use synchronous com-
munication to other services and this is needed to be kept even during inter-service
communication as well.
First of all, lets take a look into the connection between study and deployment ser-
vice, presented on figure 4.3. Starting from the study service side, there are three
blocking messages. The first one is to get a study deployment, second is to get a
list of study deployments and third is removing a study deployment. For these we
have to depend on the deployment service being alive and responding to the messages.
Otherwise these calls time out after a few seconds. The rest of the communication
is asynchronous, as long as the producers can send the records to the kafka topics,
the consumers can process them when they are alive and not busy. Creating and
updating a study deployment event is this kind of communication. Also publishing
events to the study and deployment eventbuses are the same.
From the deploy-
ment service side of things, all the consumers can be found that are subscribed for
the topics in connection with the study service. In more detail the following top-
ics: ”get-study-deployment-topic”, ”get-study-deployment-list-topic”, ”remove-study-
deployment-topic”, ”add-study-deployment-topic”, ”update-study-deployment-topic” and
”deployment-eventbus-topic”. The rest are producers that are in charge of sending
back the responses for the study services synchronous messages.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Microservice architecture
27
Figure 4.3: Study service, deployment service communication.
Secondly, there is a similar communication also between deployment and account
service shown on figure 4.4. Similarly to the previous design, there is need for both
synchronous and asynchronous communication. On the deployment side of things,
there is the finding account and invite new account requests, that are waiting for
response from the account service.
The other requests are not waiting for reply,
just want to successfully publish data into the kafka topics. This kind of requests
are the following: inviting an existing user, publishing different events to the de-
ployment eventbus and sending back requested information to the account service.
Deployment service also has some additional consumers in addition to the ones dis-
cussed previously connected to study service. One is subscribed to the ”account-topic”
and provides response about whether the deployment contains a redirect url or not
into the ”account-requestreply-topic”. The other consumer is the before mentioned
”deployment-eventbus-topic”. On the account service side, there are the matching
consumers and producers in connection with the messages coming from deployment
service. There is one additional producer-consumer pair for processing sending emails.
This is essential for keeping the email sending messages persistent, and even if the
email server is down, the email messages are not lost and can be sent to the users
later on.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Design
Figure 4.4: Deployment service, account service communication.
4.3
Services
To gain more insight into the different services, this section will display the design of
each individual service.
4.3.1
Study service
Study service is implementing the functionalities defined in CARP Core for the study
domain. The most important classes can be seen on figure 4.5. Participant, Study and
Recruitment classes are the ones needed to be persisted into the database. For the
study side implementation, StudyRepository interface is responsible for the database
operations, meanwhile CoreStudyRepository is an implementation of the defined repos-
itory of Carp Core that uses the previously mentioned interface to persist and read
data. The next important class is CoreEventBus. It implements sending messages
to the ”study-eventbus” and ”deployment-eventbus” kafka topics and finds the sub-
scribers for these events.
CoreStudyService class depends on CoreStudyRepository
and CoreEventBus classes it provides an instance of the Core Study Service with the
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Services
29
implemented dependencies. This microservice is also responsible for handling Recruit-
ments, since they belong to the domain of studies. The classes are similar for the
already discussed structure of the study repository and service. The only difference is
that the CoreRecruitmentService has a dependency on CoreDeploymentService. This
service doesn’t belong to the study domain but it comes from core as well. Since it
doesn’t belong this domain, it is not possible to implement the logic there, thus it
is designed to provide communication to the actual deployment service and trigger
the correct methods there. Both of the services are used by the StudyVerticle that
receives and handles the requests coming from the clients by the use of a router.
Figure 4.5: Study service class diagram.
4.3.2
Deployment service
Next up is the deployment service, figure 4.6. It is the service that deploys the dif-
ferent studies to participants. It persists StudyDeployments and ParticipantGroups
to the database. The structure of the classes are similar to the discussed ones in
the study microservice. It has repositories and services that are defined by core and
implemented here. It also relies on the Account service, but it only implements com-
munication calls to the actual account service, rather than the actual implementation.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Design
Figure 4.6: Deployment service class diagram.
4.3.3
Account service
One other crucial service is the account service, figure 4.7. It is in charge of man-
aging accounts for the different users and connect these accounts to the different
deployments of studies. Connection and actions related to the database are done the
AccountRepository interface again. This is used by the AccountServiceImpl, that im-
plements the IAccountService. IAccountService extends the AccountService interface
of core and also contains some extra funcionality. This implementation is used by
the AccountVerticle and AccountRouter to serve requests. The account service is in
control of sending email invitations as well for user registration. On figure 4.8 the
classes for this functionality are visible. The formerly discussed AccountServiceImpl
class uses the IEmailInvitationService interface, that is implemented by the Email-
InvitationServiceImpl class. This class contains a reference to the EmailSendingJob
class and the EmailServiceImpl class. EmailSendingJob class is useful for processing
email sends through a kafka topic making it more resilient for failures. EmailServi-
ceImpl is responsible for the logic of creating the email and sending it to the recipients.
EmailRepository is used for keeping track of the status of emails, since some of the
emails can be already pending or sent, so it is necessary to stop these from sending
again. There is one significant thing to mention regarding the account service. It
should provide a way to also register and store users for security reasons, but this
is not yet designed and included in the current design, but will be mentioned in the
discussion section.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Services
31
Figure 4.7: Account service class diagram.
4.3.4
Protocol service
Protocol service is the last Carp Core dependent service from the microservices. It is
more simple, than the already mentioned services, thanks to not having any depen-
dencies and communication to other services. As a result the class diagram is also
more simple, figure 4.9. There is the usual structure of the Protocol domain class for
the data format. ProtocolRepository interface for communication with the database.
And CoreProtocolRepository implementing the repository interface provided by core
and using the ProtocolRepository for database communication. In ProtocolVerticle
class an instance of this CoreProtocolRepository is used to create a service instance
Figure 4.8: Email class diagram.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Design
of ProtocolService in ProtocolVerticle class provided by core as well. ProtocolVerticle
class handles the incoming requests with the help of the ProtocolRouter class.
Figure 4.9: Protocol class diagram.
4.3.5
Data point service
In the following sections, the plan for the rest, non core dependent services will be
shown, starting with the class diagram of Data point service appearing on figure
4.10.
This is probably the most crucial service when it comes to the question of
scalability. This service will receive the most input from user throughout the run of
the application. Most of the other services have to serve one time or at most a few
times every request. For example, only researchers are able to interact with creating
studies, deployments, protocols and inviting users. On the other hand this service is
used by the everyday users to upload data about them self on a regular basis. With a
huge amount of users it can be a lot of data upload request and a considerable amount
of load on this system to be handled. It has the usual repository interface for database
communication and another custom repository interface for a separate functionality,
that cannot be done with the usual repository calls. For this separate functionality,
an implementation is needed, this comes from the DataPointRepositoryImpl class,
that uses the normal DataPointRepository. There is also an interface for the service
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Services
33
methods needed for this microservice, and an implementation provided with business
logic. This service is used to serve the requests coming to the DatapointVerticle and
the router. The last important class to mention is the DatapointBatchProcessorJob.
It is used when a batch of data points is uploaded into the service, that might need
a longer time to process. This batch is going to be sent through a Kafka topic and
consumed by a listener job and processed.
Figure 4.10: Data point class diagram.
Furthermore, to demonstrate the behavior of the batch data point upload the
sequence diagram on figure 4.11 shows the flow of this request. The flow starts with
a user making a request with a file and a deployment id to the batch datapoint
endpoint handled by the router used in the DatapointVerticle. This handler calls
the creatMany method implemented in the DatapointService class. First this method
parse the file with the help of a method in DataPointProcessorJob class. If the file
is empty or contains some kind of bad content instead of an array of data points,
this method throws an error and an error message is returned back to the user. If
everything is okay with the content of the file a list of data points is returned back
from the parser. This list is sent to the DataPointBatchProcessorJob class again just
to the process method. This process method serialize this list and send it to the
”datapoint-processing-topic” on the RedPanda container. After this the user receives
a successful request response. In the same class there is a Listener subscribed for this
processing topic and consumes the data, when there is free resources to process it.
This listener deserializes the message and for each data point in the list it calls the
create method in DatapointService. The create method saves the data point to the
database with the help of the save method in DatapointRepository. It is one of the
most important flow of the services from a scalability point of view, since this part of
the application will receive the most load during studies with lots of users uploading
data points at the same time.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Design
Figure 4.11: Batch data point upload sequence diagram.
4.3.6
Consent service
Consent service is in control of managing and storing consent documents, relevant
for collecting user data. On figure 4.12 the class diagram of this service is displayed.
It is a fairly simple service with the classes of ConsentVerticle and ConsentRouter
in charge of handling requests with the help of the IConsentDocumentInterface and
its implementation. And finally, as usual the ConsentDocumentRepository uses the
connection with the database to write and read ConsentDocuments.
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Services
35
Figure 4.12: Consent class diagram.
4.3.7
File service
Next up is file service shown on figure 4.13. This service contains classes for storing
metadata about uploaded files to the application, and also for storing and download-
ing them to and from the disk. As always we have a router class that uses all the
other service classes. In this case, these service classes are the IFileStorage inter-
face and the IFileService interface and their implementation. The storage interface
and implementation is responsible for storing the files on disk as it name suggests.
Meanwhile the file service interface and class is in charge of saving the meta data
with the help of the repository interfaces and implementation and implementing the
business logic. To the database the File domain class is persisted. Some additional
classes are the FileUtil and FilePermissionUtil classes, that are used during the file
storage implementation. Finally, there is a kafka consumer class in connection with
the communication with the data point service. In some cases a file is also uploaded
during datapoint upload and it is need to be saved by the file service.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Design
Figure 4.13: File class diagram.
4.3.8
Collection service
Collection service is in control of managing documents and also organize them into
collections. For this two different subdomain is necessary in this service. First is
the collection domain, it is used for collecting and storing documents to the same
place, so it is easier later on to find the relevant documents. There is a common
verticle class called DocumentCollectionVerticle, that can serve both collection and
document requests from the clients. The structure of the collection domain is the
usual structure as in the previously seen services.
Figure 4.14: Collection class diagram.
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Design summary
37
As for the document side of this service, it is also fairly trivial. It is not shown on
the diagram but these classes are also connected to the DocumentCollectionVerticle
class, namely the DocumentRouter class to serve user requests. An additional class to
the repository and service interfaces and implementation classes is the DocumentSpec-
ification class, which provides some additional queries on the documents.
Figure 4.15: Document class diagram.
4.4
Design summary
To sum up the design process, first the carp core domain was analyzed and its imple-
mentation with the current monolith solution. After analyzing it, the monolith was
taken apart into smaller domains, aligning with the core domain model and its own
separate architecture. After this separation, the dependency between these separated
domains was taken into consideration and a design for interservice communication
with the help of kafka was created. This includes all the producers and consumers and
the kafka topics in the middle. Finally, the structure of the services were designed
and the dependencies between the different classes and interfaces inside them.
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
In the implementation chapter, the process of how the design discussed in the pre-
vious chapter was implemented is detailed. Each service will be discussed on after
another. First the structure will be explained, then the functionality of each compo-
nent inside a service. As the explanation progress to the next services, some parts of
the implementation will show repetitive logic. These will be explained only once and
just referenced back to the previous example upon seeing them again.
5.1
Study service
The first service implemented was the study service. To begin with, a Spring boot gra-
dle project was generated with the help of the spring boot project intializer 1 in kotlin
language. First the dependencies for the project were configured in the build.gradle.kts
file.
The most important dependencies are the carp core dependencies such as
”dk.cachet.carp.studies:carp.studies.core-jvm:1.0.0-alpha.35” or ”dk.cachet.carp.common:carp.comm
jvm:1.0.0-alpha.35”. Here it is important to notice that core version 35 was used
in this project. Other important dependencies are the vert.x dependencies such as
”io.vertx:vertx-web” and ”io.vertx:vertx-lang-kotlin-coroutines” to access functionali-
ties for web development and coroutines. Finally, the rest of the dependencies are
from spring boot starter for web application development and database connection,
jackson dependencies for serialization and deserialization and kafka dependencies for
communication from both spring and apache kafka. An important aspect to mention
is the embeded tomcat server that comes with many of the spring boot dependencies
and would start up automatically when the spring boot application is started. It
is crucial to disable this automatic start up, since vert.x only works with its own
http server. For this purpose, all the tomcat dependencies were excluded from the
other dependencies. The next important file for configuring the project is the appli-
cation.properties file, that contains vital configuration for database connection, data-
source information and for communication with kafka and the redpanda container.
Next, lets see the structure of the files of the study service. The structure is separated
into three packages, namely common, deployment and study. The common package
contains all the logic that is not specific to the study domain, but some more generic
logic that can be reused in every other service as well. The first common folder is the
1https://start.spring.io/
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Implementation
audit folder and inside them the classes, that are required for audit purposes. These
classes are used to add some extra columns for the persisted data in the database, such
as who created or updated the record and when was the record created or updated.
Next is the datasource folder that has the DataSourceConfiguration class inside. This
class configures the data source options on the application start up, to optimize the
connection and setup with it. Another significant class is the CoreEventBus class,
that provides implementation to the EventBus interface introduced in carp core. The
most interesting detail is how the publish function was implemented with the help
of kafka. The publish method can be either called from a StudyService method or a
DeploymentService method, this determines what kind of event is the event needed to
be published. After being casted to the correct event type the event is serialized into
a string with the help of the core serializer JSON. Finally, a kafka record is created
from this serialized event and sent to the correct kafka topic.
1 override suspend fun <TService : ApplicationService <TService, TEvent>,
TEvent : IntegrationEvent <TService>> publish(
2
publishingService: KClass<TService>,
3
event: TEvent
4
) {
5
if (StudyService::class == publishingService) {
6
val castedEvent = event as StudyService.Event
7
val serializedEvent = JSON.encodeToString(castedEvent)
8
val record: ProducerRecord <String, Any> = ProducerRecord <String,
Any>(
9
environment.getProperty("kafka.topic.study-eventbus-topic")
!!, serializedEvent
10
)
11
kafkaTemplate.send(record)
12
LOGGER.info("New StudyService event '${castedEvent::class.
simpleName}' is published.")
13
} else if (DeploymentService::class == publishingService) {
14
val castedEvent = event as DeploymentService.Event
15
val serializedEvent = JSON.encodeToString(castedEvent)
16
val record: ProducerRecord <String, Any> = ProducerRecord <String,
Any>(
17
environment.getProperty("kafka.topic.deployment-eventbus-
topic")!!, serializedEvent
18
)
19
kafkaTemplate.send(record)
20
LOGGER.info("New DeploymentService event '${castedEvent::class.
simpleName}' is published.")
21
}
22
}
Listing 5.1: publish to EventBus topics.
The following packages are exception and internalization packages inside the common
package. The exception package consists of two different exceptions: BadRequestEx-
ception and SerializationException. BadRequestException is thrown, when a request
is invalid or missing a required parameter and SerializationException occurs if a se-
rializer cannot serialize the value due to bad format or empty objects. Moving on
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Study service
41
to the internalization package, it has an abstract class called AMessageBase, that
has two methods for getting different messages with the help of a message source
accessor. One method gets a message with a defined code, while the other method
gets a message with a defined code and also fills the places in the message with given
parameters. The other class in the internalization package is MessageBase class. It
implements the previous abstract class and provides configuration for the message
source that contains all the needed messages.
Lastly, there are two more common packages.
The first is the kafka package for
setting up all the configuration needed for producing and consuming kafka messages.
The KafkaConfig class holds these configurations. It is annotated with @Configura-
tion and @EnableKafka annotations. The configuration annotation indicates to the
spring container that this class contains one ore more @Bean methods that need to be
processed. @EnableKafka is necessary for kafka specific listeners to be able to detect
methods and configurations defined in this class. To begin with, lets start with the
producer and consumer configurations.
1
@Bean
2
fun stringProducerConfigs(): Map<String, Any?> {
3
val props: MutableMap <String, Any?> = HashMap()
4
// list of host:port pairs used for establishing the initial
connections to the Kakfa cluster
5
props[ProducerConfig.BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS_CONFIG] = environment?.
getProperty("spring.kafka.bootstrap-servers")
6
props[ProducerConfig.ACKS_CONFIG] = "all"
7
props[ProducerConfig.KEY_SERIALIZER_CLASS_CONFIG] = StringSerializer
::class.java
8
props[ProducerConfig.VALUE_SERIALIZER_CLASS_CONFIG] =
StringSerializer::class.java
9
return props
10
}
Listing 5.2: Producer configuration.
This code shows how does the configuration for a producer looks like.
The most
important values set for the producer are the BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS_CONFIG,
ACKS_CONFIG, KEY_SERIALIZER_CLASS_CONFIG and VALUE_SERIALIZER
_CLASS_CONFIG properties. These properties define how can the broker be reached,
what are the delivery semantics2 and what are the serializers used for key and value
serialization. Ack=all setting for producers doesn’t help with latency and throughput
but helps with durability. This is expected to not cause any issues with the current
scalability aim of the project, and using RedPanda as a broker with this setup seems
to be a scalable solution.
As for the consumers the configuration3 is as follows:
1
@Bean
2https://medium.com/@sdjemails/kafka-producer-delivery-semantics-be863c727d3f
3https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/installation/configuration/consumer-configs.html
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Implementation
2
fun consumerConfigs(): Map<String, Any?> {
3
val props: MutableMap<String, Any?> = HashMap()
4
props[ConsumerConfig.BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS_CONFIG] = environment?.
getProperty("spring.kafka.bootstrap-servers")
5
props[ConsumerConfig.GROUP_ID_CONFIG] = environment?.getProperty("
spring.kafka.consumer.group-id")
6
props[ConsumerConfig.KEY_DESERIALIZER_CLASS_CONFIG] =
StringDeserializer::class.java
7
props[ConsumerConfig.VALUE_DESERIALIZER_CLASS_CONFIG] =
JsonDeserializer::class.java
8
props[ConsumerConfig.ENABLE_AUTO_COMMIT_CONFIG] = true
9
props[ConsumerConfig.AUTO_OFFSET_RESET_CONFIG] = "earliest"
10
props[ConsumerConfig.REQUEST_TIMEOUT_MS_CONFIG] = "60000"
11
return props
12
}
Listing 5.3: Consumer configuration.
Some configurations are similar as the previously seen producer configs, like the boot-
strap server and the key and value settings, just deserializer classes instead of seri-
alizers. The group id is an important configuration for the consumers. It shows for
the for the broker what to do when a record is published to a topic. The record will
be delivered to one consumer instance within each subscribing consumer group. It is
possible, that the consumer instances are even in separate processes or on separate
machines. Further settings are the auto commit and the offset reset properties, to
set up on the kafka server, the next messages to be consumed next. Finally, request
time out controls the time the client waits to resend a message upon not receiving a
response.
Now that the producer and consumer configuration is clear, lets continue with the
kafka specific beans that facilitate the communication. First is the producer factory
method that creates a DefaultKafkaProducerFactory instance with the producer con-
figurations. This factory method is used in the next @Bean method, which creates
a KafkaTemplate object. This kafka template later can be used to send records to
different topics.
1
@Bean
2
fun producerFactory(): ProducerFactory <String, Any?> {
3
return DefaultKafkaProducerFactory(jsonProducerConfigs())
4
}
5
6
@Bean
7
fun kafkaTemplateObject(): KafkaTemplate <String, Any?> {
8
return KafkaTemplate(producerFactory())
9
}
Listing 5.4: Producer factory and Kafka template example.
There is another more complex template to send messages beside this simple one,
which is used for synchronous messaging. As it was detailed in the design session,
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Study service
43
this is also a requirement for some of the interaction between services. For this, a so
called ReplyingKafkaTemplate is needed.
1
@Bean
2
fun replyKafkaTemplateStudyDeployment(
3
pf: ProducerFactory <String, String?>?,
4
@Qualifier("replyContainerStudyDeployment") container:
KafkaMessageListenerContainer <String, String >?
5
): ReplyingKafkaTemplate <String, String?, String> {
6
val replyTemplate = ReplyingKafkaTemplate(pf, container)
7
replyTemplate.setSharedReplyTopic(true)
8
replyTemplate.setDefaultReplyTimeout(Duration.ofSeconds(10))
9
return replyTemplate
10
}
11
12
@Bean
13
fun replyContainerStudyDeployment(cf: ConsumerFactory <String, String >):
KafkaMessageListenerContainer <String, String >? {
14
val containerProperties = ContainerProperties(environment?.
getProperty("kafka.topic.get-study-deployment -requestreply -topic
"))
15
return KafkaMessageListenerContainer(cf, containerProperties)
16
}
17
18
@Bean
19
fun consumerFactoryString(): ConsumerFactory <String, String> {
20
return DefaultKafkaConsumerFactory(
21
consumerConfigs(), StringDeserializer(), StringDeserializer()
22
)
23
}
Listing 5.5: ReplyingKafkaTemplate example.
This code example how the ReplyingKafkaTemplate is implemented for sending a
message with the help of the producer factory, but also listening for a reply with the
configured KafkaMessageListenerContainer bean. For this bean method a Consumer-
Factory bean with the proper configuration and deserialization is needed as well. For
the reply container a reply topic is essential to be set, so it knows where to subscribe
for the reply for the produced record. This ReplyingKafkaTemplate is implemented
for getting a study deployment, getting a study deployment list and removing a study
deployment.
Finally, the last significant method of the kafka configuration is the bean that is essen-
tial for subscribing for a kafka topic from anywhere in the application. The following
code shows how is this implemented for enabling listening to messages coming from
the study event bus.
1
@Bean
2
fun kafkaListenerContainerFactoryString(): KafkaListenerContainerFactory
<ConcurrentMessageListenerContainer <String, String>> {
3
val factory: ConcurrentKafkaListenerContainerFactory <String, String>
=
4
ConcurrentKafkaListenerContainerFactory <String, String >()
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Implementation
5
factory.consumerFactory = consumerFactoryString()
6
return factory
7
}
Listing 5.6: KafkaListenerContainerFactory example.
This is method is fairly straight forward, it can be defined what kind of value is
expected, such as a String or another object. A ConcurrentKafkaListenerContainer-
Factory instance is created with the given type. After this, only a ConsumerFactory
is needed to be set for the listener factory and it is ready to start listening to a given
topic.
Finally, the last common package is the serializers package. The purpose of this
package is to configure a primary object mapper bean, which is injected into every
class that needs an object mapper instance. The class for this is the ObjectMapperCon-
fig class and it implements SimpleModule, that allows registration of serializers and
deserializers. After all the necessary registration the objectMapper bean is created.
1
@Bean
2
@Primary
3
fun objectMapper(): ObjectMapper {
4
val objectMapper = ObjectMapper()
5
objectMapper.registerModule(KotlinModule())
6
objectMapper.registerModule(this)
7
8
objectMapper.registerModule(JavaTimeModule())
9
objectMapper.configure(SerializationFeature.
WRITE_DATES_AS_TIMESTAMPS , false)
10
11
return objectMapper
12
}
Listing 5.7: Primary objectMapper bean example.
This concludes the common packages inside study service.
The second main package is the deployment package. This wouldn’t belong to
the study service by nature, however carp core introduces a dependency to it, thus
it needs to be implemented as a messaging implementation to the real deployment
service.
The way to create an instance of a core service is to implement all the
parameters used in its constructor and then create an instance from it.
1
@ExperimentalSerializationApi
2
@Component
3
class CoreDeploymentService(
4
deploymentRepository: CoreDeploymentRepository ,
5
coreEventBus: CoreEventBus) {
6
final val instance: DeploymentService =
DeploymentServiceHost(
7
deploymentRepository ,
8
coreEventBus.createApplicationServiceAdapter(DeploymentService::
class)
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Study service
45
9
)
10 }
Listing 5.8: Core deployment service instance.
Here the deploymentRepository and coreEventBus parameters are required for instan-
tiating this service, and it is up to the developer to decide how to do the implemen-
tation. This means that the deploymentRepository doesn’t actually need to do what
its name would suggest, rather than just sending records.
1
override suspend fun add(studyDeployment: StudyDeployment) {
2
val recordMessage: String = objectMapper.writeValueAsString(
3
StudyDeploymentKafkaMessage(
4
studyDeployment.id,
5
studyDeployment.protocolSnapshot
6
)
7
)
8
val record: ProducerRecord <String, Any?> = ProducerRecord <String,
Any?>(
9
environment?.getProperty("kafka.topic.add-study-deployment-topic
"), recordMessage
10
)
11
// post in kafka topic
12
studyDeploymentKafkaTemplate!!.send(record)
13
}
14
15
16
override suspend fun getStudyDeploymentBy(id: UUID): StudyDeployment? {
17
val record: ProducerRecord <String, String?> = ProducerRecord <String,
String?>(
18
environment?.getProperty("kafka.topic.get-study-deployment-topic
"),
19
objectMapper.writeValueAsString(id)
20
)
21
// set reply topic in header
22
record.headers()
23
.add(
24
RecordHeader(
25
KafkaHeaders.REPLY_TOPIC ,
26
environment?.getProperty("kafka.topic.get-study-
deployment -requestreply -topic")!!.toByteArray()
27
)
28
)
29
// post in kafka topic
30
val sendAndReceive: RequestReplyFuture <String, String?, String> =
31
getStudyDeploymentKafkaTemplate!!.sendAndReceive(record)
32
LOGGER.info("Get study deployment message sent")
33
// get consumer record
34
val consumerRecord: ConsumerRecord <String, String> = sendAndReceive.
get()
35
val response: StudyDeploymentKafkaMessage =
36
objectMapper.readValue(consumerRecord.value(),
StudyDeploymentKafkaMessage::class.java)
37
// return consumer value
38
return StudyDeployment(response.studyProtocolSnapshot , response.id)
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Implementation
39
}
Listing 5.9: CoreDeploymentRepository example.
The add method is an example for an asynchronous way of publishing a record to
the proper topic. First the vital information are is serialized to string format, then
a record created from it and sent to the correct topic. The second example is the
getStudyDeploymentBy, shows the way to communicate synchronously. Here the con-
figured objectMapper is used again for serialization at the beginning and for deseri-
alization at the end. In the middle is the example, of how to send and receive with
the same request. The last essential thing to mention is the serialization and deseri-
alization classes, that are implementing the serialization for the core classes. These
classes are the ones that are registered to the previously mentioned objectMapper
configuration.
Lastly, the main component of this service is the study package. The domain,
repository, service and serdes packages were reused from the existing monolith due to
time constraint reasons. The first different class is the StudyEventProcessorJob, that
is subscribed for the ”study-eventbus-topic” and invokes the handlers from coreEvent-
Bus for the received event. This invocation is a blocking operation, thus a coroutine
job is launched to execute it.
1
@KafkaListener(topics = ["study-eventbus-topic"])
2
fun listen(message: String) {
3
LOGGER.info("New message received from the study event topic.")
4
val event: StudyService.Event = JSON.decodeFromString(message)
5
launch {
6
try {
7
coreEventBus.invokeHandlers(event)
8
} catch (e: Exception) {
9
LOGGER.warn(e)
10
}
11
}
12
}
Listing 5.10: Study event processor job.
Finally, the last task was the implementation for receiving requests from different
clients. In a usual spring boot application this would be handled by a Controller class,
that has different POST, GET, DELETE and PUT endpoints for serving requests.
As it was planned from the start to introduce an asynchronous solution for handling
these requests another framework was used instead of the spring boot solution. This
framework is the previously explained vert.x4 solution. In vert.x, there are the so
called Verticle instances and they are the ones facilitating all the request handling
with the use of Routers. Each verticle is deployed, when the application is started.
In the case of a spring boot application this happens at the @PostConstruct phase,
after all the spring beans are already up. This verticle is called StudyVerticle in this
4https://vertx.io/
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Study service
47
microservice and it implements the AbstractVerticle abstract class. It has only one
method inherited from AbstractVerticle called start showcased on listing 5.11. This
method is responsible for creating a router instance for request handling and also for
creating a http server on a specified port.
1
override fun start(startPromise: Promise<Void>) {
2
val router = StudyRouter(
3
vertx,
4
coreStudyService.instance,
5
coreRecruitmentService.instance,
6
messageBase ,
7
kafkaTemplate ,
8
environment ,
9
objectMapper
10
)
11
12
val httpServerOptions = HttpServerOptions().setPort(8080)
13
vertx.createHttpServer(httpServerOptions)
14
.requestHandler(router.getRouter())
15
.listen { async ->
16
if (async.succeeded()) {
17
println("Web server verticle started on port: ${async.
result().actualPort()}")
18
} else {
19
println("Error on creating the WebServer Verticle. Cause
:
${async.cause()}")
20
}
21
}
22
}
Listing 5.11: StudyVerticle start method.
As it can be seen a StudyRouter is created for handling the requests.
The
getRouter() method contains the following, visible on listing 5.12
1
fun getRouter(): Router {
2
val router = Router.router(vertx)
3
router.route().handler(BodyHandler.create())
4
5
// POST
6
router.post(STUDY_SERVICE).coroutineHandler {
handleStudyServiceRequest(it) }
7
router.post(RECRUITMENT_SERVICE).coroutineHandler {
handleRecruitmentServiceRequest(it) }
8
router.route().failureHandler {
9
run {
10
val statusCode = when(it.failure()) {
11
is BadRequestException -> 400
12
is SerializationException -> 400
13
is IllegalArgumentException -> 400
14
else -> 500
15
}
16
it.response().setStatusCode(statusCode).end(it.failure().
message)
17
}
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Implementation
18
}
19
return router
20
}
Listing 5.12: StudyRouter getRouter method.
First a reference to the router instance is gained, then a handler registered to it.
For this router all the necessary routes can be defined, like the post request route
with the url of the study service endpoint. For each route a handler is needed. In
this case it needs to be a so called coroutineHandler, because the handling functions
are suspendable functions and they need to be run inside of a coroutine context,
seen on listing 5.13.
This handler takes a function and launches a coroutine job
and calls the function inside of the job. This kind of function is for example the
handleStudyServiceRequest() method. This method’s task is to process the request
and execute the relevant service calls with the correct data and provide a response
back to the callers.
1
private fun Route.coroutineHandler(fn: suspend (RoutingContext) -> Unit)
{
2
handler {
3
CoroutineScope(it.vertx().dispatcher()).launch() {
4
try {
5
fn(it)
6
} catch (e: Exception) {
7
it.fail(e)
8
}
9
}
10
}
11
}
Listing 5.13: Coroutine handler example.
5.1.1
PostgreSQL and RedPanda docker containers
Before the application is ready to be tested, two important docker containers are
needed to be created and started. This is done by the use of the docker-compose.db.yml
and docker-compose.redpanda.yml files. For the postgres container the image post-
gres:latest is used and the container can be reached on port number 5432.
The
redpanda container uses the docker.vectorized.io/vectorized/redpanda:v21.9.5 image
and listens on port 9092. Instead of the redpanda container other kafka compatible
containers are also okay to use such as confluent kafka. However, redpanda provides
an easy out of the box docker setup and documentation5 and other benefits as well,
discussed in the analyzis chapter.
5https://vectorized.io/docs/quick-start-docker/
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Deployment service
49
5.2
Deployment service
The next implemented service was the deployment service, as the study service had
a dependency to it. So it was the best approach to continue with this one, so the
functionality in study service can be testes thoroughly. This service also contains
the common package. Most of the functionality is similar to the common package
discussed in study service, just adjusted for the needs of this service. This is mainly
relevant for the kafka configuration and the serializers. In the kafka configuration
the beans for receiving communication from the study service and also for replying
to some of that is needed. Some additional beans were also needed to enable commu-
nication with the account service as well.
The next package beside the obvious deployment package is the account package. It
only contains an implementation for AccountService and some serialization classes.
This implementation is vital to satisfy the dependency in the ParticipationService,
which is part of the deployment package. When a study is deployed to a participant,
first a deployment is created and secondly a participation is also created. For a par-
ticipation to be valid the participant need to be added to the system as well, thus the
inviteNewAccount or inviteExistingAccount method is called in the account service.
The implementation of these call are similar to the communication discussed between
the study service and deployment service. During this implementation, there was
on very interesting problem causing some complication. It was caused by the seri-
alization of the devices, that are included in the message to the AccountService for
creating a new account and for creating an existing account as well. The reason is,
that this list of devices has a type of DeviceDescriptor<*, *>, which is a polymorphic
type. After some research, the following solution was found for this issue, listing 5.14.
1
JSON.encodeToString(ListSerializer(PolymorphicSerializer(
DeviceDescriptor::class)),devices))
Listing 5.14: Serializing a polymorphic type.
JSON.encodeToString method is provided by carp core, and it receives a ListSerial-
izer combined with a PolymorphicSerializer inside and the defined polymorphic type.
Finally, the structure of the deployment package is also very similar to the struc-
ture presented in the study service. It contains the packages of verticle, router, service,
repository, domain, eventbus and serdes(serializer, deserializer package). However,
there is one new package that contains a consumer class for all the subscribers for
messages aimed to arrive to this service with Kafka. This class contains two kind of
listeners, the first is just listens and doesn’t send back any reply shown on listing 5.15
and the other type which sends back replies to a specified topic detailed on listing
5.16. The main differences between these two types are, during the first type the
service call is handled in an asynchronous way, a coroutine job is launched for pro-
cessing it and the thread is not blocked. On the other hand, during type two when a
message is required to be sent back, the service call is put inside a runblocking block
and the next blocks of code doesn’t get executed until this runblocking block finishes.
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Implementation
Furthermore, additional meta data is received about the message, such as correlation
id, to facilitate the correct destination of the reply message.
1
@KafkaListener(topics = ["add-study-deployment -topic"])
2
@Throws(InterruptedException::class)
3
fun listenAddStudyDeployment(studyMessage: ConsumerRecord <String, Any>)
{
4
LOGGER.info("New addStudyDeployment message received.")
5
val newMessage: String = studyMessage.value().toString().replace("\\
", "")
6
val message: String = newMessage.substring(1, newMessage.length - 1)
7
val studyDeploymentKafkaMessage: StudyDeploymentKafkaMessage =
objectMapper.readValue(message, StudyDeploymentKafkaMessage::
class.java)
8
val study = StudyDeployment(studyDeploymentKafkaMessage.
studyProtocolSnapshot , studyDeploymentKafkaMessage.id)
9
launch {
10
try {
11
deploymentService.add(study)
12
} catch (e: Exception) {
13
LOGGER.warn(e)
14
}
15
}
16
}
Listing 5.15: Kafka listener.
1
@KafkaListener(topics = ["get-study-deployment -list-topic"],
containerFactory = "kafkaListenerContainerFactoryGetStudyDeployments
")
2
@SendTo
3
@Throws(InterruptedException::class)
4
fun listenGetStudyDeployments(@Payload message: List<String >?,
5
@Header(KafkaHeaders.RECEIVED_MESSAGE_KEY)
key: String?,
6
@Header(KafkaHeaders.RECEIVED_PARTITION_ID
) partition: Int,
7
@Header(KafkaHeaders.CORRELATION_ID)
correlation: ByteArray?,
8
@Header(KafkaHeaders.RECEIVED_TOPIC) topic
: String?,
9
@Header(KafkaHeaders.RECEIVED_TIMESTAMP)
ts: Long): Message<List<String >>? {
10
LOGGER.info("New getStudyDeploymentList message received.")
11
val uuidSet: Set<UUID> = message!!.map {UUID(it.substring(1, it.
length - 1))}.toSet()
12
var result: List<StudyDeployment >?
13
runBlocking {
14
result =
deploymentService.getStudyDeploymentsBy(uuidSet)
15
}
16
val resultStrings: List<String> = result!!.map { objectMapper.
writeValueAsString(StudyDeploymentKafkaMessage(
17
it.id,
18
it.protocolSnapshot)) }
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Account service
51
19
return MessageBuilder.withPayload(resultStrings).setHeader(
KafkaHeaders.CORRELATION_ID , correlation).setHeader(KafkaHeaders
.MESSAGE_KEY , key).build()
20
}
Listing 5.16: Kafka replying listener.
5.3
Account service
Account service consists of the usual common package and its own main package,
the account package. Starting with the account package, the structure is the usual
package structure, that is familiar from the previous services. It contains the domain,
dto, kafka, repository, router, serdes, service and verticle packages. The functionality
and business logic is the same as the business logic of the monolith.
As for the common package, one new package appears here called email. It is taken
from the monolith as well and it helps generating email messages, by the use of tem-
plates and implements sending them to an actual email address. The only difference
is, while in the monolith for processing email sending and making it more durable,
a RabbitMQ based solution is used, on the contrary in this implementation a kafka
based solution.
Another big difference is the missing security package, that would be used to create
and manage users linked with the created accounts.
It would be the solution for
authentication and authorization as well, however in this project it is out of scope,
but will be discussed later on in the discussion chapter.
5.4
Protocol service
The next and final service that comes from carp core version ”1.0.0-alpha.35” is the
protocol service. This service is fairly simple, basically a normal CRUD service for
protocols. There is no interaction with any other services. It still has the common
package, but without kafka and eventbus. As for the protocol package it has the
domain, serdes, verticle, router, repository packages. One thing to notice here is, that
there is no service package. It is this way, because the core service can be instantly
instantiated from the verticle. This is the last service, where the service business logic
is provided by core, in the following services all the business logic is free to implement.
The only requirement is, that at the end, they should have the same functionality
from the point of view of clients, as the functionalities of the monolith.
5.5
Data point service
The first non-core service is the data point service. This is the service, that is most
likely to be under the highest load during the run of the application. It needs to receive
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Implementation
and handle data point uploads from many users constantly, often at the same time.
In the common package, there is a new package called query package, to implement
different queries to be executed on the data points. Also, the kafka configuration sets
up the system to process data points with the help of a kafka topic and also to send
files to the file service for storage. The usual verticle, router, repository, service and
domain classes are present here as well. With the difference, that the service class
now contains the implementation of the service methods, instead of just instantiating
a service from core.
The exciting tasks for this service were the implementation
the endpoints with vert.x compared to Spring Boot endpoints. And replacing the
RabbitMQ data point processing job with Kafka. The code on listing 5.17 showcases,
how can the create many request be processed and the service method called with
the appropriate parameters.
1
private fun handleCreateMany(routingContext: RoutingContext) {
2
val deploymentId = routingContext.request().getParam(DEPLOYMENT_ID)
3
LOGGER.info("Start POST: /api/deployments/$deploymentId/data-points/
batch")
4
5
val files: Set<FileUpload > = routingContext.fileUploads()
6
if (files.isEmpty()) {
7
routingContext.response().end()
8
return
9
}
10
val fileUpload: FileUpload = files.iterator().next()
11
val file = FileInputStream(fileUpload.uploadedFileName())
12
dataPointService.createMany(file, deploymentId)
13
file.close()
14
15
routingContext.response().setStatusCode(201).end()
16
}
Listing 5.17: Create many datapoint handler.
At one point of this method the file is processed into an array of data points,
then sent to the batch data point processing job. The process and receive methods
are shown on listing 5.18 and listing 5.19. In the process part, the data points are
serialized to a string and sent to the ”datapoint-processing-topic”.
This record is
consumed by the listener, when there is enough resource in the service to receive it.
1
fun process(dataPoints: Array<DataPoint >)
2
{
3
val dataPointString = objectMapper.writeValueAsString(dataPoints)
4
val record: ProducerRecord <String, String> = ProducerRecord <String,
String >(
5
environment.getProperty("kafka.topic.datapoint-processing -topic"
)!!, dataPointString
6
)
7
kafkaTemplate.send(record)
8
LOGGER.info("A new batch of data points is sent to the kafka topic."
)
9
}
==PAGE:63==
5.6 File service
53
Listing 5.18: Batch data point process.
1
@KafkaListener(topics = ["datapoint-processing -topic"])
2
fun receive(dataPointsString: String)
3
{
4
val dataPoints: Array<DataPoint>
5
try
6
{
7
dataPoints = objectMapper.readValue(dataPointsString , Array<
DataPoint >::class.java)
8
LOGGER.info("A new batch of data points arrived to the kafka
topic.")
9
dataPoints.forEach { dataPoint -> dataPointService.create(
dataPoint) }
10
}
11
catch (ex: JsonParseException)
12
{
13
LOGGER.warn("The parsed [Json] file does not have any content.")
14
}
15
}
Listing 5.19: Batch data point listen.
One thing to mention here is, that a similar processing job with a listener should be
set up for receiving data points from 3rd party applications. Currently, this listener
is missing from this implementation.
5.6
File service
Next is the file service. Its job is to store files on a specified location on the disk and
to store metadata about these files in the database. It is also configured to receive
files from the data point service and send back the metadata about them with Kafka.
The interesting implementation details were here as well, how does the received byte
array from the data point can be processed and saved on the disk. Furthermore, the
different endpoint implementations for receiving files were engaging, but similar how
it was handled in the data point service.
5.7
Collection service
Let’s continue with collection service. It holds all the classes and packages needed
for handling requests in regards with collections and documents. There is only one
common verticle class, with both routers connected to it so the service can serve all
requests on one port. The code for this is displayed on listing 5.20. Otherwise, it is
a basic service, similar to the previously covered examples.
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Implementation
1
val documentCollectionRouter = collectionRouter.getRouter()
2
documentCollectionRouter.mountSubRouter("/", documentRouter.
getRouter())
Listing 5.20: Connecting two routers.
5.8
Consent service
The last traditional web microservice is the consent service. It provides the same
packages as the other services and the ability to persist consent documents into the
database. Just like the previous services it has a verticle, router, repository, domain
and service packages containing all the necessary classes.
5.9
Gateway
Gateway is the service that receives all the communication from the outside and dis-
tributes the requests to the correct services. It is implemented with the help of Spring
Cloud gateway. For this ”org.springframework.cloud:spring-cloud-starter-gateway” is
added to the dependencies to this application and ”org.springframework.cloud:spring-
cloud-starter-circuitbreaker-resilience4j” for circuit breaking. There are three vital
classes building up the gateway. First is the CircuitBreakerConfiguration class. It
contains the circuit breaker configuration, that is responsible for monitoring the num-
ber of failing requests and closes the traﬀic for a certain amount of time, if a threshold
is reached. The second is GlobalFilterConfiguration, responsible for intercepting re-
quests.
It is used to log the behaviour experienced during making the calls, for
example it logs what are the requests made to which services/endpoints and also logs
the result of these. This can be crucial in a MA to make debugging an effective task.
The third and final class is the RouteConfiguration. This is the core of the gateway-
api. It determines, what are the routes and defines the uri-s for each route as well. A
part of this class is showcased on listing 5.21. It is defined what kind of requests are
allowed, in this case GET, POST, PUT, DELETE and PATCH, so basically every-
thing. Then a path is given, which is a regex and the gateway will check every request
whether they fit any of the used regexes and redirect the communication to the uri
belonging to that regex. The uri in this instance is http://cans-accountservice:8092
the uri of the docker container of the account microservice.
1
private const val ACCOUNT: String
= "http://cans-accountservice:8092"
2
@Bean
3
fun apiRoutes(builder: RouteLocatorBuilder): RouteLocator
4
{
5
return builder.routes()
6
.route { predicateSpec: PredicateSpec ->
7
predicateSpec.method(HttpMethod.GET, HttpMethod.POST,
HttpMethod.PUT, HttpMethod.DELETE, HttpMethod.PATCH)
==PAGE:65==
5.10 Deployment
55
8
.and()
9
.path("/api/accounts")
10
.uri(ACCOUNT)
11
}
12
.build
13
}
Listing 5.21: Route configuration.
5.10
Deployment
For deploying the services, docker containers are used. A container is build from
every service and a container build from the gateway as well. These containers all
connect to the before mentioned Redpanda and Postgres containers. Creating every
container is done by the combination of 3 different files. The files in the study service
will be used as an example, but the setup in every service is similar. The first is
the docker-compose.yml file, presented on listing 5.22. Important details here are the
name of the service, it is important to remember later on, since this is the url of the
container from the outside. For example in the gateway the url of the study service
is ”http://cans-studyservice:8080”. The restart setting defines, what should happen
with the container if it stops for some reason. Restart is a good option, since it is
desired to have the most up time and be ready to serve requests. Environment is
also a vital setting, here it is possible to configure for instance the resources available
to the container such as RAM. This setting can be experimented with, when the
performance of some containers is put under test. Finally the last crucial detail is the
network and driver setup. It is essential to build all the containers to be on the same
network, to be able to see each other. This also includes the Postgres and Redpanda
containers as well.
1 version: '3.8'
2
3 services:
4
5
cans-studyservice:
6
container_name: carp-studyservice
7
restart: always
8
build:
9
context: ../../..
10
dockerfile: Dockerfile
11
ports:
12
- 8080:8080
13
volumes:
14
- ~/carp/storage/development:/root/home/carp/storage/development
15
environment:
16
- "JAVA_OPTS=-Xmx512m -Xms512m -XX:MaxPermSize=256m"
17
networks:
18
- cans
19
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Implementation
20 networks:
21
cans:
22
driver: bridge
Listing 5.22: docker-compose file.
The second important file is the Dockerfile, showcased on listing 5.23. It is used to
build and copy the built project. The build is done by gradle clean bootJar -x test
command, that builds a bootJar from the spring application. After this is done, the
created jar file is copied to the correct location, an entrypoint set and the application
started.
1 FROM gradle:6.8.3-jdk11 AS builder
2 COPY ./ /src
3 USER root
4 WORKDIR /src
5 RUN gradle clean bootJar -x test
6
7
8 FROM openjdk:15
9 WORKDIR /app
10 COPY --from=builder /src/build/libs/studyservice.jar .
11 RUN chown -R root:root /app
12 USER root
13 ENTRYPOINT ["java","-jar","studyservice.jar"]
14 CMD ["java", \
15
"$JAVA_OPTS", \
16
"-XX:+ExitOnOutOfMemoryError","-XX:+HeapDumpOnOutOfMemoryError", "-XX:
HeapDumpPath=/tmp","-XX:ErrorFile=/tmp/jdk.error", \
17
"-XX:TieredStopAtLevel=1", \
18
"-Djava.security.egd=file:/dev/./urandom", \
19
"-Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote", \
20
"-jar", "/app/studyservice.jar"]
Listing 5.23: Dockerfile.
Finally, the last file is a shell script named deployment.sh to prepare for managing
many docker-compose.yml files in the future, with a single file. In the current setup,
there is only one docker-compose file, however in the future when the app needs to be
deployed to multiple instances this file will come in handy. All of these containers are
currently deployed on a local development machine for testing the proof of concept.
From the nature of containers, they supposed to operate similarly no matter if they
are local or later deployed to a server.
5.11
Overview
This concludes the Implementation chapter. It is seen, that all the services introduced
in the Design chapter were successfully implemented with the help of Spring Boot,
Vert.x and using Kotlin language. Every service is containerized and they are ready
to be put to a server as they are. On the other hand, it has to be mentioned, that the
==PAGE:67==
5.11 Overview
57
work is not completely finished. There are lots of areas left untouched, such as security
or building an advanced deployment solution. These areas were not a necessity for the
question of scalability and will be further discussed in the Discussion chapter later on.
The following Evaluation chapter will explain, how the MA was performance tested
and compared with the existing monolith.
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation
This chapter will detail the tests performed on the application and compare the results
with the same scenarios performed on the monolith. There are multiple factors to
take into consideration, when scalability is tested. First is the latency of each request,
which shows the amount of time it take to receive a response from the server. Second
is throughput, that measures the number of requests per period of time succeeding.
Another factor for throughput is the amount of data sent and received per second.
The final parameter that is measured is the rate of error, or with another name the
percentage of failed requests. Less latency and error and more throughput means a
better performing system. This generally means, that the number of users can be
scaled up and the system will handle it better.
To achieve this plan, an open source application called Jmeter1 is used. This is
an easy to use testing tool, that allows to send requests to a huge amount of users
simultaneously. It is fairly easy to set up the application to use, and it has also a
great GUI to create the tests with.
6.1
Test plan
The plan is to performance test the create datapoint endpoint in both the MA and the
monolith application. Why was this particular endpoint chosen some might ask. The
reason is, that first of all, most likely this will be one of the endpoints that is under the
most load during running different studies, so it is a great starting point. Secondly, it
is beneficial to chose a call that not just writes, but also returns back some data to put
more load on the system. The amount of users, that hit this endpoint at the same time
will increase in each test and the results showcased. The number of users will be 100,
200, 500, 1000, 2000 and 4000 in the final test. Also there will be 3 different scenarios
tested, first is the created MA, second is the created MA, but the data point service
is deployed in a container with increased resources(vertically scaled) and finally the
last scenario is the monolith run locally. To gain a precise understanding of these
test cases the allocated resources need to be taken into consideration as well. For the
containerized MA each container has 256MB of heap memory allocated, while in the
vertically scaled solution this is increased to 512MB in the data point service. The
1https://jmeter.apache.org/
==PAGE:70==
60
6 Evaluation
monolith is run locally from the development software used for its development and
has an allocated memory of 2048MB, some of this memory is used to run the software
itself, but there is still more than 1200MB allocated for running the web application.
6.2
Test cases
In this section, the different test cases are detailed starting from the scenario with
100 users and ending it with a scenario with 4000 users.
6.2.1
Test with 100 users
The first test case was to send the upload data point request with 100 users at the
same time. First the MA was tested with this setup. The results are visible on figure
6.1. The results show a really good result, in total it took 2 seconds for all request
to finish, but individually the average latency was 25ms which is really fast. There
were no failing request.
Figure 6.1: MA performance test result with 100 users.
Secondly the same MA was tested, with increased resources assigned to the data
point container. The results for this are on figure 6.2. It can be seen, that there is no
significant difference in throughout and latency and the error rate is still 0 percent.
This is expected, since 100 users are not enough to put too much load on the service.
Figure 6.2: MA increased resources performance test result with 100 users.
Finally, the last test was conducted on the monolith, it shows a slight increase in
latency, but this result is still shows a very good ability to handle the requests.
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Test cases
61
Figure 6.3: Monolith performance test result with 100 users.
To sum up both the monolith and MA was able to handle 100 simultaneous user
requests without any major difference.
6.2.2
Test with 200 users
The second test case was with the same request, but now with 200 users at the same
time. Again the MA was tested first with this setup. The results are shown on figure
6.4. There is an increase in latency compared to the test with 100 users, but it is still
acceptable, considering the amount of users. The error rate is still 0, which shows
that the system is durable under a bigger load.
Figure 6.4: MA performance test result with 200 users.
Secondly the modified MA, with increased resources was tested again. The results
for this are visible on figure 6.5. It can be seen, that there is a slight improvement in
throughout and a decrease latency and the error rate is still 0 percent. This is a good
result, since it shows, what was already expected, that vertically scaling a service can
help with scalability. It is also easier to vertically scale one service instead of the
whole system.
Figure 6.5: MA increased resources performance test result with 200 users.
Finally, the last test was conducted on the monolith again. The result for this was
a surprise after the previous two tests. Already, with 200 users there was a big av-
erage latency experienced, almost 11 second per request. Also the error rate jumped
up to 40 percent, which is significant, probably without this many failing request the
latency would have been even bigger. As for the throughput it dropped to 10 requests
==PAGE:72==
62
6 Evaluation
per second. The exact report can be seen on figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Monolith performance test result with 200 users.
It is clear to say, that the MA is already performing better and the difference is
significant with even this smaller amount of users. The next test case will be crucial
to gain a better reassurance.
6.2.3
Test with 500 users
The format of the third test was similar to the previous ones, just with 500 requests.
The results for the MA are showcased on figure 6.7. The is an increase in latency
again, it is starting to be a too much for real time user experience, but it is still ac-
ceptable. The error rate is still 0, which shows that the system is still durable under
an even bigger load.
Figure 6.7: MA performance test result with 500 users.
The results for the vertically scaled data point service are displayed on figure 6.8.
It can be seen, that there is again a slight improvement in throughout and further-
more a huge decrease in latency and the error rate is still 0 percent. This result
further proves the expectation mentioned towards vertical scaling.
Figure 6.8: MA increased resources performance test result with 500 users.
Finally, going into the test with the monolith was already expected to result in a
bad performance, since it was struggling with even 200 requests as well. The result
is shown on figure 6.9. The result shows, that the system is completely over loaded.
96percent of the requests failed, and the average latency shows an extreme 60seconds.
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Test cases
63
Basically it proves, that is impossible to use this feature with this much load.
Figure 6.9: Monolith performance test result with 500 users.
From the result of this test case, is that it is futile to perform more tests on the
monolith with even more users. The difference between the two solutions is clear. To
further test the limits of the MA, the rest of the test cases with 1000, 2000 and 4000
users will still be performed.
6.2.4
Test with 1000 users
As it was mentioned, the scenario with 1000 users is only going to be run on the
MA. The results for the MA are on figure 6.10 and figure 6.11. The latency increased
again, although not a big jump, compared to the previous test with half the users.
The error rate is still 0 percent, that is promising for the further test cases as well. It
is still visible that with increased resources, the result is also better.
Figure 6.10: MA performance test result with 1000 users.
Figure 6.11: MA increased resources performance test result with 1000 users.
6.2.5
Test with 2000 users
Next up is the scenario with 2000 requests. The results for the MA are on figure
6.12 and figure 6.13. As expected more increase in latency, It is starting to be a long
waiting time for the users. This is the first case, when there are errors, although it is
a very insignificant percent compared to the number of users.
==PAGE:74==
64
6 Evaluation
Figure 6.12: MA performance test result with 2000 users.
Figure 6.13: MA increased resources performance test result with 2000 users.
6.2.6
Test with 4000 users
Next up is the scenario with 4000 requests. The results for the MA are on figure 6.14
and figure 6.15. The trend of increasing latency continues in this case as well, and
the number of errors also increased, yet it is still within an acceptable limit.
Figure 6.14: MA performance test result with 4000 users.
Figure 6.15: MA increased resources performance test result with 4000 users.
6.3
Evaluation overview
The evaluation section summarised the findings of the created architecture’s perfor-
mance an also compared it with the performance of the existing monolith. From
the different tests performed, it is clear, that the monolith architecture was already
struggling to handle 200 users at one time and completely failed with 500 users. On
the other hand the MA was able to perform so much better on the same scenarios, in
fact even surpassed them and was able to handle a stunning 4000 users with relative
ease. It is also seen, that there is a possibility to enhance the performance of the
different services of the MA, by vertically scaling the container they are running in.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
This chapter provides a discussion regarding the initial goals of the project and evalu-
ates each of them. It will also mention the limitations encountered and, finally, dive
into some details about the future this project.
7.1
Evaluation of goals
A set of goals and methods were introduced in section 1.3.
This section aims to
provide an evaluation of each goal and summarize what was done to achieve them.
7.1.1
How can scalability be achieved?
First of all, the pertinent technologies and topics for achieving scalability were ana-
lyzed, as it can be seen in section 3. The difference between the monolith and the
MA was presented and different programming frameworks were analyzed, in regards
to scalability. Furthermore, a comparison was drawn between different communica-
tion possibilities. Finally, the different scalability techniques and their benefits were
researched.
After this analysis, a design was set up for the MA, detailed in chapter 4. Later, this
design was implemented using the different technologies that were discovered to be
able to aid the performance of the system. Given the nature of the chosen architec-
ture, the usage of the two scaling techniques is prepared to be easily added as well.
Finally, chapter 6 provides an evaluation of the obtained performance results and
compares them to the ones for the existing monolith. From this evaluation it can be
concluded that the approach was successful and scalability was achieved.
7.1.2
How can a deployment process be set up?
The architecture is prepared to be easily deployed to a server on demand. Every
service contains multiple files to help in this regard. These files make it possible to
build each service and create a docker container from it. These containers can be
later moved to the server as they are.
In the future, when deployment is the goal, it is possible to create a docker image
from the service, store it in a place that the server has access to and the server can do
==PAGE:76==
66
7 Discussion
the job of creating a container from it. This solution can be further improved in the
future, however the new implemented structure is suitable for the current use case of
deploying the services one by one.
7.1.3
How can the different services be made to run
independently?
Most of the services are designed in a way that they can run fully independently from
each other. They are loosely coupled and have the least effect on each other. This
was completed by first analyzing the underlying domain and separating the services
as well as possible so they have less dependency on each other. In some cases it was
not possible to eliminate of some the dependency between services. In these cases, an
inter-service communication was set up between the services with the help of Kafka.
This ensures that the messages arrive to the other service even if the service in question
is temporary out of service, but will be operational shortly. There are a few cases
however, where the communication needed to be synchronous and this introduces a
certain amount of dependency. It has to be mentioned that this dependency cannot
be changed with this current setup, because of the underlying CARP Core design.
7.1.4
How can it be checked whether the solution is scalable?
Performance tests were conducted on both the monolith and the MA, using a software
called Jmeter. Firstly, the test cases were determined, namely the part of the system
to put under high load and the different amount of users for each test case. Secondly,
the parameters for evaluating scalability were tested. These parameters are latency,
rate of errors and throughput.
Finally the different cases were executed on both
architectures and the results in each category compared. This strategy successfully
fulfilled the purpose of testing the scalability.
7.2
Limitations
Even though the developed framework provides a solution for all the obstacles iden-
tified in section 1.3, it still has to be stated that some limitations arose during the
design and development. This section goes through these issues and explains the
cause and importance of each.
7.2.1
Architecture
A typical quality of a MA is that its services are completely independent from each
other. One service can be stopped without any effect on other services. However,
in this case, this quality doesn’t apply to the full architecture, because some of the
services have synchronous calls implemented between them. It was inevitable to avoid
==PAGE:77==
7.2 Limitations
67
this solution because of CARP core. It is possible, that in the future CARP core
will be updated to a version that facilitates decoupling the services even more, but
presently, they cannot be further decoupled. As stated before, the use of a common
dependency in multiple services is not a good practice. In the case that the CARP
core dependency gets updated to a higher version in one of the services, all the other
services need to be checked whether this new version is compatible with the older
version employed in other locations. If it is not compatible, then those services need
to be updated as well. The final issue was the use of a common database. Although
each service can only modify their own tables, using a common database in a MA
violates the independence of the services. The database becomes a single point of
failure. Instead of a shared database, it is preferable to use a database per service
pattern. If so, no matter if the schema belonging to one service changes, it wont
affect the other services, which is better option for scalability. In this project, due
to the limited available time for development, the complexity of the project and the
fact that the primary focus was on the logical level rather than the persistence level,
the prior solution was used.
7.2.2
Framework
When it comes to the used frameworks in the system, the choice was made to use
Spring Boot with the combination of Vert.x. Spring Boot brings a lot of benefits, when
talking about making the development process easier. In addition, it is a synchronous
framework, which is not optimal with the scalability of the services. It also brings
a lot of heavy weight dependencies with itself, that can influence build times and
deployments. Moreover, using Spring Boot’s JPA repository is proven to be one of
the slowest database access repositories. To cope with these problems Vert.x was
integrated with Spring Boot, and it turned out to be an great solution for handling a
huge load of user inputs. To further improve scalability, the best solution would only
use Vert.x in the entire system and also for setting up the communication with the
database in an asynchronous way.
7.2.3
Functionality
The plan was to achieve the same functionality with the MA as the CANS monolith
has. This came close to being achieved, however some facts need to be mentioned
here.
Firstly, one part of the functionality is missing from the MA, which is the
feature to generate reports about all the information stored for studies. This was
left out, due to its complexity, related to the obligation of contacting every service
for their data, and the lack of time available for development. Secondly, the system
dictates the use of users that can register, sign in and call different services while
authenticated, authorized and audited by the system. This would require the design
and implementation of a user service linked with security. Additionally, a security
solution that would authenticate the requests coming in to the system is imperative
==PAGE:78==
68
7 Discussion
to be implemented for the MA in the future. Due to the fact that security is not
in the scaling scope of the developed system, it was decided to not include it in this
project. As a result, the functionality of the system needs to be updated with user
management to reach the same level as in the monolith.
7.2.4
Evaluation
The assessment done on the developed software was set up by locally running all the
services in containers and running performance tests on them. This was a great initial
test, that proved that the core focus of this thesis was achieved, but to gain a more
precise result, placing them on a web server and running these same tests is required.
7.3
Future work
As has been shown in the previous sections, the goals of the project were reached, but
there are still many improvements to be designed and implemented before it is ready
to be used in production.
7.3.1
Carp core version updates
The current implementation uses Version 1.0.0-alpha.35 of Carp core.
Since the
start of this project three more versions have been released, ending with the most
recent one Version 1.0.0-alpha. The project needs to be kept up to date with the
newer versions released, because they contain crucial new logic and solutions. As an
example Version 1.0.0-alpha.36 introduces a new domain in Carp Core. This domain
is the data point domain. It also provides all the logic and functionality connected
to this domain. In the current solution this is not yet implemented for the MA and
the data point service defined in the monolith was used. In the future, it is necessary
to replace this service with a new one depending on Carp Core to keep up with the
new updates constantly arriving to this dependency.
7.3.2
Security
To design and implement the security for a MA is an important, standalone research
topic for the future. To achieve full functionality it is a must to include it in the system.
It would be great to create a separate service, that is responsible for authenticating
the users into the system and provide back a token that can be later used to access
the rest of the system. This service can be developed in any framework of, as a benefit
from using microservices. The only constraint is, that all the other services are need
to be prepared for checking the incoming requests and validate the tokens. This is
only one suggested solution of the many possibilities, nevertheless it is truly a need
for the system to have user authentication in the future.
==PAGE:79==
7.3 Future work
69
7.3.3
Horizontal scaling
It is stated that the current system is ready to be horizontally scaled, due to the
employed containerized solution. However, this process of how to handle duplicating
and managing multiple instances of the same service is a work for the future. There
are different technologies that can help to manage an entire architecture of services,
such as Dockerswarm or Kubernetes. With the help of these the services could be
constantly monitored and scaled on demand.
7.3.4
Deployment pipeline
The final proposal to be looked at is how the application is deployed to a server and
how is it managed there. Currently, each service needs to be built separately locally
and then pushed to the server. The best would be to set up an automated process
for this, for example when the code gets pushed to a repository on github.
This
process would run some tests on the code build it and deploy it to the server. A lot of
configuration is needed for this, for example setting up a configuration server where
this process could read all the necessary info about the properties of the application
and build it according. This would be a great improvement for the future, considering
the limited resources and time CACHET has as a company for deployments.
==PAGE:80==
70
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to migrate an existing monolith application into a new
MA architecture, for the purpose of handling the data storage needs of digital pheno-
typing applications in CACHET in a more scalable way.
First of all, a research for relevant works was conducted, to gain a better under-
standing of the area. The result of this process was the support for the disadvantages
of a monolithic application and the findings for how a MA can help with these. Fur-
thermore, the existence of other phenotyping applications were also discovered and
analyzed. These provided proof and support for the previously identified goal.
Secondly, an extensive analysis was performed in the field of microservice architec-
tures and web development. This analysis contains the description of a monolith and
a MA, different development frameworks, communication in web applications, data
storage and scalability. This was an essential task to discover the essential technolo-
gies, frameworks and methods for the design and implementation of the application.
The core part of the project was to design and implement the MA. The design
process is detailed on different diagrams starting from the highest level, and moving
down to the design of each service. This design was used during the implementation
of the services.
The implementation was done by completing the services one by
one and reusing parts of the existing monolith. The structure and used technologies
of each service is similar, as a result it was incrementally easier to implement each
new service. Finally, the architecture was completed by the containerization of each
service.
After finishing the implementation, an evaluation needed to be conducted. For
this a set of performance tests were run with increasing amount of users both on the
new architecture and the monolith. The result of these tests showed that while the
monolith application couldn’t handle 200 users simultaneously, the created MA was
able to bear with a load up to 4000 users at the same time. This result was gained
by inspecting three different properties. The average latency, the rate of errors and
the throughput.
Overall the initial goals of the project were met, and the scalability improved
==PAGE:82==
72
8 Conclusion
compared to the existing solution. Furthermore a deployment process is prepared so
the services can be put on a server when needed. However, it has to be mentioned,
that the work is far from finished, there are further tasks to be completed before the
system is ready to be used. These tasks include improving the deployment process,
adding security and user handling and to put further scalability techniques into place.
==PAGE:83==
Acronyms
API Application Programming Interface. 7, 20
CACHET Copenhagen Center for Health Technology. iii, v, 2–5, 7–9, 11, 69, 71
CANS Carp Nervous System. 7, 67
CARP Copenhagen Center for Health Technology Research Platform. 2, 7
DBMS Database Management System. 15
DI Dependency Injection. 13
DP Digital Phenotyping. 1–3, 7, 8
DS Distributed System. 12, 13, 15
HTTP Hyper Text Transfer Protocol. 13, 17
JPA Java Persistence API. 14, 67
LAN Local Area Network. 12
MA Microservice Architecture. iii, 1, 2, 5, 7–9, 11–13, 23, 25, 59, 63–68, 71
POJO Plain Old Java Object. 13
REST REpresentational State Transfer. 7
RPC Remote Procedure Call. 7
WAN Wide Area Network. 12
==PAGE:84==
74
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1]
Healthcare Management. 5 Trends in the U.S. Health Care System. 2021. url:
https://www.healthcare- management- degree.net/list- articles/5-
trends-in-the-u-s-health-care-system/.
[2]
Aditya Vaidyam, John Halamka, and John Torous. Actionable digital phenotyp-
ing: a framework for the delivery of just-in-time and longitudinal interventions
in clinical healthcare. 2019. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC6737424/.
[3]
CHIRON. Advantages of Telemedicine for Patients. 2021. url: https : / /
chironhealth.com/definitive- guide- to- telemedicine/telemedicine-
info-patients/advantages-telemedicine-patients/.
[4]
Jennifer Melcher, Ryan Hays, and John Torous. Digital phenotyping for mental
health of college students: a clinical review. 2020. url: https://ebmh.bmj.com/
content/23/4/161.
[5]
Geoffrey Martin CEO of GE Healthcare Consulting. Top 10 Emerging Trends
in Health Care for 2021: The New Normal. 2021. url: https://trustees.aha.
org/top-10-emerging-trends-health-care-2021-new-normal.
[6]
Healthcare Strategist Cheryl Rodenfels. The Modern Approach to Acquiring
Healthcare IT. 2020. url: https : / / hitconsultant . net / 2020 / 12 / 03 /
approach-acquiring-healthcare-it/#.YczQlS-cZQI.
[7]
Andriy Pukas et al. “Transactional Business Application Based on Microservice
Architecture.” eng. In: 2021 11th International Conference on Advanced Com-
puter Information Technologies, Acit 2021 - Proceedings (2021), pages 564–567.
doi: 10.1109/ACIT52158.2021.9548385.
[8]
Iris Braun, Manuel Hoffmann, and Robert Morseburg. “Implementation of a
web-based audience response system as microservice application vs. monolithic
application.” eng. In: 18th International Conference on Www/internet 2019
(2019). Edited by Pedro Isaias, pages 27–34. doi: 10.33965/icwi2019_201913l004.
[9]
Kinnary Jangla. Accelerating Development Velocity Using Docker : Docker
Across Microservices. eng. Apress, 2018, 1 Online–Ressource (XIX, 148 Seiten)
(unknown). isbn: 9781484239360, 1484239369, 1484239350, 9781484239353.
==PAGE:86==
76
Bibliography
[10]
Sarita and Sunil Sebastian. “Transform Monolith into Microservices using Docker.”
eng. In: 2017 International Conference on Computing, Communication, Control
and Automation, Iccubea 2017 (2018), page 8463820. doi: 10.1109/ICCUBEA.
2017.8463820.
[11]
Armin Balalaie et al. “Microservices migration patterns.” eng. In: Software -
Practice and Experience 48.11 (2018), pages 2019–2042. issn: 1097024x, 00380644.
doi: 10.1002/spe.2608.
[12]
John Torous et al. “Creating a Digital Health Smartphone App and Digital
Phenotyping Platform for Mental Health and Diverse Healthcare Needs: an
Interdisciplinary and Collaborative Approach.” eng. In: Journal of Technology
in Behavioral Science 4.2 (2019), pages 73–85. issn: 23665963. doi: 10.1007/
s41347-019-00095-w.
[13]
Wenhao Li, Niranjan Bidargaddi, and John Fouyaxis. “DHLink: A Microser-
vice Platform supporting Rapid Application Development and Secure Real-time
Data Sharing in Digital Health.” und. In: (2021), page 12.
[14]
Stephan Thordal Larsen. “Scaling in Microservice Architectures, Skalering i
Microservice Arkitekturer.” und. 2017.
[15]
Kinnary Jangla. Accelerating Development Velocity Using Docker. Apress, 2018,
pages 19–26. isbn: 9781484239360.
[16]
Splunk Inc. What Are Distributed Systems? 2021. url: https://www.splunk.
com/en_us/data-insider/what-are-distributed-systems.html.
[17]
IBM Corporation. What is distributed computing. 2015. url: https://www.
ibm.com/docs/en/txseries/8.2?topic=overview-what-is-distributed-
computing.
[18]
Anastasia Kushnir. Pros and Cons of Using Spring Boot. 2021. url: https:
//bambooagile.eu/insights/pros-and-cons-of-using-spring-boot/.
[19]
Kislay Verma. Why I like the Vert.x Framework. 2020. url: https://kislayverma.
com/programming/why-i-like-the-vert-x-framework/.
[20]
Michael Heinrichs. 3 Reasons to Choose Vert.x. 2014. url: https://dzone.
com/articles/3-reasons-choose-vertx.
[21]
Michael Borozenets. Why use PostgreSQL as a Database for my Next Project
in 2021. 2021. url: https://fulcrum.rocks/blog/why-use-postgresql-
database/.
[22]
Docker Inc. Swarm mode overview. 2021. url: https://docs.docker.com/
engine/swarm/.
[23]
The Kubernetes Authors. Production-Grade Container Orchestration. 2022. url:
https://kubernetes.io/.
[24]
Simplilearn. Kafka vs RabbitMQ: What Are the Biggest Differences and Which
Should You Learn? 2021. url: https://www.simplilearn.com/kafka-vs-
rabbitmq-article?source=frs_category.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
77
[25]
Inc. Amazon Web Services. What is Apache Kafka? 2021. url: https://aws.
amazon.com/msk/what-is-kafka/.
[26]
Deepak Vohra. “Apache Kafka.” eng. In: Practical Hadoop Ecosystem (2016),
pages 339–347. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-2199-0_9.
[27]
Eran Levy. Kafka vs. RabbitMQ: Architecture, Performance & Use Cases. 2019.
url: https://www.upsolver.com/blog/kafka-versus-rabbitmq-architecture-
performance-use-case/.
[28]
Alok Nikhil Vinoth Chandar. Benchmarking Apache Kafka, Apache Pulsar, and
RabbitMQ: Which is the Fastest? 2020. url: https://www.confluent.io/
blog/kafka-fastest-messaging-system/.
[29]
Alexander Gallego and Roko Kruze. Vectorized: The Kafka API is great; now
let’s make it fast! 2021. url: https://vectorized.io/blog/fast-and-safe/.
[30]
Dunith Dhanushka. Real-Time Streaming for Mortals: How Redpanda and Ma-
terialize Making It a Reality. 2021. url: https://medium.com/event-driven-
utopia/real-time-streaming-for-mortals-how-redpanda-and-materialize-
making-it-a-reality-18ac0bdc6f43.
[31]
Nnamdi Iregbulem. Why Developers Love Redpanda. 2021. url: https : / /
whoisnnamdi.com/why-developers-love-redpanda/.
[32]
Vishal Bhatia. What are scalable web applications and how they work. 2019.
url: https://www.businessofapps.com/insights/what-are-scalable-
web-applications-and-how-they-work/.
==PAGE:88==
