==PAGE:1==
Topology optimisation with
cut finite elements
Niels Brummerstedt
s144426
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
January 6th, 2022
Submitted as partial fulfilment to the requirements for the degree of
Master of Science in Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1 Topology optimisation ..........................................................
2
1.2 Fictitious domain methods and cut finite elements ............................
3
1.3 Objectives for this project.......................................................
5
2
Subdividing and integrating cut finite elements
6
2.1 The marching cubes algorithm .................................................
6
2.2 On polyhedra ....................................................................
8
2.3 Tetrahedra generation ...........................................................
8
2.4 On topologically correct representations....................................... 11
2.5 Subdivision into hexahedra, pyramids, and wedges ........................... 13
2.6 Subdivision of tetrahedra ....................................................... 14
2.7 Quadrature rules................................................................. 14
2.8 Space conversion and weighing of integration points ......................... 16
3
Parsing of input surfaces
17
3.1 Surface descriptions............................................................. 17
3.2 Distance query................................................................... 18
3.3 Bounding Search Tree .......................................................... 19
3.4 Heap priority queue ............................................................. 19
4
Level set based finite element formulations and PETSc
22
4.1 Implementation using PETSc framework ...................................... 22
4.2 Linear elastic deformation problem ............................................ 23
4.3 Level-set representation with very few elements .............................. 25
4.4 Validation of Finite Element Analysis ......................................... 25
5
Implementation into topology optimisation framework
28
5.1 On topology- and shape optimisation .......................................... 28
5.2 Perturbation of the level as a design variable .................................. 30
5.3 Sensitivity of volume and compliance ......................................... 31
5.4 An actual optimisation .......................................................... 33
6
Conclusion
36
6.1 Summary ........................................................................ 36
6.2 Lessons .......................................................................... 37
6.3 Perspective....................................................................... 38
6.4 Further work..................................................................... 38
References
39
1
==PAGE:3==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Humans have always worked to improve things—it may even be considered a trademark
characteristic of our species. From the earliest days, new and improved technologies have
been invented, and this process continues today. Unfortunately, for the last century or so,
humans have been primarily focused on improving one thing: economic growth. This
focus has undoubtedly bettered many things such as living standards and food safety,
but perpetual growth has also been associated with a continuous increase in resource
consumption which caused the current ecological tragedy and climate crisis.
We have a great challenge in front of us. We need to dramatically reduce the global
use of resources, but it would be unrealistic to ask anyone to accept a decrease in living
standard, or to deny the rapidly developing parts of the world access to the standard of
living we enjoy in the richest areas. We need to be more clever; we need to use resources
optimally.
The field of mechanical engineering has an enormous responsibility in this regard, as
many resource consuming devices are engineered mechanisms. Fortunately, mechan-
ical and structural engineering also has a great potential to contribute to improvements
in all of the most consuming and polluting industries: generating energy, transporting
goods, construction of buildings and infrastructure, even producing food. The mech-
anical engineer can contribute by designing structures that perform better and use less
material.
Topology optimisation algorithms are among the tools we need to do so. And so, refining
these tools is an appropriate place to direct the human desire to improve things.
1.1
Topology optimisation
Topology optimisation is in a very general sense a computational method that systemat-
ically generates a design with the best possible performance on some desired parameter.
In the context of mechanical engineering, topology optimisation (or structural optim-
isation) is often concerned with creating a structure optimised for material use against
strength, fatigue, heat transfer, or other mechanical properties.
In more concrete terms, topology optimisation is the application of numerical algorithms
to find a solution to a boundary value problem that minimises some quantity of interest.
2
==PAGE:4==
The boundary value problem (a set of differential field equations with prescribed beha-
viour on the domain boundary) is itself solved numerically using finite element analysis.
In recent years, topology optimisation has rapidly found its way to industrial applica-
tions. The simultaneous advances in additive manufacturing technologies have made it
possible to manufacture still more complicated geometries, and optimised designs that
were previously not viable from a production standpoint are now attractive contenders
to classic designs.
The usability of topology optimisation is restricted by the required computational power.
The problem is the design resolution. The number of degrees of freedom for a required
level of detail increases O(n3) with the length scale of the design domain.
To put things in perspective, consider the naïve optimisation of the internals structure
in an aircraft wing, and imagine a desired resolution of 1 mm. Approximated wing di-
mensions of a large commercial airliner are 35 m × 10 m × 1 m amounting to 350×109
voxels. Just storing a single scalar field with values at each node in a computer in double
precision requires about 2.8 terabytes, preferably on the fast volatile memory. If that is
the required space for storage, it is easy to imagine that attempting to perform computa-
tions on such amounts of data requires impressive hardware. Now, consider including
the fuselage in the optimisation.
There are essentially two things that can be done about the computation problem. Either
obtain more powerful hardware, or reduce the detail. In recent years, much effort has
gone into techniques for handling the truly large scale optimisation problems using
multi-grid techniques along with distributing computations with sophisticated parallel
algorithms [1; 2; 5]. The results of these efforts continue to break size records, expanding
the range of problems that topology optimisation can be used on.
The present work deals with the other option. What can be done to achieve fidelity
without increasing computational resolution?
1.2
Fictitious domain methods and cut finite elements
Any geometry treated using the finite element framework must be represented by a mesh.
As long as the mesh makes physical sense, there are practically no restrictions on the
mesh from a geometry description point of view. Topology optimisation algorithms,
however, will require many iterations, and the intermediate geometry must be represen-
ted in each iteration.
There are, of course, several alternative ways of describing a geometry, as shown in
fig. 1.1. The simplest for humans to comprehend fig. 1.1a is the (analytical) paramet-
ric description of surfaces and volumes using simple concepts such as spheres, boxes
sweeps along Bézier-curves, etc. This is a typical format for CAD systems [10]. Un-
fortunately, this way of thinking does not support a numerical optimisation very well,
which is why discretised triangulated surfaces and conforming finite element meshes are
used for numerics fig. 1.1b.
For topology optimisation, this is a problem because the mesh has to be re-computed in
each iteration. Therefore, it is common in topology optimisation to use a regular (or at
3
==PAGE:5==
least constant) background mesh with the geometry represented as a density field [8; 9],
shown in fig. 1.1c. This way of thinking solves most problems related to meshing cost,
but introduces staircase features in the optimised design, which must be handled in post
processing.
This report focuses on a fourth strategy: the geometry boundary is defined by an iso-
contour of a scalar field sampled in all nodes of a constant background mesh, as seen
in fig. 1.1d. This contour is free to slice through individual finite elements, and as such
the geometry boundary is ”immersed” in the background mesh. Because the geometry
representation can cut elements in arbitrary angles, its surface can be represented con-
siderably smoother than it could at the same resolution in its density-based counterpart.
(a) Bézier-Spline representation
(b) Bodyfitted mesh
(c) Density field on regular mesh
(d) Immersed piecewise linear boundary
Figure 1.1 – Various ways of describing geometry
The immersed boundary technique implies that all finite elements not touching the bound-
ary are either completely inside or outside the geometry, and the have constant stiffness.
On the other hand, the boundary-intersecting elements need special treatment because
their interior contain two phases, and it is not trivial to construct a local stiffness matrix
for these elements.
4
==PAGE:6==
1.3
Objectives for this project
In this project, an extension to the standard 8-node hexahedron element will be developed
to be used for topology optimisation in the PETSc framework presented by Aage et al.
[1]. The element will be developed as a C++ class capable of returning a numerical
integration rule for an arbitrary cut through the element by an immersed boundary.
In order to successfully perform numerical integrations on a finite element that is only
partially contained in the physical geometry, a strategy must be devised for representing
the boundary within the finite element. Subdivision and piecewise integration on each
side of the boundary is a natural choice. The objective is therefore to devise a method to
subdivide a finite element into several smaller elements that can be used for piecewise
integration of the original.
The practical part of this project is heavily focused on developing a piece of software.
The following requirements and properties for the implementation will serve as a guideline
for development choices. The focus will be on (in order of priority) speed, robustness,
numerical stability, predictability, and accuracy.
The method will be designed to interact with the PETSc framework [1]. Therefore, it
should use first order elements. The method should be fast, and sophisticated schemes
will not be considered unless their benefit obviously far outweighs the cost. A simple
hexahedron subdivided into tetrahedrons will suﬀice (for now).
The method should be robust to perturbations of the input values. For the element to
be useful to a topology optimisation algorithm, its sensitivity to design perturbations
must be predictable, and preferably continuous. The method should produce consistent
divisions such that the division of two adjacent elements does not create gaps or overlaps.
Some of the requirements above have conflicting implications (e.g. speed and accuracy).
The next chapter will attempt to document such conflicts and the choices made in trade-
off situations.
5
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 2
Subdividing and integrating cut finite
elements
2.1
The marching cubes algorithm
The marching cubes algorithm was originally presented by Lorensen and Cline [23] as
a means for generating triangulated iso-surfaces from e.g. CT and MR scans. Since its
inception, variants of the algorithm has been widely applied in computer visualisation.
Marching Cubes takes as input a set of discrete sample points of the field in interest. As
the name indicates, the sample points are arranged in a lattice forming cubes, and each
cube is (naturally) defined by eight sample points. Since topology optimisation normally
operates on exactly this arrangement of samples, Marching Cubes is a natural choice.
The algorithm was originally conceived for an equally spaced sample set (voxels), be-
cause this is the type of result one would get from a computed tomography scan [24],
but in principle the sample points do not need to have equal spacing, i.e. cubes are not
strictly required. In fact, the strategy behind the algorithm can be generalised to work
on voxels with any shape (boxes, tetrahedra, prisms, etc.), and thus on any conceivable
mesh generated from any point cloud. This makes the algorithm very useful for level-set
based approaches in all finite element settings.
The level set
To the computational domain Ωis associated a continuous scalar indicator field, ϕ. We
call the value of the field at a sample point, s, the level of the point, and call the collection
of values for all points in a discretised field a level-set. The field will have the property
that the boundary between the physical (solid) domain and the non-physical (void) do-
main takes a constant value, ϕ0. That is, the boundary is an iso-contour of the level-set.
It is usually convenient to set this threshold value as ϕ0 = 0. Then, a sample point is
considered inside the physical domain if its level s ⩾ϕ0.
6
==PAGE:8==
Figure 2.1 – The computational domain with physical and void domains indicated by the value
of the zero contour of the level-set. The analogy to an island in the ocean is obvious.
Intersected elements
For each element in the computational mesh, each vertex has a level. Elements that
are entirely inside either the solid or void can be treated as normally. The zero contour
intersects the set of elements that contain levels on both sides of the threshold ϕ0. These
elements are ”cut” into a solid and a void part.
The subdivision works by first identifying edges intersected by the iso-surface, which are
those edges that have endpoints on opposite sides of the boundary. On each such edge,
a temporary vertex is constructed at the point where the linear interpolation between the
endpoint values is equal to the threshold value. The edge vertices and the eight corner
vertices are then used to construct a set of sub-elements.
x
y
z
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Figure 2.2 – A hexahedron element with node and edge numbering.
7
==PAGE:9==
Case detection and permutations
Given eight nodes that can be either inside or outside of the physical domain, there are
28 = 256 combinations to consider. The 256 combinations will be referred to as the cut
cases. The cut cases can be numbered easily, for example by using local node numbering
to indicate bit location, setting bits to true if the corresponding node is inside the domain
and false otherwise, and interpreting the sequence of 8 bits as an integer. It should be
noted that in converting the scalar level to a boolean at this stage, a simplification is made.
We will come back to this shortly.
An overview of the 256 combinations are shown in fig. 2.3. It is clear that each of the 256
individual cases can be obtained as various orientations (permutations) of a smaller set
of more general base cases. Possible permutations are sequences of solid body rotations,
mirroring about the planes defined by coordinate axes, and simultaneous inversion of the
sign of all nodal levels. 48 unique permutations exist. Using these, the cut cases can be
grouped into 14 base cases, presented in fig. 2.4.
The fundamental idea behind the marching cubes algorithm is to associate each cut case
to its corresponding subdivision in a lookup table. In practical implementations, two
tables are used; one to map from cut case to base case, and one to map base case to
subdivision. Each base case is therefore associated with a predefined and constant sub-
division into tetrahedra. The task is now to generate the list of subdivisions.
2.2
On polyhedra
To a mathematician, a polyhedron is a volume enclosed by flat polygonal faces. The finite
element hexahedron does not generally have flat faces, and it is not formally a polyhedron.
In normal finite element settings, this is a irrelevant fact, since hexahedrons are mostly
used in structured grids where the faces are either truly flat, or where the curvature of a
face is of no consequence.
However, for the piecewise integration rules of subdivided finite elements, it becomes
relevant to ask what domain will actually be integrated. Tetrahedons have triangular
faces which are inherently flat (it takes three points to define a plane), but if tetrahedrons
are used to subdivide a ”hexahedron” with curved faces, they will not span the original
domain.
The problem is most important for the internal phase boundary in a cut element. This
surface is defined by an iso-level of the trilinear interpolant of eight nodal values. It is
usually a curved surface, with the exception of triangular cuts in case B and E of fig. 2.4.
Therefore, it can only be approximately represented by the piecewise flat triangular sur-
faces of the sub-tetrahedra. Nevertheless, this project uses tetrahedral sub-elements. In
section 2.5, other subdivisions will be discussed.
2.3
Tetrahedra generation
The subdivision starts by identifying each edge intersected by the zero-level. These edges
have opposite signs on their two nodes. In constructing the a-priori subdivision table,
endpoint levels are unknown, so the actual location of the intersection is also unknown.
8
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.3 – 256 cut cases. A black dot in a node indicates that ϕ ⩾ϕ0
This is in fact a serious issue for the robustness of the subdivision scheme, but this issue
will be ignored for now. To perform a subdivision, a proxy intersection point is placed in
the midpoint of all intersected edges, such that the cloud of points in a subdivided base
case is constant. This will allow tetrahedra to be computed once, a priori, as opposed to
each time a cut element is encountered.
To convert a cloud of points into the constant lookup table of sub-tetrahedra, the obvi-
ous choise was to use the Delunay-based algorithm TetGen [27]. It can of course also
be done by hand, but anyone who attempts this will very soon see why an automated
9
==PAGE:11==
A: Solid or void
2 permutations
B: Single point
16 permutations
C: One edge
24 permutations
D: One face diagonal
24 permutations
E: One box diagonal
8 permutations
F: Three points in face
48 permutations
G: Edge and one opposite point
48 permutations
H: Boxed triangle
16 permutations
I: One complete face
6 permutations
J: One complete corner
8 permutations
K: Opposite edges
6 permutations
L
24 permutations
M
24 permutations
N: Opposite diagonals
2 permutations
Figure 2.4 – 14 base cases. Each case can be permuted by inverting solid and void phases,
rotating, mirroring, and combinations thereof. Often, different combinations of permutations are
equivalent, and do not contribute twice to the final permutation count. For example, all rotations
of case A are equivalent, and a mirror of case I is equivalent to inverting phases.
10
==PAGE:12==
algorithm is attractive. Unfortunately, TetGen is released under the AGPL v3 license, so
the actual source code of TetGen is not included in the source code of this project. Only
the resulting output generated by TetGen is used in the lookup table, and the output is
fortunately not restricted by the license.
The lookup table returns a list of tetrahedrons, of which an example is shown in fig. 2.5.
Each tetrahedron is defined by four local node-numbers, using the following convention:
Nodes 1 to 8 are the corner nodes, nodes 9-20 are nodes positioned on each of the 12
edges of the hexahedron, such that the number is equal to the edge number plus eight.
Node and edge numbers were indicated in fig. 2.2.
Having obtained a connectivity for the tetrahedrons, the actual location of the nodes is
computed run-time when a cut element is encountered: for each intersected edge, the
intersection point is obtained by linear interpolation of the endpoint levels.
When the tetrahedron is fully defined, it can be used to construct the unique integration
rule for the particular cut element.
2.4
On topologically correct representations
As mentioned earlier, the binary consideration of a point as either inside or outside of
the geometry is a simplification: information about the actual level is not used in con-
structing the connectivity.
Upon further investigation of the topologies represented by the 14 base cases, it turns out
that many of them are in fact ambiguous. For example, considering case N in fig. 2.4,
it is easy to convince oneself that if the two slots grow large enough, they will form a
tunnel in the middle. Another example is shown in fig. 2.6, which corresponds to case
E.
As noted by Natarajan [25], a lattice using the 14 cases from Lorensen and Cline [23]
can produce C0 discontinuities (holes) in the surface of the geometry. Further, even if
all C0 discontinuities are eliminated, the result is still topologically ambiguous. That is,
one base case can represent several distinct topologies. The issue is that the trilinear in-
Figure 2.5 – Mesh of sub-tetrahedra generated using midpoints of intersected edges. The grey
surface indicates the interface between solid and void.
11
==PAGE:13==
(a) Disc
(b) Tunnel
Figure 2.6 – Two different topologies with the same cut case [22]. The disc case corresponds to
what is shown in fig. 2.4, case E.
terpolant can have saddle points, which are completely ignored in the original algorithm.
Barrera and Maute [6] deals extensively with strategies for resolving these ambiguities.
Chernyaev’s table
Chernyaev [13] resolves the ambiguities with the ”Marching Cubes 33” algorithm, provid-
ing thirty-three base-cases with which topological consistency is preserved. Lopes and
Brodlie [22] points out and resolves that only 31 cases are unique, and Custodio et al.
[17] provides some further enhancements to the treatment.
All ambiguities are associated with the appearance of saddle-points in the trilinear in-
terpolant of nodal values. The resolution of the ambiguities revolves around evaluating
the interpolant at these points. For a positive-valued saddle-point, a bridge is formed,
whereas two islands are separated in the opposite case. This situation is illustrated in
fig. 2.7.
(a) Saddle point above zero level
(b) Saddle point below zero level
Figure 2.7 – Distinguishing between two topologies with the same base case using Steiner points,
illustrated in 2D. Contour lines for positive values are black and negative values are grey. Like
the bilinear interpolant can have a saddle point, so can the trilinear.
12
==PAGE:14==
Steiner points
To further enhance the quality of the subdivision, one can calculate two Steiner points
inside the element. These points are, just like the edge intersection points, temporarily
used to create sub-tetrahedra, but are never stored. The location of the Steiner points
can for example be chosen to preserve volume, or according to some rule that is com-
putationally eﬀicient. This is covered in [22], who chose the intersection point of the
hyperbolic zero-contour and the straight line from the saddle-point to the corner. This
point is fairly easy to compute, and has the nice property that it minimises the difference
in area between the hyperbola and its polygon representation.
Unfortunately, implementation of the expanded subdivision table was outside the scope
and time constraints of this project.
2.5
Subdivision into hexahedra, pyramids, and wedges
The issue of spanning the integrated volume with the sub-elements can partly be ad-
dressed by employing better suited polyhedra as sub-elements. Figure 2.8 shows two
such examples. The wedge replaces three tetrahedra, and the pyramid replaces two tet-
rahedra, in both cases reducing the number of integration points necessary.
Another interesting property is that these geometries have surfaces with four nodes,
which can capture the curvature of an internal surface. Used along with sub-hexahedra,
the number of sub-elements for some cuts can be significantly reduced, and integration
rules can more accurately represent the integrand.
One can obtain an integration rule for these elements without writing new code by treat-
ing them as degenerate hexahedra, but specialised (and better) integration rules are read-
ily available [18; 20; 21], and should naturally be favored.
Unfortunately, the implementation of specialised sub-elements is more complicated than
obtaining good integration rules. The issue lies in the technical details of how one would
structure the program for the processor. In order to be fast, a processor relies heavily on
guessing what it will be asked to do next, and preparing for it. But whenever a branch is
met, where two different pieces of code will run depending on the input, the processor
cannot prepare, and speed will decrease. Avoiding this situation is referred to as ”branch-
less” or ”vectorised” code.
r
s
t
(a) Wedge
r
s
t
(b) Pyramid
Figure 2.8 – Polyhedra
13
==PAGE:15==
In a subdivision using only tetrahedra, almost everything is pre-calculated, and branching
is minimal, leading to very fast execution of the program. In a subdivision leading to
a heterogeneous collection of sub-elements, branching is more diﬀicult to avoid (but
not theoretically impossible). Care must be taken in order for the benefits from better
elements to be worthwhile. This project did not implement specialised sub-elements.
Information on tessellation into polyhedral meshes can be found in [14].
2.6
Subdivision of tetrahedra
In many optimisation algorithms, the computational mesh is not a regular lattice of hexa-
hedra, but instead a composed of tetrahedra. This is particularly true if the computational
domain is defined by a mesh generated from a commercial software. This case is very
relevant to industry, where the design domain may be a complex shape defined in CAD
software.
In such cases, it will be necessary to subdivide tetrahedra. Fortunately, this is consider-
ably easier than subdividing hexahedra, since only 24 = 16 unique cases exist, which are
permutations of only three base cases: fully solid or void, one node with opposite phase,
or two nodes in each phase. Subdivision tables can be generated by hand, and when a
subdivision is available, the logic behind numerical integration is exactly the same as for
hexahedra. The three base cases for tetrahedra are shown in fig. 2.9.
2.7
Quadrature rules
Ultimately, the purpose of any finite element method is to perform a piecewise numerical
integration of a domain by constructing a numerical integration scheme for each finite
element. Research in the field of finite elements is still today producing more elabor-
ate, numerically stable, and specialised integration rules. The method of subdividing
elements, considered in this text, is no exception: The entire goal is to construct a nu-
merical scheme that can integrate a field with a few discontinuities inside the element.
At this point, it will be convenient to list some standard integration rules for integrating
finite elements to first order. An extensive collection of quadrature rules can for example
be found in the Python package Quadpy [26]. All integration rules used in this project
are quadratic rules, meaning that they integrate the weakly formulated finite element
r
s
t
r
s
t
(a) All solid or all void
r
s
t
(b) One solid or one void
r
s
t
(c) Two solid and two void
Figure 2.9 – Three base-cases of the cut tetrahedron
14
==PAGE:16==
problem (first order derivatives) with first order shape functions to machine precision
[30].
Tetrahedrons are the simplest convex geometry (simplex) in three dimensions. For the
purposes of this project, the integration rule chosen is the simple four-point integration
rule, as also found in Cook et al. [15]. The hexahedron rule used is the classical Gauss
rule. Table 2.1 lists the used 3D integration rules.
When operating in 3D, it is also necessary to have 2D- and 1D integration rules available.
A 2D integration will for example facilitate implementation of surface loads (pressure
and traction), and a 1D integration may be useful for volume loads that operate along
a line, for example in electro-magnetics, or a heat source from a resistive wire. In any
case, integration rules are required. Table 2.2 lists integration rules for quadrilaterals,
triangles, and line segments.
r
s
t
w
1
−α
−α
−α
1.
2
α
−α
−α
1.
3
α
α
−α
1.
4
−α
α
−α
1.
5
−α
−α
α
1.
6
α
−α
α
1.
7
α
α
α
1.
8
−α
α
α
1.
(a) Hexahedron,
α = 1/
√
3
r
s
t
w
1
α
β
β
1/4
2
β
α
β
1/4
3
β
β
α
1/4
4
β
β
β
1/4
(b) Tetrahedron,
α = (5 + 3
√
5)/20,
β = (5 −
√
5)/20
Table 2.1 – Integration rules in 3D using intrinsic coordinates (r, s, t) and weight w.
r
s
w
1
α
α
1
2
−α
α
1
3
−α
−α
1
4
α
−α
1
(a) Quadrilateral,
α = 1/
√
3
r
s
w
1
1/6
1/6
1/3
2
4/6
1/6
1/3
3
1/6
4/6
1/3
(b) Triangle
r
w
1
α
1
2
−α
1
(c) Segment,
α = 1/
√
3
Table 2.2 – Integration rules in 2D for quadrilateral and triangle, and in 1D for a segment.
15
==PAGE:17==
2.8
Space conversion and weighing of integration points
The integration points for a sub-element cannot be used directly, as the element itself is
virtual with missing nodal values. The integration points must be converted from the iso-
parametric space of the sub-element to the iso-parametric space of the parent element,
and their weight must be scaled appropriately.
Using the shape functions of the sub-element along with its nodal coordinates given in the
iso-parametric space of the parent element, the integration point can easily be mapped.
If the shape functions evaluated at the sub-element integration point, P = [rl, sl, tl], is
listen in the row vector
N = N(rl, sl, tl) = [ N1, N2, · · · , Ni ]
(2.8.1)
and if the coordinates of the sub-element nodes in the parent space are vectors x, y, and
z, then the location of the integration point in parent space (r, s, t) is simply the inner
product of the shape functions and the coordinates
(r, s, t) = [ Nx, Ny, Nz ]
(2.8.2)
The original weight of the integration point is then multiplied by the sub-element Jac-
obian at the integration point, and then scaled with the volume of the iso-space of the
sub-element. For a tetrahedron, the volume of the iso-space is 1/6, and the Jacobian is
constant and related to the volume by det (J) = 6V , where J is the Jacobian matrix and
V is the volume of the iso-space.
The void material phase
There is a solid and a void phase in every cut element. Setting the weight of the void
phase to zero would cause a numerical problem. The use of ghost penalties (cf. [11])
has been proposed and used to solve the issue within a cut element. However, in order
to maintain all nodes in a background mesh for a topology optimisation at all times, the
purely void region cannot be discarded. Instead, in this project, an Ersatz material model
is used, where the void phase has a real but negligible stiffness. Practical implementation
involves scaling the weight of integration points in the void phase with some small value,
for example 1×10−6.
A
B
C
D
E
F
(a) Physical space
r
s
D
E
F
(b) Child space
E
F
A
B
C
D
r
s
(c) Parent space
Figure 2.10 – Mapping from child to parent
16
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 3
Parsing of input surfaces
Importing a predefined geometry is a frequent task in finite element and topology optim-
isation work-flows. It might be the geometry specification of an existing part, the defini-
tion of a computational domain, or some initial guess for the optimisation algorithm. In
any case, such a geometry description is usually given in a format not directly compatible
with the implementation of the optimisation. Some parsing is necessary.
3.1
Surface descriptions
Triangulations
Geometries used in numerical analysis (as opposed to CAD) are usually defined using
a discretised triangulated surface mesh (also known as a ”trimesh”, or to topologists
simply a ”triangulation”). The surface representation can be used to recover the volume
geometry as long the surface does not self-intersect, and as long as there is a consistent
notion on what is exterior and interior of the surface. Formally, the surface triangulation
must be a closed orientable piecewise-linear 2-manifold.
A triangulation where all triangles are in agreement about interior and exterior is an
orientable manifold. It is conventional to define orientation by associating a triangle
with its normal vector, which by convention points towards the exterior. It is useful to
avoid storing the actual normal by instead encoding the normal in the order in which
the vertices are given following the right hand rule. When doing so, the normal must
of course be calculated whenever required, but the storage requirement is reduced with
25%. Depending on what the triangulation is used for, one strategy or the other may be
most suitable.
Representing a volume with a surface requires that the surface is closed in addition to
orientable. A triangulation where all triangles have an odd number of neighbouring
triangles on all edges is closed. A triangulation where all triangles have exactly one
neighbour on all edges is in fact a sharper restricting, but very useful for reasonably
engineering geometries.
Lastly, a reasonable requirement on a surface representing a physical object is that it does
not self-intersect. This check is easy to implement, but painfully diﬀicult to implement in
17
==PAGE:19==
a fast way, and it cannot be enforced by triangulation file formats. In this case, one must
hope that the triangulation is generated by software capable of handling this requirement.
File formats
Common formats for storing geometries by polygonised surface description include STL,
OBJ, PLY, AMF, and OFF. Each format has its own list of benefits and drawbacks, and
many other proprietary formats exist.
STL, released in 1987 as the native file format for the software Stereolitography CAD
by 3D Systems, is used even today despite its obvious wastefulness, primarily because
it is extremely simple to implement. The format simply stores a list of triangles, for
each explicitly listing: its normal vector in 12 bytes, its three vertices each in 12 bytes,
and finally 2 bytes for auxiliary information. The format is not concerned with handling
connectivity, surface closure, or consistent orientation. The format stores each vertex
several times, and potentially with small numerical gaps.
OBJ, released by Wavefront in the 1990s, and designed for 3D graphics software, is a
more sophisticated format, capable of optionally storing a range of information about
objects and surfaces. It was used in this project because it works well with the C++ lib-
rary GEL [12], which the input parsing in this project depends on. OBJ is a face-vertex
type format, which stores each vertex once and defines polygons by listing vertex indices
counter-clockwise. OBJ stores face normals implicitly, and is not limited to storing tri-
angles, but can store any polygon. In addition, OBJ can optionally store explicit vertex
normals, permitting the definition of curved surfaces. The primary drawback of this flex-
ibility is that information is not evenly spaced as for the STL. Therefore, the OBJ format
must be parsed.
AMF was not used in this project, but is mentioned here with the intention of recommend-
ing the format. AMF (Additive Manufacturing Format) is a fairly new format, developed
in the early 2010s as a replacement for STL. AMF is essentially a ZIP-compressed XML-
format with the features of OBJ. Additionally, it handles multiple materials well, and has
improved support for curved faces and edges using Bézier-curves in B-splines.
3.2
Distance query
The purpose of the preceding discussion was to highlight that it is not a trivial task to rep-
resent a physical object in computer memory—many solutions exist for many purposes.
It was also intended to facilitate the distinction between storage and computation. The
purpose is not just to store the geometry surface, but to perform computations and ad-
justments on the geometry solid. To perform a levelset-based topology optimisation, the
geometry must be parsed to and represented in the computer as a scalar level-set. This
level-set be used as the design variable for the optimisation algorithm.
The intuitive approach is to initialise the level-set with the signed distance to the surface,
such that a (negative) distance in the interior maps to a positive level, and the exterior to
a negative level.
Unfortunately, for the signed distance approach to be robust, a distance must be queried
at every single design point in the design domain, and there may be billions of those.
18
==PAGE:20==
Root
A
AA
AAA
AAB
AB
ABA
ABB
B
BA
BAA
BAB
BB
BBA
Figure 3.1 – A binary search tree (two children in each branch). The root node is the bounding
box containing the entire geometry. The tree is then structured with branches of progressively
smaller bounding-boxes, with all internal nodes being tight bounding-boxes on their sub-tree.
End nodes are the bounding boxes for the individual triangles in the surface triangulation. If the
triangles are distributed such that the tree will be balanced, search times can be reduced from
Θ(n) to a worst-case Θ(lg n), where n is the number of nodes in the tree, and Θ() is the notation
for the asymptotically tight bound, cf. [16].
To make matters worse, the signed distance is the distance with the smallest absolute
value to any of the faces in the triangulation. A realistic simple geometry contains tens
of thousands of faces, and there is no trivial way to exclude faces from the distance
evaluation. There is, however, non-trivial ways, and the library GEL implements one
such method. It was, with only few adjustments, seamlessly implemented in the PETSc
environment.
3.3
Bounding Search Tree
In order for a distance query on a polygon surface to be eﬀicient, the polygons must be
structured in a way that minimises the number of distance evaluations. For this purpose
a search tree structure is used.
Specifically, GEL uses a binary search tree (fig. 3.1), where each internal node is a geo-
metrical bounding box for all its children, all the way down to the leaf nodes, which
contain the surface polygons. The bounding box can be either oriented in space (SOBB)
or axis-aligned (AABB). The oriented box provides tighter bounding leading to fewer
distance evaluations at the cost of a larger storage overhead and more expensive evalu-
ations. The axis-aligned box has very fast distance evaluations, but will generally need
to perform more comparisons in order to find the closest polygon. This project uses an
axis-aligned box. An internal node and its two child nodes is shown in fig. 3.2.
3.4
Heap priority queue
Traversing the bounding tree to find the nearest node is conveniently done by maintaining
a heap of possible candidates [16]. The heap is treated as a priority queue, where the
first element is always processed in every step. The heap is a so-called ”min-heap”,
19
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2 – AABB-tree. An internal node, which is itself a bounding box, is divided in two on
its longest dimension (dotted line). The threshold for division is snapped to the vertex closest to
the threshold. Facets are distributed into a left and right branch based on the centre-point of the
individual facet relative to the threshold.
indicating that if some measure a < b, then a has priority over b. The measure is the
smallest distance between a query point and the bounding box of the node in question.
Initially, the queue contains only the root bounding box. Then, while the queue has not
been emptied, the first (smallest) element in the queue is removed (we say that the ele-
ment is popped from the min-heap), and its two children are then considered for addition
to the queue.
Each boundary box in the queue has associated a minimum and a maximum distance
to the query point. Each box is known to contain some part of the triangulated surface,
with a distance to the query point bounded by the minimum and maximum values. At
any moment, the smallest encountered maximum value is maintained, because it serves
as an upper bound, or threshold, for addition to the queue. A child node is not added
to the queue if its smallest distance to the query point is larger than the already known
upper bound. The situation is illustrated in fig. 3.3.
If a child node passes the threshold, it is added to the back of the queue, and then moved
forward until the element in front has a shorter minimum distance to the query point. We
say that it is pushed into the min-heap.
20
==PAGE:22==
AA
AB
BA
BB
Q
max (AA)
min (BA)
Figure 3.3 – Exclusion principle of the heap search. The thick curved line represents a surface.
The surface is recursively split into bounding boxes. When traversing the tree, only bounding
nodes with a minimum distance to the query point Q smaller than the currently known shortest
maximum distance will be considered. In this way, branches in the search tree can be very ef-
ficiently pruned, avoiding a large number of distance evaluations. In the illustration, if box AA
has been seen, box BA and BB will never be explored.
21
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 4
Level set based finite element
formulations and PETSc
The preceding chapters have described how to represent a geometry boundary using a
level-set, how to subdivide a boundary-intersecting finite element into parts that are not
intersecting the boundary, how to obtain numerical integration rules for the boundary-
intersecting element, and how to obtain a signed-distance based level-set from a trian-
gulated surface. This chapter will be concerned with solving a finite element problem
using the above techniques.
4.1
Implementation using PETSc framework
The implementation builds upon Aage et al. [1], which based on the results from An-
dreasen et al. [4] was adapted to a level-set design variable in Aage et al. [3]. The core
framework for computations is PETSc [28], which is a high-performance parallel sci-
entific computing framework. PETSc handles all the practicalities of data communica-
tion, which is not part of the topic in this project, as well as large-scale linear algebra
(i.e. solving the global equation system).
The purpose was to create a plug-in tool that could be directly used by PETSc in the
already existing level-set based version with minimal adjustments.
Practically, this
was done by programming a Hexahedron with subdivision features as a (mostly) self-
encapsulated C++ class. A C++ class is an abstract formulation of a data structure along
with all operations that are logically tied to it. An object of the class stores the nodal co-
ordinate information, and the class exposes subroutines for generating integration rules
and their perturbations based on an input level-set.
From the perspective of the PETSc program, all the details explained in chapter 2 are
irrelevant. The only knowledge necessary is that a hexahedron object H can be created
given the nodal coordinates x, y, and z,
H = Hexahedron(x, y, z)
(4.1.1)
and that, given a nodal level-set, s, a variable length vector of integration points P can
be generated
P = H. subIntegrationPoints(s, i, v)
(4.1.2)
22
==PAGE:24==
where an element of P, contains the list [(r, s, t), w], where (r, s, t) is an integration point
in the hexahedron iso-parametric space, ans w is the weight of this point. The optional
inputs i and v are the nodal index and scale value of a level perturbation. A few other
subroutines were exposed for convenience, most notably
H. populateStiffness(ke, s, i, v)
(4.1.3)
which integrates the local stiffness matrix and inserts values into the vector ke with length
24 × 24 = 576.
Considering the amount of considerations that has to be made to perform the subdivision,
the fact that it can all be reduced to a few convenient calls to some functions with few
input arguments is, in my humble opinion, quite wonderful. Of course, this is the entire
rationale behind the object oriented programming paradigm, and nothing new. Moreover,
more complexity will naturally be added if one wishes to have external control over
the iso-level where the cut is made, the order of the numerical integration rules, or the
material properties used for the stiffness integration.
4.2
Linear elastic deformation problem
The selected problem is the deflection of a cantilever beam positioned in the design
domain shown in shown in fig. 4.1. The domain has dimensions [x, y, z] = [2, 1, 1], is
fixed with prescribed deflection u = 0 for all degrees on freedom in the plane x = 0, and
is loaded evenly on the line x = 2, z = 0 with a total load in the z-direction of Pz = −1.
Two geometries are considered. A more complex geometry, shown in fig. 4.2, is a pre-
optimised cantilever. The purpose of this geometry is to test the subdivided elements in a
setting where many different cut cases are encountered. Not all cases will be encountered
(some cases are really unlikely), but enough of the likely cases should be covered to be
able to draw some conclusions on the quality of the implementation.
For the purpose of evaluating predictable deflections, even with very few elements, such
that the quality of the integration rule can be tested in the limit where all elements are cut,
x
y
z
P
(0, 0, 0)
(2, 1, 1)
Figure 4.1 – Design domain
23
==PAGE:25==
a tapered beam with flat surfaces is used. This beam is shown in fig. 4.3. The practicality
of this choice comes from the fact that it can be discretised with two elements that are
both cut, such that fully solid or void elements will not hide potential problems. Addi-
tionally, this geometry can use the same boundary conditions as the complex geometry.
This is very convenient for testing, since the PETSc framework at present doesn’t provide
an interface for dynamically defining boundary conditions (they are hard-coded).
x
y
z
P
Figure 4.2 – Pre-optimised cantilever, provided in the STL format at the resolution shown.
(a) Shown with body-fitted mesh. The mesh is
swept mesh from a free quadrilateral mesh on
the front surface. Empty space not meshed or
included in computation.
(b) Shown as a solid immersed in a regular back-
ground mesh.
Sub-tetrahedra are not shown,
only intersections between the background ele-
ments and the solid.
Figure 4.3 – Tapered cantilever. The cantilever tapers off from a thickness of 1 at the base (left)
to a thickness of 0.3 at the tip (right).
24
==PAGE:26==
4.3
Level-set representation with very few elements
The level-set representation suffers from a critical issue when the length scale of the
problem approaches the length-scale of the element. Under such conditions, elements
may exist that are supposed to model a partly solid region, but where the only ”solid”
nodes lie exactly at the interface with level zero This is for example the situation of the tip
elements in fig. 4.3b. Such elements will not according to the subdivision rules outlined
in this project be considered solid.
Since we wish to test the immersed boundary method for single elements, a solution is
required. The quickest solution, utilising the input file capabilities presented in chapter 3,
is to make an input geometry which is much larger than the design domain, but where the
part that the design domain intersects is identical. This way, the levels of the geometry
boundary nodes located on the boundary of the design domain in fig. 4.3b have positive
values, the distance to the sloped surface. For the pre-optimised geometry in fig. 4.2, it
is more diﬀicult to solve the problem, and the simplest strategy is to work with a high
enough resolution.
4.4
Validation of Finite Element Analysis
The finite element analysis was validated against the commercial software COMSOL.
Material parameters were in both cases E = 1 (Pa), ν = 0.3, and the total load was
P = 1 (N). The validation is based on checking that tip deflection converges to the
same value on increasing resolution.
When comparing the optimised geometry, the tip deflection in the point (2, 0.5, 0.0) was
chosen. This point exhibits maximum deflection in the high-resolution solutions. When
comparing the tapered beam, the tip deflection was measured at (2, 0.5, 0.3). This was
done to distribute the effect of the very localised edge loading in the bottom—but it
should be of no consequence to the conclusions. Measurement was done for the PETSc
solutions in the software Paraview, using its built in probe tool. If the probe point is
not part of the mesh, a linear interpolation is used, which is perfect for the present case.
Measurement in COMSOL can be somewhat more cumbersome, but it can also be done,
and the principle is the same.
Tapered cantilever
Figure 4.4 shows the relative error of the solution versus degrees of freedom for both a
swept free quadrilateral mesh in COMSOL (fig. 4.3a) and an immersed boundary on a
fixed background mesh in PETSc (fig. 4.3b). Relative error is measured against a conver-
gence value calculated by means of least squared error. It should be noted that COMSOL
was set to use linear elements to compare on equal terms. The smallest number of de-
grees of freedom was 36, which corresponds to two adjoining hexahedra.
It is observed that the implementation in this project benchmarks well against COMSOL
for the simple beam deflection problem, with almost exactly the same behaviour at a
convergence rate of 2/3.
25
==PAGE:27==
102
103
104
105
106
107
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
Degrees of freedom, n
Relative error of tip deflection
PETSc
6.2764n−0.6607
R2 = 0.9992
COMSOL
6.6898n−0.6679
R2 = 0.9996
Figure 4.4 – Convergence of the Finite Element Analysis for the tapered beam.
Pre-optimised cantilever
For the case of the pre-optimised cantilever, convergence is shown in fig. 4.5. The rate of
convergence is clearly not as strikingly pretty as it was for the simple case. There are at
least two good reasons for this. Firstly, for low resolutions, the cantilever is simply rep-
resented poorly by the mesh due to sharp curvatures. This is true for both representations,
both a body-fitted mesh and an immersed boundary.
Secondly, the geometry is given as an input file with limited resolution (see fig. 4.2).
Increasing the resolution above this limit will change what is actually refined in the con-
vergence analysis. Initially, the representation of the geometry is improved along with
the mesh refinement, but at some point the geometry is completely represented (it is
a collection of flat triangles). At this point, further mesh refinement will be purely an
h-refinement (cf. [15]). The background mesh resolution that the optimised cantilever
exists on is (64×32×32) elements, corresponding to 212 355 degrees of freedom, after
which the immersed boundary representation achieves no further geometry detail. It is
observed that the convergence of the immersed boundary representation actually flattens
out at this point.
Regardless, the solution does converge, and it does agree with commercial software,
indicating that the subdivided finite elements return valid integration rules for a wide
range of cut cases and level-set values.
26
==PAGE:28==
104
105
106
10−2
10−1
Degrees of freedom, n
Relative error of tip deflection
PETSc
COMSOL
Figure 4.5 – Convergence of the Finite Element Analysis for the pre-optimised beam. Note that
the number of degrees of freedom for the PETSc case is the entire design domain. Void elements
are also modelled.
27
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 5
Implementation into topology
optimisation framework
The optimisation problem is formulated as a compliance minimisation
min
s
:
ϕ = uTKu
s.t. :
Ku = f
V /V ∗−1 ≤0
(5.0.1)
where ϕ = ϕ(s) is the compliance, s is the design variable vector, K = K(s), is the global
stiffness matrix, f is the loading vector, u is the displacement field vector, V = V (s) is
the design volume fraction, and V ∗is the volume fraction constraint.
5.1
On topology- and shape optimisation
In fig. 2.1, the analogy between the level-set representation and the concept of geo-
graphical elevation was introduced. This analogy is very effective for highlighting a
fundamental issue with the level-set representation: the lack of sensitivity away from
the boundary. If one wants to build an artificial island in the middle of the ocean, one
might ask how much land area is gained by dumping one cubic meter of material. Un-
fortunately, if the material is not placed on the shoreline, the answer is zero—no matter
if the ocean depth is 2 m or 2 km.
The analogy of course breaks down when it is observed that, for a structural design,
even if an island of material could be created, it would have no impact on the structural
stiffness if it was not connected to said structure. In other words, when operating in a
levelset-based framework, changes to the design can only occur on the boundary. This
is a fundamental condition of working with a crisp boundary, as opposed to the dens-
ity method, where intermediate densities can connect islands so they contribute to the
overall behaviour.
When a structural optimisation only moves the boundary, it is not a topology optim-
isation, but a shape optimisation. However, as pointed out by Aage et al. [3], when a
levelset-based framework like the one described in this project is used in 3D, surfaces
28
==PAGE:30==
can collide and merge, forming holes, or tunnels can close the entrance to leave a cavity.
That is, topological changes occur naturally. The level-set approach can therefore claim
the title of a true topology optimisation.
However, the basic working principle of evolving the boundary in the level-set approach
still has consequences. One very notable is that an optimised design is highly dependent
on the initial design configuration—different starting guesses will find different local
minima. Although the different solutions are in themselves valid solutions, there may
be a significant differences in performance. Aage et al. [3, figs. 6,9,10] produced an
example where an initial design with pre-seeded holes performed around 6% better than
an initial design with no holes.
It in in the interest of the engineer to find the best possible local minimum (robustness
et cetera being equal). Mechanisms that can push the optimiser towards such solutions
might therefore be considered. Since holes can easily be closed and merged during op-
timisation, a natural starting point may be to pre-seed the design with plenty of holes,
as don in [3]. Another approach may be to dynamically nucleate cavities during the op-
timisation, for example like done by Andreasen et al. [4] for the 2D case, where holes
cannot naturally emerge. This is also discussed in Barrera et al. [7]. It should be noted
that the trigger conditions for such a hole nucleation is not necessarily cheap or trivial to
compute.
A third approach is to start an optimisation with a density based method, but to stop early
and switch over to the levelset-based approach. The fuzzy density-field will already after
a few design cycles have indicative features that can be used as an initial level-set. While
these features are by no means near an optimum (then no further work would be needed),
they might serve as a better starting point than the above strategies. This strategy has the
advantage of circumventing the fact that the initial few iterations from a block design are
quite expensive for the levelset-method compared to the density-method. Additionally,
constructing a useful initial design respecting the volume constraint can be quite diﬀicult.
One may of course initially violate the volume constraint, but then special attention must
be given to the MMA penalty parameters [3].
The density-based starting guess might be particularly useful if some infill strategy [29]
can be devised to produce rudimentary infill in the very early design cycles. The key is
to find a balance between quickly switching to the (assumed) much faster levelset-based
approach, and obtaining a good initial design. It should also be noted that the immersed
boundary method has most of its merit in solving crisp interface problems, for which the
density method cannot be relied upon anyway.
A fourth idea, quite unlikely at the present moment, and purely speculative, is to use gen-
erative neural networks to produce heuristic initial designs. Semi-heuristic approaches
such as ant-colony optimisation might also produce fast initial guesses. In both cases, it
would be up to the designer of such approaches to take on the discussion of optimality.
If one cannot document how a starting guess was conceived, how can one then prove
that it is a good one?
In any case, the methods outlined do not remove any property of evolving boundary
methods. They merely address an associated weakness the best they can. Solutions to
the optimisation problem should still be treated with healthy scepticism.
29
==PAGE:31==
5.2
Perturbation of the level as a design variable
The optimisation cycle is based upon a gradient-based perturbation of design variables.
That is, a sensitivity provides information about the design change in the next step. The
sensitivity of the objective (compliance) ϕ to the design vector s, is computed with a
simple linear finite difference approximation.
∂ϕ
∂s

i
≈ϕ(s) −ϕ(si)
h
(5.2.1)
where si is the design vector perturbed by an amount h in index i. The perturbed state is
calculated locally for each design variable by solving the adjoint problem.
In the levelset-based approach, a perturbation of a nodal level will lead to a slightly per-
turbed collection of integration points (integration rule) for an element if the element is
a cut element. For uncut elements, nothing changes, and sensitivity is zero. The integ-
ration rule is used to construct the local stiffness matrix, hence, for a given design the
local compliance sensitivity for an element to a perturbation of a single design variable
with index i is, from the solution of the adjoint problem
∂(uTKu)
∂s

i
≈
∆(uTKu)
h

i
= uT
K(s) −K(si)
h

u
(5.2.2)
The sensitivity of a node receives contributions from all the elements it is connected to.
In a structured hexahedral mesh, each internal node is connected to eight elements.
The critical point to be made when working with subdivided elements is that since the
objective function must be differentiable, it cannot have discontinuities. This implies
that the underlying subdivision must never change when an integration rule is required
for a perturbed level-set. Such a situation could cause a finite difference approximation
to return very large sensitivities.
In the implementation, which uses tabulated cut cases, the subdivision changes when a
nodal level changes sign (zero is positive). With an evolving boundary, it is likely that the
boundary will at some point be closer to a node than the finite difference tolerance. To
avoid this, the direction of a level-perturbation must always be away from the zero-level.
This project implemented a convenient perturbation feature deeply embedded and hidden
away from the user (less risk of errors), but a more liberal approach could also have been
adopted, where the end user is responsible for perturbing in the correct direction.
30
==PAGE:32==
5.3
Sensitivity of volume and compliance
In order to test that the implementation achieves correct sensitivities, a finite difference
check is employed. In essence, one reduces the perturbation size gradually, and expects
to see the resulting derivative converge until the step size is so small that the division
causes numerical errors to take over. The convergence rate (the slope in a log-log plot)
should match the order of the finite difference approximation.
The volume sensitivity is relatively easy to compute for a single element. Choosing a
level-set for the nodes, the corresponding tetrahedral subdivision is obtained from the
program. Each tetrahedron has an analytical expression for its volume in terms of its
nodal coordinates. Defining three vectors a, b, and c, from one node to each of the three
others, the volume is
V = |a · (b × c)|
6
(5.3.1)
and expanded
V =
 x4 −x1
 (y2 −y1)(z3 −z1) −(z2 −z1)(y3 −y1)

6
+
 y4 −y1
 (z2 −z1)(x3 −x1) −(x2 −x1)(z3 −z1)

6
+
 z4 −z1
 (x2 −x1)(y3 −y1) −(y2 −y1)(x3 −x1)

6
The coordinates of the intermediate (edge) nodes are then expressed in terms of variable
levels. Setting all levels constant, except for one node of interest (lets give that variable
the name x), and summing the volumes of all tetrahedra together, one can with some
simplification obtain a rather friendly-looking expression. For example, setting the level
of node 3 and 7 to −1 and all others to 1 gives base case C (cf. figs. 2.2 and 2.4). Then
letting x be the level of node 7, we obtain
V (x) = 17x2 −44x + 23
24(x −1)2
(5.3.2)
and its derivative
∂V
∂x =
5x −1
12(x −1)3
(5.3.3)
such that the derivative (sensitivity) at the original level evaluates to
∂V
∂x

x=−1
= 1
16
The volume is integrated numerically by calling the subroutine for integration points, and
integrating the field f(x, y, z) = 1, which is just a sum of the integration point weights
multiplied by their respective jacobians. The sensitivity is calculated for a range of per-
turbation values, by again calling the subroutine for integration points this time supplied
a perturbation node index and perturbation value. The two volumes are subtracted and
31
==PAGE:33==
10−10
10−9
10−8
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
10−8
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
Step size, ∆s
Relative error
Figure 5.1 – Finite difference check of single element volume sensitivity. Error measured against
analytical value. A characteristic ”tick-mark” is observed with a slope of 1, behaving like expec-
ted.
divided with the step size. The resulting finite difference check is shown in fig. 5.1. The
relative error is scaled to the analytical result.
The observed behaviour is as expected, with nice convergence towards the analytical
value. The sensitivity computation with finite differences is as such validated. Because
the volume was integrated using the subroutine for the perturbed integration rule, it can
be concluded that the integration rule resulting from the perturbed design variable is
computed correctly—at least for this cut case with the selected ”pretty” values.
The conclusion does unfortunately not extend to all cut cases (there might be an error in
a data table somewhere) or to all cut locations (it may be problematic if a nodal level is
very close to, but not exactly, zero). But those are potential issues in the sub-division
methodology, and not strongly linked to the perturbation and finite difference approxim-
ation. Therefore, it makes more sense to verify those things by applying the program
to a larger scale problem. Incidentally, that is exactly what was done in chapter 4 by
validating the solution of a large-scale problem against commercial software.
Together, the two validations (the deflection problem and the volume sensitivity) already
make a strong case for the correctness of the program. There are however a few more
things that should be done. First, integrating the volume is to integrate a constant, and
the locations of the integration points are therefore irrelevant as long as the weights are
correct. The unperturbed integration point are known to be correctly positioned from the
results in chapter 4, but the position of perturbed integration points still lack validation.
The compliance sensitivity ∆(uTKu) /h will validate that the perturbed integration
points are positioned correctly. The analysis is first performed on a single element, with
the same cut configuration as for the volume. The three solid phase bottom nodes were
fixed in all degrees of freedom, and a load was prescribed in node 5 (cf. fig. 2.2) to
obtain the deflection vector u. The result is shown in fig. 5.2.
The sensitivity analysis on the compliance also converges with a rate corresponding to
32
==PAGE:34==
10−8
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Step size, ∆s
Relative error
Figure 5.2 – Finite difference check of single element compliance sensitivity. Here, the value
that the relative error is measured against is chosen such that the monotonically decreasing part
has the best possible fit in a least squares sense.
the order of the finite difference scheme (one). Like for the volume sensitivity, the fi-
nite difference approximation converges for a step size factor down to 1×10−6 before
numerical errors take over.
Having validated the finite difference approximation on isolated elements gives confid-
ence that the perturbation implementation is correct. The last thing to check is that the
sensitivity analysis works well in the topology optimisation framework, where a global
array of design sensitivities must be constructed.
This is conveniently done by actually solving for the compliance (and volume) of the
entire system in both an unperturbed and finitely perturbed state. The finite difference in
the actual compliance (divided by the step size) is then measured against the predicted
value from the adjoint analysis. This is done for a range of decreasing step-sizes, and
convergence should be expected. Figure 5.3 displays the results of this analysis in the
actual implementation. The behaviour is as expected, by which the sensitivity analysis
is considered validated.
5.4
An actual optimisation
Working with software is often frustrating and filled with unexpected obstacles, which
slow progress down. This is especially true, if one has to work with code written by
others. It is natural and should be expected, even planned for.
In the case of this project, a functional and validated program was achieved at the very
last minute, and there was no more time to tune optimisation parameters. Without good
parameters, an optimisation is likely to take advantage of some loophole in the numerics
that represent physics. For the case of level-set based subdivided elements, one such
33
==PAGE:35==
10−8
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Step size, ∆s
Relative error
Volume sensitivity
Compliance sensitivity
Figure 5.3 – Finite difference check of
loophole is very thin structures, approaching infinitely thin, which will still transfer loads,
and will in fact be quite stiff, through the subdivided formulation.
Figure 5.4 features selected steps in the only optimisation that was run before the deadline.
It can be seen how material is lumped towards the edges of the support surface, while it
appears that the optimiser is not disturbed at all by the fact that the load is detached from
the support after only a few iterations. But to the optimiser, the load is not detached. In
fig. 5.5, the last design from the sequence is shown, but this time with the threshold level
offset to reveal how the (filtered) design field looks just behind the threshold. Behind
the curtains, the optimiser found a way to keep the structure attached and obtain high
stiffness with feature sizes below the element scale.
This is a, however, a known issue [4] with level-set based topology optimisation, and
Figure 5.4 – Evolution of a design in an optimisation with bad parameters.
34
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.5 – The last design from fig. 5.4, with the threshold value changed to 0.1 below the
datum value of 0.87. Although the design in fig. 5.4 appears completely detached, it is still
connected in the numerical representation.
was expected. One solution is to implement a robust approach with an enforced design
scale, as is done in [3].
35
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
6.1
Summary
This project set out to implement a hexahedral finite element with support for discon-
tinuous fields within the element by piecewise integration. The purpose was to use it in
a level-set based topology optimisation.
The implementation used a subdivision of tetrahedra with a subsequent mapping of in-
tegration points to the parent element. The elements can be initialised eﬀiciently, gener-
ate custom integration rules on the fly, and be destructed from memory again at end of
scope with no trace or side effects. In computer science lingo, the implementation does
not leak.
Implemented this way, the mesh representation and design field never carries informa-
tion about the tetrahedra, so no book-keeping is necessary. Therefore a crisp immersed
boundary could be implemented on a fixed background mesh in a large-scale 3D topo-
logy optimisation framework (Aage et al. [1], based on PETSc), with very little effort,
except that required to switch from an element-based design field to a nodal representa-
tion.
A significant amount of time was spent on providing a plug-and-play solution of import-
ing a pre-defined geometry into a signed-distance based level-set. The library GEL was
successfully adapted for this purpose.
The project focused much attention on generating a general list of integration points for
any physics setting. Once created, the focus was put on the linear elastic problem, and the
integration rules were put to work in a stiffness integration. Solutions to the deflection
problem were benchmarked against production software with good results.
The stiffness integration was exposed in a simple API such that the usage in the topology
optimisation framework required minimal effort. The tools necessary for solving the
adjoint problem in a sensitivity analysis was developed, and given a perturbation to a
nodal level, the framework could perform the sensitivity analysis on design variables.
Performance of the implementation was validated with good results. Evaluation was
done both for select individual elements directly against analytical values and using finite
difference checks.
36
==PAGE:38==
The sensitivity analysis was applied to the minimal compliance problem under volume
constraint. The optimisation algorithm was shown to run in a predictable manner, but
unfortunately not with useful results. No more optimisation was done, as time ran out.
6.2
Lessons
Crispness and length scales
Immersed boundary level-set based topology optimisation has in recent years received
much attention, probably because it is a very attractive way to escape the curse that a
crisper design requires a crisper resolution, which for a voxel-based representation grows
in computer requirements with order O(n3).
The immersed boundary does help. This project did not reach the stage of benchmarking
run-times, much to the authors regret, but it is obvious from a few simple illustrations like
fig. 1.1 that at least some curved geometries can be represented well using significantly
fewer variables using a piecewise linear boundary.
Having said that, some structures are ill suited for this representation. Features with
length scales less than the background mesh can only be represented if they happen to
coincide with the nodes of the mesh, resulting in positive levels. If the feature happens to
begin and end inside one element, it will be lost. That is, unless some very sophisticated
higher order methods are used in combination with a significant amount of communica-
tion between neighbouring elements.
And even if small features can be represented using the level-set, it does not mean that
they should. First order finite elements never perform well on single-element scales, so
no engineer in his right mind would trust a calculation based on an over-integration on a
sub-element scale. No. Unfortunately, without guidance, the optimisation algorithm is
not an engineer in his right mind. Sub-scale elements are stiff, and will be used unless
penalised.
In order to expect sensible results, level-set based topology optimisation requires length-
scale control.
Topology changes and local minima
The use of a moving boundary representation is of course limiting when working in
2D. As Stephen Hawking once observed, one cannot in a 2D universe carve a tunnel
through an object without completely disconnecting the two sides (so creatures who rely
on intestines for eating would have a problem [19]).
In 3D, this is not a problem. As is clear even from the not-so-usefull optimisation ex-
ample in this project (fig. 5.4), topologies can change very easily. But as was discussed,
the change of morphology is not as free when it is restricted to a moving boundary as it
is for a changing density. This has the consequence of rendering the method susceptible
to getting caught in local minima. Some recent literature on the subject (e.g. [3; 7]) fo-
cus on navigating the solution landscape using good initial designs and intelligent hole
nucleation. Any optimisation made for non-convex problems has to deal with this issue,
but moving boundaries are more sensitive.
37
==PAGE:39==
In order to expect high-performance results, level-set based topology optimisation re-
quires mechanisms for avoiding local minima.
6.3
Perspective
Aage et al. [2] performed a full optimisation of an aircraft wing with a reported compu-
tation resource consumption of 8.000 CPUs (let us assume that the author means CPU
cores) for up to five days. This is of course an extreme case, but it will serve an im-
portant point. For the sake of argumentation with simple numbers, suppose a 10 core
CPU consumes 100 W. Then, 8.000 cores consumes 80 kW. Four days is approximately
100 hours, which gives us 8000 kWh, or around DKK 16.000,- of power consumption at
current price levels, or roughly 3500 kgs of CO2. This number is assuming full load on
all cores all the time, and is a very rough estimate. Then, factor in the expected lifetime
of the processor, its life-cycle and environmental footprint.
The point is that computing can be expensive when accumulated. If all major manu-
facturing companies in the world wants to optimise all their products using mega- to
giga-scale resolutions, we may very well end up with material savings and very light
aircraft, but we may also have emptied some rare-earth mines and melted a data-center
or two.
I do not wish to indicate that optimisation should not be done. On the contrary. I wish
to deliver the message that we need to optimise optimisation itself too. That will often
mean knowing what type of optimisation is most suited for a problem. But it also means
that there is a present need for perfecting the tools. Compared to what we have available
at the present, January 2022, much further work needs to be done
6.4
Further work
First and foremost, this project is in severe lack of actual optimisation results. Obtaining
optimised designs using the in this project developed and thoroughly validated code is an
obvious next step. I have made my code available to my supervisors, and I do hope that it
can serve as a short-cut for future students, who can instead spend their time optimising.
Really, without observing what the optimisation actually does, everything is just theory.
This is my biggest regret.
Secondly, it makes no sense talking about a potentially faster method without bench-
marking speed. The CPU time required to obtain useful designs should at least see an
improvement over the density method for some problems to compensate for the pitfalls
of the method. Otherwise, it is just an academic curiosity.
When that is done, I will propose looking into better sub-elements. Some specific cuts
would probably benefit in both speed and stability by subdividing to, for example hexa-
hedra. Related is the topic of resolving ambiguities better, for example by implementing
Chernyaev’s table (see Custodio et al. [17]).
38
==PAGE:40==
References
[1]
Niels Aage, Erik Andreassen, and Boyan Stefanov Lazarov. Topology optimiz-
ation using PETSc: An easy-to-use, fully parallel, open source topology optim-
ization framework. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 51(3):565–
572, 2015. ISSN 16151488, 1615147x. doi: 10.1007/s00158-014-1157-0.
[2]
Niels Aage, Erik Andreassen, Boyan Stefanov Lazarov, and Ole Sigmund. Giga-
voxel computational morphogenesis for structural design. Nature, 550(7674):
84–86, 2017. ISSN 14764687, 00280836. doi: 10.1038/nature23911.
[3]
Niels Aage, Reinier Giele, and Casper Schousboe Andreasen. Length scale
control for high-resolution three-dimensional level set–based topology optim-
ization. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, apr 2021. doi: 10.1007/
s00158-021-02904-4.
[4]
Casper Schousboe Andreasen, Martin Ohrt Elingaard, and Niels Aage. Level
set topology and shape optimization by density methods using cut elements
with length scale control. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 62:
685–707, 3 2020. doi: 10.1007/s00158-020-02527-1.
[5]
Mads Jacob Baandrup, Ole Sigmund, Henrik Polk, and Niels Aage. Closing
the gap towards super-long suspension bridges using computational morpho-
genesis. Nature Communications, 11(1):2735, 2020. ISSN 20411723. doi:
10.1038/s41467-020-16599-6.
[6]
Jorge L. Barrera and Kurt Maute. Ambiguous phase assignment of discretized
3d geometries in topology optimization. Computer Methods in Applied Mech-
anics and Engineering, 369:113201, 2020. ISSN 00457825, 18792138. doi:
10.1016/j.cma.2020.113201.
[7]
Jorge L. Barrera, Markus J. Geiss, and Kurt Maute.
Hole seeding in level
set topology optimization via density fields. Structural and Multidisciplinary
Optimization, 61(4):1319–1343, 2020. ISSN 16151488, 1615147x. doi: 10.
1007/s00158-019-02480-8.
[8]
M. P. Bendsøe. Optimal shape design as a material distribution problem. Struc-
tural Optimization, 1:193–202, 1989.
[9]
Martin P. Bendsøe and Ole Sigmund.
Topology Optimization - The-
ory,
Methods,
and Applications.
Springer Verlag,
2003.
ISBN
3540429921, 9783540429920, 364207698x, 3662050862, 9783642076985,
9783662050866.
[10]
Martin Philip Bendsøe and Noboru Kikuchi. Generating optimal topologies
in structural design using a homogenization method.
Computer Methods
in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 71(2):197–224, 1988.
ISSN 0045-
7825. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0045-7825(88)90086-2. URL https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0045782588900862.
[11]
Erik Burman. Ghost penalty. Comptes Rendus Mathematique, 348(21-22):
1217–1220, 2010. ISSN 17783569, 1631073x. doi: 10.1016/j.crma.2010.10.
006.
[12]
J. Andreas Bærentzen. Gel. URL https://github.com/janba/GEL.
39
==PAGE:41==
[13]
E Chernyaev. Marching cubes 33: construction of topologically correct isosur-
faces. 1995.
[14]
David Contreras and Nancy Hitschfeld-Kahler.
Generation of polyhedral
delaunay meshes. Procedia Engineering, 82:291–300, 2014. ISSN 18777058.
doi: 10.1016/j.proeng.2014.10.391.
[15]
Robert Davis Cook, David S. Malkus, and Michael E. Plesha. Concepts and
applications of finite element analysis. Wiley, 2002. ISBN 9780471356059.
[16]
Thomas H. Cormen, Charles Eric Leiserson, Ronald Linn Rivest, and Clifford
Stein. Introduction to Algorithms. MIT Press, 2009. ISBN 9780262033848.
[17]
Lis Custodio, Sinesio Pesco, and Claudio Silva. An extended triangulation to
the marching cubes 33 algorithm. Journal of the Brazilian Computer Society,
25(1):6, 2019. ISSN 16784804, 01046500. doi: 10.1186/s13173-019-0086-6.
[18]
Carlos Felippa. A compendium of fem integration formulas for symbolic work.
Engineering Computation, 21(8):867–890, 2004. URL https://doi.org/
10.1108/02644400410554362.
[19]
Stephen W. Hawking. A brief history of time :. Bantam Books„ 1988. ISBN
055305340x, 9780553053401.
[20]
Ethan J. Kubatko, Benjamin A. Yeager, and Ashley L. Maggi. New computa-
tionally eﬀicient quadrature formulas for pyramidal elements. Finite Elements
in Analysis and Design, 65:63–75, 2013. ISSN 18726925, 0168874x. doi:
10.1016/j.finel.2012.10.012.
[21]
Ethan J. Kubatko, Benjamin A. Yeager, and Ashley L. Maggi. New compu-
tationally eﬀicient quadrature formulas for triangular prism elements. Com-
puters and Fluids, 73:187–201, 2013.
ISSN 18790747, 00457930.
doi:
10.1016/j.compfluid.2013.01.002.
[22]
Adriano Lopes and Ken Brodlie. Improving the robustness and accuracy of
the marching cubes algorithm for isosurfacing. Ieee Transactions on Visualiz-
ation and Computer Graphics, 9(1):16–29, 2003. ISSN 19410506, 10772626,
21609306. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2003.1175094.
[23]
William E. Lorensen and Harvey E. Cline. Marching cubes: A high resolution
3d surface construction algorithm. SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph., 21(4):163–
169, August 1987. ISSN 0097-8930. doi: 10.1145/37402.37422. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1145/37402.37422.
[24]
Muhammad Maqbool.
An Introduction To Medical Physics - Chapter 8:
Computed Tomography.
Springer International Publishing, 2017.
ISBN
9783319615400. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-61540-0.
[25]
B. K. Natarajan.
On generating topologically consistent isosurfaces from
uniform samples.
Visual Computer, 11(1):52–62, 1994.
ISSN 14322315,
01782789, 14328726. doi: 10.1007/BF01900699.
[26]
Nico Schlömer.
Quadpy, 2021.
URL https://github.com/nschloe/
quadpy.
[27]
Hang Si. Tetgen, a delaunay-based quality tetrahedral mesh generator. ACM
Trans. Math. Softw., 41(2), February 2015.
ISSN 0098-3500.
doi: 10.
40
==PAGE:42==
1145/2629697. URL https://doi-org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/10.1145/
2629697.
[28]
UChicago Argonne LLC and the PETSc Development Team.
Petsc.
URL
https://petsc.org.
[29]
Jun Wu, Niels Aage, Ruediger Westermann, and Ole Sigmund. Infill optim-
ization for additive manufacturing - approaching bone-like porous structures.
Ieee Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 24(2):1127–1140,
2018.
ISSN 19410506, 10772626, 21609306.
doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2017.
2655523.
[30]
O. C. Zienkiewicz, R. L. Taylor, and J.Z. Zhu. The Finite Element Method:
Its Basis and Fundamentals.
Butterworth-Heinemann, 8 2013.
ISBN
9781856176330.
41
