==PAGE:1==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era
of Big Data
Author
Ahmed Said Mahmoud Farag Khalil - s200370
Supervisors
Assoc. Prof. Jose F. Soler - DTU Fotonik
Senior Researcher Douglas McCloskey - DTU Biosustain
January 23, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Multi-Omics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Cloud Computing and Massive Datasets in Bioinformatics
. . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theoretical Background
6
2.1
Multi-Omics and Big Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Use case: Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Analysis . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Current challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
System Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.1
Data Handling Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.2
GUI Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.3
Computational Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
System Design
11
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Existing Solutions (GUI/CLI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
User Journey Map - GUI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
System Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3.1
User Journey Map
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.2
SmartPeak CLI vs. Server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.3
Visualisation Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.4
Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.5
Authorisation Mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Client-Server Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Implementation
27
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.1
Containerisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Server containerisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Client-Server Communication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.1
Implementation Choice: gRPC vs. OpenAPI & REST API . . . . . .
31
4.3.2
Weighing the advantages and disadvantages of gRPC . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3.3
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.4
Service Deﬁnition and Message Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
GUI modiﬁcations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.5
Cluster Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5.1
Single Node Cluster - Installation and Prep. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Testing and Veriﬁcation
56
5.1
Testing Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.1.1
Components used in testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
i
==PAGE:3==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
Contents
5.1.2
Single Container Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.1.3
Multi Container Testing & Simultaneous User Request Handling . . .
61
5.2
Known limitations/advantages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
Conclusions
62
6.1
Summary of The Proposed Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.1.1
Project Management Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.2
Future Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
II
Nomenclature
III
References
III
Appendix A
VI
7
Appendix A
VI
ii
==PAGE:4==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
Contents
"A distributed system is one in which the failure of a com-
puter you didn’t even know existed can render your own
computer unusable."— (Leslie Lamport - May 1987)
Page 1 of 63
==PAGE:5==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
Contents
Abstract
Recent advances in high-throughput technologies have hastened the acquisition of
vast volumes of omics data from a variety of sources, including the metabolome, pro-
teome, transcriptome, genome, lipidome, and glycome. Historically, data from each
source (e.g., the genome) has been evaluated independently using statistical techniques.
Eﬃcient analysis of multi-omics and clinical data is critical for advancing biomedical
research and precision medicine. Specialised computational methodologies are neces-
sary to conduct integrated analysis of biological data gathered through a variety of
modalities eﬀectively and eﬃciently. This work presents leveraging existing techniques
for addressing distinct computational obstacles associated with statistical analysis on
multi-omics datasets: high computational throughput, adaptive multi-user scalability,
and intuitive operation/usage concerns.
Page 2 of 63
==PAGE:6==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
1
Introduction
Modern high-throughput Omic measuring platforms have made it necessary for biomed-
ical investigations to adopt an integrated yet inclusive strategy in order to properly exploit
measurement data and obtain insights into biological systems. This is especially true in the
ﬁeld of drug discovery, material synthesis and disease treatment. Using concurrent algo-
rithms, data from diﬀerent omics sources such as genomics, proteomics, and metabolomics
may be combined to uncover the complex workings of systems biology and the relationships
between them. A new generation of computationally intensive algorithms is being/has been
developed to combine and analyse diﬀerent omics data sets, allowing researchers to uncover
novel biological markers and other biomarkers1. These biomarkers have the potential to aid
in the correct diagnosis of illness, the classiﬁcation of patients, and the administration of
personalised medication. This work examines the current limitation of performing Multi-
Omics on conventional desktop computers and how is it compared to oﬄoading computa-
tional workloads to cloud computing facilities. It oﬀers information and recommendations
for multidisciplinary experts who wish to integrate cloud computing into in Multi-Omics
research.
Through large-scale analysis of omics data, high-throughput studies allow researchers to
investigate complicated multifactorial illnesses. The challenges associated with such large-
scale data collections include storage, analysis, and dissemination. Recent advancements in
computational technologies and methods, particularly in cloud computing, provide a promis-
ing, low-cost, and highly adaptable option for bioinformatics. Cloud computing is quickly
establishing itself as a valuable tool for molecular modelling, omics data analytics (e.g.,
RNA sequencing, metabolomics, or proteomics data sets), and the integration, analysis, and
interpretation of phenotypic data [1].
1.1
Multi-Omics
It is the fundamental postulate of molecular biology that genetic information in living
organisms travels from DNA (Deoxyribo-Nucleic Acid) through mRNA (Messenger Ribo-
Nucleic Acid) to protein. It is generally agreed that the study of DNA, mRNA, and proteins
is together referred to as genomics, transcription genomics, or protein genomics. The genetic
blueprint of a cell is investigated via the use of genomics, which examines the DNA of humans
and facilitate the determination of whether or not speciﬁc genes are present in a certain cell.
Transcriptomics is the study of transcribed genetic material and the examination of genes
that are actively expressed, and it gives information about what is going on at the cellular
level, according to the National Institutes of Health. When it comes to protein pathways
and networks, proteomics may assist in characterising information ﬂow that occurs inside
the cell and the organism [2].
While metabolomics, lipidomics, and glycomics are not included in the core dogma
1Biomarkers are substances found in abnormal levels in - for instance - cancer patients’ bodily ﬂuids.
They may help manage patients if their levels indicate a malignancy and are proportionate to the entire
tumour burden.
Page 3 of 63
==PAGE:7==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
1.2
Cloud Computing and Massive Datasets in Bioinformatics
analysis, they provide a lot of information on the metabolites, lipids, and glycans (which are
synthesised by the proteome through metabolic pathways) found in the environment. As
intermediate products of a cell’s information ﬂow, these substances are considered as excel-
lent indicators of the cell’s general health and activity. While metagenomics is similar to
single-genome research in that it employs genetic information from ambient samples rather
than isolated species, it eliminates the necessity for species isolation [3] [4].
A biomarker is any information obtained via the measurement of omics data. Biomarkers
assist in understanding and analysing the fundamental features and complexity of biologi-
cal systems. Some of the most signiﬁcant omics used to investigate biological systems are
components of the same biological information pipeline, the output of which many inputs
and regulatory mechanisms are dependent. Every one of these omics may be assessed us-
ing specialised high-throughput technologies, such as microarray for genomics [5] and mass
spectrometry [6] for metabolomics. Omics data generated by high-throughput methods has
played a critical role in the development of precision medicine biomarkers for diseases such
as diabetes and cancer [7] [8]. Recently, these omics have also been included into COVID-
19 research investigations as well [9]. In addition, several additional specialised omics have
developed, such as pharmacogenomics [10], radiomics [11] and interactomics [12].
Overall, these omics oﬀer a comprehensive picture of cell biology and the functions that
are associated with it which has triggered the development of diﬀerent software methods
that may give a prediction of an individual’s genotype utilising next-generation Multi-Omics
data that has been easily accessible recently [13].
1.2
Cloud Computing and Massive Datasets in Bioinformatics
The exponential increase of biomedical data sets over the last decade has resulted in
the discovery of a plethora of molecular ﬁngerprints critical for realising the age of person-
alised diagnosis and therapy. Bioinformatics researchers often combine data from various
platforms, including genomes, proteomics, transcriptomics, epigenomics, metabolism, and
imaging, with clinical data obtained from a variety of modalities, ranging from structured
to semi-structured to unstructured.
As a consequence, large-scale and complicated data
sets are being examined more often, posing a number of diﬃculties. For instance, current
next-generation sequencers generate more than 100 GB of raw sequence data2 per genome3.
Together with diverse clinical and phenotypic characteristics, these data have the potential
to signiﬁcantly enhance the understanding of complicated illnesses, but also pose storage
and bioinformatics diﬃculties. Appropriate storage infrastructures capable of storing such
biological data may then be used to support applications that make use of their character-
istics in order to generate new ideas about disease prevention and treatment as well as the
immense computational resources that are required to process these data sets in the shortest
amount of time. Biomedical big data hold the enticing prospect of assisting in the discovery
2Studies can be acquired from the EBI MetaboLights repository :
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/
metabolights/studies
3A genome is an organism’s complete genetic information. It is composed of DNA nucleotide sequences.
Page 4 of 63
==PAGE:8==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
1.2
Cloud Computing and Massive Datasets in Bioinformatics
of new and critical molecules and in deciphering their biological and physiological roles and
activities which may assist clinical decision-making and illness treatment, thus enhancing
health care.
In essence, Multi-Omics data sets generated from the four main omics technologies,
genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics, eventually provide in-depth char-
acterisations of interactions between genes, proteins, and metabolites. There is a need for
integrating various omics data in order to conduct systematic, in-depth characterisation and
understanding of biological processes, such as those associated with adverse outcomes, and
typical Multi-Omics studies involve the integration of various omics types in order to gain
a better understanding of the overall complex underlying biological mechanisms. This has
triggered the need to transition to cloud-based solutions for storage and processing since ex-
ecuting automated analytical techniques require large capacities of random memory as well
as powerful multi-core CPUs to perform the workﬂow analysis (i.e. raw data, noise removal,
and feature identiﬁcation) on the samples in the data set and provide bioinformaticians with
the results while minimising the processing time.
Page 5 of 63
==PAGE:9==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Multi-Omics and Big Data
Metabolomics is one of many omics branches that is most directly associated to pheno-
types4, which includes the study of multiple matrices, including blood, urine, and tissues, in
a variety of species, including plants. It is concerned with the study of very tiny molecules
known as metabolites in order to get a better understanding of metabolic processes. How-
ever, investigating metabolites is not straightforward since it entails numerous crucial stages
that are currently plagued by bottlenecks. Metabolomics is a relatively new ﬁeld of study
and faces a variety of unique problems [14].
Liquid-Chromatography Mass Spectrometry is one of the three primary methods used
in metabolomic analysis (LC-MS). Data analysis for this technology entails a number of
procedures, ranging from data extraction through statistical analysis and annotation. To
facilitate the execution of a comprehensive LC-MS study in a single environment, the Smart-
Peak5 Team has developed the SmartPeak GUI for metabolomics analysis amongst others.
2.1.1
Use case: Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Analysis
Proteins6 are a necessary component of all living things. The large-scale analysis of
proteins and proteomes has a variety of applications in the age of systems biology, protein
structure, including protein identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation, post-translational modiﬁcation
studies, and protein-protein or protein-nucleic acid interactions. The purpose of this section
is to illustrate how mass spectrometry data are extracted from protein samples which is
considered the dominant technique for multi-omics analysis, and how it is used to characterise
proteins.
Using genomics and transcriptomics to unravel the intricacy of gene expression at the
whole-organism level was once considered to be the key to comprehending life’s processes.
However, protein expression does not necessarily correspond with gene expression since mes-
senger RNA (mRNA) is not always translated into protein, a single transcript may encode
many proteins, and post-translational modiﬁcations can signiﬁcantly alter the function of a
protein.
Proteomics is the next level of investigation into biological systems. Examining the
proteome, on the other hand, is far more complex than analysing the genome or transcrip-
tome, since each cell expresses its unique collection of proteins. Mass spectrometry (MS)
has emerged as the most signiﬁcant and widely used technique for rapidly identifying, char-
acterising, and quantifying proteins and their post-translational modiﬁcations [15].
Separating proteins and peptides may be accomplished using a variety of techniques.
4The phenotype is the collection of observable qualities or characteristics of an organism. It includes
an organism’s morphology, developmental processes, biochemical and physiological qualities, behaviour, and
the outcomes of behaviour.
5https://github.com/AutoFlowResearch/SmartPeak
6https://med.libretexts.org/Under_Construction/Purgatory/Book%3A_Human_Nutrition_
(University_of_Hawaii)_1st_Ed/06%3A_Protein/6.02%3A_Defining_Protein
Page 6 of 63
==PAGE:10==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
2.2
Data Processing
Gel-based techniques have been employed as a standard process for proteomics for many
years [16], although they are time intensive. Liquid chromatography (LC) in two dimensions
in conjunction with mass spectrometry (LC-MS) is the new standard for high-throughput
proteomics [17]. Parallel protein separation using LC is followed by screening and labelling
of diﬀerentially expressed proteins for identiﬁcation using tandem mass spectrometry.
One of the primary approaches to proteomics analysis is the peptide-level approach:
Prior to LC-MS analysis, samples are digested into peptides as seen in Figure 1. Another
approach in which intact proteins are examined directly by LC-MS can be used to inves-
tigate post-translational changes at the protein level. Both procedures may be carried out
quantitatively when separate protein mixture samples are tagged (often with stable isotope
tags) and pooled for LC-MS analysis.
In the below mass spectrometry acquisition and analysis pipeline shown in Figure 1,
which typically involves digesting proteins into peptide mixtures, after which chromato-
graphic separation occurs (i.e. Multi-dimensional Liquid Chromatography in Proteomics
[18]) and MS analysis to identify observed peaks [15].
Protein
Extraction
Digest
Protein Mixtures
Seperation
Peptide Mixtures
Mass Spectrometry
Fragment Selected 
Peptides
MS
MS/MS
Quantification
Peptide Identification
Figure 1: Proteomics Mass Spectrometry Analysis Pipeline
2.2
Data Processing
Metabolomics typically uses GC/MS which is best suited for low-to-medium polarity
substances and can directly examine naturally occurring volatile metabolites as well as semi-
volatile and non-volatile metabolites following a derivatisation process. The most common
ionisation in GC-MS is electron Ionisation (EI). The m/z7 ratios of the resultant charged
pieces yield the observed mass spectra. A sample mass spectra is shown in Figure 2. Most
GC-MS devices use Electron Ionisation mass spectra at 70 eV [19], which allows for library
7The ratio of an ion’s mass (m) to its formal charge (z). Formal charge is typically +1. m/z units are
usually omitted.
Page 7 of 63
==PAGE:11==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
2.2
Data Processing
searches for analyte identiﬁcation through an observed change of signal8. This technique is
extensively employed in biochemical [20], and biomedical [21] research.
Figure 2: Mass Spectra for QC Serum 80-20 MeOH
Datasets generated from GC/MS or LC/MS are obtained as a temporal series of mass
spectral scans, each consisting of a pair (m/z, intensity). This is done by binning raw scans
at equidistant m/z intervals. The generated data intensity matrix contains binned m/z in-
tensities, with scan numbers (or time points) and m/z values as indices. These include noise
smoothing, baseline correction, peak detection, alignment and normalisation as well as li-
brary matching and visualisation.
The SmartPeak GUI accepts sequence ﬁles as mzML9 which is widely used in LC/GC-
MS based analysis, this is to be supplied with the end user deﬁned input for samples’ set-
tings and relevant parameters such as featureFilterComponents, featureQCComponents,
quantitationMethods, sequence, standardsConcentrations and traML which is used by
the workﬂow conﬁguration phase to initialise and track the core processing engine. The Core
Data Processing shown in Figure 3 is the most computationally intensive phase in the
8Identiﬁcation is the process of establishing the identiﬁcation of analytes that generated a signal shift.
9https://www.psidev.info/mzML
Page 8 of 63
==PAGE:12==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
2.3
Current challenges
entire pipeline; smoothing (i.e. Savitzky-Golay ﬁlter10, Discrete/Continuous Wavelet Trans-
forms, Kaiser window, ..), baseline correction (i.e. Continuous Wavelet Transform, Linear
interpolation, ..) and feature detection and extraction algorithms11 as well as quantitation
and Feature quality control are routines running on every injection in the database while
calibration and QC/QA is executed on the given sequence(s). The ﬁnal steps is to store the
results and the reports to disk.
Input Files (.mzML)
User Defined Input
Workflow
Configuration
Feature
Detection
Feature
Extraction
Feature QC
Quantitation
Calibration
QC/QA
Feature Files
(featureXML)
Detailed
Reports
Core Data Processing
Output
Input
Figure 3: Data Processing Pipeline
2.3
Current challenges
The current challenges are exhibited in the form of computational bottlenecks that the
user encounters while attempting to perform workﬂow analysis on datasets with more than
120 injections/transitions combinations on a modern personal computer system. Further-
more, processing huge datasets directly from network-attached volumes poses the danger of
the workﬂow analysis being terminated abruptly in the event of a network failure or other
unexpected interruptions. Due to this massive amounts of data generated by multi-omics
research, there is a rising strain on data processing and a growing need to migrate these in-
tense calculations to cloud computing platforms. This was for instance the motivation behind
SCIEX’s12 OneOmics13 initiative amongst others. The SCIEX OneOmics Cloud was built to
oﬀer storage and processing for multi-omics applications in a cloud computing environment
that enables quick, safe analysis and display of huge and complex data sets. Additionally,
results may be safely shared with collaborators using the environment’s unique sharing of re-
sults projects from one user account to another. Researchers may evaluate individual studies
as well as compare data across many omics experiments and even align and compare results
across multi-omics experiments using the processing and visualisation apps.
2.4
System Requirements
The system requirements for the proposed solution presented in this work are primarily
derived from the aforementioned issues along with feedback from the end users and are
classiﬁed into three distinct categories as shown below.
10SG Smoothing Filter <https://uk.mathworks.com/help/signal/ref/sgolayfilt.html>
11i.e. Wavelet-Based Peak Detection [22]
12SCIEX is leader in the ﬁeld of mass spectrometry since debuting the ﬁrst commercially successful triple
quad in 1981 : https://sciex.com/about-us
13OnceOmics Suite : https://sciex.com/products/software/oneomics
Page 9 of 63
==PAGE:13==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
2.4
System Requirements
2.4.1
Data Handling Requirements
A dataset contains one or more sample mzML ﬁles saved in mzML folder, method descrip-
tors and parameter ﬁles. SmartPeak GUI cannot handle data ﬁles that are compressed,
instead the dataset must be contained in a regular directory so that the SmartPeak GUI
can perform IO ﬁle operations on the ﬁles inside the dataset folder. Dataset folder must
contain a subfolder for the features where featureXML14 ﬁles are saved after processing, the
feature ﬁles are used for later analysis and visualisation. The whole dataset folder must be
accessible to the SmartPeak Server entity and SmartPeak GUI.
2.4.2
GUI Requirements
The SmartPeak GUI application must not undergo major user interface modiﬁcations
since the current end user is accustomed to the latest releases15 of the SmartPeak GUI
application. Running a remote workﬂow analysis on the SmartPeak Server should be as
easy as running it locally, therefore all the UI modiﬁcations are expected to take place in
the RunWorkflowWidget16 and are reﬂected therein as shown in Figure 16.
2.4.3
Computational Requirements
The primary goal of this work is to transition computational workloads to perform
multi-omics analysis oﬀthe end user’s PC into a high performance computer that is capable
of handling multiple computational requests from one or many end users simultaneously
when needed. This entails deﬁning the minimum requirements for the remote server, the
communication paradigm as well as the service that would orchestrate and organise request
handling and distribution as well as handling faults and unexpected system crashes.
14featureXML <https://pyteomics.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/featurexml.html>
15SmartPeak Releases <https://github.com/AutoFlowResearch/SmartPeak/releases>
16https://github.com/AutoFlowResearch/SmartPeak/blob/develop/src/widgets/source/ui/
RunWorkflowWidget.cpp
Page 10 of 63
==PAGE:14==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3
System Design
3.1
Introduction
The proposed system design aims at addressing the end user’s pain points through
categorising end users into focus groups, these target group’s major pain points are taken
into consideration at various phases of using SmartPeak GUI. By determining the frustrating
areas for the end users, a solution can be derived to address these pain points through a
system architecture that is designed speciﬁcally to eliminate these paint points. This chapter
addresses the user journey map for major focus groups, proposes a system design to eliminate
hurdles the user come across when using the desktop version of SmartPeak and dives deeper
into some of the design choices.
3.2
Existing Solutions (GUI/CLI)
The SmartPeak Team’s current solutions are SmartPeak GUI and SmartPeak CLI. Both
are open source, with a precompiled version available to the public through the GitHub
website17. SmartPeak GUI is targeting users who have mass spectrometry data and wish
to analyse it - for instance by picking peaks in a chromatogram - using the graphical user
interface to plot and export the results in various formats. On the contrary, SmartPeak
CLI is the headless version of the SmartPeak GUI which targets slightly advanced users
who are comfortable using the command-line interface since it does not oﬀer any graphical
user interfaces to the end user which makes it ideal to run on headless servers with more
computational resources.
3.2.1
User Journey Map - GUI
A poll of over 5 individuals SmartPeak users were asked to discuss their experience with
the software to analyse and export mass spectrometry data, as well as the obstacles that
prevent them from using the software and their ideal vision of the most intuitive analytical
software tool. The following categories were formed based on their responses:
Biochemists/Lab-Technicians focus group:
1. User group 1: Users with a basic biochemistry education who are constantly upgrading
their skills using cutting-edge technology. These are the users who are technologically
savvy.
2. User group 2: Users with a basic biochemistry education who are not constantly up-
grading their skills using cutting-edge technology.
These are the users who would
become proﬁcient using one or a few more tools in the long run.
3. User group 3: Users with a advanced level of education who are comfortable using
multiple analytical tools including Non-GUI or script-based technologies to analyse
17https://github.com/AutoFlowResearch/SmartPeak
Page 11 of 63
==PAGE:15==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.3
System Design
and export analysis results, they are quick learners and adept at adapting to new
technologies.
Additionally, the non-focus group was added to document the use behaviour of a ran-
dom user who has little or no aﬃnity with mass spectrometry analysis. The analysis of the
non-focused group’s behaviour enables the prediction of unusual use cases, which aids the
design process in avoiding unanticipated failures. If the objective is to convert a one-time
user to a recurrent user who may eventually become a member of a focus group, the platform
must be created with the general use pattern in mind.
By taking the average of responses on a scale from 1-10 from both groups, the users
main pain points are illustrated in the following user journey map Figure 4 which indicate
that the "Execute" phase is the most frustrating to most users who don’t wish to wait longer
periods of time to get the analytical results from the software they are using.
    Launch GUI
    Load Dataset
Execute
Analyse
Close GUI
Multi-omics data analysis using SmartPeak
The user has a dataset
ready for analysis, the
user launches the
SmartPeak GUI after it
has been installed on the
computer.
The user selects "load
session" from the "file"
menu and selects the
dataset for SmartPeak to
load.
Once the dataset is loaded, the SmartPeak GUI will
begin to execute the workflow steps the user has
provided. The execution time depends on the size
and number of injections and transitions in the
dataset, for larger datasets this step is the most
unpleasant to desktop users.
After the SmartPeak
Service has processed
the clients request,
SmartPeak GUI loads the
results from the
SmartPeak Server.
After the user has
analysed and exported
the results, the
SmartPeak GUI can be
closed without
disconnecting first.
frustration : indicates how frustrating this phase can be for the end user
fun : indicates how much fun this phase is for the end user
1
10
Figure 4: User Journey Map - GUI
3.3
System Design
As local machines typically lack suﬃcient computational throughput and/or the user
does not wish to allocate much of these valuable resources to run workﬂows in SmartPeak,
custom solution to this problem had to be developed by detaching the graphical user in-
terface from the computational workspace. In order to be able to achieve this, three major
components are considered:
1. Data Files - Where the datasets including user related ﬁles are stored.
2. Processing - On which hardware (remote/local) will the workﬂow steps run.
Page 12 of 63
==PAGE:16==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.3
System Design
3. Graphical User Interface - How it will be able to interact with the detached com-
putational backend to execute the workﬂow steps remotely.
Additionally, the system architecture is deﬁned by the following set of functional criteria,
which were examined prior to making any implementation or design decision:
1. Scalability - The service should be able to scale up and down based on the current
workload to reserve resources.
2. Parallelism - Incoming requests to execute workﬂow steps should be processed with-
out waiting for the other requests to ﬁnish ﬁrst.
3. Fault Tolerance - The proposed system design should account for failures and how
to recover from them with minimal to no intervention from the end user or the system
administrator.
4. Rapid Execution - Compared to the desktop solution, the proposed design should
bring signiﬁcant speedup advantages by shifting the analytical computation to a hosted
service in the cloud.
The following system architecture diagram in Figure 5 depicts the primary components
required to obtain high computational performance from a cloud instance linked to the
SmartPeak GUI, where the end user is expecting the same graphical user experience as the
existing desktop version18.
18https://github.com/AutoFlowResearch/SmartPeak/releases/tag/v1.19.0
Page 13 of 63
==PAGE:17==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.3
System Design
SmartPeak As A Service - On-Premise
Run Workflow →
← Workflow Results/logs/vis-data
Detached 
Front-End
GUI
Mounted Dataset Directory
Worker Node #1
cAdvisor
Kube-
Proxy
kubelet
Ingress
Service
Namespace #1
SPS
POD
SPS
POD
API
Server
Controller Manager
Scheduler
etcd
Detached Back-End : Server Cluster 
Master Node
Users
Users Database
CRUD
Admin
gRPC
Figure 5: smartpeak-hosted service - System Architecture.
The proposed design relies on a technology called Kubernetes19.
Kubernetes is a
lightweight, ﬂexible, open-source platform for managing containerised workloads and ser-
vices. It supports declarative conﬁguration as well as automation. It has a huge and fast
expanding ecology. Services, support, and tools for Kubernetes are widely accessible.
The architectural design is dissected into the following major components, from the left
to the right:
1. SmartPeak GUI : The enhanced desktop version contains communication capabili-
ties; however, none of the extra classes or methods are actively instantiated or called
until the user selects "Run Workﬂow", checks the "Run on Server" box, and provides
the following information:
(a) Server URL in the format of SERVICE_IP:SERVICE_PORT
(b) Sign In credentials including the username and password.
19https://kubernetes.io
Page 14 of 63
==PAGE:18==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.3
System Design
2. Communication Medium : The solution uses google’s gRPC20 framework which is
built upon HTTP/2 for implementing RPC21 APIs.
3. Kubernetes Cluster : A collection of Kubernetes managed worker computers known
as Nodes that execute containerised applications. As shown in the diagram, the clus-
ter’s nodes are not connected to the public internet and a minimum of one worker node
and a control place node must exist.
(a) Ingress : Ingress provides HTTP and HTTPS routes from the outside world to
cluster services. The Ingress resource deﬁnes the rules that govern traﬃc routing.
(b) Service : A service that uses label selectors to identify a collection of Pods.
Unless otherwise stated, Services are presumed to have virtual IP addresses that
are routable solely inside the cluster network.
(c) Master Node/Control Plane : The control plane is responsible for managing
the cluster’s worker nodes and pods. The control plane is often distributed over
numerous computers, while the cluster is distributed across multiple nodes, which
provides fault tolerance and high availability, however this design considers all
nodes to exist on a single machine (Higher Quality of Service (QoS) possible
when needed by replicating nodes).
i. API Server : The API server serves as the interface to the Kubernetes con-
trol plane. kube−apiserver is the primary implementation of a Kubernetes
API server and is intended to grow horizontally by adding more instances.
Many instances of kube-apiserver can be instantiated and traﬃc can be dis-
tributed across them.
ii. Controller Manager : To execute controller processes.
Although each
controller is logically a distinct process, they are all compiled into a single
binary and operated in a single process to decrease complexity22.
These
controllers are classiﬁed as node controller which is in charge of detecting
and reacting to node failures, job controller which monitors for job objects
that represent one-time activities and then constructs Pods to do those jobs,
endpoints controller which creates an instance of the Endpoints object to joins
Services & Pods when instructed to do so and controllers of service accounts
and tokens for new namespaces, account creations and API access tokens.
iii. Scheduler : A Component that monitors for newly formed Pods that do not
yet have an allocated node and assigns them one. Individual and collective re-
source needs, policy/hardware/software limitations, aﬃnity and anti-aﬃnity
speciﬁcations, data locality, inter-workload interference, and deadlines are all
factors taken into consideration when scheduling choices are made23.
20https://grpc.io/
21Remote Procedure Calls
22https://github.com/kubernetes/controller-manager
23https://github.com/kubernetes/kube-scheduler
Page 15 of 63
==PAGE:19==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.3
System Design
iv. etcd : Consistent and highly available key-value store that serves as the
backup store for all cluster data in Kubernetes clusters24.
(d) Work Node(s) : The worker node(s) host the Pods that represent the application
workload components.
i. kubelet : An agent that is installed on each node in the cluster and operates
in the background. It checks to see if containers are running in a Pod before
continuing. When the kubelet receives a collection of PodSpecs from diﬀerent
sources, it checks to see that the containers speciﬁed in those PodSpecs are
up and running and in good health. Containers that were not generated by
Kubernetes are not managed by the kubelet, and vice versa.
ii. cAdvisor : Container Advisor oﬀers container users with an overview of the
resource consumption and performance characteristics of the containers that
are currently executing. Running daemon that collects, aggregates, processes,
and outputs information on currently running containers. This information
is necessary to gather and analyse cluster metrics in order to conduct diﬀer-
ent orchestration activities (such as scheduling, managing container resource
requests and limitations, and Horizontal Pod Autoscaling), which are per-
formed by cluster components like as the scheduler, Kubelet, and controllers.
cAdvisor records information on container resource use in the past, resource
isolation settings, network data, and other relevant information. Due to the
fact that cAdvisor is a component of the Kubelet binary, it is intimately tied
with Kubelet which is the principal "node agent" responsible for running and
controlling containers on nodes in compliance with PodSpecs speciﬁcations.
Figure 6 illustrates these relationships.
Container Metrics
cAdvisor
kubelet
Container Management
PodSpec
Container Metrics
docker
Figure 6: Kubelet and cAdvisor on Metrics collection
Kubelet obtains metrics on container resource utilisation directly from cAd-
visor and takes recommendations in response to them. Additionally, it gives
aggregated statistics on pod resource utilization through a REST API25.
iii. Kube Proxy : kube−proxy is a network proxy that runs/installed on each
node in the cluster, implementing a component of the Kubernetes Service
concept and is responsible for keeping network rules up to date on nodes.
Using these network rules, communication with Pods across the network from
sessions that are either inside or outside of the cluster is feasible. If there is a
packet ﬁltering layer in the operating system and it is available, kube-proxy
will make advantage of it. Otherwise, kube-proxy is responsible for forwarding
the traﬃc.
24https://etcd.io/docs/v3.5/quickstart/
25https://github.com/google/cadvisor
Page 16 of 63
==PAGE:20==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.3
System Design
iv. Pod : Kubernetes provides orchestration services by encapsulating applica-
tion containers in abstractions called pods. Pods oﬀer a common network
and storage interface for containers, as well as access to the platform’s dif-
ferent orchestration services. Pods may be abstracted further into services
that operate as load balancers for the backend Pods. Pods and services are
often controlled by controllers, which ensure that applications remain in the
intended state and ease scaling and upgrading26.
4. SmartPeak Server : The application which runs in a container and encapsulates
all the logic to execute, manage and run workﬂow analysis through remotely invoked
methods by the SmartPeak GUI or any other client with access rights. The Server ﬂow
chart in Figure 8 summarises the major components and the ﬂow of requests and how
they are handled.
5. Data Files : Because the solution will be accessible only to DTU Biosustain users,
the data generated from mass spectrometers is stored on mounted volumes that may
be accessed by the end user from any PC inside the facility. The user will be prompted
to give the full path to the data sets on which the process analysis will be performed,
which results in the following requirements:
(a) The network attached storage has to be mounted and accessible to the end user.
(b) The SmartPeak Server requires full access (Read/Write/Modify) to the same data
sets.
The above criteria serve as the foundation for data ﬁle management between the Smart-
Peak GUI and the SmartPeak Server. As a general rule, if the SmartPeak GUI has
access to data sets stored on a network attached disk, the Server should have the same
read, write, and modiﬁcation permissions for those data sets.
6. Users Database : A service administrator manages the users database, which com-
prises a list of registered users who are authorised to access the service.
3.3.1
User Journey Map
The user journey map for an average user of the proposed solution is illustrated below
26https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/concepts/pod
Page 17 of 63
==PAGE:21==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.3
System Design
    Launch GUI
    Load Dataset
Connect
Execute
Analyse
Close GUI
Multi-omics data analysis using SmartPeak
The user has a dataset
ready for analysis, the
user launches the
SmartPeak GUI after it
has been installed on the
computer.
The user selects "load
session" from the "file"
menu and selects the
dataset for SmartPeak to
load.
The user proceeds with
connecting to the
SmartPeak Service,
given they have their
usernames registered in
the users database. 
Once the user is
authenticated, the
SmartPeak GUI will
connect to the
SmartPeak Service and
execute the workflow
steps the user has
provided.
After the SmartPeak
Service has processed
the clients request,
SmartPeak GUI loads the
results from the
SmartPeak Server.
After the user has
analysed and exported
the results, the
SmartPeak GUI can be
closed without
disconnecting first.
frustration : indicates how frustrating this phase can be for the end user
fun : indicates how much fun this phase is for the end user
1
10
Figure 7: User Journey Map for SmartPeak GUI to SmartPeak Server Interactivity
For the end user the level of frustration using the SmartPeak Service tend to increase
slightly during the "Connect" and "Execute" phases, this is due to possible network latency
or on rare occasions when the service is unreachable as a result of request ﬂooding to the
service where it’s deployed on scarce resources such as servers with less computational power
and/or available memory. Whereas in the aforementioned phases, the levels of fun during
execution tend to decrease. The "Execution" phase is unpleasant to most users but speciﬁ-
cally for users running workﬂows on larger datasets either on their desktop machines or the
SmartPeak Service27.
3.3.2
SmartPeak CLI vs. Server
During the early stages of the development of a solution to execute the the workﬂow steps
remotely, the SmartPeak CLI was seen as a potential candidate when some modiﬁcations
are applied to it. Upon closer examination this has proven to be untrue for the following
reasons:
1. The SmartPeak CLI follows an object oriented design with tightly coupled classes to
initialise the application setting and application management with the parameters pro-
vided as a class object that’s supplied into the application setting class as a reference,
a reference to the initialised application setting is supplied to the application manager
constructor to which tasks are added (i.e. initialise logger, load session, ..) as shown
in Figure 8. This tight coupling has rendered modifying the CLI much harder without
changing the general design of it which isn’t desired.
27Datasets larger than 1 GB in size take much longer on average and cause a major pain point to the end
user
Page 18 of 63
==PAGE:22==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.3
System Design
2. The only possible way to provide the CLI with information regarding the workﬂow to
run is through the command line parameters, the Server should receive these informa-
tion through a payload over the network instead for eﬃciency reasons.
3. The CLI doesn’t have a parent process attached to it to keep it alive to listen for
requests, in order for this to work a parent process such as a service proxy has to
remain in an active loop to listen for requests from end users and relay these requests
to the CLI. The problem with this approach is that it’s prone to faults and is harder
to debug.
4. The CLI would require communications capabilities added to it which would break it’s
design apart. Furthermore parsing the output such as the progress or the logs isn’t the
most eﬃcient of choices. Figure 9 illustrates this modiﬁcation versus a native Smart-
Peak Server implementation which encapsulates all the functionalities for processing
workﬂow steps and sending the results back to the client.
Page 19 of 63
==PAGE:23==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.3
System Design
SmartPeak CLI
Failed
intialise Parser
Failed
Mandatory
Paramters
Provided
Invalid
Provided
Parameters
Valid
Failed
CLI Setting
Initialisation
Failed
Initialise
Logger
Instance
Failed
Create
Sequence
Instance
Failed
Initialise
Workflow
Assets
Failed
Initilaise
Workflow
Steps
Failed
Run
Integriity
Checks
Execute
Workflow
Failed
Export
Results
Exit
End
Start
SmartPeak Server
Yes
Failed
Initialise Server
Instance
Invalid
Valid IP & Port
Failed
Initialise
Logger
Failed
Create
Sequence
Instance
Failed
Initialise
Workflow
Assets
Failed
Initialise 
Workflow
Steps
Failed
Run 
Integrity
Checks
Failed
Execute
Workflow
Export
Results
Exit
Awaiting Remote 
Calls
Request received
Success
Success
Success
Success
Success
Success
Success
Figure 8: Flowchart Comparison between SmartPeak CLI and SmartPeak Server
Page 20 of 63
==PAGE:24==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.3
System Design
Modified CLI
Current SmartPeakCLI
Communication capabilities for
logs & progress info.
Service Proxy
Server
SmartPeakServer
Communication capabilities
for logs & progress info.
Service Proxy
Figure 9: Modelling comparison between Modiﬁed SmartPeak CLI and SmartPeak Server
3.3.3
Visualisation Data
There are varying approaches to how the visualisation data is communicated back to
the SmartPeak GUI client given it’s current design, these approaches are summarised into
three main categories:
1. Generate All & Transfer All : After the workﬂow has been executed on the server,
the server generates the plotting data for all injections, transitions and features.
2. Unary Sample Request & Transfer : The client initiates a single request to the
server to generate plotting data for a single injection sample, the server processes the
request and sends it back to the client.
3. Parse & Extract From Results : The client parses the features output folder and
extracts the plotting data after the server had successfully processed the workﬂow
request.
Page 21 of 63
==PAGE:25==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.3
System Design
The following table illustrates the advantages and disadvantages of each of the afore-
mentioned approaches.
The data set used is LCMS_MRM_QCs28 which includes 2 injection
samples and 324 transitions which yields 648 combinations of samples.
Advantages
Disadvantages
Generate All & Transfer All
• Visualisation data is lighter 
relative to the features XML ﬁles 
(~1.4MB compared to 12.7MB). 
• All Chromatogram data is 
extracted in only 91.3ms. 
• Client doesn’t need to maintain 
a steady connection to the 
server. 
• The server isn’t occupied with 
client’s requests for 
visualisation data. 
• Delegates responsibilities 
accordingly, the server 
processes computational 
requests while the client 
renders responses. 
• Ideal for mobile devices and 
web clients compared to the 
third approach.
• Adds an extra processing layer 
on both the client and server 
sides. 
• Source code is subject to 
moderate modiﬁcations to 
accommodate the approach 
which will increase the scope of 
debugging and maintainability.
Unary Sample Request & 
Transfer
• Visualisation data doesn’t need 
to be prepared, this saves up 
the time needed to get the data. 
It takes approx. 3.3ms to get 
the chromatogram data for a 
single sample compared to 
91.3ms for all injections and 
transitions. 
• Delegates responsibilities 
accordingly, the server 
processes computational 
requests while the client 
renders responses. 
• Ideal for mobile devices and 
web clients compared to the 
third approach.
• Server availability and 
reachability must be at its 
highest. Network latency will 
greatly aﬀect GUI 
responsiveness. 
• Longer processing time from 
initiating the request from the 
client to the server. 
• Plot-Stepper won’t be suitable 
for this approach since it will 
swarm the server with requests 
for visualisation data. 
• Source code is subject to 
moderate modiﬁcations to 
accommodate the approach 
which will increase the scope of 
debugging and maintainability.
Parse & Extract From Results
• Plotting mechanism remains 
mostly unchanged, whereby the 
logic needed to perform plotting 
on the GUI is to be 
implemented for automated 
loading of raw data & features 
and mapping of 
chromatograms. 
• source code is subject to minor 
changes. 
• A connection to the server is 
not needed once the workﬂow 
has been executed.
• XML parsing overhead 
associated with plotting data 
extraction and visualisation. 
• Known limitations when parsing 
multiple massive XML feature 
ﬁles and loading them to 
volatile memory. 
• Does not delegate 
responsibilities accordingly, the 
server processes computational 
requests while the client would 
also extracts and processes 
visualisation data plus renders 
the outcome.
Figure 10: Comparison of various visualisation data generation and transfer approaches
28https://github.com/AutoFlowResearch/SmartPeak/tree/develop/src/examples/data/LCMS_MRM_
QCs
Page 22 of 63
==PAGE:26==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.3
System Design
Since opting for the ﬁrst and the second approaches implies use cases that are not covered
in this work in addition to the disadvantages mentioned above, the current implementation
follows the "Parse & Extract From Results".
3.3.4
Scalability
Manual scaling of pod-based applications is accomplished by raising the replicas ﬁeld in
the ReplicationController29, ReplicaSet30, Deployment31, or other scalable resource. Vertical
scaling of pods is also possible by raising the resource requirements and limitations of their
container (though this can currently only be done at pod creation time, not while the pod
is running). While manual scaling is acceptable when load spikes can be anticipated in ad-
vance or when load varies gradually over time, needing manual intervention to accommodate
abrupt, unforeseen traﬃc surges is not optimal. Kubernetes can monitor pods and auto-
matically scale them up when it detects an increase in CPU utilisation or another measure.
If the infrastructure is cloud-based, it can also spin up extra nodes if the present ones are
unable to take any further pods.
3.3.5
Authorisation Mechanism
One of the SmartPeak Server’s responsibilities is to authorise the user’s request after
an authentication step has been performed. This ensures that unauthenticated users cannot
ﬂood the service with requests and render it unstable.
The users database contains a single table named active_users which contains two
columns, one for the username(s) and the other is for the password(s). Entries are not allowed
to be null and the username entry is the primary key for the table, both entries are of type
text while the password is saved as an sha256 hashed text of the originally entered password.
The database can be created using the following query : "CREATE TABLE active_users (
,→username TEXT NOT NULL UNIQUE PRIMARY KEY, password TEXT NOT NULL)".
29A replication controller is a class that speciﬁes the template for a pod. Additionally, it controls settings
that allow for horizontal scaling of identical duplicates of Pod by raising or lowering the number of running
copies.
30Replication sets are an interplay between the replication controller’s design and the controller’s ability to
detect the pods it is supposed to handle. It supersedes replication controllers due to its enhanced capabilities
for replica selection.
31Deployment is a standard workload that can be established and managed directly. Deployment makes
use of a replication set as a building piece, which oﬀers life cycle management functionality.
Page 23 of 63
==PAGE:27==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.4
Client-Server Interaction
CRUD
Users DB
read(username)
SmartPeak Server App
sha256(password)
SmartPeak GUI
Yes
No
Authorised?
Run workflow
Wait for
 requests
Notify GUI / Don't
run workflow
User Space
Admin Space
DB CLI Tools
Figure 11: Authorisation Mechanism
As shown in Figure 11 there are two distinct spaces where the interaction with the
database take place. The Admin space operates create, read, update and delete (CRUD)
operations on the database, for instance a system admin may choose to add, modify or remove
a user in the active_users table. Executable scripts written in Python has been developed
and available in the oﬃcial repository32 to simplify CRUD processes by administrators. On
the other hand on the User space, the user is prompted to enter their username/password
set given by the administrator which will be supplied to the server as gRPC Metadata33.
For security purposes, the SmartPeak GUI performs an sha256(..)34 hashing function on
the password string provided by the user which is used by the SmartPeak Server App to
query the database for the provided pair of username and password. Once authenticated, the
Server App will have full authorisation to execute the workﬂow steps, otherwise a warning
message to will appear on the SmartPeak GUI to notify the end user that logging on was
not successful.
3.4
Client-Server Interaction
The interaction between major components triggered by the end user in executing work-
ﬂows involve the user itself, the SmartPeak GUI and the SmartPeak Server Application as
illustrated in the sequence diagram below:
32Server
tools
<https://github.com/AutoFlowResearch/SmartPeak/tree/develop/tools/
smartpeakserver>
33https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/#metadata
34https://www.openssl.org/docs/man1.1.1/man3/SHA256.html
Page 24 of 63
==PAGE:28==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.4
Client-Server Interaction
Server:SmartPeak
Server
User:GUI
button:run
Server:User
Session Folders
run workflow analysis
Mounted
Volume
stream logs
send results
reconnect
fetch last session data
fetch analysis results
Client-Server Interactivity
Users
DB
save analysis results
opt
cred. incorrect
notify:user invalid
create sequence
fetch sequence data
process
stream progress
save session data
prepare plot data 
and export results
opt
client disconnects/reconnects
send results
prepare plot data 
and export results
authenticate user
authenticated
analysis completed
Figure 12: SmartPeak GUI-to-Server Interaction Sequence Diagram
The steps the user undertakes to execute a remote workﬂow analysis on the SmartPeak
Server are as follows:
1. The end user has loaded the dataset into SmartPeak GUI and has ﬁlled in all the
required information then clicks the "Run workﬂow" button, the server receives the
request and checks the users database if the user exists and is authorised to run the
workﬂow.
2. If The credentials are incorrect, the remote procedure call will not execute.
3. Once the user is authenticated the workﬂow analysis run is delegated to the server
which creates and runs a sequence instance.
Page 25 of 63
==PAGE:29==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
3.4
Client-Server Interaction
4. The logs and progress information are streamed back to the SmartPeak GUI so that
the user can track the progress of the analysis.
5. The results including the status of every analysis are saved in a directory inside of
the dataset. The progress of the analysis is saved in comma separated ﬁled named
serversession.ssi which hosts information about the last workﬂow executions such
as the username, workﬂow status, the start and end date/time of the analysis and the
full path to the exported results.
6. In cases where a server session ﬁle for the user exists in the folder, the server loads the
results.
Page 26 of 63
==PAGE:30==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4
Implementation
4.1
Introduction
Due to the fast advancement of cloud computing technology, computing systems may
be made much more dispersed and tailored to the structures of issues encountered in a wide
variety of applications. Additionally, distributed computing systems provide the following
signiﬁcant beneﬁts: First: A distributed computing system’s performance may be signiﬁ-
cantly improved by enhancing its parallel processing capacity. Second: Due to the spread
nature of distributed computing, it is possible to increase the fault tolerance of the system.
And ﬁnally: The system is expandable. Because the properties of distributed computing sys-
tems vary greatly from those of centralised computing systems, distinct methods to software
design that can successfully solve the diﬃculties inherent in distributed computing systems
and fully exploit their potential are needed [23].
A distributed computing system may be thought of as a collection of physical processors,
each with a distinct set of computing capabilities, connected through a network of commu-
nication connections. From a software perspective, a distributed software system may be
thought of as a collection of sequential processes, each of which runs on a separate hardware
processor and which collaborate to accomplish a system-wide goal. While the creation of
these individual processes has many of the features of sequential software for centralised
computing systems, the following aspects of distributed computing software are considered
during the software design phase for such systems [24]:
1. Parallel execution of processes is feasible in a distributed software system.
2. In a distributed software system, processes may collaborate to complete a system-wide
job. Cooperation entails communication and process synchronisation.
3. A software component may be translated to hardware resources by dividing and as-
signing software components according to the distributed computing system’s structure
and performance needs.
Based on these principles the proposed solution encompasses isolating each process in
its own dedicated run-time environments, which ensures parallel execution of unique user
requests without aﬀecting each other on performance or data races.
4.1.1
Containerisation
The use of containers in large-scale distributed systems and the cloud is now nearly
ubiquitous. Containers allow for packaging analytical applications and isolate them from
their environment. It enables container-based applications to be deployed simply and reliably
in a data center, a public cloud or even on a desktop computer.
In addition to that, containerisation allow developers to concentrate on application logic
and dependencies while operations teams focus on deployment and administration without
Page 27 of 63
==PAGE:31==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.2
Server containerisation
understanding application speciﬁcs like software versions and settings35.
UNIX chroot36
introduced the notion of containers in late seventies37. This command moves a process’s
root directory and its children to a new place in the ﬁle system that is solely accessible to
that process. With FreeBSD Jail introduced in 2000 38 which is an OS call, like chroot, but
with further functionality for isolating the ﬁlesystem, users, networking, etc. That entails
giving each unique process a separate IP address.
For virtualisation, isolation, resource management and checkpointing OpenVZ 39 uses
the Linux kernel.
OpenVZ containers have their own ﬁle system, users, groups, process
tree, network, and devices. Google introduced control groups, or cgroups, which were a
game changer and the Linux Kernel adopted it to restrict, account for, and isolate resource
utilisation for a process collection 40. LXC (Lightweight Virtualisation)41 is the ﬁrst and most
comprehensive implementation of Linux container management. It uses cgroups and Linux
namespaces. LXC featured Python, Go, and Haskell bindings and runs on the Linux kernel
without patches. Despite these eﬀorts and innovations, current container frameworks did
not get widespread adoption until Docker had made the container interaction more user-
friendly [25].
4.2
Server containerisation
To package the smartpeak−server application into an image, a Dockerﬁle must be
created43 which includes a set of commands that Docker will execute while generating the
image. The to-be-built image is based on ubuntu:20.04 image which gets pulled by the
Docker Daemon from the Docker Hub should it not exist on the host machine. By execut-
ing the docker build command on the speciﬁed Dockerﬁle, the Docker Client uploads the
Dockerﬁle to the Docker Daemon which takes full responsibility in building the image inside
a VM44.The imagine creation process is summarised in the Fig.13.
The instructions in the Dockerﬁle follow the multi-stage build pattern45 to reduce the
ﬁnal image size. The ﬁrst stage is dependencies−fetcher which fetches all the libraries
and tools required to build the required libraries for the SmartPeakServer executable, the
second stage is bin−builder which pulls the source code for OpenMS and SmartPeak then
builds the required libraries and the SmartPeakServer executable. In the ﬁnal build stage
35Following this development model brings in several beneﬁts to the overall’s agility of teams involved.
36Version 7 Unix https://en-academic.com/dic.nsf/enwiki/175578
37https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/chroot.2.html
38FreeBSD Jails <https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/handbook/jails/>
39https://openvz.org/
40Kernel
cgroups
<https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/cgroups.
html>
4142
43Dockerfile.smartpeak−server
<https://github.com/AutoFlowResearch/SmartPeak/blob/
develop/dockerfiles/Dockerfile.smartpeak-server>
44Images could also be built by a remote Docker Daemon
45https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/multistage-build/
#use-multi-stage-builds
Page 28 of 63
==PAGE:32==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.3
Client-Server Communication
smartpeak−server the libraries and the executable from the second stage are placed in the
default paths so that the linker can ﬁnd the required libraries46 when the SmartPeakServer
is called. Then the SmartPeakServer is exposed through the port 50051 and an entry-point
is declared by calling SmartPeakServer by the exec47 form.
Docker Client
ubuntu:20.04
Dockerfile
smartpeak-server:v1.3.0
docker
build
Host Machine
Docker Daemon
Figure 13: Image creation process for the smartpeak−server
4.3
Client-Server Communication
gRPC has several advantages over other protocols, including cheaper (de)serialisation
costs, automated type checking, structured APIs, and less TCP management overhead. An-
other possibility is to use OpenAPI or the REST API, an extensive compairson is discussed
in section 4.3.1.
In an RPC system, the server implements a set of remotely invokable functions. The
client program builds a stub that abstracts the same functions as the server application,
allowing the client application to directly access stub functions that invoke the server appli-
cation’s remote functions.
The workﬂow service encapsulates a set of remote procedure calls that operate across
the network. runWorkflow as one of the methods in the workﬂow service, which allows the
client to run workﬂows on the server by supplying a full path to the dataset along with
auxiliary parameters and settings to ﬁne tune the remote request. The activities taken by
the client when it invokes a remote function are shown in Fig.14.
46In /usr/local/bin/ and /usr/local/lib/
47https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#entrypoint
Page 29 of 63
==PAGE:33==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.3
Client-Server Communication
HTTP/2 Connection
SmartPeak GUI
runWorkflow(..)
getWorkflowEvent(..)
stopRunningWorkflow(..)
Workflow Stub
StubInterface
Encoded protobuf message(s)
POST
/SmartPeakServer.Workflow.runWorkflow
/SmartPeakServer.Workflow.getLogSteam
..
SmartPeak Server
runWorkflow(..)
getWorkflowEvent(..)
stopRunningWorkflow(..)
WorkflowService
grpc Service
Decoded protobuf message(s)
request details
payload
Figure 14: gRPC Client-Server Communication
When the SmartPeak GUI Client contacts the created stub’s runWorkﬂow method, the
following critical stages occur:
1. The client process invokes the produced stub’s runWorkﬂow method.
2. The client stub sends the encoded message as an HTTP POST request. All queries in
gRPC are HTTP POST requests with the content-type application/grpc. It sends a
diﬀerent HTTP header for the remote function it calls (/SmartPeakServer/Workflow
,→/runWorkflow).
3. The HTTP request message is sent to the server computer over the network.
4. When the server receives the message, it evaluates the message headers to determine
which service function should be invoked and passes the message to the service stub.
5. The service stub converts the message bytes to data structures relevant to the language.
6. The service then makes a local call to the runWorkflow method using the parsed
message.
7. The service function’s answer is encoded and returned to the client. The response
message proceeds in the same manner as the client message (response encodes HTTP
response on the wire); the message is unpacked and its value is delivered to the waiting
client process.
Page 30 of 63
==PAGE:34==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.3
Client-Server Communication
4.3.1
Implementation Choice: gRPC vs. OpenAPI & REST API
Remote procedure call (RPC) and Representational state transfer (REST) are the two
major Application Programming Interface (API) design paradigms. Regardless of the de-
sign paradigm, the majority of current APIs are implemented by translating them to the
same HTTP protocol in some fashion. Additionally, it is the norm for RPC API designs to
integrate some HTTP concepts while remaining inside the RPC paradigm, expanding the
variety of options available to an API designer.
gRPC48 is a technique for building RPC APIs that makes use of the HTTP 2.0 transport
protocol as its foundation. gRPC and HTTP conceptual models are diametrically opposed,
gRPC is built on top of the Remote Procedure Call (RPC) concept, in which procedures
and data are concealed behind remote calls, while HTTP operates in the opposite manner.
The addressable elements in HTTP are "data entities"49, and the behaviours are concealed
behind the data whereas the system’s behaviour is determined by the creation, modiﬁcation,
and deletion of resources [26].
There are three fundamental and unique methods to developing HTTP-based APIs.
gRPC, REST and OpenAPI50.
REST is the least often used API model. A distinguishing REST feature is that URLs
are not generated by clients; instead, URLs are handed out by the server. That is, discovered
URLs are followed out of the current URL received from the server. For instance, A web
browser processes a URL by determining which information is necessary for submission in
an HTTP request, then builds a complete URL from other base URL(s). Therefore, clients
aren’t required to comprehend URL structures, since such forms are not included in the API
deﬁnition that clients receive [26].
gRPC illustrates a second paradigm for utilising HTTP for APIs. Under the hood,
gRPC employs HTTP/2, although HTTP is not accessible to the developer. Because gRPC-
generated skeletons51 conceal HTTP from both the client and server, Developers should not
be concerned with how RPC concepts are converted to HTTP, since a solid knowledge of
gRPC suﬃces.
A client makes use of the gRPC API by ﬁrst determining which procedure to execute,
then calculating the relevant parameter values, and then making the call using a code-
generated stub that provides the server with the argument values.
OpenAPI
Speciﬁcation languages such as OpenAPI52 are the most prevalent technique to building
HTTP RPC APIs.
The OpenAPI distinguishes itself by allowing clients to access it by
48Universal RPC Framcework <https://grpc.io/>
49referred to as "resources" in the HTTP standards
50OpenAPI Speciﬁcation <https://swagger.io/specification/>
51i.e. stubs
52formerly known as the Swagger speciﬁcation
Page 31 of 63
==PAGE:35==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.3
Client-Server Communication
creating URLs from other data. Once the URL route template has been selected and the
proper parameter values calculated, a client may utilise OpenAPI by making an HTTP
request and including those parameters.
It should come as no surprise that this is not a RESTful API. If utilising OpenAPI, one
need to know how URLs are structured and how to build them using other data, otherwise
one won’t be able to make use of HTTP as intended. For instance, a REST API operates in
a completely diﬀerent way, in which the URL forms are completely invisible to the end-users
and they never have to construct them. It’s important for API builders to consider the
OpenAPI paradigm, which is widely used and widely successful.
It’s also worth noting that the client model for an OpenAPI is remarkably similar to that
of a gRPC API. Whereas a gRPC client selects a procedure to invoke, an OpenAPI client
selects a URL route template. Both the gRPC and OpenAPI clients compute parameter
values. Whereas a gRPC client utilises a stub procedure to combine the parameters and
the procedure signature and initiate the call, an OpenAPI client injects values into the URL
route template and initiates an HTTP request. While the details vary, the fundamental
concept is rather similar. Additionally, OpenAPI contains tools that produce a client stub
method in the desired programming language for the client where implementation details
are hidden.
Approaching OpenAPI as an RPC API with custom HTTP request mapping might help
explain the remarkable resemblance between gRPC and OpenAPI’s client models. To the
extent that this is true, then gRPC and OpenAPI are both RPC interface deﬁnition languages
(IDL) [27]. The main distinction between the two is that OpenAPI enables API designers
to choose the mapping whereas gRPC conceals all HTTP details behind a predetermined
mapping.
In any case, it is hard to dispute that OpenAPI’s underlying API paradigm is noth-
ing more than plain old RPC; however, many obvious features of both systems and their
distinction from REST remain. This more thorough comparability is supported by these
analogies53.
REST’s Advantages
The beneﬁts ascribed to REST are essentially the same as those ascribed to the world wide
web, such as stability, homogeneity, and universality54. The HTTP/REST approach is an
exception due to its intrinsic entity-oriented nature. This feature is noteworthy since it has
been extensively explored and embraced by advocates of non-REST models such as gRPC
and OpenAPI.
Entity-Oriented Models are rather straightforward, consistent, understandable, and sta-
ble in the long run than basic remote procedure call models. A RPC API often increase
in size when new processes are implemented, each performing a job that the system may
execute. An entity-oriented model organises the system’s actions. For instance, the online
social media platform’s entity model, which includes groups, persons, ﬁrms, and accounts.
If that capacity were stated entirely remote procedure calls, a lengthy, less-organised set of
53OpenAPI vs. gRPC <https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/comparing-openapi-grpc>
54https://www.ibm.com/dk-en/cloud/learn/rest-apis
Page 32 of 63
==PAGE:36==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.3
Client-Server Communication
processes for exploring catalogues, adding persons to groups, pages, tracking connections
between individuals, and messaging is unnecessarily created.
Maintaining consistency among process descriptions will be a diﬃcult task as the list
becomes longer. One method for ensuring orderly list is to describe all of the behaviours
using a comparable set of methods for each object type. Although HTTP is naturally entity-
oriented, an entity-oriented approach may be used to RPC as well. Process categorisation
based on entity type is also a fundamental concept in object-oriented languages 55.
4.3.2
Weighing the advantages and disadvantages of gRPC
OpenAPI, has two critical traits that contribute to its popularity. One is that the Ope-
nAPI approach is comparable to the classic RPC concept, which is known and comfortable
to the majority of programmers. Additionally, the model corresponds to common program-
ming concept which are well known by many developers. Secondly, it enables developers
to construct their own mappings between RPC concepts and HTTP requests. This second
attribute entails both advantages and disadvantages. The key advantage is that clients may
use simply conventional HTTP technology to access the API. This is critical for public APIs
since it ensures API-availability across the most common and widely used programming
languages and environment without requiring the client to embrace extra technologies. A
drawback, however, is seen in that it may take considerable eﬀort and time to design the
underlying HTTP logic, and additional eﬀort on the part of the customer to understand
them.
For OpenAPI-described APIs, a design problem lies in specifying URL routes and meth-
ods (i.e POST) that encapsulates procedures and values. This might be a challenging task,
since there are several possibilities. It is debatable if this is an eﬃcient use of time and
energy for the majority of undertakings.
gRPC advantages
gRPC deﬁnes an RPC API using IDL that builds on the legacy of RPC IDLs56. gRPC’s IDL
deﬁnes remote procedures more simply and directly than OpenAPI’s technique of employing
URLs, their arguments, and the HTTP methods.
Although gRPC makes use of the HTTP/2 protocol behind the scenes, HTTP/2 features
are not disclosed to the end user and developer alike. This makes the conceptualisation and
development phases much easier. OpenAPI, on the other hand, demands API designers to
describe the subtleties of how the RPC model is represented on top of HTTP for each API,
and the API client must learn about those nuances. Using OpenAPI gives API customers
the beneﬁt of using industry-standard HTTP tools and technologies, which makes it worth
the eﬀort for many API developers.
One of the most appealing features of gRPC is its ability to generate easy and eﬃcient
client-side programming libraries. Although OpenAPI may also build client-side program-
ming libraries, the gRPC version is found to be easier and more evident, most likely because
55gRPC vs. REST <https://www.imaginarycloud.com/blog/grpc-vs-rest/>
56Such as Cobra IDL
Page 33 of 63
==PAGE:37==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.3
Client-Server Communication
its IDL simply needs to explain RPC principles and does not need to concurrently deﬁne
their translation to HTTP. On the server side, the gRPC APIs are easy to implement. Al-
though various frameworks exist to help with this, it may be simpler to develop a gRPC
method server implementation than to design a conventional HTTP request handler that
parses incoming requests and runs the relevant implementation methods.
Additionally, gRPC is known for its speed and scalability. gRPC uses HTTP/2 to man-
age connections and delivers an eﬃcient binary payload that is simple to build and parse. In
order to use binary payloads with HTTP/2 directly, the clients will need to be familiar with
other technologies, such as gRPC. While some of the best HTTP-based APIs don’t imple-
ment the whole HTTP protocol, the gRPC framework overcomes this problem by deﬁning
a particular subset of the protocol that API providers and clients may use to communicate
with each other. Both REST and OpenAPI APIs are aﬀected by this problem. gRPC avoids
this problem by requiring the employment of specialized software to implement the whole
gRPC protocol on both the client and the server.
Disadvantages of gRPC
A common characteristic of HTTP APIs is that they may be used by clients and imple-
mented by servers using merely general-purpose and generally accessible technology. API
calls may be done quickly and easily by entering URLs into a browser or by executing cURL57
instructions within a bash script amongst others. No more than a simple HTTP library is
required for programmers to access or develop an HTTP API. In comparison, gRPC needs
both client and server-side speciﬁc software. Classes and other entities generated by the
protoc compiler must be integrated into the SmartPeak Server and the SmartPeak GUI
client - which may be burdensome due to it’s complexity and the learning curve associated
with it.
Often, HTTP APIs are modelled to add security features, check user input, map data
kinds, and handle a number of other problems. Adding, removing, or editing headers is a
common part of this process, as is processing and sometimes changing the content itself.
Both standard and custom headers may be used by proxies to do this. In many cases, these
features are achieved using technologies that do not need the use of traditional programming
languages or development environments that can easily integrate gRPC. The entity-oriented
approach with gRPC is only useful for new builds; adapting an existing RPC API is chal-
lenging.
Because gRPC does not provide a standard technique for preventing data loss when
two clients attempt to edit the same resource concurrently, a customised solution has to be
designed and implemented by the developer. For this reason, HTTP provides the standard
Etag58 and If-Match headers59. Additionally, gRPC has no method descriptions for partial
57https://curl.se/
58The ETag (or entity tag) HTTP response header identiﬁes a resource version. If the content hasn’t
changed, a web server doesn’t need to transmit a complete response, saving time and bandwidth. Also,
etags help prevent concurrent resource updates from overwriting each other ("mid-air collisions"). <https:
//datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7232.html#section-2.3>
59The HTTP request header If-Match makes the request conditional. The server will only return the
requested resource if it matches one of the mentioned ETags for the GET and HEAD methods. In this
Page 34 of 63
==PAGE:38==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.3
Client-Server Communication
updates, therefore when required, the developer has to design and implement a customised
PUT/PATCH call function. HTTP generically speciﬁes a technique for doing partial updates.
4.3.3
Conclusion
Stability, uniformity, and universality are just a few of the advantages that APIs that
adhere to the REST hypertext paradigm have over others. This approach is suitable if all
members of the team are acquainted with API design or are willing to learn about it.
OpenAPI-described APIs are built on notions similar to RPC concepts. This technique
enables clients to use the resultant API using just widely accessible HTTP, but it also intro-
duces extra implementation choices into these APIs, which makes them more challenging to
develop and understand. However if contemplating whether building an API using OpenAPI
is the most suitable choice for the SmartPeak Service implementation, then designing and
implementing it with gRPC is the most sensible solution to pick since both API approaches
are fundamentally equivalent, whereas gRPC eliminates the need to create an own mapping
to HTTP manually.
Regardless of whether to use gRPC or OpenAPI for communication APIs between the
SmartPeak Server and the SmartPeak GUI client, some of the beneﬁts of a REST API can
be achieved by organising it based on entity, standardising the names of the procedures such
as create, get and update. Utilising gRPC is particularly appealing in this work since ﬁrst:
The API is internal, second: a complete control over the technological choices made by the
client, and third the server implementation is feasible in the native programming language of
SmartPeak (C++) as well as other major programming languages for other platform speciﬁc
implementations (i.e. iOS, Objective-C) [28].
4.3.4
Service Deﬁnition and Message Encoding
As previously indicated, gRPC writes the service speciﬁcation for gRPC services using
protocol buﬀers.
Using protocol buﬀers to deﬁne the service entails establishing remote
methods inside the service and describing the messages to transmit over the network. For
instance, considering the runWorkﬂow method in the Workﬂow service, the runWorkflow
,→method receives as an input parameter a WorkflowParameters message and returns a
WorkflowResult message. Other declared remote RPC methods in the Workﬂow service are
:
1. getLogStream: streams the log messages back to the SmartPeak GUI.
2. getWorkflowEvent: streams the workﬂow events (i.e. which injection currently being
processed) back to the SmartPeak GUI.
3. stopRunningWorkflow: halts a remote workﬂow analysis initiated by runWorkflow
situation, PUT and other unsafe operations will just upload the resource. The comparison with the stored
ETag use the strong comparison technique, which means that two ﬁles are regarded identical only byte for
byte. This comparison technique will never match an ETag with the W/ preﬁx, which indicates a weak
entity tag. <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7232.html#section-3.1>
Page 35 of 63
==PAGE:39==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.3
Client-Server Communication
The input and output messages are also deﬁned using protocol buﬀers as showing in
Listing.1
Listing 1: Workﬂow.proto
1 # LICENCE INFO
2
3 syntax = "proto3";
4 package SmartPeakServer;
5
6 service Workflow {
7
rpc runWorkflow (WorkflowParameters) returns (WorkflowResult) {}
8
rpc getLogStream (InquireLogs) returns (stream LogStream) {}
9
rpc getWorkflowEvent (WorkflowParameters) returns (WorkflowEvent) {}
10
rpc stopRunningWorkflow (Interrupter) returns (Interrupter) {}
11 }
12
13 message WorkflowParameters {
14
enum ExportReport {
15
ALL = 0;
16
FEATUREDB = 1;
17
PIVOTTABLE = 2;
18
}
19
string dataset_path = 1;
20
ExportReport export = 2;
21
string report_metadata = 3;
22
string report_sample_types = 4;
23
string integrity = 5;
24 }
25
26 message SingleAxisData {
27
repeated float axis_data = 1;
28 }
29
30 message Interrupter {
31
bool to_interrupt = 1;
32
bool is_interrupted = 2;
33 }
34
35 message GraphData {
36
repeated string series_names_area = 1;
37
repeated SingleAxisData x_data = 2;
38
repeated SingleAxisData y_data = 3;
39
repeated SingleAxisData z_data = 4;
40
repeated string series_names_scatter = 5;
41
repeated SingleAxisData x_data_scatter = 6;
42
repeated SingleAxisData y_data_scatter = 7;
43
string x_axis_title = 8;
44
string y_axis_title = 9;
45
string z_axis_title = 10;
46
float x_min = 11;
47
float x_max = 12;
Page 36 of 63
==PAGE:40==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.3
Client-Server Communication
48
float y_min = 13;
49
float y_max = 14;
50
int32 nb_points = 15;
51
int32 max_nb_points = 16;
52 }
53
54 message HeatmapData {
55
repeated string selected_sample_names = 1;
56
repeated string selected_transitions = 2;
57
repeated string selected_transition_groups = 3;
58
repeated string header_row = 4;
59
repeated string header_column = 5;
60
repeated SingleAxisData column_data = 6;
61
string x_axis_title = 7;
62
string y_axis_title = 8;
63
string selected_feature = 9;
64
float feat_value_min = 10;
65
float feat_value_max = 11;
66 }
67
68 message WorkflowResult {
69
string status_code = 1;
70
string session_id = 2;
71
string path_to_results = 3;
72
GraphData graph_data = 4;
73
HeatmapData heatmap_data = 5;
74 }
75
76 message InquireLogs {
77
int32 nr_lines = 1;
78 }
79
80 message LogStream {
81
enum LogSeverity {
82
NONE = 0;
83
FATAL = 1;
84
ERROR = 2;
85
WARNING = 3;
86
INFO = 4;
87
DEBUG = 5;
88
VERBOSE = 6;
89
}
90
string log_line = 1;
91
LogSeverity log_severity = 2;
92 }
93
94 message ProgressInfo {
95
string status_code = 1;
96 }
97
98 message WorkflowEvent {
99
string event_name = 1;
100
int64 event_index = 2;
Page 37 of 63
==PAGE:41==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.4
GUI modiﬁcations
101
string item_name = 3;
102
repeated string command_list = 4;
103 }
The WorkﬂowParameters message contains a unique dataset_path identiﬁer and other
parameters to specify what to which data to export and whether an integrity check should
be performed. The workﬂow message is structured in the manner necessary to represent the
workﬂow to be run. It is critical to deﬁne the request/response message(s) appropriately,
since the way the message is speciﬁed impacts how it is encoded.
Encoding and creating the byte content equivalent of messages is handled by the mes-
sage deﬁnition’s produced source code. Each supported language has its own compiler for
generating source code, as a result, the protoc compiler is used to generate C++ equiva-
lent code by specifying the location of the proto ﬁle as well as the compiled plugin for the
speciﬁed language as shown in Listing.2
Listing 2: Service and Message Generation
1
protoc −I protos/ −−grpc_out=. \
2
−−plugin=protoc−gen−grpc=grpc_cpp_plugin protos/workflow.proto
3
protoc −I protos/ −−cpp_out=. protos/workflow.proto
Assuming the end user has commanded running a workﬂow remotely with dataset\
,→_path set to /data/LCMS_MRM_QCs and all other ﬁelds set to the user speciﬁc needs; a
message object is built with the aforementioned values and fed into the runWorkflow method.
A tag generates two values: the index of the ﬁeld and the wire type. The ﬁeld index is
the unique identiﬁer allocated to each message ﬁeld in the proto ﬁle when deﬁning a message.
The wire type is determined by the ﬁeld type, which is the data type that may be entered
into the ﬁeld. This wire type contains information that may be used to determine the length
of the item. For instance in the WorkflowParameters a message is structured with a string
wire type for the value of dataset\_path.
4.4
GUI modiﬁcations
The SmartPeak GUI client has undergone a set of modiﬁcations to enable it to initiate
communication with the SmartPeak Server entity when the end user decided to run a work-
ﬂow analysis remotely, these alterations ensure a smooth operation between the default local
mode (running workﬂow analysis on the host PC) as well as the server mode should the end
user wishes to connect to the server to execute computationally intensive workﬂows. Fig.15
illustrates the possibilities between local and remote execution of workﬂow analysis’.
Page 38 of 63
==PAGE:42==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.4
GUI modiﬁcations
User loads dataset
No
Yes
dataset loaded
Yes
No
"Run on Server" 
checked && "Server
Address"+"Credentials"
entered
Instantiate grpc channel
and set it to
WorkflowClient stub
instance
Run workflow locally
"Run Workflow"
clicked
call runWorkflow(..)
set
WorkflowParameters
getWorkflowEvents(..)
getLogstream()
No
Server parameters
No
Yes
Is user authorised
Yes
loadRawDataAndFeatures
workflow
finished
Abort
users
database
Check authentication
Show detailed
warning
Show warning
message
Yes
process
workflow
Yes
workflow previously
 processed successfully?
Yes
No
user reruns
workflow?
Reload results
Figure 15: Workﬂow Execution in SmartPeak GUI
Page 39 of 63
==PAGE:43==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
The second decision diamond branches into the "Server Mode" if and only if the "Run
on Server" checkbox has been clicked; if it is evaluated to true the SmartPeak GUI will
enter the "Server Mode" and will initialise server related classes as well as execute a series of
functions to run the workﬂow analysis, get the events and logs stream from the SmartPeak
Server once the user has been authenticated against the users database and ﬁnally loads
the results for potential visualisation purposes, which will also be applied in the event of
deciding to rerun the workﬂow shall a previously successful workﬂow analysis had been run.
There are four steps60 the user has to perform in order to run the workﬂow with an
added extra sub-step for the user to include mandatory information regarding the SmartPeak
Service and the user credentials to gain permission to run the workﬂow analysis, Figure 16
illustrates the added extra sub-step under Step 4.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
After start SmartPeakGUI, the
user selects "New/Load
Session" from the "File"
dropdown menu
The user specifies the full path
to the dataset to perform the
workfllow analysis on
From the "Actions" dropdown
menu, the user selects "Run
workflow"
To run the workflow steps on
the server, the user checks
"Run on Server", enters the
Service URL, then enters a
valid username and password
Figure 16: SmartPeak GUI - Steps to Execute Workﬂow Steps
4.5
Cluster Deployment
As indicated previously, Kubernetes is used in this work to expose Smartpeak as a
service to clients who need to run workﬂow analytical experiments on substantially more
powerful high-performance computers. Kubernetes enables developers to easily manage and
orchestrate the lifecycles of containers and applications therewithin, as well as the incoming
and outgoing requests and messages between the SmartPeak Server and the SmartPeak GUI
client.
Containerised applications/services are usually deconstructed into smaller, self-contained
components known as microservices. When the service becomes too large to self-contain all
60Whether for the "Server/Remote Mode" or "Local/Default Mode"
Page 40 of 63
==PAGE:44==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
the underlying sub-/co-services, it is expected to be broken down into separately coupled mi-
croservices. Microservices may be built, launched, updated, and scaled independently of one
another due to their decoupled nature. This enables rapid component replacement to suit
the continually changing business requirements associated with future continuous improve-
ment. As the number of deployable components rises, building, operating, and maintaining
a stable system gets increasingly challenging. It is far more diﬃcult to ﬁnd the optimal loca-
tion of each of those components in order to maximise resource eﬃciency while minimising
hardware costs. Completing all of this manually is time consuming. Automation is required,
including automatic scheduling of those components on servers, as well as automated setup,
supervision, and failure management, all of which is accomplishable via using Kubernetes.
Without signiﬁcant assistance of an operations team, Kubernetes enables developers
to deploy applications autonomously and as often as required.
Additionally, it aids the
operations team by monitoring and automatically rescheduling those apps in the event of
a hardware failure. System administrators’ focus shifts away from monitoring individual
programs and toward supervising and administering Kubernetes and the rest of the infras-
tructure, with Kubernetes taking care of the applications. Kubernetes abstracts away the
data centre’s underlying hardware architecture and displays it as a single enormous com-
puting resource. It enables the installation and management of software components in
the absence of knowledge of the underlying servers (i.e. Virtualisation, Networking, Storage,
..). When Kubernetes is used to provide a multi-component application, it selects a server
for each component, deploys it, and conﬁgures it to interact seamlessly with the other com-
ponents. As a result, Kubernetes is an ideal solution for the majority of oﬀ-premises cloud
computing systems, particularly those built and run by cloud service providers. Kubernetes
allows businesses to provide developers an easy-to-use platform for deploying and managing
any kind of application, without requiring the cloud provider’s system administrators to be
conversant with the tens of thousands of applications running on their infrastructure. With
an increasing number of large companies adopting the Kubernetes paradigm as the optimal
way to operate applications, it is rapidly establishing itself as the de-facto standard for op-
erating distributed applications in the cloud and on-premises, and is thus used in this work
due to its long-term support by the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF)61 and its
evolving nature.
4.5.1
Single Node Cluster - Installation and Prep.
After packaging SmartPeak Server Application within a container image and making it
public through Docker Hub, the next step is to deploy it in a Kubernetes cluster rather than
executing it directly in Docker which required a conﬁgured Kubernetes cluster.
A proper Kubernetes installation spans many physical or virtual computers and needs ade-
quate network conﬁguration to allow all containers operating inside the Kubernetes cluster to
communicate over the same ﬂat networking space. There are several techniques for deploying
a Kubernetes cluster. It can be run on a local development machine, on a organisation’s
61CNCF <https://www.cncf.io/>
Page 41 of 63
==PAGE:45==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
cluster of machines, on cloud providers that provide virtual machines (Such as Amazon EC2
& Microsoft Azure), or by utilising a managed Kubernetes cluster such as Amazon EKS or
Google Kubernetes Engine (GKS).
This section discusses a straightforward methods for obtaining a working Kubernetes
cluster by installing and operate a single-node Kubernetes cluster on a local system, for a
production system however, a hosted cluster running on Amazon EKS62 OR Google Kuber-
netes Engine (GKE) is highly recommended.
Minikube is the easiest way to get started with Kubernetes on a local machine. The
command-line utility can create a single-node Kubernetes cluster, which is ideal for test-
ing Kubernetes and building applications locally which is suﬃcient for investigating and
prototyping the SmartPeak Service.
Minikube is a single executable ﬁle that must be downloaded and placed on the system’s
path. It is compatible with macOS, Linux, and Windows. The installation procedures are
well documented on the Minikube’s oﬃcal website63. A quick method to have it installed on
macOS is by installing it with the brew package manager brew install minikube and with
the choco package manager for windows in a priviledged powershell window choco install
,→
−y minikube. Additionally kubectl CLI client to interface with Kubernetes is also re-
quired, it can be installed on macOS via the brew package manager brew install kubectl
or via the choco package manager on windows choco install kubernetes−cli.
Once Minikube and kubectl has been successfully installed locally, the following com-
mand shown in Listing:3 is entered to instantly start a Kubernetes cluster.
Listing 3: Running Single Node Cluster with Minikube
1
minikube start −−cpus 4 −−memory 4096 −p sp−hosted
2
−−namespace sp−hosted−ns −−hyperv−virtual−switch "smartpeak−storage−
,→switch"
3
−−v=4 −−mount −−mount−string="$HOME/data:/data" −−driver=hyperkit
Upon instantiating a cluster, minikube has to be provided with the full path of the
location of the datasets on the host machine on which the user wishes to run the workﬂow
analysis on. The previous command shows how to mount the local datasets folder /path/to/
,→local/datasets to /data inside the minikube VM with will be later mounted in all pods.
A Kubernetes Service is a resource that is established to provide a centralised,
consistent point of access to a collection of pods that provide the same service. Each service
has a unique IP address and port that remain constant during its existence. Clients may
62This can be accomplished by the kops tool, which is developed on top of the kubeadm which can
be obtained from http://github.com/kubernetes/kops. It enables the deployment of production-grade,
highly available Kubernetes clusters on AWS
63Installation Instructions can be followed here : https://v1-18.docs.kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/
tools/install-minikube/
Page 42 of 63
==PAGE:46==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
establish connections to that IP and port, which are subsequently routed to one of the
service’s pods. Thus, customers of a service are not required to know the location of the
individual pods that provide the service, enabling those pods to be relocated across the
cluster at will.
By deﬁning a service for the frontend pods and setting it to be available from outside
the cluster, a single, consistent IP address for external clients to connect to the pods is
exposed. Even if the pod’s IP address changes, the service address remains constant. The
service’s connections are load-balanced over all of the backup pods, Listing4 illustration how
the smartpeak-hosted service is deﬁned.
Listing 4: smartpeak-hosted-svc.yaml
1
apiVersion: v1
2
kind: Service
3
metadata:
4
name: smartpeak−hosted
5
spec:
6
type: NodePort
7
ports:
8
−port: 50051
9
targetPort: 50051
10
protocol: TCP
11
name: grpc
12
selector:
13
app: smartpeak−hosted
kubectl create −f smartpeak−hosted−svc.yaml && kubectl get svc deploys and
lists all active services.
The service accepts connections on port 50051 and routes each incoming connection to
port 50051 of one of the pods at random which is not desired since some pods might be in
the middle of a workﬂow analysis which will be explained later in Auto Scaling. In order for
the pods to discover the service, Kubernetes oﬀers mechanisms for client pods to ﬁnd the IP
and port of a service since creating a service ﬁrst is not mandatory.
When pods are launched, Kubernetes creates a collection of environment variables that
refer to each service that is currently available (i.e. smartpeak-hosted). If the service is
created before the client pods are created, processes in those pods may get the service’s IP
address and port by checking their environment variables.
A pod environment variables of one of the running pods can be examined via kubectl
,→exec smartpeak−hosted−xxxx env which will reveal two deﬁned services in the cluster:
kubernetes and smartpeak−hosted; as a result, the list contains two sets of service-related
environment variables. Among the variables associated with the smartpeak−hosted service
established at the start of the deployment are the SMARTPEAK_HOSTED_SERVICE_HOST and
Page 43 of 63
==PAGE:47==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
SMARTPEAK_HOSTED_SERVICE_PORT environment variables, which contain the smartpeak−
,→hosted service’s IP address and port, respectively. While environment variables are one
method of determining the IP address and port number of a service, Kubernetes is also
included with a DNS server, which allows for service IPs check up using DNS.
kube-dns is an essential pod in the kube-system namespace. Additionally, the kube-
system namespace has a service with the same name. As the name implies, the pod hosts a
DNS server, which all other pods in the cluster are set to utilise automatically64. Any DNS
query made by a process operating within a pod is handled by Kubernetes’ own DNS server,
which is aware of all the services running on the system.
Each service is assigned a DNS record in the internal DNS server, and client pods that
know the service’s name may contact it directly using the service’s fully qualiﬁed domain
name (FQDN)65 rather than via environment variables.
A Deployment is a higher-level resource that is used to deploy and update programs
declaratively, rather than through a ReplicationController or a ReplicaSet, both of which
are considered lower-level notions.
When a deployment is built, an associated ReplicaSet resource is generated (eventually
more of them). ReplicaSets are the next generation of ReplicationControllers and should
be used in their place.
Additionally, replica-sets duplicate and manage pods.
When a
Deployment is used, the actual pods are produced and maintained by the ReplicaSets of the
Deployment, not by the Deployment itself (Deployment −→ReplicaSet =⇒∃(Pod)).
While upgrading the SmartPeak Server Application, a second ReplicationController
must be introduced to coordinate the two controllers to avoid erroneous operation between
the two. That is handled by a Deployment resource66. Using a Deployment simpliﬁes Appli-
cation updates signiﬁcantly, as the desired state can be deﬁned using a single Deployment
resource.
The process of building a Deployment is similar to that of establishing a Replication-
Controller. Additionally, a deployment includes a label selector, a desired replica count,
and a pod template. Additionally, it has a ﬁeld that provides a deployment strategy that
determines how the Deployment resource should be updated when it is amended.
To begin building the Deployment the command kubectl create −f smartpeak−
,→hosted−deployment.yaml −record deployment "smartpeak−hosted" tells Kubernetes
to build the Deployment based on the yaml ﬁle provided and saves the command to the
revision history. To ensure a successful deployment as well as listing the deployed pods,
the following command can be used kubectl status rollout deployment smartpeak−
,→hosted && kubectl get po.
Listing 5: smartpeak-hosted-deployment.yaml
1
apiVersion: apps/v1beta1
64/etc/resolv.conf of each container is edited by Kubernetes itself for that purpose
65https://kb.iu.edu/d/aiuv
66Though not by the Deployment resource itself, but by the controller process running in the Kubernetes
control plane
Page 44 of 63
==PAGE:48==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
2
kind: Deployment
3
metadata:
4
name: smartpeak−hosted
5
spec:
6
replicas: 3
7
template:
8
metadata:
9
name: smartpeak−hosted
10
labels:
11
app: smartpeak−hosted
12
spec:
13
containers:
14
−image: autoflowresearch/smartpeak−server:v1.3.0
15
name: smartpeak−hosted
For external clients to access a cluster of pods, a service of type NodePort is speciﬁed.
By building a NodePort service, as shown in Listing4, Kubernetes is instructed to reserve a
port on each of its nodes (using the same port number), and to pass incoming connections to
the service’s pods. This is comparable to a standard service (whose true type is ClusterIP),
except that a NodePort service may be accessed not only through the service’s internal
cluster IP, but also via the IP and reserved node port of any node. In actual deployment
environment where cloud-based Kubernetes clusters supports automatic provisioning of load
balancers via a cloud infrastructure. The service type is required to change to LoadBalancer
rather than NodePort. The load balancer will be assigned a unique, publicly available IP
address and will be responsible for redirecting all connections to the smartpeak−hosted
,→service. As a result, the smartpeak−hosted service is to be accessed through the load
balancer’s IP address. On the other hand if Kubernetes is operating in an environment that
does not allow LoadBalancer services, the load balancer will not be deployed, but the service
behaves similarly to a NodePort service. This is because the LoadBalancer service is a subset
of the Node-Port service67.
Persistent Volumes is another essential Kubernetes resource. As previously stated,
pods are analogous to logical hosts in that processes operating inside them share compu-
tational, memory and networking resources.
And sharing disks amongst processes is no
exception, apart from the fact that each container in a pod has its own isolated ﬁlesystem,
which is created by the container’s image. Each new container begins with the same set
of ﬁles that were added to the image during the build process. Combining this with the
fact that containers within a pod are restarted (i.e. the SmartPeakServer has terminated
unexpectedly), and it becomes mandatory not to move the datasets inside the processing
pod then moving the processed dataset back to the host machine. In certain cases, such as
when resuming a process on a physical system, the new container needs to resume where the
previous one left oﬀ.
67For prototyping purposes NodePort is chosen, however with GKE or EKS the Service type must be
changed to LoadBalancer
Page 45 of 63
==PAGE:49==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
This is possible in Kubernetes via the use of storage volumes which are not top-level
resources, like pods, but are speciﬁed as a sub-resource of a pod and share the pod’s lifespan.
This implies that when the pod is launched, a volume is produced and destroyed when the
pod is deleted. As a result, the contents of a volume survive throughout container restarts.
When a container is restarted, the new container may view all the ﬁles that the previous
container wrote to the volume. Although a volume is accessible to all containers inside the
pod, it must be mounted into each container that requires access, at any path on the ﬁlesys-
tem of each container.
The majority of pods should be ignorant of their host node and should avoid attempting
to read any ﬁles on the node’s disk. Kubernetes, on the other hand, supports this through
a hostPath volume. The hostPath property on a volume points to a speciﬁc ﬁle or directory
on the node’s ﬁlesystem. Pods that share a node and the same host-path volume see the
same ﬁles. hostPath volumes are persistent storages, since their contents endure after the
container is destroyed. If a pod is destroyed and the succeeding pod uses a hostPath volume
pointing to the same path on the host, the subsequent pod will view every ﬁle/item left
behind by the previous pod, but only if the new pod is scheduled to the same node as the
ﬁrst pod68.
To apply the changes to the previously created deployment the command kubectl
,→apply −f smartpeak−hosted−deployment.yaml −record deployment "smartpeak−
,→hosted" tells Kubernetes to mount the /data directory on the host node into each con-
tainer created at /data path to the existing deployment. To ensure a successful application
of the modiﬁed properties as well as listing the deployed pods, the following command
can be used kubectl status rollout deployment smartpeak−hosted deployment &&
,→kubectl get po.
Listing 6: smartpeak-hosted-deployment-with-volumes.yaml
1
apiVersion: apps/v1beta1
2
kind: Deployment
3
metadata:
4
name: smartpeak−hosted
5
spec:
6
replicas: 3
7
template:
8
metadata:
9
name: smartpeak−hosted
10
labels:
11
app: smartpeak−hosted
12
spec:
13
containers:
14
−image: autoflowresearch/smartpeak−server:v1.3.0
68Volumes | K8 <https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/>
Page 46 of 63
==PAGE:50==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
15
volumeMounts:
16
name: data
17
−mountPath: /data # in pod
18
volumes:
19
−name: data
20
hostPath:
21
path: /data
22
type: Directory
23
name: smartpeak−hosted
An Ingress Resource requires just one IP address, even when providing access to
hundreds of services.
When a client sends an HTTP request to the Ingress, the service
called is determined by the host and path supplied in the request. Ingresses operate at the
application layer of the network stack (HTTP) and oﬀer features such as cookie-based session
aﬃnity. To use Ingress resources, a cluster must have an active Ingress controller. By default,
a kubernetes installation does not include an ingress controller and must be conﬁgured
separately in a fully managed cluster. However, technologies such as GKE enable Ingress
by using Google Cloud Platform’s built-in HTTP load balancing capabilities. Minikube’s
prototype phase includes the activation of add-ons that allow the Ingress features (ingress
,→and ingress−dns)69. Listing.7 illustrates the Ingress’s YAML manifest for building an
ingress resource.
Listing 7: smartpeak-hosted-ingress.yaml
1
apiVersion: extensions/v1beta1
2
kind: Ingress
3
metadata:
4
name: smartpeak−hosted
5
annotations:
6
nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/grpc−backend: "true"
7
nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/service−upstream: "true"
8
spec:
9
rules:
10
−host: smartpeak−backend.local
11
paths:
12
−path: /
13
pathType: ImplementationSpecific
14
backend:
15
serviceName: smartpeak−hosted
16
servicePort: 50051
This establishes an Ingress with the following rules:
69minikube −p my−profile addons enable ingress && minikube −p my−profile addons enable
,→ingress−dns
Page 47 of 63
==PAGE:51==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
1. The Ingress controller and containing the host smartpeak−backend.local are for-
warded to the smartpeak−hosted service on port 50051.
2. Since the service is relying on gRPC traﬃc, the ingress is annotated with "grpc-
backend" which sets up the appropriate nginx conﬁguration to route http/2 traﬃc
to the smartpeak-hosted service.
3. Since Pods’ endpoints is used in the nginx upstream conﬁguration by default, the
service-upstream is activated to override this behaviour in order to use the service’s
uniﬁed cluster IP/Port.
In order to access the service through smartpeak−backend.local, the domain name
to the Ingress controller’s IP address must be resolved. A list of the ingresses associated
IPs can be shown by calling kubectl get ingresses. Once the IP address is determined,
a DNS servers can be conﬁgured to forward smartpeak−backend.local to that address or
a host entry mapping can be added to the /etc/hosts ﬁle like so : smartpeak−backend.
,→local 192.168.3.179.
With the client connected to one of the pods through the Ingress controller, The client
initially looked up smartpeak−backend.local through DNS, and the DNS server (or the
local operating system) provided the Ingress controller’s IP address. The client then sub-
mitted an HTTP request to the Ingress controller with the Host header set to smartpeak
,→−backend.local. The controller recognised that the client is attempting to access the
smartpeak−hosted service, looked up the pod IPs associated with the service through the
End-points object, and routed the client’s request to one of the pods. The request was not
sent to the service by the Ingress controller but was solely used to choose a pod.
Horizontal Pod Auto-scaling eliminated the need for manual resource scaling since
the replicas ﬁeld in the ReplicationController, ReplicaSet, Deployment, or any scalable re-
source may be increased by an operations team. Vertically scaling pods requires raising
container resource demands and restrictions. Manual and scheduled scaling is permitted
when load spikes can be anticipated in advance or when the load varies steadily over time,
however it isn’t ideal when unexpected traﬃc spikes occur. Kubernetes can monitor pods
running the smartpeak-server app and automatically scale them up when the CPU con-
sumption. HPA is considered a vital part of the deployment since pods can take between
a few minutes to hours to ﬁnish processing workﬂow analysis delegated by the end user. A
busy pod can not and should not process more than one request at a time, therefore the
autoscaling on the number of available pods is directly related to the CPU utilisation as
a metric to make an automated autoscaling decision to ensure availability to all registered
users.
Horizontal pod autoscaling is the automated scaling of a controller’s pod replicas. The
Horizontal controller does this by generating a HorizontalPodAutoscaler (HPA) resource.
The controller checks pod metrics regularly, determines the needed number of replicas, and
Page 48 of 63
==PAGE:52==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
updates the replicas ﬁeld on the target resource (Deployment, ReplicaSet or Replication-
Controller). The Autoscaling process begins with obtaining metrics for the scaled resource
object’s pods. Then calculate the number of pods necessary to achieve the desired metrics
and ﬁnally Update the scaled resource’s replicas ﬁeld.
The Autoscaler does not collect pod stats.
It derives its stats from elsewhere.
As
mentioned previously, cAdvisor collects pod and node metrics, which are subsequently ag-
gregated by the cluster-wide metrics API. The horizontal pod autoscaler controller queries
metrics API over REST for all pod metrics to calculate out the needed number of replicas. It
must select a number that will bring the metric’s average across all copies as near as feasible
to the set objective. a series of pod metrics (potentially more than one per pod) and a single
integer as output (the number of pod replicas).
Calculating the required number of replicas is straightforward when the Autoscaler is
conﬁgured to analyse just one statistic. Calculating the HorizontalPodAutoscaler’s target
value by summing all pods’ metrics values, dividing by the target value, and rounding up.
Indeed, the technique is somewhat more challenging since it guarantees that the Autoscaler
does not thrash about when the metric value varies rapidly. With a variety of pod metrics,
such as CPU use and (Query Per Second) QPS, the Autoscaler calculates the replica count
for each measure independently and chooses the greatest value (for instance, if four pods are
required to achieve the target CPU usage, and three pods are required to achieve the target
QPS, the Autoscaler will scale to four pods).
It is then up to the ReplicaSet controller to decide whether to spin up more pods or
delete superﬂuous ones. The Autoscaler controller updates the Scale sub-replicas resource’s
ﬁeld. With the exception of the Scale sub-resource, it allows the Autoscaler to scale resources
without knowing any speciﬁcs about them.
A process within a container is guaranteed the amount of CPU required by the con-
tainer’s resource requirements. When no other processes are running, the process may take
100% of the node’s CPU. A pod using 80% of the CPU isn’t apparent if it’s the node’s
CPU, a guaranteed CPU for the pod (the resource request), or a hard limit established for
the pod via resource limitations. When assessing a pod’s CPU consumption, the Autoscaler
simply considers the promised CPU amount (the CPU requests). To calculate the CPU
usage percentage, the Autoscaler compares the pod’s actual CPU use to its CPU requests.
To enable autoscaling, the CPU resource requirements given in each pod. A CPU resource
request to the Deployment’s pod template must be added as shown in Listing8. This is a
standard Deployment object without autoscaling. It will launch two smartpeak-server in-
stances, each using 100 millicores. After constructing the Deployment, the next step is to
build a HorizontalPodAutoscaler (HPA) object and point it to the Deployment by deﬁning
the HPA’s YAML manifest as shown in Listing 8.
Listing 8: smartpeak-hosted-hpa.yaml
1
apiVersion: autoscaling/v2beta1
2
kind: HorizontalPodAutoscaler
Page 49 of 63
==PAGE:53==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
3
metadata:
4
name: smartpeak−hosted
5
spec:
6
minReplicas: 2
7
maxReplicas: 10
8
metrics:
9
−resource:
10
name: cpu
11
targetAverageUtilization: 10
12
type: Resource
13
scaleTargetRef:
14
apiVersion: extensions/v1beta1
15
kind: Deployment
16
name: smartpeak−hosted
17
behavior:
18
scaleDown:
19
policies:
20
−type: Pods
21
value: 1
22
periodSeconds: 45
23
selectPolicy: Min
24
stabilizationWindowSeconds: 600
25
scaleUp:
26
policies:
27
−type: Pods
28
value: 2
29
periodSeconds: 10
30
selectPolicy: Max
31
stabilizationWindowSeconds: 0
This builds the HPA object and sets the scaling goal to smartpeak−hosted. The target
CPU usage of the pods to 10% and the minimum and maximum replica count to two and ten
respectively. As long as the Autoscaler maintains a CPU usage of 10% or less, it will never
scale below two replicas or above ten. The maximum number of replicas is derived from the
total number of active users and a minimum of two is for ensuring that the ﬁrst requests
are ready to be serviced. Scaling rules are described as scaleDown and scaleUp. scaleDown
deﬁnes how the policy is scaled down by one pod every iteration. The periodSeconds vari-
able speciﬁes the duration of a scaling iteration, which is set to 45 seconds. selectPolicy
decides which policy to use ﬁrst, and Min is chosen to allow for the smallest amount of
change possible. stabilizationWindowSeconds speciﬁes the time interval during which the
HPA should check for desired states and is set to 600 seconds to allow the pod replicas to
return to the default number of active pods. Similarly, the scaleUp policy follows the same
procedure, scaling up by two pods for each scaling iteration lasting ten seconds.
Page 50 of 63
==PAGE:54==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
Load Balancing in Kubernetes typically doesn’t function well with gRPC by default,
the stock load balancing service randomly selects a pod as a destination which is not al-
ways optimal since busy pods are not supposed to accept or process more than one request
at any given time. Kubernetes load balancing makes use of customised iptable rules that
behave like a load balancer70. However, gRPC violates conventional connection-level load
balancing, including Kubernetes’. Because gRPC is based on HTTP/2, which uses a single
long-lived TCP connection for all requests, and allows several requests to be active on the
same connection at the same time71. This is beneﬁcial since it minimises connection man-
agement overhead. As a result, connection-level balancing isn’t particularly beneﬁcial. Once
connected, no further balancing is required. A single destination pod will be used for all
requests.
Since no balancing can be achieved at the connection level, establishing HTTP/2 con-
nections to each destination is required. In network terms, this implies understanding the
protocol delivered across TCP connections rather than L3/L4. This is achieved with linkerd
,→72 which is a service mesh for Kubernetes. linkerd may also be used as a service sidecar,
allowing it to be applied to a single service without cluster-wide rights. This implies that
adding linkerd to the smartpeak−hosted service, it instantly adds a small, ultra-fast proxy
to each pod. Using linkerd oﬀers several beneﬁts. First, it supports any language includ-
ing C++, any gRPC client, and any deployment model (headless or not). It auto-detect
HTTP/2 and HTTP/1.x and execute L7 load balancing, while passing all other traﬃc as
plain Transmission Control Protocol (TCP).
linkerd’s load balancing relies on the peak exponentially weighted moving average
(EWMA) algorithm73, which distributes traﬃc to replicas with the shortest round-trip time,
weighted by the amount of pending requests. This is considered a much eﬃcient than the
round-robin algorithm which distribute requests to replicas/pods in turn with random prob-
ability and ignores the fact that some pods are over loaded with workﬂow analysis processing.
Peak EWMA outperforms both RPC latency and queue depth. The distinction between the
two possibilities is not so much an algorithmic one as it is an informational one to make the
right load balancing decision. In summary linkerd not only keeps an eye on the Kubernetes
API but also automatically updates the load balancing pool when pods are rescheduled and
will redirect traﬃc away from a pod that is slowing down. This reduces tail latency74.
In order to run linerd as part of the deployment, the linkerd CLI must be down-
loaded and installed using the command : curl −fsL https://run.linkerd.io/install
,→
| sh. Once the latest version is installed, a conﬁguration check can be assessed with
linkerd check −−pre, then the linkerd control plane can be installed and checked using
linkerd install | kubectl apply −f −&& linkerd check.
70https://scalingo.com/blog/iptables#load-balancing
71SmartPeak GUI initiates multiple requests throughout the workﬂow process
72https://linkerd.io
73PEWMA <https://twitter.github.io/finagle/guide/Clients.html>
74Intelligent Load Balancing <https://servd.host/blog/intelligent-load-balancing>
Page 51 of 63
==PAGE:55==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
linkerd provides a full on-cluster metrics stack such as a web dashboard as well as
pre-conﬁgured grafana dashboards, these extensions can be activated using linkerd viz
,→
install | kubectl apply −f −which will install a grafana75 and a prometheus76
instances into the linkerd-viz namespace. The linkerd dashboard can be called with linkerd
,→
viz dashboard &.
The overall structure of the deployment is illustrated in Fig.17
and Fig.18 for the sp−hosted−ns and linkerd namespaces respectively. The sp−hosted
,→−ns includes the deployment resources, a replica set, and ingress controller and the
service component.
Whereas the linkerd namepsace includes deployment resources for
destination, proxy−injector & identity, replica sets thereof, and various services for
policy management for outbound connections, proxy injection, and identity management.
75https://grafana.com/
76https://prometheus.io/
Page 52 of 63
==PAGE:56==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
Figure 17: smartpeak-hosted Namespace Components
Page 53 of 63
==PAGE:57==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
Figure 18: Linkerd Namespace Components
Page 54 of 63
==PAGE:58==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
4.5
Cluster Deployment
Deployment Packaging eliminates the need to apply the resource ﬁles (i.e. deploy-
ment.yaml, hpa.yaml, ..) separately using the kubectl command. The most well known
package manager for Kubernetes is Helm77. Helm can manage Kubernetes applications and
provides functionalities to deﬁne, install and upgrade these applications through a packaged
set of deﬁnition ﬁles called Helm charts. The Helm chart for the smartpeak−hosted ser-
vice78 includes conﬁguration ﬁles that deﬁnes the service as mentioned previously. To install
a deployment, the command helm install −−namespace sp−hosted−ns smartpeak−
,→hosted . executed to install a brand new deployment in the sp−hosted−ns namespace.
Upgrading is as simple as substituting the install command with upgrade.
77https://helm.sh/
78smartpeak-hosted Helm Chart <https://github.com/ahmedskhalil/smartpeak-hosted>
Page 55 of 63
==PAGE:59==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
5
Testing and Veriﬁcation
The purpose of testing the smart-peak service is to ensure that all system components
operate harmoniously. A service is said to be operable and ready when it can handle one
or more remote requests at any given time and is prone to request overloading or possible
attacks, which were mitigated by authenticating the end user prior to performing workﬂow
analysis on the deployed service.
5.1
Testing Overview
While some ﬁrms employed test automation decades ago, it was not widely adopted un-
til the last several years. There are several causes for this, but without a question, the shift
from the old Waterfall to the Agile strategy increased the requirement for test automation
signiﬁcantly. In the conventional waterfall model, software projects were seen as one-time
events, similar to a sky scraper construction. Planning and designing is done ﬁrst, then cre-
ating, and lastly testing and conﬁrming the ultimate product’s quality, resolving any small
diﬃculties that may develop. The idea was that if the planning and engineering were done
well, everything should ultimately operate as expected, except for a few small programming
errors that could be quickly repaired. This technique requires just one veriﬁcation of the ﬁnal
result’s conformance to the speciﬁcation. Only when a test fails and a correction is made
should the test be repeated to validate the correction. If each test is performed just once or
twice, it is often more cost eﬀective and convenient to do it manually than to automate it.
Over time, it became evident that the waterfall technique does not always deliver on
its promise. Most software projects become so complicated that planning and closing all
technical elements in advance became impractical. Even when it was viable, by the time
a software project was completed (which is normally a few years), both technology and
business requirements had changed, rendering the program less suﬃcient than it was intended
to be.
As a result, reacting swiftly to client input becomes much more important than
adhering to the initial strategy. Gradually, the bulk of the software industry transitioned
away from one-oﬀsoftware projects and toward fast delivery cycles [29]. Today, some of
the largest and mid-sized organisations including AutoFlowResearch release new features
and bug ﬁxes on a daily basis, if not on a minute-by-minute basis! The same principles
were applied throughout the development and testing of the solution proposed in this work.
Small incremental improvements were carried out to the ﬁnal product with automated and
manual testing, the tests themselves follow a rigid set of requirements derived from the
system requirements introduced in chapter 2.
5.1.1
Components used in testing
Development and Operations (DevOps) is a philosophy, and a collection of technological
methods [30]. It enables communication, integration, automation, and tight collaboration
amongst all parties involved in the planning, development, testing, deployment, delivery, and
maintenance of a Solution. DevOps is a component of the Lean Enterprise’s Agile Product
Page 56 of 63
==PAGE:60==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
5.1
Testing Overview
Delivery capability [31]. Without DevOps, there is often considerable friction between de-
velopers who create solutions and those who support and maintain them. The SmartPeak
Team uses DevOps to dismantle organisational barriers and establish a Continuous Delivery
Pipeline (CDP) - a high-performance productivity engine capable of satisfying the build,
test and deployment requirements in an agile environment.
The objective is straightforward: provide value anytime a client need arises. This is
deﬁnitely possible, since teams who thrive at DevOps deploy 208 times more often, 106
times quicker, have seven times fewer errors, and recover 2,604 times faster from events than
poor performing teams79.
Continuous delivery is enabled through DevOps. The SmartPeak Team has sought to
provide real continuous value to end users through embracing the DevOps philosophy and
related technological approaches.
These are essential abilities in an age of rapid digital
upheaval and innovation.
Continuous delivery pipelines are the outcome of eﬃciently implementing DevOps across
value streams. Due to the fact that a feature has no value until it is delivered, modern organ-
isations must be constantly creating, measuring, and improving existing and new features
in order to rapidly improve the products that attract and keep consumers. The Continuous
Delivery Pipeline is a pipeline that encourages quick, low-risk experimentation and contin-
uous development of the end users’ requirements, habits, and preferences. DevOps enables
eﬃcient continuous delivery pipelines, as demonstrated in Figure 19. It does this by provid-
ing the mentality, processes, and equipment necessary to facilitate quick development and
delivery at each stage.
Passing Local
Build/Tests
Push on Feature
Branch
Run Cross-Platform
Tests
Build & Code-Sign
Cross-Platform
Artefacts
Create Pull Request
Code Review
Merge into main
branch
Schedule Release
Review Release
Release Cross-
Platform Build
Artefacts & Source
Code
Feature Planning
Local Implementation
Devolopement
CI
CD
Operations
Figure 19: SmartPeak Continuous Integration/Development Pipeline
The Continuous Development and Integration pipeline is categorised into development
and operations phases as follows
1. Development
79Accelerate
-
State
of
DevOps
2019.
https://services.google.com/fh/files/misc/
state-of-devops-2019.pdf
Page 57 of 63
==PAGE:61==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
5.1
Testing Overview
(a) Feature Planning: After collecting input from end users and debating user needs
during retrospective sessions, a set of requirements is formed and a new feature
is created in the issue tracking system, which includes session feedback, user
requirements, and early technical requirements.
(b) Local Implementation: With the information gathered in the ﬁrst stage, the devel-
oper80 will reassess the requirements, as well as study and compare tools, frame-
works, and libraries in preparation for creating and integrating the new feature.
This step often involves incremental feature updates which leading to the ﬁnalising
the feature in question as a whole.
(c) Passing Local Build/Tests: Each time the code base is modiﬁed, the implementa-
tion must pass a successful build on the local development environment, as well
as all unittests, including those produced for the new classes and methods.
(d) Push on Feature Branch: As the last step in the development phase, the changes
to the code are committed to a newly established git branch named after the
feature in the issue tracking system81 and then pushed into the repository to
ensure that the changes are not lost and to facilitate the pipeline’s subsequent
building processes.
2. Operations
(a) Continuous Integration - CI
i. Run Cross-Platform Tests: Once the code is committed to the repository, the
continuous integration environment82 is triggered to fetch and install the nec-
essary libraries and dependencies to the target platforms which is followed
by compiling the source code into executables, apps, and executable tests.
At this point, all tests should run and pass successfully. However, on cer-
tain other platforms, some of the tests may fail to run owing to diﬀerences
in compiler implementations and/or dependency versions; this phase reveals
such issues so they may be addressed early in the development process.
ii. Build & Code-Sign Cross-Platform Artefacts: Applications built by the con-
tinuous integration environment are code signed so that users with restricted
installation permissions on work computers imposed by the IT Admins can
install the software (i.e. SmartPeak GUI) without requiring special permis-
sions.
iii. Create Pull Request: Pull requests notify others of modiﬁcations made to the
repository’s feature branch. Once a pull request is ﬁled, it is necessary to
discuss and evaluate possible modiﬁcations with members of the SmartPeak
Team and to make follow-up commits prior to the changes being merged into
the main branch. In certain conﬁgurations, the pull request also acts as a
80Referring to the author of this work.
81The SmartPeak Team uses Atlassian’s Jira as the primary issue tracking tool.
82CircleCI is the primary CI environment used by the SmartPeak Team
Page 58 of 63
==PAGE:62==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
5.1
Testing Overview
trigger for the continuous integration process, triggering the build and test
processes.
iv. Code Review: This process occurs during an active pull request, in which
which members review the code, comment on modiﬁcations, and converse
with the author about potential improvements if at all, which leverages the
overall code quality and documentation.
(b) Continuous Development - CD
i. Merge into main branch: Merging code enables several team members to in-
corporate changes into the master branch from which the ﬁnal products are
constructed. After passing all tests and code reviews, the feature branch is
ready to be merged into the main branch. During the feature branch’s inte-
gration phase, numerous manual merges were performed due to code conﬂicts
between the main and feature branches, which resulted in a tedious cherry
picking process, especially when the main branch is constantly changing.
ii. Schedule Release: Once a signiﬁcant feature is committed to the main branch,
the SmartPeak Team determines a release date for the following version,
which includes the new features and bug ﬁxes added to the previous ver-
sion. SmartPeak products are versioned in the same way as the SmartPeak
library, however the SmartPeak Server App is versioned diﬀerently, with ver-
sion v1.3.0 being the most recent and production-ready. The Docker imagine
available on Docker Hub follows the same versioning convention83.
iii. Review Release: A release is merely a pull request with an incrementally
updated version number and an updated CHANGELOG to incorporate the new
features and bug ﬁxes into the release note.
iv. Release Cross-Platform Build Artefacts & Source Code: The release pipeline
is conﬁgured to activate itself when the pull request is formatted as release
,→/vx.xx.xx, this will cause the build system to run (rerun when required)
and when successful will retrieve the cross-platform artefacts and upload them
the GitHub’s release page including the changes made to the CHANGELOG ﬁle.
The previous Continuous Development and Integration pipeline ensures that the fol-
lowing tests are passed which is essential in an agile environment with with higher levels
of quality controls. It is important to note that robust unit test coverage is necessary for
rapid feedback loop 84. It is believed that the only way to acquire high-quality unit test
coverage is via Test-Driven Development (TDD) which is crucial for allowing continuous
delivery. In test-driven development setups, tests are constructed before creating new code
or ﬁxing an issue. These tests not only impact the program’s design and quality guidelines,
but also serve as regression tests and documentation for the code and intended behaviour.
This work emphasises on a mix of rigour and practical TDD throughout the expansion of
the SmartPeak’s core features and capabilities in Object-Oriented Software Development
paradigm.
83Docker Hub : autoﬂowresearch/smartpeak-server:v1.3.0
84As well as acceptance test coverage, but these tests take longer to run.
Page 59 of 63
==PAGE:63==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
5.1
Testing Overview
1. Build testing: Automated and approved by the Continuous Integration build environ-
ments.
2. Unittesting: Automated and is executed before the build stage across all implemented
functions and classes including those developed for the SmartPeak Server, SmartPeak
GUI and gRPC Services.
3. Container testing: Done manually during the development phase with potential for
later automation.
4. UI testing: Done manually since the current UI framework doesn’t provide a native
UI testing toolkit85.
5. Client-Server communication testing: Done manually during the development phase
with potential for later automation.
6. Incremental integration testing: Done as part of the development process with every
module/function added to ensure that the addition is not causing unexpected behaviour
or potential crashes in one of the applications.
5.1.2
Single Container Testing
The purpose of this test is to perform a blackbox non-functional testing such as load-
/stress tests, on a container containing the SmartPeak Server App, as well as to measure
the average CPU consumption and memory in order to better estimate the resource values
for the horizontal pod autoscaling (HPA). The containers are not tested within Kubernetes
but rather by running a docker container based on the latest smartpeak-server image. The
statistics are parsed from the docker stats command once every second and averaged over
the duration the SmartPeak Server took to fully analyse a given dataset and export the
results. The total average CPU and memory consumption on small sized datasets86 are
19.09% and 125.32MiB respectively, with some datasets the CPU consumption has exceeded
the 150% mark for a few seconds, whereas the memory consumption has increased gradually
during the analysis and then decreased once complete.
Dataset
# samples
# transitions
# chromatograms
# spectrums
Avg. CPU over time (%)
Avg. Memory Consumption over time (MiB)
processing time
FIAMS_FullScan_Unknowns
2
10116
0
1
13.4
96.38
15s
GCMS_SIM_Unknowns
1
151
151
0
9.84
85.73
13s
HPLC_UV_Standards
14
22
22
0
81.88
172.92
868s
HPLC_UV_Unknowns
9
22
22
0
10.73
76.53
41s
LCMS_MRM_QCs
2
324
324
0
10.66
68.56
7s
LCMS_MRM_Standards
45
324
324
0
86.64
320.93
349s
LCMS_MRM_Unknowns
3
324
324
0
20.92
74.20
47s
ProAAs_GCMS_fullscan
0
130
0
0
5.32
107.28
16s
Total average
9
1426
145
0
19.09
125.32
169.5
Table 1: Average Processing Resource Consumption
85ImGui <https://github.com/ocornut/imgui>
86https://github.com/AutoFlowResearch/SmartPeak/tree/develop/src/examples/data
Page 60 of 63
==PAGE:64==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
5.2
Known limitations/advantages
5.1.3
Multi Container Testing & Simultaneous User Request Handling
This manual regression test ensures seamless operation when multiple containers are
spawned to meet the needs for serving more end users. Since the test runs on old hardware
with limited CPU and memory resources, the test is limited to 3 concurrent dataset analysis
running separately in dedicated containers.
In 3 diﬀerent shell sessions, a gRPC call is
executed using following the command
Listing 9: Test command for multi container testing
1
grpcurl −plaintext −d '{"dataset_path": "/data/LCMS_MRM_QCs","export": 2,"
,→report_metadata": "ALL","report_sample_types": "ALL","integrity": "
,→NONE"}' 192.168.64.2:30777 SmartPeakServer.Workflow.runWorkflow
which calls the gRPC function SmartPeakServer.Workflow.runWorkflow on the re-
mote server with the parameters supplied as a plain JSON text. The command communicates
with the smartpeak−hosted service reachable at 192.168.64.2:3077787 which forwards the
request to the chosen container. An initial request causes the CPU utilisation to rise above
the speciﬁed HPA CPU threshold which spawns more containers to serve more incoming re-
quests. Apart from the limited hardware resources of the test environment, running analysis
in a particular containers does not and shall not manipulate or interrupt a running analysis
in another container.
5.2
Known limitations/advantages
1. A pod can process exactly one request at a time. This means that there can be only one
workﬂow analysis request running in a container, requests can be handled concurrently
at the container level and not at the application level. Pods can be spawned to handle
the requests which ensures full isolation between processes. This also eliminates the
need to conduct request stress tests on a smartpeak-server container since it can only
process one request at a time.
2. A node cannot have zero pods, since there is a service running that processes and
reroutes the requests to destination pods, at least one pod must be running healthy
and ready to accept and process external requests.
3. No request queuing in case multiple request arrive to the service and the maximum
number of potential pods cannot handle all the requests. An extra measure that can
be taken to ensure scalability with limited hardware resources is to design, implement
and deploy a queuing service which will store the incoming requests and forwards it to
a pod when it becomes ready to handle the request.
87Varies each time the smartpeak-hosted service goes live.
Page 61 of 63
==PAGE:65==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
6
Conclusions
Cloud computing oﬀers a number of beneﬁts and disadvantages, ranging from large-
scale omics research to remote molecular diagnostics work in clinical labs. The ﬁrst step is
to determine which cloud environment is most appropriate for the application and then to
determine if it provides a cost-eﬀective option. This work outlines what should be evaluated,
the available possibilities, and proposed solutions that may serve as references for determining
the best course of action. Cloud ﬁrms oﬀer a variety of services including computation,
storage, virtual machine deployment, and access to numerous databases. Additional services
are provided by cloud suppliers and third parties to map users ranging from beginners to
specialists.
Cost advantages of cloud computing over alternative compute environments
must be carefully evaluated in relation to the task’s size, complexity, and nature. Cloud
computation are said to be elastic since it grows/shrinks to meet the computing requirements
of an activity, this is considered one of its main advantages over conventional computing.
The proposed solution in this work inherits the advantages of modern cloud computing which
has been showcased on a smaller scale, however with the proper conﬁguration it can be easily
scaled up to serve hundreds of end users given availability of the hardware resources.
6.1
Summary of The Proposed Solution
The proposed solution in this work was derived from a set of requirements based on
the end user’s requirements; after the problem was identiﬁed, a solution was produced that
comprises a generalised system diagram including all of the key components necessary to
realise the solution.
The solution is developed and implemented using agile techniques
and test-driven development principles to guarantee quick adaption to changing business
requirements while adhering to the project management timeline.
Additionally, a mock
deployment on a local workstation validates the distributed system architecture elements of
availability, consistency, data durability, and message persistence.
6.1.1
Project Management Timeline
During the ﬁrst week of deﬁning the problem scope and the general requirements for
a solution, a project management schedule had been deﬁned (Appendix.7) to better esti-
mate the task’s workload and duration since the allotted duration from conceptualisation to
deployment is limited to 22 weeks considering delays and other unexpected inﬂuences. All
tasks were concluded on time except the following:
1. Design, Implement and test outbound server responses: Expanded by one week due to
performance concerns regarding the transmission of the visualisation data which was
delegated later to the client application (SmartPeak GUI) to handle.
2. Design and integrate an authentication service / manage File Server accessibility: Ex-
panded by one week due dependence on the previous unﬁnished task.
Page 62 of 63
==PAGE:66==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
6.2
Future Improvements
3. Analyse system performance: Expanded by two week due dependence on the previous
unﬁnished task.
4. Deployment: The solution was deployed on a local machine rather than the designated
HPC instance, this was due to the delayed responses from the IT Service when the
instance was initially out of reach for several weeks.
6.2
Future Improvements
1. Implementation of a readiness probe in order to determine whether the containerised
application is running healthy and doesn’t suﬀer from internal errors or major faults.
2. Securing K8s is an essential step especially when the workﬂow analysis service targets
wider audience outside of the organisation since the current default security measures
were meant for an on-premise solution that does target the employees’ organisation.
3. Implementation and deployment of Identity and Access Management solution such as
keycloak88. This will have the added beneﬁt of allowing the users to register them-
selves through existing means (i,e, Google, GitHub, ..) as well as add the ability to ex-
clude/include certain users to/from running workﬂows or modifying existing databases
for ﬁne-grained access control to resources.
4. Implementation of a sever availability indicator in SmartPeak GUI to inform the user
that the service is available and ready to accept the users requests.
5. Implementation of Web-based GUI which will make the service much more accessible
through portable devices such as tablets with constrained access to power sources.
6. Implementation of dataset locking mechanism to guarantee non concurrent access to
the same dataset by two or more SmartPeak Server applications.
7. Implementation of a request queuing microservice to handle excessive workﬂow re-
quests in constrained environments with limited hardware resources, this necessitates
the implementation of additional horizontal pod scaling techniques triggered by the
magnitude of current requests in the queue.
88https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak
Page 63 of 63
==PAGE:67==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
List of Figures
List of Figures
1
Proteomics Mass Spectrometry Analysis Pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Mass Spectra for QC Serum 80-20 MeOH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Data Processing Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
User Journey Map - GUI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
smartpeak-hosted service - System Architecture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6
Kubelet and cAdvisor on Metrics collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
7
User Journey Map for SmartPeak GUI to SmartPeak Server Interactivity . .
18
8
Flowchart Comparison between SmartPeak CLI and SmartPeak Server
. . .
20
9
Modelling comparison between Modiﬁed SmartPeak CLI and SmartPeak Server 21
10
Comparison of various visualisation data generation and transfer approaches
22
11
Authorisation Mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
12
SmartPeak GUI-to-Server Interaction Sequence Diagram
. . . . . . . . . . .
25
13
Image creation process for the smartpeak−server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
14
gRPC Client-Server Communication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
15
Workﬂow Execution in SmartPeak GUI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
16
SmartPeak GUI - Steps to Execute Workﬂow Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
17
smartpeak-hosted Namespace Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
18
Linkerd Namespace Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
19
SmartPeak Continuous Integration/Development Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . .
57
20
Project Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VII
Page I of VI
==PAGE:68==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Average Processing Resource Consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
Page II of VI
==PAGE:69==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
References
References
[1] H. P. Shanahan, A. M. Owen, and A. P. Harrison, “Bioinformatics on the cloud com-
puting platform azure,” PloS one, vol. 9, no. 7, p. e102642, 2014.
[2] R. M. Plenge, E. M. Scolnick, and D. Altshuler, “Validating therapeutic targets through
human genetics,” Nature reviews Drug discovery, vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 581–594, 2013.
[3] P. S. Reel, S. Reel, E. Pearson, E. Trucco, and E. Jeﬀerson, “Using machine learning
approaches for multi-omics data analysis: A review,” Biotechnology Advances, p. 107739,
2021.
[4] R. Hettich, P. Jagtap, E. Mathe, T. Mishra, and K. Ruggles, “Multi-omics: Traversing
the central dogma of molecular biology,” Journal of biomolecular techniques: JBT,
vol. 31, no. Suppl, p. S38, 2020.
[5] R. Bumgarner, “Overview of dna microarrays: types, applications, and their future,”
Current protocols in molecular biology, vol. 101, no. 1, pp. 22–1, 2013.
[6] J. Glaves, M. Li, P. Mercier, R. Fahlman, and B. Sykes, “High-throughput, multi-
platform metabolomics on very small volumes: 1 h nmr metabolite identiﬁcation in an
unadulterated tube-in-tube system,” Metabolomics, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 1145–1151, 2014.
[7] J. Blayney, V. Haberland, G. Lightbody, and F. Browne, “Biomarker discovery, high
performance and cloud computing: a comprehensive review,” in 2015 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), pp. 1514–1519, IEEE,
2015.
[8] M. J. Borad and P. M. LoRusso, “Twenty-ﬁrst century precision medicine in oncology:
genomic proﬁling in patients with cancer,” in Mayo Clinic Proceedings, vol. 92, pp. 1583–
1591, Elsevier, 2017.
[9] K. A. Overmyer, E. Shishkova, I. J. Miller, J. Balnis, M. N. Bernstein, T. M. Peters-
Clarke, J. G. Meyer, Q. Quan, L. K. Muehlbauer, E. A. Trujillo, et al., “Large-scale
multi-omic analysis of covid-19 severity,” Cell systems, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 23–40, 2021.
[10] M. Whirl-Carrillo, E. M. McDonagh, J. Hebert, L. Gong, K. Sangkuhl, C. Thorn, R. B.
Altman, and T. E. Klein, “Pharmacogenomics knowledge for personalized medicine,”
Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, vol. 92, no. 4, pp. 414–417, 2012.
[11] Z. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Du, Z. Tang, K. Wang, J. Wei, D. Dong, Y. Zang, J. Dai,
et al., “Radiomics analysis allows for precise prediction of epilepsy in patients with
low-grade gliomas,” NeuroImage: Clinical, vol. 19, pp. 271–278, 2018.
[12] T. Dammeyer and M. Schobert, “Interactomics,” in Handbook of hydrocarbon and lipid
microbiology, 2010.
Page III of VI
==PAGE:70==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
References
[13] F. R. Pinu, D. J. Beale, A. M. Paten, K. Kouremenos, S. Swarup, H. J. Schirra,
and D. Wishart, “Systems biology and multi-omics integration: viewpoints from the
metabolomics research community,” Metabolites, vol. 9, no. 4, p. 76, 2019.
[14] F. R. Pinu, S. A. Goldansaz, and J. Jaine, “Translational metabolomics: current chal-
lenges and future opportunities,” Metabolites, vol. 9, no. 6, p. 108, 2019.
[15] T.-H. Tsai, M. Wang, and H. W. Ressom, “Preprocessing and analysis of lc-ms-based
proteomic data,” in Statistical Analysis in Proteomics, pp. 63–76, Springer, 2016.
[16] C. Abdallah, E. Dumas-Gaudot, J. Renaut, and K. Sergeant, “Gel-based and gel-free
quantitative proteomics approaches at a glance,” International journal of plant ge-
nomics, vol. 2012, 2012.
[17] S. Bravo-Veyrat and G. Hopfgartner, “Mass spectrometry based high-throughput bio-
analysis of low molecular weight compounds: are we ready to support personalized
medicine?,” Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[18] X. Zhang, A. Fang, C. P. Riley, M. Wang, F. E. Regnier, and C. Buck, “Multi-
dimensional liquid chromatography in proteomics - a review,” Analytica chimica acta,
vol. 664, no. 2, pp. 101–113, 2010.
[19] A. Amirav, A. B. Fialkov, K. J. M. Eren, B. Neumark, O. Elkabets, S. Tsizin, A. Gordin,
and T. Alon, “Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (gc–ms) with cold electron ion-
ization (ei): Bridging the gap between gc–ms and lc–ms,” Current Trends in Mass
Spectrometry, supplement to LCGC North America, vol. 18, pp. 5–15, 2020.
[20] J. Kopka, “Gas chromatography mass spectrometry,” in Plant Metabolomics, pp. 3–20,
Springer, 2006.
[21] K. K. Pasikanti, P. Ho, and E. Chan, “Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry in
metabolic proﬁling of biological ﬂuids,” Journal of Chromatography B, vol. 871, no. 2,
pp. 202–211, 2008.
[22] P. Du, W. A. Kibbe, and S. M. Lin, “Improved peak detection in mass spectrum by
incorporating continuous wavelet transform-based pattern matching,” bioinformatics,
vol. 22, no. 17, pp. 2059–2065, 2006.
[23] M. van Steen and A. S. Tanenbaum, “A brief introduction to distributed systems,”
Computing, vol. 98, no. 10, pp. 967–1009, 2016.
[24] S. S. Yau and J. J.-P. Tsai, “A survey of software design techniques,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, no. 6, pp. 713–721, 1986.
[25] R. Dua, A. R. Raja, and D. Kakadia, “Virtualization vs containerization to support
paas,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering, pp. 610–614,
IEEE, 2014.
Page IV of VI
==PAGE:71==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
References
[26] C. M. Kulkarni and M. Takalikar, “Analysis of rest api implementation,” Int. J. Sci.
Res. Comput. Sci, vol. 3, pp. 2456–3307, 2018.
[27] D. G. Messerschmitt, “Interface deﬁnition language,” University of California, Oakland
CA, 1999.
[28] “Grpc vs rest: Understanding grpc, openapi and rest and when to use them in api design
| google cloud blog.”
[29] B. Fitzgerald and K.-J. Stol, “Continuous software engineering: A roadmap and agenda,”
Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 123, pp. 176–189, 2017.
[30] C. Ebert, G. Gallardo, J. Hernantes, and N. Serrano, “Devops,” Ieee Software, vol. 33,
no. 3, pp. 94–100, 2016.
[31] J. Humble, J. Molesky, and B. O’Reilly, Lean enterprise. " O’Reilly Media, Inc.", 2020.
Page V of VI
==PAGE:72==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
7
Appendix A
An overview of the whole project plan is illustrated in Fig.20.
Page VI of VI
==PAGE:73==
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
Thesis Project Plan

PROJECT NAME
PROJECT LEAD
PROJECT START DATE
PROJECT END DATE
TODAY’S DATE
Multi-Omics Data Analysis in The Era of Big Data
Ahmed Khalil
23-08-2021
23-01-2022
23-01-2022
MONTH
08
09
09
09
09
09
10
10
10
10
11
11
11
11
12
12
12
12
12
01
01
01
WEEK #
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
01
02
03
ACTIVITY
ASSIGNED TO
STATUS
STATUS
ENDS
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
Problem Formulation
Ahmed K.
Complete
03-09
03-09
Background 
Research
Ahmed K.
Complete
10-09
10-09
System Design
Ahmed K.
Complete
16-09
16-09
Implementation
Ahmed K.
Complete
06-09
03-11
- Setup build 
environment for the 
GUI and Server
Ahmed K.
Complete
10-09
10-09
- Allocate Resources 
on HPC instance
Ahmed K.
Complete
10-09
10-09
- Setup functioning 
test environment
Ahmed K.
Complete
20-09
16-09
- Design, implement 
and test inbound 
server requests
Ahmed K.
Complete
20-09
08-10
- Design, implement 
and test outbound 
server responses
Ahmed K.
Complete
20-09
08-10
- Design and 
integrate an 
authentication 
service / manage File 
Server accessibility
Ahmed K.
Complete
20-09
22-10
- Deploy a test 
version to the HPC 
instance
Ahmed K.
Complete
20-09
05-11
- Analyse system 
performance
Ahmed K.
Complete
20-09
03-12
Testing
Ahmed K.
Complete
20-09
03-12
Code Review
Ahmed K.
Complete
03-12
06-01
Report
Ahmed K.
Complete
20-09
20-01
DEPLOY
 
20-09
10-12
NOTES
- Completed tasks are marked darker green.
- In-Progress tasks are marked lighter green.
- Not-Started tasks are marked turquoise.
- Service is expected to go live by 
10-12-2021.
- Testing starts a week after the implemented 
has begun.
- Tasks and their subtasks are grouped 
together.
Page VII of VI
