==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Absolute Sustainability Assessments of the Built Environment
in Denmark – Using Life Cycle Assessment, the Doughnut
Theory and the SDGs
Master Thesis
Nana Kira Prisholm Skrøder
s163845
Sara Føns Ste↵en
s163837
Kongens Lyngby
January 2022
==PAGE:2==
Absolute Sustainability Assessments of the Built Environment in Denmark
– Using Life Cycle Assessment, the Doughnut Theory and the SDGs
Master Thesis
23.01.2022
Nana Kira Prisholm Skrøder
s163845
Sara Føns Ste↵en
s163837
Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:3==
We would like to thank Lone Hedegaard Mortensen, Peter Noy´e, Claus Wessel Andersen, Inge Werther,
Morten Dallov Ibsen, Gertrud Øllgaard, Mikael Hallstrøm Eriksen, Christian Eriksen and the rest of
the steering group at NIRAS for contributing with their expertise and insights on the development of
SDG Measure 2.0.
Thanks to Helen Glindvad Kristensen from Gladsaxe Municipality for providing information on the
case study and showing us the construction site.
Thanks to our supervisors, Morten Ryberg and Mia Heide, for constructive guidance throughout the
process. A special thanks to Mia for investing so much time and energy in our project, answering all
of our questions and giving us the opportunity to make a small contribution to her PhD.
Signature
Signature
Date
Date
23.01.2022
23.01.2022
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This study aims to examine absolute sustainability in the Danish building sector by deﬁning a social
foundation and an environmental ceiling. The project consists of two parts: 1) absolute social sustain-
ability and 2) absolute environmental sustainability. Both parts are developed for and applied to the
Danish building sector and a case study of a kindergarten, assessing whether it is absolute sustainable.
Part 1) takes starting point in theories of human well-being and the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). The project is developed in collaboration with a PhD project in NIRAS and at DTU Man-
agement and aims at developing a version 2.0 of NIRAS’ design tool ”SDG Measure” by adding a
perspective of absolute sustainability. Absolute social sustainable sub-goals, indicators and targets
are developed for SDG 3 and 12 with a full life cycle perspective on building level.
Part 2) is based on the planetary boundaries (PBs) and a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) based absolute
environmental sustainability assessment (AESA). The LCA is conducted for the kindergarten consid-
ering three di↵erent lifespans and applies a dynamic approach by modelling three di↵erent energy
scenarios. To deﬁne absolute environmental sustainability references (AESRs), di↵erent methodolo-
gies on quantifying the safe operating space for climate change are investigated: one based on IPCC’s
scenario SSP1-1.9 and one based on carrying capacity. Two sharing principles are assessed for alloc-
ating a share of the safe operating space to the kindergarten: ﬁnal consumption expenditure and a
new principle, fulﬁlment of humans needs (FHN). This results in four di↵erent AESRs.
The results reveal that all targets currently measurable for SDG 3 are assessed as absolute sustainable.
For SDG 12, four out of 11 targets are assessed as not absolute sustainable. SDG Measure 2.0 is a
design tool to be used throughout the entire planning and construction of a building. In this study,
however, the tool is applied after the construction stage is started, which inﬂuences the results.
The AESA shows that the AESRs for climate change can vary signiﬁcantly, depending on the choice
of sharing principle. The AESR combining carrying capacity and FHN leads to the largest share of
the safe operating space assigned to the kindergarten. However, the kindergarten is assessed as not
absolute sustainable in terms of climate change, no matter which of the AESRs is used.
The combined social and environmental results are visualised using the Doughnut theory. The targets
from SDG 3 and 12 constitute the social foundation and the nine PBs form the environmental ceiling.
Even though the kindergarten is assessed not absolute sustainable, the study conﬁrms that it is possible
to apply the Doughnut theory to a speciﬁc building project. Working with and applying absolute social
and environmental targets can guide the Danish building sector towards absolute sustainability.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
List of Abbreviations
1
2
Introduction
2
3
Case Study
4
4
Theory
5
4.1
Human Well-Being . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.2
Sustainable Development Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2.1
SDG 3 - Good Health and Well-Being . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2.2
SDG 12 - Responsible Consumption and Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.3
Planetary Boundaries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.4
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4.1
Life Cycle Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4.2
Quantifying the Safe Operating Space and Assigning a Share . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.5
The Doughnut Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Method: Absolute Social Sustainability
15
5.1
Framework for Setting Targets for Social Sustainability Indicators
. . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Formulating and Setting Targets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2.1
Method 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2.2
Method 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2.3
Method 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6
Results: Absolute Social Sustainability
23
6.1
Sub-Goals, Indicators and Targets for the Danish Building Sector . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2
Absolute Social Sustainability Assessment of the Kindergarten
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7
Method: Absolute Environmental Sustainability
30
7.1
LCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.1.1
Goal and Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.1.2
Prerequisites
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.2
Quantifying the Safe Operating Space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.3
Assigning a Share of the Safe Operating Space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3.1
Equal per Capita . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:6==
7.3.2
Final Consumption Expenditure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.3.3
Fulﬁlment of Human Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8
Results: Absolute Environmental Sustainability
45
8.1
LCA of the Kindergarten
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8.2
AESA of the Kindergarten . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
9
A Doughnut for the Kindergarten
51
10 Discussion
52
10.1 Absolute Social Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
10.2 Absolute Environmental Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
10.3 Living within the Doughnut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
11 Conclusion
60
References
61
Appendices
66
Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
Appendix B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Appendix C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
Appendix D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
Appendix E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
==PAGE:7==
1
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
1
List of Abbreviations
• AESA - Absolute environmental sustainability assessment
• AESR - Absolute Environmental Sustainability Reference
• DGNB - German Sustainable Building Council (Deutsche Gesellschaft f¨ur Nachhaltiges Bauen)
• EPC - Equal per capita
• EPD - Environmental product declaration
• ES - Earth System
• EoL - End of Life
• FCE - Final consumption expenditure
• FHN - Fulﬁlment of human needs
• FU - Functional unit
• GHG - Greenhouse gas
• GWP - Global warming potential
• HDI - Human Development Index
• ILCD - International Reference Life Cycle Data System
• IPCC - The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
• LCA - Life Cycle Assessment
• LCC - Life cycle cost
• LCI - Life cycle inventory
• PB - Planetary boundaries
• SDG - Sustainable Development Goal
• SHDB - Social Hotspot Database
• SoSOS - Share of safe operating space
1
==PAGE:8==
2
INTRODUCTION
2
Introduction
On a global scale, the building sector contributes with up to 30% of global annual green house gas
emissions and consumes up to 40% of all energy (UNEP SBCI, 2009). The same applies for Denmark.
We spend 90% of our time indoors (DTU, 2019) and around 3% of the Danish population is employed
in the Danish building sector (Danmarks Statistik, 2021). Therefore, the Danish building sector has
large inﬂuence on both environmental and social sustainability in Denmark and should be beacons for
other sectors.
This study aims to investigate absolute sustainability in the Danish building sector by deﬁning a
social foundation and an environmental ceiling. An absolute perspective indicates whether a product
system, in this case a building, is in fact sustainable in a holistic sense - if it is good enough and not
just better than an alternative (Hauschild, 2015).
According to University of Leeds (2018), Denmark is highly rated when it comes to social sustainability.
However, this is assessed on a national level and not at sector level. An absolute social sustainability
framework at sector level will be introduced in this study, taking its starting point in determining and
formulating sub-goals, indicators and deﬁne absolute social targets to the Danish building sector for
two Sustainable Development Goals. Working with social sustainability in an absolute perspective
implies that a social environment or parameter is good enough.
This framework is developed in
collaboration with a PhD project in NIRAS and at DTU Management and aims at developing an
updated version of NIRAS’ design tool - SDG Measure 2.0.
When assessing environmental sustainability in the built environment, it is often done through a Life
Cycle Assessment (LCA) in a relative matter, evaluating whether a building is better than another
or if the carbon footprint is below a certain level. In a Danish building context, that point could
be determined by either the German Sustainable Building Council (DGNB), Den Frivillige Bæredy-
gtighedsklasse (FBK) or from 2023, the Danish Building Regulations. In this study, an LCA-based
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment is carried out for climate change. It includes two
di↵erent approaches to quantifying the safe operating space of the planet, and two di↵erent principles
on how to allocate an adequate share of the safe operating space to a product system.
To put the above mentioned elements into practice, the study includes a case study of a kindergarten,
investigating whether the kindergarten is assessed as absolute sustainable in social and environmental
terms.
2
==PAGE:9==
2
INTRODUCTION
Reader’s Guide
Figure 1: Composition of the study
The composition of this study is presented in Figure 1. It is composed of two overall aspects: 1) ab-
solute social sustainability and 2) absolute environmental sustainability. The ﬁrst deals with absolute
social sustainability in the Danish building sector and takes its point of departure in theories of human
well-being and the Sustainable Development Goals. The second investigates absolute environmental
sustainability, also in the Danish building sector. Here, the planetary boundaries and an absolute
environmental sustainability assessment is the underlying basis.
Both aspects are connected through the Doughnut theory, where a social foundation and an environ-
mental ceiling is deﬁned. The social foundation is generic, and developed to ﬁt the Danish building
sector in general, where the environmental ceiling is deﬁned for each speciﬁc case.
At last, both aspects are tested on a case study of a kindergarten, as a way of putting theory into
practice. A social foundation and an environmental ceiling are established for the kindergarten based
on the assessments of the two aspects.
Five appendices are enclosed to this study, and supplementary material is submitted separately.
3
==PAGE:10==
3
CASE STUDY
3
Case Study
The case building of this study is a kindergarten built by Gladsaxe Municipality. It is designed and
built in collaboration with Lendager ARC, Tscherning, Ason, Sweco and NIRAS. The project was
initiated in 2016 and the year of occupancy is 2022 (Gladsaxe Municipality, 2020). The kindergarten
is pictured in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Rendering of the kindergarten. Made by Lendager ARC and retrieved from the project proposal.
The kindergarten is a one-storey building containing group, administrative and sta↵rooms, a food
producing kitchen, a gym and an orangery used for arrival. Additionally, three storm water reservoirs
are situated underground. The building consists of a wooden structure with few steel and concrete
elements. It is designed to obtain the requirements for Svanemærkning and with a focus on circularity
of materials, particularly by reusing materials from an old school formerly situated on the building
site. The reusable materials are mostly steel, bricks, wood and roof tiles. These materials are used for
roof and facade cladding. Wooden trusses from the school are used as the structural element of the
kindergarten’s orangery. Furthermore, crushed concrete from the school is utilised in the foundation.
The kindergarten is 1,430 m2 out of which 1,359 m2 are heated. The kindergarten must accommodate
176 children norms and 31 employees. This study included a visit to the construction site to collect
information about the reused materials, storage of them, waste management on site etc. Pictures from
the site are shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Visit to the construction site. From left 1) waste management, 2) storage of the reused wooden trusses,
3) the roof tiles, 4) mock-up of the facade made of reused roof tiles and steel and 5) the new wood structure.
4
==PAGE:11==
4
THEORY
4
Theory
In the following chapter, the relevant theories for the study are introduced, including relevant con-
cepts and prerequisites. The theory is divided into ﬁve sections, each describing a subject: Human
well-being, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the planetary boundaries (PBs), absolute
environmental sustainability assessment (AESA) and the Doughnut theory.
4.1
Human Well-Being
Humanity faces the challenge of creating an absolute sustainable society where both people and nature
thrive (O’Neill et al., 2018). In order to do so, every human being should be able to achieve well-
being. This includes achieving a certain quality of life for the entire global population in a way that
can be sustained (Rogers et al., 2012). Despite one billion people escaping poverty from 1990-2015,
income inequality has risen since 1980 worldwide. This means people are left behind, not able to meet
physical, emotional and social needs (UNDP, 2018). The SDGs address this problem by pledging to
three universal values: a human rights-based approach, the principle of leaving no one behind and
securing gender equality and women’s empowerment (UN, 2022). The SDGs and their role in social
sustainability are further elaborated in Section 4.2.
Figure 4: Human well-being illustrated as a multidimensional concept, where all components are interconnected.
The ﬁgure is from Rogers et al. (2012).
5
==PAGE:12==
4
THEORY
Human well-being is a multidimensional concept, relational, dynamic and context speciﬁc (Rogers
et al., 2012). Figure 4 encompasses the many components to human well-being and how they are all
interconnected. As pointed out in Figure 4, human well-being is also connected to stable ecosystems
and vice versa (Rogers et al., 2012). Thus, it is important to create a social foundation encompassing
well-being in order to reach an absolute sustainable state. This leaves us with an operating space,
which is referred to as the consumption corridor by Gough (2019).
In order to obtain human well-being, some fundamental needs must be fulﬁlled. There are di↵erent
theories regarding these needs. Some agree on humans having universal needs (Gough et al. (2007),
Rogers et al. (2012), O’Neill et al. (2018)).
Others believe that we do not necessarily have joint
universal needs (Clark & McGillivray, 2007).
This study will work with the ﬁrst of the two above-mentioned theories, arguing that some needs
are universal (non-substitutable, satisﬁable and cross generational (O’Neill et al., 2018)). These can,
however, be fulﬁlled with di↵erent need satisﬁers (variable and local goods, services, activities and
relationships that can contribute to need satisfaction). An example is the need for food and dwelling,
which apply to all people, but there is a large variety of cuisines and forms of dwelling that can meet
those needs (Gough, 2019).
Human needs can be divided into two groups: objective needs and subjective needs, where both
groups are believed to be universal ((Gough, 2019), (Rogers et al., 2012)). The objective needs are
physiological health and survival, referring to functions not feelings, whereas the subjective needs are
autonomy and psychological needs, referring to feelings and relationships, not functions.
On the contrary to needs are wants or luxuries. These can also contribute to well-being (or ill-being),
but luxuries are not necessarily universal. Instead, they tend to reﬂect on ones cultural environment
(Gough, 2019). If all of humanity is to operate above this social foundation, i.e., every individual
having universal needs fulﬁlled, it is necessary to distinguish between needs for human well-being and
luxuries. Luxuries are ”nice-to-have”, but not a requirement to achieve well-being (Gough, 2019).
Achieving well-being must be the foundation for creating an absolute social sustainable society. There-
fore, every human being must be able to fulﬁl their needs. To do so, and at the same time reduce
humanity’s environmental impacts, we must cut back on our luxuries, since the richest 10 % of the
world’s population are responsible for over half of the cumulative carbon emissions (Oxfarm Media
Brieﬁng, 2020).
6
==PAGE:13==
4
THEORY
4.2
Sustainable Development Goals
In 2015, the UN published the 17 SDGs illustrated in Figure 5. The aim of the SDGs is to end poverty,
protect the planet, and ensure that all people enjoy peace and prosperity by 2030 (UN, 2021d). Thus,
the SDGs address all three aspects of sustainability - environmental, social and economic. However,
in this study, they are used as a means to quantify and deﬁne absolute social sustainability in the
Danish building sector.
Figure 5: The 17 Sustainable Development Goals developed by the UN.
The 17 goals have 169 targets and 232 indicators and they deﬁne speciﬁc objectives which are to be
met in order to achieve each goal. The SDGs are interlinked and thus, the key to success on one SDG
will involve tackling issues associated with another (UNDP, 2022). Each target has a set of indicators
for monitoring progress, stagnation or regress. It is a global framework, and thus the targets are
set at a global level, meaning that not all targets are equally relevant to all countries or industries.
Therefore, it makes sense to develop targets and indicators which are ﬁt for the speciﬁc country and
context, and use the existing targets and indicators as a guideline for which topics each SDG should
cover (Danmarks Statistik og 2030-Panelet, 2020).
In this study, sub-goals, indicators and targets for absolute social sustainability in the Danish building
sector are developed for two of the SDGs: SDG 3 - Good health and well-being and SDG 12 - Responsible
consumption and production. The sub-goals, indicators and targets are part of SDG Measure 2.0,
developed by Heide (2020-2023) in collaboration with NIRAS, and to be used in the building sector
to assess whether a speciﬁc building is absolute sustainable. The two SDGs and their relation to the
Danish building sector is further elaborated in the following sections.
7
==PAGE:14==
4
THEORY
4.2.1
SDG 3 - Good Health and Well-Being
The goal of SDG 3 is to ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages (UN, 2021c).
Since the targets for the SDGs are global, and aim at leaving no one behind, some SDG 3 targets are
more applicable to the Global South and involves e.g. reducing maternal, neonatal and child mortality,
eradicate tropical diseases and provision universal health coverage. Denmark generally performs well
on those subjects and thus, this SDG is broadly interpreted to ﬁt a Danish building sector context.
From the perspective of the Danish building sector, this goal emphasises the importance of safety
and mental and physical well-being in and around our buildings, as well as during the planning and
construction stage of a building.
We spend 90% of our time indoors (DTU, 2019) and thus, indoor climate plays an important role
when it comes to human health and well-being. A good indoor climate can improve productivity and
learning, whereas a poor indoor climate can lead to headaches, fatigue and irritation of the mucous
membranes of eyes, nose and throat (N. Jørgensen, 2020).
When it comes to safety, the building and construction sector performs worse compared to other
Danish sectors. The frequency of accidents in the building sector is more than twice as high as the
average across all Danish sectors (Arbejdstilsynet, 2020), leaving room for improvement.
Stress is categorised as a public health issue in Denmark (Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2020) and thus, in
order to reach the goal of well-being for all, stress prevention at workplaces is a relevant target to
consider. Reducing illnesses, whether mental or physical, is a key element for ensuring healthy lives
and promoting well-being.
SDG 3 is much related to SDG 8 when it comes to occupational health and safety at the workplace.
However, it is decided that all impact in the supply chain outside Denmark is located to SDG 8, and
therefore not included in this study.
4.2.2
SDG 12 - Responsible Consumption and Production
SDG 12 aims to ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns (UN, 2021b). By changing
our consumption and production patterns, economic growth and human well-being can be decoupled
from resource use and environmental impact. This is indeed relevant for building sectors worldwide,
since construction materials dominate the total material use globally (OECD, 2018). Not only does
the current consumption of construction materials lead to a wide range of environmental consequences,
it results in shortage of raw materials, too.
8
==PAGE:15==
4
THEORY
SDG 12 can be interpreted as mainly relevant when considering environmental sustainability. However,
in this study SDG 12 concerns social sustainability, considering that current generations should not
exploit the resources to a degree which denies the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.
A way to reduce the consumption is prolonging the lifespan of materials, components and buildings.
Implementing a circular resource economy (reduction and eﬃcient use of resources) and designing for
longevity by implementing ﬂexibility, generalisation and elasticity, can extend the lifespan of buildings
and hence reduce the production of virgin materials.
The building sector accounts for more than 30% of all waste generated in Denmark annually, out of
which the majority is being downcycled (Miljøstyrelsen, 2020). An increased focus on upcycling and
use of the waste hierarchy could contribute signiﬁcantly to reducing the consumption of new materials
by turning waste into a resource.
For many years, hazardous materials which are harmful to human health have been used in the Danish
building sector. These materials can be harmful during repair and demolition, but also to the users of
the building through the indoor climate. Therefore, reducing the amount of toxic materials in future
construction, as well as handling them correctly when dismantling or renovating is an important aspect
of this goal, too.
4.3
Planetary Boundaries
It is well documented that human activities increasingly inﬂuence Earth’s climate (Eyring et al., 2021)
and that humanity puts a pressure on ecosystems and the environment (Rockstr¨om et al., 2009). To
deﬂect this direction, it is necessary to deﬁne boundaries which humanity can operate safely within -
a safe operating space for humanity with respect to the functioning Earth System (ES) as we know it.
In 2009, the PBs were developed by Rockstr¨om et al. (2009) and revised in 2015 by Ste↵en et al.
(2015b). They deﬁne nine key ES processes and quantify a boundary for each process, within which it is
expected that humanity can operate safely. The nine PBs are presented in Figure 6. Transgressing one
or more of the boundaries will threaten the Holocene-like state, having allowed agriculture and complex
human societies to develop (Lade et al., 2020). Currently, only seven of the PBs are quantiﬁable.
The PBs are built on a precautionary principle. Instead of allowing some degree of uncertainty, the
boundary for each PB is set at the lower limit of the zone of uncertainty (marked as yellow in Figure
6). The zone of uncertainty indicates an increasing risk, where transgressing the upper limit of the
zone causes a high risk.
9
==PAGE:16==
4
THEORY
Figure 6: The nine PBs by Ste↵en et al. (2015a). The PBs are built on a precautionary principle where the
boundary is set at the lower limit of the zone of uncertainty. Orange indicates high risk of threatening the
Holocene-like state of the Earth. Yellow indicates increasing risk, whereas green indicates that the PB stays
within its limit.
As shown in Figure 6, humanity has already transgressed four PBs: climate change, biosphere integrity,
land-system change and biogeochemical ﬂows. Climate change and land-system change are in the
zone of uncertainty. Biosphere integrity and biogeochemical ﬂows are beyond the zone of uncertainty
(Ste↵en et al., 2015b).
Climate change and biosphere integrity are so-called ’core PBs’ due to their fundamental importance
to the ES. Large changes within the two core PBs could - on its own - destabilise the ES in which
humanity thrives (Ste↵en et al., 2015b). The core PBs are regulated by processes corresponding to
the other ’non-core PBs’. Thus, the PBs are interdependent which causes a network of interactions.
Most interactions found are amplifying, meaning that increased impacts on one PB leads to increased
impacts on other PBs (Lade et al., 2020).
The PBs aim to help guide human societies away from destabilising the ES and towards a safe operating
space in which we can continue to develop and thrive (Ste↵en et al., 2015b). In this study, the PBs
create the outer boundary, i.e., the environmental ceiling for the Danish building sector.
10
==PAGE:17==
4
THEORY
4.4
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment
When assessing a product system’s environmental sustainability an LCA is commonly used. LCA is
however a relative tool not considering an absolute threshold. To investigate whether or not a product
system is absolute environmental sustainable for the PB climate change, an LCA-based AESA is
conducted.
An AESA evaluates the environmental impact of the given product system and compares it to an
assigned share of the safe operating space (SoSOS) (Bjørn et al. (2020), Ryberg et al. (2018)). In
order for the product system to be absolute sustainable, the assigned SoSOS cannot be exceeded. In
this study, two approaches are used to deﬁne the SoSOS: the PBs and the environmental carrying
capacity. Both will be elaborated upon in the following.
The AESA consists of three steps: estimating the environmental impact (LCA), quantifying the safe
operating space and assigning a share of the safe operating space (Bjørn et al., 2020).
4.4.1
Life Cycle Assessment
LCA is a practical tool to examine the total environmental impact of a product system. It is a holistic
approach analysing environmental impacts during the entire life cycle from cradle-to-grave. The LCA
conducted in this study will follow the guidelines of Hauschild et al. (2018).
There are di↵erent software which can be used to conduct an LCA. In this study, the LCA is modelled
using the software LCAbyg 5 (5.2.0.1) since it is the most commonly used in the Danish building
sector. LCAbyg uses the Oekobau database and environmental product declarations (EPDs) can be
added to the inventory (E. B. Jørgensen et al., 2021).
Table 1 shows all stages considered in the life cycle of a building. The ones marked with green are
included in LCAbyg and the same life cycle stages are included in this study. Module D, marked with
grey, is not included in the results, but can be viewed in LCAbyg.
A conventional LCA looks at the world as static, where social, economic and material conditions do
not change over time.
In a dynamic LCA, the variation of a product system’s state over time is
included (Hauschild et al., 2018). This can be done by using projections on the product system’s
performance in the future. In this study, a dynamic LCA is conducted by using energy projections for
heat and electricity during the use stage. By doing so, possible future changes to the Danish energy
mix are taken into consideration. These scenarios are further elaborated in Section 7.1.2 - Operational
Energy.
11
==PAGE:18==
4
THEORY
Life cycle stages
Processes
Product
A1 Raw materials
A2 Transport
A3 Manufacturing
Building process
A4 Transport
A5 Construction/installing
Use
B1 Use
B2 Maintenance
B3 Reparation
B4 Replacement
B5 Renovation
B6 Operational energy consumption
B7 Operational water consumption
End of life
C1 Dismounting/demolition
C2 Transport
C3 Waste management
C4 Disposal
Outside project
D Potential for reuse, recycle and recovery
Table 1: The life cycle stages of a building. The LCA software LCAbyg includes the stages highlighted with
green. The same life cycle stages are included in this study. Module D (grey) is not included in the results, but
can be viewed in LCAbyg.
4.4.2
Quantifying the Safe Operating Space and Assigning a Share
There are di↵erent ways in which the safe operating space can be quantiﬁed, depending on where and
how the boundary is set. In this study, two di↵erent approaches will be applied.
One is based on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) SSP1-1.9 scenario, following
the aim of the Paris Agreement of staying below a temperature rise of 1.5°C. The second one is based on
carrying capacity deﬁned by Bjørn and Hauschild (2015) as: the maximum sustained environmental
intervention a natural system can withstand without experiencing negative changes in structure or
functioning that are diﬃcult or impossible to revert. The two di↵erent ways of quantifying the safe
operating space are investigated in Section 7.2.
Once the safe operating space is quantiﬁed, the share belonging to the product system investigated
is allocated based on a sharing principle. To better understand the choice of distribution behind the
sharing principle, one can look at the justice theory which the respective sharing principle applies to.
Justice theories concern ideal just distribution of beneﬁts and burdens. What an ideal distribution
looks like is not given and thus, di↵erent theories exist based on di↵erent views on what an ideal
just distribution is (Ryberg et al., 2020). Two di↵erent ways of assigning a share are investigated in
Section 7.3.
12
==PAGE:19==
4
THEORY
The AESA is completed by comparing the result of the LCA with the share assigned to the product
system investigated, i.e., the absolute environmental sustainability reference (AESR). If the result of
the LCA is below the AESR, the product system is assessed as absolute sustainable.
4.5
The Doughnut Theory
Economist Kate Raworth has developed the Doughnut Economics model, which brings together the
social and environmental aspects of sustainability. It was developed as a starting point for assessing the
interconnection between social, environmental and economic dimensions of sustainability (Raworth,
2012). In this study, the theory behind the Doughnut Economics model is used.
The Doughnut theory suggests that well-being depends on enabling every human to live a life of
dignity and opportunity, while preserving Earth’s life-supporting systems. Thus, the combination of
social and ecological boundaries is crucial in order to encompass human well-being (Raworth, 2017b).
The theory is visualised as a doughnut, where the inner circle, the so-called social foundation, indic-
ates a minimum level, below which there are shortfalls of human health and well-being. The social
foundation consists of 12 dimensions based on the SDG framework (Raworth, 2017b). In this study,
absolute social sustainability is deﬁned as fulﬁlling this social foundation. The social foundation is
seen as context speciﬁc, i.e., in this case it is related to the Danish building sector. According to
University of Leeds (2018), Denmark is close to fulﬁlling the social foundation. The outer circle of the
Doughnut, the ecological ceiling, indicates the threshold beyond which there is an excessive pressure
on Earth’s life-supporting systems. The ceiling consists of the nine PBs.
The area between the social foundation and the ecological ceiling represents an environmentally safe
and socially just space in which all of humanity has the chance to thrive (Raworth (2017b), O’Neill
et al. (2018)). The 12 dimensions of the social foundation are presented in Figure 7 together with the
nine dimensions of the ecological ceiling.
13
==PAGE:20==
4
THEORY
Figure 7: The Doughnut theory (Raworth, 2017a). The inner circle, the social foundation, indicates a minimum
level, below which there are shortfalls of human health and well-being. The outer circle, the ecological ceiling,
indicates the threshold beyond which there is an excessive pressure on Earth’s life-supporting systems.
The theory implies that sustainable development is only possible if the eradication of poverty is
pursued alongside environmental sustainability. Crossing either of those two boundaries equals a risk
of triggering either a social or ecological crisis (Raworth, 2012).
In order to succeed, it is suggested that the use of natural resources is distributed more equally
worldwide, supported by a reduction of global emissions, with the greatest reductions coming from
the richest consumers. Furthermore, a greater eﬃciency in transforming natural resources to meet
human needs is needed (Raworth, 2012). This calls for a renewal of economic theory and policy-
making, where the focus is shifted from GDP growth to an economic vision of regenerative, global
economies that help bring humanity into the Doughnut (Raworth, 2017b).
The Doughnut theory conceptualises a space where social, economic and environmental sustainability
is obtainable. It does not deﬁne a road on how to reach such a state - ”the Doughnut is a 21st century
compass, but the greater task is to create an e↵ective map of the terrain ahead” (Raworth, 2017b).
14
==PAGE:21==
5
METHOD: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
5
Method: Absolute Social Sustainability
The purpose of absolute social sustainability is to create a sound, social foundation for all of humanity.
In this study, the social foundation is considered in relation to the Danish building sector.
The social foundation is not as well deﬁned as the environmental ceiling. Absolute social sustainability
can be diﬃcult to quantify. To do so, it is important to understand the universal needs which are
to be fulﬁlled to achieve well-being, as described in section 4.1. The foundation for absolute social
sustainability is described by the Doughnut theory, but it is not described how to operationalise it
(Section 4.5). The existing methods, such as the Product Social Impact Assessment, the Social LCA
and the SDG Assessment Method are either not developed based on the SDGs or are lacking the
absolute perspective (Heide et al., 2021).
In the following section, the framework behind the development and deﬁnition of sub-goals, indicators
and targets for absolute social sustainability in the Danish building sector are presented. These sub-
goals, indicators and targets form the social foundation of SDG Measure 2.0.
5.1
Framework for Setting Targets for Social Sustainability Indicators
In this study, sub-goals, indicators and targets are developed for SDG 3 and 12 for the Danish building
sector based on the framework by Heide (2020-2023). The framework consists of six steps, which are
presented in Table 2.
Step
Description
1
What?
Deﬁne the goal of the study: purpose, homogeneous sector and product
type
2
Where?
Identify life cycle stages for the product system and the expected geographic
location for the di↵erent activities. Deﬁne functional unit and consider the
main need that the product fulﬁls (need or luxury?)
3
Who and how?
Identify stakeholders and the risks, opportunities, burdens and beneﬁts
they experience related to the SDGs in each life cycle stage
4
Validate
Identify if there are risks of human rights violations or breach of basic needs
and involve stakeholders to change and/or validate sub-goals and indicator
subjects
5
Formulate
Formulate ﬁnal social indicators based on the stakeholders’ evaluation and
a set of criteria, in units that can be measured in absolute terms
6
Set targets
Divide the indicators into two groups of needs (quantitative/qualitative).
Determine the absolute target(s) for each of the ﬁnal indicators
Table 2: Six-step guide to selecting and setting targets for social SDG indicators (Heide et al., 2021).
15
==PAGE:22==
5
METHOD: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
Step 1-4 were already partly determined ahead of this study. These will brieﬂy be described below in
relation to the Danish building sector and SDG 3 and 12. However, the framework can be applied on
all sectors or product systems. The development of step 5 and 6 is part of the current study, and the
methodology behind it is explained in section 5.2.
Step 1
The purpose of this study is to identify social SDG indicators and absolute sustainability targets for
the Danish building sector. The indicators are broadly formulated since the framework is generic and
meant to ﬁt all types of buildings. It is intended that building speciﬁc indicators can be developed when
using SDG Measure 2.0 on a particular building, e.g. a school or hospital, where certain non-generic
parameters are relevant to include. This step is not included in this study, since these indicators will
be developed for each speciﬁc building project.
Step 2
The entire life cycle from extraction of raw materials to End of Life (EoL) of the building should be
included. The geographical location should be taken into account for each individual step of the life
cycle. Even though the focus is on the Danish building sector, several other geographical locations are
of relevance. Extraction of materials often happens outside of Denmark, materials could be imported
and foreign labour might be used during construction. The geographical locations will vary depending
on the speciﬁc building project.
The functional unit (FU) is also building speciﬁc, since it depends on what type of building one
is investigating and what purpose it serves. One must consider what obligatory needs the building
should fulﬁl and for how long, and also if it is an actual need or a luxury that the building fulﬁls.
Furthermore, the FU should deﬁne in what way the building provides its function. Thus, the FU will
vary from building to building and must always be deﬁned in this step. The FU should be deﬁned as
done by Hauschild et al. (2018).
Step 3
To identify stakeholders and the risks and opportunities within the Danish building sector, a systematic
review of SDG 3 and 12 is completed together with a small literature review for every relevant subject
linked to the speciﬁc SDG. This includes academic and popular articles. The review is the foundation
used for determining initial sub-goals and indicators.
For each SDG, all life cycle stages must be considered to identify what impacts the di↵erent stakehold-
ers are exposed to during the entire life cycle of the building. E.g. SDG 3 - good health and well-being
must cover both the use stage (users, employees, residents, operating sta↵) and the construction stage
16
==PAGE:23==
5
METHOD: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
(the workers on the construction site and workers in the design stage). In general, whoever might be
a↵ected during extraction of raw materials, production, use or any other life cycle stage. As of now,
all indicators related to work outside Denmark are addressed in SDG 8 - Decent work and economic
growth and are not included in this study.
Step 4
Identiﬁcation of risk of human rights violations or breach of basic needs is done through a social
risk analysis conducted with the Social Hotspot Database (SHDB). SHDB is used to determine the
geographical locations in which the Danish building sector has activities. The process ”Construc-
tion/DNK U” is analysed with the method “Social Hotspot 2019 Subcat & Cat Method w Damages
/ Equalsubcatweights” to identify the mean risks working hours (MRWH) in the countries which the
Danish building sector interacts with. The results of the social risk analysis mainly impact the supply
chain outside Denmark, which is included in SDG 8 - decent work and economic growth. Later on,
the indicators developed based on the results from the SHDB will be moved to the relevant SDG -
e.g. good health and well-being of the workers extracting materials outside of Denmark will be moved
to SDG 3. However, the process of developing indicators from the SHDB is ongoing, and thus these
indicators are not included in this study.
To involve stakeholders, an advisory board was established consisting of eight key representatives from
the Danish construction sector. The role of the advisory board is to give feedback on the initial sub-
goals and indicators for SDG 3 and 12 and validating them. These initial sub-goals and indicators are
developed based on a set of criteria developed by Heide (2020-2023) and a steering group consisting of
experts from NIRAS and DTU. These criteria are developed to ﬁt all Danish sectors, and hence, they
are not building sector speciﬁc. The criteria can be found in Appendix A. The criteria are developed
based on the report Gør Verdensm˚al til Vores M˚al (Danmarks Statistik og 2030-Panelet, 2020).
5.2
Formulating and Setting Targets
Step 5 & 6
In this study, step 5 (Formulate) and 6 (Set targets) are completed for SDG 3 and 12 for the Danish
building sector. This is done based on the sub-goals and indicator subjects validated by the advisory
board (step 4) and the knowledge gained from the theory (Section 4).
Formulating sub-goals, indicators and targets is an iterative process where one is formulated, then
discussed and reformulated if necessary. In this process it is relevant to discuss the indicators and
targets with experts who can contribute with their knowledge. The steering group and the advisory
17
==PAGE:24==
5
METHOD: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
board have contributed with their insights, and several experts have been interviewed, which is further
elaborated in Section 5.2.1 - Expert interviews.
Sub-goals or indicators might be modiﬁed in case it is not possible to set an absolute target, or if a
better sub-goal or indicator is developed. Some indicators might end up being measured by the same
target, and are thus combined. This results in a set of ﬁnal sub-goals, indicators and targets. The
iterative process is shown in Figure 8.
Figure 8: The iterative process of formulating sub-goals, indicators and targets.
In this study, the absolute social targets are mostly deﬁned as thresholds (i.e., good enough or not good
enough), not scales, since absolute sustainability is about being good enough, and not just relatively
better than others. However, for some indicators the target is deﬁned as a range, since a performance
that is too good might make it almost impossible to fulﬁl other indicators. This is illustrated in Figure
9. An example could be air change in a building: a certain level is needed in order for the indoor
climate to be good enough, but if the air change gets ”too good” it will require a high amount of
energy, making it diﬃcult to fulﬁl indicators from e.g. SDG 7 - A↵ordable and clean energy.
Figure 9: The targets are mostly deﬁned as thresholds (left). For some indicators the target is deﬁned as a range
(right), since a performance that is too good might make it almost impossible to fulﬁl other indicators.
As mentioned earlier, several studies distinguish between two groups of needs. A selection of these
studies and the two Groups of needs are presented in Table 3. Both groups are universal, as described
in Section 4.1, but how to deﬁne targets for each of the groups di↵ers. For Group 1 it is possible
to deﬁne absolute social thresholds by identifying an objective source (e.g. statistics, standards or
18
==PAGE:25==
5
METHOD: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
experts). Group 2 contains more subjective needs, such as emotional well-being, and is therefore more
challenging to measure quantitatively.
Rogers et
al. (2012)
Mathes
(1970)
Gough
et
al. (2007)
O’Neill
et
al. (2018)
Gough
(2019)
UNDP
(2018)
SDGs
UN
(2021a)
1
Objective
Physiologi-
cal
health,
survival
Quantitative
Basic
needs
Pertaining
individuals
Absolute
depriva-
tion
Physical
needs (1, 2,
3, 4, 6)
2
Subjective
Autonomy/
psychologi-
cal needs
Qualitative
Psychologi-
cal & self-
fulﬁlment
needs
Pertaining
collectives
Relative
disadvant-
age
Social/hu-
man
rights
(5,
8,
10,
16)
Table 3: Groups of needs as determined by di↵erent studies (Heide et al., 2021).
To cover both Groups of needs, the four methodologies presented in Table 4 are used to set targets for
each indicator. The choice of method is based on the Group of need, but also on the time perspective
related to the indicator. An indicator might represent both Groups of needs, in which case Method 3
applies.
Method
Group of need
(Table 3)
Method description to identify absolute targets
1
1
Identify objective sources e.g., through industry experts, researchers,
standards, statistics, legislation or certiﬁcation schemes that contain
quantiﬁable guidelines
2
2
Measured bilaterally:
a)
Requirements on documenting that the given indicator is considered
in the design stage. Identiﬁed as Method 1 if possible. If not, it is
required to document that the indicator is considered in the project
proposal, answered by yes/no
b)
User survey or measurement in the construction or use stage.
2a
2
Method 2a can be used without 2b in case it is not possible to ask
the stakeholders in the construction or use stage. This is relevant for
indicators with long time perspectives.
3
1 + 2
Combining Group 1 + 2 applies to indicators where we know an inter-
val where the users thrive (e.g., indoor temperature). We can simulate
quantitatively how the building performs in the design phase and con-
trol the performance during the functional performance testing right
before the use stage.
Table 4: Method overview to identify absolute social targets (Heide et al., 2021).
19
==PAGE:26==
5
METHOD: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
5.2.1
Method 1
Method 1 is relevant for the ﬁrst Group of needs (Table 3), where the target addresses needs that
can be quantiﬁed and the threshold can thereby be deﬁned using objective sources. In some cases
it is simple to identify this threshold, because there is zero tolerance - e.g. when it comes to fatal
work injuries - no one should be at risk of dying at work. In other cases where zero tolerance is not
obtainable, a threshold has to be determined at a level of overall average satisfaction assessed to be
absolute sustainable.
All indicators measured using Method 1 can be quantiﬁed or determined by yes or no, i.e., is a certain
set of rules complied with, yes or no? The targets for those indicators are based on experts interviews
and/or standards, statistics, guides and certiﬁcations.
Expert Interviews
In order to develop absolute targets, which are as objective as possible, it is helpful to consult experts
within a certain area. Since this study is conducted in collaboration with NIRAS, it has been possible
to consult some of their experts regarding indoor climate, demolition and waste as a resource.
They have provided insights on how the indicators could be measured and what the thresholds of the
targets should be. Furthermore, they have practical knowledge regarding the Danish building sector,
which has helped deﬁning which issues are relevant to address and how the indicators and targets are
made measurable.
In Appendix B, a list of all targets can be found with an indication of which experts have contributed
to what targets.
Standards, Statistics, Guides, Certiﬁcations
Objective sources such as the Danish Building Regulations’ guides, relevant standards and statistics
give insights on the current requirements to the Danish building sector, and how the sector is perform-
ing compared to other sectors in Denmark. Certiﬁcation schemes such as DGNB are used to explore
what requirements are used by other sustainability certiﬁcations when assessing buildings.
In Appendix B it is indicated which standard, statistic, guide or certiﬁcation is used to set each of the
targets.
An example is the indicator Minimising, sorting and disposing waste on the construction site belonging
to the sub-goal Increase reuse and recycling and prevent raw material shortages from SDG 12. Here,
the latest statistic from Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet (2020) on how waste in the building sector is
20
==PAGE:27==
5
METHOD: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
distributed according to the waste hierarchy (see Figure 10, right) is used to set absolute thresholds.
Since the sub-goal concerns increasing reuse and recycling, the target is that no materials should end
up in landﬁll or be incinerated, which respectively 5% and 7% currently does. Instead, that share
is placed higher in the waste hierarchy. Other utilisation is lower in the hierarchy than reuse and
recycling and is in fact downcycling of materials. Therefore, the absolute target ends up as shown in
Figure 10, left.
Figure 10: Left: the table shows the statistic for construction waste in 2019 and the absolute threshold for
the SDG 12 indicator ”Minimising, sorting and disposing waste on the construction site”. Right: the waste
hierarchy.
5.2.2
Method 2
Method 2 is relevant for indicators that are categorised as a Group 2 need (Table 3), meaning that
the target addresses qualitative needs and the threshold is deﬁned using objective sources for part a)
and subjective sources for part b). Step 2a) is conducted in the same way as Method 1 if possible.
In cases where no relevant standard, statistic or similar is available, it is still important to include
a yes/no question in the design stage, since it gives the designer a chance to consider how to fulﬁl
this indicator before it is measured later on in the life cycle. Method 2a) can be used separately as
described in Table 4.
User Survey
Part 2b in Method 2 is a user survey, which for the Danish building sector is conducted in the
construction or use stage of a building. Here, the employees will give their opinion on the occupational
health and safety at the construction site and di↵erent users of the building will provide input on how
the building performs on the given indicator.
The user survey is developed in collaboration with anthropologists Mikael Hallstrøm Eriksen, Chief
Consultant and Gertrud Øllgaard, Expertise Director at NIRAS. They have advised on how to frame
the questions in order to make them easily understandable, how to design the user survey, which
information is needed in order for the respondents to provide suﬃcient answers and which intervals to
use.
21
==PAGE:28==
5
METHOD: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
The forced choice Likert scaling is used for the user survey. The Likert scale score is calculated as
sum of responses over sum of respondents. The scale provides answers that allow the respondents
to express a degree of agreement or disagreement (Bernstein, 2004). When using the forced choice
Likert scale, an equal amount of answering options is provided, which leaves no answer neutral, i.e.,
the respondents are ”forced” to form an opinion.
A respondent does not necessarily agree or disagree completely. Therefore, it can be diﬃcult whether
to answer ”agree” or ”disagree” if those are the only two options. Adding the options ”slightly agree”
and ”slightly disagree” makes the tipping point less sharp and hopefully this will provide a more
accurate result. Therefore, in this user survey, four possible options are provided:
Agree
Slightly agree
Slightly disagree
Disagree
It is rarely possible to satisfy all respondents. When working with thermal indoor climate, it is expected
that around 10% disagree when the thresholds from the Danish Building Regulations guidance are
complied with (Danish Standards Association, 2017). The absolute boundary determining how large
a share is allowed to disagree is yet to be determined, however, in this study, 10% is used. Thus, if
the result of the user survey is equal to or lower than the threshold of 10% disagreement, the target
is assessed as good enough regardless of whether those 10% answer slightly disagree or disagree.
5.2.3
Method 3
Method 3 combines Group 1 and 2 (Table 3). For the Danish building sector, this method is relevant
when developing indicators and targets for indoor climate. There are several standards and regulations
on how the indoor climate should be, but at the same time, it is very subjective how the indoor climate
is perceived. It is often diﬃcult to satisfy all when it comes to indoor climate (EXHAUSTO A/S,
2022) and therefore, a user survey might not lead to any useful conclusions, making it diﬃcult to
establish an absolute threshold. A user survey on indoor climate might be a↵ected by other factors
such as having a bad day, a minor cold or wearing too much or too little clothes. This can a↵ect ones
mood and well-being and thus, ones answers in a survey.
Instead, the indicator is measured during the functional performance test, which is carried out during
the pre-use stage. By doing so, it can be explored whether the requirements for healthy indoor climate
are actually complied with. The targets for the functional performance tests are determined based
on information from the Danish Building Regulations as well as knowledge from NIRAS’ experts on
indoor climate, Peter Noy´e, Expertise Director and Lone Hedegaard Mortensen, Civil Engineer, PhD.
22
==PAGE:29==
6
RESULTS: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
6
Results: Absolute Social Sustainability
In the following sections, the sub-goals, indicators and targets developed for SDG 3 and 12 for SDG
Measure 2.0 are presented. They are developed to ﬁt the Danish building sector and are thus relatively
generic. In order to avoid pitfalls, a manual on how to use SDG Measure 2.0 is developed to support
the employees using it. The manual can be found in Appendix C.
SDG Measure 2.0 are tested on the kindergarten. The kindergarten was not designed following the
SDG Measure 2.0, which means that some of the requirements might not have been considered in the
design stage. This could inﬂuence the results.
6.1
Sub-Goals, Indicators and Targets for the Danish Building Sector
SDG 3
The ﬁnal sub-goals (dark green) and indicators (light green) for SDG 3 are presented in Figure 11.
Sub-goals and indicators are placed in the relevant life cycle stage. There are three sub-goals in the
construction stage - Well-being at the workplace, Safe work environment and Health at the workplace -
which considers the architects, engineers and contractors’ health, well-being and safety during planning
and construction. The three other sub-goals - Promote healthy indoor climate in existing and new
construction, Design for safe use and Buildings’ support of human well-being - represent the operation
and use stage, considering the health, well-being and safety of the users of the building.
Figure 11: Sub-goals (dark green) and indicators (light green) for SDG 3 - Good health and well-being. The
placement of the sub-goals indicate where in the life cycle they are relevant.
23
==PAGE:30==
6
RESULTS: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
Below, two of the indicators for SDG 3 are presented with their targets. The remaining sub-goals,
indicators and targets for SDG 3 can be found in Appendix B.
Figure 12: Example of indicator (light green) and targets for the SDG 3 sub-goal: design for safe use (dark
green). The indicator is elaborated with a brief text. To the left the targets in the design stage are listed and to
the right the targets in the use stage.
Figure 12 is an example of how sub-goals, indicators and targets are presented and how a concrete
indicator with targets is formulated.
Firstly, the sub-goal (dark green) is introduced: Design for
safe use and the indicator (light green): Experience of the environment in and around the building.
Secondly, the indicator subject is elaborated in a brief text. Lastly, the targets are presented. To
the left, the targets in the design stage are listed and on the right the targets in the use stage (or
the pre-use or construction stage) are listed. In order for this indicator to be fulﬁlled, i.e., to be good
enough, one must be able to answer ”yes” to the two questions in the design stage. In the use stage, at
least 90% must answer ”slightly agree” or ”agree” with the current threshold. This might be changed
later on as SDG Measure 2.0 is further developed.
For the indicator in Figure 12, Method 2 is used to set the targets.
The indicator concerns the
experience of safety and security, which can be perceived di↵erently. One does not necessarily feel
safe, even if certain guides on how to create a safe environment are complied with. Therefore, the
questions in the design stage do not include any speciﬁc standards, as these will not necessarily resonate
with the feeling of being safe. This is a reminder to the designer to consider the safety and security
in and around the building before the users have to evaluate whether they ﬁnd it good enough. This
enhances the developer’s chance of creating an absolute sustainable building, where the users feel safe.
24
==PAGE:31==
6
RESULTS: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
In the use stage it is tested whether or not the initiative(s) considered in the design stage work
suﬃciently. For this sub-goal, it is done through two user survey questions.
Figure 13: Example of indicator (light green) and targets for the SDG 3 sub-goal: promote healthy indoor
climate in existing and new construction (dark green). The indicator is elaborated with a brief text. To the left
the targets in the design stage are listed and to the right the targets in the pre-use stage.
The indicator in Figure 13 is developed using method 3 (Table 4). The Danish Building Regulations’
guide on ventilation provides a standard for outdoor air supply compliance. The air supply compliance
is documented through calculations in the design stage if the building is either residential or an
institution. However, it is possible to measure this indicator in the pre-use stage too, in order to
control if the performance actually is good enough.
Here, the CO2-level is measured in standard
rooms to see whether it complies with the threshold of 1,000 PPM. In order for this indicator to be
fulﬁlled, one must be able to answer ”yes” to the question and thus meet the minimum requirements
for outdoor air supply in the design stage and meet the requirement of the CO2-level for standard
rooms and schools during the functional performance test.
SDG 12
The ﬁnal sub-goals and indicators for SDG 12 are presented in Figure 14. Several of the sub-goals
and indicators are related to more than one of the life cycle stages. E.g. the indicator Prevention of
raw material shortages from the sub-goal Increase reuse and recycling and prevent material shortages
should be considered in extraction of raw materials, production, construction and at EoL, since it is
possible to prevent the use of materials which are scarce in all these life cycle stages.
25
==PAGE:32==
6
RESULTS: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
The sub-goal Use of responsibly produced materials is created to include the earlier life cycle stages
extraction of raw materials and production. It takes into account what materials are used in the
building and how responsibly these are extracted and produced. Thus, the responsibility lies both
with those who extract the materials and the manufacturer. The sub-goal Design for longevity spans
between the operation and use stage and the EoL stage, thus having a long time perspective.
Figure 14: Sub-goals (dark brown) and indicators (light brown) for SDG 12 - Responsible consumption and
production. The placement of the sub-goals indicate where in the life cycle they are relevant.
Below, two of the indicators are presented with their targets. The remaining sub-goals and indicators
for SDG 12 can be found in Appendix B.
For the indicator shown in Figure 15, Method 1 is used to set the targets. It is identiﬁed using objective
sources and measured both in the design and construction stage. Once again, this is measured in the
design stage to give the developer the opportunity to implement solutions for fulﬁlling the indicator
before the construction stage begins. During the design stage, the contractor must document that
there is a plan for minimising waste, as well as sorting and disposing it correctly. This is also measured
during the construction stage by following a guide on handling waste on construction sites, and by
looking at the percentages of waste that are reused, recycled or utilised. In order for this indicator to
be fulﬁlled one must be able to answer ”yes” to the two questions in the design stage and meet the
requirements in the construction stage.
26
==PAGE:33==
6
RESULTS: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
Figure 15: Example of indicator (light brown) and targets for the SDG 12 sub-goal: Increase reuse and recycling
and prevent raw material shortages (dark brown). The indicator is elaborated with a brief text. To the left the
targets in the design stage are listed and to the right the targets in the construction stage.
Figure 16 is an example of an indicator developed using Method 2a. Since it concerns maintenance
and demolition, the time perspective is rather long, making it diﬃcult to measure the indicator in the
use and EoL stage. Therefore, this indicator is solely measured during the design stage. In order for
it to be fulﬁlled, one must be able to answer ”yes” to the two questions.
Figure 16: Example of indicator (light brown) and target for the SDG 12 sub-goal: design for longevity (dark
brown). The indicator is elaborated with a brief text. To the left the targets in the design stage are listed.
27
==PAGE:34==
6
RESULTS: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
6.2
Absolute Social Sustainability Assessment of the Kindergarten
After having developed sub-goals, indicators and targets for the Danish building sector for SDG 3
and 12, SDG Measure 2.0 is tested on the kindergarten. In Appendix D the results and how they are
obtained are listed for each target. Since the construction stage is still on-going, it is only possible to
apply the tool to the targets related to the design and construction stage.
SDG 3
The ﬁnal results for the kindergarten, determining which targets are absolute social sustainable and
which are not when considering SDG 3 is shown in Figure 17. The outer circle represents the sub-
goals (dark green), the middle circle the indicators (light green), and the inner circle the targets. All
indicators are listed to the right. The legend to the left refers to the targets indicating whether or not
a target is absolute sustainable.
Figure 17: The ﬁnal absolute social sustainability results for the kindergarten for SDG 3. The outer circle
represents the sub-goals (dark green), the middle circle the indicators (light green), and the inner circle the
targets. All indicators are listed to the right. The legend to the left refers to the targets. Some targets are not
yet measurable, since they are related to a part of the life cycle which is not yet reached.
As seen by Figure 17, many of the targets are not yet measurable, because the building is still under
construction and many of the targets are measured during the use stage. Out of the targets which
are measurable, two are marked as unknown due to lack of information on the project or in need of
further calculations. The rest are assessed as absolute sustainable.
28
==PAGE:35==
6
RESULTS: ABSOLUTE SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
SDG 12
The ﬁnal results for SDG 12 are presented in Figure 18 in the same way as they were for SDG 3.
Figure 18: The ﬁnal absolute social sustainability results for the kindergarten for SDG 12. The outer circle
shows the sub-goals (dark brown), the middle circle the indicators (light brown) and the inner circle the targets.
All indicators are listed to the right. The legend to the left refers to the targets.
Figure 18 shows that only one of the targets for SDG 12 is not yet measurable, because it is to
be measured at the end of the construction stage. Four out of the 11 targets are assessed as not
sustainable. They all relate to the sub-goal Design for longevity. In the project proposal, there is a lack
of information on how design for longevity is considered. This might be at the expense of the project’s
considerable focus on the sub-goal Increase reuse and recycling and prevent raw material shortages by
reusing materials from the school formerly situated on the building site. This indicates why a holistic
approach is important when designing a building that aims to be absolute social sustainable.
29
==PAGE:36==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
7
Method: Absolute Environmental Sustainability
Deﬁning a common AESR for all buildings to comply with is diﬃcult to justify, since all buildings do
not fulﬁl the same purpose and thus, they cannot be assigned the same SoSOS. Hence, the SoSOS is
case speciﬁc and must be assigned to each individual building.
In order for the kindergarten to be absolute environmental sustainable, it must remain within its
SoSOS. In this study, it will be assessed whether the kindergarten stays within its share in terms of
climate change. This is done through an LCA-based AESA (as described in Section 4.4), where the
climate change impact of the kindergarten is compared to the assigned SoSOS when using di↵erent
methodologies to quantify the safe operating space and di↵erent sharing principles.
7.1
LCA
The LCA follows the guidelines from Hauschild et al. (2018). Assumptions made regarding the material
input can be found in Appendix E. The LCA is divided into two groups: materials and operational
energy. Each group is described further in Section 7.1.2.
7.1.1
Goal and Scope
The goal of the LCA is to assess whether the product system (i.e., the kindergarten) is absolute
environmental sustainable in terms of climate change. To do so, the entire life cycle perspective is
taken into account. Because it is a study of absolute environmental sustainability and not relative
sustainability, it is not a comparable LCA.
The study has limitations when it comes to data on speciﬁc materials and amounts, since the kinder-
garten is still in the construction stage. It is a retrospective study and hence, no decisions are to be
made based on the LCA. However, NIRAS intend to use the results to guide and identify hotspots for
future projects. Depending on the decision context of a study, di↵erent modelling choices are recom-
mended. A study which is not to be used for decision support is context C. When interactions with
other systems are included, which is the case in the this study, it is decision context C1 (Hauschild
et al., 2018).
The International Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) recommended life cycle inventory (LCI) modelling
framework for decision context C1 is attributional LCA, since it is of accounting nature. An attribu-
tional LCA considers which environmental impacts can be attributed to the product system. ILCD
recommend that multi-functional processes are handled by system expansion when subdivision is not
possible. Therefore, this LCI modelling framework is used throughout the study.
30
==PAGE:37==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
The FU should be deﬁned as done by Hauschild et al. (2018). To deﬁne the FU, one must consider how
long the building lasts, how well it performs its function, the amount of materials required and where it
is situated. The FU includes elements necessary to provide the physical frames for the kindergarten.
This includes: the building structure, maintenance of the building and operational energy for the
building, for a temporal consideration of 75 years. The FU excludes daily services that covers food,
diapers, excursions, etc. The kindergarten must accommodate 176 children norms and 31 employees.
A timeline for the product system can be found in Figure 20.
Temporal consideration
Usually, the temporal consideration of a building is 50, 60 or 80 years. For the AESA, projections are
needed to quantify the safe operating space as described in Section 4.4.2. These are calculated up until
2100. Since the construction of the kindergarten will be ﬁnished in 2022, a temporal consideration
of 80 years would exceed the projection. Therefore, a temporal consideration of 75 years (2022-2096
both years included) is chosen.
This does not mean that the building actually lasts 75 years. At some point, the building might no
longer be what is wanted or needed on the speciﬁc location and thus, it could be demolished earlier
than anticipated. However, the lifespan could also be longer than the temporal consideration. The
temporal consideration is important when assessing relative environmental sustainability, providing a
similar o↵set when comparing buildings. When assessing absolute environmental sustainability the
actual lifespan of the building is important, since it is part of assigning the SoSOS for the given
building.
Therefore, three di↵erent lifespans are investigated. This is done in order to explore what di↵erence
the actual lifespan of a building makes. The three lifespans investigated are:
- 25 years
- 50 years
- 75 years
For the building with a lifespan of 25 years, an LCA is conducted with a temporal consideration of
25 years. To comply with the FU, the result is multiplied by three. For the building lasting 50 years,
the same approach is used, and thus the results are multiplied by 1.5 to comply with the FU. The
LCAs are conducted for materials only and LCAs of the operational energy is calculated separately to
include future improvements to the operational energy mix. This is elaborated later in Section 7.1.2
- Operational Energy.
31
==PAGE:38==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
System Boundaries
The system boundaries for the kindergarten are illustrated in Figure 19. Building materials, outdoor
pavement, operational energy (electricity and heat), waste on site and transport to site are within the
system boundaries. Water consumption in the use stage, food, furniture and daily services etc. are
excluded ﬂows and thus outside the system boundaries, since it is part of the daily operations and
not part of the building itself. Site energy used in the construction stage and transport on site is not
included in this study, since no data is available.
Figure 19: System boundaries and cut-o↵s for the kindergarten. Building materials, outdoor pavement, opera-
tional energy (electricity and heat), waste on site and transport to site are within the system boundaries. Water,
food, furniture and daily services are excluded ﬂows and thus outside the system boundaries, since it is part of
the daily operations and not the building itself. Site energy and transport on site is not included since no data
is available. Reused and recycled materials are modelled using the cut-o↵approach (100:0).
Representativeness
The geographical representativeness is considered for each of the input processes. For operational
electricity and heat, Danish processes are chosen since both are produced and consumed in Denmark.
However, the imported share is also included in the study, including energy from Sweden, Norway
and Germany. Since the Oekobau database is used, the data sets for building materials represent
the country speciﬁc situation in Germany, focusing on the main technologies, the region speciﬁc
characteristics and/or import statistics.
The study only includes technologies that already exist and replacements of materials are based on cur-
rently available data. Thus, if new technologies are developed throughout the building’s lifespan, which
potentially could lower the emissions related to refurbishment or reconstruction, it is not included.
32
==PAGE:39==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
In some sectors, technological development move fast, meaning the time-related representativeness is
low (Hauschild et al., 2018). E.g. the current focus on waste management and recycling of materials
could lead to fast development in that sector, resulting in waste management looking di↵erent in a
near future. This is not accounted for, but could potentially inﬂuence the results.
Another parameter expected to develop over time is the Danish energy mix. This is considered by
modelling future energy mixes for electricity and heating based on di↵erent projections. These di↵erent
projections are presented and further elaborated in Section 7.1.2 - Operational Energy.
The timeline of the kindergarten is shown in Figure 20. It illustrates the expected time frames for the
di↵erent life cycle stages from planning of the project until demolition/disposal at the building’s EoL.
As mentioned, three di↵erent lifespans are investigated, according to which the EoL will be in 2046,
2071 and 2096, respectively.
Figure 20: Timeline of the kindergarten, presenting the di↵erent life cycle stages and their expected time frames.
7.1.2
Prerequisites
The life cycle stages considered, which were presented in Table 1, are divided into two groups:
- Materials: Building materials (A1 - raw material extraction, A2 - transport, A3 - manufacturing,
B4 - replacement, C3 - waste management and C4 - disposal) and building process (A4 - transport
to site and A5 - contruction/installing, which in this study includes material waste on site and
excludes on-site energy)
- Operational energy: B6 - operational energy consumption (electricity and heat).
Materials
The LCA of the materials is conducted using the software LCAbyg. For production stages, A1-A3, and
EoL stages, C3-C4, generic data from the Oekobau database (BMI, 2021) or EPDs are used. In cases
where a speciﬁc product is known, and where an EPD is available, the EPD is used instead of generic
data from the Oekobau database. Which materials are from EPDs and the database, respectively, can
33
==PAGE:40==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
be found in Appendix E.
A Revit model of the kindergarten is provided by NIRAS. This model is used to map the elements and
materials of the building by downloading schedules with inventory data. The schedules from Revit
are compared to the tender list to avoid leaving out elements which are not modelled in Revit.
Building process stages, A4-A5, are modelled using generic values corresponding to FBK, when no
other data on material waste or transportation is provided. FBK adds 10 % waste to the materials
and 500 km of transport (Traﬁk-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2020).
Module B4 considers replacement of building materials. How often a material is replaced can have
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the results of the LCA. LCAbyg provides a table of standard lifespans for
di↵erent building materials, based on Aagaard et al. (2013). These standard lifespans are used in this
study. LCAbyg considers the remaining lifespan, even if it is less than 10 years. Thus, replacements
of materials are always included in the calculations, even if the remaining lifespan is less than 10 years
(E. B. Jørgensen et al., 2021).
Potential for utilisation, recycling and reuse, D, is not included in the results. It is placed outside the
present project, since it is seen as input material for the next product system, and thus the added
beneﬁt would result in double counting. As shown in Figure 21, the amount of material utilised,
recycled or reused at EoL is subtracted from the amount of material going through waste management.
Since it is included in the next product system, it equals zero in the current product system.
Reused Materials
The reused materials are modelled using the cut-o↵approach (100:0) as described by van der Harst
et al. (2016), shown in Figure 21. This approach considers recycled materials in the manufacturing
of a product (A1-A3), by allocating 100% of the impact to the materials’ ﬁrst life cycle. It does not
provide credits for the share of recycled materials at EoL. The share reused or recycled at EoL (stage
D) is assigned to the second life cycle of the material, which uses the reused or recycled material as
input.
Figure 21: The cut-o↵approach (100:0) used to model reused materials in the LCA. Based on the Figure from
van der Harst et al. (2016). Y indicates the amount of recycled material and X indicates the amount of product
recycled af EoL.
34
==PAGE:41==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Some energy is spent on cleaning the bricks before they can be reused. This is taken into account by
using the EPD for reused bricks from Gamle Mursten (Gamle Mursten, 2017), which includes the pro-
cess of cleaning the bricks. Regarding the other reused materials, a minimum of energy and resources
are needed to prepare the materials for the next life cycle (according to Gladsaxe Municipality) and
therefore, it is assumed insigniﬁcant and not included.
The reused materials from the school have not left the construction site, and thus transportation is
not needed. For the reused materials, the generic 10% waste is not added, since those materials are
already considered as waste from the ﬁrst life cycle (i.e., the life cycle of the school). Thus, if not all
of those materials are used, the remaining are part of the ﬁrst life cycle and the kindergarten does not
account for that.
When working with reused and recycled materials, one has to consider the lifespan of each given ma-
terial. Since reused materials have a previous life, the remaining lifespan could be reduced. However,
it is assumed that the reused materials are of a certain quality and thus, the lifespan is set as equal
to a corresponding new material. It is unknown whether the reused materials with a lifespan shorter
than the temporal consideration will be replaced by virgin or reused materials. In LCAbyg, when
a reused material reaches its EoL and needs to be replaced (B4), the replacement is not considered
when using the cut-o↵approach (100:0). This causes a small source of error, since the emissions from
the replacement is not accounted for. Due to the small extent of reused materials with a lifespan of
less than 75 years, the replacement of reused materials is thus excluded in this study.
Reused wood is di↵erent from the other reused materials.
In LCAbyg, reusing wood will result
in higher emissions than virgin wood, since the CO2 that wood stores is considered as a negative
emission during the production stage (A1-A3). During waste management (C3), the CO2 which the
wood has stored is accounted for. This means that leaving out the impact from production will result
in higher emissions than by including the production stages. Therefore, it is decided that reused wood
is modelled as carbon neutral.
Operational Energy
Operational energy consumption, B6, considers the operational energy consumption during the use
stage of the building’s lifespan. In Denmark, the software BE18 is used for the energy performance
estimate. The energy performance requirements for BR18’s low energy class is 33 kWh/m2/year. To
comply with this requirement, the kindergarten needs solar cells and a solar heating system (NIRAS,
2020). The contribution from the solar cells and the solar heating system is accounted for in the
energy performance estimate. After this contribution is subtracted, the total energy demand of the
35
==PAGE:42==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
kindergarten is 28.1 kWh/m2/year, according to NIRAS (2020). In Table 5, the share of the energy
demand related to operational heating and electricity, respectively, are presented together with the
heated building area and the year of occupancy. See Supplementary Material 1 for calculations.
Operational heat consumption
9.51 kWh/m2/year
Operational electricity consumption
18.59 kWh/m2/year
Heated building area
1,359 m2
Year of occupancy
2022
Table 5: Data used for modelling the operational energy consumption for the kindergarten.
BE18 is not meant to calculate a building’s actual energy consumption. The calculation method in
BE18 is simpliﬁed to make it easier to compare di↵erent buildings’ energy consumption - without taking
location, user preferences and behaviour into account. This simpliﬁcation results in a lower operational
energy consumption than measured in reality (Petersen & Hviid, 2021). Since the operational energy
consumption added to the LCA is based on the result from BE18, the environmental impact from the
operational energy consumption will appear smaller than it is.
The di↵erence between the BE18 estimate and the actual energy consumption is known as the per-
formance gap (Petersen & Hviid, 2021). According to Petersen and Hviid (2021), the actual energy
consumption is up to four times higher than BE18 shows. The performance gap is included in this
study by modelling three di↵erent energy consumption scenarios for the kindergarten, based on the
ﬁndings from Petersen and Hviid (2021):
- Low: Gladsaxe Municipality’s energy performance estimate for the kindergarten
- Medium: A scenario twice the size of the energy performance estimate
- High: A scenario four times the size of the energy performance estimate
These consumption scenarios are modelled for district heating and electricity separately, which results
in nine di↵erent energy scenarios. For calculations and assumptions regarding the energy scenarios,
see Supplementary Material 1.
Furthermore, the energy mix is considered to contain a larger share of renewable energy in the future
(DTU, 2018) and therefore, a dynamic LCA, based on three projections for electricity and district
heating respectively, is carried out. The three di↵erent projections are:
- LCAbyg: The standard projection used in LCAbyg (Traﬁk-, Bygge-, og Boligstyrelsen, 2021)
- Frozen: DTU Frozen Policy projection based on the Danish Energy Agency’s basis projection
(DTU, 2018)
- CBP: Carbon Budget Paris projection based on the Paris Agreement target of staying within
36
==PAGE:43==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
a temperature rise of 1.5°C (DTU, 2018)
The LCAbyg projection is calculated up to and including 2040. From DTU (2018), the percentage
distribution between di↵erent energy sources is found for the CBP and Frozen projections for district
heating and electricity, respectively. These two are modelled up to and including 2050. Thus, if the
LCAbyg projection improves from 2040 to 2050, it is not included in the results. Since the temporal
consideration is 75 years (2022-2096 both years included), the energy impact is assumed constant from
2040 for LCAbyg and from 2050 for Frozen and CBP.
The Frozen and CBP projections are modelled in the LCA software SimaPro to calculate the climate
change impact for one kWh of electricity and one kWh of district heating in 2020, 2030, 2040 and
2050. Linear regressions are calculated between each of the projection years. For calculations and
assumptions, see Supplementary Material 1. LCAbyg provides the climate change impact for one kWh
of electricity and one kWh of district heating for each year. From 2040 and during the rest of the
temporal consideration, the impact is assumed constant.
Since there are three projections for district heating and electricity, respectively, nine di↵erent pro-
jection combinations are possible. Figure 22 shows the three di↵erent projections for district heating
and Figure 23 shows the three di↵erent projections for electricity.
Figure 22: Projections for district heating from 2022 to 2096. Three di↵erent projections are modelled: one
based on the standard used in LCAbyg, the DTU Frozen Policy projection, which is based on the Danish Energy
Agency’s basis projection, and the Carbon Budget Paris projection (CBP), which is based on the Paris Agreement
target of staying within a temperature rise of 1.5°C.
Figure 22 shows that the LCAbyg projection has a signiﬁcantly higher GWP per kWh than Frozen
and CBP throughout the 75 years. It is important to note that the LCAbyg projection stops in 2040,
37
==PAGE:44==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
whereas Frozen and CBP are projected until 2050. Thus, LCAbyg might show a decline from 2040 to
2050, which is not accounted for.
Figure 23: Projections for electricity from 2022 to 2096. Three di↵erent projections are modelled: one based on
the standard used in LCAbyg, the DTU Frozen Policy projection, which is based on the Danish Energy Agency’s
basis projection, and the Carbon Budget Paris projection (CBP), which is based on the Paris Agreement target
of staying within a temperature rise of 1.5°C.
Figure 23 shows how the GWP per kWh for electricity evolves more radically the next 20 years when
compared to district heating. All three projections have a rather similar impact, however Frozen ends
up causing the largest impact on climate change.
Combining the nine energy scenarios with the nine di↵erent energy projections results in 81 di↵erent
possible combinations. Three of them will be used in the dynamic LCA; the combination which leads
to the highest Global Warming Potential (GWP) (Worst case), the combination leading to the lowest
GWP (Best case), and the median value (Median case). These three energy scenarios are presented
in Table 6. All 81 scenarios can be found in Supplementary Material 1.
Scenario
District heating
Electricity
Energy [t CO2-eq.]
Worst case
Low, CBP
Low, CBP
799
Median case
Low, CBP
High, CBP
339
Best case
High, LCAbyg
High, Frozen
117
Table 6: The three energy scenarios used in the LCA. Worst case is the combination of district heating and
electricity scenarios which leads to the highest GWP, Median case is the median value of all scenarios and Best
case is the combination leading to the lowest GWP.
38
==PAGE:45==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
7.2
Quantifying the Safe Operating Space
In order to quantify the safe operating space for climate change, two projections are needed: a projec-
tion for population growth and for greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The projection for population
growth is based on UN’s medium variant (UN, 2019). To test di↵erent methodologies and to assess
the importance of which method is used, two di↵erent approaches are used for quantifying the safe
operating space:
- IPCC: Based on IPCC’s SSP1-1.9, aiming at staying below a temperature rise of 1.5°C (Hoegh-
Guldberg et al., 2018), aligned with the Paris Agreement and the PB climate change
- CC: Based on carrying capacity as deﬁned by Bjørn and Hauschild (2015)
The current GHG emissions are beyond the safe operating space determined by the PBs, and it will
take time to revert this current overshoot.
IPCC’s SSP1-1.9 scenario is intended to comply with
the Paris Agreement by limiting the temperature rise to 1.5°C compared to pre-industrial levels and
staying within the safe operating space (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018).
This projection takes its
starting point in current emissions and slowly decreases over time. Since current emissions are not at
a level where we can stay below a temperature rise of 1.5°C, we will later on have to make up for the
current overshoot. In this projection, that is done by assuming negative GHG emissions from 2054
and onwards.
Even though the IPCC projection requires a negative CO2 contribution from 2054, it is not expected
that the kindergarten can deliver a negative contribution and thus, zero emissions are allocated to the
kindergarten from 2054 and the rest of the lifespan. This is illustrated in Figure 24, where the green
line (IPCC) represents the case where zero emissions are allocated to the kindergarten from 2054, and
the light green line (IPCC negative) illustrates the case where the negative contribution is included.
Carrying capacity, as deﬁned by Bjørn and Hauschild (2015), di↵ers from the PBs, since it is based on
what we can emit if we were to live absolute sustainable from today and onwards, i.e., what we can
emit without transgressing the carrying capacity of the planet. Furthermore, it is a best estimate of
Earth’s exact carrying capacity, whereas the PBs use a precautionary approach (Bjørn & Hauschild,
2015). It is calculated in two di↵erent ways: one which allows a temperature rise of 2°C compared to
pre-industrial levels and one which allows an energy imbalance of maximum 1 W/m2, corresponding
to a temperature rise of 1.06°C. Since it is already too late to reach a maximum temperature rise of
1.06°C, the limit of 2°C is used in this study. However, it is not known whether some of the PBs will
be transgressed at a temperature rise of 2°C and therefore, it is not necessarily absolute sustainable
to stay within the threshold of 2°C. The results from the article by Bjørn and Hauschild (2015) are
39
==PAGE:46==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
based on the World population in 2010, and therefore it has to be recalculated with the population
from 2022 and onwards.
In Figure 24, the three di↵erent projections are presented: the one based on carrying capacity (CC),
and two di↵erent options based on the IPCC projections: one which includes the negative values of
the projection (IPCC negative), and one where the minimum CO2 emissions are equal to zero (IPCC).
For calculations, see Supplementary Material 3.
Figure 24: CO2 budget per capita per year for three di↵erent projections: one based on Earth’s carrying capacity
if aiming at staying below a 2°C temperature rise and two based on IPCC’s projection IMAGE SSP1-1.9 - one
which follows the projection, and one where it is assumed that the minimum CO2 emissions are equal to zero.
Figure 24 shows the break-even between the IPCC and CC projections around 2039-2040. Before
2040, the IPCC projection assigns a larger share per capita per year compared to CC. From 2040
and onwards, the share per capita per year is larger for CC. The share assigned by IPCC decreases
signiﬁcantly within the next 20 years, whereas the CC projection decreases proportionally to the
increase in world population, and would increase if the world population decreases. As mentioned, it
is not expected that the kindergarten can deliver a negative contribution and thus, the IPCC negative
projection will not be used going forward.
7.3
Assigning a Share of the Safe Operating Space
Di↵erent sharing principles can be used to allocate the safe operating space to individual or product
level. To select the sharing principles for this AESA, the framework presented by Ryberg et al. (2020)
is used. Here, it is recommended to use equal per capita (EPC) sharing of the safe operating space to
distribute from global to individual level. EPC is based on the justice theory egalitarianism. Egalit-
arianism holds that all people should be treated as equal (Ryberg et al. (2020), Hjalsted et al. (2020)).
40
==PAGE:47==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Hereafter, the SoSOS is upscaled from individual to sector or product level. This share depends on
the number of users and the utility provided to the users, which is based on approximations and data
availability. Here, it is recommended to use either gross value added (GVA) or ﬁnal consumption
expenditure (FCE). Both are based on existing economic data, but it is easier to get access to FCE
data and therefore, this principle is used. FCE is based on utilitarianism, which argues that we should
maximise the well-being in society (Bjørn et al. (2020), Hjalsted et al. (2020)).
Ryberg et al. (2020) also recommends further research on development of new sharing principles with
better methods for approximating the added utility to people. Mia Heide is currently developing a
new sharing principle, fulﬁlment of human needs (FHN) (Heide, 2020-2023). This sharing principle is
tested in this study and compared to FCE.
7.3.1
Equal per Capita
EPC is simple to calculate, since the data required (population numbers) is easily accessible. It can be
criticised for being too simple, since it does not take into account that every person is di↵erent. E.g.
a professional athlete might require more calories to fulﬁl their daily functions than someone working
in an oﬃce. However, it seems fair to use EPC when considering a larger group of people. Instead
of having to determine the needs of each individual, an even distribution is a simple and acceptable
way of dividing the safe operating space. Using EPC might cause some ethical challenges. It could be
argued that the population of the Global North should have a smaller share, since the Global North
has used a larger share throughout the last centuries. Using a principle such as ability to pay would
take this into consideration (Hjalsted et al., 2020). Due to its simplicity, EPC is used in this study, but
could be replaced by another sharing principle if one wanted to calculate other absolute thresholds.
EPC is calculated as shown in eq. 7.1 and 7.2. For calculations, see Supplementary Material 3.
SoSOSind(t) =
SOSPB
popWorld(t)
(7.1)
SoSOSind(t) =
SOSCC
popWorld(t)
(7.2)
where:
SoSOSind(t) is the SoSOS allocated for an individual at the time t
SOSPB is the global safe operating space for a given PB
SOSCC is the global safe operating space using CC
popWorld(t) is the world population at the time t
41
==PAGE:48==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
7.3.2
Final Consumption Expenditure
When upscaling to a non-human product system, one must consider how many individuals are a↵ected
by that system. FCE bases its allocation on current consumer preferences. Thus, it does not take
into account that the current consumption is not necessarily sustainable, nor di↵erentiate between
necessary consumption and luxurious consumption. As mentioned, FCE is based on economy - the
more expensive a product, service, activity or sector is, the larger the SoSOS is. In the case of the
kindergarten, it would be assigned a larger share if it had been more expensive. This is not necessarily
a sustainable way of assigning the SoSOS, since economic value and added utility to people are not
necessarily proportional.
FCE for the kindergarten covers the life cycle cost (LCC), which includes building services: construc-
tion, maintenance and operations (water, heat, electricity). Daily maintenance which covers food,
diapers, excursions, etc. is not part of the FCE for the kindergarten.
FCE is calculated as shown in eq. 7.3. For calculations, see Supplementary Material 3.
SoSOSkindergarten(t) = SoSOSind(t) · popkindergarten(t) · FCEkindergarten(t)
(7.3)
where:
SoSOSkindergarten(t) is the SoSOS allocated to the kindergarten at a given time t
SoSOSind(t) is the SoSOS allocated for an individual at the time t
popkindergarten(t) is the no. of users of the kindergaten at a given time t
FCEkindergarten(t) is the FCE for the kindergarten at a given time t
The SoSOS assigned to the kindergarten depends on its lifespan, since it is based on the cost of the
construction and the cost of operational energy. If the lifespan is only 50 or 25 years, the kindergarten
has to be built two and three times, respectively, to comply with the FU. The share will be larger the
shorter the lifespan is, due to the cost of constructing a new kindergarten. The shares assigned for a
lifespan of 25, 50 and 75 years are presented in Table 7. Even though a building lasting only 25 years
would be the least sustainable solution, it is assigned a signiﬁcantly larger share than the buildings
with a lifespan of 50 or 75 years.
FCE
SoSOSs(t)
The kindergarten (lifespan: 25 years)
0.00021 %
The kindergarten (lifespan: 50 years)
0.00014 %
The kindergarten (lifespan: 75 years)
0.00011 %
Table 7: The kindergarten’s SoSOS according to FCE allocation. Depending on the expected lifespan, the SoSOS
varies since it is based on the share of the economy spent on construction and operational energy costs.
42
==PAGE:49==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
7.3.3
Fulﬁlment of Human Needs
The sharing principle FHN is based on fulﬁlling all essential human needs. Those needs have to be
achievable for the entire global population with known technologies within the safe operating space
deﬁned by the PBs (Heide, 2020-2023). It is calculated using equation 7.4 presented below:
SoSOSkindergarten.con = SOSclimate(t)
popworld(t)
·SCeducation · FCEpreschool
FCEeducation
· popkindergarten
poppreschool
· building cost
total cost
(7.4)
where:
SoSOSkindergarten.con is the SoSOS for the construction and operational energy of the kinder-
garten
SOSclimate(t) is global safe operating space for climate change at the time t
popworld(t) is the global population at the time t
SCeducation is the share allocated to education based on the sustainable consumption principle
FCEpreschool is the total economic spending on pre-primary schools in Denmark
FCEeducation is the total economic spending on all education in Denmark (Eurostat, 2019)
popkindergarten is the number of children norms and man years in the kindergarten
poppreschool is the total number of children norms and man years in kindergartens in Denmark
Building cost includes the LCC
Total cost includes the LCC and daily maintenance, food, excursions, etc.
Ideally, the sharing principle should take its starting point in a sustainable consumption pattern, i.e.,
the consumption pattern in an absolute sustainable country. However, no country is absolute sustain-
able if considering the criteria of set by The Footprint Network (2017): Human Development Index
(HDI) > 0.8 and ecological footprint < 1.6 gha, whilst also including GWP < 1 t CO2-eq./capita/year
as done by Bjørn and Hauschild (2015).
Instead, three criteria are introduced which are to be met for a country to qualift as one of the most
sustainable. If those criteria are met, the country’s consumption pattern is used to allocate the SoSOS
to di↵erent consumption categories. The three criteria are:
- HDI > 0.7
- Ecological footprint < 3 gha/person
- Impact on global warming < 5 t CO2-eq/capita/year
43
==PAGE:50==
7
METHOD: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
11 countries worldwide (out of the countries with relevant consumption data available) fulﬁl all three
criteria. Their consumption patterns are thus used to deﬁne an average consumption for 18 di↵erent
consumption categories.
When looking at the average consumption for these countries, 23% of the total is allocated to food.
However, the EAT-Lancet Commission’s report on healthy diets from sustainable food systems (Willett
et al., 2019) states that 5 Gt CO2 eq. per year, corresponding to 15% of the safe operating space
if following IPCC scenario SSP1-1.9, should be allocated to food consumption in order to provide
enough nutrition for all. Therefore, the 8% di↵erence is redistributed onto the other consumption
categories based on their size of the share, resulting in an adjusted average consumption, referred
to as the sustainable consumption principle (Heide, 2020-2023). This results in 8% allocated to the
consumption category education, SCeducation, which the kindergarten belongs to.
Based on data from Eurostat (Eurostat, 2019), FCE is used to downscale the share from educational
level (FCEeducation) to pre-primary schools speciﬁcally (FCEpreschool).
To assess how large a share this speciﬁc kindergarten is assigned, EPC is used. The total number of
children and employees in the kindergarten (popkindergarten) is compared to the total number of children
and employees in kindergartens across Denmark (poppreschoolDK).
The share allocated to building services and daily maintenance, respectively, is found using FCE. Build-
ing services includes construction, maintenance and operation (water, heat and electricity), whereas
daily maintenance covers food, diapers, excursions, etc. (Gladsaxe Kommune, Børne- og Undervis-
ningsudvalget, 2020).
Using FHN, the SoSOS assigned to the kindergarten depending on its lifespan is presented in Table 7.
FHN
SoSOSs(t)
The kindergarten, lifespan: 25 years
0.00045 %
The kindergarten, lifespan: 50 years
0.00041 %
The kindergarten, lifespan: 75 years
0.00039 %
Table 8: The kindergarten’s share of safe operating space calculated using FHN. The share of safe operating
space depends on the lifespan of the building.
Comparing the sharing principles FCE (Table 7) and FHN (Table 8), a larger SoSOS is allocated
to the kindergarten when using FHN. The share decreases when the lifespan is increased for both
principles. However, there is a larger decrease when using FCE. Both principles will be included in
the following results.
44
==PAGE:51==
8
RESULTS: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
8
Results: Absolute Environmental Sustainability
In the following sections, the LCA results of the kindergarten and the AESA are presented. The LCA
of materials and operational energy are conducted separately, since operational energy is calculated
through a dynamic LCA, where three di↵erent scenarios are calculated. This is not possible in LCAbyg,
and therefore, this part of the LCA is calculated using the software SimaPro.
The results of the LCA conducted in SimaPro can be found in Supplementary Material 1, and the
results of the LCA conducted in LCAbyg can be found in Supplementary Material 2.
8.1
LCA of the Kindergarten
Characterisation of the midpoint impact categories is calculated for the materials used for the kinder-
garten. It is calculated for three di↵erent lifespans: 25, 50 and 75 years (all with a temporal consider-
ation of 75 years). The results are presented in Table 9. For data and calculations, see Supplementary
Material 2.
Table 9: Midpoint results for impact categories. The temporal consideration is 75 years for all three cases, but
the expected lifespan of the building varies between 25, 50 and 75 years.
The results presented in Table 9 are the midpoint impact categories calculated for the materials. The
impact category ’climate change’ is used in this study, since climate change is the PB examined. The
other impact categories relate to some of the remaining PBs and thus, the results from the LCA can
be used to compare the kindergarten to absolute thresholds for other PBs, once these thresholds are
established.
In Figure 25, the results for GWP including both materials and operational energy are presented.
There are nine di↵erent scenarios, based on the three di↵erent energy scenarios presented in Table 6
and the three di↵erent assumed lifespans of 25, 50 and 75 years.
45
==PAGE:52==
8
RESULTS: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Figure 25: GWP of the kindergarten. The nine di↵erent scenarios are based on three di↵erent lifespans and three
di↵erent energy scenarios (based on the three energy projections and the three energy consumption scenarios).
The temporal consideration is 75 years for all scenarios.
As expected, Figure 25 shows the importance of the lifespan of a building when assessing the envir-
onmental impact. The ﬁgure shows a tendency; prolonging the lifespan of the building decreases the
total GWP. It might require a thorough renovation at one point, since a large share of the materials
last 80 years. Thus, a lifespan of e.g. 85 years might show a small increase in GWP, but if the building
lasts 100 or 120 years, the total GWP could decrease further.
In all scenarios, material use is the main contributor to GWP. Depending on the lifespan and energy
scenario, the contribution from material use is 62-96%, whereas operational energy contributes with
4-38%. Since the GWP from the materials decrease when increasing the lifespan, the three energy
scenarios play a more important role, the longer the lifespan is. The worst case 75 years (blue in
Figure 25) has a larger GWP than the best case 50 years (green in Figure 25). Thus, in this particular
case, the energy scenario is just as signiﬁcant as the lifespan.
The most commonly used temporal consideration when conducting an LCA of a building is 50 years as
done by DGNB and FBK. However, this is a rather short temporal consideration when comparing to
the actual lifespan of many buildings. The results from Figure 25 show that lifespan is an important
parameter to consider in order to decrease the GWP. In a worst case scenario, where the building
is demolished after 25 years, the total GWP is signiﬁcantly higher compared to when the buildings
lifespan is 75 years. The e↵ect of prolonging the lifespan is more signiﬁcant when increasing from 25
to 50 years, than from 50 to 75 years.
46
==PAGE:53==
8
RESULTS: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
This study seeks to examine whether the kindergarten is absolute sustainable. The building with a
lifespan of 75 years performs best on average and since 75 years is not an unrealistic lifespan for a
building, this is the lifespan assessed going forward.
In Figure 26, the GWP is presented based on type of material. It shows that the solar panels have
the highest impact, followed by concrete, plastic, aluminium and mineral wool. Here, the operational
energy is excluded.
Figure 26: Percentage distribution of the kindergarten’s GWP based on type of material for a lifespan of 75
years.
The high impact from solar panels (solar cells and collectors) can be misleading, since the energy
gained from the solar panels is not accounted for here. Figure 26 does not include the impact from
operational energy, which the solar panels contribute to reducing. This is however accounted for in
the energy performance estimate and thus included in the results combining materials and operational
energy. If the solar panels were not included, the impact from materials would be reduced. However,
this would result in burden-shifting, increasing the impact from operational energy, since the solar
panels produce renewable energy which has lower impact than the Danish electricity mix.
40% of the concrete in the foundations is crushed and utilised concrete from the school. However,
concrete is still the second largest contributor. There is a lot of concrete in the foundation since the
soil beneath the building is soft. The amount of concrete could have been reduced by choosing a
building site with less moist in the ground. For comparison, the amount of concrete in the foundation
of the example one-family house in LCAbyg is investigated (E. B. Jørgensen et al., 2021). Both the
kindergarten and the example one-family house are one-storey houses and thus the foundations are
47
==PAGE:54==
8
RESULTS: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
assumed comparable. The foundation of the one-family house consists of 0.14 m3 concrete per m2. For
the kindergarten, the foundation consists of 0.30 m3 concrete per m2. Thus, there is more than twice
the amount of concrete per m2 in the foundation of the kindergarten. For future projects, it is worth
considering if the soil is suitable to build on, i.e., not too soft or polluted, since it has a signiﬁcant
impact on the amount of concrete needed and thus on the total emissions.
The contribution from plastic is amongst the largest contributors due to the three storm water reser-
voirs built on site. The the impact from the aluminium is mainly from the sills and frames of windows
and the framing of the large glass panels in the orangery. Aluminium has a large potential for recycling,
however it is uncertain if there is room for improvement, since the process data set from Oekobau does
not state the amount of recycled aluminium used. Mineral wool is the ﬁfth largest contributor. Based
on Oekobau’s data on paper wool (Oekobau, 2018a) and mineral wool (Oekobau, 2018b), the impact
could be reduced by approximately 50% by using paper wool with the same thermal conductivity.
8.2
AESA of the Kindergarten
Figure 27 shows the accumulated AESRs for GWP which the kindergarten has to keep within to
be absolute sustainable. Combining the two di↵erent approaches to quantifying the safe operating
space and the two sharing principles results in four AESRs: IPCC FCE, IPCC FHN, CC FCE and
CC FHN.
Figure 27: GWP of the accumulated AESRs (2022-2096). Combining the two di↵erent approaches to quantifying
the safe operating space and the two sharing principles results in four AESRs.
Figure 27 shows how using di↵erent projections and sharing principles inﬂuences the SoSOS assigned
to the kindergarten. When using the IPCC projection, the assigned share of GWP stagnates (green
48
==PAGE:55==
8
RESULTS: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
lines), whereas the combinations using the CC projection start with a smaller share, but shows a linear
increase over time (purple lines). The largest inﬂuence on the share assigned is the choice of sharing
principle.
When using FHN (dotted lines) a signiﬁcantly larger share is allocated to the kindergarten than when
using FCE (solid lines). However, if the lifespan of the building is 25 years, the choice of method used
to quantify the safe operating space also plays a signiﬁcant role, since the IPCC projection has not
yet reached the zero emissions threshold.
In Figure 28 the results of the LCA-based AESA are presented for a lifespan of 75 years. The results
are retrieved from Supplementary Material 3.
Figure 28: The results of the LCA-based AESA for a lifespan of 75 years. Three di↵erent scenarios are presented:
worst case, median case and best case energy scenarios (dark grey) together with the GWP of the materials (light
grey). The horizontal lines present the four absolute thresholds (green and purple) and two thresholds set by
Indenrigs- og Boligministeriet (2021) (yellow and brown).
Figure 28 shows the GWP of the three di↵erent energy scenarios (dark grey: worst case, median case
and best case) combined with the GWP of the materials (light grey). The horizontal lines represent
the absolute thresholds presented in Figure 27 accumulated for 75 years starting in 2022. Furthermore,
the two thresholds set by Indenrigs- og Boligministeriet (2021) as part of the national strategy for
sustainable construction are also shown:
- BR: 12 kg CO2-eq. per m2 per year from 2023 (BR - yellow line)
- FCO2: 8 kg CO2-eq. per m2 per year (Frivillig CO2-klasse (FCO2 - brown line))
49
==PAGE:56==
8
RESULTS: ABSOLUTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
A signiﬁcantly smaller SoSOS is assigned to the kindergarten when using FCE compared to FHN and
the two targets from Indenrigs- og Boligministeriet (2021). If using the CC FCE reference, the impact
from the best case scenario is still four times as high as the assigned share. As mentioned, FCE is
based on Danish consumption patterns, which the cost of the kindergarten is an extremely small part
of. For the share assigned to the kindergarten to be larger, it would either have to be more expensive,
or the total Danish consumption would have to decrease.
The shares assigned using FHN are placed in between the thresholds by Indenrigs- og Boligministeriet
(2021), where the BR threshold assigns the largest share of GWP to the kindergarten. FCO2 assigns
a signiﬁcantly smaller share to the kindergarten compared to both FHN references, which makes the
FCO2 threshold look quite ambitious. FCO2 is however allocated based on number of square metres
(and so is BR), where FHN is allocated based on function, i.e., the service delivered.
FCE is as mentioned based solely on current economic systems (which are not sustainable), and since
the cost of the kindergarten is such a small part of the Danish consumption expenditure, the share
assigned is equally small. FHN is based on more sustainable consumption patterns, which assign a
larger share to education, which is the consumption category of the kindergarten.
An LCA includes a number of assumptions, which a↵ect the results and add some degree of uncer-
tainty. Given these uncertainties and the best case scenario being rather close to reaching the CC FHN
threshold, other assumptions could potentially result in that scenario being assessed as absolute sus-
tainable. On the other hand, the uncertainties could also result in the GWP of the kindergarten being
larger.
One of these assumptions is the lifespan. As mentioned previously, the actual lifespan of a building
is an unknown factor. If the kindergarten had a lifespan of e.g. 100 years, it might be assessed as
absolute sustainable, if aiming at the CC FHN reference.
50
==PAGE:57==
9
A DOUGHNUT FOR THE KINDERGARTEN
9
A Doughnut for the Kindergarten
The doughnut presented in Figure 29 shows the visualisation of SDG Measure 2.0. It includes the
results of the absolute social targets found in Section 6.2, constituting the social foundation, together
with the absolute environmental targets based on the PBs, out of which the target for climate change
has been assessed in Section 8.2. These form the environmental ceiling.
Figure 29: The ﬁnal absolute sustainability results for the kindergarten for SDG 3, SDG 12 and climate change.
The outer circle represents the PBs, out of which climate change is the only one assessed. The middle circle
shows the SDGs investigated. The inner circle indicates if the targets are absolute sustainable or not. Some
targets are not yet measurable, since they are related to a part of the life cycle which is not yet reached.
Since several of the targets for SDG 12 are marked as not absolute sustainable, and none of the
calculated AESRs for climate change are met, the kindergarten is not assessed as absolute sustainable
in this study. As part of Mia Heide’s PhD, (Heide, 2020-2023), the remaining relevant SDGs will be
added to SDG Measure 2.0. Not all PBs are equally relevant for the Danish building sector, but for
those that are, AESRs will be established, too.
51
==PAGE:58==
10
DISCUSSION
10
Discussion
10.1
Absolute Social Sustainability
Working with social sustainability in absolute terms is still a relatively unexplored ﬁeld. SDG Measure
2.0 is a ﬁrst step towards working with absolute social targets in a systematic and informed way by
translating the global perspective of the SDGs into an operational level for the Danish building sector.
The existing methods, such as the Product Social Impact Assessment, the Social LCA and the SDG
Assessment Method, are either not developed based on the SDGs or are lacking the absolute perspective
(Heide et al., 2021).
Thoughts Behind SDG Measure 2.0
The intention of the tool is to guide the Danish building sector in an absolute sustainable direction
by working with both social and environmental aspects. Even if the building assessed does not end
up being absolute sustainable, which is the case for the kindergarten, the process of working with
absolute sustainability overall will hopefully result in a more sustainable project and an sustainable
awareness that future projects can beneﬁt from.
SDG Measure 2.0 is created to ﬁt all building types. Thus, it must be versatile and generic. A future
feature of the tool is to develop targets that are building type speciﬁc. E.g. when creating a concert
hall, the tool could set a more ambitious target regarding acoustics. Some sub-goals or indicators
will be labeled as obligatory when using SDG Measure 2.0 and additional indicators can be made
speciﬁcally for a given project with a certain focus. Some indicators might be more relevant for some
projects than others. In some cases, certain indicators might even be disregarded.
When using the results from SDG Measure 2.0, it is important to make it transparent and avoid
greenwashing. I.e., stating which SDGs and sub-goals have been included and which are excluded. If
a building is assessed as absolute sustainable based on the selected SDGs for that speciﬁc project, it is
important to emphasise that we do not know if it is absolute sustainable when including all SDGs and
sub-goals. It is suggested that the guide on environmental marketing by the consumer ombudsman
(Forbrugerombudsmanden, 2021) is followed when presenting the results.
Deﬁning Absolute Social Targets
Deﬁning an absolute target, when something is good enough, is a new way of thinking. For some
indicators, it is simple. For others, it can be diﬃcult due to the qualitative and subjective nature
of the indicators, and because the indicators emerge from either new concepts, ideas or approaches,
where no or only little experience is yet drawn. In those cases, expert interviews are often used to
52
==PAGE:59==
10
DISCUSSION
form an objective basis for a certain absolute target. However, experts do not necessarily agree on
when something is good enough, and it is questionable if experts can be said to be purely objective.
Therefore, some of the targets are formulated to encourage the client to take some important social
aspects into consideration, without any quantitative measures. This is likely to expand the social
focus in the projects.
The targets regarding absolute social sustainability are more subjective than the targets set for absolute
environmental sustainability, and it can be diﬃcult to see the actual e↵ect of the initiatives. For
environmental sustainability, we can measure the e↵ect of e.g. building with reused materials. Not
all e↵ects from social targets are as easily and immediately measurable and thus, it might take time
before the outcome of implementing these targets can be observed.
In this study, the absolute social targets are assessed as either good enough (green) or not good
enough (red). There is no degree or scale on how well the performance is. From a Danish building
sector perspective, absolute sustainability targets might not be as attractive to work with as relative
sustainability, where the focus is on progress or regress and how one’s project performs in comparison
with others. It is important to state that having a red target does not mean that a building performs
worse than other buildings. It means that it is not living up to the minimum threshold for absolute
social sustainability and could and should be improved.
Denmark performs well on many social aspects (University of Leeds, 2018). Hence, the absolute social
targets presented in this report are quite ambitious in a global perspective and maybe too ambitious
for some other countries. However, the targets are mainly deﬁned based on the ideal goal - e.g. the
target of zero deaths on the construction site - despite knowing that accidents happen and an employee
on a building site is more exposed to a dangerous environment than an employee in an oﬃce.
It is however a concern if creating too ambitious targets could result in demotivating the developers
in the building sector, if the goals from the beginning of a project seem impossible to reach.
To
accommodate these challenges, it could be interesting to incorporate a scale of red and green to SDG
Measure 2.0, indicating how far from or close to the threshold a project is.
Interlinkages
The SDGs are interlinked. Progress within one target can lead to progress or regress within another.
This also applies for the targets formulated for SDG Measure 2.0. E.g., fulﬁlling the SDG 12 indicator
minimising, sorting and disposing waste on the construction site can lead to a positive side e↵ect
of reducing the carbon footprint, which is part of the goal for SDG 13 - Climate Action. However,
it is important to be aware of the risk of counteracting one goal if overperforming on another. I.e.,
53
==PAGE:60==
10
DISCUSSION
achieving good enough for one target might cause other targets to fall short. An example was given
in Section 5.1: to fulﬁl the SDG 3 indicator Atmospheric indoor climate: air quality, a certain level
of air quality has to be complied with, but a high air exchange requires a lot of energy, which could
challenge the possibilities of reaching energy eﬃciency targets within SDG 7 - A↵ordable and clean
energy. This has not been an issue when formulating indicators and targets for SDG 3 and 12, but
it is important to consider interlinkages when formulating indicators and targets for the remaining
SDGs, so that it does not end up being impossible to achieve overall absolute sustainability.
Needs vs. Luxuries
As mentioned in Section 4.1 regarding human well-being, we have to distinguish between needs and
luxuries if the global population is to achieve well-being, but how to draw the line?
Some buildings seem more important than others, such as hospitals, schools and residential buildings.
Others are more open to discussion - is a concert hall for example an actual need or a luxury? Can it
ever be absolute sustainable to build a concert hall? Maybe if it is built with multipurposes in mind?
On one hand, it can be argued that as long as some people lack a home, a concert hall can never
be considered a necessity. On the other hand, it can be argued that culture and music are part of
human well-being and the purpose in life. But if so, is it necessary to construct a building to fulﬁl
that purpose alone?
According to Rogers et al. (2012), ”we need to avoid a one-model-ﬁts-all approach to well-being.
Instead, we must develop measures ... reﬂecting the diversity of cultures, environments and circum-
stances, and the multidimensionality of the concept of well-being itself”. Thus, well-being might be
universal, but it can be obtained through various means. Therefore, it is indeed diﬃcult to draw the
line of which types of buildings are necessities and which are luxuries.
10.2
Absolute Environmental Sustainability
LCA
When conducting an LCA a signiﬁcant amount of assumptions and modelling choices must be made.
The LCA-software LCAbyg provides the opportunity of taking a dynamic approach by incorporating
a projection for both electricity and heating (including a choice of heating type) in Denmark. LCAbyg
causes some limitations, since it does not provide the possibility of a dynamic LCA approach when it
comes to projecting future emissions from materials. This is relevant when considering the emissions
from replacements (stage B4). The energy used to manufacture materials could follow the projection
for energy in the manufacturing country, creating a dynamic LCA approach for the materials, too.
54
==PAGE:61==
10
DISCUSSION
Furthermore, new technologies, production methods or new types of materials, which might inﬂuence
the carbon footprint of the buildings, are not considered. Some of these could be foreseen and included
in the LCA - others, are completely unknown as yet and therefore, it is impossible to determine an
estimate. Thus, when modelling a product system with a long lifespan (as for a building) we need to
accept a number of uncertainties.
As mentioned earlier, electricity and heat are only projected until 2050 for the scenarios Frozen and
CBP (DTU, 2018) and until 2040 for LCAbyg (Traﬁk-, Bygge-, og Boligstyrelsen, 2021). The energy
mix in 2040 is used for LCAbyg for the remaining part of the temporal consideration (from 2041-2096),
and for Frozen and CBP the energy mix from 2050 is used for the remaining years (2051-2096). Thus,
there is no development in the energy mix after 2050. This is a limitation to the study, making the
operational energy input uncertain for a large share of the temporal consideration. Alternatively, the
energy mix could have been assumed carbon neutral from a given year, and a linear regression between
2050 and that year could have been made. However, this would add yet another assumption.
Reused Materials
It is interesting (especially to NIRAS) to calculate how much the kindergarten has reduced the carbon
footprint by focusing on circularity and incorporating reused materials, compared to a similar building
project without this focus. Therefore, an LCA is conducted using similar virgin materials instead of
the reused materials. The assessment shows that the kindergarten built with virgin materials would
emit 1.4 kg CO2-eq. per m2 per year more than the circular kindergarten (see Supplementary Material
2). It is important to note that the reused materials are substituted with similar virgin materials.
Some of the materials are slightly unconventional - e.g., the use of roof tiles as facade cladding - and
thus, if a similar kindergarten was built without reusing old materials from the school, other choices
of materials might have been made, leading to di↵erent assessment results.
Currently, there is no guideline on how to incorporate reused materials in LCAbyg: how to assess
the lifespan, the amount of energy spent on preparing the materials for reuse or how to model the
replacements. Reusing materials is gaining ground across the Danish building sector, which stresses
the relevance of a common point of reference. Thus, it would be ideal to develop a guideline to make
sure that the same methodology is used across the sector.
Lifespan
Calculating the impact from the kindergarten with a lifespan of 25 years is done by multiplying the
LCA results by three to fulﬁl the FU. As mentioned earlier, LCAbyg does not include a projection for
emissions from the manufacturing of materials. A new kindergarten built in 25 years will probably
55
==PAGE:62==
10
DISCUSSION
have a smaller carbon footprint than the one built today, which is not accounted for.
Thus, the
assessment in this study is more conservative.
When assessing absolute environmental sustainability, the assumed lifespan of the building is of signi-
ﬁcant importance. The tendency seen in Figure 25 indicates that there might be a chance of reaching
a lifespan at which the kindergarten could be assessed as absolute environmental sustainable in terms
of climate change. E.g., if the kindergarten lasts for 100 years, it might end up within the threshold
of CC FHN or IPCC FHN. However, climate change and population is only projected until 2100 and
thus, an absolute assessment for a building with a lifespan of 100 years would require additional
assumptions adding more uncertainty.
It would be interesting to investigate if there is an optimal lifespan for the kindergarten. Many of
the materials used have a lifespan of 80 years thus and a thorough renovation is required around that
time. To beneﬁt from the renovation, the kindergarten would have to last a considerable amount of
years afterwards. The standard lifespan for structural elements made of steel, concrete and wood is
120 years in LCAbyg, and thus maybe that is the optimal lifespan?
Data Uncertainties and Methodological Choices
Sensitivities are related to the data uncertainty of material ﬂows and operational energy and the meth-
odological assumptions (Hauschild et al., 2018). Sensitivities and uncertainties are inevitable when
modelling large product systems such as the kindergarten. The degree of sensitivity and uncertainty
inﬂuences the reliability of the ﬁnal results and hence, the conclusions and recommendations.
The sensitivity of data uncertainties could be investigated through a Monte Carlo simulation, which
performs a risk analysis where a range of values are substituted for any parameter that has inherent
uncertainty (Hauschild et al., 2018). In this study, the LCA is meant to explore the absolute sustain-
ability of the kindergarten, as part of the AESA. And thus, a sensitivity analysis of the materials has
not been carried out.
Instead, the inﬂuence of methodological choices is investigated by assessing di↵erent approaches to
quantifying the safe operating space and di↵erent sharing principles.
The choice of sharing prin-
ciple was found to have signiﬁcant importance, resulting in high sensitivity of the ﬁnal results. This
sensitivity is discussed in the following section.
Sharing the Safe Operating Space
Both the IPCC and the carrying capacity projections are uncertain. We cannot know if the thresholds
that these projections use are absolute or not. Maybe the ES will destabilise even if we stay within a
56
==PAGE:63==
10
DISCUSSION
maximum temperature rise of 2°C or 1.5°C. Projections are based on several assumptions, which will
always lead to some degree of uncertainty.
Due to the many di↵erent variables included when assigning a SoSOS, it is possible to calculate
numerous other AESRs than the ones presented in this study. One could use a di↵erent population
projection, a di↵erent approach to quantifying the safe operating space, or another sharing principle.
Because there are so many di↵erent ways of calculating the AESR, there is not one common threshold
which we can deﬁne as the absolute environmental sustainability reference.
One can choose the
threshold which is most beneﬁcial in a given case, and thus a project might be assessed as absolute
sustainable with one approach and far from absolute sustainable with another approach. As the results
for the kindergarten showed, the GWP of the kindergarten was rather close to the AESRs calculated
with FHN, but far from the AESRs calculated using FCE.
This is also the case when deciding which sharing principle to use. One can choose the methodology
which suits the situation the best. Grandfathering might be beneﬁcial to use in the Global North, since
it distributes the safe operating space based on the actual status quo distribution of environmental
impact, i.e., assigns a larger share to those who already have high emissions. A sharing principle such
as ability to pay aims to prioritise those who are worst o↵(Hjalsted et al., 2020). Hence, di↵erent
sharing principles can lead to very di↵erent conclusions and it is important to be critical of and justify
why a certain principle is used. Therefore, this study uses the framework developed by Ryberg et
al. (2020) for selecting sharing principles. However, none of the current sharing principles consider
the added utility to people, which is why Ryberg et al. (2020) also recommends further research on
development of new sharing principles.
FCE, which is used in this study, indicates that the more expensive something is, the more important
it is.
It encourages spending more money on e.g.
a building to get a larger share of the CO2-
budget. Since neither the current global economy nor the Danish is absolute sustainable, it seems
contradictory to calculate an absolute threshold based on that. When using FCE to assign a share
for the kindergarten, it is done based on the cost of the kindergarten. Denmark is a rather wealthy
country, spending a large share of its economy on luxuries such as alcohol, clothes, furniture, etc.
whilst also emitting more CO2 than ”allowed” when using EPC. The economic cost of a product does
not reﬂect the importance of the need it fulﬁls. Thus, the Danish consumption is not sustainable and
hence, a strange benchmark to use for sharing the safe operating space.
Because FCE is part of the calculation when using FHN, it includes the same ﬂaw, although to a
lesser extent. FHN does start o↵by dividing the safe operating space between di↵erent consumption
57
==PAGE:64==
10
DISCUSSION
categories based on the currently most sustainable countries worldwide (based on the selected criteria).
It might not be ideal, but in the absence of an absolute sustainable country, it is an attempt to use a
more sustainable approach for dividing the SoSOS.
The AESRs determined with FHN allow a larger share than the voluntary threshold set by Indenrigs-
og Boligministeriet (2021) (FCO2). FCO2 is allocated based on number of square metres (the same
applies for the BR threshold), whereas FHN is allocated based on the service provided - in this case,
the children norms and man years in the kindergarten. It could be argued that a building’s SoSOS
should not be based on how expensive it is nor how many square metres it is, but the utility delivered
to its users. If using either FCE, or aiming at the thresholds set by Indenrigs- og Boligministeriet
(2021), it is beneﬁcial to either built more expensive or additional square metres to obtain a larger
SoSOS. This is problematic, since neither the amount of square metres nor the price of a building
reﬂects the importance of the need the given building fulﬁls.
Absolute Environmental Sustainable?
The kindergarten is assessed as not absolute environmental sustainable when looking at climate change.
However, the data uncertainty linked to the LCA and the methodological uncertainty linked to the
choice of sharing principle have considerable inﬂuence on the results. The estimated lifespan is also
of signiﬁcant importance when assessing whether or not the kindergarten is absolute environmental
sustainable. Thus, if other assumptions, modelling or method choices were made throughout the LCA,
the climate change impact could potentially be smaller (or larger), resulting in a di↵erent conclusion.
Assuming a scenario where the kindergarten’s LCA results are below one of the AESRs, but above the
three other references, would it then be assessed as absolute sustainable? Looking into all these di↵er-
ent principles and scenarios, it is diﬃcult to choose which one is the most meaningful, when deﬁning
whether or not a building is assessed as absolute environmental sustainable. Which combination is
most sound, fair or beneﬁcial? And who decides? The choice of sharing principle seems to be one of
the most important methodological choices that has to be made, and thus it is important to justify
this choice.
As mentioned, none of the current sharing principles consider the added utility to people (Ryberg
et al., 2020), which is why FHN is tested in this study. FHN reﬂects the fulﬁlment of a need for
the users of the given product. FHN assigns a larger share to the kindergarten than FCE and thus,
some other product system must get a smaller share. Which need or utility that this a↵ects remains
unknown, but it is worth considering that assigning a larger share to one product system will result
in a smaller share somewhere else when working in absolute terms.
58
==PAGE:65==
10
DISCUSSION
10.3
Living within the Doughnut
This study applies and operationalise the Doughnut theory, translating it into an absolute perspective
in terms of social and environmental sustainability. This is done in a Danish building sector context.
A few of the social targets are not absolute sustainable for the case study, and there is some work to do
if the Danish building sector or Denmark is to become absolute sustainable regarding climate change,
but it does not seem impossible. However, is it possible worldwide? If we in Denmark - or the Global
North generally - change our consumption patterns to a more environmental sustainable alternative,
e.g. by taking fewer vacations by plane and buying less clothes, will it result in a setback to those
people and countries who make a living o↵of tourism or producing clothes? Will more environmental
sustainable habits make the social foundation harder to reach globally?
According to Rogers et al. (2012), ”the primary social and economic change required to move towards
environmental sustainability ... may also be the change that will do most to increase human well-
being”. And thus, maybe a combination of more environmental sustainable consumption patterns,
increased circularity of materials and a development in renewable energy could bring us below the
environmental ceiling, without compromising the principle of leaving no one behind. Thereby, we
could reach a state where we are able to live within the safe operating space of the Doughnut.
59
==PAGE:66==
11
CONCLUSION
11
Conclusion
This study provides the foundation for the tool, SDG Measure 2.0, for measuring absolute sustain-
ability in the Danish building sector. For SDG 3 and 12, absolute social sub-goals, indicators and
targets are formulated with a full life cycle perspective. The process of working with these sub-goals,
indicators and targets should lead the Danish building sector in a social sustainable direction.
SDG Measure 2.0 is tested on a kindergarten. Some targets are not yet measurable, since the kinder-
garten is still under construction. For SDG 3, all targets currently measurable are assessed as absolute
sustainable. For SDG 12, four targets, out of the currently measurable, are assessed as not absolute
sustainable. All four belonging to the sub-goal Design for longevity. The kindergarten is designed
with a focus on increasing circularity of materials. However, there is a lack of awareness regarding
prolonging the lifespan of the building.
An LCA-based AESA is carried out for the kindergarten, focusing on the impact category climate
change. The majority of the contribution to GWP is from material use, which contributes with 62-
96%, depending on the lifespan and choice of energy scenario. Operational energy contributes with
4-38%. The main contributors are solar panels, concrete, plastic and aluminium, accounting for more
than 50% of the material use altogether.
Depending on the choice of method for quantiﬁcation and allocation of the safe operating space, the
AESR can vary signiﬁcantly. However, the choice of sharing principle shows a greater inﬂuence than
the choice of approach to quantifying the safe operating space. The combination of quantifying the safe
operating space by using carrying capacity and applying FHN allocation results in the largest share
assigned to the kindergarten. When using FCE, regardless of which approach is used for quantifying
the safe operating space, the kindergarten is far from absolute sustainable. However, no matter which
AESR is used, the kindergarten is assessed as not absolute environmental sustainable in terms of
climate change.
The results from the absolute social and environmental sustainability assessments of the kindergarten
are combined and visualised using the Doughnut theory, where the targets from SDG 3 and 12 con-
stitute the social foundation and the nine PBs - out of which climate change is assessed - form the
environmental ceiling. Even though the kindergarten is not assessed as absolute sustainable, this study
conﬁrms that it is possible to apply the Doughnut theory to a speciﬁc building project. Working with
and applying absolute social and environmental targets can guide the Danish building sector towards
absolute sustainability.
60
==PAGE:67==
REFERENCES
References
Aagaard, N. J., Brandt, E., Aggerholm, S. & Haugbølle, K. (2013). SBi 2013:30 Levetider af bygn-
ingsdele ved vurdering af bæredygtighed og totaløkonomi. SBI forlag.
Arbejdstilsynet. (2020). Arbejdsulykker i byggeriet 2015-2019. at.dk/media/6533/faktaark-ulykker-
byggeriet.pdf
Bernstein, I. (2004). Likert scale analysis. encyclopedia of social measurement (pp. 497-504). University
of Texas.
Bjørn, A., Chandrakumar, C., Boulay1, A., Doka, G., Fang, K., Gondran, N., Hauschild, M., A.,
K., King, H., Margni, M., McLaren, S., Mueller, C., Owsianiak, M., Peters, G., Roos, S.,
Sala, S., Sandin, G., Sim, S., Vargas-Gonzalez, M. & Ryberg, M. (2020). Review of life-cycle
based methods for absolute environmental sustainability assessment and their applications.
Environmental Research Letters.
Bjørn, A. & Hauschild, M. (2015). Introducing carrying capacity-based normalisation in lca: Frame-
work and development of references at midpoint level. International Journal of Life Cycle
Assessment.
BMI. (2021). Oekobaudat, german federal ministry of the interior, building and community. oekobaudat.
de/no cache/en/database/search.html
Clark, D. & McGillivray, M. (2007). Measuring human well-being: Key ﬁndings and policy lessons.
United Nations University.
Danish Standards Association. (2017). Ds474:1993 - code for indoor thermal climate. sd.ds.dk/Post?
ProjectNr=16922%5C&Status=90.20
Danmarks Statistik. (2021). Byg1: Beskæftigede ved bygge og anlæg efter branche (db07), art og
sæsonkorrigering [Last visited on 13-01-2022]. statistikbanken.dk/byg1
Danmarks Statistik og 2030-Panelet. (2020). Gør verdensm˚al til vores m˚al. www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/
Sdg/aktiviteter/danske-maalepunkter
DTU. (2018). Energiaftalen. energiaftalen.tokni.com/about
DTU. (2019). Menneskers p˚avirkning af indeklima kortlægges. dtu.dk/nyheder/2019/05/paavirkning-
af-indeklima-kortlaegges?id=b2a70182-3ef5-4212-b7d8-3caac2959510
Eurostat. (2019). General government expenditure by function (cofog). ec . europa . eu / eurostat /
databrowser/view/GOV 10A EXP custom 933896/default/%20%5C%5C%20table?lang=en
EXHAUSTO A/S. (2022). Indeklima og personlig ventilation [Last visited on 03-01-2022]. exhausto.
dk/projektering/Working%5C%20-%5C%20Kontorventilation/Indeklima
61
==PAGE:68==
REFERENCES
Eyring, V., Gillett, N. P., Rao, K. M. A., Barimalala, R., Parrillo, M. B., Bellouin, N., Cassou, C.,
Durack, P. J., Kosaka, Y., McGregor, S., Min, S., Morgenstern, O. & Sun, Y. (2021). Human
inﬂuence on the climate system. in climate change 2021: The physical science basis. contribution
of working group i to the sixth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate
change. Cambridge University Press. In Press.
Forbrugerombudsmanden. (2021). Kvikguide til virksomheder om miljømarkedsføring [Last visited on
13-01-2022]. forbrugerombudsmanden.dk/media/56731/kvikguide-om-miljoemarkedsfoering.
pdf
Gamle Mursten. (2017). Used bricks (whole and half), machine cleaned and hand sorted.
Gladsaxe Kommune, Børne- og Undervisningsudvalget. (2020). Referat 4. juni 2020 kl. 16.30. dagsordener.
gladsaxe.dk/vis?id=5b00abf7-51f8-44a2-9643-fd6656c65e75
Gladsaxe Municipality. (2020). Verdensm˚alsuge: Gladsaxe bygger verdens første cirkulære børnehus
[Last visited on 20-01-2022]. https : / / gladsaxe . dk / kommunen / kommunen / nyhedsarkiv /
verdensmaalsuge-gladsaxe-bygger-verdens-foerste-cirkulaere-boernehus
Gough, I. (2019). Necessities and luxuries: How to combine redistribution with sustainable consump-
tion - chapter in ’What next for sustainable development? Our common future at thirty’.
Edward Elgar Publishing.
Gough, I., McGregor, J. & Camﬁeld, L. (2007). Theorising wellbeing in international development -
chapter in ’Wellbeing in developing countries: From theory to research’. Cambridge University
Press.
Hauschild, M. (2015). Better - but is it good enough? on the need to consider both eco-eﬃciency and
eco-e↵ectiveness to gauge industrial sustainability. Procedia CIRP 29: 1–7.
Hauschild, M., Rosenbaum, R. & Olsen, S. (2018). Life cycle assessment - theory and practice. Springer
International Publishing AG.
Heide, M., Skrøder, N., Ste↵en, S., Hauschild, M. & Ryberg, M. (2021). Framework for selecting and
setting boundaries for social sustainability indicators in a life cycle perspective. Accepted at
the 2nd International Conference on Circularity in the Built Environment.
Heide, M. (2020-2023). PhD: Operationalization of the UNs sustainable development goals in absolute
sustainability assessments of the building industry in denmark. orbit.dtu.dk/en/persons/mia-
heide
Hjalsted, A., Laurent, A., Andersen, M., Olsen, K., Ryberg, M. & Hauschild, M. (2020). Sharing the
safe operating space - exploring ethical allocation principles to operationalize the planetary
boundaries and assess absolute sustainability at individual and industrial sector levels. Journal
of Cleaner Production.
62
==PAGE:69==
REFERENCES
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Jacob, D., Taylor, M., Bindi, M., Brown, S., Camilloni, I., Diedhiou, A., Djalante,
R., Ebi, K., Engelbrecht, F., Guiot, J., Hijioka, Y., Mehrotra, S., Payne, A., Seneviratne, S.,
Thomas, A., Warren, R. & Zhou, G. (2018). Impacts of 1.5°c global warming on natural
and human systems. Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of
global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change,
sustainable development, and e↵orts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O.
P¨ortner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. P´ean, R. Pid-
cock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock,
M. Tignor, and T. Waterﬁeld (eds.)]. In Press.
Indenrigs- og Boligministeriet. (2021). National strategi for bæredygtigt byggeri. im.dk/publikationer/
2021/apr/national-strategi-for-baeredygtigt-byggeri
Jørgensen, E. B., Kanafani, K., Zimmermann, R. K., Sørensen, C. G., Birgisdottir, H. & Rasmussen,
F. N. (2021). Brugervejledning til LCAbyg version 5.2.
Jørgensen, N. (2020). Indeklima, oversigt. sundhed.dk/borger/patienthaandbogen/sundhedsoplysning/
indeklima/indeklima-oversigt/
Lade, S., Ste↵en, W., de Vries, W., Carpenter, S., Donges, J., Gerten, D., Ho↵, H., Newbold, T.,
Richardson, K. & Rockstr¨om, J. (2020). Human impacts on planetary boundaries ampliﬁed by
earth system interactions. Nature Sustainability.
Mathes, E. W. (1970). Motivation and personality - second edition. New York: Harper and Row.
Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet. (2020). A↵aldsstatistik 2019 - miljøprojekt nr. 2152. www2.mst.dk/
Udgiv/publikationer/2020/12/978-87-7038-249-6.pdf
Miljøstyrelsen. (2020). A↵aldsstatistik 2019. www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/publikationer/2020/12/978-87-
7038-249-6.pdf
NIRAS. (2020). Børnehuset p˚a tobaksvejen - energirammenotat.
OECD. (2018). Global material resources outlook to 2060. oecd.org/environment/waste/highlights-
global-material-resources-outlook-to-2060.pdf
Oekobau. (2018a). Process data set: Cellulose ﬁbre blowing insulation material; 45 kg/m3 (en) [Last
visited on 19-01-2022]. oekobaudat.de/OEKOBAU.DAT/datasetdetail/process.xhtml?uuid=
c355d75b-9026-4899-a41c-e5d221c424f2&version=20.19.120
Oekobau. (2018b). Process data set: Mineral wool (blowable); 50kg/m3 (en) [Last visited on 19-01-
2022]. oekobaudat.de/OEKOBAU.DAT/datasetdetail/process.xhtml?uuid=601af947-1f14-
474d-8233-780715a12268&version=20.19.120
63
==PAGE:70==
REFERENCES
O’Neill, D., Fanning, A., Lamb, W. & Steinberger, J. (2018). A good life for all within planetary
boundaries. Scientiﬁc American.
Oxfarm Media Brieﬁng. (2020). Confronting carbon inequality. Oxfarm Meidia Brieﬁng. oxfamilibrary.
openrepository.com/bitstream/handle/10546/621052/mb- confronting- carbon- inequality-
210920-en.pdf
Petersen, S. & Hviid, C. A. (2021). Kronik: Tvivlsomme beregninger af byggeri kan skævvride kli-
maindsats. Ingeniøren.
Raworth, K. (2017a). The doughnut of social and planetary boundaries. kateraworth.com/doughnut/
Raworth, K. (2012). Safe and just space for humanity: Can we live within the doughnut? Oxfam.
Raworth, K. (2017b). A doughnut for the Anthropocene: Humanity’s compass in the 21st century.
The Lancet.
Rockstr¨om, J., Ste↵en, W., Noone, K., Persson, A., Stuart III Chapin, F., Lambin, E., Lenton, T.,
Sche↵er, M., Folke, S., C., H.J., B., Nykvist, de Wit, C., Hughes, T., van der Leeuw, S.,
Rodhe, H., S¨orlin, S., Snyder, P., Costanza, R., Svedin, U., Falkenmark, M., . . . Foley, J.
(2009). Planetary boundaries: Exploring the safe operating space for humanity. Ecology and
Society.
Rogers, D., Duraiappah, A., Antons, D., Munoz, P., Bai, X., Fragkias, M. & Gutscher, H. (2012). A
vision for human well-being: Transition to social sustainability. Environmental Sustainability.
Ryberg, M., Andersen, M., Owsianiak, M. & Hauschild, M. (2020). Downscaling the planetary bound-
aries in absolute environmental sustainability assessments - a review. Journal of Cleaner Pro-
duction.
Ryberg, M., Owsianiak, M., Clavreul, J., Mueller, C., Sim, S., King, H. & Hauschild, M. (2018). How
to bring absolute sustainability into decision-making: An industry case study using a planetary
boundary-based methodology. Science of the Total Environment, 634, 1406-1416.
Ste↵en, W., Richardson, K., Rockstr¨om, J., Cornell, S., Fetzer, I., Bennett, E., Biggs, R., Carpenter, S.,
de Vries, W., de Wit, C., Folke, C., Gerten, D., Heinke, J., Mace, G., Persson, L., Ramanathan,
V., Reyers, B. & S¨orlin, S. (2015a). Planetary boundaries [[Illustration by J. Lokrantz/Azote
based on Ste↵en et al. (2015). Accessed Sept-02-2021]]. stockholmresilience.org/research/
planetary-boundaries.html
Ste↵en, W., Richardson, K., Rockstr¨om, J., Cornell, S., Fetzer, I., Bennett, E., Biggs, R., Carpenter, S.,
de Vries, W., de Wit, C., Folke, C., Gerten, D., Heinke, J., Mace, G., Persson, L., Ramanathan,
V., Reyers, B. & S¨orlin, S. (2015b). Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a
changing planet. Science.
Sundhedsstyrelsen. (2020). Stress - tal og fakta. sst.dk/da/Viden/Mental-sundhed/Stress/Tal-og-fakta
64
==PAGE:71==
REFERENCES
The Footprint Network. (2017). Sustainable development [Last visited on 13-01-2022]. footprintnetwork.
org/our-work/sustainable-development/
Traﬁk-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen. (2020). Vejledning om den frivillige bæredygtighedsklasse.
Traﬁk-, Bygge-, og Boligstyrelsen. (2021). Opdaterede emissionsfaktorer for el og fjernvarme.
UN. (2019). World population prospects 2019. population.un.org/wpp/DeﬁnitionOfProjectionVariants/
UN. (2021a). The 17 goals [[Accessed Nov-24-2021]]. sdgs.un.org/%5C#goal section
UN. (2021b). Goal 12. sdgs.un.org/goals/goal12
UN. (2021c). Goal 3. sdgs.un.org/goals/goal3
UN. (2021d). The SDGs in action. undp.org/sustainable-development-goals
UN. (2022). What does the 2030 agenda say about universal values? [Last visited on 12-01-2022].
unsdg.un.org/2030-agenda/universal-values
UNDP. (2018). What does it mean to leave no one behind? - A UNDP discussion paper and framework
for implementation. UNDP.
UNDP. (2022). What are the sustainable development goals? [Last visited on 17-01-2022]. sdg -
accelerator.org/content/sdg-accelerator/en/home/sdg-presa.html
UNEP SBCI. (2009). Buildings and climate change: Summary for decision-makers. UNEP. wedocs.
unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/32152/BCC SDM.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
University of Leeds. (2018). Country comparisons - a good life for all within planetary boundaries.
goodlife.leeds.ac.uk/national-snapshots/countries/
van der Harst, E., Potting, J. & Kroeze, C. (2016). Comparison of di↵erent methods to include recycling
in lcas of aluminium cans and disposable polystyrene cups. Waste Management.
Willett, W., Rockstrom, J., Loken, B., Springmann, M., Lang, T., Vermeulen, S., Garnett, T., Tilman,
D., DeClerck, F., Wood, A., Jonell, M., Clark, M., Gordon, L., Fanzo, J., Hawkes, C., Zurayk,
R., Rivera, J. A., De Vries, W., Sibanda, L., . . . Murray, C. (2019). Food in the anthropocene:
The EAT–lancet commission on healthy diets from sustainable food systems. The Lancet.
65
==PAGE:72==
APPENDIX A
Appendices
Appendix A
66
==PAGE:73==
Each indicator is described with a headline, a short description and one to four questions. 
A building will be determined absolute social sustainable in SDG 3 and 12 when all indicators are answered by “yes” and for 
the user surveys a sufficient level is reached when 90% reply slightly agree or agree. The 10% dissatisfaction rate is based on 
the principles from indoor climate theory (DS474:1993 (rettet 2017-udgave)). 
1
Well-being at the 
workplace
Health at the 
workplace 
Safe work 
environment
Design, development and 
review of health and safety 
programs
Mental work 
environment during 
construction and 
planning of the project
Sick leave with stress 
during construction and 
planning of the project
Visual indoor climate: 
daylight, lighting and 
direct sunlight
Atmospheric indoor 
climate: air quality
Acoustic comfort: 
sound and noise level
Thermal indoor 
climate: temperature
Promote healthy 
indoor climate in 
existing and new 
construction
Buildings' support of 
human well-being
Design for safe use
Building functions and 
user needs
Experience of the 
environment in and 
around the building
GOAL
#3 – ENSURE HEALTHY LIVES AND PROMOTE WELL-
BEING FOR ALL AT ALL AGES
BEACON DESCRIPTION
IN THE CONTEXT OF THE DANISH BUILIDNG  SECTOR
Danish construction should work towards improving the indoor climate in existing construction and 
creating a good indoor climate in new constructions. We spend 90% of our time indoors, which is 
why the indoor climate is an important factor for our health: a good indoor climate creates 
improved productivity, learning and satisfaction and reduces illness. On the other hand, a bad 
indoor climate can lead to nausea, fatigue, headaches, irritation of the mucous membranes of the 
eyes, nose, throat and respiratory tract. 
Buildings must support well-being both inside and outside (around and on buildings), and among 
other things contribute to good physical and mental health / well-being through the design of 
outdoor spaces with a good outdoor climate and by meeting the needs of users. 
The frequency of accidents at work in the construction industry is more than twice as high as for 
the labor market in general in Denmark. 70% of the damage occurs on the construction site, 
therefore the construction industry has a great potential for improvement for safety. 
Stress is a major public health problem, which is why mental health and especially stress prevention 
in the workplace is something all Danish companies should work with. 
Reducing both physical and mental occupational injuries will reduce sick leave, thus there is a 
financial gain from increased mental health and fewer occupational injuries as well. 
(SDG 3 is very much related to SDG 8 when it comes to working environment)
SUB-GOALS AND INDICATORS 
IN A LIFE CYCLE PERSPECTIVE
Work injuries during 
construction
Experience of physical work 
environment during construction 
and planning of the project
Spatial comfort
Stresses and strains on the 
body
APPENDIX B
Appendix B
67
==PAGE:74==
Design stage
Does the design comply with the Danish 
Building Regulation’s Vejledning om termisk
indeklima og installationer til varme- og
køleanlæg and is it documented through 
simulations? 
Pre-use stage
Cooling efficiency is tested during the functional performance test in the pre-use 
stage. The efficiency has to be within the green area to be accepted as good 
enough.  If there is no air condition in the building, the graph on the left is used. If 
the air condition is dimensioned for 26°C and a relative humidity of 60%, the graph 
on the right is used. 
The graphs show the concept. The final targets are yet to be determined. 
3
The indoor temperature affects human health, mood, and productivity. Temperature is perceived differently and therefore it can be 
difficult to decide a common threshold. Instead of aiming at a specific temperature or cooling efficiency, an interval within which 
most people are expected to feel comfortable is used.
Promote healthy indoor climate in 
existing and new construction
Yes
No
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Potential cooling [W/m2]
Load [W/m2]
With A/C
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Air flow rate  [W/m2]
Load [W/m2]
Without A/C
Thermal indoor climate: 
temperature
Design stage
Does the design comply with The Danish Building 
Regulation’s vejledning om ventilation and is it documented 
through calculations?
Pre-use stage
The CO2 level in a given room is tested during the functional 
performance test. The CO2 level must not exceed the 
threshold shown below*.
4
Air quality involves whether the air change in a building is good enough. Bad air exchange can lead to odour nuisances (from other 
people, materials, pollution, etc.), dry air (too low humidity), heavy air (too high humidity) and/or draught from e.g., ventilation. This 
can lead to difficulty concentrating, discomfort, eye or airway irritation, cold and tensions. 
Atmospheric indoor climate: air 
quality
Yes
No
Category
Minimum outdoor air supply
Residence
0.3 l/s per m2 heated floor area
Institution
0.35 l/s per m2 heated floor 
area
*For standard rooms in offices and schools
CO2 level
PPM ≤ 1000
Promote healthy indoor climate in 
existing and new construction
APPENDIX B
68
==PAGE:75==
Design stage
Does the design comply with the Danish Building Regulation’s 
Vejledning om lydforhold pkt. 1.4 and is it documented 
through calculations?
Pre-use stage
During the functional performance test, it is tested whether 
the actual performance corresponds to the target according 
to SBi-instruction 217 Udførsel af bygningsakustiske malinger*
in the four areas:
1)
Sound transmission between rooms, dwellings or business 
units within the building. 
2)
Noise from the building's technical installations. 
3)
Noise from roads and railways. 
4)
Reverberation time.
5
Acoustic comfort concerns the noise level from our surroundings. It covers sound transmissions, noise from 
installations, noise from roads and railways, and reverberation time. 
Acoustic comfort: sound and 
noise level  
Promote healthy indoor climate in 
existing and new construction
* https://build.dk/anvisninger/Pages/217-Udfoerelse-af-bygningsakustiske-
maalinger-1.aspx
Yes
No
Design stage
Does the design comply with the Danish Building Regulation’s 
Vejledning om lys og udsyn pkt. 1.2 & 1.3 and is it 
documented through simulations?
Pre-use stage
During the functional performance test, it is tested whether 
the actual performance complies with The Building 
Regulation’s requirements for illuminance and Vejledning om 
funktionsafprøvning 4.2.
If the building type is an office, the following question is to be 
included as well:
Are there at least two possibilities of manual regulation of the 
visual indoor climate? 
(E.g., having a desk lamp and individual solar shading)
6
Yes
No
Visual indoor climate: daylight, lighting 
and direct sunlight 
Yes
No
Promote healthy indoor climate in 
existing and new construction
Light can come from two sources: the sun (daylight) and artificial lighting. Daylight is important when it comes to one’s mood 
and comfort, but occasionally it is necessary to shield from direct sunlight. Artificial lighting must supplement the daylight. 
APPENDIX B
69
==PAGE:76==
Design stage
Is spatial comfort in the building considered and 
incorporated in the project proposal?
Use stage
User survey: Overall, I experience the spatial comfort as good 
7
Yes
No
Agree
Slightly agree
Slightly disagree
Disagree
Spaces in buildings can seem claustrophobic or too wide and open. This experience can be referred to as spatial comfort 
and can be affected by the following factors: the proportions of the space (l x w x h) and the amount of people. 
Buildings’ support of human well-
being
Spatial comfort
Design stage
Are the different user categories of the building included in 
the design phase and are their suggestions incorporated in 
the project proposal?
Use stage
User survey: I experience the functions of the building as 
adequate for its purposes/needs
User survey: I experience that the physical surroundings for a 
well-functioning work environment are adequate.  
8
Yes
No
Different types of buildings have different function and user categories. The building type can e.g. be a hospital with users
(patients and relatives), employees (nurses and doctors) and operating staff (cleaning staff and janitor). The building’s 
functions should always accommodate the users’ purposes and needs. 
* involves physical objects and material interior
Buildings’ support of human well-
being
Building functions and 
user needs
Agree
Slightly agree
Slightly disagree
Disagree
Agree
Slightly agree
Slightly disagree
Disagree
APPENDIX B
70
==PAGE:77==
Design stage
9
Buildings and the surrounding areas should feel safe and secure both physically and mentally. Security concerns the physical objects 
when staying in and around the building (stairs, banisters, sharp edges, heights, traffic lights, pedestrian crossings, etc.). Safety is the 
psychical element of security and is a subjective perception.
Use stage
I experience the building and the surrounding areas as secure
Design for safe use
Yes
No
I feel safe in the building and in the surrounding areas
Is the feeling of safety in and around the building
considered in the project proposal in the form of 
a concept or note?
Yes
No
Is security in and around the building considered in the 
project proposal in the form of a concept or note?
Agree
Slightly agree
Slightly disagree
Disagree
Agree
Slightly agree
Slightly disagree
Disagree
Experience of the environment in and 
around the building
Construction stage 
User survey: I experience having the opportunity of reporting 
if I experience health and safety challenges including risks of 
getting hurt on the construction site
User survey: I experience that there is adequate introduction of 
health and safety programs
10
Yes
No
Safe work environment
Design stage
Before the construction stage begins: Has a work 
environment coordinator been selected and does the project 
proposal include a section on safety and health? 
To create a safe work environment, the employees should have the opportunity of contributing to the design and 
development of health and safety programs. 
Agree
Slightly agree
Slightly disagree
Disagree
Agree
Slightly agree
Slightly disagree
Disagree
Design, development and review of 
health and safety programs
APPENDIX B
71
==PAGE:78==
11
Injuries that lead to:
Per 1000 employees
Expected sick leave of 1 
day or more
≤ 15
Non-fatal
0
Fatal
0
Work injuries during the 
construction stage
In the period from 2015-2019 there were twice as many injuries leading to sick leave of 1 day or more in the Danish building 
sector compared to the average of the entire Danish labour market. The level of the Danish building sector should not be 
above average, which in 2015-2019 was 15 injuries per 1000 employees*.
Construction stage 
* at.dk/media/6533/faktaark-ulykker-byggeriet.pdf
Sikkert arbejdsmiljø på 
byggepladsen
Safe work environment
12
Stresses and strains on 
the body 
Stresses and strains on the body emerge from long-term stresses, such as unsuitable working positions and heavy lifts. This 
leads to construction workers  leaving the sector at a young age. To overcome this, employers and developers can invest in 
remedies which can reduce the physical load on the construction workers, and by switching between different tasks during 
the day. 
Design stage
Is the Work Environment in Denmark’s Guide on heavy lifts 
and unsuitable working positions complied with? 
* www.at.dk/brancher/bygge-og-anlaeg/ulykker-i-byggeriet/tunge-
loeft-og-daarlige-arbejdsstillinger/
Yes
No
Construction stage and during the planning of the project 
User survey: I experience that there is adequate remedies to 
reduce the physical load on the construction site  
Safe work environment
Agree
Slightly agree
Slightly disagree
Disagree
APPENDIX B
72
==PAGE:79==
13
Mental work environment during construction and 
planning of the project 
It is important to experience a good psychical work environment without discriminative behaviour, “forced” overtime and 
the possibility of reporting in such cases. Reporting can e.g. be through a whistle-blower system. 
Construction stage and during the planning of the project 
User survey: Overall, I experience a healthy mental work 
environment at my workplace 
User survey: I experience that there are adequate options of 
reporting if I experience something uncomfortable at my 
workplace
Well-being at the workplace
Yes
No
Design stage
Before the construction stage begins: Has a working 
environment representative been selected and does the 
project proposal include a section on how to maintain a 
healthy psychical working environment? 
Agree
Slightly agree
Slightly disagree
Disagree
Agree
Slightly agree
Slightly disagree
Disagree
14
The physical surroundings for a well-functioning work environment can be affected by e.g. dust, indoor climate, noise, 
adjustable chairs and tables, work clothes, safety equipment, etc. 
Design stage
Before the construction stage begins: Has a working 
environment representative been selected and does the 
project proposal include a section on how to maintain a 
healthy physical working environment? 
Well-being at the workplace
Experience of physical work environment during 
construction and planning of the project 
Yes
No
Construction stage and during the planning of the project 
User survey: I experience that the physical surroundings for a 
well-functioning work environment are adequate.  
Agree
Slightly agree
Slightly disagree
Disagree
APPENDIX B
73
==PAGE:80==
15
Sick leave with stress during construction and 
planning of the project 
Construction stage and during the planning of the project
Is the number of sick leaves due to stress equal to 0? 
25% of the Danish adult population experience a high level of stress*. For men it is 21% and for women 29%. Thus, stress is a
public health issue in Denmark. 
* www.sst.dk/da/Viden/Mental-sundhed/Stress/Tal-og-fakta
Health at the workplace
Yes
No
Increase reuse and 
recycling and prevent 
raw material shortages
Inclusion of maintenance and 
demolition strategies
Prevention of raw 
material shortages
Eco-labeled wood
Building adaptability
Minimising, sorting and 
disposing waste on the 
construction site
Use of responsibly 
produced materials
Eco-labeled materials
GOAL
#12 – ENSURE SUSTAINABLE CONSUMPTION AND 
PRODUCTION PATTERNS
BEACON DESCRIPTION
IN THE CONTEXT OF THE DANISH BUILIDNG  SECTOR
SUB-GOALS AND INDICATORS 
IN A LIFE CYCLE PERSPECTIVE
Danish construction should become better at utilising materials and resources by first and foremost 
focusing on design for a long service life and extending the service life of existing buildings. This 
should be achieved with designs for flexibility, generalisation and elasticity, increased collaboration 
across actors and with better use of digitisation. 
For existing constructions, it is about renovation and transformation, here both the resource and 
climate gain is greatest, and then using the waste hierarchy to achieve the greatest possible value 
for the materials and minimise downcycling (e.g., recycle the materials directly on the same area or 
in other construction and as the last option recycle the materials both in the construction sector or 
in other sectors). 
Circular resource economy (reduction of and efficient use of resources), materials with low climate 
footprint and energy optimisation of buildings play important roles in sustainable constructions of 
the future. Climate footprint and raw material shortages are two of Danish construction's major 
challenges; construction is responsible for 29% of the EU's raw material consumption, more than 
40% of energy consumption and 36% of greenhouse gas emissions. 
Construction waste amounts to approx. 40% of the total amount of waste in Denmark. In 2019, the 
waste generation was 5 million tons (excluding soil), of which 36% was recycled, 7% was sent to 
incineration, 5% was landfilled. The low recycling rate is due to 52% of construction waste being 
collected for other final material recovery. 
Historically, Danish construction has used several materials that are harmful to human health. 
Health risks can arise in both repair and demolition tasks but are also relevant to the users of the 
buildings in relation to the impact through the indoor climate. It is important to handle the toxic 
substances correctly during dismantling and to minimise the use of toxic materials in the future.
Lifespan - technical, 
functional, economic 
and aesthetic
Design for longevity 
APPENDIX B
74
==PAGE:81==
Design stage
Is a strategy for maintenance included and documented in 
the project proposal?
Is a strategy for demolition included and documented in the 
project proposal?
17
Inclusion of maintenance and 
demolition strategies
Design for longevity
A demolition strategy forms the basis for reusing and recycling components and materials in a building after its End of Life.
Thus, creating circularity. Therefore, it is important to consider which materials and compositions create sound demolition 
opportunities. It may be beneficial to use connections designed for disassembly or uniform material compositions, whereas it 
may be a disadvantage to use composite materials, since they are difficult to disassemble. The demolition strategy must not 
compromise the longevity of the building, and thus it is important to include a strategy for maintenance, too. 
Yes
No
Yes
No
Design stage
Is building adaptability in terms of generalisation 
incorporated in the design of the building?
Is building adaptability in terms of flexibility incorporated in 
the design of the building?
Is building adaptability in terms of elasticity incorporated in 
the design of the building?
18
Generalisation: the building’s interior is designed in a way 
where most rooms have a general character, meaning they 
can be used by several different departments and for several 
different purposes. 
Flexibility: the building’s ability to be rebuild. The structural 
system, facade systems and routing of technical installations 
is organised and modular, which makes it possible to 
remodel without changing the building’s main structure. 
Elasticity: the building’s ability to be expanded or reduced. 
Columns, beams, and decks are dimensioned with additions 
to the building in mind, and the technical installations and 
their routing is dimensioned with excess capacity, making it 
possible to expand without having to change the technical 
installations (modular construction, making additions as easy 
as possible, etc.)  
Not at all
Slightly
To some degree
To a great extent
Absolute goal: average of 2. Not at all = 0, Slightly = 1, To some degree = 2, To great extent = 3. 
Design for longevity
Building adaptability
Building adaptability can be measured using three parameters: Generalisation, flexibility, and elasticity. Below each of these 
are elaborated. 
Not at all
Slightly
To some degree
To a great extent
Not at all
Slightly
To some degree
To a great extent
APPENDIX B
75
==PAGE:82==
Design stage
Is the technical lifespan taken into consideration in the project 
proposal? 
Is the functional lifespan taken into consideration in the 
project proposal? 
Is the aesthetic lifespan taken into consideration in the project 
proposal? 
19
Technical: material quality, execution, complexity, conditions of 
use and maintenance 
Functional: societal changes, technological development, 
changed life patterns, urbanisation, availability of materials, 
adaptability
Aesthetic: quality, patina, shape and design (timeless)
Design for longevity
Lifespan – Technical, functional, 
aesthetic
Lifespan means the period of time, where the building can fulfil the functions it originally was intended to. Decrease in the
building’s performance under a certain level, which cannot be restored with maintenance, means that the lifespan is exhausted. 
Four types of lifespans are measured: technical, functional, economical, and aesthetical. These are elaborated blow. 
Absolute goal: average of 2. Not at all = 0, Slightly = 1, To some degree = 2, To great extent = 3. 
“Not at all” is not accepted in any of the four parameters and will result in insufficient. 
Not at all
Slightly
To some degree
To a great extent
Not at all
Slightly
To some degree
To a great extent
Not at all
Slightly
To some degree
To a great extent
20
Prevention of raw material 
shortages
Design stage
Checklist (if there is no building at the site to begin with, start at pt. 4)
1.
If it is possible to renovate or transform the existing building on the site, 
this must be done.
2.
If not, create an environment- and resource mapping with a focus on 
environmentally damaging material, the possibilities of division of 
materials and components and their potential for reuse and recycling. 
The guide: “Hvordan kan vi mindske vores byggespild?” from Gladsaxe
Municipality or similar can be used.
3.
Afterwards, a selective demolition is performed and the materials are 
stored.
4.
The materials used in the new building are chosen with the purpose of 
following the waste hierarchy (this applies reuse/recycling/utilisation of 
the materials from the earlier building on site and the purchased 
materials)
Reuse
Recycle
Utilisation
Biobased materials
Non-biobased virgin materials
Waste hierarchy 
Increase reuse and recycling and 
prevent raw material shortages
To prevent raw material shortages all materials should be reused or recycled, as long as they fulfil the required functions or 
ability. Furthermore, one should consider using alternative materials which are not in shortage, e.g. by exploring whether 
there exists biobased alternatives or products which are produced from reused or recycled materials. 
APPENDIX B
76
==PAGE:83==
21
The waste generated on a construction site is to be sorted and placed as high in the waste hierarchy as possible. 
Organising and sorting on the construction site influences where in the hierarchy waste ends. 
Construction stage
Is the Danish Environmental Protection Agency’s vejledning 
om håndtering af bygge- og anlægsaffald** or guide om 
ressourceanvendelse på byggepladsen complied with? 
Design stage
Is there a plan for minimising waste on the construction site 
and is it documented by the contractor?
Disposal of waste
Statistics
Percentual distribution
Reused or recycled
36%
≥ 48%
Other utilisation
52%
≤ 52%
Incineration
7%
0%
Landfill
5%
0%
The percentage of waste on the construction site being 
recycled or utilised should as a minimum follow the 
distribution below***
Is there a plan for sorting and disposing waste on the 
construction site and is it documented by the contractor?*
*This includes mapping of the construction site, placement of waste containers 
and educating the employees on how to handle and sort waste
**VEJ nr 9139 af 25/02/2019
*** Mass percentage
Increase reuse and recycling and 
prevent raw material shortages
Minimising, sorting and disposing waste on 
the construction site 
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
21
22
Construction stage
Is a minimum of 90% of the wood either FSC- or PEFC-
certified?*
* If the wood is reused, the demand does not apply
Use of responsibly produced 
materials
Eco-labelled wood
One of the requirements for FSC- and PEFC-certified products is that the forests where the wood originates from are to be 
conserved and/or restored. Thus, the use of FSC- and PEFC-certified products contribute to sustainable consumption, since 
the consumption is not allowed to extent what the forests can reproduce. 
Yes
No
APPENDIX B
77
==PAGE:84==
23
Construction stage
Does painting, varnish and prime comply with one of the 
following eco-labels: Svanemærket, Blauer Engel or EU 
Ecolabel?
Does filler, glue and paste have one of the following eco-
labels: Svanemærket, Blauer Engel or EU Ecolabel? 
Use of responsibly produced 
materials
Eco-labelled materials
Responsible consumption involves reducing the amount of toxic materials produced. The amount of toxic materials in 
building components can be reduced by buying eco-labelled materials. 
Yes
No
Yes
No
APPENDIX B
78
==PAGE:85==
Sources used to determine each target 
 
Sub-goal 
Indicator 
Method 
Source 
 
SDG 3 
 
Promote healthy 
indoor climate in 
existing and new 
construction 
Thermal indoor 
climate: 
temperature 
3 
Danish Building Regulations: 
www.bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-
bestemmelser/19/Vejledninger/Termisk-indeklima   
Expert interviews, Lone Hedegaard Mortensen (LMO) & 
Peter Noyé (PNO) 
Atmospheric 
indoor climate: air 
quality 
3 
Danish Building Regulations:  
www.bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-
bestemmelser/22/Vejledninger/Generel_vejledning  
Expert interviews (LMO & PNO) 
Acoustic comfort: 
sound and noise 
level 
3 
Danish Building Regulations: 
www.bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-
bestemmelser/17/Vejledninger/Generel_vejledning   
Expert interviews (LMO & PNO) 
Visual indoor 
climate: daylight, 
lighting and direct 
sunlight 
3 
Danish Building Regulations:  
www.bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-
bestemmelser/18/Vejledninger/Generel_vejledning   
Expert interview (LMO & PNO) 
Buildings’ 
support of 
human well-
being 
Spatial comfort 
2 
DS/EN 16309+A1 – Bæredygtighed inden for byggeri og 
anlæg – Vurdering af bygningers sociale bæredygtighed 
– Beregningsmetoder 
Building functions 
and user needs 
2 
Expert interviews, Gertrud Øllgaard (GER) & Mikael 
Hallstrøm Eriksen (MERI) 
Design for safe 
use 
Experience of the 
environment in 
and around the 
building 
2 
Expert interview (GER & MERI) 
Safe work 
environment 
Design, 
development and 
review of health 
and safety 
programs 
2 
Branchefællesskabet for arbejdsmiljø i byggeri og anlæg 
(BFA):  
www.bfa-ba.dk/pligter-og-ansvar-for-arbejdsmiljoe/   
Work injuries 
during the 
construction stage 
1 
Work Environment in Denmark: Arbejdsulykker i 
byggeriet 2015-2019, www.at.dk/media/6533/faktaark-
ulykker-byggeriet.pdf   
Stresses and 
strains on the body 
2 
Work Environment in Denmark: Heavy lifts and 
unsuitable working positions, 
www.at.dk/brancher/bygge-og-anlaeg/ulykker-i-
byggeriet/tunge-loeft-og-daarlige-arbejdsstillinger/   
Well-being at the 
workplace 
Mental work 
environment 
during 
construction and 
2 
BFA: www.bfa-ba.dk/pligter-og-ansvar-for-
arbejdsmiljoe/ 
APPENDIX B
79
==PAGE:86==
planning of the 
project 
Experience of 
physical work 
environment 
during 
construction and 
planning of the 
project 
2 
BFA: www.bfa-ba.dk/pligter-og-ansvar-for-
arbejdsmiljoe/ 
Health at the 
workplace 
Sick leave with 
stress during 
construction and 
planning of the 
project 
 
1 
Danish Health Authority: www.sst.dk/da/Viden/Mental-
sundhed/Stress/Tal-og-fakta  
 
SDG 12 
 
Design for 
longevity 
Inclusion of 
maintenance and 
demolition 
strategies 
 
2a 
Expert interview (LMO & PNO) 
Building 
adaptability 
 
2a 
Expert interview (LMO & PNO) 
Lifespan – 
technical 
functional, 
aesthetic 
 
2a 
Morten Leen, AP Pension 
Morten Pedersen, Kirkbi  
Increase reuse 
and recycling and 
prevent raw 
material 
shortages 
 
Prevention of raw 
material shortages 
 
 
Minimizing, sorting 
and disposing 
waste on the 
construction site 
1 
Expert interview, Inge Werther  (ILW) 
Affaldsbekendtgørelsen, §64: 
www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2020/2159   
Environmental Protection Agency: Affaldsstatistik 2019  
https://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/publikationer/2020/12/978-
87-7038-249-6.pdf  
Use of 
responsibly 
produced 
materials 
 
Eco-labelled wood 
1 
DGNB: 
Most strict requirement by DGNB is 0+% FSC-certified 
wood  
Eco-labelled 
materials 
1 
DGNB Appendix 1 – criteria matrix: regarding quality 
step 3 and 4, pt. 1 and 2 
 
 
All questions regarding the user survey (method 2) have been discussed with GER and MERI 
according to phrasing, explanation and scale.  
APPENDIX B
80
==PAGE:87==
SDG Measure 2.0 Manual 
The SDG Measure 2.0 is a tool for measuring absolute sustainability in the Danish building sector. The 
design tool considers absolute sustainability across all three parameters (social, environmental and 
economic) and includes a full life cycle perspective. It aims at assessing absolute social sustainability on 
a building project level. 
This manual starts with a brief explanation on how to use the design tool, the thoughts behind it and 
which pitfalls one must be aware of.  
The user of SDG Measure 2.0 should be a sustainability consultant/specialist employed in NIRAS.  
Composition 
The tool takes offset in the 17 SDGs1. For each SDG, sub-goals, indicators and targets are formulated in 
a Danish context for all life cycle stages of a building. A beacon text describes the relation between the 
specific SDG and the Danish building sector and highlights the challenges, burdens, benefits, and the 
potentials of the building sector.  
The sub-goals and indicators are versatile and generic since they are created to fit all building types. It 
is possible to select some SDGs and leave other out, depending on the prioritisation of the project. 
However, some sub-goals are mandatory to include (e.g., impact on climate change). Furthermore, it 
will be possible to add more context specific indicators depending on the type of building being 
assessed and the focus of the project.  
Figure 1 shows the sub-goals (dark green) and indicators (light green) for SDG 3 – Good Health and 
Well-being. The sub-goals and indicators are placed at the relevant life cycle stage. For each SDG, a 
similar overview is made2.  
 
Figure 1 – Sub-goals (dark green) and indicators (light green) for SDG 3 - Health and well-being. The placement of the sub-goals 
indicates where in the life cycle they are relevant. 
 
1 United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs (2021). The 17 Goals. https://sdgs.un.org/#goal_section  
2 Currently, the overviews are created for SDG 3, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13 and 15. Once they are all available, a reference in where to find them will 
be added 
APPENDIX C
Appendix C
81
==PAGE:88==
In Figure 2, an example of indicator and targets for the SGD 3 sub-goal: Design for safe use is shown. 
 
Figure 2 - Example of indicator (light green) and targets for the SDG 3 sub-goal: Design for safe use (dark green). The indicator 
is elaborated with a brief text. To the left the targets in the design stage are listed and to the right the targets in the use stage. 
Firstly, Figure 2 introduces the sub-goal (dark green): Design for safe use and the indicator (light green): 
Experience of the environment in and around the building. Secondly, the subject related to the indicator 
is elaborated with a brief text. Lastly, the targets are presented - this indicator has four targets, but this 
can vary for different indicators. On the left the targets in the design stage are listed and on the right 
the targets in the use stage (or the pre-use or construction stage for other targets).  
The targets are assessed as either good enough (green) or not good enough (red). In order for a building 
to be assessed as absolute social sustainable, all targets must be assessed as good enough (green). If 
the target is a “yes”/”no” question, “yes” equals good enough. For the user survey, a sufficient level is 
reached when 90% of the respondents reply slightly agree or agree. The 10% dissatisfaction rate is 
based on the principles from indoor climate theory3. 
Methodology 
SDG Measure 2.0 sub-goals, indicators and targets are developed based on the framework by Heide et. 
al 20214. The indicators must live up to the following criteria to be accepted to SDG measure 2.0 (for 
Danish industries): 
- 
Relevance: ability, responsibility, materiality, representativity 
- 
Measurable 
- 
Reliability 
- 
Accept 
- 
Additionality 
- 
Data availability (reason why indicator on building pass isn’t yet possible) 
- 
Resources 
 
3 DS474:1993 (rettet 2017-udgave) 
4 Heide, M., Skrøder, N., Steffen, S., Hauschild, M. & Ryberg, M. (2021). Framework for selecting and setting boundaries for social 
sustainability indicators in a life cycle perspective. Accepted at the 2nd International Conference on Circularity in the Built Environment. 
APPENDIX C
82
==PAGE:89==
SDG Measure 2.0 includes a full life cycle perspective. This means that it considers all life cycle stages 
from extraction of raw materials to End of Life (EoL) of the building. For each SDG, all life cycle stages 
are considered to identify the impacts or pressure the different stakeholders are exposed to. E.g., SDG 
3 - good health and well-being must cover all people in the use stage (users, employees, residents, 
operating staff) and the construction stage (the workers on the construction site and workers in the 
design stage). 
Thoughts behind  
Because the targets are absolute, the building either performs good enough or not good enough. The 
degree of how good or bad it performs is not shown. Hence, if a target is marked as not good enough, 
the building could still be rather close to reaching the state of good enough. Furthermore, being 
assessed as not good enough is in relation to the absolute goal, and not relative to other buildings. This 
is important to remember – being assessed as not good enough – means that the building could and 
should improve in this area.    
When using the results from the SDG Measure 2.0 it is important to make it transparent and avoid 
greenwashing. E.g., state which SDGs and sub-goals have been included and which are excluded. If a 
building is assessed as absolute sustainable based on the sub-goals included, it is still important to 
emphasise that we do not know if it is absolute sustainable when including all SDGs and sub-goals. It is 
suggested that the guide on environmental marketing by the consumer ombudsman is followed when 
presenting the results5.  
The process of working with these absolute sub-goals, indicators and targets should lead the Danish 
building sector in a more sustainable direction. Even if some targets are assessed as not good enough 
and the building does not end up being absolute sustainable, the process of working with absolute 
sustainability will result in a more sustainable way of thinking, which future projects can benefit from.  
 
 
5 Forbrugerombudsmanden (2021). Kvikguide til virksomheder om miljømarkedsføring. 
https://www.forbrugerombudsmanden.dk/media/56731/kvikguide-om-miljoemarkedsfoering.pdf  
APPENDIX C
83
==PAGE:90==
Sources used to measure each target 
 
Absolute sustainable 
Not absolute sustainable 
Not yet measurable 
Unknown 
 
 
Sub-goal 
Indicator 
Result 
Source 
 
SDG 3 
 
Promote healthy 
indoor climate in 
existing and new 
construction 
3.1.1 – Thermal 
indoor climate: 
temperature 
 
Status document on implementation of  requirements to 
obtain Svanemærket. States that further calculations are 
needed to proof the indoor temperature good enough.  
 
Measured in pre-use stage = not yet measurable. 
3.1.2 – 
Atmospheric 
indoor climate: air 
quality 
 
Status document on implementation of  requirements to 
obtain Svanemærket proofs the sound and noise level 
good enough. 
 
Measured in pre-use stage = not yet measurable. 
3.1.3 – Acoustic 
comfort: sound 
and noise level 
 
Status document on implementation of  requirements to 
obtain Svanemærket proofs the sound and noise level 
good enough.  
 
Measured in pre-use stage = not yet measurable. 
3.1.4– Visual 
indoor climate: 
daylight, lighting 
and direct sunlight 
 
Status document on implementation of  requirements to 
obtain Svanemærket proofs the sound and noise level 
good enough. 
 
Measured in pre-use stage = not yet measurable. 
Buildings’ 
support of 
human well-
being 
3.2.1 – Spatial 
comfort 
 
Considered and incorporated in the project proposal. 
 
Measured in use stage = not yet measurable. 
3.2.2 – Building 
functions and user 
needs 
 
Confirmed by Helen Glindvad Kristensen  (HGK) , who 
represents the developer (Gladsaxe Municipality).  
 
Measured in use stage = not yet measurable. 
 
Measured in use stage = not yet measurable. 
Design for safe 
use 
3.3.1 – Experience 
of the environment 
in and around the 
building 
 
Considered and incorporated in the project proposal. 
 
Considered and incorporated in the project proposal. 
 
Measured in use stage = not yet measurable. 
 
Measured in use stage = not yet measurable. 
Safe work 
environment 
3.4.1 – Design, 
development and 
review of health 
and safety 
programs 
 
Confirmed by HGK. 
 
Measured in construction stage = not yet measurable. 
 
Measured in construction stage = not yet measurable. 
3.4.2 – Work 
injuries during the 
construction stage 
 
Measured in construction stage = not yet measurable. 
3.4.3 – Stresses 
and strains on the 
body 
 
Indicator developed later than the remaining targets. 
Thus, it has not been possible to include an answer from 
HGK or the supervisor on the construction site.  
APPENDIX D
Appendix D
84
==PAGE:91==
 
Measured in construction and planning stage = not yet 
measurable. 
Well-being at the 
workplace 
3.5.1 – Mental 
work environment 
during 
construction and 
planning of the 
project 
 
Confirmed by HGK. 
 
Measured in construction and planning stage = not yet 
measurable. 
 
 
Measured in construction and planning stage = not yet 
measurable. 
3.5.2 – Experience 
of physical work 
environment 
during 
construction and 
planning of the 
project 
 
Confirmed by HGK. 
 
 
 
Measured in construction and planning stage = not yet 
measurable. 
Health at the 
workplace 
3.6.1 – Sick leave 
with stress during 
construction and 
planning of the 
project 
 
Measured in construction and planning stage = not yet 
measurable. 
 
SDG 12 
 
Design for 
longevity 
12.1.1 – Inclusion 
of maintenance 
and demolition 
strategies 
 
Not included in the project proposal. 
 
 
Not included in the project proposal. 
12.1.2 – Building 
adaptability 
 
Not included in the project proposal. 
12.1.3 – Lifespan – 
technical 
functional, 
aesthetic 
 
Not included in the project proposal. 
Increase reuse 
and recycling and 
prevent raw 
material 
shortages 
 
12.2.1 – Prevention 
of raw material 
shortages 
 
Confirmed by HGK.  
12.2.2 – 
Minimizing, sorting 
and disposing 
waste on the 
construction site 
 
Confirmed by HGK.  
 
Confirmed by HGK.  
 
Confirmed by HGK.  
 
Measured at the end of construction stage = not yet 
measurable.  
Use of 
responsibly 
produced 
materials 
 
12.3.1 – Eco-
labelled wood 
 
 Status document on implementation of  requirements 
to obtain Svanemærket.  
12.3.2 – Eco-
labelled materials 
 
Status document on implementation of  requirements to 
obtain Svanemærket. 
 
APPENDIX D
85
==PAGE:92==
*reuse/recycled from the school
Building element
Construction
Material
Amount
Unit
Amount
Unit
Comments and assumptions
Windows
Windows
Total
247.96 m2
Using LCAbyg's standard of share of area for glass, sill, frame and sealing
Windows
Windows
Windowsill, aluminium
2.76 m/m2
Using LCAbyg's standard of share of area for glass, sill, frame and sealing
Windows
Windows
Window frame, aluminium
2.87 m/m2
Windows
Windows
EPDM-sealing
5.775 m/m2
Windows
Windows
Insulating glass, 2x4 mm
0.9 m2/m2
Windows
Skylight
Total
49.51 m2
Using LCAbyg's standard of share of area for glass, sill, frame and sealing
Windows
Skylight
Windowsill, aluminium
2.76 m/m2
Windows
Skylight
Window frame, aluminium
2.87 m/m2
Windows
Skylight
EPDM-sealing
5.775 m/m2
Windows
Skylight
3 layered glass
0.9 m2/m2
Using LCAbyg's standard of share of area for glass, sill, frame and sealing. 
Doors
Ext. Glassdoor
Total
82.06 m2
Using LCAbyg's standard of share of area for glass, sill, frame and sealing. 
Doors
Ext. Glassdoor
Windowsill, aluminium
2.76 m/m2
Doors
Ext. Glassdoor
Window frame, aluminium
2.87 m/m2
Doors
Ext. Glassdoor
EPDM-sealing
5.775 m/m2
Doors
Ext. Glassdoor
Insulating glass, 2x4 mm
0.9 m2/m2
1.5 doors are subtracted due to the portholes (1 door = 2 m2)
Doors
Int. Door
Total, not glass
43.50 stk
1.5 doors are subtracted due to the portholes (1 door = 2 m2)
Doors
Int. Door
Doors, not glass
1 m2/m2
Doors
Int. Door
Porthole
3.08 m2
Doors
Int. Door
Windowsill, aluminium
3.54 m/m2
3.54 m pr m2 equals the circumference of a circle w. area = 1 m2
Doors
Int. Door
EPDM-sealing
3.54 m/m2
3.54 m pr m2 equals the circumference of a circle w. area = 1 m2
Doors
Int. Door
Screws
0.05 kg/m2
Doors
Int. Door
Glass, 3mm
0.9 m2/m2
Doors
Int. Glassdoor
Total
21.56 m2
Doors
Int. Glassdoor
Windowsill, aluminium
2.76 m/m2
Doors
Int. Glassdoor
Window frame, aluminium
2.87 m/m2
Doors
Int. Glassdoor
EPDM-sealing
5.775 m/m2
Doors
Int. Glassdoor
Insulating glass, 2x4 mm
0.9 m2/m2
Doors
Sliding doors
Total
10.08 m2
Deck
Deck
Total
222.56 m2
Deck
Deck
Trapez. prof. sheet, hot-galv. Steel
6.14 kg/m2
Multiplied by a factor 1.125 to include the profile of the steel
Deck
Deck
C-profile, steel, 200 mm
10.61 kg/m2
2 pcs per running meter
Deck
Deck
Insulation
0.045 m3/m2
Gypsum board in LCAbyg is 13 mm -> multiplies by a factor 2.38 to get 31 mm
Deck
Deck
Gypsum, 31mm
2.38 m2/m2
Gypsum board in LCAbyg is 13 mm -> multiplies by a factor 2.38 to get 31 mm
Floors
Linoleum
Total
890.52 m2
Floors
Linoleum
2,5 mm Linoleum
1 m2/m2
Floors
Linoleum
Screed
48 kg/m2
2400 kg/m3
Floors
Tiles
Total
243.55 m2
Floors
Tiles
Tiles, 10 mm
1 m2/m2
Floors
Tiles
Tile adhesive, 2 mm
3.1 kg/m2
Floors
Floor in gym
Total
63.41 m2
www.unisport.com/sites/default/files/2017-09/Unisport%20Elastic%20MDF%2035%20Taraflex%207.0.pdf 
Floors
Floor in gym
Sportsmat in rubber
2 m2/m2
7 mm thickness = 2 x rubber floor w. a thickness of 3.55 mm
Floors
Floor in gym
2x MDF-sheet, 10mm
14.75 kg/m2
Does not exist in LCAbyg - using rubber floor. 3.55 mm thickness = need 4.23 m2/m2 to get 15 mm thickness
Floors
Floor in gym
Sviktelement, rubber, 15 mm
4.23 m2/m2
Does not exist in LCAbyg - using rubber floor. 3.55 mm thickness = need 4.23 m2/m2 to get 15 mm thickness
Orangery
Bricks
Total
74.02 m2
Reuse from the school. Typed in LCAbyg as Gamle Mursten (EPD), which includes processing 
Orangery
Bricks*
Brick, reused
194.4 kg/m2
Reuse from the school. Typed in LCAbyg as Gamle Mursten (EPD), which includes processing 
Orangery
Bricks
Screed
4.95 kg/m2
Orangery
Bricks*
Hard core, 250mm
425 kg/m2
Gravel from digging up the foundations from the school
Orangery
Glass wall
Total
100.49 m2
Includes glass walls in the big and small orangeries 
Orangery
Glass wall
Glass
1 m2/m2
Assumed that the glass in the orangery is one layer 3 mm and thus we need 1 m2/m2
Orangery
Glass wall
Sealing strip, EPDB, extruded
0.03 kg/m2
LCAbyg glass wall standard
Orangery
Glass wall
Screws
0.05 kg/m2
LCAbyg glass wall standard
Orangery
Glass roof
Total
70.46 m2
Orangery
Glass roof
Glass
1 m2/m2
Assumed that the glass in the orangery is one layer 3 mm and thus we need 1 m2/m2
Orangery
Glass roof
Sealing strip, EPDB, extruded
0.03 kg/m2
LCAbyg glass wall standard
Orangery
Glass roof
Screws
0.05 kg/m2
LCAbyg glass wall standard
Orangery
Windows
Total
16.32 m2
Orangery
Windows
Glass
1 m2/m2
Assumed that the glass in the orangery is one layer 3 mm and thus we need 1 m2/m2
Orangery
Windows
Sealing strip, EPDB, extruded
0.03 kg/m2
LCAbyg glass wall standard
Orangery
Windows
Screws
0.05 kg/m2
LCAbyg glass wall standard
Orangery
Alu profiles
Total
2.28 m3
Orangery
Alu profiles
Aluminium profile
2700 kg/m3
Orangery
Wooden rafter
Total
3.36 m3
Orangery
Wooden rafter*
Wood
1 m3/m3
Reused wood from the school. Not included in the calculations in LCAbyg
Orangery
Steel for rafters
Total
0.21 m3
Orangery
Steel for rafters
Steel
7800 kg/m3
Rafters
Wooden rafters in gym
Glulam
2.88 m3
Rafters
Wooden rafters in gym
Steel
7800 kg/m3
0.18 m3
Int. walls
Folding wall of glass
Total
14.28 m2
Assumed that the glass is 2 layered for noise reduction and thus we need 2 m2/m2
Int. walls
Folding wall of glass
Glass
2 m2/m2
Assumed that the glass is 2 layered for noise reduction and thus we need 2 m2/m2
Int. walls
Folding wall of glass
Aluminium profile
0.5 kg/m2
Int. walls
Folding wall of glass
Sealing strip, EPDB, extruded
0.03 kg/m2
Int. walls
Folding wall of glass
Screws
0.05 kg/m2
Int. walls
Gypsum wall
Total
1100.1 m2
The gypsum walls have different surface materials. Noted further down. 33 doors of 0.9*21 = 62.37 m2. 17 
windows of 0.92*0.92 = 14.39 mw. Subtracting the total area of "22.1 Type 1 walls"
Int. walls
Gypsum wall
2x Gypsum, 12.5mm
2 m2/m2
VLG120 - Lightweight concrete w. gypsum. Interior, but structural/stabilizing
Int. walls
Gypsum wall
Screws
0.15 kg/m2
Int. walls
Gypsum wall
Structural wood
0.00705 m3/m2
Int. walls
Gypsum wall
Mineralwool
0.095 m3/m2
Int. walls
Gypsum wall
Paint
0.76 kg/m2
1044.61 m2
Area of doors and windows are subtracted
Int. walls
Gypsum wall
Ground
0.38 kg/m2
Int. walls
Gypsum wall
Tiles, 10 mm
1 m2/m2
26.18 m2
Int. walls
Gypsum wall
Tile adhesive, 2 mm
3.1 kg/m2
Int. walls
Gypsum wall, cistern
Total (2 layers of gypsum of 12.5mm
2 m2/m2
28.96 m2
Int. walls
Brick wall, half
Total
223.5 m2
Revit does not void the wall area with windows and doors. Doors in brick wall, half = 19 pcs of 0.9*2.1 = 
35.91 m2. Subtracted from the total area of brick wall, half
Int. walls
Brick wall, half*
Brick, 108x54x114 mm
194.4 kg/m2
Reuse from the school. Typed in LCAbyg as Gamle Mursten (EPD), which includes processing 
Int. walls
Brick wall, half
Mortar
12 kg/m2
Int. walls
Brick wall, whole
Total
31.79 m2
Revit does not void the wall area with windows and doors. Doors in brick wall, whole = 1 pcs of 0.9*2.1 = 1.9 
m2. Subtracted from the total area of brick wall, whole
Int. walls
Brick wall, whole*
Brick, 108x54x228 mm
194.4 kg/m2
Reuse from the school. Typed in LCAbyg as Gamle Mursten (EPD), which includes processing 
Int. walls
Brick wall, whole
Mortar
12 kg/m2
Int. walls
Acoustic panel
Total
224.88 m2
Int. walls
Acoustic panel
Acoustic batts, 30mm
0.03 m3/m2
Mineralwool used, since there are no acoustic batts  in LCAbyg, nor a relevant EPD to import 
Int. walls
Acoustic panel
Plywood, 12mm
0.012 m3/m2
Int. walls
Acoustic panel
Wooden lamella, 20mm
0.02 m3/m2
56.12 m2
Only on the bottom part of the walls
Ext. walls
Skeleton construction
Total
582.34 m2
Amount based on wall schedule from Revit. Ext. Wall construction of wood and insulation
Ext. walls
Skeleton construction
Structural wood, poles
0.018 m3/m2
every 600 mm = 1,667 pcs per m
Ext. walls
Skeleton construction
Structural wood, horizontal laths
0.002 m3/m2
1 pcs per m
Ext. walls
Skeleton construction
Insulation, 245mm
0.245 m3/m2
Ext. walls
Skeleton construction
Insulation, 45mm
0.045 m3/m2
Ext. walls
Skeleton construction
2x Gypsum, 12.5mm
2 m2/m2
Ext. walls
Lightweight concrete
Total
211.19 m2
Amount based on wall schedule from Revit
Ext. walls
Lightweight concrete
Insulation, 300mm
0.3 m3/m2
Ext. walls
Lightweight concrete
Lightweight concrete, 120mm
0.12 m3/m2
Facade
Brick facade
Total
259.24 m2
Facade
Brick facace*
Brick, 108mm
194.4 kg/m2
Reuse from the school. Typed in LCAbyg as Gamle Mursten (EPD), which includes processing 
Facade
Brick facace
Mortar
12 kg/m2
Facade
Wooden facade
Total
256.48 m2
Facade
Wooden facade*
Wood, 21mm
0.021 m3/m2
Facade cladding. Reused wood from the school. Not included in the calculations in LCAbyg
Facade
Wooden facade
Laths, 38mm
0.0017 m3/m2
Height = 45 mm. 1 pcs per m2
Facade
Wooden facade
Gap list, 25mm
0.0017 m3/m2
Width = 45 mm, 0,5 m i n between each. 1.5 pcs per m2
APPENDIX E
Appendix E
86
==PAGE:93==
Facade
Wooden facade
Screws
0.15 kg/m2
Facade
Steel facade
Total
191.64 m2
Facade
Steel facade*
Steel
8.775 kg/m2
Multiplied by a factor 1.125 to include the profile of the steel. Reuse from the school
Facade
Steel facade
Laths, 38mm
0.0017 m3/m2
Facade
Steel facade
Gap list, 25mm
0.0017 m3/m2
Facade
Steel facade*
Screws
0.15 kg/m2
Mounting lists are included with the steel plates from the school
Facade
Tile facade
Total
243.78 m2
Facade
Tile facade*
Tile
50 kg/m2
50 kg roof tiles per m2 (LCAbyg). "Vingetegl" does nost exist in LCAbyg. Roof tiles used instead
Facade
Tile facade
Laths, 38mm
0.0043 m3/m2
1 lath per 40 cm. = 2.5 pcs per m
Facade
Tile facade
Gap list, 25mm
0.0017 m3/m2
Facade
Tile facade
Screws
0.15 kg/m2
Roof
Roof construction
Total
1973.16 m2
Amount based on Roof schedule from Revit. Area of skylights are subtracted
Roof
Roof construction
Roofing felt, 1st layer
1 m2/m2
https://www.bolius.dk/tag-med-tagpap-19004 
Roof
Roof construction
Roofing felt, 2nd layer
1 m2/m2
Roof
Roof construction
Vapour barrier
0.2 kg/m3
LCAbyg standard pitched roof construction
Roof
Roof construction
Screws
0.15 kg/m2
Roof
Roof construction
Boards, 25mm
0.025 m3/m2
Roof
Roof construction
Insulation, 295mm
0.295 m3/m2
Roof
Roof construction
Structural wood
0.02 m3/m2
Are not included in the Revit file. 1 x 295 x 45 + 3.5 x 45 x 45 = 0.02 m3/m2
Ceiling
Gypsum ceiling, pitched roof
Total
47.98 m2
Ceiling
Gypsum ceiling, pitched roof
Insulation, 45mm
0.045 m3/m2
Mineralwool, pitched roof is used
Ceiling
Gypsum ceiling, pitched roof
Plywood, 12mm
0.012 m3/m2
Ceiling
Gypsum ceiling, pitched roof
Fibre gypsum, 15mm
1.5 m2/m2
LCAbyg gypsum fibreboard, 10 mm is used
Ceiling
Gypsum ceiling, pitched roof
Ground
0.38 kg/m2
Ceiling
Gypsum ceiling, pitched roof
Paint
0.76 kg/m2
Ceiling
Acoustic ceiling
Total
762.03 m2
Area of skylights are subtracted
Ceiling
Acoustic ceiling
Textile acoustic, 45mm
0.045 m3/m2
Mineralwool, pitched roof is used
Ceiling
Acoustic ceiling
Troldtekt, 25mm
1 m2/m2
EPD from EPDdanmark uploaded to LCAbyg
Ceiling
Gypsum ceiling, troldtekt
Total
341.7 m2
Ceiling
Gypsum ceiling, troldtekt
Steel profiles and sheets
2 kg/m2
Ceiling
Gypsum ceiling, troldtekt
2xGypsumsheets, 13mm, perforated
2 m2/m2
Ceiling
Gypsum ceiling, troldtekt
Screws
0.1 kg/m2
Ceiling
Gypsum ceiling, troldtekt
Mineralwool
0.045 m3/m2
Ceiling
Gypsum ceiling, troldtekt
Screed, cement
12 kg/m2
Ceiling
Gypsum ceiling, troldtekt
Troldtekt, 25mm
1 m2/m2
Ceiling
Sanitation ceiling
Total
43.1 m2
Ceiling
Sanitation ceiling
Steel profiles and sheets
2 kg/m2
Ceiling
Sanitation ceiling
2xGypsumsheets, 13mm, perforated
2 m2/m2
Ceiling
Sanitation ceiling
Screws
0.1 kg/m2
Ceiling
Sanitation ceiling
Mineralwool
0.045 m3/m2
Ceiling
Sanitation ceiling
Screed, cement
12 kg/m2
Ceiling
Sanitation ceiling
Troldtekt, 25mm
1 m2/m2
EPD from EPDdanmark uploaded to LCAbyg
Roof
Brick roof
Total
429.00 m2
8 windows = 19.84 m2 subtracted from the area
Roof
Brick roof
Brick roof
1 m2/m2
Roof
Brick roof
Laths, 38mm
0.014 m3/m2
1 lath oer 12.6 cm = 8 pcs per m https://beklædningstegl.dk/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Wienerberger-
Urban-Teknisk-Brochure-2019.pdf 
Roof
Brick roof
Gap list, 25mm
0.0017 m3/m2
Roof
Brick roof
Screws
0.15 kg/m2
Roof
Steel roof
Total
732.01 m2
Roof
Steel roof*
Steel
8.775 kg/m2
7800 kg/m3. Multiplied by a factor 1.125 to include the profile. Reuse from the school
Roof
Steel roof
Laths, 38mm
0.0017 m3/m2
Roof
Steel roof
Gap list, 25mm
0.0017 m3/m2
Roof
Steel roof*
Screws
0.15 kg/m2
Mounting lists are included with the steel plates from the school
Roof
Wooden roof
Total
379.02 m2
Roof
Wooden roof*
Wood, 21mm
0.021 m3/m2
1 window = 2.48 m2 subtracted. Wood is reused from the school and not included in LCAbyg calculations
Roof
Wooden roof
Laths, 38mm
0.0017 m3/m2
Roof
Wooden roof
Screws
0.15 kg/m2
Roof
Tile roof
Total
442.41 m2
5 windows = 12,4 m2 subtracted
Roof
Tile roof*
Tiles
50 kg/m2
50 kg roof tiles per m2 (LCAbyg). "Vingetegl" does nost exist in LCAbyg. Facade tiles used instead
Roof
Tile roof
Laths, 38mm
0.0043 m3/m2
1 lath per 40 cm = 2.5 pcs per m
Roof
Tile roof
Gap list, 25mm
0.0017 m3/m2
Roof
Tile roof
Screws
0.15 kg/m2
Energy prod.
Solar panel
Total
215 m2
Volume is divided by thickness = 0.01. Generates 13.5 kWh/m2/yr (acc. to NIRAS energy performance calc.)
Energy prod.
Solar panel
Solar panels
1 m2/m2
LCAbyg solar panels. Assumed that there is no waste
Energy prod.
Solar power cell
Total
14 m2
Generates 3,7 kWh/m2/ur (acc. to NIRAS energy performance calc.)
Energy prod.
Solar power cell
Solar power cells
1 m2/m2
LCAbyg solar power cells. Assumed that there is no waste
Windows
Solar shading
Total
67.03 m2
LCAbyg solar shading, polyethylenterephethalat
Windows
Solar shading
Solar shading, textile
1 m2/m2
Windows
Solar shading
Frame, aluminium
3.14 kg/m2
0.07791
Pipes
Pressure pipe, PEM PN10
Total
1 kg/kg
138.13 kg
https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/pe-pipe-weights-d_324.html 
Pipes
Pipe, PP drain
Total
1 kg/kg
522.23 kg
kg/m for the given diameter * no. of meters. Multiplied by 1,05 to include 5% for fittings
Pipes
Pipe, PP (sewage pipes)
Total
1 kg/kg
4076.49 kg
5% added for fittings for all types of pipes
Pipes
Well, Oil separator
Total
1 kg/kg
2600 kg
Concrete, ø1250
Pipes
Well, grease separator
Total
1 kg/kg
1424 kg
Concrete, ø1250
Pipes
Drainage well ø315
Total
1 kg/kg
436.05 kg
Pipes
Well, PP
Total
1 kg/kg
3658.44 kg
Drainage well: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/pe-pipe-weights-d_324.html 
Pipes
Line drain, tray and grid
Total
1 kg/kg
1209.42 kg
Galvanized steel
Pipes
Storm water reservoir 
Total
7998 kg
diameter = 1,4 m, 133,3 kg per m (www.uponor.dk/infra/produkter/regnvandssystemer). After visiting the 
construction site we saw that there are 3 pcs. Assumed length = 20 meter. Assumed that the storm water 
reservoirs are delivered in the correct size and thus no waste is assumed.  
Pipes
Pipes, PEM PN10
Total
11.33 kg
5% added for fittings
Pipes
Pipes, PEM PN10
Pipe, utility water, PEX
1 kg/kg
Pipes
Pipes, PEM PN10
Insulation
0.02 m3/kg
Pipes
Pipes, PP red-brown
Total
1 kg/kg
10.66 kg
5% added for fittings
Water
Hot-water tank
Total
1 stk
Water
Hot-water tank
Buffertank
222 kg/stk
Assumed that there is no waste
Ventilation
Ventilation duct, round
Total
1675.05 kg
5% added for fittings
Ventilation
Ventilation duct, round
Steel
1 kg/kg
Ventilation
Ventilation duct, round
Insulation
0.006 m3/kg
Ventilation
Ventilation duct, rectangular
Total
258.66 kg
5% added for fittings
Ventilation
Ventilation duct, rectangular
Steel
1 kg/kg
Ventilation
Vent. duct, silencer
Total
495.6 kg
Ventilation
Vent. duct, silencer
Steel
420.53 kg
Ventilation
Vent. duct, silencer
Insulation
75.07 kg
Ventilation
Ventilation device
Total, 20.000 m3/h
1 stk
Requirement: 15,600 m3/h for the entire kindergarten. Closest one, which is larger, is 20,000
Ventilation
Ventilation device
Ventilation device
1376.00 kg/stk
1 stk
Assumed that there is no waste
Ventilation
Ventilation device
Aircondition pr 1 kW
150.00 stk/stk
1 stk
Assumed that there is no waste
Heat
Pipe, stainless steel
Total
210.82 kg
5% added for fittings
Heat
Pipe, stainless steel
Steel
1 kg/kg
Heat
Pipe, stainless steel
Insulation
0.002 m3/kg
Electricity
Cable tray with holes, steel
Total
1026.87 kg
5% added for fittings
Electricity
Cable tray with holes, steel
Steel
1 kg/kg
Structure
Wooden columns
Total
12.09 m3
Structure
Wooden columns
Glulam columns
1 m3/m3
Structure
Wooden columns
Angle bracket, steel
12 kg/m3
Structure
Steel columns, H-profile, 120x120 Total
111.28 m
LCAbyg standard steel column 120x120
Structure
Steel columns, H-profile, 120x120 Steel
26.52 kg/m
LCAbyg standard steel column 120x120
Structure
Steel columns, H-profile, 120x120 Fire-resistant paint
0.13 kg/m2
75.22 m2 surface
Structure
Steel columns, H-profile, 200x200 Total
60.10 m
Structure
Steel columns, H-profile, 200x200 Steel
60.918 kg/m
LCAbyg standard steel column 200x200
Structure
Steel columns, H-profile, 200x200 Fire-resistant paint
0.13 kg/m2
68.51 m2 surface
Structure
Point foundation
Total
203.89 m3
Structure
Point foundation*
Concrete, utilized from the school
0.4 m3/m3
40% of foundations are utilized concrete from the old school
Structure
Point foundation
Concrete
0.6 m3/m3
Structure
Point foundation
Reinforcement
80 kg/m3
Structure
Wooden beams
Total
17.41 m3
Structure
Wooden beams
Glulam beams
1 m3/m3
Structure
Wooden beams
Angle bracket, steel
6 kg/m3
Structure
Steel beams, H-profile, 200x200
Total
19.58 m
APPENDIX E
87
==PAGE:94==
Structure
Steel beams, H-profile, 200x200
Steel
60.918 kg/m
Amount from LCAbygs standard steel beam
Structure
Steel beams, H-profile, 200x200
Fire-resistant paint
0.13 kg/m2
22.32 m2 surface
Foundation
Line found., FOBP220
Total
15.92 m3
Foundation
Line found., FOBP220*
Concrete, utilized from the school
0.4 m3/m3
40% of foundations are utilized concrete from the old school
Foundation
Line found., FOBP220
Concrete
0.6 m3/m3
Foundation
Line found., FOBP220
Reinforcement
25 kg/m3
25 kg reinforcement per m3 acc. to LCAbyg
Foundation
Line found., FOBP220
Insulation
1.63 m3
30 mm insulation, height = 180 mm, on both sides of the 151 m line foundation
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP250
Total
34.65 m3
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP250*
Concrete, utilized from the school
0.4 m3/m3
40% of foundations are utilized concrete from the old school
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP250
Concrete
0.6 m3/m3
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP250
Reinforcement
25 kg/m3
25 kg reinforcement per m3 acc. to LCAbyg
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP250
Insulation
17.73 m3
100x640 mm EPS acc. to revit detail drawing on each side of the 277 m strip found FSBP250
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP400+250
Total
94.47 m3
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP400+250*
Concrete, utilized from the school
0.4 m3/m3
40% of foundations are utilized concrete from the old school
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP400+250
Concrete
0.6 m3/m3
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP400+250
Reinforcement
37.99 m3
250x580 mm EPS acc. to revit detail drawing on each side of the 262 m strip found. FSBP400+250
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP400+250
Armeringsnet
25 kg/m3
25 kg reinforcement per m3 acc. to LCAbyg
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP400
Total
66.87 m3
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP400*
Concrete, utilized from the school
0.4 m3/m3
40% of foundations are utilized concrete from the old school
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP400
Concrete
0.6 m3/m3
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP400
Reinforcement
25 kg/m3
25 kg reinforcement per m3 acc. to LCAbyg
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP700
Total
13.50 m3
Concrete column area subtracted (13 pcs)
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP700*
Beton, nedknust fra skolen
0.4 m3/m3
40% of foundations are utilized concrete from the old school
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP700
Concrete
0.6 m3/m3
Foundation
Strip found., FSBP700
Reinforcement
25 kg/m3
Ground deck
Box girder, 180mm
Total
1364.38 m2
Area from Revit structural model
Ground deck
Box girder, 180mm
Concrete
305.6 kg/m2
Lcabyg prestressed box girder used. 180 mm
Ground deck
Box girder, 180mm
Reinforcement
7.2 kg/m2
Ground deck
Box girder, 180mm
Radon protection
1 m2/m2
Ground deck
Box girder, 180mm
Screed, gravel
160 kg/m2
1600 kg screed gravel per m3: https://havehandel.dk/vaegtfylde-og-massefylde/
Ground deck
Box girder, 180mm
Insulation, total
1128.9 m2
Area of FSBP400 and FSBP400+250 is subtracted
Ground deck
Box girder, 180mm
Insulation, total
0.4 m3/m2
Sanitation
Toilets
Total
20 stk
Sanitation
Toilets
Sanitation ceramics
26 kg/stk
https://www.xl-byg.dk/shop/duravit-starck-3-m-skujlt-montering-haengetoiletskaal-6710032#specifications-
anchor 
Sanitation
Zink, procelain*
Total
23 stk
2 pcs with 2 fixtures. Fixture weighs 1.8 kg/pcs and zink weighs 13 kg/pcs
Sanitation
Zink, procelain*
Sanitation ceramics
299 kg
https://www.xl-byg.dk/shop/laufen-val-0-haandvask-60-cm-hvid-6741433#specifications-anchor 
Sanitation
Zink, procelain*
Fixtures
0.15 kg/kg
https://www.xl-byg.dk/shop/grohe-get-haandvaskarmatur-1-greb-krom-6710050#specifications-anchor 
Pavement
Concrete tiles
Total
0.01 m3/m2
600 m2
New concrete tiles. Reused pavement is not included
Heat
District heat exchanger
Total
1 stk
LCAbyg standard
Heat
District heat exchanger
District heat exchanger
400 kg/stk
Assumed that there is no waste
Heat
District heat exchanger
Circulation pump, 50-250 W
1 stk/stk
Assumed that there is no waste
Heat
District heating
Pipes, floor heating, 200mm gap
1 m2/m2
1359 m2
1359 m2 heated area
324
120
Udvendig væg
Invendig væg
Udvendig vægbeklædning
9mm vindspærre
245 mm isolering
Dampspærre
45 mm isolering
2x12.5 mm gips
21.3 Type 2 - Træ facade
21.3 Type 4 - Vingetegl facade
21.3 Type 3 - Stål facade
22.3 Type 1 - Glasvæg træningsrum
22.1 Type 1 - Gipsvæg 
22.4 - Akustik panel
21.1 Type 1 - Ydervæg skelet konstruktion
21.1 Type 2 - Ydervæg letbeton
120
300
108 mm mursten
30 mm ventilation
300 mm isolering
120 mm letbeton
30 mm trapez plade
38 mm lægter
25 mm afstandslister
21 mm træ
38 mm lægter
25 mm afstandsliste
25 3873
30 108
62
73 mm vingetegl
38 mm lægter
25 mm afstandsliste
136
20 mm trælamel
30 mm PET akustik batts
12 mm krydsfiner
9
245
45
13
13
22.1 Type 2 - Gipsvæg cisterne 
22.3 Type 2 - Glasvæg krearum
50
22.1 Type 3 - Gipsvæg skørt 
150
150
12.5 mm gips
45 mm stålprofil
2x12.5 mm gips
100 mm cisterne?
22.2 Type 1 - Muret væg halvsten
114 mm mursten
114
22.2 Type 2 - Muret væg helsten
228 mm mursten
228
125
93
83
25 38 20
2538 30
558
27.2 Tag konstruktion m. gips
Tagbeklædning
2 lag tagpap 
25 mm rupløjede brædder
75 mm ventilation 
295 mm isolering 
Damspærre 
45 mm isolering 
12 mm krydsfiner 
15 mm fibergips
47.2 - Stål
47.1 - Beklædningstegl
47.3 - Træ
47.4 - Vingetegl
93
100
30 mm trapez plade
38 mm lægter
25 mm afstandslister
21 mm træ på klink
38 mm lægter
73 mm vingetegl
38 mm lægter
25 mm afstandsliste
37 mm beklædningstegl
38 mm lægter
25 mm afstandslister
37
38
25
30
38
25
21
38
73
38
25
136
5
5
25
73
295
45
12
15
475
Nedhængt lofter
35.1 Gipsloft (under etagedæk)
35.2 Hygiejne loft
27.1 Tag konstruktion m. troldtekt
5
5
25
75
295
45
25
475
2 lag tagpap 
25 mm rupløjede brædder
75 mm ventilation 
295 mm isolering 
Damspærre 
45 mm tekstil akustik
25 mm troldtekt
59
35.3 60x60 systemloft
23.1 Tærrendæk
Gulvbelægning
43.1 - Linoleum
43.2 - Fliser
43.3 - Sportsgulv
43.4 - Mursten
100 mm beton
Radonsikring
400 mm polystyrene
100 mm afretning
7
10
10
15
42
7 mm sportsmatte
2x10 mm MDF plade
Plastfolie
15 mm sviktelement
9 mm fliser
fliselim
9
2
11
54 mm mursten
30 mm afretningsand
250 mm stabil grus
2.5 mm linoleum
20 mm afretningslag
600
100
200
200
100
3
20
23.2 Etagedæk m. gips loft
30
19
20
200
25
25
16
16
350
30 mm gulvbelægning
19 mm floor board
Trinlydsdug
20 mm trapezplade
200 mm c-profil
25 mm lydbøjle
45 mm isolering
25 mm monteringsprofil
2x15,5 mm gips
54
30
250
334
23.3 Etagedæk m. hygiejne loft
30
19
20
200
25
25
16
16
350
30 mm gulvbelægning
19 mm floor board
Trinlydsdug
20 mm trapezplade
200 mm c-profil
25 mm lydbøjle
45 mm isolering
25 mm monteringsprofil
2x15,5 mm gips (hygiejne)
Projekt:
Sagsnr:
Emne:
Arkitekt: 
Bygherre:
Rev:
Kont:
Godk:
Tegningsnr: 
Mål:
Dato:
Sign:
1 : 20
IKB016001_K01_H5_EXX_N061
Børnehuset på Tobaksvejen
Normal konstruktioner
Gladsaxe Kommune
Lendager Group
2019_385
RD
NF/AH
CD
29/05/2020
IKB016001_K01_H5_EXX_N061
Ni
APPENDIX E
88
