==PAGE:1==
Glacier calving front delineation using ma­
chine learning
Master Thesis
Mathias Sabroe Simonsen
DTU Space
National Space Institute
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
Mathias Sabroe Simonsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Gordon Hamilton
Published by:
DTU, National Space Institute, Ørsteds Plads, building 348, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at DTU Space, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
Mathias Sabroe Simonsen ­ s164034
Signature
Date
ii
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
January 9th, 2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Melting of Greenland’s glaciers is a big contributor to global sea level rise[1]. There­
fore tracking glacier calving fronts is an important part of modelling and predicting sea
level rise. Conventionally these calving fronts are hand drawn which is a time consuming
process, which limits the available data. This thesis presents a method to automatically
delineate calving fronts in Sentinel­1 radar images using a U­Net. Three sets of models
have been trained, one set trained and tested on the same glacier and two other sets
trained on 2 and 6 glaciers and tested on a separate glacier. Two different ways to label
the calving front during training is tested along with different types of image and label pre­
processing. The best model had an average error of 140 meters when tested on Helheim
Glacier. The models were also tested on 3 glaciers where the calving front is more difficult
to detect to test the limits of the models and the radar images.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my project supervisors for their great guidance, suggestions and help
during this thesis.
John Peter Merryman Boncori, Main supervisor, DTU Space
Morten Rieger Hannemose, co­supervisor, DTU Compute
Nanna B. Karlsson, co­supervisor, GEUS
Jonas Kvist Andersen, co­supervisor, DTU Space
iv
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
CLAHE contrast limited adaptive histogram equalization. 15, 35, 45, 47, 56, 61, 62, 69,
71
DEM Digital Elevation Model. 14, 32
ESA CCI ESA Climate Change Initiative. 1, 24, 25, 28, 33, 36, 37, 43, 72
GIS Geographic Information System. 11, 14, 24
SAFE Standard Archive Format for Europe. 13, 26, 35
SAR synthetic aperture radar. 3
SLC Single Look Complex. 3, 13
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Radar theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Neural network theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methods
11
3.1
The two label approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
The pipeline from radar data to predicted calving front . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Quality metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
The data
23
4.1
The images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
The calving front labels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3
The glaciers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Results
35
5.1
Training and testing on the same glacier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.2
Training on two glaciers and testing on other glaciers . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.3
Training on six glaciers and testing on other glaciers . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
6
Discussion
59
6.1
Results summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6.2
Line delineation and full segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
6.3
Limitations of the model and the radar data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
6.4
Summary and recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
7
Conclusion
71
Bibliography
73
A Appendix
75
A.1 List of SAFE products used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
A.2 List of ArcticDEM tiles used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
A.3 Full segmentation models trained on two glaciers, not shown in main text
. 82
A.4 Difficult glaciers, results not shown in main text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The mass loss from the glaciers of Greenland has a large impact on the global sea level.
This mass loss happens by for example iceberg calving from the glaciers, therefore track­
ing the glacier calving front lines is an important part of predicting future sea level rise[2].
Conventionally these calving front lines are hand drawn using satellite imagery, for ex­
ample the ESA CCI[3] or the PROMICE[4] data sets. The calving front lines are tedious
to draw by hand, so usually only one or a few calving fronts are delineated per year per
glacier. The limited amount of data restricts our understanding of the development of the
glaciers and calving fronts during the year.
This thesis aims at creating an automated way of extracting the calving fronts from satellite
imagery, specifically Sentinel­1 radar imagery, to increase the number of delineated the
calving fronts over time. Sentinel­1 radar imagery was chosen as the sensor can see the
ground in all weather conditions and is indifferent to day and night, so the calving fronts
can also be delineated during the arctic night. As far as I know, no automated methods
are operationally used to delineate calving fronts. The thesis builds on prior work done
during my synthesis project where an automated method was created to delineated the
calving fronts of a single glacier, Jakobshavn. This thesis builds on the synthesis project
with the aim of making an automated method to delineate the calving front of any glacier,
and not just the glacier(s) the method was trained on.
Some related work has already been done on the topic of automatically delineating glacier
calving fronts. Zhang et al. released papers in 2019[6] and 2021[5] about automatically
delineating calving fronts. The first paper from 2019 is only focused on delineating calv­
ing fronts from the Jakobshavn glacier. Images from the radar satellite TerraSAR­X is
used to train and test a U­Net[7]. The 2020 Zhang et al. paper[5] is about creating a
generalized method for delineating the calving fronts of glaciers. The method from the
2020 paper is trained on the glaciers Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq and tested on Hel­
heim using imagery from 7 different satellites, 2 are optical and 5 are radar. They evaluate
four different deep­learning network architectures U­Net, DeepLabv3+ with ResNet, DRN,
and MobileNet as the backbones. They also test three different histogram normalization
schemes, histogram equalization, linear stretching, and no histogram modification. They
find that RN­DeepLabv3+ using histogram equalization gives the lowest test error of 86
meters. This thesis takes some inspiration from this paper e.g. training on Jakobshavn
and Kangerlussuaq and testing on Helheim along with the histogram equalization, but
also expands on that by training and testing on more glaciers and evaluating contrast lim­
ited adaptive histogram equalization. Another notable paper is the Calving Front Machine
(CALFIN) paper[8]. Here a modification of the DeepLabV3+ Xception[9] neural network
is trained using 22678 optical Landsat images of 66 glaciers. The Landsat images are fil­
tered to only contain 20% cloud pixels or less. Their method achieves an average error of
86.76±1.43 m. The CALFIN network is also tested on Sentinel­1 radar images, but they
use images of Antarctic glaciers, and looking at the images they seem to be a lot easier
to delineate because the glaciers in general don’t have any ice mélange in front of them,
and the contrast between the open ocean and calving front is very clear. Methods other
than deep neural networks have also been employed to delineate calving fronts. A very
recent paper from November 2021 describes a method to delineate calving fronts using 2­
D wavelet transform modulus maxima segmentation using optical Landsat imagery. They
achieve a median misfit between 10.9±9.8 meters and 75.9±34.0 meters depending on
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
1
==PAGE:12==
if the conditions are clear with no sea ice, or with sea ice. The papers mentioned here
are just some notable highlights from the state of the art. Most of the related work on this
topic is usually focused on either only optical imagery or a mix between optical and radar.
The work done in this thesis is entirely focused on radar.
The thesis contains 7 chapters, chapter 1 being this introduction setting up and motivating
the work. Chapter 2 explains the radar and neural network theory necessary to understand
the data and processing of the thesis. Chapter 3 contains a description of the applied
methods to get the results. Chapter 4 describes the data used to train and test the different
models. Chapter 5 consists of three sections describing the results of using three different
amounts of training data, and a section summarising the results using quantitative quality
measures described in the methods chapter. Chapter 6 discusses the important and
significant parts of the different results. Finally chapter 7 consists of a short conclusion,
summarising the work done and briefly describing the results.
2
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:13==
2
Theory
This chapter will first introduce the basic principles behind Sentinel­1 imaging and the
unique features and distortions that come with radar imaging. Then the basics of neural
networks and U­Net will be introduced. The aim of these sections is for a reader not
familiar with either of these topics to get a basic understanding of them, to be able to
understand the data, processing and the neural network model in the rest of this thesis.
2.1
Radar theory
The images used to train and test the neural network in detecting calving fronts are im­
ages acquired from Sentinel­1. Sentinel­1 is a satellite constellation that consists of two
identical synthetic aperture radar (SAR) satellites, Sentinel­1A and Sentinel­1B. The two
satellites share the same orbital plane, such that the same area of the Earth (at the equa­
tor) is revisited every 3 days by one of the two satellites[10]. This repeat cycle increases
to less than a day near the poles. Because Sentinel­1 uses radar it can observe the
ground in all weather and is not affected by day or night. The high revisit frequency and
indifference to weather and day/night makes Sentinel­1 great for detecting calving fronts
with the goal of tracking the development of the calving fronts throughout the year. Espe­
cially in the winter where the long arctic nights limit the use of for example optical imaging
satellites.
The radar on Sentinel­1 is looking to the right relative to the direction of travel, with an
incidence angle of 29.1◦­ 46.0◦(depending on distance down range). An illustration of
the Sentinel­1 geometry can be seen in figure 2.1. The radar creates images by sending
out pulses of radio waves to illuminate a scene and records the returns as the pulses are
scattered and reflected by the scene. The intensity of each pixel in the image depends
on the how large the returns are. The time delay between sending and receiving the
signal is used to place the returns in the image. The longer the delay, the further away
from the radar the returns are placed in the image. Because the radar measures both
the amplitude and phase of the return signal, the images downloaded contain complex
values. These images are called Single Look Complex (SLC). In this thesis only the
amplitude information in the SLC’s are used for the images of the glaciers.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
3
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: An illustration of the Sentinel­1 sensing geometry. The figure is created by
Harris Geospatial[11].
Because the radar is looking to the side at an angle with the horizon, large gradients in
the terrain can cause different geometric distortions in the image. These distortions are
called foreshortening, layover and shadowing. Both foreshortening and layover occur
because the distance from the radar is measured from the radar in orbit to the ground in
the slant range, but the features in the images are projected onto the ground and not on
the slant range. Foreshortening occurs when imaging a tall feature where the radio waves
reaches the bottom of the feature first and then the top, for example a mountain. Because
the top of the feature is elevated, the distance in the image between the bottom and top
is shorter than in reality and the slope will appear compressed. Layover is very similar
to foreshortening, but layover occurs when the top of a feature is so tall it is closer to the
radar than the bottom of the feature. So in the image the top of the feature will be placed
before the bottom, leading to layover. Shadowing is very simple, because the radar is not
looking straight down, but at an angle with the horizon, tall features can block the radars
view, creating a shadow behind the tall feature. Relevant for this project, shadowing
could also occur behind a tall calving front, which might help highlight it. Another feature
of radar images is double bounce, where the radio waves are reflected up by the surface
and then reflected directly back to the radar by another object. Double bounce could
for example occur between a calving front and the ocean. So if the radar is imaging a
calving front looking from the ocean, and the calving front is tall enough, the calving front
should be highlighted by double bounce. Since the mountains surrounding the glaciers
and the calving fronts have a certain height, we are certain to see these distortions in the
radar images of calving fronts. So the neural network will probably be able to use these
distortions as features to identify the calving front. Illustrations of foreshortening, layover,
shadowing and double bounce can be seen in figure 2.2.
4
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:15==
(a) Foreshortening
(b) Layover
(c) Shadowing
(d) Double bounce
Figure 2.2: Illustrations of the distortions and features of radar imaging. In figures (a) and
(b) the bottom line represents the feature locations on the ground while the top line rep­
resents where these features are placed in the radar image. In figure (c) is an illustration
of shadowing and in figure (d) is an illustration of double bounce. Figures (a), (b) and (c)
are by Christian Wolff[12].
Because Sentinel­1 is looking to the right relative to the direction of travel the same place
on the ground can be viewed from two perspectives. As the satellite is travelling from
south to north, the scene will be viewed from an ascending orbit. As the satellite comes
up behind the Earth finishing an ascending orbit it is travelling from north to south and
will view the scene in a descending orbit. An example of an ascending and descending
image of the same glacier can be seen in figure 2.3. In the image it is very clear how the
calving front is highlighted by layover and double bounce in the ascending image, while
it is highlighted by shadowing in the descending image.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: An example of an ascending and descending image of the same glacier,
Narsap Sermia which is located on Greenlands west coast, along with illustrations of the
satellite’s respective direction of travel and viewing angle. In the ascending image, the
satellite is looking from the ocean towards the glacier, so the calving front is prominent
with layover and double bounce. In the descending image the satellite is looking from
inland towards the glacier. From this perspective the calving front creates shadowing on
the ocean behind it, highlighting it clearly.
A common problem in radar imagery is speckle. Speckle is caused by several scatterers
being in each resolution cell of the image. The signal from each scatterer in the resolution
cell adds constructively and destructively which results in darker and brighter pixels in the
image. So something that would appear very uniform in an optical image, for example a
grass field or a concrete slab, will have darker and brighter spots in a radar image. To
reduce the speckle a commonly used method is multilooking. Multilooking is essentially
a spatial averaging of the amplitude in the radar signal, followed by decimation, which is
just a downsampling. An example of two Sentinel­1 images, one without multilooking and
one with multilooking can be seen in figure 2.4. The reduction in speckle is very clear.
(a) Without multilooking
(b) With multilooking
Figure 2.4: An example of the same Sentinel­1 image of the Helheim glacier, one image
without multilooking and one image with multilooking.
6
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Neural network theory
To automatically detect the calving fronts in the Sentinel­1 radar images a neural network
is used, specifically using an architecture called a U­Net. The predicted calving fronts are
made by inputting a 512×512 radar image to the network, of a glacier with the calving
front visible. The trained network then outputs a 512×512 image with numbers between
0 and 1. Where the 1’s indicate the location of the calving (or the glacier/bedrock) and the
0’s indicates none calving front (or the ocean).
2.2.1
The network architecture
U­Net[7] uses a contracting and expansive path of convolutions with skip connections
in­between, an illustration of the U­Net architecture can be seen in figure 2.5. The idea
behind U­Net is to allow the network to learn at different scales by applying successive
convolutions at different resolutions. The information lost during downsampling is con­
served by concatenating the feature maps from the contracting path before downsam­
pling with the corresponding step in the expansive path. The convolutions used have a
kernel size of 3×3, with a stride of 1 and a padding of 1 to ensure the resolution stays the
same between convolutions. The output from the convolutions is then a tensor with size
H × W × C, where H and W is the height and width of the input and C is the number
of channels or features, that depend on the number of kernel chosen for the convolution.
The contracting path consists of a series of two 3×3 convolutions after which the resolu­
tion is halved using downsampling. This is then repeated 4 times, where the resolution is
halved in each step, but the number of features from the convolutions are doubled, with
the number of features from the initial convolution set to 64. So first the resolution of the
images are 512×512×1, then in the first two convolutions with a kernel size of 3×3×64
the output is a 512×512×64 tensor. In the two next convolutions after downsampling the
dimensions are 256×256×128 and so on.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.5: The U­Net architecture used. The height and width of the boxes corresponds
to the resolution and number of channels in each layer of the network respectively, starting
with the input image with a resolution of 512×512 pixels with one channel. Each convo­
lution has a kernel size of 3×3 followed by a batch normalization, ReLU and dropout with
a probability of 0.2. Max pooling is done with a kernel size of 2×2, cutting the resolution
in half. Upsampling is done with bilinear interpolation with a scale factor of 2 to double
the resolution. This figure is heavily inspired by the figure in the original U­Net paper[7],
but adapted to fit the U­Net used in this thesis.
After each convolution an activation function is applied in the form of a ReLU, which returns
the input number if the input is positive or or if the input is 0 or negative. ReLU can be
expressed as
ReLU(x) = max(x, 0)
where x is the input. The downsampling between the two convolutions is done using max
pooling with a kernel size and stride of 2. The max pooling operation looks at the input in
a 2×2 grid and returns the largest value in the grid. Then it moves the 2×2 grid over by
2 so the same input is never used more than once. This operation effectively halves the
resolution of the input. An illustration of max pooling can be seen in figure 2.6
Figure 2.6: An illustration of the max pooling operation, image by Peltarion.
8
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:19==
After the contraction path of U­Net comes the expansive path, which is simply the con­
traction path in reverse. But instead of downsampling with max pool to half the resolution,
upsampling is done using bilinear interpolation to double the resolution. The convolutions
are also used to decrease the number of channels by half for each upsampling step. To
retain the information lost in the previous downsampling steps, the output from the double
convolutions is concatenated to the corresponding step with the same dimensions in the
expansive path before the double convolutions. At the end of the expansive path when
the dimensions are 512×512×64 a final convolution with a 1×1 kernel size is done to re­
turn to the original image size of 512×512×1. Finally a sigmoid function is applied to the
output of the final convolution which transforms the output of the network to be between
0 and 1. The sigmoid function and it’s plot can be seen below in equation 2.1 and figure
2.7. When the network has been trained and is used to predict calving fronts the output
of the sigmoid is thresholded such that pixels larger than or equal, for example, 0.9 are
set to 1’s and pixels below are set to 0.
S(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(2.1)
Figure 2.7: The sigmoid function, which converts the input to a number between 0 and 1.
2.2.2
Training
The U­Net is trained using Sentinel­1 images of calving fronts with the corresponding
hand drawn calving front labels. When a radar image of a calving front is input into the
network we want the output to match the label as closely as possible. The network uses
the weights in the kernels of all the convolutions in the network to determine the output.
During training these kernel weights are updated such that the output matches the label
as closely as possible. To measure the difference between the network output and the
desired true label the binary cross­entropy loss function is used
BCELoss(x, l) = −1
N
N
∑
i=1
(w · li · log(xi) + (1 −li) · log(1 −xi))
(2.2)
where x is the network prediction (output) and l is the label we want the prediction to
match. When the label pixel is one, l = 1, only the first part is used and when the label
pixel is zero, l = 0, only the second part is used. N is the batch number which is how
many images is run through the network at a time and i is the current image in the batch,
so we are averaging the loss between the images in the batch. Finally w is a weight
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
9
==PAGE:20==
that can be used to increase the importance of getting the l = 1 classes correct, so if
the weight is larger and the network misclassifies a 1 in the label the loss will be larger
than misclassifying a 0. The weight is used to counter act the large class imbalance in
the calving front labels that are dominated by none calving front labels (labels called the
line delineation approach in the methods chapter). Without this weight the network would
quickly learn to just predict the whole image as none calving front and get a pretty low
loss, since only the few calving front pixels are misclassified. The loss gets smaller as
the difference between the network prediction and the label decreases and the loss is 0
when they are equal.
During training, the kernel weights are learnt using an algorithm called backpropagation
that calculates the gradient of the loss function with respect to each of the kernel weights
in the convolutions. The weights are then updated in the direction that would decrease
the loss. The weights are updated using an optimization algorithm called Adam[13] with
an initial learning rate of 0.0001.
In short, during training four things happen. A batch of training data is passed through the
network to get some predictions. Using the loss function the predictions are compared
with the true labels to get a loss. The gradients for all the learnable parameters (e.g. the
kernel weights in the convolutions) are computed. The learnable parameters are updated
using the gradients to reduce the loss. Once all the available training data has been
passed through the network oen time an epoch is said to have passed. The network then
trains for as many epoches as is specified.
Dropout and batch normalization
After each convolution is a batch normalization layer and dropout layer. Spatial dropout[14]
randomly zero’s entire channels that are output from the convolutions with probability p
during training. In this case with a probability of p = 0.2. When training is finished dropout
is turned off and all channels are used. Dropout is used to prevent the different features
becoming over­reliant on each other, since dropout might randomly zero a feature. This
means dropout can prevent overfitting[15].
Batch normalization has been shown to increase the speed of training[16] by applying
normalization inside the network as a part of the training phase. In this network, batch
normalization is applied after each convolution layer. The batch normalization operation
is calculated as
y = x −E[x]
Var[x] + ϵγ + β
(2.3)
where x is the output from the convolution layer and y is the output from the batch nor­
malization layer. E[x] and Var[x] is the mean and variance of x. During training the mean
and variance is calculated as running estimates and after training the calculated mean
and variance is used to normalize the data. γ and β are learnable parameters like the
kernel weights, initialized at 1 and 0 respectively. γ and β is used to scale the output from
the convolutions to decrease the loss.
10
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:21==
3
Methods
This chapter will describe the processing necessary to understand and replicate the re­
sults. Section 3.1 describes the two different approaches of labelling the calving front for
the neural network, section 3.2 describes the processing from the downloaded radar data
to training the neural network and predicting calving fronts, finally section 3.3 describes
the quality metrics used to gauge the performance of the different models.
3.1
The two label approaches
In this project two different approaches to representing the calving front in the training
labels were tried. First a simple representation where 1’s represent the calving front pixels
and 0’s represent none calving front pixels in the label image. These labels are hand
drawn using satellite imagery in GIS software, I have used QGIS[17]. This approach
will be referred to as the line delineation approach. In the second labelling approach 1’s
represent the glacier and the surrounding bedrock pixels, while 0’s represent the ocean
pixels. This approach will be referred to as the full segmentation approach. The motivation
behind the full segmentation approach is to force the models to create continuous calving
front delineations, since the models trained using the line delineation approach tend to
create gaps in the predicted delineations. An example of the two labelling approaches
along with the corresponding radar image can be seen in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Example of the two labelling approaches. The line delineation approach in the
middle and the full segmentation approach to the left. The two delineations are created
using the radar image to the right.
The full segmentation training labels are generated using the labels from the line delin­
eation approach which are hand drawn using the images of the glacier. The full segmen­
tation labels are generated by combining the line delineation labels and a segmentation
that indicates the location of the bedrock in the images of the glacier. Since the bedrock
is static, only one bedrock segmentation is made per glacier. The bedrock segmentation
is drawn similarly to the line delineation in QGIS, except a polygon is drawn instead of
a line. When the line delineation and bedrock segmentations have been combined, the
pixels that make up the glacier are filled using a flood fill operation. The flood fill will only
work if the line delineation touches the bedrock on either side of the glacier, if it doesn’t
make contact at both sides the ocean pixels will also be flood filled. An illustration of the
steps required to create a full segmentation label can also be seen in figure 3.2. When
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
11
==PAGE:22==
a network has been trained to output full segmentations, we want to be able to go back
to the usual calving front delineation. To create a calving front delineation from the full
segmentation approach, a line is drawn at the border of the two classes and then the line
at the known bedrock is removed. This leaves the delineation at the border between the
ocean and the glacier , i.e. the calving front. This is also explained and illustrated further
down in figure 3.9.
(a) Line delineation
(b) Combine bedrock and line
delineations
(c) Flood fill the glacier
Figure 3.2: An illustration of how full segmentation labels are created from line delineation
labels and a bedrock segmentation. The starting point is the line delineation (figure a),
then the bedrock segmentation and line delineation are combined (figure b), finally the
glacier side of the segmentation is flood filled(figure c) to create the full segmentation
label.
12
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:23==
3.2
The pipeline from radar data to predicted calving front
A flowchart of the pipeline can be seen in figure 3.3. The processing chain is described
below.
Figure 3.3: A flowchart of the pipeline from downloading radar images (SLC) to having a
calving front prediction. The process starts at the red block and ends at the green block.
The top part of the processing in the green box only needs to be done once per glacier.
Note that the two labelling approaches, line delineation and full segmentation, are never
used together, only one labelling approach is chosen per network trained.
3.2.1
DEM, download, initial processing and creating labels
The Sentinel­1 image data is retrieved from the Alaska Satellite Facility1. Each image is
downloaded as a Single Look Complex (SLC) using the Interferometric Wide Swath (IW)
beam mode and the HH polarization. The images are downloaded in the Standard Archive
Format for Europe (SAFE) format. The first step in the processing is a multilooking of the
radar data with factors 4 and 1 in the range and azimuth directions respectively. The
multilooking is done using the multi_look_ScanSAR GAMMA script. The Sentinel­1 data
used for this project is acquired in the the IW mode where the imaging resolution is 5×20
meters (in range and azimuth respectively), so the multilooking serves to both remove
speckle and make the resolution cells square. After multilooking the spatial resolution
1https://asf.alaska.edu/
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
13
==PAGE:24==
will effectively be 20×20 meters. Then the multilooked image is geocoded to a Digital
Elevation Model (DEM) of the bedrock and mountains surrounding the glacier using the
geocode_back GAMMA script. The DEM is provided by The Polar Geospatial Center at
the University of Minnesota through the ArcticDEM data set[18]. The ArcticDEM tiles
used can be found in the tables in appendix A.2. Geocoding is done to resample the
image from radar geometry onto ground geometry. In this case the image is resampled
to a 16×16 meter geocoded grid, so the size of each pixel in the radar images is 16×16
meters (before the U­Net, all images are resized to 512×512 pixels, so this does not hold
true after resizing the images).
To improve the contrast of the geocoded radar intensity image a simple transformation is
applied to each pixel. The transformation is
x′
ij =
√
log(xij + 1)
(3.1)
where xij is a pixel in the geocoded radar intensity image and x′
ij is a transformed pixel.
A comparison of an image before and after the contrast transformation can be seen in
figure 3.4, it is pretty clear why the initial contrast transformation is necessary.
(a) Without contrast transformation
(b) With contrast transformation
Figure 3.4: Example of an image before and after the contrast transformation x′
ij =
√
log(xij + 1).
The geocoded radar intensity image is then ready to be opened with a GIS program, as
a raster file. The raster file is opened with QGIS[17] and converted to a .TIF file. If the
calving front of the glacier needs to be delineated, a manual delineation can be drawn
on the raster image of the glacier in QGIS as a line shapefile. The delineation is then
converted to a .TIF file in QGIS using the raster image as the extent for the label image,
so the label image matches the image of the glacier. If calving fronts from a data set
is used, they are also loaded into QGIS and converted to .TIF files. At this stage the
bedrock surrounding the glacier can also be delineated as a polygon shapefile in QGIS
and converted to a .TIF. The bedrock delineation is used to create the full segmentation
labels and to remove predicted calving front pixels on or near the bedrock.
14
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:25==
3.2.2
Image and label pre­processing
The overall shade of the images can vary greatly, mostly depending on the time of year. I
think this happens because the snow and ice has more liquid water content in the summer.
The liquid water reflects more of the radar waves away from the radar, resulting in an over­
all darker appearance of the glacier and sea ice. To reduce the differences between the
images two preprocessing methods were tested, histogram equalization and contrast lim­
ited adaptive histogram equalization (CLAHE). Histogram equalization is a way to improve
the contrast of an image by transforming the data in the image to use more of the avail­
able intensity range. Histogram normalization also has downsides as it only considers the
global contrast which can lead to worse contrasts in certain local areas. Contrast limited
adaptive histogram equalization tries to address this by applying histogram normalization
in small tiles of 8×8 pixels. The histogram equalization and CLAHE implementations used
are from the OpenCV[19] library. The effects of both histogram equalization and CLAHE
can be seen in figure 3.5 where both have been applied to a dark and light image. In
the figure it is clear how both histogram equalization and CLAHE make the light and dark
images a lot more similar. It’s also apparent how histogram equalization spreads the pixel
values out evenly over the entire range between 0 and 1 and CLAHE doesn’t spread out
the pixels as evenly but the local contrast is better in the image.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
15
==PAGE:26==
(a) Light image
(b) Light image, HE
(c) Light image, CLAHE
(d) Histogram
(e) Histogram, HE
(f) Histogram, CLAHE
(g) Dark image
(h) Dark image, HE
(i) Dark image, CLAHE
(j) Histogram
(k) Histogram, HE
(l) Histogram, CLAHE
Figure 3.5: Example of the effects of histogram equalization(HE) and CLAHE on a light
and dark image of the glacier Helheim along with the histogram for each case. The light
image in the first row is from Janurary 17th 2015 and the dark image in the third row is
from June 28th 2016.
Another form of preprocessing that was tested is applying a Gaussian blur to the line de­
lineations label during training. The idea being to reward the model when it also predicted
the area near the calving front. Instead of having a very sharp drop off from 1 to 0 the
drop off would be more gradual. The blurring is done by first convolving the image with a
one dimensional kernel in the horizontal direction and then in the vertical direction. The
16
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:27==
kernel is calculated as Gaussian function
G(x) =
1
√
2πσ2 e−x2
2σ2
(3.2)
where x is the distance from the origin and σ is the standard deviation of the Gaussian
function. When this preprocessing was applied a standard deviation of σ = 3 was used.
An example of a normal and a blurred label can be seen in figure 3.6.
(a) Unblurred label
(b) Blurred label
Figure 3.6: An example of a unblurred and blurred label. The label is from December 7th
2015 of the Helheim glacier.
3.2.3
Data handling and U­Net
With enough images and corresponding delineations of calving fronts a U­Net model can
be trained to automatically delineate calving fronts. The U­Net implementation used is by
Alexandre Milesi[20] implemented in the PyTorch[21] framework with slight modifications
by me and the data loader is implemented by Aladdin Persson[22] with very heavy modifi­
cation by me. Before the images are passed to the network during training all images are
resized to 512×512 pixels and normalized by dividing every pixel by the maximum pixel
value in the image. If the model is trained on more than one glacier, data augmentation
is applied in the form of vertical and horizontal flipping both with a 50% probability and a
rotation by 0◦, 90◦, 180◦or 270◦each with an equal probability of 25%. Data augmenta­
tion is used to expose the network to more glacier configurations to improve the networks
performance on other glaciers the network has not trained on. The data augmentation is
done with the Albumentations[23] Python package.
The U­Net is trained using a batch size of 7, this is the largest batch size my GPU could
accommodate. The GPU used is a GTX 1070 with 8 GB of VRAM. The loss function
used is the binary cross­entropy described in the theory chapter. The value for the weight
of the positive class w depended on what training data and was only used with the line
delineation labelling approach. The specific value for w in each case is mentioned in
table 5.1. The weight w was chosen to even out the class imbalance, so if there were
100 calving pixels and 5000 non­calving front pixels in the training data, the weight was
w = 5000
100 = 50. The number of epoches used for each model is also mentioned in table
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
17
==PAGE:28==
5.1. As mentioned in the theory chapter the optimizer used is the Adam optimizer[13],
with the initial learning rate set to 0.0001.
The post­processing done depends on the label approach used, line delineation or full
segmentation, described earlier in section 3.1.
Line delineation
The predictions output by the network contain values between 0 and 1 due to the sigmoid
function at the end of the network, as described in the theory chapter. To binarize the
network output a threshold is applied such that values below the threshold are set to 0
and values above the threshold are set to 1. When using the line delineation approach
this threshold is set to 0.9. The predictions output by the network are usually thicker than
the very thin true labels. To address this problem skeletonize is applied to the predicted
labels. Skeletonize is a function that reduces binary structures in an image to 1 pixel wide
representations. It works by successively passing over the image, removing the border
pixels of the objects in the image, but making sure to not break up an object into two. An
example of the skeletonize function applied to a calving front prediction can be seen in
figure 3.7. The skeletonize function used is implemented in the scikit­image toolbox [24]
for Python.
(a) Before skeletonize
(b) After skeletonize
Figure 3.7: Illustration of the effects of the skeletonize function as described in the text
above. The left figure is the thick prediction output by the network and the right figure is the
prediction after it has been thinned using skeletonize. The red is the network prediction
and the blue is the true label.
When a model is predicting the location of a calving front, many models have a tendency
to predict the border between the glacier and the bedrock, as a calving front along with the
actual calving front. Probably because the contrast between glacier and bedrock can be
very similar to the contrast between glacier and ocean. Since the bedrock is static we can
easily remove any predictions that are on or near the bedrock. To remove predictions near
the bedrock, a dilation with a disk of radius 10 pixels is applied to the bedrock label. An
example of removing predictions on or near the bedrock while maintaining the prediction
on the calving front can be seen in figure 3.8.
18
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:29==
(a) Before removing bedrock predictions
(b) After removing bedrock predictions
Figure 3.8: An example of a prediction from the network where the predictions at or near
the bedrock has and has not been removed. The red is the prediction from the network
and the blue is the true hand drawn label. The predicted ”dot” in the ocean is just a false
positive.
3.2.4
Full segmentation
When the full segmentation labelling approach is used, the network output first needs
to be thresholded just like the line delineation approach. When the full segmentation
approach is used the threshold used is 0.5. The full segmentation label output by the
network needs to be converted to a calving front delineation. Sometimes the network
output contain small ”islands” in either the ocean or glacier/bedrock classes. These are
removed to allow for extracting the correct delineation. The islands are detected using
using the measure.label function in the scikit­image toolbox [24], which labels connected
regions. The values in regions with less than 1000 pixels are then flipped from 0 to 1 or
vice versa. Alternatively, the values of all but the two largest regions could be flipped,
but there might be glacier configurations where this could cause issues. An example
of an image with and without islands can be seen in figure 3.9a and 3.9b respectively.
Then the border between the glacier/bedrock and ocean class is extracted, this can be
seen in figure 3.9c. The initial extracted border will also include the border between the
bedrock and ocean, so the bedrock polygon is used to remove the border on or near the
bedrock. An example of this can be seen in figure 3.9d where the large polygons indicate
the location of the bedrock near the glacier. The final calving front delineation after the
bedrock border has been removed can be seen in figure 3.9e.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
19
==PAGE:30==
(a) With islands
(b) Islands removed
(c) Border extracted
(d) Remove delineations on/n­
ear bedrock
(e) Final delineation
Figure 3.9: A showcase of the post­processing for the full segmentation labelling ap­
proach. First small islands are removed. Then the border between the two classes is
extracted and the border on or near the bedrock is removed. Then the final calving front
delineation is left.
3.2.5
Finished calving front delineation
After the post­processing the predicted calving front delineation is finished. In theory
once a model has been trained, generating new calving fronts requires no human input
and could be automated after the extent of the glacier of interest has been specified.
Currently downloading the Sentinel­1 images is done manually, but API’s that download
Sentinel­1 images do exist, for example sentinelsat2. Also running individual processing
scripts and the QGIS conversions is also done manually. But the processing scripts can
be run automatically as images are downloaded and the QGIS conversion can be done
with the GDAL library in the command line. QGIS is just used to provide a convenient
interface to run the GDAL commands.
3.3
Quality metrics
When gauging the performance of a model, the predictions on the test images were judged
qualitatively, and also using several quality metrics to judge a models performance quan­
titatively. The quantitative quality metrics used are the mean distance between the label
and predicted delineation, the percent of the labels covered by predictions and the preci­
sion of the prediction.
The mean distance between the label and predicted delineation is calculated by looping
through every label pixel and calculating the Euclidean distance to the nearest prediction
2https://sentinelsat.readthedocs.io/en/master/api_overview.html
20
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:31==
pixel. This is done for every label pixel and the mean of these distances is then used as
the quality metric.
The percent of the front covered is very simple, if a label pixel and a prediction pixel
coincide the label pixel is counted as covered. The amount of covered label pixels is then
divided by the total amount of label pixels and multiplied by 100 to calculate how many
percent of the calving front is covered by the prediction. This metric is good for gauging
the true positives, but it doesn’t say anything about false positives.
To get some information about the false positives the precision is also calculated. Preci­
sion is calculated as
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(3.3)
where TP is the true positive predictions and FP is the false positive predictions. So it is
the ratio between the true positives and the total amount of positive predictions made. If
all the positive predictions made are correct the precision would be 1. If only half of them
are correct the precision would be 0.5.
Since the calving front labels and predictions are very thin it is rare that the predicted
calving front exactly coincides with the label. To incorporate predicted pixels that are
close to the label pixels, another set of quality metrics were calculated allowing for a
certain margin of error. If a predicted calving front pixel is closer than 6 pixels to a label
pixel the predicted pixel would be counted as covering the label pixel and as a true positive
in the precision calculation.
To illustrate the quality metrics, below in figure 3.10 are two calving front predictions, one
of a good prediction and one of a bad prediction, along with the quality metrics for each of
the two cases in table 3.1. Looking at the table of quality metrics, it is clear that the quality
metrics can be used to differentiate the good and bad prediction. It also shows why the
quality metrics that allow for a margin of error are necessary. E.g. in the good case the %
of front covered jumps from 10.4% to 67.0% when a margin of error of 6 pixels is allowed,
and the precision jumps from 0.51 to 0.97.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
21
==PAGE:32==
(a) A good prediction
(b) A bad prediction
Figure 3.10: Examples of a good and a bad calving front prediction on two images of the
Helheim glacier, used to illustrate the quality metrics described in this section. The red is
the prediction and the blue is the true hand drawn label. The quality metrics can be seen
in table 3.1
Case
Mean
distance [pixels] ([meters])
% of front covered
(with margin)
Precision
(with margin)
Good case
14.5 (220)
10.4% (67.0%)
0.51 (0.97)
Bad case
38.1 (577)
0.37% (11.8%)
0.05 (0.58)
Table 3.1: The quality metrics for the good and bad prediction shown in figure 3.10. The
mean distance shown in parentheses is the mean distance in meters. The values for % of
front covered and precision in parentheses is those quality metrics with a margin of error
of 6 pixels allowed. So if a predicted pixel is 3 pixels away from a label pixel, the label
pixel will be counted as covered and the predicted pixel will be counted as a true positive
for in the precision.
22
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:33==
4
The data
Two kinds of data are used in this thesis, satellite images of the glacier calving fronts and
labels that indicate the location of the calving fronts in the images.
4.1
The images
The images used in this thesis are all Sentinel­1 radar intensity images of various glaciers
on the north, east and west coast of Greenland. The specific location of each glacier can
be seen in figure 4.4. The basic principles behind Sentinel­1 imaging are described in
the theory chapter in section 2.1. The images are downloaded and then processed as
described in the methods chapter. In figure 4.1 is a comparison between an optical image
(from Google Earth) and a Sentinel­1 radar image, both depicting the calving front of the
Helheim glacier.
(a) Optical image (Google Earth)
(b) Sentinel­1 image (Sep. 8th 2016)
Figure 4.1: An optical and radar image of the Helheim glacier. The optical image is from
Google Earth and is acquired somewhere between Aug. 2nd 2016 and now, no specific
date is stated. The radar image is a Sentinel­1 intensity image acquired Sep. 8th 2016 in
a descending orbit.
In the Sentinel­1 images of glaciers there usually is a very large difference in the pixel in­
tensity over the year. In the summer the images are usually darker and in the winter they
are usually brighter. I think this happens because in the warmer summer months the ice
and snow on the glacier will have a higher liquid water content. The water in the ice and
snow will then reflect more of the radar pulses out into space instead of backscattering
them back to the radar. This means less signal will return to the radar, and the images
in the summer will be darker overall. An example of a summer and winter image can be
seen in figure 4.2. Because of this large image intensity difference over the seasons, the
training and testing images were chosen to cover all seasons. Along with covering all
seasons, the images were also chosen to include both ascending and descending view­
ing geometries (when possible). In the theory chapter a figure illustrating the difference
between an ascending and descending image was shown in figure 2.3. Because of these
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
23
==PAGE:34==
difference in the ascending/descending images both are used to train and test the models
when available. When I picked the images I tried to pick both ascending and descending
images. But when the calving front delineations were provided in other data sets usually
only either ascending or descending images are used per glacier. In general the perspec­
tive chosen by other data sets was the one looking from the ocean towards to glacier (i.e.
ascending on the west coast, descending on the east coast).
(a) Summer image, June 29th 2020
(b) Winter image, January 25th 2020
Figure 4.2: Examples of a summer and winter Sentinel­1 image of the glacier Jakobshavn.
The difference in the pixel intensity in the summer and winter is very apparent.
4.2
The calving front labels
Each Sentinel­1 image of a calving front has a corresponding label image to indicate
the calving front’s location. Either used to train the neural network to detect the calving
fronts or to test the neural network’s ability to correctly predict the location of the calving
fronts in the images. Some of the label images were delineated by hand by me, other
delineations are from a data set by the ESA Climate Change Initiative (ESA CCI)[3] that
contains calving front locations of 28 major outlet glaciers between 1992 and 2016. Most
of the delineations in the ESA CCI data set are done using optical satellite imagery but a
few of the delineations between 2014 and 2016 use Sentinel­1 radar images. These are
the ESA CCI delineations I use. In addition to the ESA CCI data, two of the delineations
of the Helheim glacier are from a data set uploaded along with the 2021 paper by Zhang
et al.[5]. One of these delineations were chosen because the image contained a very
interesting case of the Helheim glacier where a large 2.8 km long iceberg had just calved
off the glacier. The other image was just used to get 12 Helheim testing delineations so
the result plots could be shown in a nice 3×4 grid. These two images and delineations
can be seen in the results chapter in figure 5.9 and 5.10 in the middle and bottom right.
The labels are created by loading the processed images (processing described in meth­
ods) into QGIS[17] which is a GIS software, and then the calving front is hand drawn on top
of the satellite image. To be able to convert the line delineation labels to full segmentation
24
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:35==
labels as described in the methods chapter, it is very important that the line delineation
meets the bedrock at both ends of the glacier. By doing this it is easy to flood fill the
glacier side of the label to create the full segmentation label. Therefore I made sure that
the delineation met the bedrock for all the delineations I hand drew. I also extended some
of the delineations made by ESA CCI and Zhang et al.[5] to ensure all the delineations
met the bedrock.
When hand delineating the calving front, it can be found in a few different ways. Usually
there will be a slight texture difference between the the glacier and ocean/ice mélange,
the border between them can be used to see the calving front. In Sentinel­1 imagery,
because the radar is side­looking and the calving front usually sticks up over the water
it can also be detected by looking for layover, shadowing or bright double bounce spots
in the image. The geometric principles that give rise to layover, shadowing and double
bounce are explained in the theory chapter. In figure 4.3a and 4.3c are two examples of
Sentinel­1 images of two glaciers and their corresponding labels in figure 4.3b and 4.3d
respectively. In both images the calving front stands out due to the texture difference
between the glacier and ocean/ice mélange. But the calving fronts can also be found by
the layover and double bounce effects in figure 4.3a and the shadowing in figure 4.3c.
Both images are taken in descending orbits(in the images the radar is looking from right
to left), but the first image is on Greenland’s west coast and the second image is on the
east coast. This orientation gives rise to layover at the calving front in the first image and
shadowing at the calving front in the second image.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
25
==PAGE:36==
(a)
Layover
and
double
bounce
example,
Sentinel­1 image
(b) The calving front label
(c) Shadowing example, Sentinel­1 image
(d) The calving front label
Figure 4.3: Two examples images of calving fronts and their corresponding delineations.
Figures (a) and (b) is the image and label of the calving front of Helheim on September
8th 2016. Figures (c) and (d) is the image and label of the calving front of Narsap Sermia
on July 15th 2020. These two examples have very ideal conditions, in other cases the
calving front can be very difficult to detect even for humans, mostly because the difference
between the glacier and ice mélange can be very small.
4.3
The glaciers
Sentinel­1 images of 10 Greenland glaciers have been retrieved to train and test several
neural networks. The location of the glaciers can be seen in figure 4.4 and a table detailing
the glaciers can be seen in table 4.1. An example image of each glacier can be seen below
along with a brief description. A table with all the SAFE products used can be found in
appendix A.1.
26
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.4: A map showing the location of the different glaciers used in this work. The
background map used is Google Maps satellite map of Greenland.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
27
==PAGE:38==
Glacier
Number of
images
Delineation
source
Training
or testing
Ascending/
descending
split
Coast
Width
Jakobshavn
74
ESA CCI & me (9/65)
Both
37 asc, 37 desc
West
10 km
Kangerlussuaq
30
Me
Training
6 asc, 24 desc
East
6 km
Helheim
12
ESA CCI & Zhang (10/2)
Testing
0 asc, 12 desc
East
6 km
Hagen
8
ESA CCI
Training
8 asc, 0 desc
North
10 km
Inngia
9
ESA CCI
Training
9 asc, 0 desc
West
3 km
Kangiata (North)
9
ESA CCI
Training
9 asc, 0 desc
West
3 km
Upernavik
10
ESA CCI*
Training
10 asc, 0 desc
West
4 km
Petermann
4
Me
Testing
2 asc, 2 desc
North
17 km
Zachariae
3
ESA CCI
Testing
0 asc, 3 desc
North
28 km
Narsap Sermia
4
Me
Testing
2 asc, 2 desc
West
4 km
Table 4.1: A table of the different glaciers used in this work and some details about them
and the images I used of the glaciers. The values in parentheses in the delineation source
column is the split between the different delineation sources. *The ESA CCI delineations
of Upernavik were systematically incorrect, they were ∼150 meters to the east of the
calving front in the Sentinel­1 image I had processed. The delineations of this glacier
were corrected by me to fit the radar images.
4.3.1
Jakobshavn
Jakobshavn is one of the more well known and widely studied glaciers in Greenland.
Its official name is Sermeq Kujalleq, but it is often referred to as Jakobshavn glacier.
Jakobshavn is a large glaciers at around 10 km wide and is one of the highest producing
glaciers responsible for draining about 6.5% of Greenland’s ice sheet[25]. In this project
Jakobshavn was the first glacier to be used and some models have been trained and
tested (using different images) on Jakobshavn before other glaciers were added. An
example of a Jakobshavn image can be seen in figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: A descending Sentinel­1 image of Jakobshavn glacier from June 19th 2020.
4.3.2
Kangerlussuaq
Kangerlussuaq is a medium sized glacier at around 6 km wide located on the east coast
of Greenland. Kangerlussuaq was the seconded glacier used in this project and was
28
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:39==
introduced to train on two glaciers (Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq) and test on a third
glacier (Helheim, shown next). An example of an image of Kangerlussuaq can be seen in
figure 4.6. The glacier has interesting shape where the lower two thirds move back and
forth a lot but the upper third is nearly stationary which create a sideways ”U” shape. I
think this happens because the fjord narrows downstream from the glacier which is also
visible in the right side of the image. There are also two smaller glaciers just south of
Kangerlussuaq that once flowed out and into the same calving front, but as the main
glacier retreated the two smaller glaciers got their own calving front. When labelling the
calving front in images of Kangerlussuaq, the two smaller calving fronts were also labelled.
Figure 4.6: A descending Sentinel­1 image of Kangerlussuaq glacier from September 1st
2020.
4.3.3
Helheim
Helheim is another medium sized glacier at around 6 km wide located on the east coast
of Greenland. Helheim flows along a fjord with nearly parallel walls and the calving front
is usually nearly straight with a slight bend. In this project Helheim is the primary glacier
used to test models that have been trained on more than one glacier. An example image
of Helheim can be seen in figure 4.7.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.7: A descending Sentinel­1 image of Helheim glacier from September 8th 2016.
4.3.4
Hagen
Hagen is a large glacier on the north coast of Greenland with a width of around 10 km.
It flows from Greenland’s ice sheet into a 100 km long straight fjord that leads directly to
the Arctic ocean. An example of an image of Hagen can be seen in figure 4.8. In this
project Hagen is used to train the models that were trained on 6 glaciers, Jakobshavn,
Kangerlussuaq, Hagen and the next three introduced below.
Figure 4.8: An ascending Sentinel­1 image of Hagen glacier from September 29th 2016.
4.3.5
Inngia
Inngia is a small glacier on the west coast of Greenland at only around 3 km wide. An
example image of Inngia can be seen in figure 4.9.
30
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.9: A ascending Sentinel­1 image of Jakobshavn glacier from July 20th 2016.
4.3.6
Kangiata
Kangiata is another small glacier on the west coast of Greenland at 3 km wide. An example
image of Kangiata can be seen in figure 4.10. There are some mountains at the top and
a small outcrop of mountains in the bottom right corner. Just south of the glacier in this
image is another glacier (not visible in the image) of about the same size. In the past
they both shared the same calving front. Since then they have retreated into separate
neighbouring fjords and each have a calving front. It should be noted that in the ESA CCI
dataset the Kangiata delineations are drawn for both calving fronts but I have only used
the delineation of the northern calving front.
Figure 4.10: An ascending Sentinel­1 image of Kangiata (north) glacier from September
12th 2015.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
31
==PAGE:42==
4.3.7
Upernavik
Upernavik is the final glacier used for training, it is around 4 km wide and lies on the west
coast of Greenland. An example image of Upernavik can be seen in figure 4.11. The
calving front has a very similar shape Helheim, it just faces west instead of east.
Figure 4.11: An ascending Sentinel­1 image of Upernavik glacier from December 5th
2015.
4.3.8
Petermann
Petermann is a very large glacier on the north coast of Greenland at around 17 km wide.
An example of a Petermann image can be seen in figure 4.12. The glacier runs along a
very long fjord with very tall mountains on either side which can be seen in the left and
right side of the image. I think the black shapes on the mountains are caused by gaps in
the DEM due to the steep slope of the mountains. Petermann is one of the three more
difficult glaciers used to test the models, so the models were not only tested on Helheim
which has a relatively simple layout. The two other difficult glaciers used for testing are
the last two described below.
32
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.12: An ascending Sentinel­1 image of Petermann glacier from July 13th 2019.
4.3.9
Zachariae
Zachariae is a very large glacier on the northern part of Greenland’s east coast and it is
around 28 km wide. An example of an image of Zachariae can be seen in figure 4.13.
The main part of Zachariae’s calving front is very messy with many small and large ice­
bergs in the ocean just next to the calving front. From personal experience the calving
front can be very difficult to delineate without prior knowledge of where the calving front
usually is. Especially at the southern part of the calving front where the ocean and glacier
blend together and there are also some rocky islands poking out of the ocean very close
to the glacier. Because of this I used the ESA CCI delineations, which only includes 3
Sentinel­1 delineations, instead of delineating the front myself like I did with Petermann
described above and Narsap Sermia described below. In this project Zachariae is used
as the second difficult test glacier.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.13: A descending Sentinel­1 image of Zachariae glacier from September 6th
2015.
4.3.10
Narsap Sermia
Narsap Sermia is a small glacier with a width of around 4 km located on the western coast
of Greenland. An example of a Narsap Sermia image can be seen in figure 4.14. Narsap
Sermia is used as the third and final difficult test glacier. In the summer the glacier’s
calving front is very easy to discern, but in the winter the glacier and ice mélange blend
together so it is very difficult to discern the calving front.
Figure 4.14: An ascending Sentinel­1 image of Narsap Sermia glacier from July 17th
2019.
34
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:45==
5
Results
The training and test images were downloaded and processed in three different stages
throughout the project. Naturally the results are split up in the same manner, to show
the results achieved throughout the project with a different number and different kinds
of training images. In the first stage I only worked with images of one glacier, Jakob­
shavn, so I trained and tested the model on Jakobshavn. To understand how the model
generalises, in the second stage I started training on two glaciers on opposite coasts of
Greenland, Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq, and testing on a glacier the model had not
seen, Helheim. In the third stage I wanted to see if the generalisation of the model im­
proved if I increased the diversity of the training glaciers. So I added 4 different glaciers
to the two existing training glaciers and tested on Helheim again. At this point I knew
the model worked well on Helheim. To understand how well the models would work on
other more difficult glaciers with different geometries I also tested the models on the Pe­
termann, Zachariae and Narsap Sermia. In this chapter only the results from the best
model tested on the difficult glaciers is shown, but the results for the other models can be
seen in appendix A.4.
In table 5.1 is an overview of each of the models trained detailing what glaciers were used
for training and testing, the label approach used as described in section 3.1, the weight of
w in the loss function described in the theory section, the number of epoches trained for,
whether data augmentation was used and what (if any) pre­processing was used. Tables
of all the SAFE products used for each glacier can be found in table A.1.
Number
Training glacier(s)
Test glacier(s)
Label approach
Positive class
weight w
Epochs
Data augmentation
Pre­processing
1
Jakobshavn
Jakobshavn
Line
186
1000
None
None
2
Jakobshavn
Jakobshavn
Full
1
1000
None
None
3
Jakobshavn, Kangerlussuaq
Helheim
Line
170
10000
Rotate and flip
None
4
Jakobshavn, Kangerlussuaq
Helheim
Line
170
10000
Rotate and flip
HE
5
Jakobshavn, Kangerlussuaq
Helheim
Line
170
5000
Rotate and flip
CLAHE
6
Jakobshavn, Kangerlussuaq
Helheim
Full
1
10000
Rotate and flip
None
7
Jakobshavn, Kangerlussuaq
Helheim
Full
1
10000
Rotate and flip
HE
8
Jakobshavn, Kangerlussuaq
Helheim
Full
1
10000
Rotate and flip
CLAHE
9
Jakobshavn, Kangerlussuaq,
Hagen, Inngia,
Kangiara (North), Upernavik
Helheim
Line
138
10000
Rotate and flip
HE
10
Jakobshavn, Kangerlussuaq,
Hagen, Inngia,
Kangiara (North), Upernavik
Helheim
Line
56
10000
Rotate and flip
HE, GB
Table 5.1: A table detailing the different models trained. In the preprocessing column
HE, CLAHE and GB represents histogram equalization (HE), contrast limited adaptive
histogram equalization (CLAHE) and Gaussian blur (GB) respectively.
To get quantitative results some quality metrics have also been calculated as described in
the methods chapter. All metrics were calculated after skeletonize had been applied(line
delineation only) to the predicted delineations so both the true and predicted delineations
had a thickness of one pixel. The mean distance in pixels (explained in the methods
chapter, section 3.3) was calculated using the 512 × 512 images output by the network,
and the mean distance in meters was calculated after the output images were transformed
back into their original resolutions where the mean distance in pixels was multiplied by 16
meters which is the length of one pixel. It should be noted that for the cases where the
models were trained on delineations with Gaussian blur, these metrics were calculated
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
35
==PAGE:46==
using the original unblurred true labels. The quality metrics are reported as each result is
shown. All the quality metrics are also collected at the end of this chapter to make it easy
to view them all together.
5.1
Training and testing on the same glacier
The first models have been trained and tested on the same glacier, Jakobshavn. The
models were trained using 56 images of Jakobshavn and tested using 18 images of Jakob­
shavn. The training images were all from 2020 and the testing images were from a period
of between 2014 and 2017. 9 of the test images are ascending images of Jakobshavn
with the delineation from the ESA CCI[3] dataset. The other 9 test images are descend­
ing images of Jakobshavn that I manually delineated. The test images and corresponding
delineations can be seen in figure 5.1 and 5.2 respectively.
Figure 5.1: Jakobshavn images used for testing the models. The 9 images on the left are
ascending and the 9 images on the right are descending.
36
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.2: Jakobshavn true labels, each label corresponds to an image in figure 5.1. The
9 delineations on the left are from the ESA CCI[3] dataset. The 9 delineations on the right
are manually delineated by me. To make the delineation more clear dilation has been
applied to widen the delineation for this plot.
Two different models were tested with this data, one using the line delineation approach
and one using the full segmentation approach as described in the methods chapter, sec­
tion 3.1.
5.1.1
Line delineation
First a model trained using the line delineation approach, as described in the methods
section 3.1, was trained using 1000 epochs on the Jakobshavn data. The model output
for the Jakobshavn validation images after thresholding can be seen in figure 5.3. The
predicted and true delineation overlayed over the validation images can be seen in figure
5.4.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.3: Output from the network using the Jakobshavn validation images after thresh­
olding. The network is trained on the Jakobshavn data using the line delineation approach.
Figure 5.4: Red is the predicted delineation by the network and blue is the true delin­
eation. The red predicted delineation is plotted above the blue label. So when only the
red delineation is visible both delineations are aligned. To make the true (blue) delineation
more clear dilation has been applied to it for this plot.
In most of the test images a large part of the calving front is predicted. Most of the predic­
tions create a gap at the same place, which is understandable because the calving front
is very hard to discern in this area, as can be seen in figure 5.1. There are also very few
false positives in the predictions. The quality metrics for this model can be seen in table
5.2.
38
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:49==
Training and testing on Jakobshavn
Label
approach
Mean distance
[pixels] ([meters])
% of front covered
(with margin)
Precision
(with margin)
Line delineation
7.90 (206)
13.7% (75.25%)
0.28 (0.83)
Table 5.2: Quality metrics of the model trained and tested on Jakobshavn using the line
delineation label approach.
5.1.2
Full segmentation
Another model was trained on the Jakobshavn data this time using the full segmentation
approach, described in section 3.1. The full segmentation labels can be seen in figure
5.5. The segmentations were created as described in the methods chapter. The result
of passing the Jakobshavn validation images through the trained network can be seen
in figure 5.6. In figure 5.7 the delineations have been extracted from the predicted seg­
mentations and in figure 5.8 the true delineations and the extracted predicted delineations
have been overlayed on the test images.
Figure 5.5: Jakobshavn full segmentation labels, created using delineations from figure
5.2.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.6: Results for the full segmentation approach training and testing on Jakobshavn.
Figure 5.7: Delineations extracted from the full segmentation approach. To make the
delineation more clear dilation has been applied to widen the delineation for this plot.
40
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.8: The full segmentation extracted delineations and the true delineations over­
layed over the validation images. Red is the predicted delineation by the network and
blue is the true delineation. The red predicted delineation is plotted above the blue label.
So when only the red delineation is visible both delineations are aligned. To make the
delineations more clear dilation has been applied to it for this plot.
Similar to the line delineation model above, most of the calving fronts are predicted. But
instead of creating gaps like the line delineation model, the full segmentation model is
forces to guess by design to, ensure a continuous delineation. This forced guessing
creates more false positives, which can be seen in the precision. The quality metrics for
this model can be seen in table 5.3.
Training and testing on Jakobshavn
Label
approach
Mean distance
[pixels] ([meters])
% of front covered
(with margin)
Precision
(with margin)
Full segmentation
4.96 (130)
13.0% (79.2%)
0.13 (0.73)
Table 5.3: The quality metrics of the model trained and tested on Jakobshavn using the
full segmentation labelling approach.
5.2
Training on two glaciers and testing on other glaciers
The biggest goal of this project was to make a model that could predict calving front
delineations on glaciers the model had not seen during training. The previous models that
were only trained and tested on Jakobshavn probably don’t work well for other glaciers
than Jakobshavn. To make a model that would generalise better the next models were
trained on all the Jakobshavn data (both the training and testing data from the previous
section) and 30 images of Kangerlussuaq. To improve the model’s ability to generalise
to different glacier shapes, the training images were randomly rotated and flipped during
training. They were rotated 0◦, 90◦, 180◦or 270◦with equal probability and they were
randomly flipped vertically with a 50% chance and horizontally with a 50% chance. The
models trained on Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq were tested on Helheim, so the models
are tested on a glacier that is not seen during training. The Helheim validation images
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
41
==PAGE:52==
can be seen in figure 5.9 and the labels in figure 5.10. Like previously, models using the
line delineation approach and full segmentation approach as described in the methods
chapter were trained. Two preprocessing steps were also tried, histogram equalization
and CLAHE described in the methods chapter in section 3.2.2, in an attempt to make the
images more similar over different times of year.
Figure 5.9: Helheim testing images.
42
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.10: The calving front labels of the Helheim validation images seen in figure 5.9.
10 of the delineations are from the ESA CCI[3] data set and two are from the Zhang et
al.[5] data set. These two are the delineations from June 6th, 2018 and December 28th,
2018.
5.2.1
Line delineation
The results for the model that was trained on Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq using the
line delineation approach can be seen in figure 5.11. The model was trained for 10000
epochs. The results for the corresponding models that also used histogram equalization
and CLAHE preprocessing can be seen in figure 5.12 and 5.13 respectively.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
43
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.11: Trained on Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq for 10000 epochs using the line
delineation approach. The blue delineation is the true label delineation. The red is the
predicted delineation from the network. To make the true delineation more clear dilation
has been applied to it for this plot.
Histogram equalization
Figure 5.12: Trained on Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq for 10000 epochs with histogram
equalization as preprocessing using the line delineation approach. The red is the pre­
dicted delineation from the network. To make the true delineation more clear dilation has
been applied to it for this plot.
44
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:55==
CLAHE
Figure 5.13: Trained on Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq for 5000 epochs with CLAHE as
preprocessing using the line delineation approach. The red is the predicted delineation
from the network. To make the true delineation more clear dilation has been applied to it
for this plot.
All three different models manage to delineate parts of the calving front. It is clear that the
model with no pre­processing struggles with some of the darker images, e.g. June 10th
2015, April 29th 2016 or September 8th, 2016. The two models with pre­processing per­
form better than the model with no pre­processing and both delineate more of the calving
front. The difference between the histogram equalization and CLAHE pre­processing is
very small. In a few cases the CLAHE model create more false positives. In the end the
histogram equalization model performs slightly better. This is also reflected by the quality
metrics. The quality metrics for all three models can be seen in table 5.4.
Training on Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq, testing on Helheim
Pre­
processing
Mean distance
[pixels] ([meters])
% of front covered
(with margin)
Precision
(with margin)
None
22.7 (351)
6.21% (51.0%)
0.33 (87)
HE
13.2 (204)
10.3% (65.2%)
0.42 (0.83)
CLAHE
14.7 (227)
8.64% (61.1%)
0.35 (0.80)
Table 5.4: The quality metrics for the three models trained on Jakobshavn and Kangerlus­
suaq and tested on Helheim using the line delineation label approach. The three models
use different pre­processing, none, histogram equalization (HE) and CLAHE.
5.2.2
Full segmentation
Models using the full segmentation approach were also trained on Jakobshavn and Kanger­
lussuaq. The full segmentation approach is not very successful when applied to glaciers
the network has not been trained on. To show the exact output of the model I’ve decided
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
45
==PAGE:56==
to show the output before thresholding, and the output after thresholding, overlayed on
the Helheim images. The results for the model trained on Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq
using the full segmentation approach can be seen in figures 5.14­5.15.
Figure 5.14: The output from the model trained on Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq before
thresholding using the full segmentation approach. The model was trained for 10000
epochs.
46
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.15: The red is the output from the model trained on Jakobshavn and Kangerlus­
suaq using the full segmentation approach, after thresholding the output at > 0.5. The
model was trained for 10000 epochs. The blue is the true segmentation showing the
glacier/bedrock part of the segmentation. The blue is made slightly transparent to show
the Helheim images beneath.
The results produced by the full segmentation model trained on two glacier and tested on a
third are very unexpected and not usable. Due to the disjointed nature of the predictions it
is not possible to produce any calving front delineations using the predictions. The models
trained using histogram equalization and CLAHE pre­processing did not produce usable
results either. The results from these models are not shown here but look very similar
to those of figure 5.15. The results can be seen in the appendix in section A.3 in figures
A.1­A.2 and A.3­A.4 respectively.
5.3
Training on six glaciers and testing on other glaciers
The models shown in the previous section were only trained on two glaciers, Jakobshavn
and Kangerlussuaq and tested on Helheim. Another set of models were trained not only
on Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq but also on Hagen, Inngia, Kangiata (north) and Uper­
navik. Based on the results of previous experiments covered in the previous section, I
determined that histogram equalization was the best preprocessing option, so for these
models trained on even more glaciers I only tried histogram equalization and not CLA­
HE/no preprocessing. I also tried a new preprocessing method of applying a Gaussian
blur to the delineations the network is trained on. As with the previous models the train­
ing images were randomly rotated and flipped during training to increase the number of
glacier geometries the models were exposed to during training.
The results for the model trained using histogram equalization can be seen in figure 5.16.
Because these delineations are slightly wider than the previously shown delineations I
have also included a version where the skeletonize function described in the methods
chapter has been applied which can be seen in figure 5.17.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
47
==PAGE:58==
Histogram equalization
Figure 5.16: The results for the model trained on 6 glaciers and tested on Helheim with
histogram equalization pre­processing. The red is the prediction and the blue is the true
label, the red is plotted above the blue so sometimes the blue true label can be covered
by the red prediction.
Figure 5.17: The results shown in figure 5.16 skeletonized.
48
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:59==
Histogram equalization and Gaussian blur
Finally a model was trained with histogram equalization applied to the training images and
a Gaussian blur applied to the training labels, as described is section 3.2.2. An example
of what the labels look like with Gaussian blur applied can be seen in figure 5.18 where
the labels in figure 5.10 are the originals. A standard deviation of σ = 3 was chosen for
the Gaussian blur. The results for the model with histogram equalization and Gaussian
blur can be seen in figure 5.19. Because the blur encourages a wider delineation I have
again included a figure where the skeletonize function has been applied in figure 5.20.
Figure 5.18: The true Helheim labels with Gaussian blur applied.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.19: The results for the model trained on 6 glaciers and tested on Helheim with
image histogram equalization and Gaussian blurred label pre­processing (before skele­
tonization). The red is the prediction and the blue is the true label, the red is plotted above
the blue so sometimes the blue true label can be covered by the red prediction.
Figure 5.20: The results shown in figure 5.19 skeletonized.
The models trained using 6 glaciers perform very well on Helheim, with most of the calving
fronts delineated. The only problematic part is the southern part of the calving front in
50
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:61==
some images. The two models seem to perform very similarly, looking at table 5.5 it’s
clear that the model with both histogram equalization and Gaussian blur performs best,
having a smaller mean distance error and a slightly higher percent of the front covered.
Coincidentally the two models have the same precision when allowing for a margin of
error of 6 pixels.
Training on 6 glaciers, testing on Helheim
Pre­
processing
Mean distance
[pixels] ([meters])
% of front covered
(with margin)
Precision
(with margin)
HE
11.7 (182)
9.15% (73.8%)
0.34 (0.88)
HE & GB
8.96 (140)
10.4% (75.6%)
0.37 (0.88)
Table 5.5: The quality metrics for the two models trained on 6 glaciers and tested on
Helheim. One model trained with only histogram equalization (HE) pre­processing and
one with both histogram equalization and Gaussian blur (GB) pre­processing.
5.3.1
Difficult cases
Helheim, the glacier that I have been testing on in this and the previous section has a
relatively simple calving front. To test the limits of the models’ ability to detect calving
fronts and the capabilities of the radar data to show calving fronts, I have also tested the
models on three new glaciers Petermann, Zachariae and Narsap Sermia. The results (and
the skeletonized results) of the model trained on the 6 glaciers with histogram equalization
and Gaussian blur using the line segmentation approach can be seen in figures 5.22­5.27.
The results of using the other models from the previous sections on these glaciers can be
seen in appendix A.4. All the testing images used for each of the three glaciers can be
seen in figure 5.21.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
51
==PAGE:62==
(a) Petermann.
(b) Narsap Sermia.
(c) Zachariae.
Figure 5.21: Testing images of the three difficult glaciers used to limit test the models.
52
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:63==
Petermann
Figure 5.22: The result of the model trained on 6 glaciers using histogram equalization
and Gaussian blur tested on the Petermann test images. The blue is the true calving front
label and the red is the predicted calving front.
Figure 5.23: The skeletonized results from figure 5.22. Again, the blue is the true calving
front label and the red is the predicted calving front.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
53
==PAGE:64==
The results on the Petermann glaciers shows the model is able to delineate parts of the
calving front. But it gets confused by some of of the contrast difference between ice
mélange and ocean and confuse this for the calving front. See the top left image, January
the 14th 2019.
Zachariae
Figure 5.24: The result of the model trained on 6 glaciers using histogram equalization
and Gaussian blur tested on the Zachariae test images. The blue is the true calving front
label and the red is the predicted calving front.
Figure 5.25: The skeletonized results from figure 5.24. Again, the blue is the true calving
front label and the red is the predicted calving front.
The results from the Zachariae testing images show the model is able to delineate a large
part of the calving front, despite the glacier being so ”messy”. Though there are parts of
the calving front the does not get delineated, and sometimes the model delineates areas
on the glacier itself or deceptive areas in the ocean that look a bit like a calving front.
54
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:65==
Narsap Sermia
Figure 5.26: The result of the model trained on 6 glaciers using histogram equalization
and Gaussian blur tested on the Narsap Sermia test images. The blue is the true calving
front label and the red is the predicted calving front.
Figure 5.27: The skeletonized results from figure 5.26. Again, the blue is the true calving
front label and the red is the predicted calving front.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
55
==PAGE:66==
The results on Narsap Sermia shows an extreme in the difference between the summer
and winter images. The model is able to delineate the bottom summer images really well,
but completely fails in delineating the top winter images. The images without any of the
predicted or true labels can be seen earlier in figure 5.21. Here it is also apparent how
difficult the calving front is to see in the winter images compared with how well the calving
fronts stand out in the summer images.
The quality metrics for all difficult glaciers using this model can be seen in table 5.6.
Test glacier
Mean
distance [pixels] ([meters])
% of front covered
(with margin)
Precision
(with margin)
Petermann
10.7 (436)
11.5% (57.7%)
0.19 (0.71)
Zachariae
18.7 (1036)
5.48% (50.6%)
0.05 (0.46)
Narsap Sermia
47.3 (423)
2.89% (33.6%)
0.37 (0.71)
Table 5.6: The quality metrics for the model trained on 6 glaciers using histogram equal­
ization and Gaussian blur as pre­processing, tested on the three difficult glaciers.
5.4
Summary
Three sets of models were trained. The first set were trained and tested on the same
glacier Jakobshavn, two models were trained each using the two different labelling ap­
proaches described in section 3.1. Both models performed similarly, the full segmentation
model had a smaller mean distance error, but the line delineation model had a better pre­
cision.
The second set of models were trained on two glaciers and tested on a third. Again the
two labelling approaches were tried, but only the line delineation approach gave usable re­
sults. The full segmentation approach produced disjointed segmentations where a calving
front delineation could not be extracted. The line delineation approach was trained with­
out pre­processing and with two different forms of pre­processing. The model with no pre­
processing performed okay, but overall worse than both the models with pre­processing.
Both the models using pre­processing performed very similarly but the model using his­
togram equalization slighly outperformed the model using CLAHE pre­processing.
The third set of models were trained on 6 glaciers and tested on Helheim. Two models
were trained this time only using the line delineation approach since the full segmentation
approach failed in the last set of models. Of the two models trained, one used histogram
equalization since it performed best in the last set of models. The other model used
histogram equalization along with a new form of pre­processing consisting of applying
a Gaussian blur to the training labels. In testing, the model using Gaussian blur and
histogram equalization outperformed the model that only used histogram equalization.
A collection of the quality metrics for all the models shown in this chapter can be seen in
tables 5.7­5.9. The best metric in each column has been highlighted in bold.
56
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:67==
Approach
Mean distance
[pixels] ([meters])
% of front covered
(with margin)
Precision
(with margin)
Training and testing on Jakobshavn
Line
7.90 (206)
13.7% (75.25%)
0.28 (0.83)
Segmented
4.96 (130)
13.0% (79.2%)
0.13 (0.73)
Table 5.7: The quality metrics for the models tested on Jakobshavn. In the mean distance
column, the first value is the distance in pixels in the 512×512 images and the second
value is the value in meters. The values in parentheses in the last two columns are the
metric calculated with a margin of error of 6 pixels allowed.
Pre­
processing
Mean distance
[pixels] ([meters])
% of front covered
(with margin)
Precision
(with margin)
Training on Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq, testing on Helheim
None
22.7 (351)
6.21% (51.0%)
0.33 (87)
HE
13.2 (204)
10.3% (65.2%)
0.42 (0.83)
CLAHE
14.7 (227)
8.64% (61.1%)
0.35 (0.80)
Training on 6 glaciers, testing on Helheim
HE
11.7 (182)
9.15% (73.8%)
0.34 (0.88)
HE & GB
8.96 (140)
10.4% (75.6%)
0.37 (0.88)
Table 5.8: The quality metrics for the models tested on Helheim. In the mean distance
column, the first value is the distance in pixels in the 512×512 images and the second
value is the value in meters. The values in parentheses in the last two columns are the
metric calculated with a margin of error of 6 pixels allowed.
Test glacier
Mean distance
[pixels] ([meters])
% of front covered
(with margin)
Precision
(with margin)
Training on 6 glaciers with HE and GB, testing on 3 difficult glaciers
Petermann
10.7 (436)
11.5% (57.7%)
0.19 (0.71)
Zachariae
18.7 (1036)
5.48% (50.6%)
0.05 (0.46)
Narsap Sermia
47.3 (423)
2.89% (33.6%)
0.37 (0.71)
Table 5.9: The quality metrics for the model trained on 6 glaciers using histogram equal­
ization and Gaussian blur as pre­processing, tested on the three difficult glaciers. In the
mean distance column, the first value is the distance in pixels in the 512×512 images
and the second value is the value in meters. The values in parentheses in the last two
columns are the metric calculated with a margin of error of 6 pixels allowed.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
57
==PAGE:68==
58
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:69==
6
Discussion
In this chapter I will first compare the different results shown in the previous chapter and
discuss the progression of the results. I will also discuss the pros and cons of the two
approach’s of line delineation and full segmentation. Lastly I will discuss the limitations
of the model and the limitations of the radar data using the glaciers shown in the difficult
cases subsection.
6.1
Results summary
6.1.1
Training and testing on Jakobshavn
The two models trained and tested on Jakobshavn using the two different approaches
both worked okay, but not perfectly. The main results can be seen in figure 5.4 and 5.8. It
is clear that some of the testing images are easier to delineate than others. For example
the images in figure 6.1, one has a very good prediction, the other has a large gap in the
prediction.
(a) Easy image, with good prediction.
(b) Difficult image, with mediocre prediction.
Figure 6.1: An example of two Jakobshavn images, one being easy to delineate and hav­
ing a good prediction, the other being hard to delineate and having a mediocre prediction.
The predictions are from the line delineation model trained and tested on Jakobshavn.
Both models trained and tested on Jakobshavn also struggled with the same part of Jakob­
shavn’s calving front, an example can be seen in figure 6.2.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
59
==PAGE:70==
(a) Line delineation
(b) Full segmentation
Figure 6.2: An example of the two models trained and tested on Jakobshavn both strug­
gling with the same part of the calving front. The line delineation model does not make
a prediction at the difficult part of the front, while the full segmentation model is forced to
guess and as a result misses the true calving front by a couple hundred meters.
One reason this part of the calving front is consistently challenging could be that it aligns
with the radar’s line of sight. This means there is less opportunity for double­bounce, lay­
over or shadowing and the calving front can only be distinguished by the texture difference
between the sea ice and the glacier.
In table 5.7 with quality metrics, we can see that the mean distance between the predicted
calving fronts and the true calving fronts is a lot better for the full segmentation approach.
But the full segmentation approach also produces more false positives, so the precision is
lower, while both approaches approximately cover the same amount of the calving front.
In short, the biggest difference between the two approaches is that the full segmentation
approach has to guess because it is forced to draw an uninterrupted delineation, while
the line delineation approach is allowed to make gaps. As a result the full segmentation
creates more false positives and has a lower precision, but those false positives are close
enough to the true delineation that the mean distance becomes smaller than the mean
distance for the line delineation approach. So it’s a trade off between false positives and
gaps in the delineation.
6.1.2
Training on two glaciers and testing on a third
Next, a set of models were trained on the Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq glaciers, and
this time tested on a glacier unseen during training, Helheim. Two forms of preprocessing
were used in an attempt to improve performance, histogram equalization and CLAHE, a
set of models without preprocessing were also trained. Again both the line delineation
and full segmentation approaches were tried, but only the line delineation approach gave
useful results while the full segmentation approach results were not usable. I will discuss
the full segmentation approach further in the following subsection.
The line delineation approach produces good results overall but with quite a few gaps.
Looking at figure 5.11, 5.12 and 5.13 it’s pretty clear that histogram equalization and
CLAHE both outperform the model with no preprocessing. Looking qualitatively at the
figures, it’s a lot more challenging to say if histogram equalization or CLAHE is better.
60
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:71==
In figure 6.3 is an example of images where histogram equalization performs better and
where CLAHE performs better.
(a) A good prediction using HE
(b) A bad prediction using CLAHE
(c) A bad prediction using HE
(d) A good prediction using CLAHE
Figure 6.3:
A comparison between histogram equalization (HE) and CLAHE pre­
processing, showing a good and bad prediction from each from the models trained on
Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq and tested on Helheim.
Overall, both approaches don’t have many false positives, except for April 29th, 2016 with
CLAHE preprocessing where there are a lot of false positives. I have shown the specific
image again in figure 6.4 from both the histogram equalization and the CLAHE model.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
61
==PAGE:72==
(a) Histogram equalization
(b) CLAHE
Figure 6.4: The image that the CLAHE model struggles on and creates false positives
along with histogram equalization models prediction on the same image.
Quantitatively looking at the quality metrics in table 5.8, histogram equalization performs
slightly better. The mean distance error, amount of calving front covered and precision
are all slightly better when using histogram equalization.
6.1.3
Training on six glaciers and testing on an seventh
In the final round of results I trained on six glaciers and tested on Helheim again. Because
histogram equalization slightly outperformed CLAHE in the previous round of experiments
no model was trained using CLAHE for this data. Along with a model using histogram
equalization another model was also trained using histogram equalization on the training
images and Gaussian blur on the training labels. Both models perform well, there are
almost no false positives, and a lot fewer gaps compared to the previous models. Looking
at the quality metrics in table 5.8 the model with histogram equalization and Gaussian blur
performed slightly better. With a slightly smaller mean distance, more of the front covered
and a better precision. Looking qualitatively at figure 5.20 the prediction consistently
covers the majority of the calving front, with the exception of some of the ends where the
calving front can be challenging to detect, even for a human. An example of an image
where the model struggles delineating the calving front can be seen in figure 6.5 along
with the just the image without any predictions. In the image without any predictions it’s
clear that the top and bottom parts of the calving front, the model does not delineate, are
very difficult to see.
62
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:73==
(a) The image pre­processed with HE
(b) The predicted calving front
Figure 6.5: An example of a predicted calving front by the model trained on 6 glaciers
using histogram equalization (HE) and Gaussian blur. Figure (a) shows the image used
and figure (b) shows the predicted calving front. The parts of the calving front not predicted
in (b) are also difficult to detect in (a), so it’s understandable why these parts of the calving
front have not been delineated.
I think the reason the model with Gaussian blur performs better is that the thicker predicted
delineation ensures that as the predicted delineation starts to thin where a gap might usu­
ally appear, the thicker delineation prevents the gap from forming. And with skeletonize
the thicker delineation can be thinned the same as the thin delineation. An example of
this can be seen in figure 6.6.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
63
==PAGE:74==
(a) Without Gaussian blur
(b) With Gaussian blur
Figure 6.6: An example of two predictions from two models on the same image. The two
models are those trained on 6 glaciers, one only using histogram equalization and the
other using both histogram equalization and Gaussian blur. In figure (a), the model only
using histogram equalization creates a large gap, while in figure (b), the model using both
does not have nearly as large a gap. Skeletonize has been applied to the predictions in
both images.
Comparing the models trained and tested on different glaciers with the models only trained
and tested on Jakobshavn, shows the power of training and testing on the same glacier.
Even though Jakobshavn arguably has a more complex calving front, that is more difficult
to detect compared to Helheim, only the best models tested on Helheim came close to pre­
dicting the same amount of the calving front (see tables 5.7­5.9). Furthermore, the models
trained and tested on Jakobshavn didn’t have any of the pre­processing that helped the
models tested on Helheim, so there are probably some easy performance gains left on the
table for the Jakobshavn models. In hindsight the models trained and tested on different
glaciers should not have been trained on the data used to test the models only trained
and tested on Jakobshavn. If the the Jakobshavn testing data had been left out it would
have been a lot easier to draw a direct comparison between the two sets of models.
6.2
Line delineation and full segmentation
The line delineation approach and full segmentation approach each have their pros and
cons. As was covered in section 6.1.1, both approaches work well when the model is
trained and tested on the same glacier. The difference between the two is that when the
calving front is difficult to detect in a part of an image the line delineation approach creates
a gap, but the full segmentation approach is forced to guess. An example of this can be
seen in figure 6.7 where the line delineation approach creates gaps but nearly no false
positives and the full segmentation approach creates a complete delineation but with false
positive predictions.
64
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:75==
(a) Line delineation
(b) Full segmentation
Figure 6.7: An example comparing the line delineation and full segmentation approaches.
In figure (a) the line delineation approach creates a gap when it’s unsure and in figure (b)
the full segmentation approach is forced to guess and guess incorrectly.
When training and testing on separate glaciers the full segmentation falls apart, but the line
segmentation continues to perform well. Maybe because locally, the glacier is challenging
to distinguish from the ocean/ice mélange in the radar images, but the calving front vs
not calving front is a lot easier to distinguish. In figure 6.8 I have taken two examples
from figure 5.14, which is the raw network output from the full segmentation model before
thresholding, along with their corresponding images and highlighted a small area of the
glacier, calving front and ocean in each. One image is from winter one from is summer.
In squares B and E we can see that the model can somewhat detect the calving front.
But squares A, C, D and F are all predicted as ocean. Looking at squares A and D it’s
easy to see why the model could mistake these for ocean since the glacier locally also
looks very similar to ice mélange floating in the ocean. This might also explain why the
model struggles with differentiating the glacier and ocean, but is capable of segmenting
the bedrock above and below the glacier.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
65
==PAGE:76==
(a) A winter image of Helheim
(b) A summer image of Helheim
(c) Full segmentation of the above image
(d) Full segmentation of the above image
Figure 6.8: A comparison of a summer and winter image for the full segmentation ap­
proach.
Maybe the full segmentation method only works well when the network is used on a glacier
it has seen during training. So it knows in what areas the glacier and ocean are instead
of actually having to distinguish the two, it just has to look for the calving front. Other
papers have successfully used the full segmentation approach[5] so maybe its’ failure in
this thesis is due to a lack of training data or because the full segmentation works less
well with radar images, because of how easily the glacier can be mistaken for ocean/ice
mélange as discussed earlier.
6.3
Limitations of the model and the radar data.
Along with Helheim, the models trained on two or more glaciers were also tested on three
other, more challenging glaciers, Petermann, Zachariae and Narsap Sermia. The best
model tested on Helheim that performed very well on Helheim does not perform nearly
as well on these more challenging glaciers. The model performed okay on Petermann.
In some images the model delineated most of the calving front without creating false
66
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:77==
positives, in others the model delineated the contrast between sea ice and open ocean
instead of the calving front. Examples of these two cases can be seen in figure 6.9.
(a) Model delineates the calving front
(b) Model delineates the sea ice and ocean con­
trast
Figure 6.9: Two examples of Petermann predictions. One where only the calving front is
predicted and then another where the contrast between the sea ice and ocean is delin­
eated as the calving front.
The model performed decently on Zachariae when you take into account how messy
Zachariae is. For the most part the model delineates the main part of the front, but misses
large chunks of the ends and also creates many false positives. When you consider how
messy Zachariae is I think the model performs okay. It can even be difficult for a human
to find the calving front without the prior knowledge of where the calving front usually is.
For Narsap Sermia there seems to be a clear trend that the calving front is nearly impos­
sible for the model to detect during winter and very easy to detect during summer. I think
it’s reasonable that the model cannot detect the calving front in winter. I had to do a lot of
guessing and estimating when I was manually delineating the winter images. I think this
shows a shortcoming in the radar data that for some glaciers the calving front is nearly
impossible to detect. In figure 6.10 I have shown an example of one of the challenging
winter images and one of the very easy summer images.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
67
==PAGE:78==
(a) Easy summer case
(b) Challenging winter case
Figure 6.10: Examples of an easy summer case and a challenging winter case of the
glacier Narsap Sermia.
Lastly there is also a challenging case in one of the Helheim images, June 6th, 2018. In
this image a large, roughly 2.8 km long, iceberg has calved off the glacier and is floating
in front of the calving front. Locally the edge of the iceberg looks identical to the actual
calving front. And all of the models have delineated the edges of the iceberg as calving
front. Since there are no similar images in the training data with icebergs of this size
it’s understandable that the iceberg is delineated as calving front. I think if the training
data included images with large icebergs the model would be able to learn to distinguish
between icebergs and the calving front. An example of a model delineating the iceberg
as calving front can be seen in figure 6.11.
Figure 6.11: The Helheim image with an iceberg with the label and model predictions from
the model trained on 6 glaciers using histogram equalization and Gaussian blur.
68
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:79==
6.4
Summary and recommendations
In summary, when training and testing on the same glacier both the line delineation and
full segmentation labelling approach work well, with some minor differences between the
two. When the testing glaciers are not included in the training data only the line delineation
labelling approach works. The difference between no pre­processing of the images and
using histogram equalization or CLAHE is pretty big and making the images more similar
with these techniques helps the models make better predictions. In the end histogram
equalization was found to perform better, but the difference between the two is small and
maybe in the future CLAHE should be examined more. When the models were tested
on Helheim they generally performed well, but when tested on glaciers like Petermann,
Zachariae or Narsap Sermia (in the winter) the results were not as good. The main take
away from this is that the model can work well on glaciers it has not been trained on, if
the calving front is reasonably recognisable for example Helheim or Narsap Sermia in
the summer. In more difficult cases like Petermann, Zachariae or Narsap Sermia (in the
winter) the results will not be nearly as good and sometimes completely unusable.
If this method was to be used operationally to automatically delineate calving fronts, on
demand or continually as new satellite images were acquired, here are some recommen­
dations based on the findings in this thesis. In general, the more training data the better
and diversifying the training data by adding more glaciers to the data is also a great way
to improve the models performance. The images of the glaciers should be made similar
using methods such as histogram equalization or CLAHE. If it is practical, the training
data should include the glacier(s) the user wishes to apply the model to. The glacier(s)
should also be previewed by a human in the winter and summer to gauge the feasibility
of actually delineating the calving front. For example a case like Narsap Sermia that has
a very clear calving front in the summer images, but the calving front is nearly invisible in
the winter images.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
69
==PAGE:80==
70
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:81==
7
Conclusion
The goal of the thesis was to create a method to automatically delineate glacier calving
fronts in Sentinel­1 radar images using machine learning. Several U­Nets were trained
using a different number of glaciers from east, west and north Greenland and using dif­
ferent kinds of preprocessing. One set of models were trained and tested using the same
glacier, another set were trained on two glaciers and tested on Helheim. A final set of
models were trained on 6 glaciers and tested on Helheim. The different preprocessing
tried was histogram equalization, CLAHE and no preprocessing, though not all combi­
nations with number of glaciers and preprocessing were tested. Two different labelling
approaches were also evaluated, line delineation where the calving front and non­calving
front pixels were labelled and full segmentation where the glacier/bedrock and ocean/sea
ice pixels were labelled as 1’s and 0’s respectively.
Of the models that were trained and tested on the same glacier, the full segmentation
approach had a smaller error of 130 m compared to the line delineation approach with
an error of 206 m. But the line delineation approach had better precision because the
line delineation approach had the option to create gaps in the delineation, but the full
segmentation was force to guess, resulting in more false positives. It is difficult to say
which approach performed best in this case, since it’s a trade­off between distance error
and precision.
For the models that were trained on 2 glaciers and tested on Helheim only the line de­
lineation approach gave usable results while the full segmentation approach did not give
usable segmentations that could be converted to calving front delineations. With regards
to preprocessing, histogram equalization performed best compared to CLAHE and no
preprocessing. These experiences were brought to the models trained on 6 glaciers and
tested on Helheim, where only the line delineation approach and histogram equalization
was used, along with a new preprocessing method of applying Gaussian blur to the labels,
encouraging a wider predicted calving front. The model that performed the best included
both histogram equalization and Gaussian blur, with a mean error of 140 meters. Com­
pared with the histogram equalization model that was only trained on 2 glaciers the mean
error was 204 meters and model trained on 6 glaciers with histogram equalization but
no Gaussian blur had a mean error of 182 meters. This shows the power of diversifying
the training data set. By only adding 36 images to the already existing 104 images(35%
increase), but increasing the number of different glaciers from 2 to 6, the performance
gains a noticeable boost.
The models were also tested on three glaciers which have more difficult fronts to detect
than Helheim or Jakobshavn for various reasons, e.g. ice bergs, small contrast between
ice mélange and glacier or large contrasts between ocean and ice mélange that could look
like calving fronts. These glaciers show that none of the models can completely solve the
problem of automatically delineating calving fronts for all glaciers. Many of the difficult
calving fronts could probably be delineated with a better model, for example one trained
on more images and glaciers. But when the glacier and ice mélange blend together the
calving fronts are simply really hard to detect even for a human. In such a case maybe
Sentinel­1 radar data could be supplemented by imagery from optical sensors, but then
the challenges of optical sensors would also have to be addressed (night, clouds, etc.).
Regarding future work there are a few things that could be tried, changed and added. In
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
71
==PAGE:82==
most machine learning endeavours, more data is usually always wanted and this is no
exception. It would be interesting to see whether more data could make the full segmen­
tation approach usable on cases where the model is not tested and trained on the same
glacier. It would also be interesting to see if the performance on the difficult glaciers im­
proved with more training data. To start with, the full segmentation models could also be
trained using the 6 glaciers that were used to train the line delineation models, instead
of giving up on full segmentation approach after the failure when training on 2 glaciers.
There are also a few other available Sentinel­1 calving front delineation data sets that
could be used to train future models. For example more of the ESA CCI glaciers could
be used, the ESA CCI data set contain 28 glaciers in total and each glacier has around
0­10 calving front delineations that use Sentinel­1 images. The data published along
with the paper by Zhang et al. from 2021[5] also have some calving fronts drawn using
Sentinel­1 images of Jakobshavn, Kangerlussuaq and Helheim that could be used. In this
paper they also tested the U­Net architecture and the DeepLabv3+ architecture and saw
big improvements when using DeepLabv3+ over U­Net, so DeepLabv3+ or other neural
network architectures could also be tried in the future. In the same paper the models
were trained using 7 different satellite sensors (both optical and radar) and they tested
the model using images from the individual sensors. The sensor with the best perfor­
mance was TerraSAR­X which is a radar satellite with a very high spatial resolution of
2×2 meters, with the downside that it images a small area compared to Sentinel­1. In the
future maybe other sensors like TerraSAR­X could be tested instead of Sentinel­1. New
and improved radar satellites such as Sentinel­1 Next Generation and ROSE­L are also
in the works and the methods described in this thesis will also apply to data from these
new satellites.
In conclusion, a method to automatically delineation glacier calving fronts in Sentinel­1
images has been developed. It has been shown to work well when trained and tested on
the same glacier, and when trained on several glaciers also has the ability to generalise
to a simpler glacier like Helheim, but there are still challenges with more difficult glaciers.
72
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
B. Noël et al. “A tipping point in refreezing accelerates mass loss of Greenland’s
glaciers and ice caps”. In: Nature Communications 8.1 (Mar. 2017), p. 14730. ISSN:
2041­1723. DOI: 10.1038/ncomms14730. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms14730.
[2]
M.L. Andersen et al. “Basin­scale partitioning of Greenland ice sheet mass balance
components (2007–2011)”. In: Earth and Planetary Science Letters 409 (2015),
pp. 89–95. ISSN: 0012­821X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2014.10.015.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0012821X14006360.
[3]
ESA Greenland Ice Sheet CCI project team. ESA Greenland Ice Sheet Climate
Change Initiative (Greenland_Ice_Sheet_cci): Greenland Calving Front Locations,
v3.0. Centre for Environmental Data. 2019. URL: https://catalogue.ceda.ac.uk/uuid/
8889dfe3de45406e815bce13ae8a0c92.
[4]
Jonas K. Andersen et al. “Update of annual calving front lines for 47 marine ter­
minating outlet glaciers in Greenland (1999–2018)”. In: GEUS Bulletin 43 (June
2019). DOI: 10.34194/GEUSB-201943-02-02. URL: https://geusbulletin.org/index.
php/geusb/article/view/4296.
[5]
Enze Zhang et al. “An automated, generalized, deep­learning­based method for
delineating the calving fronts of Greenland glaciers from multi­sensor remote sens­
ing imagery”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 254 (2021), p. 112265. ISSN:
0034­4257. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2020.112265. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0034425720306386.
[6]
E. Zhang, L. Liu, and L. Huang. “Automatically delineating the calving front of Jakob­
shavn Isbræ from multitemporal TerraSAR­X images: a deep learning approach”.
In: The Cryosphere 13.6 (2019), pp. 1729–1741. DOI: 10.5194/tc-13-1729-2019.
URL: https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/13/1729/2019/.
[7]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U­Net: Convolutional Net­
works for Biomedical Image Segmentation. 2015. arXiv: 1505.04597 [cs.CV].
[8]
D. Cheng et al. “Calving Front Machine (CALFIN): glacial termini dataset and auto­
mated deep learning extraction method for Greenland, 1972–2019”. In: The Cryosphere
15.3 (2021), pp. 1663–1675. DOI: 10.5194/tc- 15- 1663- 2021. URL: https://tc.
copernicus.org/articles/15/1663/2021/.
[9]
Liang­Chieh Chen et al. Encoder­Decoder with Atrous Separable Convolution for
Semantic Image Segmentation. 2018. arXiv: 1802.02611 [cs.CV].
[10]
European Space Agency. Revisit and Coverage. URL: https://sentinels.copernicus.
eu/web/sentinel/user-guides/sentinel-1-sar/revisit-and-coverage.
[11]
Harris Geospatial. Sentinel­1 Intensity Analysis in ENVI SARscape Tutorial. URL:
https://www.l3harrisgeospatial.com/docs/sentinel1intensityanalysistutorial.html.
[12]
Christian Wolff. Radar basics. URL: https://www.radartutorial.eu/20.airborne/ab07.
en.html.
[13]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization.
2017. arXiv: 1412.6980 [cs.LG].
[14]
Jonathan Tompson et al. Efficient Object Localization Using Convolutional Net­
works. 2015. arXiv: 1411.4280 [cs.CV].
[15]
Geoffrey E. Hinton et al. Improving neural networks by preventing co­adaptation of
feature detectors. 2012. arXiv: 1207.0580 [cs.NE].
[16]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Net­
work Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift. 2015. arXiv: 1502.03167 [cs.LG].
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
73
==PAGE:84==
[17]
QGIS Development Team. QGIS Geographic Information System. QGIS Associa­
tion. 2021. URL: https://www.qgis.org.
[18]
Claire Porter et al. “ArcticDEM”. Version V1. In: (2018). DOI: 10.7910/DVN/OHHUKH.
URL: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/OHHUKH.
[19]
G. Bradski. “The OpenCV Library”. In: Dr. Dobb’s Journal of Software Tools (2000).
[20]
Alexandre Milesi. UNet: semantic segmentation with PyTorch. 2019. URL: https:
//github.com/milesial/Pytorch-UNet.
[21]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High­Performance Deep Learn­
ing Library”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2019, pp. 8024–8035. URL: http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/9015-
pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.pdf.
[22]
Aladdin Persson. PyTorch Image Segmentation Tutorial with U­NET. 2021. URL:
https://github.com/aladdinpersson/Machine-Learning-Collection/tree/master/ML/
Pytorch/image_segmentation/semantic_segmentation_unet.
[23]
A. Buslaev et al. Albumentations: fast and flexible image augmentations. 2018.
eprint: 1809.06839.
[24]
Stéfan van der Walt et al. “scikit­image: image processing in Python”. In: PeerJ 2
(June 2014), e453. ISSN: 2167­8359. DOI: 10.7717/peerj.453. URL: https://doi.
org/10.7717/peerj.453.
[25]
Ian Joughin, Waleed Abdalati, and Mark Fahnestock. “Large fluctuations in speed
on Greenland’s Jakobshavn Isbræ glacier”. In: Nature 432.7017 (Dec. 2004), pp. 608–
610. DOI: 10.1038/nature03130. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03130.
74
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:85==
A
Appendix
A.1
List of SAFE products used
SAFE files of Jakobshavn
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20141011T204643_20141011T204713_002787_003230_DBB0.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20141019T095956_20141019T100024_002897_003480_7AA7.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20141206T095955_20141206T100023_003597_004401_E16E.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20141210T204641_20141210T204711_003662_004568_E74C.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150228T095953_20150228T100021_004822_005FF8_D9A9.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150304T204640_20150304T204710_004887_006173_C630.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150511T095956_20150511T100024_005872_0078FA_606E.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150608T204649_20150608T204716_006287_0083E8_B870.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150819T204652_20150819T204719_007337_00A135_BDB1.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20151205T204704_20151205T204731_008912_00CC0C_B111.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160211T100008_20160211T100035_009897_00E82D_4ABC.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160318T100009_20160318T100036_010422_00F737_EB61.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160602T204643_20160602T204710_011537_0119B8_85F5.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160813T204647_20160813T204714_012587_013BA3_94B2.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160906T204648_20160906T204715_012937_014754_E36C.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20170729T095924_20170729T095952_006701_00BC94_79EE.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20170816T100005_20170816T100032_017947_01E1B3_28DA.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20170904T095209_20170904T095237_018224_01EA2D_9CBC.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200101T204706_20200101T204733_030612_0381D9_B83C.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200103T095949_20200103T100017_019651_025237_BE35.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200110T095142_20200110T095210_019753_025594_711F.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200113T204706_20200113T204733_030787_0387F2_A3C4.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200122T095141_20200122T095209_019928_025B28_8DFC.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200125T204705_20200125T204732_030962_038E1D_F84C.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200206T204705_20200206T204732_031137_039437_7E0B.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200208T095948_20200208T100016_020176_026317_54F1.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200216T094409_20200216T094436_031276_0398FE_F90B.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200218T204705_20200218T204732_031312_039A43_4AD8.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200228T094409_20200228T094436_031451_039EFD_9879.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200301T204705_20200301T204732_031487_03A045_DBF4.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200313T204705_20200313T204732_031662_03A659_6BB6.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200315T095948_20200315T100016_020701_0273DD_B80D.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200325T204705_20200325T204732_031837_03AC88_E85E.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200327T095948_20200327T100016_020876_02795F_237A.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200406T204705_20200406T204732_032012_03B2AF_C07E.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200408T095948_20200408T100016_021051_027EEC_A319.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200418T204706_20200418T204733_032187_03B8D7_05C0.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200420T095949_20200420T100017_021226_028471_361C.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200430T204706_20200430T204733_032362_03BEFD_6C5C.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200502T095950_20200502T100017_021401_0289FB_7BCE.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200512T204707_20200512T204734_032537_03C4B8_89BB.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200514T095950_20200514T100018_021576_028F61_9017.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200524T204707_20200524T204734_032712_03CA07_C91B.SAFE
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
75
==PAGE:86==
Table A.1 continued from previous page
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200526T095951_20200526T100019_021751_029483_FA90.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200605T204708_20200605T204735_032887_03CF33_5741.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200607T095952_20200607T100020_021926_0299C5_13B4.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200617T204709_20200617T204736_033062_03D477_84C2.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200619T095952_20200619T100020_022101_029F0F_5571.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200625T100023_20200625T100051_033172_03D7C4_BDBA.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200626T095145_20200626T095213_022203_02A23C_1502.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200629T204709_20200629T204736_033237_03D9C9_8874.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200711T204710_20200711T204737_033412_03DF19_1DDC.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200713T095954_20200713T100021_022451_02A9C3_BBDA.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200723T204711_20200723T204738_033587_03E47A_B39B.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200725T095954_20200725T100022_022626_02AF10_9CEF.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200810T204630_20200810T204657_022866_02B67E_87C5.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200812T100026_20200812T100054_033872_03EDA4_EBE7.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200822T204631_20200822T204658_023041_02BBFC_9AD0.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200824T100027_20200824T100055_034047_03F3CE_70DC.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200903T204632_20200903T204658_023216_02C16B_BE10.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200905T100027_20200905T100055_034222_03F9F6_0CDA.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200915T204632_20200915T204659_023391_02C6EF_61B4.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200917T100028_20200917T100056_034397_040015_EA7C.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200927T204632_20200927T204659_023566_02CC6E_0C56.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200929T100028_20200929T100056_034572_04064D_2335.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201009T204632_20201009T204659_023741_02D1D9_6F80.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201011T100029_20201011T100057_034747_040C6C_2931.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201021T204632_20201021T204659_023916_02D753_05AD.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201023T100028_20201023T100056_034922_04127F_4FDA.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201102T204633_20201102T204700_024091_02DCC0_9517.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201104T100028_20201104T100056_035097_041884_B88E.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201114T204632_20201114T204659_024266_02E241_9B9C.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201116T100028_20201116T100056_035272_041E9A_8D3D.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201126T204632_20201126T204659_024441_02E7BF_1CD6.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201128T100028_20201128T100056_035447_0424B0_C0FE.SAFE
Table A.1: List of .SAFE products used for Jakobshavn
SAFE files of Kangerlussuaq
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200101T083741_20200101T083808_019621_025156_CFEE.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200117T085448_20200117T085515_030838_0389CA_026D.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200204T085406_20200204T085433_020117_02613B_7BD3.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200218T083740_20200218T083807_020321_0267CB_2F14.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200301T083739_20200301T083806_020496_026D69_DAF8.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200313T083739_20200313T083806_020671_0272F4_7E69.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200404T085406_20200404T085433_020992_027D1C_241A.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200418T083740_20200418T083807_021196_02838E_D0E6.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200504T085449_20200504T085516_032413_03C0D3_06DF.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200516T085450_20200516T085517_032588_03C646_4F4E.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200603T085409_20200603T085436_021867_02980E_1B27.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200617T083744_20200617T083811_022071_029E32_4D74.SAFE
76
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:87==
Table A.2 continued from previous page
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200703T085452_20200703T085519_033288_03DB57_AE32.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200717T083827_20200717T083854_033492_03E18A_6F1C.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200802T085413_20200802T085440_022742_02B299_13C1.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20200807T193322_20200807T193337_033805_03EB53_3EBF.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20200815T084645_20200815T084715_033915_03EF22_C753.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20200819T193322_20200819T193337_033980_03F178_F364.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20200831T193323_20200831T193338_034155_03F7A3_19C9.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200901T085456_20200901T085523_034163_03F7E7_BB9E.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20200912T193323_20200912T193339_034330_03FDC5_5006.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200915T083830_20200915T083857_034367_03FF0F_E67E.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20200924T193324_20200924T193339_034505_0403EF_74E6.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201001T085415_20201001T085442_023617_02CDF1_34EB.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20201006T193324_20201006T193339_034680_040A1B_F3B9.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201015T083749_20201015T083816_023821_02D449_51BA.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201102T083831_20201102T083858_035067_041770_F757.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201114T083831_20201114T083858_035242_041D93_CAEB.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201201T084649_20201201T084719_035490_04262A_5C9C.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20201218T085456_20201218T085523_035738_042E9E_0C1B.SAFE
Table A.2: List of .SAFE products used for Kangerlussuaq
SAFE files of Helheim
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150117T091102_20150117T091132_004209_0051D2_07B1.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150117T091130_20150117T091157_004209_0051D2_B060.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150210T091102_20150210T091132_004559_0059AE_C577.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150210T091129_20150210T091157_004559_0059AE_5F53.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150610T091112_20150610T091139_006309_008490_26DA.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150902T091115_20150902T091143_007534_00A694_4202.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20151207T091120_20151207T091147_008934_00CCA8_CB44.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160429T091120_20160429T091147_011034_010987_9E92.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160628T091126_20160628T091153_011909_01256C_B938.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160803T091128_20160803T091155_012434_01369D_43A2.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160908T091130_20160908T091157_012959_014805_B082.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160920T091130_20160920T091157_013134_014DC7_58F6.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20180620T085529_20180620T085556_022438_026E17_D67E.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SSH_20181228T090254_20181228T090322_014240_01A79F_17DF.SAFE
Table A.3: List of .SAFE products used for Helheim
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
77
==PAGE:88==
SAFE files of Hagen
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150126T183028_20150126T183057_004346_0054D1_7D0C.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150207T183028_20150207T183056_004521_0058D1_8DAD.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150607T183036_20150607T183103_006271_008374_15C1.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150911T183026_20150911T183053_007671_00AA57_8BA9.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20151216T183017_20151216T183044_009071_00D06E_8439.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20151216T183042_20151216T183109_009071_00D06E_7A52.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160508T183018_20160508T183045_011171_010DE0_E216.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160508T183043_20160508T183110_011171_010DE0_1D36.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160719T183022_20160719T183049_012221_012F95_A953.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160719T183047_20160719T183114_012221_012F95_04E3.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160929T183024_20160929T183052_013271_01522E_9167.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160929T183050_20160929T183117_013271_01522E_282F.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20190116T093957_20190116T094027_025501_02D3C1_1E37.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20190116T094025_20190116T094053_025501_02D3C1_7C41.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20190716T183040_20190716T183107_028146_032DDA_0B88.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20190716T183105_20190716T183132_028146_032DDA_3563.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200117T174908_20200117T174938_019860_0258EF_0E65.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200716T183005_20200716T183032_022500_02AB4B_195B.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200716T183030_20200716T183057_022500_02AB4B_35EA.SAFE
Table A.4: List of .SAFE products used for Hagen
SAFE files of Inngia
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20141011T204735_20141011T204803_002787_003230_7E78.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20141210T204734_20141210T204802_003662_004568_3763.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150304T204732_20150304T204800_004887_006173_4ED7.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150608T204739_20150608T204806_006287_0083E8_B2FD.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150912T204743_20150912T204811_007687_00AABD_BFC3.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20151205T204754_20151205T204820_008912_00CC0C_E329.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160720T204736_20160720T204803_012237_013014_95A7.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160720T204801_20160720T204828_012237_013014_A839.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160825T204738_20160825T204805_012762_014196_5489.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160825T204802_20160825T204829_012762_014196_C25A.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20161024T204739_20161024T204806_013637_015DA7_6FD9.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20161024T204804_20161024T204831_013637_015DA7_7BBB.SAFE
Table A.5: List of .SAFE products used for Inngia
78
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:89==
SAFE files of Kangiata (North)
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150127T204521_20150127T204548_004362_005525_E4D9.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150220T204521_20150220T204548_004712_005D31_5DE6.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150726T204535_20150726T204603_006987_0097A3_D9F4.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150912T204538_20150912T204606_007687_00AABD_44CD.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20151205T204524_20151205T204551_008912_00CC0C_A2BB.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20151205T204548_20151205T204615_008912_00CC0C_C744.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160614T204529_20160614T204556_011712_011F37_0DD8.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160720T204531_20160720T204558_012237_013014_6D56.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160825T204533_20160825T204600_012762_014196_D642.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160930T204534_20160930T204601_013287_0152AC_8523.SAFE
Table A.6: List of .SAFE products used for Kangiata (North)
SAFE files of Upernavik
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20141011T204801_20141011T204824_002787_003230_66B3.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20141210T204759_20141210T204823_003662_004568_8BAD.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150304T204758_20150304T204822_004887_006173_D363.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150608T204804_20150608T204831_006287_0083E8_1FB6.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150912T204808_20150912T204836_007687_00AABD_BD2B.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20151205T204754_20151205T204820_008912_00CC0C_E329.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160614T204759_20160614T204826_011712_011F37_02B9.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160720T204801_20160720T204828_012237_013014_A839.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160825T204802_20160825T204829_012762_014196_C25A.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160930T204804_20160930T204831_013287_0152AC_5D37.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20190118T204814_20190118T204841_025537_02D515_9265.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20190717T204819_20190717T204846_028162_032E58_FA84.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200113T204820_20200113T204847_030787_0387F2_66CC.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200717T204743_20200717T204810_022516_02ABC7_286B.SAFE
Table A.7: List of .SAFE products used for Upernavik
SAFE files of Petermann
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20190114T113543_20190114T113610_025473_02D2BF_4584.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20190713T113548_20190713T113615_028098_032C62_05F2.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200113T205025_20200113T205052_030787_0387F2_9180.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200113T205050_20200113T205114_030787_0387F2_3552.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200717T204948_20200717T205015_022516_02ABC7_BAA4.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200717T205013_20200717T205037_022516_02ABC7_6AB8.SAFE
Table A.8: List of .SAFE products used for Petermann
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
79
==PAGE:90==
SAFE files of Zachariae
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150121T083444_20150121T083511_004267_00530B_3F0A.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20150906T083449_20150906T083517_007592_00A82B_0277.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160831T083510_20160831T083537_012842_014443_5DA5.SAFE
Table A.9: List of .SAFE products used for Zachariae
SAFE files of Narsap Sermia
S1B_IW_SLC__1SSH_20190117T205333_20190117T205400_014539_01B14C_53EA.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20190717T204613_20190717T204640_028162_032E58_129E.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200117T094439_20200117T094509_019855_0258BF_66BE.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20200715T094444_20200715T094514_022480_02AAA9_DC64.SAFE
Table A.10: List of .SAFE products used for Narsap Sermia
A.2
List of ArcticDEM tiles used
ArctimDEM tiles of Jakobshavn
18_38_32m_v3.0
18_39_32m_v3.0
Table A.11: ArctimDEM tiles used to geocode images of Jakobshavn
ArctimDEM tiles of Kangerlussuaq
17_45_32m_v3.0
17_46_32m_v3.0
18_45_32m_v3.0
18_46_32m_v3.0
Table A.12: ArctimDEM tiles used to geocode images of Kangerlussuaq
ArctimDEM tiles of Helheim
15_44_32m_v3.0
Table A.13: ArctimDEM tiles used to geocode images of Helheim
ArctimDEM tiles of Hagen
31_43_32m_v3.0
32_43_32m_v3.0
Table A.14: ArctimDEM tiles used to geocode images of Hagen
80
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:91==
ArctimDEM tiles of Inngia
21_38_32m_v3.0
Table A.15: ArctimDEM tiles used to geocode images of Inngia
ArctimDEM tiles of Kangiata
12_38_32m_v3.0
Table A.16: ArctimDEM tiles used to geocode images of Kangiata
ArctimDEM tiles of Upernavik
22_37_32m_v3.0
22_38_32m_v3.0
Table A.17: ArctimDEM tiles used to geocode images of Upernavik
ArctimDEM tiles of Petermann
31_38_32m_v3.0
Table A.18: ArctimDEM tiles used to geocode images of Petermann
ArctimDEM tiles of Zachariae
29_45_32m_v3.0
26_46_32m_v3.0
30_45_32m_v3.0
30_46_32m_v3.0
Table A.19: ArctimDEM tiles used to geocode images of Zachariae
ArctimDEM tiles of Narsap Sermia
13_38_32m_v3.0
Table A.20: ArctimDEM tiles used to geocode images of Narsap Sermia
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
81
==PAGE:92==
A.3
Full segmentation models trained on two glaciers, not
shown in main text
Histogram equalization
Figure A.1: The output from the model trained on Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq before
thresholding using the full segmentation approach and histogram equalization prepro­
cessing. The model was trained for 10000 epochs.
82
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:93==
Figure A.2: The red is the output from the model trained on Jakobshavn and Kanger­
lussuaq using the full segmentation approach and histogram equalization preprocessing,
after thresholding the output at > 0.5. The model was trained for 10000 epochs. The blue
is the true segmentation showing the glacier/bedrock part of the segmentation. The blue
is made slightly transparent to show the Helheim images beneath.
CLAHE
Figure A.3: The output from the model trained on Jakobshavn and Kangerlussuaq before
thresholding using the full segmentation approach and CLAHE preprocessing. The model
was trained for 10000 epochs.
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
83
==PAGE:94==
Figure A.4: The red is the output from the model trained on Jakobshavn and Kangerlus­
suaq using the full segmentation approach and CLAHE preprocessing, after thresholding
the output at > 0.5. The model was trained for 10000 epochs. The blue is the true seg­
mentation showing the glacier/bedrock part of the segmentation. The blue is made slightly
transparent to show the Helheim images beneath.
84
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:95==
A.4
Difficult glaciers, results not shown in main text
A.4.1
Model trained on 2 glaciers with no pre­processing
Figure A.5: Model trained on 2 glaciers with no pre­processing, tested on Petermann
Figure A.6: Model trained on 2 glaciers with no pre­processing, tested on Zachariae
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
85
==PAGE:96==
Figure A.7: Model trained on 2 glaciers with no pre­processing, tested on Narsap Sermia
Test glacier
Mean
distance [pixels] ([meters])
% of front covered
(with margin)
Precision
(with margin)
Petermann
145 (6189)
0.194% (3.74%)
0.01 (0.16)
Zachariae
23.2 (1210)
6.21% (37.7%)
0.08 (0.50)
Narsap Sermia
85.1 (765)
1.38% (21.4%)
0.18 (0.50)
Table A.21: The quality metrics of the model trained on 2 glaciers with no pre­processing,
tested on the 3 difficult glaciers
86
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:97==
A.4.2
Model trained on 2 glaciers using histogram equalization
Figure A.8: Model trained on 2 glaciers using histogram equalization, tested on Peter­
mann
Figure A.9: Model trained on 2 glaciers using histogram equalization, tested on Zachariae
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
87
==PAGE:98==
Figure A.10: Model trained on 2 glaciers using histogram equalization, tested on Narsap
Sermia
Test glacier
Mean
distance [pixels] ([meters])
% of front covered
(with margin)
Precision
(with margin)
Petermann
11.3 (470)
13.1% (62.8%)
0.14 (0.50)
Zachariae
14.4 (752)
8.86% (59.7%)
0.07 (0.46)
Narsap Sermia
164 (1461)
0.401% (8.35%)
0.05 (0.19)
Table A.22: The quality metrics of the model trained on 2 glaciers using histogram equal­
ization, tested on the 3 difficult glaciers
88
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:99==
A.4.3
Model trained on 2 glaciers using CLAHE
Figure A.11: Model trained on 2 glaciers using CLAHE, tested on Petermann
Figure A.12: Model trained on 2 glaciers using CLAHE, tested on Zachariae
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
89
==PAGE:100==
Figure A.13: Model trained on 2 glaciers using CLAHE, tested on Narsap Sermia
Test glacier
Mean
distance [pixels] ([meters])
% of front covered
(with margin)
Precision
(with margin)
Petermann
135 (5819)
1.8% (5.8%)
0.09 (0.21)
Zachariae
23 (5259)
4.6% (23.5%)
0.07 (0.37)
Narsap Sermia
100 (923)
0.05% (3.5%)
0.02 (0.15)
Table A.23: The quality metrics of the model trained on 2 glaciers using CLAHE, tested
on the 3 difficult glaciers
90
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:101==
A.4.4
Model trained on 6 glaciers using histogram equalization
Figure A.14: Model trained on 6 glaciers using histogram equalization, tested on Peter­
mann
Figure A.15:
Model trained on 6 glaciers using histogram equalization, tested on
Zachariae
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
91
==PAGE:102==
Figure A.16: Model trained on 6 glaciers using histogram equalization, tested on Narsap
Sermia
Test glacier
Mean
distance [pixels] ([meters])
% of front covered
(with margin)
Precision
(with margin)
Petermann
11.8 (482)
9.98% (60.0%)
0.14 (0.61)
Zachariae
16.3 (843)
5.15% (37.6%)
0.05 (0.36)
Narsap Sermia
54.8 (515)
3.96% (38.6%)
0.22 (0.47)
Table A.24: The quality metrics of the model trained on 6 glaciers using histogram equal­
ization, tested on the 3 difficult glaciers
92
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
==PAGE:103==
Glacier calving front delineation using machine learning
93
==PAGE:104==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.space.dtu.dk
