==PAGE:1==
Exploring advanced visualization for micro­
scopic mobility insights
Master Thesis
Lukas Ralf Schinzel
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
Lukas Ralf Schinzel, MSc Business Analytics
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Machine Learning
for Smart Mobility (MLSM), Department of Technology, Management and Economics, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering in Business Analytics, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Lukas Ralf Schinzel ­ s192396
Signature
Date
ii
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
January 16, 2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Advanced simulation tools like SimMobility are powerful tools that can help to evaluate
the effects of innovative mobility concepts and to effectively redesign existing transport
infrastructure. In an increasingly urbanized world, in which demand for private and com­
mercial transport rises continuously, they can contribute to higher efficiency in mobility
services. Recommendations for action can range from more effective pricing to the effi­
cient relocation of shared mobility to the introduction of new transport modes.
In order to leverage this potential, however, it has to be ensured that simulation results
are optimally analyzed and put into practice. Insights and recommendations from simu­
lations need to be prepared in a way that they can efficiently and effectively be analyzed
as well as communicated to decision­makers and legal authorities in a way that they are
understood, trusted and eventually implemented.
Constituting an instrument at the interface between data science and decision­making,
visualization plays an important role here. Due to its ability to make large data sets cog­
nitively processible and its generally intelligible form, it has the potential to facilitate data
consumption, pattern discovery and the process of turning data actionable.
Accordingly, this master thesis intends to leverage the opportunities of data visualization
for SimMobility. It aims to utilize visualization to allow for more efficient interpretation of
spatio­temporal simulation results as well as to pave the way for conveying simulation
results in a comprehensible and convincing manner.
Achieving these objectives is based on three exemplary visualization concepts developed,
which allow for comparing different mobility scenarios. With them it is possible to evaluate
the introduction of an alternative mobility concept with regard to its implications on three
relevant dimensions (congestion, travel time and activity behaviour) in comparison to a
base scenario. In addition, the assessment is conducted at different levels of aggregation
of the population (individuals, demographic groups, regional areas and the entire popula­
tion) and for several temporal resolutions.
For this purpose, a wide range of advanced visualization methods and tools is explored.
Examples from academics, industry and the media are studied in order to create a broad
catalogue that is both scientifically sound and practically relevant. The most promising
tools are subjected to an extensive test in order to take functionality, user, project and
system requirements into account when selecting the final visualization tool.
The overall methodology is based on a theoretically sound data visualization design pro­
cess to achieve the best possible project result. General design principles and best prac­
tices are investigated as well as criteria of graphical excellence studied in order to produce
high quality visualization concepts.
As a result, three ideal visualization concepts are worked out, one for each of the three
focus areas. After having examined and selected the most suitable visualization tool,
a general implementation concept is developed, on the basis of which the three final
visualization concepts are implemented. The examination of the final concepts confirms
that the developed visualizations provide interesting, valuable and practically relevant
insights in the selected application fields. In this way, the work leverages the creation
and implementation of insights from SimMobility and contributes to more effective and
cost­efficient mobility planning.
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Throughout the writing of this master thesis I have received a great deal of support and
assistance.
I would first like to thank my supervisors at DTU, Prof. Carlos Lima Azevedo and Prof.
Francisco Camara Pereira for the fruitful discussions and helpful advice along the way.
Thank you for guiding and supporting the process, for helping in sensibly narrowing down
the topic and your advice on the thesis structure.
Thanks also to research assistant Antonis Koutounidis for offering me help and support
as well as providing the necessary data for conducting the project.
Next, I would like to thank the research group at the Intelligent Transportation Systems Lab
at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), with whose cooperation the thesis was
created. Thank you for the friendly exchange and your support in providing simulation
data and infrastructure.
I also wish to thank my two supervisors at Novo Nordisk, Joachim Sverdrup Warberg and
Christian Tihic Rasmussen, who gave me the necessary flexibility in my student job and
followed my path with enthusiasm.
Furthermore, I would like to thank all my friends who have contributed in any way to
the success of this thesis. Thank you for the numerous discussions, suggestions and
ideas, often from outside the field of analytics, which opened up new perspectives for
me. Special thanks go to my good friend Patrick and my two roommates in Copenhagen,
Jesus and Emil. Thank you for listening and giving your input and feedback.
Last but not least I would like to thank my family. Mum, Dad, Ben and Sophia, thank you
for your mental support throughout my life. You have always supported me on my way,
no matter what I do and what decisions I make. You are always there for me, without you
my entire path to this master’s degree would not have been possible.
iv
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The power of data visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Graphical excellence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
SimMobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Methodology
7
2.1
General data visualization design process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Rapid prototyping in the context of visualization design . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
General procedure (project plan) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Data collection
11
3.1
SimMobility input data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
SimMobility output data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Research questions
13
4.1
Congestion and emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Travel time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5
Visualization methods
15
5.1
Visualisation techniques and practical examples for spatio­temporal data
. 15
5.2
Ideal visualization concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6
Visualization tools
25
6.1
Researching visualization tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.2
Evaluating visualization tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.3
Selecting the final visualization tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
7
Implementation
35
7.1
General implementation concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7.2
Visualization 1: Congestion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7.3
Visualization 2: Travel time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7.4
Visualization 3: Activities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
8
Conclusion and discussion
45
Bibliography
49
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Before starting the process of visualization design, some basics in connection with data
visualization in the context of this work need to be introduced. In the first step, the im­
portance and qualities of data visualization are highlighted (section 1.1). In the second
step, aspects characterizing excellent data graphics are examined (section 1.2), before
an introduction to the simulation tool SimMobility is given (section 1.3). Based on this, the
problem statement and the objectives for the thesis are formulated (sections 1.4 and 1.5).
1.1
The power of data visualization
Writing a thesis about visualization requires to clarify, why visualization is relevant and
important. Shan He, founding member of the data visualization team at Uber, mentions
four aspects: pattern discovery, data consumption, turning data actionable and storytelling
(He 2016).
Pattern discovery
Analyzing large data sets can be cumbersome and there exist many ways of approaching
it. According to Edward R. Tufte, professor emeritus of statistics and computer science at
Yale University, data visualization is one of the most effective ones (Tufte 2001, p. 10). A
well­designed data graphic is usually “the simplest and at the same time most powerful”
method to reveal patterns in data. This is because the human eye is a powerful statistical
tool, that can be taken advantage of if data is plotted (Lehmann 2021). Data visualization
can make patterns apparent that remain undiscovered when examining the raw data, a
transformation of it or its aggregated descriptive statistics (cf. for example Anscombe’s
quartet in Tufte 2001, p. 13­14).
Data consumption
Exceeding a certain size of around 20 numbers, data sets become incomprehensible if
represented in a table (ibid., p.56). The human brain reaches its natural limits. Trans­
forming the data into a visual picture, data visualization is capable of presenting it in a
cognitively processible and comprehensible form. Visualized data becomes easier to in­
terpret, making it easier to draw the right conclusions and therefore to make more accurate
decisions.
Turning data actionable
Data visualization facilitates turning data actionable because it is an important concept
for communication at the interface between data scientists and non­technical decision­
makers. It is usually not data scientists but managers from outside the field of data science
who are responsible for making decisions and putting insights and recommendations ob­
tained in data science projects into practice.
The amount of data available is growing constantly and exponentially (Holst 2021). Bas­
ing decisions on data has become an integral and inevitable part of the decision­making
process in business and the public sector. This development does not come without
challenges. Companies and public organizations need to overcome the scepticism that
is often associated with the technologies applied and results obtained in data science
projects. Furthermore, non­specialist audiences naturally struggle with the understand­
ing of the rather technical and complex results. Major challenges therefore are to create
trust and transparency as well as to translate the technical findings into comprehensible
and actionable recommendations. Data visualization plays an important role in commu­
nicating findings so that they are trusted and implemented successfully. First, visualized
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
1
==PAGE:10==
data becomes more relatable and easier to explain, creating trust in non­technical audi­
ences. And second, visualizing data allows for including domain experts in the decision
process, which can increase decision quality significantly.
Storytelling
Storytelling is closely related to turning data actionable. It is about communicating in­
sights found in data in the form of a narrative. Visualization supports this process as it
allows to visually create a story line, for example in the form of a slideshow, a poster, or a
video (Segel and Heer 2011, p. 1). Stories “communicate information in a psychologically­
efficient format, [which is] also a central goal of visualization design” (ibid., p. 2, based
on Gershon and Page 2001). In addition to that, visualization allows for a higher “com­
plexity of the content that needs to be communicated”, as it provides “intuitive and fast
exploration of large data resources” (ibid., p. 2). In a business context, visual storytelling
can support the process of communicating findings obtained in a data science project
to a non­specialist audience. Furthermore, it is a powerful tool in public relations and
marketing campaigns.
1.2
Graphical excellence
Before building visualizations, the characteristics of a good data graphic must be deter­
mined. Tufte, a pioneer in the field of data visualization, describes in his book “The Visual
Display of Quantitative Information” nine criteria for graphical excellence (see figure 1.1).
Figure 1.1: Graphical excellence according to Tufte (Tufte 2001, p. 13)
The first criterion is a very basic one, namely that good graphics should really show the
data to be visualized. Particularly with large amounts of data, it must be ensured that all
relevant data is recognizable.
The next principle concerns avoiding distractions. Good graphics draw the viewer’s atten­
tion to the data. For example, graphic design and the technology of graphic production
are not an end in themselves. They should only serve to support the evaluation of the
data. Methods used to create the graph should only be presented to the extent that they
are relevant for the analysis of the data.
Another criterion for excellence is integrity. Graphics should tell the truth. They should
be used as instruments to reason about quantitative information (Tufte 2001, p. 53), not
2
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:11==
to tell a particularly exciting story. The creator should avoid distorting the meaning of the
data. This includes displaying the data proportionally correctly. For example, the physi­
cally measurable distances inside the graphic itself should be directly proportional to the
represented numerical values (ibid., p. 56).
To prevent graphical distortion and ambiguity, “clear, detailed and thorough labeling”
should be used (ibid., p. 77). Design variations are to be avoided. Consistency helps
the viewer to orient quickly and facilitates drawing the right conclusions.
Generally, graphical design effects such as fancy 3D effects should be used sensibly to
not distort perception of the data. Excellent graphics are not overly complex. “The num­
ber of information­carrying (variable) dimensions depicted should not exceed the number
of dimensions in the data” as this can easily lead to distortion (ibid., p. 71). A common
example of a distorted graphic is when quantities are used to encode the height instead
of the volume of 3D bars and thus make value differences appear significantly larger.
Furthermore, it needs to be ensured that the data displayed is accurate, relevant and
complete to no tell a wrong story. Data integrity requires to think carefully and critically
about the data displayed and the story it will tell. Context is an important aspect, too.
”Graphics must not quote data out of context” to not deceive the audience (ibid., p. 13).
The fourth criterion was already mentioned in section 1.1 and concerns the relationship
between information and space. Good graphics manage to create a large information
density. They are able to present a large amount of information comprehensively in a
small space.
As a consequence, excellent graphics “make large data sets coherent” (ibid., p. 13). They
reveal and facilitate insights into complex, impenetrable data sets, that are hard to gain
from pure statistical analysis. At the same time, they ensure that different parts of the
data can be analysed in relation to each other.
Good graphics should also be designed to “encourage the eye to compare different pieces
of data” (ibid., p. 13). The human eye’s statistical capability is particularly strong in com­
paring lengths, sizes, colors and other dimensions (Lehmann 2021). In order to take
advantage of this property, graphics should show data variation (Tufte 2001, p. 77).
Another characteristic of successful visualizations is that they present data at different
levels of detail. In doing so, they facilitate a more complex and multi­layered analysis.
With regard to mobility data, this can for example mean different levels of aggregation of
population (population, group, individual) or road network (network, type, segment).
Also, strong visualizations serve a clear purpose. As a creator one must be clear about
the audience and the purpose, and design the graphic accordingly. Only if the audience
is clearly identified, the graphic can be designed specifically to its purpose and unfold its
full potential. Tufte names four different purposes of a graphic: description, exploration,
tabulation, and decoration (ibid., p. 13). The process to identify and serve the purpose of
the visualizations created as part of this master thesis will be discussed in chapter 6.
Lastly, a good visualization is accompanied by written explanations and statistical metrics.
These elements enrich it further and make visualizations as a tool even more powerful.
In summary, it can be stated that graphic excellence is characterized by “complex ideas
communicated with clarity, precision, and efficiency” (ibid., p. 13). ”Graphical excellence
is that which gives to the viewer the greatest number of ideas in the shortest time with the
least ink in the smallest space.” (ibid., p. 51).
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
3
==PAGE:12==
1.3
SimMobility
The data for the visualizations created as part of this thesis is obtained from SimMobility.
SimMobility is a large­scale simulation platform maintained by the Future Urban Mobility
Research Group at the Singapore­MIT Alliance for Research and Technology (SMART).
It comprises multiple mobility­sensitive behavioural models to ”predict the impact of mo­
bility demands on transportation networks, intelligent transportation services and vehic­
ular emissions” (MIT Mobility Futures Collaborative 2020). It is therefore not restricted
to the simulation of transportation, but comprises also communications between agents
and land­use (Adnan et al. 2016, p. 2). Modeling encompasses the decisions of millions
of agents, being it pedestrians, drivers, traffic lights, mobile phones or entire companies
(ibid., p. 2).
All decisions are activity­based, meaning that the individual agents’ demand for trans­
portation is based on their individual daily activity schedule (DAS) (ibid., p. 5). In this
way, it is ensured that individual behaviour can be observed in response to changes in
the transportation network supply, e.g. the introduction of new transport modes or gov­
ernmental policies.
SimMobility is a multi­layered simulation platform consisting of three sub­models: a long­
term, a mid­term and a short­term simulator. The different modules are differentiated
according to the time frame of the decisions made within a module.
The long­term simulator (LT) is responsible for long­term decisions in the range of months
and years. It comprises decisions that concern land­use, car ownership, location deci­
sions of households (HH) and organizations as well as job choices (ibid., p. 9).
The mid­term simulator (MT) models pre­day and within­day behaviour. Agent decisions
include ”route choice, mode choice, activity pattern and its (re)scheduling” (ibid., p. 3).
The time frame ranges from minutes to seconds.
The short­term simulator (ST) is designed to simulate ad­hoc decisions at the lowest level
of within­day granularity. Decisions are typically made within fractions of seconds and
include braking, lane changes, acceleration, but also re­routing (ibid., p. 12­13).
Figure 1.2: 3­layer SimMobility framework based on Yang et al. 2015, p. 5
4
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:13==
The strength of SimMobility is its fully integrated approach. As illustrated in figure 1.2, all
layers are connected and communicate with each other, ensuring full consistency between
the different layers.
With its wide­ranging functionalities and its integrated setup, SimMobility not only allows
for the simulation of how demand is serviced, but also for testing future mobility scenarios.
It is possible to simulate and compare the effects of alternative mobility concepts, future
technologies, policy decisions and investment options.
SimMobility uses several experimental settings around the world, Copenhagen among
others. In the course of this master thesis it will mainly be worked with mobility scenarios
applied to the city of Singapore and the Greater Boston Area.
1.4
Problem statement
As described in the previous section, advanced simulation tools like SimMobility are pow­
erful tools that can help to evaluate the effects of innovative mobility concepts and to
effectively redesign existing transport infrastructure. In an increasingly urbanized world,
in which demand for private and commercial transport rises continuously, they can con­
tribute to higher efficiency in mobility services. Recommendations for action can range
from more effective pricing to the efficient relocation of shared bikes to the introduction of
new routes or innovative transport modes.
In order to leverage this potential, however, it has to be ensured that outcomes are put
into practice. Insights and recommendations from simulations need to be communicated
to decision­makers and legal authorities in a way that they are understood, trusted and
eventually implemented. Without understanding and trusting simulation results, it be­
comes difficult to turn these insights actionable.
Visualization has the potential to convince non­technical decision­makers of the value of
data science for better mobility decisions. While it is difficult to convey recommendations
derived by a data scientist to lay decision­makers, visualizing simulation results makes
these results more tangible and familiar. As a consequence, they are more likely to be
understood and trusted.
Visualization can make technical insights accessible to other stakeholders, as well. Out­
put from large­scale simulations are often complex and hard to comprehend in its raw
form. Not only for lay audiences, but also for practitioners from within the field of data
science, visualization has the potential to make extensive simulation results more acces­
sible. Simulation data analysis and interpretation are expected to be facilitated. Further­
more, domain experts such as traffic specialists or urban planners can be integrated in
the analysis process, which can significantly increase the quality of project results and
recommendations for action.
1.5
Objectives
Following the challenges identified in the previous section, this master thesis aims to
leverage the opportunities of data visualization for SimMobility.
First, it aims to use visualization to allow for more efficient interpretation of simulation
results. In accordance with the qualities described in section 1.1, visualizing simulation
results will facilitate pattern discovery. For example, the identification of areas that are
disadvantaged by a political scenario is to be simplified.
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
5
==PAGE:14==
Second, this work aims to facilitate communicating SimMobility results to non­technical
audiences and decision­makers. The opportunity to enter the field of storytelling should
be created in order enable conveying well­founded research results in a comprehensible
and convincing manner. In this way, simulation data will be turned actionable and chances
of implementation will be increased.
How and by which means these objectives should be accomplished will be presented in
the next chapter.
6
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:15==
2
Methodology
In this chapter, the project plan of the thesis will be presented. It will be outlined how
the thesis period was structured and how the objectives formulated in section 1.5 were
operationalised. Sub­processes as well as interim milestones will be introduced. Before
presenting the project plan, we will describe the theories and methodologies applied in
achieving the objectives. This entails describing the generic design process applied to
create visualizations and introducing the concept of rapid prototyping.
2.1
General data visualization design process
The iterative data visualization process model of the statistician Nathan Yau served as
the methodological basis for carrying out this work. Yau is the author of the book ”Data
Points ­ Visualization that means something” and the operator of the website FlowingData,
which deals with visualization, statistics and design (Yau 2013, p. vii). His process model
consists of four steps that are run through iteratively: data collection and exploration,
definition of research questions, selection of visualization method and interpretation of
visualization results (ibid., p. 137). For this master’s thesis, the process model has been
expanded by a fifth step, selection of visualization tools. The adapted model is shown in
figure 2.1. In this section it will be introduced theoretically. In section 2.3, the practical
application on this thesis project is presented.
Figure 2.1: Data visualization design process based on Yau 2013, p. 137
Data collection and exploration
Many data science projects are started with a clear picture of what kind of visualization the
team aims to build. Yau argues that such a data science project will fail (Yau 2013, p. 137).
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
7
==PAGE:16==
The reason for this is that the most difficult and time­consuming step of any visualization
project is data acquisition. He therefore advocates a different approach, namely to base
the entire project on the available data (”data first and visualization follows”) (ibid., p. 138).
In this respect, the first step should be to examine the existing data and, if necessary, to
add additional data of use or interest.
Definition of research questions
Once a solid set of data is available and examined, potential research questions can be
formulated. What insights could the data at hand provide? Which aspects of the data
would be particularly interesting to look at? It is not about asking the perfect question
right at the beginning and sticking to it throughout the entire project. The exploration
of the data gives rise to first ideas for interesting research questions, which are further
developed through further exploration and first prototype visualizations. Some ideas turn
out to be unfavorable (e.g. on closer inspection of the data or in consideration of the
visualization tools available) and must be discarded. Others proof to be promising and
can be refined and developed further.
Yau also emphasizes that it is important to orientate oneself to the questions of the user
in order to ask (and ultimately answer) meaningful questions (ibid., p. 139).
Selection of visualization method
The next step is to determine a suitable visualization method. Like Tufte in his criteria for
graphic excellence, Yau emphasizes the importance of looking at the data from various
angles and different levels of aggregation (ibid., p. 139). It is important to experiment with
different perspectives on the data (see rapid prototyping, section 2.2).
The choice of the optimal visualization method depends on the visualization’s objective.
Exploratory visualizations require different methods than explanatory ones. The target
group is also relevant. The graphic must be adapted to the audience’s needs and back­
ground knowledge (ibid., p. 242). For iterative identification of a good research question,
it is furthermore important to illuminate data from different angles and to experiment.
Yau also objects to the misconception that data graphics should be comprehensible at first
glance. He argues that complex patterns and relationships are often not straightforward
and therefore might take a while to be penetrated and understood (ibid., p. 141).
Selection of visualisation tool
This process element is not specifically mentioned by Yau, but plays an important role
in the context of this thesis. In addition to the visualization method, one has to select a
suitable visualization tool. Can the previously defined method be implemented with the
tools available? Which tool is suitable to implement the previously created designs in the
best possible way (ideal vs. real visualization concept)? The requirements for the tool
are based, inter alia, on the target group and the purpose of the visualization. Depending
on its functionalities, connectivity, usability or costs, a certain tool can be more or less
suitable for the specific case at hand.
Interpreting visualisation results
After the visualization has been created, it has to be dealt with: What can be seen? Does
it make sense? What other aspects could be examined? What additional data would be
required? Based on the answers to these questions, it can be jumped back to one of the
previous elements.
Iterative nature
At this point it must be noted that the process presented here is not a strict sequence of
individual process steps. Both the overall process and its individual sub­processes are to
be seen as iterative elements, between which one can repeatedly jump back and forth.
8
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Rapid prototyping in the context of visualization design
Rapid prototyping is a concept that originates from mechanical engineering (Um 2015,
p. 192). It allows for fast and inexpensive implementation of virtual designs in 3D hard­
ware models. The aim is to check virtual concepts quickly and inexpensively for practical
suitability. In this way, for example, development processes can be shortened and tool
costs saved.
In the context of software design, rapid prototyping means to transform conceptual ideas
into testable prototypes as fast and efficiently as possible (Pranam 2018, p. 97). Thereby,
many different designs and their functionality can be evaluated in a time­efficient and cost­
effective manner and compared with one another. Promising designs can be refined and
improved in small iterative cycles.
Methods that are flexible, fast and inexpensive are particularly suitable for rapid prototyp­
ing. In the specific case of creating data visualizations, these are tools that are easy to
use and that allow many different visualizations to be implemented with little effort. They
are characterized by simple, sometimes even automatic, parameterization, as well as an
easy­to­use user interface.
2.3
General procedure (project plan)
The thesis project was planned using a project plan in the form of a Gantt chart. The
project plan was reviewed and revised every two weeks throughout the entire course of
the project. An extract of the first version of the project plan is displayed in figure 2.2. It
shows the planning for the second and third month of the thesis period.
Figure 2.2: Project plan extract (first version)
The project plan can roughly be divided into two parts, a theoretical and a practical. The
theoretical part comprised literature and online research. On the one hand, general design
principles and best practices were investigated. The results were, for example, the criteria
of graphical excellence presented in section 1.2, as well as the process model for data
visualization presented in section 2.1. In the further course, visualization methods were
researched specifically for spatio­temporal data, the type of data output by SimMobility.
Finally, practical examples were explored in academics, industry and the media in order
to gain inspirations for later visualization concepts.
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
9
==PAGE:18==
The individual process steps and milestones of the practical part of the thesis follow the
process model from Yau. In accordance with its iterative character, it was run through
several times at project level. The individual process steps themselves were designed
iteratively, as well, so that the process model was also applied at the process level. For
instance, in the process of selecting the visualization method, other sub­processes have
been jumped back to, for example to manipulate the data again in order to make it more
suitable for a particular visualization method.
As suggested by Yau’s process model, the project started with data collection and explo­
ration. This included the familiarization to SimMobility. Its structure and functionalities
were examined as well as the data outputs it generates.
On the basis of the data exploration, it was then started to collect potential research ques­
tions. Special focus was placed on research questions that are particularly relevant and
valuable for decision­makers from the field of transportation planning.
The next two steps comprised the ideation and sketching of ideal visualization concepts as
well as research into potential visualization tools (frameworks, libraries and applications).
The combination of these ideal visualization concepts with the available tool set resulted
in prototyping the first real visualizations. The concept of rapid prototyping introduced in
section 2.2 was applied in order to experiment with many different visualization methods
in different tools in the shortest possible time.
The insights gained from the first run of the process model were used to jump back to
individual process steps in order to refine and finalize the result. This was followed by the
selection of the most suitable tool, the definition of the final visualization concept and, last
but not least, the implementation. At the end of the project, three prototypes for the future
visualization of SimMobility simulation results were presented.
10
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:19==
3
Data collection
In accordance with Yau’s process model, the practical part of the thesis project began with
data acquisition. The basic data structure of SimMobility was dealt with. An exemplary
excerpt from the relational SimMobility database is presented in figure 3.1 (Adnan et al.
2016, p. 8). Subsequently, the data tables that could be of relevance and interest to
this work were identified. These can be divided into input and output and are presented
individually below.
Figure 3.1: Exemplary excerpt from the relational SimMobility database
3.1
SimMobility input data
Input data denotes data that is fed into SimMobility in order to conduct a simulation run.
The input data used for the visualizations created in the course of this project can be
divided into demand and supply data.
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
11
==PAGE:20==
Demand data comprises data describing the population, i.e. the simulated individuals,
the households they are belonging to as well as associated tables to decode IDs such as
employment statuses or income groups. In addition, daily activity schedules (DAS) were
used. They describe the concrete travel demand for each individual in the form of multiple
trips per person and day.
Supply data contains information about the road network that is available to service the
demand. It includes information on road sections (length, number of lanes, speed limits)
and intersections. The structure of the road network in SimMobility is shown in figure 3.2
(Singapore­MIT Alliance for Research and Technology 2019). In addition, zone data was
used to partition the experimental environment and to serve for the local aggregation of
simulation results.
Figure 3.2: SimMobility road network
3.2
SimMobility output data
Output data is data that is generated by SimMobility after conducting a simulation run, in
which planned trips are converted into realized ones. The data tables subtrip metrics as
well as segment statistics and link statistics were considered relevant for this project. They
document which individual used which parts of the network with which means of transport
at what time and for what purpose. Aggregated for the individual parts of the network,
they contain information on the number of vehicles that used a certain network section at
a certain point in time. In addition, they provide information on associated traffic­related
consequences (e.g. traffic density, flow speed, emissions, etc.).
12
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:21==
4
Research questions
After having obtained an overview of the data available in SimMobility, the next task was
to define research questions that can be answered using this data. For this purpose, an
ideation was first carried out together with the supervisors of this thesis. It was considered
which research aspects would be interesting to take a closer look at. Particular emphasis
was placed on the available data and the decision­maker perspective. It was important to
take into account what aspects could actually be investigated with the data available and
which findings would be relevant for decision­makers. The aim was to create actionable
visualizations, which can be used to solve actual problems.
Following the ideation, ideas for potential research questions were collected throughout
the initial process of the thesis project. The research of visualization methods provided
valuable suggestions for possible visualization concepts and which aspects of the mobility
data could be examined. The review of visualization tools also provided valuable input and
information as to whether answers to the research questions were feasible. The iterative
character of Yau’s process model is also reflected here. Only when visualization methods
and visualization tools were finally examined, the research questions to be answered were
ultimately determined.
As mentioned in section 1.3, SimMobility offers the user the possibility to simulate and
compare the effects of alternative mobility concepts, future technologies, policy decisions
and investment options. For example, the effects of introducing a new transport mode
can be simulated and examined in comparison to a base scenario.
Visualizing this was considered a particularly suitable research question for this work, as
it was expected that this field of application contains interesting, insightful, valuable and
practically relevant aspects. At the same time, the investigation constitutes a technically
demanding visualization concept due to its multi­dimensional character. Therefore it was
decided to investigate the implications of the introduction of new mobility concepts. This
will be done with regard to several dimensions (congestion and emissions, travel time and
activities) and at different levels of aggregation of the population (individuals, demographic
groups or regional areas and the entire population). The specific research questions are
presented individually and in detail below, according to the dimension examined.
4.1
Congestion and emissions
An interesting aspect of the investigation of novel mobility concepts is their effects on
emissions and congestion. Visualizing traffic flows, traffic density and emissions can pro­
vide answers to questions like:
• How are emissions distributed across space and time (day, week, year)?
• Where in the city and at what times can most traffic jams and peak values of emis­
sions be observed?
• How do emissions and congestion change after introducing a new mobility concept?
• Are traffic density and emissions directly related?
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
13
==PAGE:22==
4.2
Travel time
Another very relevant aspect is travel efficiency. How travel times change is usually one
of the most important factors when deciding for or against introducing an alternative mo­
bility concept. Visualizations can be valuable decision­making aids here, for example by
revealing insights such as:
• How do travel times change after introducing a new mobility concept?
• Which road segments benefit? For which segments does travel time deteriorate?
At what times (day, week)?
• How does travel time change for different residential areas? Can discrimination be
observed?
• How does travel time change for different demographic groups? Can discrimination
be observed?
4.3
Activities
Changing mobility supply is expected to change the behavior of the simulated population
in relation to their activities. Findings can arise, for example, in relation to:
• Which shifts in activities can be observed?
• In which population groups and in which regional areas are these particularly pro­
nounced?
• Do certain population groups intensify certain activities (improved accessibility) or
can a decrease in certain activities (discrimination) be observed?
The findings from this study can be used, for example, to predict changes in demand in
shopping centers or to optimize location decisions by industrial companies.
14
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:23==
5
Visualization methods
After concise research questions had been defined, the next step was to select the ap­
propriate visualization techniques. For this purpose, an overview of common visualization
methods for mobility data was obtained (section 5.1). The research included visualiza­
tion techniques from scientific literature as well as practical examples from academics,
industry and the media. Using the selection of methods resulting from this research, ideal
visualization concepts were created to address the research questions defined in the pre­
vious chapter (section 5.2).
5.1
Visualisation techniques and practical examples for
spatio­temporal data
As part of the review, extensive research was carried out in the field of academic literature
(books, articles and other publications as well as projects from university institutions), the
mobility industry (mobility providers such as Uber) and public life (blogs, newspapers and
journals).
The aim was to approach existing visualization methods theoretically and scientifically, but
at the same time to investigate the types and forms in which these methods are used in
practice. It was strived for creating a catalog that was as broad as possible, scientifically
sound, and which at the same time offered inspiration for practical implementation.
The research was divided into two parts. In the first part, techniques were examined that
make use of a spatial representation of the mobility data. In the second part, methods were
recorded that represent spatio­temporal data without their actual geographical properties.
5.1.1
Spatial visualization methods
In the context of this work, spatial visualization methods are defined as methods that
represent data on the basis of their geographic features. Using the real experimental
environments from SimMobility (e.g. Greater Boston Area), this means displaying the
data on a geographical coordinate system such as the World Geodetic System (WGS)
using its geographic coordinates (longitude and latitude).
In the course of the investigations, a set of methods relevant for the data used in this
work emerged, which are presented individually in the following (see figure 5.1). It will
be started with the methods for single data points (denoted by a single pair of longitude
and latitude coordinates). The order of presentation within this group is based on the
classification on a scale from individual to aggregated.
It will then be moved on to trip data (identified by two or more pairs of longitude and
latitude coordinates, so­called linestrings). These visualization methods make it possible
to retain network data. The order of presentation is based on the classification on a scale
from simple to complex.
Point plot (scatter plot)
The scatter plot is the simplest form to visualize data points on a map. It simply uses
the latitude and longitude coordinates of each data point to position it on the map. In
contrast to the following methods, no scaling or aggregation is applied. Each data point
is displayed individually and in the same size. Different colors may be used to indicate
membership of a specific group (cluster). Opacity can be used if many data points overlap
in order to get a better idea of their frequency.
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 5.1: Spatial visualization methods
Scatter plots are primarily used when it comes to displaying single­variate data as faith­
fully as possible. Distributions across space can be made visible. They are suitable for
visualizing geographical locations and their frequency without showing further information
about the data points.
Scaled point plot (bubble plot)
The scaled point plot (also called bubble plot) is an extension of the scatter plot. In con­
trast to the latter, the size of the data points is not constant, but used to represent an
additional variable and thus to convey additional information. In this respect, the bubble
plot serves the same application areas as the scatter plot, except that an additional vari­
able is encoded. However, it is less suitable for representing geographical distributions,
since the size of the bubble, which might not be related to the frequency of data points,
can distort the impression of the geographical distribution.
But the bubble plot can of course also be used for aggregation. Then the size of a bubble
actually represents the number of data points contained in that category. Such illustra­
tions are currently often used to show the number of Covid­19 cases per country. A bubble
scaled with the number of corona infections, fatalities or vaccinations is displayed on a
map over a certain geographical unit (e.g. district, region or country). A well­known il­
lustration of the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins
University is shown in figure 5.2 (Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Research Center 2021).
Grid plot
While the bubble plot can show data both aggregated and unaggregated, the grid plot
is an exclusively aggregating representation form. A map is divided into grid cells of the
same size and all data points are assigned to one of these grid cells according to their
geographical location. The frequency of the data points within a grid cell can then be
coded using a color scale. Of course, other color codings can also be used, for example
the mean value of a certain numerical feature of all data points within a grid cell. For
categorical data, for example, the color scaling can take place on the basis of the most
common category of a certain feature within a grid cell.
The shape of the grid parts can be varied. Squares are used very frequently, but hexagons
are also being used more and more frequently to take account of the ballistic shape of the
earth and to avoid distortions.
16
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:25==
Figure 5.2: Bubble chart for Covid­19 cases
Grid plots are particularly suitable for large amounts of data where the representation of
each individual data point would be too confusing. However, the representation is limited
to a few variables. When presenting multivariate data, it is therefore required to use more
complex methods.
Extruded grid plot
An extended form of the grid plot is the extruded grid plot. By switching from 2D to 3D, this
form of representation offers the possibility of visualizing another variable of a multivariate
data set.
Choropleth
Another, somewhat more complex form of the grid plot is the choropleth. Similar to the
grid plot, the earth’s surface is divided into so­called polygons. A polygon is a plane
area formed by a finite number of connected straight line segments. The shape of these
polygons is not based on a standardized grid (like squares or hexagons in case of the grid
plot), but on geopolitical phenomena. Examples of this are counties, regions, countries
or continents, all of which are characterized by clearly defined geographical borders. The
procedure for the color design of the choropleth is the same as that of the grid plot and it
also provides the possibility of extrusion. The choropleth is a very popular and frequently
occurring visualization method because it presents data to the viewer embedded in a
familiar background. In newspapers and other media, countless of these representations
can be found every day, for example with the presentation of corona incidences by district
in Germany (figure 5.3a) or the unemployment rate by federal state in the US (figure 5.3b).
Heat map
An alternative form of aggregation for many individual data points is the heat map, some­
times also called density map or contour map (Yau 2013, p. 174). In contrast to a grid
plot, heat maps estimate densities continuously across space. The value of each location
is calculated from the values of the surrounding data points. For example, kernel density
estimates (KDEs) are used here (Janert 2010, p. 19). With the help of color scales, the
density of data points can be made visible. However, other application forms are also
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
17
==PAGE:26==
(a) Covid­19 incidences by federal state in
Germany (New York Times 2021)
(b) US unemployment rate by county (US Bureau
of Labor Statistics 2021)
Figure 5.3: Examples for choropleths
possible. For example, heat maps can be used to show not the frequency but the level
of a certain value in a certain geographic area. An example of this are weather maps to
show precipitation or temperature across space, from which the heat map takes its name
(see figure 5.4).
Figure 5.4: Temperature in Europe on December 5, 2021 displayed on a heat map
(weather.com 2021)
Line and arc plot
Turning towards the representation of movement data, the line plot is the simplest repre­
sentation form. Start and end point of a trip are simply connected with a line. Color and
thickness of the line can be used to convey additional information such as the type of trip
(e.g. transport mode), trip metrics (e.g. trip frequency, flow, emissions) or demographics.
18
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:27==
Line plots can also be represented in 3D, in which case one speaks of arc plots. They
enable a further variable to be coded using the height. Line or arc plots are suitable for
movement data for which only the start and end points are relevant. An example is the
display of flights of an airline. With a lot of movement data, especially with many different
start and end locations, line and arc plots can quickly become crowded and confusing.
Graph­based or linestring plot
If, instead of a line between origin and destination, a precise movement profile is to be
displayed, graph­based or linestring plots are suitable. Here the movement is shown on
the map in the form of a linestring (a number of straight line segments connected to each
other). The prerequisite for such a representation is the availability of precise movement
data or the precise shape of a road segment.
5.1.2
Semi­spatial and non­spatial visualization methods
In the context of this work, semi­spatial and non­spatial visualization methods are defined
as methods that do not or only partially visualize data using their geographical location.
Methods examined as part of this research are presented in figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Semi­spatial and non­spatial visualization methods
Cartogram
Cartograms are closely related to choropleths, the only difference being that class bound­
aries do not represent real geographical borders. Instead, changing the size of a geo­
graphical unit (e.g. federal state, country or continent) serves to represent a value asso­
ciated with this geographical unit. Naturally, actual physical area and shape are distorted.
Cartograms exist in the form of semi­spatial and non­spatial representations. They are
very helpful and powerful when the physical size of geographical units is misleading and
should therefore be adjusted to a different size. An example is the distribution of votes in
the 2016 US presidential election given in figure 5.6. It originates from an article by Mads
Kudsen who tells an insightful story called ”Land Doesn’t Vote, People Do: This Electoral
Map Tells the Real Story” (Knudsen 2019). In principle, the shape of the United States is
still recognizable, but the individual counties are not shown in their geographical shape
but in the form of bubbles, the size of which in turn does not correspond to the county
area but to the number of voters. This creates a semi­spatial graphic that combines ge­
ographical and non­geographical elements. Although republican voters clearly dominate
the number of counties won, the cartogram makes it clear that particularly in populous
counties the proportion of democratic voters is often significantly higher, which ultimately
determines the election result.
Glyph
Glyphs are meaningful marks placed on a map. A very insightful example is presented by
Pérez­Messina and Graells­Garrido. Their glyph­based flow model is shown in figure 5.7.
It encodes transport mode, trip directions, trip distances and trip count in a single glyph
(Pérez­Messina and Graells­Garrido 2019).
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.6: Cartogram visualizing US presidential election votes 2016 (Knudsen 2019)
The glyph itself consists of three inner rings and twelve directions arranged around them,
each consisting of three scaled bubbles. Three different colors stand for three transport
modes (car, bus, metro). The inner rings show the aggregated trip counts per transport
mode. The outermost ring is the transport mode with the most trip counts. The bubbles
represent the trip count in a certain direction. Three bubbles are used per direction, the
outer one for long distance trips, the middle one for medium distance trips and the inner
one for short distance trips. The bigger the bubble, the larger the number of trips with
this particular distance in that direction. In addition, the bubble is colored according to the
predominant transport mode for this direction and trip distance.
Cleverly developed glyphs can represent a large amount of information in a small space in
a two­dimensional space. The disadvantage is that, due to their complexity, they are often
not intuitive and therefore not suitable for mass media. In the field of scientific literature
or urban planning, in which planners deal with the same visualizations on a daily basis,
however, they can be a powerful instrument.
Figure 5.7: Glyph­based flow model (Pérez­Messina and Graells­Garrido 2019)
20
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:29==
Origin­Destination Matrix (ODM)
The origin destination matrix (ODM) is a simple non­spatial visualization method. It is
similar to a line plot, but origins and destinations are not shown on a map, but as categories
in a matrix. The individual cells that belong to certain origin destination pairs can then be
coded using certain variables (e.g. frequency of the connection).
Chord diagram / Edge bundeling
Similar to an ODM, the chord diagram connects different categories. These categories
are usually arranged in a circle. Inflows and outflows or incoming and outgoing trips
are represented by connections between the individual categories. Chord diagrams are
often used when it comes to depicting inflows and outflows between individual categories.
Examples are shifts in mobile network providers’ market shares or parties’ influx and efflux
of voters in elections. When visualizing mobility data, individual locations can serve as
the categories. However, this form of representation is only suitable for a limited number
of trip origins and destinations, as the graphic becomes easily crowded.
5.2
Ideal visualization concepts
The next step after reviewing possible visualization methods was to draft ideal visualisa­
tion concepts for the research questions defined in chapter 4. Ideal here means that no
restrictions with regards to practically available visualization tools have yet been taken into
account. Also, in order to focus the further procedure and to limit the scope of this work
in a meaningful way, it was decided to focus exclusively on spatial visualization methods.
The visualization concepts developed for the individual research questions are presented
below.
5.2.1
Congestion and emissions
The graphic for the visualization of congestion and emissions is shown in figure 5.8. In
order to investigate how congestion and emissions are distributed across space and time,
it was considered most conducive to utilize a path based visualization that colors the indi­
vidual road segments according to the change in traffic or emissions (left pane). Sensible
measurands could be the vehicle density per kilometer or the amount of emissions emit­
ted per kilometer of the segment. In order to incorporate the temporal dimension and to
investigate how congestion and emissions are distributed throughout the day (presumably
higher during rush hour than during the night), throughout the week (presumably higher
on Friday afternoon than Sunday morning) and throughout the year (presumably less bike
riders in winter, causing more traffic and emissions), a time slider should be added (bottom
left pane). This functionality will enable the user to animate the visualization to explore
temporal patterns.
Alternatively, a choropleth or a heatmap could be used to visualize changes in conges­
tion and emissions. However, to identify hot spots in the road network, the path based
visualization was considered more insightful. In this way, it will be clearly evident, which
segments benefit from a new mobility concept, which deteriorate, and at what times.
In addition, two non­spatial bar charts were added to the graphic (right pane). They will
provide the user with further insights into the implications, namely which modes of trans­
port and which population groups are responsible for most of the emissions. This shows
whether the measure has led to an overall improvement (top right) and who are the main
contributors to emissions before and after introduction (bottom right).
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.8: Ideal concept to visualize congestion and emissions
5.2.2
Travel time
The graphic to visualize changes in travel time is presented in figure 5.9. In order to
find out how travel time develops for different residential areas and whether a preference
or disadvantage is to be expected, the choropleth in figure 5.9 was designed. It shows
changes in travel time according to place of residence in the city. Colors encode the
average daily travel time for each individual living in a specific zone. In this way, it can
for example be identified whether more remote parts of the city are disadvantaged by a
decision or whether their accessibility is even increased.
Figure 5.9: Ideal concept to visualize changes in travel time (by residential area)
5.2.3
Activities
Two alternative visualizations to provide insights into behavioral changes are presented in
figure 5.10 and 5.11. Both visualizations contain the same information but use a different
visualization method. Figure 5.10 uses a heat map, figure 5.11 uses a grid plot. A drop­
down menu on the left allows the user to filter a specific activity, e.g. work or shopping. The
heat map or grid plot will then display the change in activity for each spatial unit. Green
could denote an increase in activities in a certain area, red could denote a decrease. In this
22
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:31==
way, the visualization makes it possible to examine how activities shift when the mobility
network changes, which could indicate increased or decreased accessibility. Animating
the visualization with a time slider will provide insights into when these shifts happen
during the day. A bar chart on the right can provide additional information, for instance
disclosing a change in citizens’ preferred means of transport for reaching an activity.
Figure 5.10: Ideal concept to visualize activity changes in the form of a heatmap
Figure 5.11: Ideal concept to visualize activity changes in the form of a grid plot
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:33==
6
Visualization tools
After research questions have been defined and corresponding visualization designs have
been developed, the next step is to put these designs into practice. Accordingly, the next
step in the design process from chapter 2.1 is the evaluation and selection of a suitable
visualization tool. The first section of this chapter (section 6.1) gives a general overview
of this evaluation and selection process. The procedure with its individual sub­steps is
explained. In the second step (section 6.2) the tools judged to be most relevant for the
application in this thesis are presented in detail. An insight into the different functionalities
is given and their accuracy of fit for the task at hand is assessed. Finally, in the third
section (section 6.3) the result of the selection process is presented.
6.1
Researching visualization tools
The tools examined in this thesis were divided into three categories. The first category are
low­level programming frameworks and libraries (based on JavaScript or Python), which
are characterized by a high degree of customizability. The second category are high­level
applications. They provide less flexibility but a convenient user interface, allowing for rapid
and easy creation of visualizations with little technical knowledge required. Finally, the
last category examined are the extensions of these application­based tools for common
business intelligence platforms such as Tableau or Microsoft Power BI. They combine the
convenience of an application with additional options for interactivity and extended infor­
mation display in the form of dashboards. An overview of all visualization tools reviewed,
divided into the three categories, is given in figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Overview of visualization tools reviewed
The procedure for exploring, evaluating and selecting these tools is shown in Figure 6.2.
First of all, a broad­based research was conducted to discover existing tools. This in­
cluded tools used or introduced in academic literature, newspapers, blogs, tutorials, spe­
cialist presentations and courses attended as part of the degree. The tools found were
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
25
==PAGE:34==
roughly structured (according to the three categories presented above) and, as part of
a preselection, preliminary subjected to their suitability for the project at hand. Among
other things, the ability for system­side integration and connection to the simulation plat­
form SimMobility was considered. The preselection was then subjected to an initial pre­
liminary test. Basic functionalities of the respective tools were investigated. This mainly
concerned the suitability to address the research questions and the ability to create the
visualization concepts developed in section 5.2. In addition, project­related requirements
(e.g. costs) were taken into account. Based on these findings, the selection was filtered
further. The remaining, most promising tools were then tested in­depth, and visualizations
were created using test data (see section 6.2). Taking into account user requirements,
some of which relate to performance, usability and required technical expertise (primar­
ily in the fields of coding and data science), a decision on the final visualization tool was
made. At this point, the iterativity of the process should again be mentioned, in which new
paths opened up through the exploration of certain tools. An example is the discovery that
extensions of some tools are available for certain business intelligence platforms.
Figure 6.2: Visualization tool selection process
All of the tools pictured above have been tested and evaluated to some extent. However, it
would go beyond the scope of this work to introduce them all individually. Therefore, in the
following, only those tools are presented in detail that were judged to be most relevant for
the application in the context of this thesis. This concerns the tools listed under ”in­depth
testing” in the above figure.
6.2
Evaluating visualization tools
This section introduces the most relevant tools for this work. The requirements described
in the visualization tool selection process were used for the overall tool evaluation:
1. Functionality requirements: suitability to address research questions, ability to cre­
ate the developed visualization concepts
2. User requirements: performance, usability, technical expertise required
3. Project requirements: costs
4. System requirements: integration, ability to connect to SimMobility
26
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:35==
Since system requirements were already taken into account during the preselection and
only tools were tested in detail that actually fulfill them, only the first three requirements
are discussed below. Examination of tools was conducted using SimMobility network data
from the Eastern parts of Denmark as well as sample data provided by the tool providers.
6.2.1
Programming frameworks
As can be seen in Figure 6.1, two programming frameworks were analyzed in detail.
These are presented below and their suitability in relation to the three requirement criteria.
Deck GL for Python (Pydeck)
The first one is an open source tool provided by the ride sharing platform Uber. Uber has
the need to analyse its own mobility data to understand mobility patterns and to optimize
operations, for instance to better match supply with demand. Also, Uber aims to create
public facing visualizations and narratives for improving public relations and customer
attraction. For these purposes, Uber has developed a number of tools that are also made
available open source. All these tools are powered by Web GL. Web GL is a powerful
JavaScript API able to utilize GPU power to render 3D graphics fast and smoothly in a
web browser environment (Khronos Group Inc. 2021).
One of the frameworks developed by Uber is Deck GL. It is a JavaScript library specifically
developed for visual exploratory data analysis of large data sets (Vis.gl 2021a). Having
the ability to combine multiple layers on a single map, it is capable of building complex
yet efficient visualizations.
In order to have a better ability to integrate with SimMobility and to be able to use the
framework in a Jupyter notebook environment, Pydeck was used as part of this work.
Pydeck is a python library for making spatial visualizations with Deck GL, optimized for a
Jupyter environment. Just as Deck GL it allows for high performance rendering of large
data set utilizing GPU power.
Functionality requirements
Deck GL or Pydeck offer the user a wide range of functionalities. All spatial visualization
methods presented in section 5.1 can be implemented. In addition to that it allows to
create animated visualizations. Additional non­spatial charts as drafted in section 5.2 are
not possible to display on top of a map, but need to be created separately. Some examples
with sample data from Pydeck as well as SimMobility data from the Eastern Belt Area are
shown in figure 6.3.
User requirements
With respect to user requirements it must be stated that Pydeck is a Python library and
therefore a programming interface to the user. This requires the user to possess some
technical knowledge in the fields of programming and data science. An advantage of Py­
deck is that extensive documentation and examples are available online (Vis.gl 2021c).
Even some functionalities that are not documented for Pydeck can be derived from the
JavaScript documentation for Deck GL.
The library itself has a modular structure, through which visualizations can be created
comparatively quickly. It offers a wide range of instruments to customize plots. For in­
stance colors, widths, heights and opacity of the various visual elements can be specified.
In terms of performance it can be stated that particularly for large data the visualizations
need some time (<30s) to load but offer very fast and smooth rendering. The visualiza­
tions allow for smooth multi­touch zooming, panning and rotating.
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) Heatmap of job locations in SimMobility
(b) Arc plot of selected trips in SimMobility
(c) Scatter plot of car accidents in UK
(d) Extruded grid plot of car accidents in UK
Figure 6.3: Pydeck visualization examples
Project requirements
Since Deck GL and Pydeck as well as Python as a programming language are open
source, no costs are involved with this simulation tool. Costs could arise for the commer­
cial use of a distribution such as Anaconda. However, it is assumed that such a distribution
already exists at the universities potentially using the results of this work. Furthermore,
usage of Anaconda by universities is currently not considered commercial and therefore
free of charge (Nolan 2020).
Mapbox GL JS for Python (Mapbox GL Jupyter)
Collecting live sensor data from hundreds of millions of users every day and aggregating
it to road and telemetry data, Mapbox is one of the largest map data providers in the world
(Mapbox 2021b). It provides a large variety of sophisticated and professionally designed
28
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:37==
maps. In addition to that, Mapbox provides numerous services around their maps. One
of them is Mapbox GL JS, a high­performance JavaScript library for vector maps. Just as
Uber’s open source products, Mapbox GL JS leverages the power of Web GL to efficiently
render large 3D graphics.
(a) Scatter plot of road network nodes
in SimMobility
(b) Linestring plot of road network incl. road
widths and maximum speeds in SimMobility
(c) Choropleth using zone shape files
in SimMobility
(d) Extruded choropleth using zone shapes and
areas in SimMobility
Figure 6.4: Mapbox GL JS visualization examples
For the Python programming environment Mapbox has created Mapbox GL Jupyter, a
Python wrapper to create Mapbox GL JS data visualizations natively in Jupyter Notebooks
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
29
==PAGE:38==
with Python and Pandas (Mapbox 2021c). Similar to Folium, a tool which has also been
investigated in the course of this work, it is ”built on top of the raster Leaflet map library,
but with much higher performance for large data sets using Web GL and Mapbox Vector
Tiles” (ibid.).
Functionality requirements
Just like Pydeck, Mapbox GL JS offers the full variety of methods introduced in section 5.1.
In addition, many more functionalities are available, such as 3D buildings or 3D terrain.
Some examples created from Eastern Belt Area SimMobility data are shown in figure 6.4.
For instance, figure 6.4b shows the road network from SimMobility in the Copenhagen
area. Maximum speed data for each road segment was used to color code the individual
segments. Furthermore, the number of lanes were used to determine the line width for
each segment. Figure 6.4c uses a zone shape file to display all the zones in the Greater
Copenhagen Area. Colouring each zone according to the commune number it belongs
to, a choropleth is created. In figure 6.4d the physical area of each of these zones was
used to create an extruded choropleth.
User requirements
The possibilities for interactivity and customization are very similar to Pydeck. However,
Mapbox GL JS requires more specifications in the code to be made. In comparison,
Pydeck visualizations are somewhat easier to build. Also, the documentation is more
limited, which complicates the visualization building process.
Project requirements
Mapbox GL JS offers a free version that covers 50,000 map loads per month and three
users working within the same web application. Usage exceeding these limits is subject
to a monthly fee per 1,000 map loads and additional user (Mapbox 2021d).
6.2.2
Applications
With regard to top­level applications, two different tools were subjected to in­depth test­
ing (see Figure 6.2). They are presented below and their accuracy of fit is assessed in
relation to the three requirement criteria.
Kepler GL
Kepler GL is another open source product built by Uber’s visualization team.
It was
launched in 2018 and provides a fully built user interface (figure 6.5). Kepler GL can
be used either as a browser based application or embedded in a Jupyter notebook envi­
ronment (He 2019). Data is uploaded directly into the application and can then be filtered,
styled and visualized in different types of layers.
Functionality requirements
Just as Pydeck, Kepler GL is based on Deck GL. Therefore the functionalities with respect
to visualization methods are comparable. However, the fully developed user interface
allows for additional features. For example, once a dataset is loaded into the application,
the user can apply filters right in the application. In contrast to a programming solution,
there is no need to run the code again or to create a new visualization. The interface also
allows for a dual map view. In this way, Kepler GL is particularly suitable for comparing
two scenarios against each other or to examine an area from two data perspectives at the
same time (figure 6.6).
30
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6.5: Kepler GL user interface
If the uploaded data has a time feature, Kepler GL also allows the data to be animated
over time. Using a time slider, data can be viewed at different times or animated videos
can be played.
In contrast to Pydeck, Kepler GL automatically generates a legend on top of the map. In
Pydeck this needs to be created manually using an external library and render it next to the
Pydeck figure (Vis.gl 2021b). Customizing data on demand (hover text) and formatting the
underlying base map is also easier. In principle, it is even possible to integrate additional
charts, such as bar charts or the like, into the map. However, at this point there exists no
documentation for this feature (He 2020).
Figure 6.6: Dual map view in Kepler GL
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
31
==PAGE:40==
User requirements
In terms of performance and user interactions (panning, zooming etc.) Kepler GL is iden­
tical to Pydeck. However, the interactive user interface offers many more possibilities. It
is clear and intuitive. Instead of making customizations such as color scale adjustments
and shape formatting laboriously via code, this can be done in Kepler GL with just a few
clicks. The interactive user interface makes it easy to create new layers, to change or to
hide them. If used in the form of the browser based application, operating Kepler GL does
not require any programming skills. Apart from the creation of an automated workflow that
loads data into the Kepler GL widget, this also applies to Kepler GL for Jupyter. In com­
parison to Pydeck, Kepler GL is therefore easier to use than Pydeck and more suitable for
fast creation of visualizations. On the contrary, due to its programming interface Pydeck
offers slightly more flexibility in customizing final visualization concepts.
Project requirements
At the time of writing, Kepler GL is open source and therefore free of charge. With respect
to programming language and distribution, the same conditions apply as to Pydeck.
Mapbox Studio
Mapbox Studio is an application suite for designing custom map styles and conducting
geospatial analysis. It ”brings all the rendering power of Mapbox GL in simple toggles
and controls” (Mapbox 2021e). Its general application structure is very similar to Kepler
GL, which is why it is compared with Kepler GL in the following with regard to the different
requirement criteria.
Figure 6.7: Mapbox Studio user interface
Functionality requirements
Functionality­wise, Mapbox Studio offers a rich spectrum of visualization methods, data
layers and map styles that exceeds the possibilities offered by Kepler GL. All visualiza­
tion techniques presented in section 5.1 are possible (Mapbox 2021f). However, when it
comes to implementing the visualization concepts that have been developed, limitations
become apparent. First, Mapbox Studio does not offer a time slider that is comparable to
32
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:41==
the one offered by Kepler GL. Second, integrating non­spatial charts is either restricted or
requires substantial programming resources that exceed the scope of this master thesis
(Mapbox 2021a). Due to the lack of a Jupyter integration, extending the map by additional
charts in a notebook environment is not possible. Third, filtering is not as intuitive as in
Kepler GL. It is rather considered a technical step in data preprocessing that can be found
in submenus. And lastly, the free version has restrictions with regard to possible zoom
levels. Data will not be displayed from a certain zoom level on outwards.
User requirements
Although Mapbox Studio offers many more options for customizing map and data lay­
ers (see figure 6.7), this comes with the downside that these extensive options can be
overwhelming for the user and sometimes more complicated and time­consuming. Per­
formance and usability are comparable to Kepler GL. Just like Kepler GL, Mapbox Studio
can be used without any code. However, there is no integration into the Jupyter environ­
ment.
Project requirements
Mapbox Studio is subject to the same pricing scheme as Mapbox GL JS. Furthermore,
the free version involves restrictions on the number and size of data and tile sets that can
be uploaded per month.
6.3
Selecting the final visualization tool
In order to make the decision for the final visualization tool, the previously presented
research results for the individual tools were weighed against each other. It becomes
clear that Kepler GL for Jupyter scores best across the four requirement areas.
Figure 6.8: Kepler GL Jupyter integration (He 2019)
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
33
==PAGE:42==
It offers all the necessary functionalities as well as an intuitive user interface. Being built
on Web GL it is characterized by high rendering performance, especially for visualizing
large data sets, which is the use case when visualizing SimMobility outputs. It is free and
besides Pydeck the only tool that offers the possibility of animated visualizations. It can
be embedded in a Python programming environment, which is helpful when connecting
to SimMobility. As it is embedded in a Jupyter notebook, this solution offers the possibility
of displaying additional information to the pure map display in Kepler, e.g. in the form
of line or bar diagrams. The integration in a Jupyter notebook requires certain program­
ming skills. However, the solution sought within the scope of this thesis aims to be used
by the developers and operators of SimMobility who prepare simulation results and com­
municate them to decision­makers. Since these users have a technical background with
programming knowledge, the embedding in a programming environment does not pose
a problem.
34
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:43==
7
Implementation
The last remaining step in Yau’s process model is the creation of the envisioned visual­
ization concepts in the previously selected visualization tool. In the specific case of this
thesis, this means implementing the visualization concepts worked out in section 5.2 in
Kepler GL for Jupyter.
7.1
General implementation concept
In cooperation with the users at the Technical University of Denmark, a general visualiza­
tion concept was developed, which entails the creation of one Jupyter notebook for each
of the three visualizations (congestion and emissions, travel time and activities). These
will be designed in a way that the user only has to specify the file storage locations of the
required SimMobility output tables as well as some variable parameters (such as the filter­
ing of a certain activity or a certain temporal resolution). Other than that, no programming
activities should be necessary, the individual scripts will contain all the necessary code.
The default configurations for visualizations in Kepler GL were saved in small Python
scripts, which are automatically loaded from a configuration file when the map is created
in Kepler GL. The user is only expected to rerun the notebook for each new visualization
or when input parameters are changed. The user can then adjust the visualization in Ke­
pler GL’s user­friendly interface (e.g. by using filters or changing colors).
Since Kepler GL does not allow for additional non­spatial graphs directly on the map, the
bar charts in the concepts shown in section 5.2 will be generated using a separate cell
below the map visualization. During implementation it was heeded that compliance with
the nine criteria for graphical excellence (presented in section 1.2) is ensured.
7.2
Visualization 1: Congestion
Due to the fact that no emission data from SimMobility could be made available by the end
of the thesis period, the implementation of the first design is limited to the visualization
of traffic jams. This visualization is generated from the output link statistics by using the
traffic density of each link in the traffic network (see section 1.3) to code the road net­
work. By means of a selecting a temporal resolution, it is possible for the user to choose
between a static display (average traffic density during the day) and an animated display
(development of the average traffic density over the 24 hours of a day).
In the originally planned concept presented in chapter 5.2 it was considered to use the
percentage change in traffic density of a scenario B compared to a scenario A as coding
for the coloring of the individual road segments. However, when putting this concept into
practice, several constraints emerged.
First, Kepler GL allows the definition of a color scale and the number of gradations (color
categories within the color scale), but not the value limits of these gradations. Instead,
Kepler GL generates these anew for each data set to be visualized (minimum minus maxi­
mum divided by the number of specified color categories). This makes consistent coloring
impossible, which violates the design principle that data graphics must be coherent (see
section 1.2, criterion 5). It was therefore decided to base the coding of a link’s traffic den­
sity on its stroke width, for which Kepler GL allows an exact definition of the minimum
and maximum. As a result, contrary to the ideal visualization concept, the stroke color
was left single­colored. This and the fact that the roads natively mapped on Kepler GL’s
maps have been hidden represent decisions to draw even more attention to the data and
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
35
==PAGE:44==
reduce distraction (design principle 2).
Second, every day in SimMobility is currently the same. Changes over the 24 hours of the
day can be animated, but not changes over larger time units as planned (e.g. the seven
days of the week or the twelve months of the year).
Finally, it was found that when changing to the graph­based visualization concept de­
scribed above, especially in connection with a temporal animation, a change in the rep­
resentation of traffic density makes sense. Instead of visualizing the change directly for
each link, as intended, it was considered more insightful and understandable to use the
dual­map view function of Kepler GL and simply compare the traffic densities of two sce­
narios side by side. The final result using the example of a simulation for Singapore is
shown in figure 7.1. As no emission data is available to display, no additional bar graphs
have been added to the visualization.
Figure 7.1: Scenario comparison for traffic density in Kepler GL Jupyter. High traffic
density in scenario A (left), low traffic density in scenario B (right)
The visualization concept modified in this way comes with several benefits. On the one
hand, the traffic density of two different scenarios can be compared with each other, both
as a daily average (see figure 7.1) and for every single hour of the day (see figure 7.2). In
addition, this form of representation enables the congestion situation of a single scenario
to be compared at two different hours of the day (e.g. rush hour in the morning at 8 a.m.
vs. midday at 12 a.m.). To do this, the user only has to use the time slider available in
Kepler GL. Critical road sections can thus be examined in detail and visual comparison
is encouraged (design principle 6). A sensible selection of data displayed when hover­
ing over a specific link (traffic density in scenario A and B, respectively) provides useful
additional information ”on­demand” (design principle 8).
The following decisions were made with regard to the default settings. The minimum and
maximum stroke widths have been set so that they appear visually appealing. In addition,
Kepler GL offers three options for coding functions (linear, logarithmic and square root).
The square root function in particular was tested in detail, as it enables the influence of
extremely high traffic density values, which could potentially be outliers or data errors, to
be reduced. In the end, however, it was decided to use the linear function, as this makes
36
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:45==
(a) Traffic density at 5 a.m.
(generally low traffic)
(b) Traffic density at 6 a.m. (generally low traffic,
occasionally higher traffic volume)
(c) Traffic density at 7 a.m. (high traffic volume,
occasionally very high traffic, congestion)
(d) Traffic density at 8 a.m. (high traffic volume,
with certain local shifts compared to 7am)
Figure 7.2: Animated visualization of traffic density (Singapore) in Kepler GL Jupyter
the differences in congestion more visible. Outliers were simply filtered out by filtering
out all traffic densities greater than 200. The reason for this was that the traffic density in
SimMobility is measured in the number of vehicles per lane per kilometer. Since vehicles
should be around 5 meters long on average, 200 vehicles per kilometer appeared to be
a realistic upper limit (1000 meters per km divided by 5 meters per vehicle equals 200
vehicles per kilometer). This filter can of course be adjusted intuitively by the user in
Kepler GL at any time.
7.3
Visualization 2: Travel time
A very interesting and important aspect when testing alternative mobility concepts, trans­
portation technologies or policy scenarios is the effect on travel time. It is particularly
relevant how these effects present themselves for different regional areas and for differ­
ent population groups. In accordance with the ideal visualization concept from section
5.2, a choropleth was created for this purpose, which depicts the regional effects. This
was supplemented by several bar charts, which support the analysis of socio­economic
effects. Apart from the fact that the bar charts are not shown to the right of the map but
below in a separate Jupyter notebook cell, the visualization was implemented according
to the ideal visualization concept.
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
37
==PAGE:46==
To create this visualization, the SimMobility input tables individual and household were
used. They contain information about the demographic characteristics of all individuals
in the population as well as their respective places of residence. From this, the affilia­
tion to a certain residential area could be derived.
Furthermore, the output table sub
trip metrics was used. It contains information about the composition of all trips a person
conducts during a day as well as the corresponding metrics such as travel duration and
travel distance. The above mentioned input and output tables have been supplemented
by the tables zones, income categories, education categories and employment status cat­
egories. They were required in order to decode the IDs for demographic data and places
of residence in the population and household table.
Figure 7.3: Choropleth displaying changes in daily travel time for the Greater Boston
Area in Kepler GL Jupyter. Particularly the population in the city center experiences is
experiencing an increase in travel times
For the map visualization, the total daily travel time and daily travel distance of each indi­
vidual within a certain zone was summed up for each of the two scenarios to be compared.
The resulting total percentage change in a zone was then used for color coding of the in­
dividual zones. The results for travel time and travel distance, respectively, are presented
in Figure 7.3 and 7.4.
The visualization was designed so that two different layers were generated within the
same visualization. This enables the user to quickly switch back and forth between the
visualizations for travel time and travel distance without having to reload the entire note­
book. Using the dual­map view functionality, the user has the option of displaying changes
in travel time and distance side by side at the same time (design principle 6). In order to
make the visualization even more informative, it is furthermore possible for the user to
choose between absolute and percentage change within each visualization.
Like in the other visualizations, it was ensured to provide the user with a sensible selection
of data displayed when hovering over a specific zone (average travel time and distance
38
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:47==
in scenario A and B, respectively, as well as the corresponding percentage changes) to
supplement the graphic with additional information (design principle 9).
Figure 7.4: Choropleth displaying changes in daily travel distance for the Greater Boston
Area in Kepler GL Jupyter. Remote areas benefit from a reduction in travel distance
From the graphic displayed in figure 7.3 it becomes apparent, that travel time generally
deteriorates with the introduction of scenario B. There are a few areas where the daily
travel time remains constant or decreases slightly (light yellow). But for most zones, es­
pecially in the vicinity of downtown Boston, as well as for a coastal region in the northeast
and a region in the southwest of the Greater Boston Area, the travel time increases signif­
icantly (dark red). However, it should be added that two sharply delimited areas appear
very unnatural and could have arisen due to an error in the simulation.
Turning towards travel distance, as expected a similar picture emerges (figure 7.4). The
two regions actually appear to be data or simulation errors (dark red coloring). Apart
from that, it turns out that the introduction of scenario B has led to more remote areas
being better connected. For them, the daily distance to be covered improves considerably
(dark green coloring), whereas the regions south of the city center seem to be losing
accessibility (orange coloring).
For the bar chart display, income, education and employment status were classified as
most relevant. It shows how travel time and travel distance have developed in percentage
terms for the different population groups. The result is presented in figure 7.5.
Looking at the charts (travel time changes in red, travel distance changes in blue), it can be
observed that the daily travel time increases for all population groups (graphs on the left).
In particular, groups with low incomes seem to be disadvantaged by the new transport
concept (top left). The same picture emerges for travel distance, where people with a
low income experience a deterioration, whereas top earners even benefit. It also shows
that pensioners in particular are disadvantaged by the new transport concept, whereas
full­time employees seem to benefit (bottom right).
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 7.5: Bar graphs showing changes in daily travel time (left) and daily travel distance
(right) for two scenarios in the Greater Boston Area simulated with SimMobility
7.4
Visualization 3: Activities
When simulating alternative mobility concepts, in addition to the effects on traffic density
and travel times, behavioral changes in the population are of interest. The daily activity
schedule (DAS) was used to create this visualization. It contains information about the
activities carried out by a person in the course of a day, as well as the corresponding time
and location. It also contains information about the transport mode used. Contrary to the
assumption for the ideal visualization concept presented in section 5.2, this daily activity
schedule is the same every day for each individual simulated. It is therefore not possible
to observe and visualize changes in behavior with regard to days of the week or months.
For this reason, these options are not available for the final visualization concept. The
user is offered two options: a view of activity changes aggregated for the entire day in the
form of a static visualization (see Figure 7.7), and an animated visualization that shows
the percentage change in activities over the 24 hours of the day (see Figure 7.6).
With this visualization there are changes in the visualization method compared to the ideal
concept, as well. Originally a grid plot was planned. However, since Kepler GL does not
allow the individual values of a color scale to be specified manually, but rather deter­
mines them automatically based on the minimum and maximum values of the data set to
be visualized, an animated display over the 24 hours of the day resulted in a separate,
automatically generated color scale being used for each of these 24 hours. This leads
40
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:49==
to inconsistent coloring. When animating the 24 hours, the color representations for the
different hours cannot be compared with one another, as different color scales apply each
hour. If the minimum and maximum across all grid cells were the same for all 24 hours,
Kepler GL would always use the same color scale. It was therefore decided to reduce all
percentage increases that are greater than 100% to 100%. This ensures that all hourly
scenarios have the same minimum (­100%) and maximum (+100%). If the data points
manipulated in this way are now aggregated into cells, the color scales are consistent
(design principle 5). However, the data becomes distorted, since strong positive changes
are capped to 100% while at the same time offset against unlimited negative changes.
(a) The amount of people starting to work
at 6 a.m. decreased strongly
(b) The amount of people starting to work
at 7 a.m. decreased slightly
(c) The amount of people starting to work
at 8 a.m. increased slightly
(d) The amount of people starting to work
at 9 a.m. increased considerably
Figure 7.6: Animated visualization in Kepler GL Jupyter regarding work activity changes
in Greater Boston suggests that simulated population starts to work later in scenario B
To avoid this problem, it was decided to change the visualization method from an ag­
gregating grid plot to a non­aggregating point plot. In this way, the misleading artificial
mitigation of high positive changes is reduced. It is ensured that high positive changes
are also shown as such (dark green color). A low opacity was used to increase the vi­
sual effect of several nodes located close to each other. In addition, two artificial invisible
nodes were generated, which have the respective minimum and maximum values in each
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
41
==PAGE:50==
of the 24 hours, i.e. ­100% and +100%, so that Kepler GL uses the same color scale for
each of the 24 hours. The result is shown in Figure 7.6.
For the example displayed, the data was filtered according to the activity work, so only
work­related activities are shown. Each point of the point plot represents a location that
was visited for working by one or more individuals in at least one of the two contrasted
scenarios at this hour (the time refers to the start of the activity, i.e. the start of work). At
the same time, each point is color­coded with the average percentage change in activity,
starting from a complete reduction in work starts to 0 (­100 % activity, dark red) up to a
multiple of the number of work starts (+100% and above, dark green). Clicking on the
Play button (bottom right) plays an animated video with the activity changes for the 24
hours of the day. Besides that, the user has the option of manually increasing the visible
period and thus extending it to multiple hours.
The visualization uses two exemplary scenarios to show how work activities change over
the course of the day. It can be observed that the average start of work in the morning
shifts towards later hours. In the early morning (6 a.m., see figure 7.6a), a clearly red im­
age appears, which turns into a dark green image over the next 3 hours (figures 7.6b, 7.6c
and 7.6d). One possible explanation could be that in scenario B, compared to scenario
A, the traffic connections deteriorated in the early morning.
In order to offer the user this representation as a general overview for the entire day, the
originally intended visualization, a grid plot, was used. The result is shown in figure 7.7.
Due to the static visualization form it in this case does not have the problem with changing
color scaling. Since the size of the grid cells can be set manually by the user in Kepler GL,
no percentage change can be calculated in advance. Calculating a percentage change
based on node location and then determining the average for each grid cell in Kepler
GL would also distort the picture, as Kepler GL does not offer aggregating by weighted
average.
Figure 7.7: Scenario comparison for work activities in Kepler GL Jupyter in the form of a
grid plot. Work activity sharply decreases in the city centre while increases slightly in the
suburbs
42
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:51==
Because of this difficulty, it was decided to switch from a percentage to an absolute rep­
resentation. Instead of a percentage change in activity, the absolute change in activity is
now used for the color coding of each grid cell. The visualization’s information value is
largely retained, while at the same time distortion is eliminated.
From figure 7.7 can be seen that the overall activity has decreased considerably. The de­
cline is mainly due to the city center, where the number of activities has decreased heavily
(colored dark red). In contrast, the activity in more remote areas has slightly increased
(colored light yellow). This suggests that the changes made in simulation scenario B en­
couraged the population to move their workplaces from the city center to the surrounding
areas.
In accordance with the ideal visualization concept, the two visualizations were each sup­
plemented with a bar chart that provides information about the modes of transport used
to reach the activity location. The bar chart that was generated together with the two vi­
sualizations presented above is shown in figure 7.8. It shows that the car dominates trips
by a large margin. At the same time, it can be seen that this dominance has increased
further through scenario B, whereas the proportion of individuals who walk to work has
decreased significantly. This supports the finding from figure 7.7 that parts of the popula­
tion have moved their jobs from the city center to the surrounding areas, where distances
are normally greater and opportunities to walk to work are usually lower.
Figure 7.8: Mode changes in connection with the activity changes shown in Figure 7.7
With regards to graphical excellence it can be stated that, like the two previous visualiza­
tion concepts, the graphic for activities also produces a high level of information density
(design principle 4). Countless data points are displayed on a single map. By integrating
the temporal dimension, the information density is increased even further. Together with
the ability to aggregate different parts of the population, the visualisations reveal the data
at multiple levels of detail (design principle 7). A clear objective and purpose is also given
for all three visualization concepts, which is clearly recognizable in the definition of the
research questions (see section 4, design principle 8). Additional information and statisti­
cal metrics are provided by the bar charts and the data displayed when hovering over the
map (design principle 9).
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:53==
8
Conclusion and discussion
In an increasingly urbanized world, in which demand for private and commercial transport
rises continuously, there is a strong need for methods to optimize traffic flows. In addi­
tion, there are environmental and social aspects that must be taken into consideration in
transportation planning. Advanced simulation tools like SimMobility are powerful tools to
assess measures in terms of their ability to effectively redesign existing infrastructure. In
particular, the evaluation of the implications of introducing innovative mobility concepts
can provide informative insights into the effective improvement of traffic systems.
In order to leverage this potential, however, it has to be ensured that simulation results
are analyzed in the best possible way and ultimately put into practice. Insights and rec­
ommendations from simulations need to be prepared in a way that they can efficiently and
effectively be analyzed as well as communicated to decision makers and legal authorities
in a way that they are understood, trusted and eventually implemented.
In the course of this thesis it was shown that data visualization has the potential to achieve
this. It constitutes a powerful tool at the interface between data science and decision­
making, where it enables data consumption, facilitates pattern discovery, ensures that
data is turned actionable and opens up the possibility for convincing storytelling.
In accordance with these qualities, this master thesis intended to leverage the opportuni­
ties of data visualization for SimMobility. It aimed at utilizing visualization to allow for more
efficient interpretation of spatio­temporal simulation results as well as enriching SimMo­
bility with a visual extension to communicate simulation results in a comprehensible and
persuasive manner.
To achieve these objectives, an extensive research on both visualization techniques and
tools has been conducted. A wide range of advanced visualization methods from scien­
tific literature as well as practical examples from academics, industry and the media has
been investigated and documented. Narrowing down the further investigation to spatial
visualization techniques sensibly restricted the topic, allowing for deeper evaluation, while
at the same time leaving promising opportunities for future work.
With respect to tools, it could be shown that a large variety, often open source, exists on
the market. In­depth testing of the most promising tools was conducted and strengths
and weaknesses compared. User and functional aspects were considered as well as
project and system requirements to determine the most practical and implementable so­
lution. The results revealed Kepler GL as the most suitable tool for visualizing SimMobility
simulation results.
Based on the input and output simulation data, three exemplary ideal visualization con­
cepts were worked out, on the basis of which the practical implementation in Kepler GL
took place. Special emphasis was placed on the decision­maker perspective in order to
create actionable visualizations that can be used to solve actual problems. Allowing to
evaluate the introduction of an alternative mobility concept in comparison to a base sce­
nario, it has been decided upon three visualisation concepts that provide spatio­temporal
insights into changes in congestion, travel time and activity at different resolutions of the
population.
The overall methodology was based on a theoretically sound data visualization design
process in order to meet the scientific requirements of the work and to achieve the best
possible project results. General design principles and best practices were investigated
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
45
==PAGE:54==
and criteria of graphical excellence studied in order to produce high quality visualization
concepts.
Based on the final results it can be concluded that the objectives formulated at the begin­
ning of the thesis have been met. The examination of the three implemented visualization
concepts confirms that the criteria for graphical excellence have been considered and that
the developed visualizations provide interesting, valuable and practically relevant insights
in the selected application fields. Using the examples of the three fields of application, it
was shown how data visualization can improve decision­making in transport and mobility
planning. It becomes apparent that the use of Kepler GL for Jupyter can in the future sup­
port the interpretation of SimMobility simulation results and serve to communicate them
to non­specialist audiences. In this way, the capabilities, practicality and applicability of
SimMobility have been enhanced. The analysis of the raw output files has been facilitated
effectively. The results also show that there is still substantial potential in leveraging the
large extent of SimMobility simulation outputs. It becomes clear that it is worth investing
more resources in visualizing SimMobility simulation results in the future. For developing
further insightful visualization concepts, the general design process by Yau has proven to
be useful. The addition of the tool selection process step was a valuable extension.
On the other hand, the implementation process has also shown that, despite extensive
testing, many of the restrictions of the final tool were not immediately apparent, but only
during implementation. As a result, some unforeseen challenges arose, which then had
to be overcome with the selected tool. Therefore, the realized visualization concepts
partly do not match the ideal visualization concepts. This issue could possibly have been
avoided by more intensive testing. However, this was complicated by late data availabil­
ity. For future projects, it is therefore advisable to ensure that data is available at the
beginning of the project in order to be able to run through more experimental process
iterations and to be able to implement more of the ideal visualization concepts.
Furthermore, it must be stated that the implementation concept is aimed at scientific em­
ployees with programming knowledge. Should it be envisioned to expand the scope of
application to allow simulation analysis by non­technical urban planners or transportation
specialists, an alternative tool without programming interface might prove useful.
In a broader perspective, this work contributes to a better understanding of SimMobility by
external stakeholders and potential users (e.g. further universities and institutes) and thus
facilitates its further dissemination and application. It increases the probability that insights
from SimMobility simulations results are put into practice. In this way, it can help to make
mobility and urban planning more effective and cost­efficient. The visualization concepts
developed have the potential to solve mobility issues for cities and their inhabitants as
well as to mitigate social injustices by enabling more just mobility decisions.
In terms of environmental aspects, they can provide assistance to problems of pollution
and congestion and contribute to reach a cities’ or a countries’ emission targets. In this
way, this work contributes to the achievement of the UN sustainable development goals
and supports measures to combat climate change and global warming.
As could be seen during implementation, not all possible areas for visualization have been
exhausted. Future work is therefore suggested to collect data from other areas, for exam­
ple emissions, energy consumption or utility, and to build visualization concepts for these
application fields. Against the background of climate change and the increasing impor­
tance of sustainability, emission data in particular is an important aspect when making
decisions in the traffic and transport sector, which accounts for 16% of greenhouse gas
emissions globally, from which 12% come from road transport (Ritchie and Roser 2020).
46
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:55==
But there is also potential for the visualization concepts that have already been created.
On the one hand, these can be further refined by visualizing further scenarios. On the
other hand, new possibilities open up when the functional range of SimMobility is ex­
panded. Future work can for instance focus on examining temporal patterns of larger
time frames (e.g. days of the week, months of the year), when available. This could
provide interesting findings about the weekly and annual planning of mobility concepts.
Resolution wise, future work could focus even more on the microscopic aspects of the
visualizations. This work uses microscopic mobility data but in most cases aggregates it
to a certain extent, e.g. to activity locations, regions or demographic groups. Future vi­
sualizations could focus on the very individual travel behaviour and visualize for instance
the individual trips of certain individuals of interest.
Methodically, this work limited the consideration to spatial visualization methods. How­
ever, the examination of semi­ and non­spatial visualization methods are potentially an­
other highly efficient way of presenting insights and therefore worth to be investigated.
Last but not least, the connection to the SimMobility user interface is outstanding. A data
pipeline is to be built in order to load input and output tables directly into the visualization
tool and thus make the analysis process even more efficient.
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
Adnan, Muhammad et al. (Jan. 2016). “SimMobility: A Multi­Scale Integrated Agent­based
Simulation Platform”. In:
Gershon, Nahum and Ward Page (Aug. 2001). “What Storytelling Can Do for Information
Visualization”. In: Commun. ACM 44.8, pp. 31–37. ISSN: 0001­0782. DOI: 10.1145/
381641.381653. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/381641.381653.
He, Shan (Sept. 21, 2016). Data Visualization at Uber. Uber Engineering. URL: https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=nLy3OQYsXWA (visited on 01/03/2022).
– (June 25, 2019). Introducing kepler.gl for Jupyter. URL: https://medium.com/vis-gl/
introducing-kepler-gl-for-jupyter-f72d41659fbf (visited on 01/03/2022).
– (Mar. 24, 2020). Shan He on Twitter. URL: https : / / twitter . com / tjukanov / status /
1242540636894617605 (visited on 01/01/2022).
Holst, Arne (June 7, 2021). Volume of data/information created, captured, copied, and
consumed worldwide from 2010 to 2025 (in zettabytes). URL: https://www.statista.
com/statistics/871513/worldwide-data-created/ (visited on 10/02/2021).
Janert, Philipp K. (2010). Data Analysis with Open Source Tools. eng. O’Reilly Media, Inc.
ISBN: 9780596802356.
Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Research Center (2021). COVID­19 Dashboard. URL: https:
//coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html (visited on 12/03/2021).
Khronos Group Inc. (2021). Khronos Website. URL: https://www.khronos.org/webgl/
(visited on 12/07/2021).
Knudsen, Nick (2019). Land Doesn’t Vote, People Do: This Electoral Map Tells the Real
Story. URL: https://demcastusa.com/2019/11/11/land-doesnt-vote-people-do-this-
electoral-map-tells-the-real-story/ (visited on 12/03/2021).
Lehmann, Sune (2021). Social Data Analysis and Visualization. Master course at Techni­
cal University of Denmark, lecture 3 (Plotting single variable data). University course.
Mapbox (2021a). Dynamic charts and legend. Create a mobile­friendly map with a linked
line or bar chart. URL: https : / / www . mapbox . com / impact - tools / charts (visited on
12/13/2021).
– (2021b). Mapbox corporate website. URL: https://www.mapbox.com/about/company/
(visited on 12/07/2021).
– (2021c). Mapbox GL Jupyter ­ Location Data Visualization library for Jupyter Notebooks.
URL: https://github.com/mapbox/mapboxgl-jupyter (visited on 12/08/2021).
– (2021d). Mapbox Pricing. URL: https://www.mapbox.com/pricing (visited on 12/07/2021).
– (2021e). Mapbox Studio. URL: https://www.mapbox.com/mapbox-studio/ (visited on
12/12/2021).
– (2021f). Mapbox Studio manual. URL: https://docs.mapbox.com/studio-manual/guides/
(visited on 12/13/2021).
MIT Mobility Futures Collaborative (2020). SimMobility. URL: https : / / mfc . mit . edu /
simmobility (visited on 11/02/2020).
New York Times (2021). Tracking Coronavirus in Germany: Latest Map and Case Count.
URL: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/world/germany- covid- cases.html
(visited on 12/03/2021).
Nolan, Stephen (Oct. 28, 2020). Anaconda Commercial Edition FAQ. URL: https://www.
anaconda.com/blog/anaconda-commercial-edition-faq (visited on 12/07/2021).
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
49
==PAGE:58==
Pérez­Messina, Ignacio and Eduardo Graells­Garrido (2019). “Visualizing Transportation
Flows with Mode Split using Glyphs”. In: EuroVis 2019 ­ Short Papers. Ed. by Jimmy
Johansson, Filip Sadlo, and G. Elisabeta Marai. The Eurographics Association. ISBN:
978­3­03868­090­1. DOI: 10.2312/evs.20191165.
Pranam, Aswin (2018). Product Management Essentials. eng. Apress. ISBN: 1484233026,
1484233034, 9781484233030, 9781484233023.
Ritchie, Hannah and Max Roser (2020). “CO￿and Greenhouse Gas Emissions”. In: Our
World in Data. https://ourworldindata.org/co2­and­other­greenhouse­gas­emissions.
Segel, Edward and Jeffrey Heer (Jan. 2011). “Narrative Visualization: Telling Stories with
Data”. In: IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 16, pp. 1139–48.
DOI: 10.1109/TVCG.2010.179.
Singapore­MIT Alliance for Research and Technology (Dec. 3, 2019). SimMobility road
network. URL: https://github.com/smart-fm/simmobility-prod/wiki/SimMobility-road-
network (visited on 10/07/2021).
Tufte, Edward R. (2001). The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. 2nd ed. Graphics
Press, p. 197. ISBN: 0961392142.
Um, Dugan (2015). Solid Modeling and Applications: Rapid Prototyping, CAD and CAE
Theory. eng. Springer International Publishing, pp. 1–298. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-
21822-9.
US Bureau of Labor Statistics (2021). Unemployment rates by county, latest 12­month
averages. URL: https://www.bls.gov/lau/ (visited on 12/03/2021).
Vis.gl (2021a). Deck.gl Website. URL: https://deck.gl (visited on 12/07/2021).
– (2021b). Github Pydeck issue: In pydeck how do I display a colorbar or legend? URL:
https://github.com/visgl/deck.gl/issues/4850 (visited on 12/08/2021).
– (2021c). Pydeck documentation. URL: https://pydeck.gl/index.html (visited on 12/07/2021).
weather.com (2021). København, Region Hovestaden Radarkort. URL: https://weather.
com/ (visited on 12/05/2021).
Yang, Lu et al. (Jan. 2015). “SimMobility Mid­Term Simulator: A State of the Art Integrated
Agent Based Demand and Supply Model”. In:
Yau, N. (2013). Data Points: Visualization That Means Something. Wiley. ISBN: 9781118462195.
URL: https://books.google.de/books?id=ovdcq2AmgtcC.
50
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
==PAGE:59==
Exploring advanced visualization for microscopic mobility insights
51
==PAGE:60==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Phone: +45 45 25 48 00
www.man.dtu.dk
