==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
A Novel
Topic Extraction Algorithm
for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
authored by
Carlos Parra Marcelo
supervised by
Ole Winther
Joselene Marques
in collaboration with
January 21, 2022
==PAGE:2==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
This report is authored by:
Carlos Parra Marcelo (s192770)
This report has been supervised by:
Ole Winther, Professor, Technical University of Denmark
Joselene Marques, Head of Data Science, Infomedia
Thanks for their contributions to:
Infomedia
Finn ˚Arup Nielsen, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark
Helena Bj¨ornesj¨o, Master Student, University of Copenhagen
Marie Liljegrem Gam, Content Coordinator and Analytics, Infomedia
Daniel Varab, Ph.D. Student, IT University of Copenhagen
Sarah Ellinor Engell, Ph.D. Student, Technical University of Denmark
Submission Date:
January 21st, 2022
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibliographic
citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Over the last years, the necessity to automatize information retrieval from texts has been
growing considerably as part of media digitization. The emerging ﬂow of data requires eﬃcient
techniques in the ﬁeld of Natural Language Processing (NLP), such as Keyword Extraction (KE)
algorithms among many others. Unfortunately, languages with a small number of speakers like Nordic
languages have to face a lack of resources that weighs down the potential beneﬁts of NLP applications.
This thesis introduces a novel KE model for topic extraction that follows an unsupervised hybrid
approach making use of statistical and linguistic text features, such as syntactic analysis within
sentences, entity recognition, word frequency and position in the text, or semantic similarity. The
model can be easily conﬁgured to predict keyphrases for diﬀerent KE scenarios and it is able to
make predictions for English, Danish, Swedish, and Norwegian. The novel algorithm has shown
a competitive performance compared to other state-of-the-art unsupervised KE methods, being
evaluated using seven annotated datasets with texts in four diﬀerent languages.
The report provides research of the current state of the art in KE for Scandinavian languages
and suggests considering KE not as a ﬁnal step but an initial or complementary phase for other NLP
tasks. The proposed implementation can be used for document retrieval in many NLP applications,
such as topic clustering, summarization, or data visualization.
I
==PAGE:4==
Abstrakt
I løbet af de sidste ˚ar er behovet for at automatisere informationssøgning fra tekster vokset
betydeligt som led i mediedigitaliseringen. Den nye strøm af data kræver eﬀektive teknikker inden
for Natural Language Processing (NLP), s˚asom Keyword Extraction (KE) algoritmer blandt mange
andre. Desværre st˚ar sm˚a sprog som de Nordiske overfor en ressourcemangel, der begrænser de
potentielle fordele ved NLP-applikationer.
Dette speciale introducerer en ny KE-model for emneekstraktion, der følger en uoverv˚aget hybrid
tilgang, der gør brug af statistiske og sproglige teksttræk, s˚asom syntaktisk analyse i sætninger,
enhedsgenkendelse, ordfrekvens og position i teksten eller semantisk lighed. Modellen kan nemt
konﬁgureres til at forudsige nøglesætninger for forskellige KE-scenarier, og den er i stand til at lave
forudsigelser for Engelsk, Dansk, Svensk, og Norsk. Den nye algoritme har vist en konkurrencedygtig
ydeevne sammenlignet med andre state-of-the-art uoverv˚agede KE-metoder, idet den er blevet
evalueret ved hjælp af syv kommenterede datasæt med tekster p˚a ﬁre forskellige sprog.
Rapporten redegør for den aktuelle State of the Art indenfor KE til Skandinaviske sprog og
foresl˚ar at anvende KE som en indledende eller komplementær fase i andre NLP-opgaver. Den
foresl˚aede implementering kan bruges til dokumentsøgning i mange NLP-applikationer, s˚asom em-
neklynger, opsummering eller datavisualisering.
II
==PAGE:5==
List of Abbreviations
AI
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
BERT
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
CBOW
Continuous Bag Of Words
CPU
Central Processing Unit
DCG
Discounted Cumulative Gain
GPU
Graphics Processing Unit
IDCG
Ideal Discounted Cumulative Gain
IDF
Inverse Document Frequency
KA
Keyword Assignment
KE
Keyword Extraction
KP
KeyPhrase
ML
Machine Learning
NED
Named Entity Disambiguation
NEL
Named Entity Linking
NER
Named Entity Recognition
NLP
Natural Language Processing
NN
Neural Network
MAP
Mean Average Precision
MLM
Masked Language Model
MMR
Maximal Marginal Relevance
MRR
Mean Reciprocal Rank
POS
Part-Of-Speech
PPV
Positive Predicted Value
RAKE
Rapid Automatic Keyword Extraction
SVM
Support Vector Machine
TF
Term Frequency
YAKE
Yet Another Keyword Extractor
III
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
I
Abstrakt
II
List of Abbreviations
III
1
Introduction
1
1.1
An Example of Topic Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Keyword Extraction in Natural Language Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Keyword Extraction in Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Relevant Features for Keyword Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Common Problems in Keyword Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Related Work
10
3.1
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.1
Reference Unsupervised KE algorithms in NLP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.2
Current Status of the Research in KE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Keyword Extraction for Scandinavian Languages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Topic Extraction Model
18
4.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Novel Proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2.1
Candidate Extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.2
Candidate Weighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.3
Candidate Ranking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Experiments and Results
26
5.1
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.1
Precision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.2
Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2.3
Mean Average Precision (MAP)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2.4
Discounted Cumulative Gain (nDCG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
IV
==PAGE:7==
5.3
Statistical Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Linguistic Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.5
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Discussion
37
6.1
About the Proposed Example of Topic Extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Future Work
44
8
Conclusion
46
References
47
A BERT or fastText for Embeddings
51
B Optimal Keyphrase Length
53
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Information sources have undergone a profound transformation during the last 30 years since,
in the early 90s, the most relevant newspapers worldwide started to work on their digital versions
[Hutchins 2005]. The irruption of the internet pushed the media towards digitization, opening the
doors of a new world in terms of access, management, and treatment of information, a transforma-
tion that continues to evolve today. This procedure, with the goal of improving data access and
interaction for users, has contributed to the development of innovating techniques for text processing
framed in the ﬁeld of Natural Language Processing (NLP), a subﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
deﬁned in [Chowdhury 2003] as “the area of research and application that explores how computers
can be used to understand and manipulate natural language text or speech”.
During the last years, NLP has experienced numerous advances whose impact on society can
be measured at all levels. Speech recognition, sentiment analysis or Named Entity Recognition
(NER) are NLP tasks used daily by virtual assistants or search engines, both very valuable industrial
applications [Kalyanathaya, Akila, and Rajesh 2019]. For several of these NLP tasks focused on
information retrieval, Keyword Extraction (KE) is a basic but crucial step to identify, classify and
summarize a large number of texts [Haggag 2013], which has led to the appearance of numerous
algorithms dedicated to this purpose.
Many techniques based on linguistics, statistics, and Machine Learning (ML) have been chosen
to improve the performance of the KE models, achieving remarkable results through diﬀerent
approaches. Nevertheless, as for other NLP tasks, [Duong 2017] mentions there is a lack of resources
for small languages (where Nordic languages are included because of their number of speakers)
which unfortunately weighs down the potential beneﬁts of KE applications in contrast with the
high-resource languages.
In this thesis the state-of-the-art techniques have been researched to develop and propose a
novel topic extraction implementation compatible with Nordic languages, concretely the three
Scandinavian ones: Danish, Swedish and Norwegian. The motivation of this project relapses on the
study of a versatile unsupervised language-independent KE solution, easy to conﬁgure, that can be
easily adapted to work with other languages and is able to extract keyphrases of variable length
from any type of document. However, the novel proposal implements linguistic and statistical fea-
1
==PAGE:9==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
tures to successfully retrieve the main topic without the necessity of any corpora or previous training.
The research carried out since the beginning of this project is justiﬁed by the implementation of
the novel proposal, which will have a practical application in the industry and it has been released as
an open-source Python package. Additionally, this project aims to serve as inspiration for KE-related
research, especially in the Nordic countries, and it encourages the use of the topic extraction model
or its statistical and linguistic features for improvement. This research considers that keyphrase
extraction is not a ﬁnal step but an initial or complementary phase for other NLP tasks, such as
topic clustering, text classiﬁcation, or text summarization.
The content of this document is structured as follows. First, Chapter 2 explains the basic
theoretical concepts to understand this document, followed by Chapter 3 which contains a review
of the current state of the art in KE and an overview of the situation of KE for Scandinavian
languages. Chapter 4 provides all the details regarding the proposed algorithm, while Chapter
5 contains interesting information about the performed research. After that, Chapter 6 discuss
the ﬁnal results and Chapter 7 proposes ideas to improve and continue the research on the novel
algorithm. Finally, Chapter 8 includes the main conclusions extracted from the thesis.
Page 2
==PAGE:10==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
1.1
An Example of Topic Extraction
To exemplify the performance of the novel algorithm, the abstract of this thesis has been used
as input to obtain a ranking of 10 keyphrases with a maximum of 3 words each. The original text is
shown below, where the predicted keyphrases are highlighted with green and the overlaps between
predictions are highlighted with pink.
Over the last years, the necessity to automatize information retrieval from texts has been
growing considerably as part of media digitization. The emerging ﬂow of data requires
eﬃcient techniques in the ﬁeld of Natural Language Processing (NLP), such as Keyword
Extraction (KE) algorithms among many others. Unfortunately, languages with a small
number of speakers like Nordic languages have to face a lack of resources that weighs down
the potential beneﬁts of NLP applications.
This
thesis
introduces
a
novel
KE
model
for
topic
extraction
that
follows
an
unsupervised hybrid approach
making use of statistical and linguistic text features,
such as
syntactic
analysis within
sentences , entity recognition, word frequency and
position in the text, or semantic similarity. The model can be easily conﬁgured to predict
keyphrases for diﬀerent KE scenarios and it is able to make predictions for English, Danish,
Swedish, and Norwegian.
The novel algorithm has shown a competitive performance
compared to other state-of-the-art unsupervised KE methods , being evaluated using seven
annotated datasets with texts in four diﬀerent languages.
The report provides research of the current state of the art in KE for Scandinavian lan-
guages and suggests considering KE not as a ﬁnal step but an initial or complementary
phase for other NLP tasks.
The proposed implementation can be used for document
retrieval in
many
NLP applications , such as topic clustering, summarization, or data
visualization.
Rank
Model Prediction
1
unsupervised KE methods
2
syntactic analysis within
3
unsupervised hybrid approach
4
algorithms among many
5
many NLP applications
6
analysis within sentences
7
eﬃcient techniques
8
retrieval in many
9
datasets with texts
10
diﬀerent KE scenarios
Table 1.1: Top 10 keyphrases predicted by the novel implementation.
Page 3
==PAGE:11==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
Table 1.1 above shows the top 10 ranked keyphrases predicted by the novel algorithm. Some
predictions like unsupervised KE methods or eﬃcient techniques look correct, but others like
algorithms among many or retrieval in many are incorrect keyphrases. Nevertheless, all predictions
contain at least one important keyword. For example, algorithms among many contains the keyword
algorithms. Additionally, predictions on the top of the list represent better the main topic of the
abstract while the ones at the bottom of the ranking represent better secondary topics from the
text. These results are reviewed in detail in Section 6.1.
Page 4
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Theory
This chapter facilitates the theoretical background necessary to understand the KE process as
an NLP task, the novel model architecture, the performed analysis and research, and the evaluation
of the model.
2.1
Keyword Extraction in Natural Language Processing
As deﬁned in [Rose et al. 2010b], a keyword is a sequence of one or more words providing a
compact representation of the content of a document. Additionally, it is also interesting to deﬁne
the concept of keyphrase because is also widely used. A keyphrase is deﬁned as a phrase composed
of keywords or a phrase that provides the same type of semantic metadata as a keyword. To
avoid confusion, in this document “keyword” refers only to one word (e.g. climate, learning) and
“keyphrase” means a phrase composed of more than one word (e.g. climate change, machine learning).
NLP already comprises an important amount of tasks making a huge impact on the industry,
among which the generation of keywords is included. As mentioned in [Siddiqi and Sharan 2015],
these automatic keyword/keyphrase generation techniques can be classiﬁed into two main approaches:
• Keyword Assignment (KA): a small set of terms from a predeﬁned vocabulary of words is
assigned to describe an individual document. This approach could be very useful for topic
clustering or to limit the scope to a concrete vocabulary of keywords.
• Keyword Extraction (KE): the most signiﬁcant words present in a document are selected as
content descriptors. It does not depend on any predeﬁned vocabulary, which can be unavailable
or diﬃcult to maintain, and allows any important keyword from the text to be selected.
Regarding KE, [Siddiqi and Sharan 2015] lists four major approaches in order to automatize the
NLP task:
• Linguistic approaches: usually accurate but computationally intensive. Moreover, they
require domain knowledge and language expertise. Some linguistic features used by these
approaches are lexical analysis, syntactic analysis, entity recognition, etc.
5
==PAGE:13==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
• Statistical approaches: they are language independent and, despite being less accurate
than linguistic approaches, they still give good results because of the large amount of data
available.
• ML supervised approaches: requires training corpora which can be diﬃcult to ﬁnd. Na¨ıve
Bayes or Support Vector Machine (SVM) are well-known examples of them.
• Domain speciﬁc approaches: they use text features (e.g. structure) of a speciﬁc domain
(e.g. scientiﬁc articles) to extract keywords. It has no applicability out of its concrete domain.
2.2
Keyword Extraction in Machine Learning
From a pure ML perspective, a KE model is an algorithm able to perform a KE task and it can
be classiﬁed into two well-known ML categories depending on their training process: supervised and
unsupervised techniques.
On the one hand, supervised KE models deal with the task as a binary classiﬁcation problem (as
mentioned in [Bulgarov and Caragea 2015]), where the keyphrases are classiﬁed as true keyphrases
or non-keyphrases. The big issue with this type of algorithms is that they require human-labeled
data to train and validate the model properly, which sometimes is diﬃcult to ﬁnd or expensive
to generate. Moreover, the supervised approach can only be eﬀective on text written in the same
language as the one used for the training set, which greatly limits its applicability (especially for not
widely spoken languages).
On the other hand, unsupervised KE models are able to extract keywords from texts using only
the document itself, not depending on available human-annotated datasets. This allows predicting
keywords for those not widely spoken languages (like Nordic languages). As mentioned in [R. Wang,
W. Liu, and McDonald 2014], these type of models generally consist of two main steps: extracting
candidate phrases from the text and ranking them.
2.3
Relevant Features for Keyword Extraction
Keyword/keyphrase candidates can be extracted from a document and ranked thanks to some
features, which are present in every text. As mentioned in [Siddiqi and Sharan 2015], these features
can be classiﬁed into two broad categories:
• Based on Phraseness: they aim to measure the relationship between two words to consider
if they can build together a possible keyphrase. For example, the mean and variance of the
distance between two words within a number of sentences can give an estimation of how often
they build a relationship in the text. A low deviation in these values would mean the words
can build a keyphrase together.
• Based on Informativeness: they are focused on measuring how relevant a candidate
keyword/keyphrase could be. At the same time, they can be classiﬁed into three types: based
on term weight, based on location in the document, and miscellaneous.
Page 6
==PAGE:14==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
– Based on term weight: such as term count, term frequency, Term Frequency - Inverse
Document Frequency (TF-IDF1) as mentioned in [Ramos et al. 2003], etc. They can also
apply to sentences or tokens (whose deﬁnition may vary in each particular case), not only
words.
– Based on location: mainly relative positions of terms in the text.
They can be
computed at term level, but also at sentence or paragraph levels.
– Miscellaneous: includes any other rule-based feature, such as forbidden terms (as
suggested in [F. Liu et al. 2009]), weights for longer candidates2, the spread of candidates3,
etc.
Once the classiﬁcation of the diﬀerent features has been explained, it is interesting to provide
details about the most important NLP methods used to extract and rank keyphrases in KE models.
Some of them are mentioned in the next paragraphs.
In most of the cases, keyphrases are noun phrases (as mentioned in [Barker and Cornacchia
2000]), composed of nouns, proper nouns, adjectives, determiners or/and prepositions. Therefore,
it is very common to discard candidates if they do not belong to this type of phrase, a technique
that is called noun phrase chunking. These phrases are usually subjects or predicates within
sentences. In the example below two noun phrases belonging to the sentence have been underlined:
The head of the department booked a welcome meeting.
As mentioned in [Webster and Kit 1992] and in most NLP papers, tokenization plays a key
role as the initial phase in plenty of NLP tasks. It is deﬁned as the process of splitting a piece of
text into smaller units, such as individual words or terms. Text tokenization helps to interpret its
meaning and it can have many diﬀerent purposes. The deﬁnition of a token varies depending on
each process, but it can be also a sequence of words or a sentence.
Stopwords are often used in NLP as a rule to split tokens. A stopword is deﬁned in [Wilbur
and Sirotkin 1992] as “a word that has the same likelihood of occurring in those documents not
relevant to a query as in those documents relevant to the query”. Stopwords are also deﬁned as
“uninformative components of data” (see [Sarica and Luo 2021]). Some examples of stopwords in
English are “a”, “the” or “is”. These words are usually removed from search queries to skip the
uninformative parts and improve the ﬁnal performance.
One step forward, applied after tokenization, stemming and lemmatization are often con-
sidered to improve information retrieval from documents. As mentioned in [Balakrishnan and
Lloyd-Yemoh 2014], “stemming is a procedure to reduce all words with the same stem4 to a common
form whereas lemmatization removes inﬂectional endings and returns the base or dictionary form of
a word”. It is interesting to mention that these techniques are good approaches for very speciﬁc
tasks, like removing preﬁxes or suﬃxes acting as determiners (like it happens with Nordic languages).
1Calculates values for each word in a document through an inverse proportion of the frequency of the word in a
particular document to the percentage of documents the word appears in.
2Prioritize longer keyphrases respect to shorter ones.
3Distance between 1st and 2nd occurrences in the text.
4In linguistics, a stem is a part of a word responsible for its lexical meaning.
Page 7
==PAGE:15==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
An important topic in NLP is part-of-speech (POS) taggers, algorithms able to assign
“contextually appropriate grammatical descriptors” (deﬁned in [Voutilainen 2003]) to words in the
text. These taggers identify words as nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, etc. Moreover, some of them
act as morphosyntactic descriptors, capable of extracting information like gender, number (singular
or plural), verb tense and form, etc.
Moving from linguistics to statistics, there are widely used non-complex features like Term
Frequency (TF) and term position, both able to retrieve important information from texts.
Term frequency is deﬁned as the number of times a term occurs in a document and term position is a
number representing the position of the 1st appearance of a word in the document (it is relative and
it can refer to word position, sentence position, paragraph position, etc.). It is necessary to mention
Inverse Document Frequency (IDF), which is the logarithmically scaled inverse fraction of the
documents that contain the word (researched in [Ramos et al. 2003]), to ﬁnally remark TF-IDF,
one of the main tools for KE. TF-IDF is the product of TF and IDF values for a term and it achieves
impressive results and is widely used in NLP to extract keywords from sets of documents.
Another interesting concept is the co-occurrence of pairs of words. As mentioned in [Matsuo
and Ishizuka 2004], “if a term appears frequently with a particular subset of terms, the term is likely
to have important meaning”. Co-occurrence can refer to one text or a set of documents and it can
be used as an indicator of semantic proximity or idiomatic expression (see [Grosz 2020]).
Vectorization is one of the most used and researched techniques in NLP at present since it
can be extremely useful for several tasks. There are very simple approaches for generating word
vectors. For example, within a set of N documents, a word vector of dimension N could be generated
where each of the vector values would represent the presence of that word in each of the particular
documents from the collection (where a component has value 1 if the word is present or 0 if not
present). However, this type of vector would only provide information about how common is to
ﬁnd a word in a concrete set of documents. Word embeddings have been proved to be extraor-
dinarily useful in this ﬁeld. As mentioned in [Bakarov 2018], “word embeddings are real-valued
word representations able to capture lexical semantics and trained on natural language corpora”.
The generation of these vector representations is complex but they have plenty of applications
in NLP, like sentiment analysis5, word semantic similarity, topic clustering, etc. Sentences and
documents can also be transformed into vectors (which is also useful to represent its meaning) but, un-
fortunately, embedding an entire document into only one vector is not as precise as embedding a word.
Finally, it is important to consider applying normalization to some of the previously mentioned
features, such as TF or vectorization. This technique could be used, for example, to remove a
possible bias aﬀecting TF values introduced when comparing documents with diﬀerent lengths.
5Consists in identify, extracting, quantifying, and studying aﬀective states and subjective information from a text..
Page 8
==PAGE:16==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
2.4
Common Problems in Keyword Extraction
Although KE might seem a very straight-forward process, [Hasan and Ng 2014] states that there
are at least four corpus-related factors that can modify the diﬃculty of the task:
• Text length: longer documents mean more candidate keyphrases to ﬁlter and rank. As
consequence, extracting keywords from scientiﬁc papers or meeting transcripts is more diﬃcult
than performing KE on emails or news articles.
• Structural consistency: in structured documents, there are certain locations where keyphrases
are most likely to appear. For example, in scientiﬁc papers, most of the candidates should
appear in the abstract meanwhile in other non-structured documents the lack of this knowledge
could produce less relevant keyphrases.
• Topic change: it is proved that in scientiﬁc/news articles keywords use to appear at the
beginning and the end of the text. Nevertheless, the scenario in an informal conversation
transcript is very diﬀerent because the topic changes once or more as the interaction moves
forward in time. Consequently, for certain type of text it could be necessary to address topic
change to maintain the average quality of predicted keywords.
• Topic correlation: this problem is strongly related to topic change.
The presence of
uncorrelated topics along a document implies that it may no longer be possible to exploit
relatedness with satisfactory results, increasing the diﬃculty of the KE task if the algorithm
depends on this feature.
In addition to the already mentioned issues in KE, there is a common problem regarding how
KE models are evaluated. In most of the publications mentioned in this report, KE algorithms are
evaluated using F1, Precision, and Recall metrics. As Shrivastava explains in [Shrivastava 2020],
his is inadequate because these are metrics used for classiﬁcation tasks, while KE is a ranking task
that requires rank-aware evaluation metrics, such as Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR), Mean Average
Precision (MAP) or Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (DCG). MRR measures the average
ranking of the 1st correct prediction while MAP evaluates how many correct keyphrases are within
the predictions but also weights them according to their position in the rank. Finally, DCG goes one
step forward than MRR and MAP measuring also how relevant is each of the predicted keyphrases
in the ranking.
Page 9
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Related Work
This chapter contains information about the previous research performed on KE. The ﬁrst section
reviews the current state-of-the-art KE algorithms that have inspired the novel proposal. After that,
the second section provides an overview of the KE task in relation to the current status of NLP for
Scandinavian languages within the Nordic region.
3.1
State of the Art
This subsection provides an overview of the current status of the research in the KE task within
the context of NLP. First, a review of the most promising implementations is provided. To conclude,
some interesting insights to improve the KE task are reviewed and a list of possible concerns made
by researchers is added at the end of the section.
3.1.1
Reference Unsupervised KE algorithms in NLP
The ﬁrst KE technique to be mentioned in this section has been already deﬁned in this report:
TF-IDF. It calculates values for each word in a document through an inverse proportion of the
frequency of the word in a particular document to the percentage of documents the word appears
in. Although it was introduced by Karen Sp¨arck Jones in 1972 [Jones 1972], it is still widely used
because of its simplicity and eﬀectiveness. Because of that, it is able to extract the most descriptive
keywords from a set of documents even without having to ﬁlter out stopwords. Unfortunately, it
also has several limitations: it does not capture term position, semantics, co-occurrences, etc. In
consequence, it is mostly used as a feature in many algorithms.
Besides TF-IDF, Support Vector Machine (SVM) can also be considered as a baseline
in KE. Cited in [Noble 2006], “SVM is a computer algorithm that learns by example to assign
labels to objects”. Extrapolated to KE, [Zhang et al. 2006] proposes a supervised classiﬁcation
problem where an SVM model is trained with human-annotated data to classify keyword candi-
dates in one of these three classes: “good keyword”, “indiﬀerent keyword”, or “bad keyword”.
Currently, there are promising variants of SVM used in KE tasks, like linear/non-linear Ranking
10
==PAGE:18==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
SVM (RankSVM) [Chen et al. 2017]. These methods improve the performance of TF-IDF but
they demand training corpora which, as mentioned, is usually diﬃcult to ﬁnd or expensive to generate.
A couple of baseline implementations have been proposed in the two previous paragraphs, but
the rest of the subsection provides updated information about diﬀerent unsupervised approaches KE
models that can be classiﬁed into three main diﬀerent categories: statistical-based, linguistic-based,
and graph-based.
Among the statistical-based models, KP-Miner system (detailed in [El-Beltagy and Rafea
2009]) uses an unsupervised approach thanks to general document-based rules and heuristics that
can be ﬁne-tuned to ﬁt the user needs. It can be described in three main steps: candidate keyphrase
selection, candidate keyphrase weight calculation, and ﬁnal candidate keyphrase list reﬁnement. In
the ﬁrst step, any keyphrase must fulﬁll two requirements to be considered a candidate: it appears
at least n times in the document (what is called “least allowable seen frequency”), and its ﬁrst
appearance is within the ﬁrst m words of the document (what is called cutoﬀconstant/threshold).
In the second step, the formula below is used to compute the weight for each document term:
wij = TD −IDFij ∗Bi ∗Pf
(3.1)
where wij is the weight of term tj for the document Di, tfidfij if the TF-IDF value of the term tj,
Bi is a boosting factor for compound terms, and Pf is a term position associated factor. Finally, in
the third step, the top N phrases sorted by weight represent the output of the model. The advantages
of this approach are that is language-independent and conﬁgurable, while its disadvantages are
that TF-IDF computation is time-consuming (although it depends on the number of documents
involved).
Rapid Automatic Keyword Extraction (RAKE), described in [Rose et al. 2010a], is an-
other remarkable statistical-based KE model. RAKE is an unsupervised, domain-independent, and
language-independent method that performs reasonably well, especially from the semantic point of
view (which is interesting because is based on statistical features). RAKE implements the typical
3-step process (extract-score-rank) and it uses the sum of the ratios of the degree to frequency
deg(w)/freq(w) for each word in a candidate to compute its score (where word degree deg(w) favors
words that occur often in longer candidates). When selecting candidates, RAKE also accepts pairs
of keywords joined by a stopword if they appear in that form at least twice in the text.
One more statistical-based model that should be reviewed is Yet Another Keyword Extractor
(YAKE), from [Campos et al. 2020]. YAKE relies on local features, without the need for a document
collection like other methods based on TF-IDF. Moreover, it works for diﬀerent domains and languages
and it neither requires training corpora. It is composed of four main components: text-preprocessing,
feature extraction, individual term weighting, and candidate keywords generation. Looking into the
feature extraction module, ﬁve diﬀerent features are computed:
• Casing: words starting with capital letters (except the ones at the beginning of a sentence)
and acronyms are considered more relevant.
• Word Position: to highlight the keywords at the beginning of the document.
Page 11
==PAGE:19==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
• Word Frequency: the higher the frequency, the more important the word is. To prevent a bias
towards high-frequency in long documents, each value is divided by the average frequency plus
one.
• Word Relatedness to Context: it quantiﬁes the extent to which a word resembles the charac-
teristics of a stopword. The more the number of diﬀerent terms that co-occur with a candidate
keyword (on both sides), the more meaningless that wors is likely to be.
• Word DifSentence: quantiﬁes how often a candidate word appears within diﬀerent sentences.
In the third step, all the mentioned features are combined to produce a weight S(w) for each
term:
S(w) =
WRel ∗WP osition
WCase + WF req
WRel + WDifSentence
WRel
(3.2)
As result, important keywords have smaller S(w) values. As part of the last step in YAKE, the
ﬁnal rank of keyphrases will be based on a score per candidate (sequences generated with a sliding
window of n (kw) words not starting/ending with a stopword). Each keyphrase candidate score is
computed using the equation below:
S(kw) =
Q
w∈kw S(w)
TF(kw) ∗(1 + P
w∈kw S(w))
(3.3)
As a ﬁnal check, if there are candidates considered similar (their Levenshtein distance1 is above a
given threshold), the one with the lowest S(kw) value is the only one included in the ﬁnal output of
the model. The architecture of YAKE is very interesting for research and an important inspiration
for this report.
Before looking into the current state of the art for linguistic-based KE models, it is necessary to
mention the role of Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT), introduced
by [Devlin et al. 2018]. This language model bidirectionally (when looking at text sequences) trained
has demonstrated a deeper understanding of language context and ﬂow than others single-direction
language models. In Devlin et al. 2018], the authors explained they used a novel technique called
Masked Language Model (MLM) to train BERT, which replaces 15% of the words by [MASK]
tokens to force the model to predict them. Since BERT was released in 2018, it has been used with
extraordinary results in plenty of NLP tasks, including KE.
KeyBERT2 is a deep learning approach that uses BERT embeddings and simple cosine similar-
ity3 to ﬁnd the sub-phrases in a document that are the most similar to the document itself. First, it
extracts words/phrases as candidates from the text. Second, it generates document-embeddings
and candidate-embeddings using BERT. Finally, it uses cosine similarity to compare the document-
embedding with its respective candidate-embeddings, selecting the most similar candidates as best
1Minimum number of single-character edits (insertions, deletions or substitutions) required to change one word
into the other.
2https://github.com/MaartenGr/KeyBERT
3The cosine of the angle between two n-dimensional vectors in an n-dimensional space.
Page 12
==PAGE:20==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
keyphrases for the document. Is an unsupervised conﬁgurable language-independent approach,
because the user can choose within a set of pre-trained models available for more than 50 diﬀerent
languages. However, it completely depends on the performance of the chosen BERT model, and
multilingual BERT models do not perform as well as language-speciﬁc ones.
There are other linguistic-based models, like the one proposed by Haggag in [Haggag 2013],
although due to the recent advances in NLP (such as BERT) there are still many under research.
The algorithm Haggag proposed evaluates semantic relationships between individual words (word-
to-word) and overall similarity (word-to-document as KeyBERT does), achieving interesting results.
Among graph-based implementations, TextRank was introduced in [Mihalcea and Tarau 2004].
Its preprocessing phase uses POS tags to select candidate keywords, which in the next step are used
to build a graph. In this graph nodes are single words and an edge is added in between those words
that co-occur within a window of words in the text. Once the undirected unweighted graph is built,
each node is set to an initial value of 1 and a ranking algorithm is run on the graph for several
iterations until the values converge. In this ranking algorithm, the score associated with a node is
determined based on the edges pointing to that node and the score of the nodes from which those
edges come. Finally, the top-ranked nodes (keywords) are selected for postprocessing, where they
are marked in the text, and sequences of adjacent keywords are used to build keyphrases. The paper
shows that the implementation is competitive with other state-of-the-art models and, in addition to
that, “t it does not require deep linguistic knowledge, nor domain or language-speciﬁc annotated
corpora, which makes it highly portable to other domains, genres, or languages”.
Another two state-of-the-art unsupervised algorithms are SingleRank and ExpandRank, from
[Wan and Xiao 2008]. SingleRank is essentially a TextRank approach with three major diﬀerences.
First, in SingleRank each edge has a weight equal to the number of times the two linked word types
co-occur. Second, instead of extracting sequences from the text with the top-ranked keywords as
the starting point, in SingleRank sequences are extracted and ranked by summing the individual
scores of their words. And third, the window size used to extract sequences is bigger (size 10)
than in TextRank (size 2). ExpandRank is also a TextRank-based approach, but it incorporates
neighborhood knowledge when a set of documents is provided. For a given document, it ﬁnds
its k-nearest documents from the input set using a similarity measure (e.g cosine similarity) and
expands the co-occurrence statistics with its k-nearest neighbor documents. Both models aim to
improve the performance of TextRank, where SingleRank works for the same type of input and
ExpandRank performs on a set of documents.
TopicRank is an interesting graph-based model, introduced in [Bougouin, Boudin, and Daille
2013]. It aims to improve its performance in comparison with other methods by identifying single or
multi-word expressions that represent the main topics of a document. First, candidate keyphrases
are extracted from the text and clustered into topics. These topics are used as vertices in a complete
graph, where a ranking algorithm is applied to assign a signiﬁcance score to each topic. Finally,
keyphrases are generated by selecting a candidate from each of the top-ranked topics. This approach
reinforces the deduplication4 ability of the KE model towards the output.
One last implementation to review is RaKUn, which introduces meta-nodes (aggregates of
4The method of removing redundant data from a dataset.
Page 13
==PAGE:21==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
existing nodes) thanks to load centrality5 in [ˇSkrlj, Repar, and Pollak 2019]. Moreover, it implements
redundancy ﬁlters and can be used for document visualization.
3.1.2
Current Status of the Research in KE
The previous subsection has provided several techniques that are currently applied to KE in
NLP. This subsection aims to complete and complement that knowledge with a review of some
interesting points of research and concerns regarding KE.
As mentioned in Section 2.4, some problems linked to the KE task are related to the particularities
of the data. [Hasan and Ng 2010] evaluated a group of unsupervised KE algorithms using various
standard datasets to try to measure the impact of data from diﬀerent domains in the ﬁnal output of
the models. TF-IDF, TextRank, SingeRank, ExpandRank, and a clustering-based approach called
KeyCluster (introduced in [Z. Liu et al. 2009]) were evaluated with four diﬀerent corpora containing
diﬀerent document types (news articles, paper abstracts, full papers, and meeting transcripts),
number of words, and gold keyphrases6. The conclusion showed that the postprocessing step for the
graph-based methods where the keyphrases are formed has a strong impact on the performance, but
also that TF-IDF remains a strong baseline independently of the dataset used. Additionally, the re-
search pointed out that evaluating KE algorithms with only one dataset is inadequate and insuﬃcient.
Moving forward to the diﬀerent modules composing the current KE implementations, the pre-
processing together with the candidate extraction are the ﬁrst steps to research. As mentioned in
[Webster and Kit 1992], the signiﬁcance and complexity of tokenization used as the ﬁrst step in many
NLP processes can have an important impact on the ﬁnal performance. In KE, a token is usually
deﬁned as a keyword/keyphrase matching some criteria, such as it must not contain punctuation
symbols or stopwords, it has to be a sequence belonging to no more than one sentence, or it can
only contain nouns and adjectives. Additionally, [Boudin, Mougard, and Cram 2016] concludes
that supervised methods are, in general, more robust against noisy inputs. It is recommended to
read [R. Wang, W. Liu, and McDonald 2014] for more details about how diﬀerent preprocessing
techniques aﬀect the performance of KE models.
Following the typical pipeline of a KE model, the next step after the candidate extraction would
be the main subject of research: feature extraction. One of the ﬁrst dilemmas researchers face
when building a KE model is whether to use local or global features for their implementations.
Local features in KE are relatives to only one document, while global features are extracted from a
document collection. Local features can always be applied. In the opposite direction, the extraction
of global features is restricted to the case when the input is a set of documents. TF-IDF, from
[Jones 1972], proves that a very simple global feature such as the frequency of individual terms
among documents can retrieve very valuable information. Additionally, several publications (like
[El-Beltagy and Rafea 2009] or [Campos et al. 2020]) maintain the hypothesis that keywords use to
appear for ﬁrst time at the beginning of the documents in most cases. Related to word positions,
[Najaﬁand Darooneh 2015] deﬁnes the degree of fractality for very long texts, a method that looks
to the spatial pattern of occurrences of any vocabulary word forming a fractal set or simply a
5The load centrality of a node is the fraction of all shortest paths that pass through that node.
6Keyphrases manually annotated by professional editors.
Page 14
==PAGE:22==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
fractal7. In a complementary way, one proposal for KE that is currently being researched is the
application of Named Entity Recognition (NER). For example, [Huang, X. Wang, and H. Wang
2020] proposed a NER-RAKE implementation to enrich the list of candidate keywords able to
improve the eﬃciency of the original RAKE. Related to NER, some techniques like entity-linking,
also known as Named Entity Linking (NEL) or Named Entity Disambiguation (NED), have been
already proposed to improve KE performance. The feature extraction phase should try to endow
KE algorithms with useful knowledge by researching statistics, linguistics, ML, knowledge graphs, etc.
Towards the end of the KE pipeline, the postprocessing phase is used to implement techniques
like ﬁltering, sorting, or deduplication. However, some algorithms like TextRank (from [Mihalcea
and Tarau 2004]) implement another type of method, like keyphrase building (which is a step usually
included in candidate extraction). Filtering and sorting (or ranking) are usually performed using
a previously computed score based on information from text features. Although simple measures
like Levenshtein similarity are usually chosen for deduplication, some algorithms (like KeyBERT8)
make use of candidate embeddings with cosine similarity for this purpose. Concretely, KeyBERT
takes the 2 ∗N top-ranked keyphrases and ﬁnally outputs the N least similar ones between them.
Additionally, it also uses Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR) to allow the user to ﬁne-tune the
diversity of the results with the help of a threshold value.
In this report, KE is analyzed from the document retrieval point of view, but keywords can be
useful for other NLP tasks like text summarization, topic modeling, text classiﬁcation, or document
visualization. TextRank-based approaches mentioned in Section 3.1.1 already implement topic
clustering methods as a way to extract keywords from text, but KeyCluster (introduced in [Z. Liu
et al. 2009]) goes one step forward. KeyCluster also implements Wikipedia9-based statistics, using a
frequent word list from the web page to ﬁlter out unigrams that are selected as keyphrases. Some
papers (like in [Hasan and Ng 2014]) also suggest that text summarization and KE can potentially
beneﬁt from each other if the tasks are computed simultaneously. Ultimately, BERTopic (introduced
in [Grootendorst 2020]) is “a topic modeling technique that leverages Transformers and c-TF-IDF
to create dense clusters allowing for easily interpretable topics whilst keeping important words in
the topic descriptions”, supporting also topic visualization.
Before this subsection ﬁnishes, some research has been done about overall errors regarding KE
model architectures. As a very valuable resource, [Hasan and Ng 2014] identiﬁed errors that fall
into four major types:
• Overgeneration errors: occur when a KE model correctly predicts a candidate as a keyphrase
because it contains a word that appears very frequently in the document, but at the same
time selects other candidates as keyphrases because they contain the same word.
• Infrequency errors: is deﬁned as the opposite of the overgeneration errors. Occur when the
KE algorithm fails to identify a keyphrase due to its infrequent presence in the document.
Two ways to solve this problem are co-occurrence and Wikipedia-based relatedness measures
(currently under research).
7A fractal is a curve or geometrical ﬁgure, each part of which has the same statistical character as the whole.
8https://github.com/MaartenGr/KeyBERT
9https://www.wikipedia.org
Page 15
==PAGE:23==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
• Redundancy errors: occur when the KE implementations predict semantically equivalent
keyphrases. As mentioned previously in this subsection, deduplication techniques are a good
approach to minimize this type of error.
• Evaluation errors: Precision and Recall use to be chosen as metrics to evaluate KE models,
but they fail to evaluate the semantic proximity of the predictions. Evaluation errors occur
when a KE algorithm outputs a candidate that is semantically equivalent to a gold keyphrase
but it is considered erroneous during evaluation due to the mentioned limitation of Precision
and Recall metrics.
Overgeneration and infrequency errors should be addressed when implementing KE algorithms
while evaluation errors can be solved using more appropriate metrics for KE such as MRR or DCG
(mentioned in Section 2.4).
3.2
Keyword Extraction for Scandinavian Languages
The purpose of this section is to provide an overview of the current status of the KE task for the
Scandinavian languages: Danish, Swedish and Norwegian. Although the topic extraction proposal
is designed for its integration with Nordic languages, this project has focused its research into the
three Scandinavian as initial scope.
Regarding the available KE datasets for these three languages, the situation is not favorable as it
usually happens with languages being spoken by only a few million people in comparison to major
languages like English (with a large amount of research in NLP). None of the Scandinavian languages
have a public available labeled dataset for KE, although there are some public NLP data resources
for Danish and Norwegian. Finn ˚Aarup Nielsen elaborated an updated GitHub repository10 with
the majority of NLP resources for Danish. There is mentioned DaNewsroom (from [Varab and
Schluter 2020]), a large-scale Danish summarization dataset containing document-summary pairs of
news articles and manually written summaries. Since the DaNewsroom dataset can only be used for
academic purposes, Daniel Varab has kindly made it accessible for the elaboration of this report.
Although it is not a dataset for KE, text summarization and KE tasks are very close to each other
and the dataset has been demonstrated to be very valuable for KE evaluation (as it is explained in
Section 5.1). Regarding Norwegian, it has a particularity because there are two oﬃcial forms of
written Norwegian: Bokm˚al (literally “book tongue”) and Nynorsk (“new Norwegian”). Although
there are resources for both forms, Bokm˚al has more research and it is the chosen form for this
project (check the GitHub repository11 from Web6412 company). Anyway, no KE-speciﬁc datasets
have been found for Swedish and Norwegian.
According to the few amount of KE datasets for these three languages, there are almost no
publications about KE implementations for them. As previously reviewed in Section 3.1.1, statistical-
based KE algorithms are language-independent as well as graph-based ones. For linguistic-based KE
models, the Python library SpaCy13 provides language models for Danish and Norwegian Bokm˚al as
10https://github.com/fnielsen/awesome-danish
11https://github.com/web64/norwegian-nlp-resources
12https://web64.com
13https://spacy.io/usage/models#languages
Page 16
==PAGE:24==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
well as Stanza14 (formerly StanfordNLP) provides an experimental one for Swedish (compatible with
SpaCy), with the disadvantage of missing a NER module. Alternatively, Transformers15 provides
plenty of pre-trained models to generate word embeddings, both language-speciﬁc and multilingual.
Although there are no relevant publications referring to KE for Scandinavian languages, there are
other interesting papers related with the topic. [Kirkedal et al. 2019] provides a review of NLP tools
for Danish. [Sjøvoll 2019] performed a study on sentiment analysis, focusing on the Scandinavian
languages. Ultimately, the master thesis [Grosz 2020] researched three possible KE approaches
to predict keywords in Swedish court documents. Unfortunately, none of the three uses linguistic
features.
14https://github.com/stanfordnlp/stanza
15https://huggingface.co/models
Page 17
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4
Topic Extraction Model
The novel topic extraction model proposed in this report is the main subject of this chapter.
First, taking into account the KE research performed in previous sections, the design choices made
when developing the novel implementation are justiﬁed and explained. Just after, the novel proposal
is ﬁnally analyzed module by module.
4.1
Motivation
The proposed approach is not a Keyword Assignment (KA) model. It is a Keyword/keyphrase
Extraction algorithm. This ﬁrst main decision was taken because a KE model can be used for several
purposes, it is more versatile than KA because it can incorporate speciﬁc information retrieved
from documents to the ﬂow of other NLP tasks, like text summarization or topic modeling. KA
models are less ﬂexible because their output has to stick to their predeﬁned vocabulary while a KE
algorithm can be adapted easily to perform KA tasks.
Probably the main decision in terms of model design was to decide for an unsupervised approach
instead of a supervised one. However, this decision, for the case of KE in a multilingual environment,
is clearly deﬁned towards unsupervised learning due to lack of labeled data for (in this particular
case) Scandinavian languages. Achieving a certain performance in KE using supervised learning
for English is very feasible because there is enough data to train, validate and test the solution,
but this is not the case for less geographically widespread languages or languages being spoken
by a few million people. For the moment, fewer people speaking a language means generally less
NLP research on that language, although socioeconomic variables have to be considered for each case.
The novel unsupervised KE algorithm presented in this report is a hybrid of statistical-based
and linguistic-based approaches using local features from the text. This means, it can receive a set
of documents as input but its performance does not depend on the number of documents provided
but on the local features extracted from each document independently. Moreover, it makes use
of statistical and linguistic features rather than graph-based measures. One of the goals of this
thesis is to try to explore possible insights related to particularities for Nordic languages when
performing KE tasks. Because of this, it was preferable to put the focus on linguistic measures
18
==PAGE:26==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
rather than graph-based ones which are mainly language-independent. Additionally, although the
statistical measures are also language-independent they were selected to complement and improve
the information retrieval and, therefore, the overall performance of the solution.
4.2
Novel Proposal
Taking into consideration the design choices exposed in the previous section, this section provides
all the details regarding the novel topic extraction implementation proposed in this document.
The novel topic extraction model introduced in this master thesis is a KE unsupervised algorithm
that implements a hybrid approach that combines both statistical-based and linguistic-based text
features, being able to predict for documents in Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, and English. The
model has been implemented as an open-source Python package and it can extract keyphrases of a
minimum of one word and a maximum of N words (where N can be conﬁgured), prioritizing longer
keyphrases by default. Some of its main modules are similar to other KE algorithms, but not all
of them due to the hybrid nature of the model. These parts of the implementation are candidate
extraction, candidate weighting, and candidate ranking. The mentioned ﬂow can be checked in
Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Proposed Model Flow
Although the implementation does not require any training process, it requires certain language-
based resources to be able to predict. These requisites are listed below:
• A list of stopwords from NLTK1 library for each of the four languages.
• Four pre-trained language models from SpaCy2 library, one for each language accepted by the
model. These models are used in the candidate extraction module.
• Four pre-trained BERT models from Transformers3, one per language, to generate document,
sentence and word embeddings.
The novel implementation has been designed to provide certain adaptability to diﬀerent KE
scenarios. Proof of this is that its predictions can be modiﬁed by tuning the values of its input
1https://www.nltk.org
2https://spacy.io
3https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/index
Page 19
==PAGE:27==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
parameters. These parameters are listed in Table 4.1 and a brief description of them is provided
below:
• To initialize the topic extraction model it is only necessary to provide one or more language
codes, so the corresponding resources can be loaded. Available language codes are “DA”
(Danish), “SV” (Swedish), “NO” (Norwegian Bokm˚al) and “EN” (English).
• By default, the proposed algorithm loads the pre-trained word embedding models on GPU to
speed up the performance. Setting force cpu to True allows to load them on CPU if necessary.
• minFreq parameter conﬁgures the minimum number of appearances in the text for word
sequences to be considered keyword/keyphrase candidates. Increasing this value reduces the
number of candidates considerably for short texts.
• The four term weights wdeg, went, wpos and wfreq are used to score important words in the
document according to statistical and linguistic features. A detailed description of them can
be found in Section 4.2.2.
• The K+ parameter, introduced in Section 4.2.2, controls the number of candidates passed to
the last module of the novel algorithm.
• Finally, the semantic factor fsem allows to ﬁne-tune the inﬂuence of the third and last module
on the ﬁnal prediction. See Section 4.2.3 for details.
Parameter
Description
Required
Data Type
Default Value
langs
List of language codes
True
String List
-
force cpu
Use CPU
False
Boolean
False
minFreq
Min. Appearance Freq.
False
Integer
1
w deg
Degree Weight (wdeg)
False
Float
2.0
w ent
Entity Weight (went)
False
Float
4.0
w pos
Position Weight (wpos)
False
Float
50.0
w freq
Frequency Weight (wfreq)
False
Float
5.0
k plus
K+
False
Integer
50
f sem
Semantic Factor (fsem)
False
Float
0.9
Table 4.1: Input parameters.
Additionally, as other KE models mentioned in Section 3.1.1, the proposed algorithm allows to
modify basic aspects of the ﬁnal output when performing the predictions:
• The parameter K represents the number of keywords/keyphrases generated. By default
K = 10, returning the top 10 candidates sorted by relevance.
• The keyphrase maximum length can also be conﬁgured, being by default length = 4. Notice
that the candidate extraction module (see Section 4.2.1) only considers candidates as word
sequences within the same sentence.
Regarding the structure of the model, the next three subsections provide low-level details about
each of its main modules.
Page 20
==PAGE:28==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
4.2.1
Candidate Extraction
The ﬁrst operation performed in the candidate extraction module is text preprocessing, which is
quite simple. It removes all the special characters from the text except dots, dashes (for compound
words), and the special letters (“˚a”, “æ”, “ø” and “¨o”) used by the Scandinavian languages.
As the second step, it analyzes the preprocessed text looking for sequences of tokens with a
minimum length of one and a maximum length of N, where N is an input parameter that can
be conﬁgured. First, it splits the text into sentences (using the dots that were not removed in
the preprocessing).
After that, it looks for all the possible sequences of tokens matching the
speciﬁed length requisites within each sentence. A token is deﬁned as a lexical unit composed
of two or more alphanumeric characters. Finally, a minimum frequency ﬁlter is conﬁgured to
discard candidates appearing less than minFreq times in diﬀerent sentences. By default, this
statistical-based ﬁlter is deactivated because minFreq = 1, but it can be enabled by changing the in-
put parameter to demand keyphrases appearing in more than minFreq sentences from the document.
The third, last, and most complex element in the pipeline of the candidate extraction module is
a set of consecutive linguistic ﬁlters applied to remove unwanted candidates. The goal of this step is
to remove false keyphrases, reduce redundancy between candidates (deduplication), and minimize
the number of operations performed in the next steps of the algorithm. In this phase, the language
model from Spacy is used to analyze the original document (not preprocessed) and, thanks to the
POS tagger and the NER model included in the pipeline, detect stopwords, hotwords, coldwords,
and entities. Stopwords have already been deﬁned in Section 2.3. The other three types of tokens
are deﬁned below:
• Hotwords are every adjective, noun, or proper noun from the text, no matter the language
of the document.
• Coldwords are every adverb or verb present in the text, no matter the language of the
document.
• Entities are language-dependent because every NER module included in the diﬀerent Spacy
pipelines uses diﬀerent tags to identify entities. The most common entity tags are LOC
(location), ORG (organization), PER (person), and MISC (miscellaneous), but English and
Norwegian modules are able to identify other types of entities such as products, events, etc.
Unfortunately, as the Swedish language model from Stanza4 (formerly StanfordNLP) does not
include a NER module, for the moment entities cannot be detected for Swedish.
Once the implementation has a list of these four types of words (remember that stopwords
are imported from the NLTK library) for each document, the candidate ﬁltering is performed. A
candidate keyphrase must fulﬁll the sorted requisites listed below to go through all the diﬀerent
ﬁlters. Note that the order matters because it represents how the diﬀerent ﬁlters are sorted in the
code:
1. A candidate must not have a stopword at the beginning or the end of the sequence. For
example, “the cat of” is not a proper candidate because “the” and “of” are stopwords located
in 1st and last positions of the sequence.
4https://github.com/stanfordnlp/stanza
Page 21
==PAGE:29==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
2. A candidate must not contain coldwords. For example, “currently internet of things” is not a
correct candidate because it contains the adverb “currently”, which is considered a coldword.
3. A candidate must contain at least one hotword. For example, “internet of things” contains two
underline nouns considered hotwords and, consequently, it would be accepted as candidate.
After these ﬁlters, the candidate list is reduced and passed to the next module of the implemen-
tation. Note that the list of entities from the document has not been used yet, but it will be used in
the next module.
4.2.2
Candidate Weighting
This module is the most interesting one from the research point of view. It implements various
statistical and linguistic methods to, ﬁrst, extract local features from the text and compute a score
per word S(W) present in the candidates (received from the previous module) and, after, compute
a candidate score S(KW) based on the already computed word scores to, ﬁnally, select the top K+
(input parameter with default value K+ = 50) with the highest value.
To compute a relevance score per every keyword present in the candidate keyphrases (avoiding
unnecessary operations for the rest of words in the text), a set of statistical features are extracted
from the document. An additional linguistic feature is computed thanks to the list of entities
provided by the previous module. The list of extracted features is provided below:
• Word Frequency (Wfreq): the number of times a word appears in the text is computed for
each term. To avoid biases regarding diﬀerent lengths of the input documents, each word’s
number of appearances is divided by the average number of word appearances for the document.
Consequently, the formula remains as expressed below:
Wfreq =
Num. Word Appearances
Avg. Num. Word Appearances
(4.1)
• Word Degree (Wdeg): is an integer that measures co-occurrence and is deﬁned as the number
of times that the given word co-occurs with every other word in the candidate keyphrases.
• Word Position (Wpos): uses an integer value position that indicates in which sentence a
word is appearing for the ﬁrst time in the text, where sentences are numbered starting at 1.
Then, a logarithm is applied and the function is inverted to obtain a decreasing function that
rewards with greater scores words appearing soon for the 1st time in the document. The ﬁnal
function is shown below:
Wpos =
1
log2(position + 2)
(4.2)
• Entity (E): is a binary feature that adopts value 1 if the word is part of the list of entities
or 0 if not. Entities are usually important subjects in the text and, consequently, possible
keywords. It is the only linguistic feature part of this list.
Page 22
==PAGE:30==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
These are the features used to generate a weight/score per word but, how is the score computed?
The equation below shows how the features are combined to generate the word score S(W):
S(W) = went ∗E + wdeg ∗Wdeg + wpos ∗Wpos
wfreq ∗Wfreq
(4.3)
where E, Wdeg, Wpos and Wfreq are the four features, and went, wdeg, wpos and wfreq are their
respective weights to balance the inﬂuence of each feature in the ﬁnal score. This equation is strongly
inﬂuenced by the research made in [Rose et al. 2010a] and [Campos et al. 2020] for RAKE and
YAKE models respectively. Default values for the feature weights are speciﬁed in Table 4.2.
Weight
Default Value
wdeg
2.0
went
4.0
wpos
50.0
wfreq
5.0
Table 4.2: Default values for feature weights.
The values shown in Table 4.2 have been estimated performing random and grid parameter
search, with a representative dataset, isolating the ﬁrst and second modules of the model and using
Mean Average Precision (MAP) based on word similarity (see Section 5.2) as reference metric for
optimization. More details of this experiment can be found in Section 5.3.
Taking default values from Table 4.2 as a reference, the use of diﬀerent weight values has an
impact on the ﬁnal predictions caused by diﬀerent S(W). If wdeg is decreased, keyphrases with a
lower number of words will be more frequent among the ﬁnal predictions. If went is increased, words
recognized as entities will appear among the predicted keyphrases with greater probability. If wpos is
increased using a logarithmic scale, keyphrases appearing at the beginning of the document will be
prioritized against the rest. Finally, decreasing the default value for wfreq would imply keyphrases
containing the most repeated words (except those ones classiﬁed as stopwords or coldwords) in the
text will be prioritized in the output ranking.
Once each word present in at least one candidate has a score, it is necessary to compute a
score per keyphrase S(KW). Here the novel algorithm, in order to prioritize longer candidates over
shorter ones, simply sums the word scores of each of the words present in a keyphrase candidate.
There is only one exception: the word score of any stopword is zero (because they do not
provide information by themselves). The equation shown below expresses this operation:
S(KW) =
X
W ∈KW
S(W),
when W ̸∈stopwords
(4.4)
The candidates are sorted by their weight/score value and the top K+ ranked are selected
and passed to the next module together with their respective keyphrase weights. As mentioned
previously, K+ is an input parameter for the model with default value K+ = 50. However, if the
number of requested predictions per document K is higher than K+, the last will adopt the value of
Page 23
==PAGE:31==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
K to satisfy the condition K+ ≥K.
As the last step of the candidate weighting module, all S(KW) values for the selected K+
candidates are normalized by the maximum score of the K+ ranking. This means the best candidate
at the top of the K+ list will have S(KW) = 1, with all keyphrase scores matching the condition
0 ≤S(KW) ≤1.
4.2.3
Candidate Ranking
This last module of the implementation receives the top K+ ranked keyphrase candidates from
the previous one, together with the respective weight/score S(KW) for each candidate. The goal of
this module is to select the ﬁnal K keyphrases that will be returned to the user from the received K+
candidates. To perform this ﬁnal task, the module implements document and candidate embedding
using BERT to prioritize the candidates that are semantically close to the original document. This
last technique is based on the good performance of KeyBERT5 model, which uses a similar approach.
First, with a pre-trained BERT model loaded in the GPU (although the implementation allows
also to load it in the CPU), the original text is passed as input to the BERT tokenizer. The text
will be tokenized completely if the number of generated tokens does not exceed the maximum length
of 512 tokens required for every BERT input. If the number of tokens is greater than 512, the
sequence will be truncated to ﬁt the requirement. Since most important keywords tend to appear
at the beginning of the text, the sliding window technique has not been applied to process the
rest of the document. After that, the sequence of tokens (truncated or not) is used to feed the
BERT model, which generates a vector6 with 768 dimensions by default for each token in the input
sequence. Finally, all the token vectors are averaged to obtain only one vector representing the
whole document: a document embedding.
A very similar process is applied to generate candidate embeddings for each of the keyphrase
candidates. For each document, a batch containing all the candidates is passed as input to the
same previously used BERT tokenizer. However, since candidates never exceed the limit of 512
tokens allowed, the sequence of tokens is never truncated in this scenario. The batch of outputs
from the tokenizer is sent as input for its respective BERT model, which generates a sequence of
word embeddings for each candidate. Finally, these vectors of dimension 768 are averaged into one
for each candidate sequence to obtain candidate embeddings.
Once both document and candidate embeddings have been computed, the novel algorithm
calculates how similar is each candidate vector compared to its corresponding document vector.
Cosine similarity, deﬁned as the cosine of the angle between two n-dimensional vectors in an
n-dimensional space, is commonly employed for similarity computations in the embedding space
[Schnabel et al. 2015]. For two vectors v1 and v2, the cosine similarity between them is computed
using the Equation 4.5.
5https://github.com/MaartenGr/KeyBERT
6The embedding vectors are generated using the second to last hidden layer of the BERT model for each token.
Page 24
==PAGE:32==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
(v1, v2) =
⃗v1 ∗⃗v2
∥v1∥∗∥v2∥
(4.5)
where 1 ≥(v1, v2) ≥0, meaning (v1, v2) = 0 that v1 and v2 are completely diﬀerent, and
(v1, v2) = 1 that both are the same vector.
After this process, each candidate keyphrase from the set of K+ candidates received as input to
the module has associated two values: a candidate weight S(KW) and a measure of similarity with
the document (KW, D) (where KW represents the candidate and D represents the document). The
ﬁnal ranking score per candidate is computed using the equation shown below:
Rank(KW) = (1 −fsem) ∗S(KW) + fsem ∗(KW, D)
(4.6)
where 0 ≤fsem ≤1 is an input parameter called semantic factor (by default fsem = 0.9),
which controls how much inﬂuence has (KW, D) in the ﬁnal ranking of predictions. In other words,
is a weight that controls how much impact does the candidate ranking module has in the topic
extraction model.
The ﬁnal ranking score per candidate Rank(KW) aims to balance the importance of the infor-
mation extracted from the candidate weighting module with the semantic similarity between the
candidate and the document computed in this module.
As the ﬁnal step of this module and, consequently, the ﬁnal step of the novel KE implementation
proposed, the set of K+ candidates are sorted by their respective Rank(KW) values. Finally, the
top K candidates from the ordered list are selected as the best predictions and returned to the user
as the output of the model.
Page 25
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 5
Experiments and Results
This section of the report contains all the information about successive experiments performed
during the development of the novel topic extraction algorithm introduced in the previous section.
First, the datasets used to evaluate the model are detailed. Secondly, the metrics chosen and adapted
for the KE evaluation are explained. Third, a resume of the performed research is provided in two
sections, one from the statistical point of view and the other one from the linguistic point of view.
Finally, the ﬁnal evaluation of the model is reviewed in the last section.
5.1
Data Analysis
Regarding publicly available datasets for KE, there are plenty of resources for English. However,
as mentioned in Section 3.2, the current situation for the Scandinavian languages is very diﬀerent.
No publicly available KE datasets have been found for either Danish, Swedish or Norwegian. Never-
theless, Infomedia1 has contributed with data for the three Scandinavian languages and Daniel Varab
provided access to use DaNewsroom, a large-scale Danish dataset for summarization introduced in
[Varab and Schluter 2020]. Thanks to these contributions it has been possible to evaluate the novel
proposal for Scandinavian languages.
While performing many diﬀerent experiments to improve the overall performance of the proposed
model, a total of ﬁve datasets for English and Danish were used to test the diﬀerent iterations.
However, two more small datasets were provided by Infomedia at the end of the project, which made
it possible to evaluate the performance for Swedish and Norwegian. The seven datasets are brieﬂy
described below:
• 500N-KPCrowd-v1.1 is a broadcast news transcription dataset in English. It contains 500
news articles from 10 diﬀerent categories (such as health, politics, or technology). These
gold annotations were selected at least by 90% of the annotators involved. KPCrowd can be
downloaded from the GitHub repository2 of the LIAAD3 (Laboratory of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Decision Support) and it was introduced in [Marujo, Viveiros, and Silva Neto 2013].
1https://infomedia.org
2https://github.com/LIAAD/KeywordExtractor-Datasets
3http://www.liaad.up.pt
26
==PAGE:34==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
• KPTimes is a large-scale dataset for keyphrase generation on English news documents from
the New York Times4 and the Japan Times5, introduced in [Gallina, Boudin, and Daille
2019]. It has approx. 20.000 documents and can be downloaded from Ygor Gallina’s GitHub
repository6, although only a random sample of 500 documents has been used in the project.
• SemEval2017 was introduced in [Augenstein et al. 2017]. It consists of 500 paragraphs written
in English and selected from 500 ScienceDirect7 journal articles about Computer Science,
Material Sciences, and Physics. The keyphrases were selected by one undergraduate student
and an expert annotator. The data can be downloaded from LIAAD’s GitHub repository8.
• The Open Source Danish Dataset from Infomedia will be released soon and it has been
built with summaries from Danish press media written by editors. It contains 335 summaries
with annotations for NER, sentiment analysis, and theme extraction made by Helena Bj¨ornesj¨o.
Each document has been annotated with one sentence of a maximum of 4 words extracted
from the text representing the main theme of the article.
• DaNewsroom is a large-scale Danish summarization dataset introduced in [Varab and
Schluter 2020] and built with more than 100.000 news articles from archived content hosted at
Internet Archive9. Due to legal reasons, the dataset is not publicly available, but thanks to
Daniel Varab (who provided access to the data) it has been used in this project for academic
purposes. A random sample of 500 documents was extracted from the original dataset for the
evaluation of the novel KE model, where each news article has attached a manually written
summary. Each summary is commonly a sentence of 10-40 words long.
• A KE dataset composed of 55 news articles from Swedish press media was provided by
Infomedia in the ﬁnal stage of this project. Marie Liljegrem annotated this small set of
documents with keyphrases representing the main theme for each article.
• Another KE dataset for Norwegian was also provided by Infomedia, with identical characteris-
tics to the Swedish one but now built with articles from the Norwegian press media.
Data cleaning tasks were performed on each of the mentioned datasets to remove documents
with no annotations, duplicates, or outliers10 (referring to document length). Table 5.1 provides an
overview of the main characteristics for each dataset after being modiﬁed.
As Table 5.1 shows, datasets are very dissimilar in aspects like size, document length, or the
number of keyphrases per document. Additionally, the DaNewsroom dataset has longer keyphrases
because they are summaries, not usual keyphrases. All these details have been considered when
evaluating the novel implementation to avoid unwanted biases. An in-depth data analysis can be
consulted in this Python notebook.
4https://www.nytimes.com
5https://www.japantimes.co.jp
6https://github.com/ygorg/KPTimes
7https://www.sciencedirect.com
8https://github.com/LIAAD/KeywordExtractor-Datasets
9https://archive.org/web
10An outlier is an observation that lies outside the overall pattern of a certain distribution. In this report, the
quantile 0.99 has been used to remove outliers.
Page 27
==PAGE:35==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
Language
Size
Doc. length
Keyphrases
KP length
KPCrowd
English
363
150-600w
10-100
1-2w
KPTimes
English
500
150-1000w
2-10
1-4w
SemEval2017
English
448
100-250w
5-40
1-5w
Open Source
Danish
335
200-300w
1
1-4w
DaNewsroom
Danish
500
150-600w
1
1-50w
Internal SV
Swedish
55
180-360w
1-5
1-4w
Internal NO
Norwegian
55
170-350w
2-4
1-4w
Table 5.1: Datasets selected for evaluation.
5.2
Evaluation Metrics
As mentioned in Section 2.4, [Shrivastava 2020] states that KE algorithms are commonly evaluated
with metrics designed for classiﬁcation problems, such as F1, Precision, and Recall. Nevertheless,
KE is a ranking task that requires rank-aware evaluation metrics. This section provides an overview
of the metrics used to evaluate the novel implementation.
Before deﬁning the chosen metrics, it is necessary to deﬁne how a keyword is considered relevant
(positive prediction) or not. Three diﬀerent deﬁnitions of relevance have been used in this report:
1. Exact match: when two sequences of words are identical, ignoring casing, they are considered
an exact match with a relevance value of 1.
2. Partial match: this type of matches is represented by all the possible values between 0 and
1, both excluded. Partial matches can be detected using two techniques:
• Word similarity: given two sequences of words, it divides the number of words present
in both sequences by the number of words in the longest sequence. This similarity measure
does not take casing into account and it is referred to in other papers as Jaccard index or
Jaccard similarity coeﬃcient.
• Cosine similarity: generates sentence embeddings for the two given phrases and
computes their cosine distance. This measure expresses the semantic similarity between
both sequences and is a technique implemented in the novel proposal (see Section 4.2.3).
3. Not relevant: represented with value 0, it means both word sequences are completely
dissimilar between them.
Now that the deﬁnition of relevance for predicted keyphrases has been clariﬁed, it is time to
describe the evaluation metrics used in this project.
5.2.1
Precision
Precision is deﬁned as the fraction of correct predictions among all the predictions performed
by the model, also known as positive predicted value (PPV). It is a classiﬁcation metric and,
Page 28
==PAGE:36==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
consequently, fails to evaluate the rank of the predicted keywords. The generic equation used to
compute the Precision of a KE model is shown below:
Precision = True Keywords ∩Predicted Keywords
Predicted Keywords
(5.1)
Exceptionally for this report, two modalities of this metric have been implemented: one only
able to evaluate exact matches, deﬁned as Precision in the results, and a second one able to count
also partial matches using word similarity, called wPrecision.
5.2.2
Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR)
This metric only cares about the single highest-ranked relevant keyphrase among the predictions.
This means it does not care about other relevant keyphrases (if there are any) and their positions in
the rank. MRR is computed using the equation below:
MRR = 1
|d|
d
X
i=1
1
ranki
(5.2)
where d represents the number of documents received as input of the KE model and ranki is the
position of the highest-ranked relevant keyphrase among the predictions of document i.
Again, exceptionally for this project, two modalities of MRR have been implemented in this
report: one only able to evaluate exact matches, deﬁned as MRR in the results, and a second one
able to detect also partial matches using word similarity, called wMRR.
5.2.3
Mean Average Precision (MAP)
This metric is able to penalize if irrelevant keyphrases are located higher in the ranked list of
predictions and gradually decrease the impact of these irrelevant predictions in lower positions.
MAP is deﬁned by the equation shown below:
MAP = 1
|d|
d
X
i=1
 1
|m|
m
X
j=1
Pj

(5.3)
where d represents the number of documents received as input of the KE model, m is the number
of relevant keyphrases among the predictions, and Pj is the precision of the sublist for that relevant
keyphrase.
Also for MAP, two modalities of the metric have been implemented in this report: one only able
to evaluate exact matches, deﬁned as MAP in the results, and a second one able to detect also
partial matches using word similarity, called wMAP.
Page 29
==PAGE:37==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
5.2.4
Discounted Cumulative Gain (nDCG)
This metric is very similar to MAP but, additionally, it allows to evaluate how relevant is a
keyphrase instead of making a binary classiﬁcation (relevant or not relevant). DCG is deﬁned by
the equation shown below:
DCGk =
k
X
i=1
reli
log2(i + 1)
(5.4)
where reli is the relevance value of a keyphrase at position i in the list of predictions and the
term log2(i + 1) is a logarithmic reduction factor that penalizes proportionally to the position of
each prediction.
This metric contemplates the case in which the number of predictions may vary for each document
within a set, making DCG not comparable for all the documents. To solve this situation it applies
normalization thanks to the called ideal ranking of keyphrases (IDCG), this means, the DCGk value
for a list of gold-annotated keyphrases or, in other words, the maximum possible value for DCGk.
Consequently, the nDCG value for the n KE predictions performed on only one document is deﬁned
by the equation shown below:
nDCGk = DCGk
IDCGk
(5.5)
where the result ranges between 0 and 1 since it is normalized.
As for previous measures, two modalities of this metric have been implemented in this project,
but this time it is a bit diﬀerent compared to the previous ones. The ﬁrst one appears as nDCG in
the results and it has been already described in this section. It uses cosine similarity to compute how
relevant is a predicted keyphrase. The second one is a modiﬁcation of the ﬁrst one that removes the
logarithmic reduction factor from both terms DCGk and IDCGk, therefore not penalizing predictions
by their position in the list. This metric, appearing in the results as PbS (which means “Precision
by Similarity”), is useful when the gold-annotated keyphrases are not sorted in the KE dataset and
it is only necessary to measure how semantically relevant are the n predictions, not how are they
ranked in the list.
5.3
Statistical Research
This subsection resumes the performed research on statistical-based features and their impact
on the performance of the novel topic extraction model. All the features ﬁnally included as part of
the novel implementation are explained in Chapter 4, but speciﬁcally statistical-based ones are part
of candidate extraction (see Section 4.2.1) and candidate weighting (see Section 4.2.2) modules.
One of the ﬁrst and most basic observations during the experiments with the novel KE model
was the inﬂuence of the input parameter minFreq, which can be used to conﬁgure the minimum
amount of times that any word sequence has to appear to be considered a candidate keyphrase. By
default minFreq = 1, but some experiments were performed with minFreq = 2 with worse results
Page 30
==PAGE:38==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
for short texts where each word has a low number of appearances. Due to these results, greater
values for minFreq were automatically discarded to preserve the performance on short documents.
At the beginning of the research phase, the candidate weighting module had a simple conﬁgura-
tion based on the RAKE model (introduced in [Rose et al. 2010a]). The word scores S(W) were
computed using the fraction deg(W)/freq(W) for each word, where the degree deg(W) of a word
W was deﬁned as the number of times that the given word co-occurs with every other word in the
candidate keyphrases, and the word frequency freq(W) as the number of appearances of W in the
text. Later, the candidate score/weight was computed just by summing the scores of each word
composing the sequence. The purposes of this initial version of the model were prioritizing keywords
appearing in longer candidates and penalizing stopwords by allocating freq(W) in the denominator
of S(W). Consequently, longer keyphrases were already prioritized since the longer a candidate was,
the greater the probability of having a greater S(W) score.
Word position (Wpos), another statistical-based feature, was added later to the module. It is
based on an integer value position indicating in which sentence a word is appearing for the ﬁrst
time in the text, used in the equation shown below:
Wpos =
1
log2(position + 2)
(5.6)
The addition of this feature aimed to penalize candidates not appearing at the beginning of each
document, consequently having a bigger impact on long documents compared to short ones where
the number of sentences is lower. Figure 5.1 shows the behavior of Wpos function.
Figure 5.1: Wpos function.
Together with E, which scores entities detected in the text (researched in Section 5.4), the
statistical features Wdeg, Wfreq and Wpos are used to generate a relevance score per word S(W).
As explained in Section 4.2.2, Wfreq represents the normalization of freq(W) in order to remove
biases due to diﬀerent document lengths. Meanwhile, for Wdeg there is no more transformations
and the relation remains Wdeg = deg(W). The Equation 4.3 express the relation between the four
Page 31
==PAGE:39==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
word features, where their respective feature weights are used to balance the impact of each feature
towards S(W).
The default values for the feature weights went, wdeg, wpos and wfreq shown in Table 4.2 have
been calculated by integrating the KE model with the Python library Scikit-Learn11 to perform
random and grid parameter searches on their possible values. First, a random parameter search
was performed with fsem = 0 (meaning the candidate ranking module was deactivated) to remove
the semantic inﬂuence from the results. MAP was selected as the score metric because the main
goal was to optimize the feature weights to return individual terms appearing in the gold annotated
keywords, therefore the KE model was predicting keywords (keyphrases composed of 1 word). The
dataset used was KPCrowd because it contains 10 to 100 annotated keywords per document, most
of them composed of no more than 1-2 words. Second, a grid parameter search was performed using
the best parameter conﬁguration obtained as the starting point for a less wide range of values, with
the same model and data conditions. From the results in Table 4.2, it can be checked that wpos
has a high value because of the logarithmic term from Wpos. It is recommended to modify wdeg to
prioritize more or less longer keyphrases among the predictions.
5.4
Linguistic Research
This subsection resumes the performed research on linguistic-based features and their impact on
the performance of the novel KE implementation. As mentioned previously, all the features ﬁnally
included as part of the novel algorithm are explained in Chapter 4 but speciﬁcally linguistic-based
ones are present, in one way or another, in the three modules.
Looking into the ﬁrst module, candidate extraction, several linguistic techniques have been
applied during the development of the model. One of the main topics was the removal of stopwords.
In the beginning, stopwords were simply removed from the text as part of the preprocessing or
erased from candidate sequences. However, in some cases these methods generated non-existent
word sequences or candidates missing nexus, inducing the algorithm to miss or modify meaningful
keyphrases. Due to this problem, in the ﬁnal version of the model stopwords are not removed
before candidates are extracted from the text. Only candidate keyphrases starting or ending with a
stopword are removed.
Keeping an eye on the candidate extraction module, another interesting research was related
with SpaCy12 Python library and Part-of-Speech (POS) tags. Most relevant keyphrases use to be
composed of nouns, proper nouns, and adjectives, as mentioned in Section 2.3. They form noun
phrases and they usually work as subjects or predicates within a sentence. In the same way, verbs
and adverbs do not use to be keywords. POS taggers are included as part of the NLP pipeline in
many SpaCy language models, just after tokenization. To avoid unwanted semantic structures being
selected as keyphrase candidates, two types of words were deﬁned: hotwords (nouns, proper nouns
and adjectives) and coldwords (verbs and adverbs). Therefore, for each document, the novel proposal
elaborates two lists: one containing all hotwords and another containing all coldwords from the
11https://scikit-learn.org/stable/index.html
12https://spacy.io/usage/linguistic-features
Page 32
==PAGE:40==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
text. In this manner, linguistic ﬁlters can be conﬁgured to skip unwanted semantic structures being
deﬁned as possible keyphrases. This implementation improved the ﬁnal predictions by forcing them
to follow stricter standards, although the performance did not improve in the evaluation because
each dataset is labeled in a diﬀerent way.
Another element from the SpaCy pipeline that the novel algorithm beneﬁts from is the NER
module. Although the Swedish pipeline does not include this element, the rest of the supported
languages beneﬁt from the fact of detecting entities in the text. This linguistic technique is based
on the same hypothesis as the hotwords/colwords, because they use to be proper nouns and work as
subjects or predicates in a sentence, providing important information about the document. This
approach had already been implemented in [Huang, X. Wang, and H. Wang 2020] with interesting
results, and in this project it has helped to allocate keyphrases containing entities in the top positions
of the ﬁnal predictions. As explained in Chapter 4, although the list of entities is extracted in the
ﬁrst module of the model, it is ﬁnally used by Went to increase S(W) in the candidate weighting
module.
Finally, word embeddings were always considered as part of the novel proposal in order to improve
the retrieval of semantic information from documents, due to the excellent results from models
based on word vectors like KeyBERT13. Nevertheless, BERT models from Transformers [Devlin et al.
2018] were not the ﬁrst option due to their high computational cost. Vectorization was considered
initially using fastText14 pre-trained word vectors. This option does not have any max. length
limitation for texts (like the 512 tokens for BERT) and the models are trained using Continuous
Bag Of Words (CBOW15). Models from fastText perform faster than BERT because each word
has already a pre-deﬁned vector (regardless of the context in which the word is located) already
computed. However, despite these advantages, the bidirectional encoding from BERT produces
more precise word embeddings than fastText, improving the quality of the prediction and leaving
the choice on the increase in computational cost up to the user. Appendix A includes a performance
comparison between the novel model using BERT and fastText for embeddings.
Other vectorization approaches were considered during the research, such as SentenceTransform-
ers16 or Word2Vec (introduced in [Mikolov et al. 2013]). Nevertheless, the novel algorithm needs to
compute embeddings at three diﬀerent levels: word, sentence, and document. This fact implies the
ability to process very diﬀerent input lengths, which is not one of the purposes of SentenceTrans-
formers for example. However, in the novel implementation, only the ﬁrst 512 tokens are taken into
account when generating document embeddings. This decision is linked to the hypothesis explained
in Section 5.3, which defends candidate keyphrases are supposed to appear at the beginning of
the text and, consequently, for long texts their embeddings will be compared only with the ﬁrst
512 tokens from the original document. Additionally, some pre-trained models are not trained
on only one language and, instead, multilingual versions are provided. These multilingual models
are usually less precise and harm the overall performance when predicting for the Scandinavian
languages compared to pre-trained models for one language.
13https://github.com/MaartenGr/KeyBERT
14https://fasttext.cc/docs/en/crawl-vectors.html
15CBOW model architecture tries to predict the current target word (the center word) based on source context
words (surrounding words).
16https://www.sbert.net
Page 33
==PAGE:41==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
One of the last steps taken in the development of the novel proposal was the calibration of the
semantic factor fsem, responsible for controlling the impact of the candidate ranking module on the
ﬁnal prediction. As with the feature weights in Section 5.4, a grid parameter search was applied for
a range of fsem values between 0 and 1, leaving the rest of the parameters with their respective
default values. The dataset used was KPTimes, with 2-10 annotated keyphrases per document
composed of 1-4 words each, and the novel algorithm was set up to predict keyphrases of max. two
words scored with the metric MAP. Compared to the grid search setup for the feature weights, this
time the max. length of the predictions was increased by one word to provide some semantic context.
Greater values of fsem improve the performance and, consequently, the default value for fsem was
set to 0.9.
5.5
Evaluation
Before presenting the results of the evaluation, it is necessary to explain some measures that
have been taken due to the diﬀerent number of annotations per document in each evaluation
dataset. As shown in Table 5.1, some datasets only have 1 annotated keyphrase per document
while others can have even 100 annotations (like KPCrowd). Additionally, the annotations are not
sorted by relevance although in some cases they are prioritized by agreement between annotators.
Consequently, the evaluation metrics have been slightly adapted to try to minimize the impact of
these two circumstances. First, each prediction is compared against every available annotation for a
concrete document instead of comparing the prediction number x in the output ranking with the
annotation in position x in the golden annotation list. Second, among all the comparisons performed
for a concrete prediction, the exact match or the best partial match will be considered regardless of
the position of the annotation. For example, if a prediction is ranked ﬁfth in the model output is an
exact match with the annotation in position 23, the prediction will be considered an exact match
even if the annotation in position 5 is completely dissimilar. However, for PbS and nDCG metrics,
all the cosine similarities obtained between one concrete prediction and X golden annotations are
averaged to obtain one unique value representing the semantic similarity of the prediction with the
set of golden annotations. After these changes, the bias caused by the diﬀerence in the number of
annotations per document has been minimized, although a greater number of annotations still means
a higher probability of ﬁnding a more similar pair of sequences. Moreover, the problem regarding
the order of the annotated keyphrases has correctly been addressed.
The ﬁnal evaluation of the novel topic extraction proposal has been carried out with the datasets
listed in Section 5.1 and the metrics detailed in Section 5.2 of this report. Table 5.2 shows the ﬁnal
performance of the proposed implementation, where the best results for each metric are marked
with green and the worse ones with red. Results have been obtained using default values for input
parameters and predicting 10 keyphrases of a maximum of 4 words, deﬁned as a common theme/topic
extraction scenario. The obtained values diﬀer considerably between datasets because of the diﬀerent
characteristics of each KE dataset (see Table 5.1). These aspects, together with the impact of the
topic scenario setup on the results, are discussed in Chapter 6.
Table 5.2 includes results for all the metrics introduced in Section 5.2. Most relevant metrics for
topic extraction are wMAP, PbS and nDCG for n = 10 predictions. The novel algorithm performs
reasonably good taking into account the complex evaluation process, highlighting that 35-50% of
Page 34
==PAGE:42==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
Precision
wPrecision
MRR
wMRR
MAP
wMAP
PbS
nDCG
KPCrowd
0.000
0.183
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.492
0.571
0.577
KPTimes
0.007
0.101
0.027
0.073
0.027
0.346
0.852
0.852
SemEval2017
0.003
0.080
0.005
0.017
0.005
0.359
0.610
0.611
Open Source
0.102
0.555
0.225
0.613
0.209
0.928
0.717
0.718
DaNewsroom
0.001
0.037
0.002
0.005
0.002
0.208
0.594
0.597
Internal SV
0.023
0.320
0.063
0.192
0.060
0.843
0.617
0.616
Internal NO
0.013
0.115
0.054
0.069
0.054
0.355
0.920
0.920
Table 5.2: Evaluation results of the novel algorithm.
the predictions for the English datasets contain at least one golden keyword (see wMAP values
for KPCrowd, KPTimes, and SemEval2017). However, are remarkable the results obtained for
Norwegian with Internal NO dataset, where the novel model achieves an outstanding nDCG = 0.92.
Among the negative aspects, it is clear that Precision is not a good metric for this scenario unless
predictions are set to have only one word, but also MRR and MAP values can be irrelevant because
they can only evaluate exact matches. On the one hand, the model performs really well for the
datasets that have been annotated in Infomedia for topic/theme extraction (check results for Open
Source, Internal SV, and Internal NO datasets). On the other hand, the novel algorithm struggles
more to achieve good results for DaNewsroom and KPCrowd because the ﬁrst one is a dataset for
summarization (only a long sentence as unique annotation per document) and the majority of the
annotations from KPCrowd have only one word (not 4 as the topic extraction setup for evaluation).
The novel algorithm has been compared to other KE implementations introduced in Section
3.1.1. The conﬁguration of the chosen topic extraction scenario has been used (10 keyphrases of max.
4 words), although TF-IDF only predicts keywords not keyphrases. Table 5.3 contains the result of
the comparison using wMAP as the evaluation metric, where the best results for each dataset are
marked with green and the worse ones with red. Table 5.4 refers to the same evaluation but using
nDCG as metric. Both tables show a competitive performance of the novel algorithm compared to
other state-of-the-art KE implementations, achieving the best nDCG result for the SemEval2017
dataset.
TF-IDF
KeyBERT
KP-Miner
YAKE
RAKE
TextRank
SingleRank
TopicRank
Novel
KPCrowd
0.736
0.854
0.846
0.813
0.798
0.842
0.913
0.8
0.843
KPTimes
0.549
0.645
0.463
0.521
0.256
0.521
0.607
0.533
0.359
SemEval2017
0.808
0.846
0.877
0.769
0.816
0.836
0.900
0.821
0.928
Table 5.3: KE models comparison using wMAP as evaluation metric.
TF-IDF
KeyBERT
KP-Miner
YAKE
RAKE
TextRank
SingleRank
TopicRank
Novel
KPCrowd
0.634
0.626
0.623
0.625
0.585
0.611
0.600
0.642
0.616
KPTimes
0.604
0.599
0.609
0.605
0.574
0.615
0.611
0.614
0.611
SemEval2017
0.643
0.687
0.664
0.668
0.69
0.684
0.702
0.667
0.718
Table 5.4: KE models comparison using nDCG as evaluation metric.
Page 35
==PAGE:43==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
Finally, Figure 5.2 shows a total elapsed time comparison between KE models when predicting
for the three English datasets. The novel algorithm performs well, being faster than KP-Miner
or YAKE, and reporting similar times to other graph-based implementations like SingleRank or
TextRank.
Figure 5.2: Computational time comparison between KE models.
Page 36
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 6
Discussion
The results provided in Section 5.5 conﬁrm a competitive performance of the novel KE proposal
when performing in a topic extraction scenario. Nevertheless, during the course of this project,
an important variation of the results has been observed depending on the test data, the model
parameters, and the evaluation metrics used. This section analyzes these aspects and provides
insights based on research observations.
The ﬁrst important point of discussion relates to the nature of the datasets. As discussed
in Section 5.1 and shown in Table 5.1, seven diﬀerent datasets have been used for evaluation in
this project. The number of annotations per document, number of words per annotated keyphrase,
ordering of annotations, length of documents, or type of document are factors that condition the
evaluation of a KE model for each dataset. Consequently, Table 5.2 shows diﬀerent values for each
dataset, even using the same evaluation metric or input parameters. Some insights regarding the
datasets are shared below:
• Swedish and Norwegian datasets only contain 55 documents each, being less representative
compared to the other ﬁve sets.
• The three English datasets contain the greatest rate of annotations per document, something
that could beneﬁt or penalize the evaluation scores. Oppositely, the two Danish datasets have
only one annotation per document and, consequently, the evaluation could not reﬂect the
diversity among the K ranking of KE predictions.
• All dataset contains annotations composed of no more than 5 words on average except
DaNewsroom because it is a dataset for summarization and its annotations are sentences up to
50 words. For this reason, all metrics except PbS and nDCG should not be taken into account
for this concrete dataset. Exact matches with summaries are unlikely and most of the ﬁnal K
predictions will probably contain at least one word from the summary sentence.¨
• The majority of annotations in KPCrowd are keywords, in other words, individual words.
Since the novel algorithm prioritizes longer keyphrases of max. 4 words, exact matches are
completely unlikely when n = 10 predictions for each document. Consequently, Precision,
MRR and MAP are 0 in Table 5.2.
37
==PAGE:45==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
• Documents from KPTimes are on average longer than the rest. Although this could have an
impact when generating document embeddings with a limit of max. 512 tokens, the results
show there is no clear impact on the ﬁnal performance, achieving the second best results for
PbS and nDCG metrics.
Taking into account the previous insights, the input parameters of the novel model could be mod-
iﬁed to the particularities of each dataset, aiming to improve the performance for diverse prediction
scenarios. This fact proves the adaptability and versatility of the novel proposal compared
to other KE implementations like TF-IDF, which can only predict keywords (not keyphrases). For
example, in a commercial case where branches can be very relevant when extracting keywords
from the text, the went value could be increased to prioritize keyphrases containing entities. An
experiment regarding this topic is provided in Appendix B.
Regarding the model structure, one of the main design purposes has been to maintain a balance
between statistical and linguistic features. As mentioned in Section 5.4, linguistics features
are applied to the three modules composing the novel algorithm but it is only the last, candidate
ranking (see Section 4.2.3), the one that evaluates the semantic similarity of the K+ candidates. An
ablation study has been performed to check the impact of the candidate ranking module on the
prediction, where fsem has been set to 0 instead of its default value fsem = 0.9. Table 6.1 shows the
diﬀerence on the ﬁnal performance when fsem = 0. As expected, the performance of the KE model
slightly worsens for almost all evaluation datasets. Open Source receives the worst impact while only
for SemEval2017 the predictions improve. Taking a look at Section 5.1, the main diﬀerences between
Open Source and SemEval2017 datasets are the language, number of annotations per document,
and document type. On the one hand, Open Source is composed of summaries from Danish press
media which may be missing a typical semantic structure, where the candidate ranking module
helps to prioritize semantically relevant predictions. On the other hand, SemEval2017 was built with
English paragraphs selected from scientiﬁc articles which tend to be very well structured, in which
case the semantic information added by the last module is not necessarily relevant. Considering the
mentioned particularities, it can be concluded that the candidate ranking module in most of the
cases contributes to prioritizing predictions semantically closer to the original document, improving
the overall performance of the model.
Precision
wPrecision
MRR
wMRR
MAP
wMAP
PbS
nDCG
KPCrowd
0.000
-0.009
0.000
0.000
0.000
-0.078
-0.051
-0.052
KPTimes
0.000
-0.018
0.006
0.000
0.006
-0.071
-0.012
-0.012
SemEval2017
0.072
0.407
0.193
0.478
0.178
0.489
0.079
0.079
Open Source
-0.098
-0.483
-0.216
-0.586
-0.200
-0.645
-0.131
-0.132
DaNewsroom
-0.001
-0.012
-0.002
-0.005
-0.002
-0.080
-0.038
-0.042
Internal SV
0.004
0.008
0.010
0.022
0.009
-0.038
-0.023
-0.023
Internal NO
0.000
-0.018
-0.001
0.013
-0.001
-0.046
-0.005
-0.005
Table 6.1: Results of ablation study for candidate ranking module.
Despite the diﬀerent upgrades applied to the novel model to improve its predictions, also the
computational cost has been monitored. In fact, the set of ﬁlters applied in the candidate extractor
module and the K+ parameter are measures to reduce the number of keyphrase candidates processed
Page 38
==PAGE:46==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
through the model pipeline and, consequently, the computational cost. As Figure 6.1 shows for
English datasets, the generation of keyphrase embeddings is the most time-consuming task while
the others have a considerably smaller impact. Consequently, the ablation study performed with the
candidate ranking module demonstrated that the novel model is 90% faster when this last module is
disabled. Nevertheless, as previously mentioned the candidate ranking module improves the overall
performance of the model and, as shown in Figure 5.2, the novel algorithm is fast enough to
compete with other state-of-the-art implementations.
Figure 6.1: Computational time analysis for novel proposal.
Regarding the evaluation process, taking a look at Table 5.2 it is clear that Precision is not
an appropriate metric for this NLP task. As mentioned in Section 5.5, during the evaluation each
prediction is compared with all the available annotations for the corresponding document and then
the best match (for Precision, wPrecision, MRR, wMRR, MAP and wMAP) or the average cosine
similarity (for PbS and nDCG) is used as relevance score for that prediction. This method produces
generally low values for all metrics except wMAP, where partial matches on the top of the K ranking
increase the ﬁnal result, and PbS together with nDCG, which are normalized. Nevertheless, this
process is necessary to compare results for diﬀerent datasets while minimizing the bias caused by a
very diﬀerent number of annotations per document. Ideally, this should not be necessary for topic
extraction if the number of annotations would be constant for all datasets and the annotations were
properly ranked by their relevance, in which case each prediction should be compared with the
annotation in its same position in the ranking.
Additionally, the length of the golden annotations is another factor that impacts the evaluation
process. Unfortunately, the three metrics based on word similarity (or Jaccard similarity coeﬃcient)
for partial match detection, wPrecision, wMRR and wMAP, are biased by the mentioned factor.
These metrics identify a partial match when at least one word appears in both the annotation and
the prediction (ignoring casing). As a general rule, the greater the number of words in an annotation
Page 39
==PAGE:47==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
is, the lesser the value of these three evaluation metrics will be. At the same time, the greater the
number of words in a prediction is, the greater the value of these three evaluation metrics will be.
Nevertheless, MRR and wMRR only care about the ﬁrst exact or partial match respectively and
MAP and wMAP can vary considerably depending on how many exact/partial matches are detected
and on how are these matches located in the ranking.
In relation to Nordic languages, some insights for Scandinavian languages can be extracted from
the performance of the novel implementation. Figures 6.2 and 6.3 show evaluation results for the
novel algorithm grouped by dataset. The novel proposal obtains good results for the Scandinavian
datasets, excluding DaNewsroom (because it is a dataset for summarization). As mentioned in
Section 4.2.1, the lack of a NER module for Swedish could be penalizing slightly the evaluation results
for Internal SV, which actually contains an important amount of entities within its annotations. The
remaining diﬀerences between the evaluation results of Internal SV and Internal NO are attributed
to the small number of samples both datasets contain, while the diﬀerences with the evaluation of
Open Source could be due it has only one annotation per document and it was labeled by a diﬀerent
annotator.
Page 40
==PAGE:48==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
Figure 6.2: Novel model performance by dataset (1).
Figure 6.3: Novel model performance by dataset (2).
Page 41
==PAGE:49==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
6.1
About the Proposed Example of Topic Extraction
At the beginning of this document, in Section 1.1, an example of topic extraction was proposed
to illustrate the performance of the novel KE algorithm, using the abstract of this thesis as input
text for the model. Table 6.2 shows again the model predictions together with human annotations
(written in advance) for evaluation.
Rank
Model Prediction
Annotated Keyphrase
1
unsupervised KE methods
novel KE model
2
syntactic analysis within
topic extraction
3
unsupervised hybrid approach
model for topic extraction
4
algorithms among many
novel algorithm
5
many NLP applications
Keyword Extraction
6
analysis within sentences
Natural Language Processing
7
eﬃcient techniques
predict keyphrases
8
retrieval in many
keyphrases
9
datasets with texts
unsupervised KE methods
10
diﬀerent KE scenarios
unsupervised hybrid approach
Table 6.2: Top 10 predictions and annotations for the proposed example.
For this experiment, the novel model was set up with default values for all its input parameters
(see Table 4.1), requesting 10 ranked predictions with a maximum of 3 words each. Some insights
can be extracted by taking a look at Table 6.2:
• Each predicted keyphrase contains at least one keyword, regardless of the proposed annotations.
Even incorrect predictions, like algorithms among many.
• All predictions contain 3 words except the number 7. This is the default behavior of the
model, inﬂuenced by the research made in [Rose et al. 2010a].
As explained in Section
4.2.2, the algorithm measures co-occurrence of words with Wdeg, prioritizing words appearing
recurrently in several candidate sequences, such as unsupervised, KE or many. After, the
keyword/keyphrase score S(KW) is calculated as the sum of its word scores S(W), pushing
longer keyphrases containing high rated words up in the K+ candidate selection.
• As explained in Section 4.2.1, a candidate keyphrase must not have a stopword at the beginning
or the end of the sequence. For example, datasets with texts is a very generic and not relevant
keyphrase but the stopword with annexes two nouns building a noun phrase together, a
syntactic structure that is correctly considered relevant in the model deﬁnition.
• Sequences algorithms among many, many NLP applications or retrieval in many are incorrect
predictions even if they contain relevant keywords. The word many, which can be determiner
or pronoun in any sentence, appears in each of the mentioned predictions because is not
categorized as stopword and is identiﬁed by the POS tagger as an adjective. Ideally, many
should be categorized as stopword to discard these incorrect predictions in the candidate
extraction module.
Page 42
==PAGE:50==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
• Although “predict keyphrases” is included as annotated keyphrase, the novel model could
never predict it. As pointed in Section 4.2.1, verbs like predict are categorized as coldwords
and can not be part of a keyphrase. Although this condition is strict, it helps to discard a big
number of incorrect predictions.
Precision
wPrecision
MRR
wMRR
MAP
wMAP
PbS
nDCG
0.200
0.233
1
1
0.833
0.656
0.738
0.735
Table 6.3: Evaluation results for the proposed example.
Before concluding this section, Table 6.3 shows the evaluation results for this concrete example.
It is important to discuss some details regarding these results:
• Precision correctly expresses that 2 out of 10 predictions are exact matches, while wPrediction
shows there is also a partial match (represented by diﬀerent KE scenarios).
• MRR and wMRR denote there is an exact match at the top of the output ranking, the ﬁrst
prediction.
• MAP evaluates the output ranking higher than wMAP because the partial match diﬀerent
KE scenarios is located at the bottom of the ranking. Consequently:
MAP = ( 1
1 + 2
3)
2
= 0.833
wMAP = ( 1
1 + 2
3 + 3
10)
3
= 0.656
• PbS has a slightly greater value than nDCG because PbS does not consider the order of the
predictions, omitting the eﬀect of more relevant predictions at the bottom of the ranking.
Page 43
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 7
Future Work
The suggested novel topic extraction implementation is the ﬁnal result of the performed research
on KE. However, various proposals have not been explored during this project and this report
suggests and encourages working on them. This section agglutinates some of the most interesting
ideas for future work, with the intention of improving the exposed model but also any other KE
algorithm or similar NLP task.
Although the proposed implementation is already enriched by NER, could be interesting to move
one step forward and check the beneﬁts of using entity linking. Compared to NER, entity linking
not only detects the occurrence of an entity but also identiﬁes which speciﬁc entity it is (check [Shen,
J. Wang, and Han 2014] for more details). Another straightforward alternative would consist of
using the entity tags from SpaCy1 to classify entity types, such as locations (“LOC”) or persons
(“PROD”). Both techniques expand the information retrieval towards entities in the text as possible
keywords and, depending on the language model, can be implemented using SpaCy linguistic features.
As mentioned in section 3.1.1, graph-based unsupervised KE algorithms are deﬁnitely techniques
that should be considered for Nordic languages. Although this project did not explore this type of
model (see section 4.1 for more details), graphs can still be present as part of the novel proposal.
For example, Wikidata2 knowledge graph provides useful lexicographic data as suggested in [Nielsen
2019]. Wikidata lexemes, available for Scandinavian languages, contain more language-speciﬁc
information than POS tags, representing an opportunity to boost the performance of the model but
also considering the diﬃculties to integrate them into the current KE model.
In regard to the candidate weighting module, the performed research could be extended. As
discussed in Chapter 6, the diﬀerent nature of the KE datasets is a key factor when evaluating
the novel proposal. Default values for feature weights went, wdeg, wpos and wfreq (see Section 5.3)
could be reaﬃrmed performing grid parameter search with a varied group of KE datasets, giving
vital importance to the type of documents. Another suggestion consists of improving how the word
degree Wdeg is currently being calculated. Instead of only summing the total number of words
being together among candidate sequences for a word w, it could be more interesting to compute
1https://spacy.io/usage/linguistic-features
2https://www.wikidata.org
44
==PAGE:52==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
co-occurrence by pairs of words. This would allow adding a new term to Equation 4.4 to prioritize
keyphrases containing relevant pairs of words from the text.
Regarding word vectorization, due to BERT model limitations document embeddings can not
be generated with more than 512 tokens. Consequently, long documents are truncated to ﬁt the
maximum length for BERT inputs, and keyphrases extracted from the discarded parts of these
documents are penalized compared to the rest. Although important keyphrases use to appear at the
beginning of the text for most types of documents, a sliding window approach could be implemented
to ﬁx this problem. Then, the document would be divided into sequences of max. 512 tokens and
the whole document could be represented in one vector by averaging the resulting word vectors
properly.
Another functionality that could be added to improve the proposed KE algorithm is a proper
deduplication function to minimize redundancy in the output. The ﬁlters implemented in the
candidate extraction module (see Section 4.2.1) remove some redundant predictions from the output,
but this is not a proper deduplication function. For example, KeyBERT3 uses a threshold value to
discard similar keyphrases by their cosine similarity, something that could be implemented easily
in the candidate ranking module. Another deduplication approach could be based on Jaccard
similarity (as it has been applied for some evaluation metrics in this project), Levenshtein distance,
or Euclidean distance, although the diﬀerence in length between keyphrases aﬀects the result of the
three metrics. [Piskorski et al. 2021] suggests that deduplication functions can have a strong impact
on the results, which is logic if they are one of the last steps in the KE pipeline.
Regarding Nordic languages, the code of the proposed model can be easily adapted to any
language that matches three requisites:
1. A list of stopwords is provided for the language.
2. A pre-trained SpaCy4 language model is available for the language.
3. A pre-trained Transformers5 BERT model for embeddings is available for the language.
The last suggestions of this section are related to the applicability of the proposed model. KE is
a technique for information retrieval that can be very beneﬁcial as part of other NLP tasks, such
as topic clustering, summarization, or data visualization. For topic clustering, the suggested KE
algorithm could be adapted to extract keywords and create a graph where the predictions could
act as initial edges. On top of that, relevant data visualization for a set of documents can be
easily performed with predictions from the novel model, from simple word clouds to more complex
visualizations like topic graphs. BERTopic6 is a very complete example of what can be done with key-
words for data visualization, using BERT embeddings, dimension reduction techniques, etc. Finally,
although summarization is more complex as an NLP task than KE (because it requires building a
resume instead of extracting word sequences from the text), both share similar techniques and some
of the approaches explained in this report can be useful to build a multilingual summarization solution.
3https://github.com/MaartenGr/KeyBERT
4https://spacy.io
5https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/index
6https://github.com/MaartenGr/BERTopic
Page 45
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
After performing research on KE for the three Scandinavian languages (Danish, Swedish and
Norwegian) as most used Nordic languages, this report states there is a lack of public NLP resources
to train ML models to predict keywords from documents. Although there are useful task-speciﬁc
resources (see Section 3.2), most of them are focused on other tasks like sentiment analysis or NER.
This situation, aﬀecting non-widely spoken languages worldwide, has caused to use o unsupervised
approaches based on statistics, like RAKE [Campos et al. 2020], or graphs, like TextRank [Mihalcea
and Tarau 2004].
A novel topic extraction model for Nordic languages has been introduced in this report, with the
motivation to provide an easy-to-implement method for KE tasks compatible with Scandinavian lan-
guages. The proposed algorithm follows a hybrid unsupervised approach that implements statistical
and linguistic features, allows to be conﬁgured for diﬀerent KE scenarios (like topic extraction), and
can be easily adapted to many other languages.
The evaluation results from Section 5.5 show how the novel proposal achieves remarkable results
for seven diﬀerent KE datasets when it is compared with other state-of-the-art implementations.
Among various features, the model is able to generate a ranking of N keyphrases by analyzing
syntax within sentences, recognizing entities, computing word frequencies, identifying the position
in the text, or evaluating semantic similarities. Moreover, the implementation does not require any
training or corpora and only relies on a few NLP Python libraries like SpaCy1.
As the ﬁnal result of this thesis, the proposed model has been released and it is publicly available
as an open-source Python package. KE is not a ﬁnal step but an initial or complementary phase
for other NLP tasks. Consequently, it is encouraged to use the novel algorithm for KE and other
applications like topic clustering, summarization, or data visualization.
1https://spacy.io
46
==PAGE:54==
References
Augenstein, Isabelle et al. (2017). “SemEval 2017 Task 10: ScienceIE - Extracting Keyphrases and
Relations from Scientiﬁc Publications”. In: CoRR abs/1704.02853. arXiv: 1704.02853. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.02853.
Bakarov, Amir (2018). “A survey of word embeddings evaluation methods”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.09536.
Balakrishnan, Vimala and Ethel Lloyd-Yemoh (2014). “Stemming and lemmatization: a comparison
of retrieval performances”. In:
Barker, Ken and Nadia Cornacchia (2000). “Using noun phrase heads to extract document
keyphrases”. In: conference of the canadian society for computational studies of intelligence.
Springer, pp. 40–52.
El-Beltagy, Samhaa R. and Ahmed Rafea (2009). “KP-Miner: A keyphrase extraction system for
English and Arabic documents”. In: Information Systems 34.1, pp. 132–144. issn: 0306-4379.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2008.05.002. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0306437908000537.
Boudin, Florian, Hugo Mougard, and Damien Cram (2016). “How document pre-processing aﬀects
keyphrase extraction performance”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.07809.
Bougouin, Adrien, Florian Boudin, and B´eatrice Daille (2013). “Topicrank: Graph-based topic ranking
for keyphrase extraction”. In: International joint conference on natural language processing
(IJCNLP), pp. 543–551.
Bulgarov, Florin and Cornelia Caragea (2015). “A comparison of supervised keyphrase extraction
models”. In: Proceedings of the 24th international conference on World Wide Web, pp. 13–14.
Campos, Ricardo et al. (2020). “YAKE! Keyword extraction from single documents using multiple
local features”. In: Information Sciences 509, pp. 257–289. issn: 0020-0255. doi: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2019.09.013. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0020025519308588.
Chen, Kai et al. (2017). “Ranking support vector machine with kernel approximation”. In: Compu-
tational intelligence and neuroscience 2017.
Chowdhury, Gobinda G (2003). “Natural language processing”. In: Annual review of information
science and technology 37.1, pp. 51–89.
Devlin, Jacob et al. (2018). “Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
Duong, Long (2017). “Natural language processing for resource-poor languages”. PhD thesis.
Gallina, Ygor, Florian Boudin, and B´eatrice Daille (2019). “KPTimes: A Large-Scale Dataset for
Keyphrase Generation on News Documents”. In: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference
on Natural Language Generation, pp. 130–135.
47
==PAGE:55==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
Grootendorst, Maarten (2020). BERTopic: Leveraging BERT and c-TF-IDF to create easily inter-
pretable topics. Version v0.9.4. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.4381785. url: https://doi.org/10.
5281/zenodo.4381785.
Grosz, Sandra (2020). Keyword Extraction from Swedish Court Documents.
Haggag, Mohamed H (2013). “Keyword extraction using semantic analysis”. In: International Journal
of Computer Applications 61.1, pp. 1–6.
Hasan, Kazi Saidul and Vincent Ng (2010). “Conundrums in unsupervised keyphrase extraction:
making sense of the state-of-the-art”. In: Coling 2010: Posters, pp. 365–373.
— (June 2014). “Automatic Keyphrase Extraction: A Survey of the State of the Art”. In: Proceedings
of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers). Baltimore, Maryland: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1262–1273. doi:
10.3115/v1/P14-1119. url: https://aclanthology.org/P14-1119.
Huang, Han, Xiaoguang Wang, and Hongyu Wang (2020). “NER-RAKE: An improved rapid
automatic keyword extraction method for scientiﬁc literatures based on named entity recognition”.
In: Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology 57.1, e374.
Hutchins, John (2005). “The history of machine translation in a nutshell”. In: Retrieved December
20.2009, pp. 1–1.
Jones, Karen Sparck (1972). “A statistical interpretation of term speciﬁcity and its application in
retrieval”. In: Journal of documentation.
Kalyanathaya, Krishna Prakash, D Akila, and P Rajesh (2019). “Advances in natural language
processing–a survey of current research trends, development tools and industry applications”. In:
International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering 7, pp. 199–202.
Kirkedal, Andreas et al. (2019). “The lacunae of Danish natural language processing”. In: Proceedings
of the 22nd Nordic Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 356–362.
Liu, Feifan et al. (2009). “Unsupervised approaches for automatic keyword extraction using meeting
transcripts”. In: Proceedings of human language technologies: The 2009 annual conference of the
North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics, pp. 620–628.
Liu, Zhiyuan et al. (2009). “Clustering to ﬁnd exemplar terms for keyphrase extraction”. In:
Proceedings of the 2009 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pp. 257–
266.
Marujo, Luis, M´arcio Viveiros, and Jo˜ao Paulo da Silva Neto (2013). Keyphrase Cloud Generation
of Broadcast News. arXiv: 1306.4606 [cs.IR].
Matsuo, Yutaka and Mitsuru Ishizuka (2004). “Keyword extraction from a single document using
word co-occurrence statistical information”. In: International Journal on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Tools 13.01, pp. 157–169.
Mihalcea, Rada and Paul Tarau (2004). “Textrank: Bringing order into text”. In: Proceedings of the
2004 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pp. 404–411.
Mikolov, Tomas et al. (2013). “Eﬃcient estimation of word representations in vector space”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781.
Najaﬁ, Elham and Amir H Darooneh (2015). “The fractal patterns of words in a text: a method for
automatic keyword extraction”. In: PloS one 10.6, e0130617.
Nielsen, Finn ˚Arup (2019). “Danish in Wikidata lexemes”. In: Proceedings of the 10th Global Wordnet
Conference, pp. 33–38.
Noble, William S (2006). “What is a support vector machine?” In: Nature biotechnology 24.12,
pp. 1565–1567.
Page 48
==PAGE:56==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
Piskorski, Jakub et al. (Apr. 2021). “Exploring Linguistically-Lightweight Keyword Extraction Tech-
niques for Indexing News Articles in a Multilingual Set-up”. In: Proceedings of the EACL Hack-
ashop on News Media Content Analysis and Automated Report Generation. Online: Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 35–44. url: https://aclanthology.org/2021.hackashop-1.6.
Ramos, Juan et al. (2003). “Using tf-idf to determine word relevance in document queries”. In:
Proceedings of the ﬁrst instructional conference on machine learning. Vol. 242. 1. Citeseer,
pp. 29–48.
Rose, Stuart et al. (2010a). “Automatic Keyword Extraction from Individual Documents”. In:
Text Mining. John Wiley
Sons, Ltd. Chap. 1, pp. 1–20. isbn: 9780470689646. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/9780470689646.ch1. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
pdf/10.1002/9780470689646.ch1. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1002/9780470689646.ch1.
— (2010b). “Automatic keyword extraction from individual documents”. In: Text mining: applica-
tions and theory 1, pp. 1–20.
Sarica, Serhad and Jianxi Luo (2021). “Stopwords in technical language processing”. In: Plos one
16.8, e0254937.
Schnabel, Tobias et al. (2015). “Evaluation methods for unsupervised word embeddings”. In:
Proceedings of the 2015 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pp. 298–
307.
Shen, Wei, Jianyong Wang, and Jiawei Han (2014). “Entity linking with a knowledge base: Issues,
techniques, and solutions”. In: IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 27.2,
pp. 443–460.
Shrivastava, Ishan (July 2020). Exploring Diﬀerent Keyword Extractors — Evaluation Metrics
and Strategies. url: https://medium.com/gumgum-tech/exploring-different-keyword-
extractors-evaluation-metrics-and-strategies-ef874d336773.
Siddiqi, Sifatullah and Aditi Sharan (2015). “Keyword and keyphrase extraction techniques: a
literature review”. In: International Journal of Computer Applications 109.2.
Sjøvoll, Eirik (2019). “Sentiment Analysis in Scandinavian Languages: Systematic Review and
Evaluation”. MA thesis. The University of Bergen.
ˇSkrlj, Blaˇz, Andraˇz Repar, and Senja Pollak (2019). “Rakun: rank-based keyword extraction via
unsupervised learning and meta vertex aggregation”. In: International Conference on Statistical
Language and Speech Processing. Springer, pp. 311–323.
Varab, Daniel and Natalie Schluter (2020). “DaNewsroom: A large-scale Danish summarisation
dataset”. In: Proceedings of The 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, pp. 6731–
6739.
Voutilainen, Atro (2003). “Part-of-speech tagging”. In: The Oxford handbook of computational
linguistics, p. 219.
Wan, Xiaojun and Jianguo Xiao (2008). “Single Document Keyphrase Extraction Using Neighborhood
Knowledge.” In: AAAI. Vol. 8, pp. 855–860.
Wang, Rui, Wei Liu, and Chris McDonald (2014). “How preprocessing aﬀects unsupervised keyphrase
extraction”. In: International Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational
Linguistics. Springer, pp. 163–176.
Webster, Jonathan J and Chunyu Kit (1992). “Tokenization as the initial phase in NLP”. In:
COLING 1992 Volume 4: The 14th International Conference on Computational Linguistics.
Wilbur, W John and Karl Sirotkin (1992). “The automatic identiﬁcation of stop words”. In: Journal
of information science 18.1, pp. 45–55.
Page 49
==PAGE:57==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
Zhang, Kuo et al. (2006). “Keyword extraction using support vector machine”. In: international
conference on web-age information management. Springer, pp. 85–96.
Page 50
==PAGE:58==
Appendix A
BERT or fastText for Embeddings
As mentioned in Section 5.4, BERT (from Transformers) and fastText have been the two pre-
trained models used in the candidate ranking module for generating embeddings during linguistic
research. Table A.1 shows the impact of using fastText instead of BERT for embeddings on the
ﬁnal evaluation results from Table 5.2.
Precision
wPrecision
MRR
wMRR
MAP
wMAP
PbS
nDCG
KPCrowd
0.000
0.011
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.066
-0.064
-0.068
KPTimes
0.004
0.002
0.002
0.018
0.002
0.019
-0.002
-0.001
SemEval2017
-0.003
-0.035
-0.005
-0.017
-0.005
-0.107
-0.034
-0.035
Open Source
-0.080
-0.109
-0.173
-0.423
-0.158
-0.026
-0.039
-0.041
DaNewsroom
0.000
-0.009
0.001
0.001
0.001
-0.054
-0.043
-0.048
Internal SV
-0.018
-0.077
-0.056
-0.153
-0.053
-0.054
-0.018
-0.017
Internal NO
-0.008
-0.043
-0.047
-0.030
-0.047
0.028
-0.006
-0.006
Table A.1: Comparison for embeddings using fastText instead of BERT.
The majority of the evaluation results shown in Table A.1 are worsened on average, although
the impact on the ﬁnal version of the novel algorithm is much less than the diﬀerence obtained
during the linguistic research with an older version. The performances on KPCrowd and KPTi-
mes datasets are almost the same ones compared to the original version of the model, while the
performance on the Open Source dataset is harmed. As discussed in Chapter 6, Open Source is
composed of summaries from Danish press media which may be missing a typical semantic struc-
ture, where the BERT model helps to prioritize semantically relevant predictions better than fastText.
Nevertheless, although BERT improves the performance of the novel model on average, fastText
should be considered if it is necessary to minimize the computational time when predicting keyphrases.
Figure A.1 shows how the time used to generate document and candidate embeddings is drastically
reduced when using fastText instead of BERT, a fact that can be checked taking a look at Figure 6.1.
Figure A.2 shows how competitive the novel proposal using fastText can be in terms of computational
time when compared with other KE models.
51
==PAGE:59==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
Figure A.1: Computational time analysis for novel proposal using fastText for embeddings.
Figure A.2: Computational time comparison between KE models and Novel using fastText.
Page 52
==PAGE:60==
Appendix B
Optimal Keyphrase Length
The diﬀerent data particularities of each evaluation dataset have been discussed previously in
this report. The novel algorithm has been evaluated in a topic extraction scenario where default
values for input parameters have been used to predict 10 keyphrases per document of a maximum of
4 words. Nevertheless, the novel proposal can be adapted to make predictions for many diﬀerent
scenarios. To demonstrate this advantage of the proposed model, the maximum number of words
per prediction has been conﬁgured to ﬁt the data distribution of the annotations for each dataset.
Table B.1 shows the new conﬁguration for evaluation based on this Python notebook.
Max. Number of Words per Prediction
Number of Words per Annotation
KPCrowd
1
1-2
KPTimes
2
1-4
SemEval2017
3
1-5
Internal SV
3
1-4
Internal NO
3
1-4
Table B.1: Number of words per keyphrase.
Table B.2 shows the comparison of evaluation results between the original topic extraction setup
and the updated setup used in this section, where Open Source and DaNewsroom datasets have been
excluded. The optimal number of words per prediction for the Open Source dataset was already
matching the topic extraction scenario, while DaNewsroom is a summarization dataset. For the
rest of the datasets, in general terms, the results improve and metrics only based on exact matches
like Precision, MRR, and MAP have greater values. However, wMAP has worse values (see why at
the end of Section 6.1). This simple experiment only modiﬁes one prediction parameter, but the
possibilities increase when modifying the input parameters of the novel proposal.
53
==PAGE:61==
A Novel Topic Extraction Algorithm for Nordic Languages
Master Thesis
Precision
wPrecision
MRR
wMRR
MAP
wMAP
PbS
nDCG
KPCrowd
0.002
0.006
0.006
-0.020
0.006
-0.019
0.001
0.001
KPTimes
0.005
-0.003
-0.004
0.016
-0.004
0.005
0.004
0.004
SemEval2017
0.007
-0.018
0.031
0.035
0.031
-0.130
0.010
0.010
Internal SV
0.252
0.140
0.448
0.462
0.381
-0.243
0.053
0.051
Internal NO
0.074
0.061
0.171
0.163
0.139
-0.031
0.000
0.001
Table B.2: Comparison for evaluation results using optimal keyphrase length per dataset.
Page 54
