==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
A Practical Hardware Accelerator for Deep Neural Networks
Master Thesis
AUTHOR
Bosse Bandowski
s164582@student.dtu.dk
SUPERVISOR
Martin Schoeberl
masca@dtu.dk
23.01.2022
==PAGE:2==
23.01.2022
Abstract
This report documents the work done on a deep neural network hardware accelerator con-
figured on a field-programmable gate array as part of a 30 ECTS Master thesis in Computer
Science and Engineering at Denmark’s Technical University.
It includes the design, imple-
mentation, and evaluation of an accelerator that runs inference of a 6-layer quantized image
classification model that has been trained on the Cifar10 dataset. The network includes convo-
lutional, fully connected, and pooling layers. The accelerator is implemented as a coprocessor
to the Patmos processor, a time-predictable very long instruction word processor. Patmos is
used to facilitate communication between a host and the accelerator and its existing tool suite
of memory controllers, Ethernet controller, C compiler, etc. is used extensively.
We demonstrate that the accelerator is fully functional and can connect to a host via Ether-
net. On the Cifar10 test set, the model scores 65% top-1 accuracy at 35 inferences per second
which is significantly lower than commercially available comparable products. The test results
are analyzed and future improvements are proposed.
The report is accompanied by a code base that includes a hardware description in Chisel,
control programs in C, as well as network preparation and benchmark scripts in Python. The
code base is attached to this report but can be found more conveniently at https://github.
com/bossebandowski/nopu/tree/release_v1.6. The repository’s README details how to re-
produce the results presented in this work and Appendix 8 lists the repository contents.
Keywords: Machine Learning, Convolutional Neural Networks, FPGAs, Hardware Accelera-
tion, Patmos, Neural Network Quantization
Page 1 of 50
==PAGE:3==
23.01.2022
Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Computer Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
PATMOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Related Work
19
4
Design
21
4.1
Use Case and Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Design Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5
System Runtime Behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.6
From Model Architecture to Hardware Accelerator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Implementation
28
5.1
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Memory Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Network Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.1
Network Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.2
Network Quantization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.3
Parameter Extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Network Hardware Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4.1
Top Entity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4.2
Fully Connected Layers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4.3
Convolutional Layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4.4
Max-Pooling Layers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.5
Optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.6
Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Results
38
6.1
Accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Speed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Power Consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.4
Synthesis Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.5
Worst Case Execution Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Future Work
45
8
Conclusion
46
Page 2 of 50
==PAGE:4==
23.01.2022
1
Introduction
Image classification is the process of assigning images to classes from a predefined set. If this set was
typical pets, then a photo showing a dog should be classified as a ”dog”, and a picture of a cat should
be labelled as a ”cat”. For humans, this is a trivial task that we can solve intuitively in what feels like
the blink of an eye. However, there are many situations where we are either too slow, too unreliable,
or simply not good enough to solve this task. In these cases, we use computers to classify images
for us, and the applications range from rapid quality assessment in manufacturing processes over
astronomy and climate monitoring to cancer diagnosis. In all of these cases, computers outperform
humans, a development that only picked up speed over the last decade with the emergence of
convolutional neural networks (CNN). They are algorithms mimicking the human cognitive system
and constituting complex statistical models that are excellent at recognizing patterns and relations
between image features and labels in large sets of training data. Once trained, these models can
extrapolate their learnings to new, previously unseen images. Because convolutional neural networks
are organized in many consecutive layers, they are a particular type of the more general Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs).
As an example for CNN supremacy, they are used in Germany to distinguish between non-
cancerous moles and melanoma which are an important early indicators of skin cancer. The models
are fed with previously diagnosed labelled images of both classes and trained in a process called
supervised learning. After that, they were shown to clearly outperform professional dermatologists
and to identify cancerous melanoma of new patients, thus creating a new state-of-the-art for this
type of cancer diagnosis[1].
In order to achieve accurate classification results, these models have to be highly complex. Com-
mon networks have tens of millions of parameters and require billions of computations to infer the
class of a single image[2] which makes them slow and power-hungry. Therefore, the right choice of
computational hardware platform is important. Traditional central processing units (CPUs) that
are used in laptops and mobile phones are particularly slow at running CNNs because they can not
exploit the inherent parallelizable nature of underlying matrix multiplications. Graphics processing
units (GPUs) and tensor processing units (TPUs) can do this much faster but suffer from high power
usage [3, 4]. Consequently, there is much active research being done on hardware accelerators that
are specifically designed to provide fast and efficient neural network inference [5, 6, 7]. Most of the
researchers use field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) in constrast to application specific inte-
grated circuits (ASICs) because they have much less development time overhead and cost associated
with the chip design [8].
This report details the design, implementation, and evaluation of one such FPGA-based neural
network hardware accelerator. In particular, it is about leveraging the energy savings potential to
develop a system that is attractive for computer vision tasks in resource-constrained environments
such as drones and Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications. Currently, image classification in these
embedded systems is mostly solved by use of the centralized cloud computing paradigm where
cameras capture images that are sent to a remote server that uses GPUs to run CNNs and returns
the result. Not only is this inefficient, but it causes a range of other issues regarding the need for
reliable network infrastructure as well as privacy and security concerns[9]. Therefore, the system
described in this work is designed for so-called edge computing systems and enables them to do
these computations in place without sending data to a remote server. It should be self-contained
and have a versatile interface that allows it to be integrated into many different environments and
applications in the future. With this vision in mind, the accelerator is designed as a co-processor
to the Patmos processor[10]. This enables the use of existing features such as worst-case execution
time analysis, an Ethernet stack for communication with the host[11], memory controllers, a c
Page 3 of 50
==PAGE:5==
23.01.2022
compiler and so on. Communication between Patmos and the accelerator is implemented via the
newly developed co-processor interface[12]. The hardware platform used in this project is the Altera
DE2-115 development board with a Cyclone IV FPGA1.
Providing computer vision capabilities on the edge is not an entirely new concept. Over the past
decade, NVIDIA has been actively pushing their GPU technology to the edge in form of their Jetson2
product line. These are small yet powerful single-board computers which feature both a GPU and
multiple CPUs. As recently as 2019, Google joined the competition with their new state-of-the-art
Coral products3 that aim to translate their TPU knowledge from data centers to small, autonomous
systems. Especially interesting is their TPU USB dongle which can provide ”high-speed machine-
learning inferencing on a wide range of systems, simply by connecting it to a USB port”4. This is
the product which the accelerator developed in this project will be compared against to answer a
simple question: Can we design a cutting edge neural network hardware accelerator for the Patmos
processor that is competitive with currently available commercial solutions?
(a) Google Coral TPU dongle4
(b) Altera DE2-115 development board5
Figure 1: Form factor of a finished competitor product (left) compared to the development board
The report starts with a background section elaborating briefly on the theoretical concepts that
form the basis of this work, and provides resources for further reading. Second, a related works
section explores the current state of the art in FPGA neural network accelerators. It is followed by
a design chapter that explains the design goals, high-level system architecture, and prevalent design
choices. The implementation section goes into depth and describes how the system works in detail
and is followed by the results of the evaluation and comparison with the aforementioned competitive
products. The report is rounded up with an outlook into the future and possible continuations of
this work as well as a summary and conclusion at last.
1https://www.terasic.com.tw/cgi-bin/page/archive.pl?Language=English&CategoryNo=165&No=502#contents
2https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/autonomous-machines/embedded-systems/
3https://coral.ai/products/
4https://coral.ai/products/accelerator
5https://www.terasic.com.tw/cgi-bin/page/archive.pl?Language=English&CategoryNo=139&No=502&PartNo=1
Page 4 of 50
==PAGE:6==
23.01.2022
2
Background
2.1
Computer Vision
General
Image classification is a subset of the broader field of computer vision (CV). Computer vision in
general is simply about using algorithms to automatically extract features from input images and
interpret them. Interpretation can mean different things in this context, and it depends on which
task in particular is being attempted. The most common applications are image classification, object
detection and semantic segmentation[2].
Given an input picture, an image classifier assigns it one to class out of a predefined set. These
predefined sets could be the set of common pets which includes dogs and cats as stated in the
Introduction, or it could be the binary set of cancerous and non-cancerous skin features[1]. Most
classifiers assign a probability to the image belonging to each class and then return the class with
the highest probability. An image is classified as a whole, and the classification does not provide
any further information.
In contrast to that, object detection algorithms both classify and locate multiple objects in images
or frames. The locations of objects in the frame is usually provided by bounding boxes around the
detected object[13, 14]. Hence, object detection can be seen as an extension to image analysis and
provides information about number of objects, sizes, locations, etc.
In semantic segmentation, we go even a step further and try to assign a class to every pixel in
the image. This is particularly useful in recent self-driving applications[15]. Figure 2 highlights the
difference between these applications.
Figure 2: Visualization of different computer vision tasks6
History
Nowadays, CV applications are seen everywhere, but this is a fairly recent development. When the
field first formed in the 1970s, it was dominated by crude hand-crafted algorithms that were severely
6https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/1*J1qpG6TUYsq43whAqezjyg.png
Page 5 of 50
==PAGE:7==
23.01.2022
limited by the available computational power and there was not much practical use. This changed
over the next few decades with more powerful computers and increasingly sophisticated algorithms
that allowed systems to use computer vision in controlled environments and for specific tasks. In the
2000s, a trend developed to use machine-learning techniques instead of hand-crafted algorithms to
exploit the growing amounts of available labelled data and add robustness and generalisability which
where lacking before. However, the improvements on popular benchmarks were marginal until the
emergence of deep neural networks (DNN) in 2012 revolutionized the field and immediately became
the new state of the art approach to image classification, object detection, semantic segmentation,
and other computer vision tasks[16, 2].
Evaluation Metrics and SOTA Performance
Figure 3 shows how significant the impact of DNNs has been since the start of the last decade.
The performance of an image classifier is typically evaluated over standardized data sets such as
the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) data set which is a subset of
ImageNet7.
ILSVRC is a set containing more than a million labelled images belonging to 1000
distinct classes. The data set has been annotated by humans and is subject to strict quality control.
It is split into a training set of more than a million images, a validation set of 50000 images, and a
test set of 100000 images. The training and validation sets are used to train the image classification
models and the test set is used to evaluate them. The most important performance indicators are
the top-1 and top-5 accuracy.
The accuracy describes the number of correct predictions divided by the total number of predic-
tions:
acc = predictionscorrect
predictionstotal
(1)
The top-1 and top-5 accuracy differ in how a prediction is evaluated as correct:
• When evaluating the top-1 accuracy, a prediction is correct if and only if the predicted label
with the highest probability is equal to the ground truth label.
• When evaluating the top-5 accuracy, a prediction is correct if and only if the ground truth
label is contained in the set of the 5 predicted labels with the highest probability.
Therefore, the top-5 accuracy is a more lenient evaluation metric than the top-1 accuracy and
will reveal close misses that the top-1 accuracy ignores. Therefore, it is often the more popular of
the two. It can also be expressed as the top-5 classification error e which is simply
etop5 = 1 −acctop5
(2)
The last time the ILSVRC was held in 2017, the top-5 classification error approached 2% with the
winner being SENet[17].
7https://www.image-net.org/
Page 6 of 50
==PAGE:8==
23.01.2022
Figure 3: Top-5 Accuracy ILSVRC SOTA since 20108
Other Test Sets
In this project, we use the Cifar109 data set. It works similarly to ILSVRC but has fewer and smaller
images and only 10 distinct classes. The test dataset contains 1000 randomly selected images of each
class. Since there are so few classes, the top-5 accuracy loses significance and we will instead focus
on the top-1 accuracy.
Other computer vision tasks require different test sets, such as PASCAL VOC and MS COCO
which are annotated for object detection[18].
2.2
Neural Networks
General
Neural Networks (NNs) are statistical models that are bio-mimicking the brain. They are large
networks of nodes called perceptrons or neurons organized in a layered directed acyclic graph with
an input layer at the start and an output layer at the end. All edges in this graph have weights
assigned to them and nodes have biases assigned to them. Additionally, nodes may have different
activation functions that map the sum of all inputs to a new output. Numerous types of layers and
activation functions exist and there are countless ways to combine them, creating a diverse model
architecture landscape, but at their core they are glorified statistical machine learning models that
can be trained in several ways, for example supervised learning and unsupervised learning. During
supervised learning, the model is presented with a large number of known input and output pairs
that are used to calibrate weights and biases with a technique called backpropagation and stochastic
gradient descent[19]. This way, the model learns a statistical relationship between inputs and outputs
and will ideally associate new inputs with the correct output. During unsupervised learning, the
model is adjusting weights and biases to optimize an objective function. After training, weights and
8https://www.synopsys.com/content/dam/synopsys/designware-ip/diagrams/dwtb-q4-compvis-fig2.jpg.
imgw.850.x.jpg
9https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html
Page 7 of 50
==PAGE:9==
23.01.2022
biases are fixed and the model produces a deterministic output for any given input. This process is
called inference[20, 3].
(a) Illustration of a neural network with fully con-
nected layers 10
(b) Illustration of a single neuron with n inputs, a
bias of 1, and a step activation function 11
Deep Neural Networks
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are a particular type of neural networks where many layers are
chained to produce a deep structure. This allows the model to learn far more complex relations
between inputs and outputs than its shallow counterparts, but it also increases the computational
complexity immensely. Only in recent years have computers become powerful enough to compute
DNNs in acceptable times, and since the start of the 2010s, they have been used increasingly for
applications such as speech recognition, image classification, object detection, etc[21, 14]. During
training, they employ both supervised and unsupervised methods.
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are one version of deep neural networks. They are inspired
by the human visual system and unsurprisingly, they are especially good at image analysis tasks
(image classification, object detection, semantic segmentation, etc.) and have been delivering state-
of-the-art performance in many pattern recognition tasks for over a decade (compare Section 2.1).
They were also the first DNNs that were successfully trained without the need for computationally
expensive unsupervised learning and thus became some of the first to be deployed for complex tasks.
What enables their architecture to make do without unsupervised learning are chained convolution
and pooling layers which locally enhance features instead of fully connected layers that take the entire
output from the previous layer into account, thus drastically decreasing the number of parameters
and computational complexity[21].
10http://blog.contactpoint.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/NeuralNetworkDiagram.png
11https://www.norwegiancreations.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/perceptron.png
Page 8 of 50
==PAGE:10==
23.01.2022
Figure 5: Illustration of a CNN with convolution and pooling layers12
Layers
Since many neural networks can be regarded as directed acyclic graphs, they can be organized in
layers. The nth layer is thus the set of all nodes that are at a distance of n edges from the input
layer. A DNN consists of many such layers, and all layers that are not input or output layers are seen
as hidden layers. Four different types of layers that are relevant to this project shall be discussed in
the following:
• Fully Connected Layers
Fully connected layers (FC) are the most straight-forward type where every neuron from the
(n −1)th layer has an outgoing edge to every neuron in the nth layer. A single neuron in the
nth layer is the sum of the products of every input activation in the (n −1)th layer with the
weight associated to the edge to the target neuron plus a bias. This computation is commonly
referred to as multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations.
Given
mi = ith neuron in the (n −1)th layer
kj = jth neuron in the nth layer
I = number of neurons in the (n −1)th layer
J = number of neurons in the nth layer
wij = weight connecting mi to kj
bj = bias of kj
we get
kj = bj +
i=I−1
X
i=0
wij · mi
(3)
In other words, every neuron in a FC layer inherits information from the entire previous layer
which makes them complex and computationally expensive. A fully connected layer with I
nodes connecting to another fully connected layer with J nodes requires I ·J weights and MAC
operations. Figure 4a illustrates hidden FC layers[20, 21].
12https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Neeraj_Bokde/publication/342210370/figure/download/fig1/AS:
904104125681664@1592566629262/Convolutional-neural-network-consisting-of-convolution-and-pooling-layers-and-fully.
ppm
Page 9 of 50
==PAGE:11==
23.01.2022
• Convolutional Layers
In contrast to FC layers, convolutional layers (CONV) do not convey information from the
entire previous layer to a single neuron. Instead, the concept of locality is applied to enhance
regional features.
Figure 6 illustrates the mechanics of a CONV layer.
CONV layers are
defined by a number of hyper parameters and their actual parameters consisting of weights
and biases. The hyper parameters include
C = number of input channels
F = filter shape (3-dimensional) C · x · y
S = stride length
K = number of filters
Both weights and biases are organized by filters. That means that every filter has a single bias
assigned to it and a number of weights that matches its shape F. Hence, it is the different
filters that are adjusted during training to amplify specific features. They are applied to a
region of the input layer that is equal to their size to calculate a single neuron in the next
layer[21, 22].
The next neuron is calculated by sliding the filter across the input layer by
a distance S to a new region. Near the edges of the input layer, one can employ different
padding techniques. In this project, we use Zero-padding for its simplicity which means that
each feature mask in the convolutional layers will always be slightly smaller than those of the
input layer. A good and concise explanation of convolutional layers can be found here13.
Figure 6: Illustration of a single CONV filter applied to a 3-channel RGB input image14
• Pooling Layers
Pooling layers (POOL) are used in convolutional neural networks to decrease the model com-
plexity. They do not contain trainable parameters but simply extract the maximal (MAX-
POOL) or average value (AVG-POOL) from a defined filter area in the previous layer to
calculate a neuron value. Hence, the only parameters that define a pooling layer are its filter
size F and stride length S. The filter size defines how many values from the previous layer
are pooled together to calculate one output neuron, and the stride defines how many such
calculations are made[21, 23].
13https://stanford.edu/~shervine/teaching/cs-230/cheatsheet-convolutional-neural-networks
Page 10 of 50
==PAGE:12==
23.01.2022
Given
mx,y,z = neuron in the (n −1)th layer at x, y, z
ka,b,z = neuron in the nth layer at a, b, z
F = filter size
S = stride length
xmin = a · S −F/2
xmax = a · S + F/2
ymin = b · S −F/2
ymax = b · S + F/2
we get
ka,b,z = max({mx,y,z|xmin ≤x ≤xmax ∧ymin ≤y ≤ymax})
(4)
• Flatten Layers
Flatten layers are used in many neural network libraries such as PyTorch and Tensorflow at
the transitions between multidimensional layers such as convolutional and pooling layers to
one-dimensional layers such as fully connected layers. They do not change the data in any way
but simply indicate that the model architect assures that the shape of the activations can be
safely reinterpreted. In terms of hardware implementation, these layers can simply be ignored.
Activation Functions
As shown in Figure 4b, nodes in neural networks apply activation functions to the weighted sum of
all their inputs to compute their output. Their purpose is limit outputs to a particular range, for
example all positive numbers {x|x ∈R ∧x > 0} or all numbers with an absolute value of one or less
{x|x ∈R∧−1 ≤x ≤1}. The choice of the right activation functions based on input values and task
is an active research topic[24], but there are a few which are of particular interest to this project:
• ReLU
Rectified Linear Units (ReLUs) are piece-wise functions that are both simple and effective as
they basically perform a capped linear mapping. There are many variants which also enforce
an upper bound, notably the ReLU6 and ReLU255 functions, but the standard ReLU function
just maps all negative inputs to 0:
ReLU(x) = max(x, 0)
Figure 7: Illustration of the standard ReLU activation function15
14https://guandi1995.github.io/One-Layer-of-a-Convolutional-Networks/
15https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/1*DfMRHwxY1gyyDmrIAd-gjQ.png
Page 11 of 50
==PAGE:13==
23.01.2022
• softmax
The softmax activation is typically used at the output layer of a model to convert scores x of
given classes into probabilities p by calculating
pi =
exj
PI
i=1 exi
• sigmoid
In contrast to piece-wise functions, some model tasks seem to prefer smooth activations. The
most commonly used smooth activation function is the sigmoid (σ) activation which maps all
inputs to the interval between 0 and 1:
σ(x) =
1
1 + e−x
• swish
With the use of automated searching techniques, novel and promising activation functions
are being discovered[24]. A particularly well-performing activation function for CNNs is the
swish activation.
It extends the sigmoid activation with a linear part and a trainable or
constant parameter β so that large negative values approach 0 and positive values approach
linear growth, seemingly becoming a mix of the ReLU and sigmoid activations with a smooth
transition as illustrated in Figure 8:
swish(x) = x · σ(βx)
• h-swish
The swish activation is producing better results for deep neural networks than conventional
alternatives, but it is expensive to compute. Therefore, the architects of MobileNet used the
h-swish activation instead which mimicks the swish behaviour. It is, however, a piece-wise
function well suited for fixed-point inference on resource-constrained embedded devices[23]. It
is defined as
h-swish(x) = xReLU6(x + 3)
6
where
ReLU6(x) = min(max(x, 0), 6)
Figure 8 illustrates the minor differences between swish and h-swish.
Figure 8: Illustration of the minor differences between smooth and piece-wise activation functions16
16https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-oO-wz03INlk/XcxKwjQcMqI/AAAAAAAAE8U/UusxsMWQsKcId_
pSzZV6v5cdPIAbIl31gCEwYBhgL/s1600/image7.png
Page 12 of 50
==PAGE:14==
23.01.2022
Head and Backbone
The backbone of a model describes its underlying architecture. It is mainly used for feature enhance-
ment and extraction and is not limited to a single type of application. For example, the mobilenetv3
backbone [23] is a sequence of many layers and activations and it can be used for both image clas-
sification, object detection, and semantic segmentation because the backbone architecture has been
designed for computer vision tasks in general. However, to achieve different tasks, a model back-
bone always needs a task-specific head and a training set that mirrors the desired functionality of the
model. Hence, the particular model one could use for e.g. object detection is called ssd-mobilenetv3
because it has the mobilenetv3 backbone and a single-shot detector (SSD) head.
Compression
• Linear Quantization
CNNs are large models with millions of parameters. This creates high computational and stor-
age complexity which results in a need for model compression to deploy them on embedded
platforms. Model architects work on lean architectures to reduce the number of parameters
and operations per inference[23], but there are other optimizations that need be explored.
One of them is linear quantization where 16 or 32 bit floating point models are reduced to
low-bit fixed point representations via linear mapping. This method allows to greatly reduce
the model size and the complexity of each operation. Obviously, the number space of for ex-
ample 8 bit unsigned integers is much smaller than that of 32 bit floating point numbers, and
compressing the model in the smaller representation causes a huge loss of information, but it
has been shown that models can be surprisingly robust towards this type of compression and
maintain decent accuracy[5]. However, even smaller representations of 4 bits or less cause the
performance to deteriorate significantly and do not seem to be feasible with this technique.
One way to improve the performance of models compressed with linear quantization is to map
the the parameters of each layer into their own fixed-point space rather than mapping all
parameters into a global space. This has the advantage that all layers will use the full fixed-
point range regardless of whether their weights are relatively large or small, thus minimizing
information loss. This requires accurate scaling of each layer and is not entirely trivial. During
quantization, a representative set of input data is needed to estimate the range of activations
in each layer. Then, a small compression multiplier M is determined to describe the map-
ping into the new number space[25]. During inference, the activations of each layer i have to
be divided by their corresponding compression multiplier Mi. Convolutional layers have one
compression multiplier for every filter. Pooling layers are not quantized since they do not have
any trainable parameters.
To improve model performance even further, so-called quantization-aware training is used[25].
Most training algorithms for neural networks work best with floating point numbers of high
precision because they allow for small incremental changes in the weights and biases, leading
to more precise results. This makes it difficult to simply train the model in the target bit
width. However, the quantization process causes loss of information which reduces the accu-
racy. Therefore, quantization-aware training uses floating point numbers to train the model
but maps the weights, biases, and activations to the range of the target number space during
the feed-forward process of the training algorithm. This provides the model optimizer with
feedback about the future quantization losses and allows it to minimize them.
Page 13 of 50
==PAGE:15==
23.01.2022
• Non-Linear Quantization
In contrast to linear quantization, non-linear quantization achieves compression to 4-bit weights
and operations without accuracy loss[5] and to 2-bits with minimal losses. The techniques dif-
fer in that instead of assigning the closest fixed point representation to any floating point
number, the weights are clustered and assigned to values in lookup tables before training the
neural network.
In [26], this is achieved by low-cost hash functions that randomly assign
weights to a set of 2n hash buckets where n is the desired compressed bit width. The net-
work is then trained and fine-tuned on the hashed values rather than the floating point weights.
• Other Compression Techniques
Apart from quantization, commonly used compression techniques are singular value decompo-
sition (SVD) and pruning. During SVD, weight matrices of large layers are replaced by the
product of two smaller matrices which approximate the original matrix’ with minimal informa-
tion loss[5]. Pruning is about removing weights which do not affect the outcome of the model
prediction. Typically, weights with small absolute values are set equal to 0 and thus ignored
during inference[5].
2.3
Hardware
Platforms
• GPU
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) are highly parallel processors that were originally developed
around computationally demanding graphics pipelines that CPUs were not fit for.
Their
parallelizability also makes them well suited for matrix calculations in which they provide
orders of magnitude of performance gains compared to single-core CPUs. This makes them
attractive candidates as hardware platforms for machine learning tasks in general and (deep)
neural network inference in particular[27].
• ASIC/TPU
Application specific integrated circuits (ASICs) are chips that are developed to serve a partic-
ular purpose rather than general-purpose CPUs and, to some extent, GPUs. The developer
has full control over the placement of logic resources and routing of wires and therefore has the
ability to achieve the best possible performance in terms of chip area which largely determines
cost, speed, and efficiency. However, this full customizability comes at a cost. First, the type
of low-level description that is required to design an ASIC is very time consuming and results
in high development costs. Second, the lack of standard components means that they need
to be especially edged in chip foundries which makes their production more expensive so that
only highly budgeted companies and projects can support the cost of using ASIC[28].
In 2015, Google developed their own ASIC called a Tensor Processing Unit (TPU) for their data
centers to provide their machine-learning based cloud solutions to billions of users and have
since been improving on its design. Similar to GPUs, TPUs also excel at matrix operations
with 256² multiply-accumulators for int8 operands in the first generation TPU, high-bandwidth
DRAM, and large on-chip memory. While it remains difficult to compare GPUs with TPUs
due to a diverse range of software stacks for GPUs and different kinds of workloads and models,
TPUs seem to outperform GPUs significantly in terms of energy efficiency and speed for DNN
inference[29, 4]. With the Coral product line, Google are trying to bring TPUs from their data
centers to the edge.
Page 14 of 50
==PAGE:16==
23.01.2022
• FPGA
In contrast to ASIC, field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) are reprogrammable hardware
platforms made of standard components that can be bought off the shelf. They consist of a
large matrix of configurable logic blocks and interconnects that allow the FPGA to assume a
behaviour defined by a designer in a hardware description language with the help of synthesis
tools such as Quartus. They can facilitate hardware acceleration of particular processes without
the large development overhead of ASICs, but generally perform worse than fully customized
chips[8, 28]. Most research on hardware accelerated neural network inference uses FPGAs as
hardware platforms[5], as does this project.
FPGA Resources
• Logic Elements
The standard building blocks of FPGAs are often referred to as logic blocks or logic elements
(LEs). They are the resources that are programmed and interconnected to implement a given
circuit, but their implementation differs from vendor to vendor. What they all have in common,
though, is that they consist of look-up tables, flip-flops, and some additional arithmetic and
carry circuitry.
Figure 9: Simplified schematics of an Altera Cylcone LE17
• Lookup Tables
Lookup Tables (LUTs) are used to implement combinational logic in FPGAs. They are de-
fined by a number of inputs (usually 3 to 6) that are mapped to a single output via a truth
table. With this simple concept and combining multiple LUTs, more advanced logic can be
implemented.
• Registers / Flip-Flops
Flip-flops (FFs) are the basic binary storage elements in digital systems. They retain infor-
mation and are elementary building blocks to any digital circuit. The most simple type is a
16https://fpgasoftware.intel.com/?edition=lite
17http://ee.sharif.edu/~asic/Docs/fpga-logic-cells_V4_V5.pdf
Page 15 of 50
==PAGE:17==
23.01.2022
set-reset (SR) flip-flop that consists of two cross-coupled NOR gates that store a single bit[30].
Other types include the JK and the D flip-flop. Most flip-flops are clock-sensitive, meaning
that they sample the input data on the rising edge of a shared clock signal and retain it un-
til the next rising edge. Multiple flip-flops can be combined to form registers that store an
arbitrary number of bits.
Figure 10: Schematics of an SR flip-flop[30]
• BRAM
Block Random Acces Memory (BRAM) are distinct on-chip memory resources that are orga-
nized in blocks (hence the name) of certain width and depth. They are the most expensive
memory resource and have the smallest storage capacity, but they can be accessed in a single
clock-cycle which makes them attractive for storing larger amounts of data that are accessed
frequently.
• SRAM
Static RAM (SRAM) also uses transistors to store information, but it is a separate off-chip
component. The access time is usually a few dozen clock cycles and its size is limited to a few
MB. SRAM is mostly used for caches in systems that require a lot of data transfer.
• Embedded Multipliers
Multiplications are normally very time-consuming operations that require many LUTs to be
realized. Therefore, many FPGAs have dedicated embedded multipliers that provide fast and
relatively inexpensive multiplication capabilities.
RTL Hardware Design
RTL stands for Register Transfer Level and denotes an abstraction level of the hardware description
that defines a digital system. Modern digital systems often have hundreds of millions of transistors
and logic gates so that it becomes unfeasible for humans to design a large circuit in full detail.
Instead, we have developed tools that enable us to abstract away the low level details and focus
more on the higher level behaviour of the design. At RTL, the designer can use functional units
such as adders as well as registers and multiplexers. Moreover, they have access to a common clock
signal in all components that makes RTL timing analysis feasible. Not only does this increase the
designer’s productivity due to the lack of low-level detail design but it also allows synthesis tools that
convert the RTL description into an actual circuit to automatically optimize the implementation at
a lower level[28].
Page 16 of 50
==PAGE:18==
23.01.2022
Timing Analysis
An important factor in determining the speed of a sequential circuit is its maximum operating
frequency Fmax. It describes the highest clock rate at which the circuit can safely operate and
it is the designer’s responsibility to ensure that no timing constraints are violated.
The timing
constraints of sequential digital circuits arise from propagation delays in the combinational logic
between flip-flops (TCL) and requirements that are associated with the flip-flops themselves. These
requirements are provided by the flip-flop manufacturer and must be fulfilled in order to guarantee
correct behaviour. They include
1. the setup time Tsetup which is the time interval during which the input must be stable before
a rising clock edge and
2. the hold time Thold which is the time interval during which the input must be stable after a
rising clock edge
Furthermore, flip-flop manufacturers provide the clock-to-q delay (Tcq) that describes how long it
takes for a flip-flop to internally forward an input signal after sampling to its output signal. Fmax is
determined by the setup time constraint. It is the inverse of the minimal clock period TCLK which
has to satisfy the following inequality to avoid setup time violations[28]:
TCLK ≥Tcq + TCL,max + Tsetup
(5)
The hold time constraint has no direct effect on Fmax but must still be fulfilled to ensure correct
behaviour of the circuit:
Thold < Tcq + TCL,min
(6)
Note that Tcq, Tsetup, and Thold are intrinsic properties of the flip-flop. The designer only has
control over TCLK and TCL to satisfy the timing constraints. They must hold for every flip-flop in
the circuit.
Figure 11: Setup and hold time intervals with respect to the rising edge of the clock signal[28]
Page 17 of 50
==PAGE:19==
23.01.2022
2.4
PATMOS
General
PATMOS is a time-predictable very long instruction word (VLIW) processor that has been designed
for the use in real-time systems and allows for worst-case execution time (WCET) analysis[10].
Especially in safety-critical real-time systems, it is of utmost importance to be able to deliver guar-
antees on when computations finish so that correct system behaviour can be ensured under all
circumstances. It is a Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC) with a 5-stage, dual issue pipeline
that is statically scheduled to simplify worst-case performance analysis. Its caches are specifically
designed to serve the same purpose. It comes with a suite of tools that are further described in the
official handbook[31] and on the Github repository where contributions to this open-source project
are welcome18.
Ethernet Interface
Patmos’ Ethernet interface[11] is currently the only channel that can be used to communicate with
the processor from the outside world apart from a minimal RS-232 serial port. It provides the nec-
essary hardware to connect the OpenCores EthMac Ethernet controller to Patmos and additionally
has a software stack the supports the protocols EthMAC, IPv4, ARP, ICMP, and UDP. Hence, it
can be used for networking and high-speed data transfer of up to 100 Mbit/s.
Coprocessor Interface
As of late, there exists a new coprocessor interface for Patmos[12] that encourages the development
of dedicated hardware implementations of time-consuming algorithms in the ecosystem. It can be
used with inline assembly in c to send function codes, address and value registers from Patmos to
the coprocessor in order to transfer data and commands.
18https://github.com/t-crest/patmos
Page 18 of 50
==PAGE:20==
23.01.2022
3
Related Work
The explosion in number of both academic and industrial machine-learning applications has created
a very active research community around specialized hardware for neural network inference. There is
much diverse related work covering all aspects from training over compression to efficient hardware
implementations, and a good starting point for a deep dive into the topic are the recommendable
survey papers Guo et al. from 2017[5] and Deng et al. from 2020[32]. Both agree that the end
of Moore’s law and the slowing progress in GPU processors require specialized systems to ensure
advancements in the field of efficient neural network inference. While Guo et al. put emphasis on
the FPGA implementation of deep neural networks, Deng et al. are more focused on the algorithms
that are used to compress neural networks and reduce their computational complexity and memory
requirements.
Apart from the survey papers, much of the related academic work can be grouped into three
categories:
1. lean neural network architectures
2. compression
3. practical examples
The need for efficient implementations of neural network inference arises from their complex
architectures that require millions or even billions of multiply-accumulate operations. Therefore, a
logical first step in the pursuit of reduced computational complexity is lean model architectures that
maintain a high level of accuracy with significantly smaller numbers of parameters and calculations.
The search for these architectures has become its own academic field called Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) where machine learning methods and heuristics are applied to automatically find
promising network designs[33].
This method has been used to great effect by the developers of
MobileNetV3[23] which is a novel model architecture that is close to achieving state-of-the-art accu-
racy on ImageNet (75.2%) while being both one of the leanest and fastest models with high accuracy.
Other notably efficient DNN architectures are the SqueezeNet[34] and ShuffleNet[35] projects.
Even though these architectures are already targeting mobile and edge devices, much research
is being done to further optimize and compress even lean models.
One of the most important
techniques is quantization where floating point models are modified to only use integer arithmetic
during inference.
Kulkarni et al.[36] propose a quantization-friendly version of MobileNet (QF-
MobileNet) that reduces the latency of the original MobileNetV3 floating point model by 33%
with minimal accuracy losses after being converted to an integer-only inference model. Jacob et
al.[25] developed the linear quantization algorithms and the quantization-aware training method
that are used by the popular machine-learning framework Tensorflow. Chen et al.[26] try a different
compression method that uses look-up tables and hash functions during training to achieve non-
linear quantization with slightly better results. Qin et al.[37] take quantization a step further and
investigate the progress made on binary neural networks.
More relevant work is being done on compression techniques that do not rely on reducing operand
bit width. Han et al.[38] use network sparsification through pruning in combination with quantization
and Huffman coding to reduce the size of VGG-16 by 98%.
Instead of pruning, Qiu et al.[39]
used a model that was compressed with singular value decomposition to achieve state-of-the-art
performance in terms of speed.
The practical academic examples range from a SqueezeNet FPGA implementation by Abd El-
Maksoud et al.[40] to much simpler examples with custom network implementations for the MNIST
dataset[6].
Page 19 of 50
==PAGE:21==
23.01.2022
A look at the commercial neural network hardware accelerator landscape is also worth a look.
Industry heavyweights such as Intel19 and Google20 have developed custom chips specifically designed
for efficient neural network inference. NVIDIA21 and Xilinx22 take a different approach and establish
frameworks to accelerate the development of specialized hardware. The Apache foundation follows
the same path with their open-source framework called TVM-VTA (Versatile Tensor Accelerator23).
It is save to say that both academic and commercial interest in the topic is at an all-time high and
one might wonder how this project can contribute anything new. The fact that we adopt a practical
approach that results in a standalone system which can easily interface to many hosts separates this
work from much of the academic papers that have been produced over the past few years. Designing
the accelerator as a coprocessor to Patmos is another novelty that opens the prospect of future
integration into real-time systems.
19https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/neural-compute-stick/overview.html
20https://coral.ai/products/
21http://nvdla.org/
22https://xilinx.github.io/finn/
23https://tvm.apache.org/
Page 20 of 50
==PAGE:22==
23.01.2022
4
Design
4.1
Use Case and Scope
The attentive reader will remember that the title of this work is ”A Practical Hardware Accelerator
for Deep Neural Networks” which does not imply any particular use case. It is, however, very useful
to have a concrete network and task to work with and optimize for, and there is none better suited
than computer vision. It is already used in a wide range of applications and is intuitively understood
without domain-specific knowledge. While object detection is actually more practical in many cases
than simple image classification (especially in real-time systems), it requires much more complicated
model heads but has the same model backbone. Therefore, image classification can be seen as a
logical first step towards more complex computer vision tasks.
#
Type
Shape
Activation
Output Shape
# Nodes
# Parameters
0
Input
32x32x3
32x32x3
3072
3096
1
CONV
3x3x3x16
ReLU
30x30x16
14400
448
2
POOL
2x2
15x15x16
3600
3
CONV
16x3x3x16
ReLU
13x13x16
2704
2320
4
POOL
2x2
6x6x16
576
5
Flatten
576
576
6
FC
576x64
ReLU
64
64
36928
7
FC
64x12
12
12
780
Table 1: Model architecture
All layers are implemented from the ground up in a modular fashion making it feasible to develop
and modify them individually and have an iterative design approach. There exist plenty of commonly
used layers that are supported by popular frameworks24, but this project focuses on the most
important ones that are needed to implement a convolutional neural network, namely convolutional
layers, pooling layers, and fully connected layers. Current state-of-the-art models use many more
advanced layer types such as depth-wise convolutional layers and squeeze-and-exite blocks as well
as features such as residual connections[23, 41] which can not be in the scope for this project.
After a certain number of layers, more advanced layer types become necessary to deliver accurate
classification results. Therefore, the model architecture in this project will be kept fairly shallow
and consist of two CONV-POOL blocks followed by two FC layers as summarized in Table 1. This
showcases all layer implementations and is good enough to run simple image classification on the
Cifar10 dataset.
24https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf/keras/layers
Page 21 of 50
==PAGE:23==
23.01.2022
Figure 12: Some example images of from the Cifar10 dataset25
4.2
Design Goals
The deep neural network hardware accelerator is designed to provide efficient machine-learning in-
ference and image analysis in embedded systems. Typical evaluation parameters revolve around
accuracy/precision, throughput, latency, and energy efficiency[5]. The goal of this project is to de-
sign an FPGA implementation whose performance is within the same order of magnitude as the
existing commercial GPU/TPU solutions for such environments and that can be built upon. Since
the FPGA will be configured to run inference of one particular model, it has the fundamental disad-
vantage of not being able to be used for any task like a generic GPU or TPU would be. Therefore,
there has to be the prospect of performing significantly better in some metrics than competitive
products.
Model Accuracy
As discussed in Section 2.1, we will use the top-1 accuracy on the Cifar10 dataset to evaluate the
model accuracy. The absolute model accuracy is not of particular interest because the same model
will be tested on both the accelerator and the competitors. More significant is the loss in accuracy
between the model in floating point format and the quantized model (compare Section 2.2). A high
loss in accuracy would render the entire system useless and is therefore unacceptable. Hence, is shall
be limited to no more than 2%.
Throughput
The throughput describes how many many images can be classified per time interval and is measured
in inferences per second (IPS). While some accelerator implementations promise speed-ups by an
order of magnitude[5], the goal in this project is to be in the same order of magnitude as the TPU
dongle that the accelerator is being compared to.
25https://3qeqpr26caki16dnhd19sv6by6v-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/
Plot-of-a-Subset-of-Images-from-the-CIFAR-10-Dataset.png
Page 22 of 50
==PAGE:24==
23.01.2022
Latency
In this context, latency is the time between the host requesting a classification of a particular image
or frame and the accelerator delivering the inference results. This time window includes transmission
of input and output data. Similarly to the throughput, the latency depends on the model that is
being run. A small model results in a short latency, and a large model results in a long latency.
Hence, the latency is expected to be no more than 10 times that of the products that it is being
compared to given that all devices run the same model.
Energy Efficiency
Due to the resource-constrained nature of embedded devices, energy efficiency can be key and deter-
mine battery lifetime etc. This is also the biggest potential advantage for specialized hardware[5].
It is measured in [J/inference] and the goal is to be on par in terms of energy consumption per
inference on the accelerator compared to the same model being run on Google Coral products.
Metric
Target Value
∆acctop1 on Cifar10
≤2%
Throughput
≥0.1c∗
Latency
≤10c∗
Energy Efficiency
≤c∗
Table 2: Summary of quantifiable design goals.
c* denotes the corresponding average value of
competitive products that is experimentally confirmed in Section 6.
Some of these design goals are inherently conflicting. More aggressive compression techniques
will increase the throughput and decrease the latency, but they also result in a lower model accuracy.
Therefore, part of the design and implementation is the choice of the best compromise to satisfy
all goals. Similarly, reducing the number of clock cycles that are needed for each inference have
the potential to increase the throughput and decrease latency, but it might also require a slower
operating frequency which could nullify the gains due to timing constraints (see Section 2.3).
4.3
Requirements
Aside from the design goals, there are also requirements that shape this project. Most notably, the
hardware platform imposes hard requirements due to resource constraints. The entire system must
not use more logic elements, flip flops, embedded multipliers, and SRAM than available. Another
limitation stems from Patmos which is designed to operate at 80MHz.
The maximal operating
frequency should match that figure.
Constraint
Value
# LEs
≤114480
# FFs
≤3888 ∗210
# Embedded Multipliers
≤266
max SRAM
≤2 MB
Fmax
≥80 MHz
Table 3: Summary of design requirements
Page 23 of 50
==PAGE:25==
23.01.2022
4.4
System Architecture
With the design goals and requirements in place, it is time to address the actual design of the system
and in particular its high-level architecture. As mentioned in the introduction, the system is intent on
enabling embedded systems to run machine learning model in inference. It is a standalone device that
can provide this service to any host it connects to via a well-defined interface and uses the Patmos
processor to handle data transfer between the host and the accelerator. These three conceptual
components (the host, the accelerator, and the Patmos processor) have to be distinguished from
physical components because both Patmos and the accelerator will be programmed on the FPGA.
Another important on-chip entity is the BRAM which the accelerator communicates with. Both
Patmos and the accelerator access the off-chip SRAM via a shared SRAM controller. Figure 13
provides an overview of these important system components. Let us investigate each one of them
and determine their responsibilities.
Figure 13: A high-level view of the system architecture
Host
The embedded system in which the accelerator is meant to provide image classification is abstracted
as the host. It can assume any shape and function so long as it complies with the communication
interface required by Patmos. The inference is regarded as a service that the host can request at
any point in time unless the accelerator is busy. Therefore, it is the host’s responsibility to acquire
images and resize them if needed. All parties need to agree on the input image size because it
influences both the communication flow and the model architecture. The host can request an image
or a frame of a video feed to be classified by simply sending it to Patmos and waiting for a response.
This design poses few restrictions on the host and will therefore be quite versatile.
Patmos
During runtime, Patmos is the crucial communication link between the host and the accelerator. It
receives the images from the host, passes them on to the accelerator, listens for inference results,
and sends them back to the host. This way, the accelerator never has to directly communicate with
the host which would have complicated the hardware development. However, Patmos has more
responsibilities than simply facilitating the communication. It acts as a controller to the accelerator
which will not do anything unless it is told so by the processor. This setup in combination with
Page 24 of 50
==PAGE:26==
23.01.2022
Patmos’ C compiler allows control loops, test scripts, etc. to be written in C. This is especially
useful to load the required model parameters into SRAM, but more on this in Section 4.6 and 5.3.
Accelerator
The accelerator is the entity that implements the convolutional neural network in hardware.
It
consists of a control state machine and different layer components, each one of them implementing
a single neural network layer type as described in Section 2.2. Further, it reads network parameters
from SRAM and writes and reads intermediate values to and from BRAM for fast access.
As
mentioned previously, it remains in its idle state unless the Patmos processor requests an action.
Other than running image classification, it has no responsibilities.
4.5
System Runtime Behaviour
Figure 14 describes how the system will behave when it runs without encountering communication
issues. After startup, Patmos configures the accelerator and tells it where to find the model param-
eters in SRAM. This only needs to be executed once and after that the accelerator is ready to run
repeated image classification. This is a straight-forward process during which Patmos forwards an
image that it has received from the host to the accelerator. Then, it sends another function call
asking the accelerator to start the inference. While the inference is running, Patmos repeatedly
polls the accelerator whether the result is ready. Once the accelerator is done, Patmos can read the
result and return it to the host which has been waiting for a response. After that, the process can
be repeated when the host initiates it by sending another image.
Page 25 of 50
==PAGE:27==
23.01.2022
Figure 14: Full nominal behavioural flow of the system
Page 26 of 50
==PAGE:28==
23.01.2022
4.6
From Model Architecture to Hardware Accelerator
Figure 15: Model preparation pipeline.
Inputs/Out-
puts are blue and preparation steps are orange.
The development of a hardware accelera-
tor for neural networks is not solely about
designing hardware.
In addition to the
hardware description, a model preparation
pipeline is needed. Given a model architec-
ture like the one defined in Section 4.1 and
a data set like Cifar10, one must find a way
to train the model, compress it, extract
the network parameters, and load them
into the memory of the accelerator before
any inference can be run.
As mentioned
previously, using Patmos’ C compiler is a
straight forward way to load the network
parameters into SRAM, so the output of
the model preparation pipeline should be C
arrays containing all relevant information.
Storing these arrays in a header file called
parameters.h allows it to be imported by
Patmos’ control loop script which can then
pass the relevant memory pointers to the
accelerator after being programmed on the
FPGA.
The model preparation pipeline is writ-
ten in Python and makes use of the high-
level machine learning framework Tensor-
flow.
Page 27 of 50
==PAGE:29==
23.01.2022
5
Implementation
5.1
Communication
Figure 16: The nominal system communication for a single inference
Figure 16 shows which information flow is needed to facilitate a single inference. There are only two
communication interfaces needed to facilitate this flow: One between Patmos and the accelerator
and another between Patmos and the host.
As for the communication between Patmos and the accelerator, there were two options. The
accelerator could either be regarded as an IO device or as a coprocessor. For IO devices, the Patmos
handbook[31] recommends the OCPcore protocol which is a simple protocol and straightforward
to use. However, using the IO device paradigm for the accelerator has the downside that there is
no standard arbitration for access to off-chip resources such as SRAM. This is precisely what the
Patmos coprocessor interface provides[12] along with read, write, and custom instructions that
Patmos can send to the coprocessor. Hence, regarding the accelerator as a coprocessor rather than
an IO device to Patmos is more natural and suitable to the task. We use write instructions to pass
config and image data to the accelerator (the config data transfer is not shown in Figure 16 since it
only happens once on startup) and send run commands to initiate inference after an image has been
loaded. When the inference has been initiated, read instructions are sent to query the accelerator’s
state. Patmos repeats this poll until the accelerator’s state reads idle and the result can be fetched
with another read instruction. There has been no need to implement any custom instructions for
this interface.
The original vision of this project was to create a USB dongle like the Google Coral EdgeTPU
that could be used on any host with a USB connection. However, there were two issues with this.
The first one is that the hardware on the Altera DE2-115 development board only supports USB2.0
at full speed which has a bandwidth of 12 Mbps and could become a bottleneck when running
inference on larger images. Simple 256x256 RBG images would require
256 · 256 · 3 · 8bit = 1.57 · 106bit
to be transferred for a single inference and limit the maximum achievable throughput to less
than eight inferences per second. The other, more significant issue is that the USB protocol is fairly
Page 28 of 50
==PAGE:30==
23.01.2022
complex and a working stack for the Patmos processor does not exist. Therefore, the development of
a USB interface would have required most of the available project time and would have diverted the
focus away from the accelerator development. The most suitable available alternative is a 100Mbps
Ethernet connection supporting UDP[11] which is the protocol used for all communication between
Patmos and the host.
When the host sends an image to Patmos, it does so in batches.
The
image is split into small 1kB packets and sent to Patmos sequentially. This way, future support
for larger images is already ensured. Patmos forwards each data batch to the accelerator. Since
we have observed packet loss over the UDP connection, the host waits for a simple ACK message
from Patmos before sending the next batch. If no ACK arrives before a timeout, the host can retry
to send the package. If it fails repeatedly, the client script for the host exits with a failure. This
is only a rudimentary fix to support a working demo and is by no means intended to be a safe
and reliable communication handshake protocol on top of UDP. In the future and with the right
hardware support, the goal remains to use a USB interface instead. Figure 17 details the Ethernet
communication between the host and Patmos.
Figure 17: Detailed system communication for a single inference
Page 29 of 50
==PAGE:31==
23.01.2022
5.2
Memory Management
The correct use of the available memory resources is fundamental for efficient hardware acceleration
of neural networks. On-chip BRAM has the shortest access time but is too small to accommodate all
network parameters and intermediate results. SRAM takes longer to access but is also significantly
larger with 2MB compared to the 3888 Kbit embedded memory. Fortunately, the model that is
being worked with fits into SRAM so that there is no need to address the even slower SDRAM. The
question is: How can we best split the responsibilities between SRAM and BRAM?
The network parameters (weights, biases, and compression factors) are extracted from the model
offline and written to large C arrays as elaborated in Section 5.3. Patmos’ C compiler automatically
assigns them memory space in the SRAM during the program initialization. There is no need to
transfer them to BRAM because all network parameters are only loaded once per inference while
intermediate results are accessed much more frequently. These network parameters are not mutated
and only read by the accelerator. In contrast to that stands an image array of 8-bit RGB values
which is written to when Patmos receives a new image from the host before the data is transferred
to the accelerator. Since the accelerator must know where to find the network parameters, Patmos
sends the memory pointers of all network resources to the accelerator during a few config cycles
after boot. The weights are stored as 8-bit signed integers and the biases and compression factors
are stored as 32-bit signed integers. SRAM can be accessed via the OCPBurst protocol[31] which
returns 4 consecutive words given a single read address. This means that a single burst access returns
16 weights or 4 biases or compression factors. In the case that Patmos and the accelerator try to
access the SRAM simultaneously, the coprocessor protocol’s SRAM arbiter will prevent conflicts.
Perhaps more interestingly, the BRAM contains the network activations and intermediate results
that are read and written many times, thus minimizing delays due to slow accesses of off-chip
resources. When Patmos passes image data to the accelerator, it is treated like input activations to
the first layer and directly written to BRAM. All activations are padded to 32 bit signed integers,
even though the image pixels and requantized activations fit in the 8-bit range. This has to do with
the fact that all intermediate results must be stored in larger bit widths to avoid overflows. As of
now, there is only a single BRAM entity to make address management easier. This introduces a
bottleneck because it only allows for a single value to be read to and written from BRAM per clock
cycle. Adding BRAM parallelism will be an important step in the future to improve performance.
An interesting tweak to the current implementation is that the BRAM is already conceptually
split into two address spaces. At any point in time, to calculate the current layer, we need the
activations from the previous layer as input and the activations of the current layer as output. In
this regard, there is no difference between the different layer types. Once we progress to the next
layer, the former input activations are flushed with zeros and the output activations become the
input activations of the next layer. So, all layers with an even index use the first half of the BRAM
address space as input and the second half as output, and the odd layers act inversely. Figure 18
illustrates this. The size of the required on-chip memory is hence determined by the maximum
number of nodes in two consecutive layers. However, for simplicity, the layer with the most nodes
solely defines the size of the BRAM by the following formula:
N = number of nodes in the largest layer
M = size of the BRAM resource
M = 2⌈log2N⌉+1
In this case where N = 14400 according to the network architecture description in Section 4.1 we get
a BRAM component with 215 addresses and a bit width of 32, resulting in a total size of 1024Kbit
and well short of the available 3888Kbit.
Page 30 of 50
==PAGE:32==
23.01.2022
Figure 18: The BRAM address space segmentation for even and odd layers with the example of
layer 0 and 1
5.3
Network Preparation
5.3.1
Network Training
The implementation of the network training is a straight forward affair with the help of Tensorflow
and Python. It has classes to easily define the desired model architecture and a data loader for most
standard data sets including Cifar10. We use the adam optimizer with a sparse categorical cross
entropy loss function that is well suited for multi-label image classification. 5 epochs suffice to train
the network on this relatively small dataset as the validation accuracy begins to stagnate and we
want to avoid overfitting. The result of the training is a Tensorflow floating point model object that
is ready to be quantized.
5.3.2
Network Quantization
To convert the newly trained floating point model to one that uses integer arithmentic, we use linear
quantization to convert the weights to 8-bit signed integers and the biases to 32-bit signed integers.
This is a good compromise between accuracy and compression. It factually achieves an asymptotic
compression rate of 4 without any notable accuracy losses since weights make up more than 99% of
the models’ parameters and they are cut to a quarter of their bit width. While it was not needed
for this particular model, quantization-aware training was conducted before the quantization. This
will ensure that future more advanced models can be quantized with lower accuracy losses. For the
hardware implementation one has to be aware that the chosen quantization algorithm compresses
every layer individually to the desired bit width to make sure that the entire available number space
is used. As a consequence, the compression factors of all layers have to be extracted after training and
the layer activations have to be divided by their corresponding compression factor during inference
to be correctly scaled. We urgently want to avoid divisions during runtime and therefore use the
approximation technique proposed by Jacob et al[25]. Given a floating point compression factor M,
we can approximate it to a sufficient degree of accuracy with the following equation:
M ≈2−32M0
(7)
Page 31 of 50
==PAGE:33==
23.01.2022
where M0 is a 32-bit unsigned integer. During runtime, we approximate a scaled activation x with
a multiplication of M0 and a 32-bit shift:
xscaled = x · M0 >> 32
(8)
5.3.3
Parameter Extraction
A more challenging task than the training and quantization is the parameter extraction. This is
the process where the tensorflow integer model that is obtained after quantization is processed into
C arrays, and there are a few factors that prevent this process from being trivial.
First of all,
there is no standard way to do this. A deep dive into the TF objects reveals where the relevant
parameters are stored, but this is not documented and poorly accessible. Further, it is important
that the parameters are extracted in the correct order, or else the network is useless. Since there
is no documentation, figuring out how TF stores the weights of convolutional layers with three
dimensions required some trial and error but was eventually successful. Lastly, there is an issue
with the weights of CONV layers that is caused by the weight compression in SRAM. Loading them
into the accelerator with OCPBurst returns four words of four bytes each, but since four weights
are compressed in a single address space, there is an issue when trying to load 3x3 kernels. The
first three weights would be the first three bytes of the first word, but then things would get messy.
Figure 19 illustrates that the next 3x3 kernel layer’s first weight would be in the middle of a word
which would make addressing near impossible. Therefore, during the parameter extraction we pad
the words with zeros to maintain weight address alignment. This increases the required storage
space of convolutional layers by nearly 25% but makes the layer implementation much easier. With
these issues solved, the last step was to parse the generated arrays into valid C syntax.
To facilitate the exploration of different model architectures, the parameter extraction is fully
automated which is further elaborated in Section 5.6.
Figure 19: The difference in weight alignment between non-padded (left) and padded weight extrac-
tion of 3x3 kernels
Page 32 of 50
==PAGE:34==
23.01.2022
5.4
Network Hardware Implementation
5.4.1
Top Entity
Figure 20: The IO interface of all layer compo-
nents
Let us now examine the implementation of the
actual accelerator. The entire project was an it-
erative development process where the first pro-
totype was a simplistic and naive implementa-
tion of a fully connected layer. This was then
used to build upon and add and improve layers
which made it desirable to have isolated layer
components that could be edited individually
without interfering with the others. This mod-
ular approach stands in contrast to the more
monolithic designs of some of the work men-
tioned in Section 3 but accelerated the progress
made during this project.
All different layer types in this project (FC,
CONV, POOL) have a corresponding compo-
nent which share a common interface with
BRAM and SRAM access wires, config wires,
as well as command and status wires as shown
in Figure 20. The layer components calculate a
single layer in the network, and the accelerator
top entity controls them with a simple state ma-
chine and the contents of the configuration reg-
isters which it gets from Patmos. That means
that once Patmos has forwarded an image to the accelerator and sends a RUN command, the top
entity checks the first layer’s type in the configuration registers and then in turn sends a new RUN
command to the corresponding layer component to invoke the calculation. While the layer com-
ponent is busy calculating, the top entity grants it the necessary access to the BRAM and SRAM
controllers and queries the calculation status. Once done, the top entity allows the layer component
to return into its idle state and it invokes the next layer. When all layers have been calculated, the
accelerator simply extracts the largest node from the output layer and returns its index to Patmos.
Figure 21 shows a simplified sketch of the accelerator’s internal components and how they connect
to shared resources.
Page 33 of 50
==PAGE:35==
23.01.2022
Figure 21: The accelerator’s internal architecture (simplified)
5.4.2
Fully Connected Layers
Figure 22: FC layer state machine
The fully connected layer component is sim-
ple compared to the convolutional one. It has
a single requantization factor and one bias at-
tached per output. The computation of a fully
connected layer is split into the MAC opera-
tions and the bias add operations. After setup
and initial parameter loading, the component
loads the first value from the input layer.
Then, it proceeds to load 16 weights with one
SRAM burst access and subsequently the 16
corresponding output nodes since they con-
tain the accumulators. It adds the products
of input node and weights to the right out-
put nodes and repeats this calculation until
all output nodes have been processed. Then,
the next input value is loaded and the com-
putation is repeated.
When done with the
MAC operations for all inputs and outputs,
the component starts adding the correspond-
ing biases to all accumulated outputs, requan-
tizes them, and applies the ReLU activation
function before writing them back to memory.
After the last bias is added to its accumulator
and written, the layer is fully computed and
the FC component awaits acknowledgement
from the top level entity before returning to
its idle state.
Page 34 of 50
==PAGE:36==
23.01.2022
5.4.3
Convolutional Layers
Figure 23: CONV layer state machine
Convolutional layers are calculated one filter at a time. This ordering is based on the fact that the
filter weights and biases are located in the off-chip SRAM, so it is desirable to minimize the number
of read operations. With this setup, each convolutional layer parameter is only read exactly once.
When the top entity requests the calculation of a convolutional layer, the component starts with
an initial setup state followed by loading the requantization factors of all filters from SRAM into the
corresponding register array. Next, it loads the bias of the first filter. Filters are three-dimensional
matrices that match the number of input convolutions in size, but in order to simplify implementa-
tion, the filters are applied layer-wise to reduce the problem to two dimensions. Hence, after the bias
of the first filter is loaded, the weights of the first filter layer are fetched. All convolutional layers
that are used in this project have 3x3 filters, but it is conceptually possible to use different filter
sizes. To match the filter size, the component loads the top left 3x3 values of the input layer’s first
convolution and executes element-wise multiplication of the filter and input map. The products are
summed up and written back as an intermediate result to the correct address in the output segment
of BRAM. The input map is moved over the first input convolution according to the stride length
and the calculation process is repeated. Once the first input convolution is fully processed, the next
filter layer is loaded and the subsequent input convolution is handled. When working on the last
layer of a single filter, the component adds a bias, requantizes the result, and applies the ReLU
activation function before writing the final result to memory. This entire sequence is executed for
every filter in the layer. After the last layer, the state machine transitions to a done state which the
top entity recognizes and acknowledges. After that, the component returns to its idle state.
There are a few nested loops which result in the following time complexity given a stride length
Page 35 of 50
==PAGE:37==
23.01.2022
of 1:
CO = number of filters and output convolutions
CI = number of input convolutions
I = input size
F = filter size
O = CO · CI · I2 · F 2
5.4.4
Max-Pooling Layers
Figure 24: POOL layer state machine
The pooling layers have proven to be
fairly straightforward to implement due
to their lack of parameters.
There is
no need to access SRAM at all because
they only extract the maximum activa-
tions from certain regions of the previ-
ous layer’s output. The biggest challenge
has been to keep track of the correct read
and write addresses, but more on that in
Section 5.5. Similarly to the CONV lay-
ers, the POOL layers are computed in 2d
slices. With the 2x2 MAX POOL layers
that have been used in this project to
reduce the model complexity, the layer
component iterates over every 2x2 square
in every input convolution and writes re-
sult to the output layer.
5.5
Optimizations
The aforementioned layer implementations are the result of an iterative optimization process. With
all fundamental building blocks in place, the focus has been on optimizing for speed. Looking at
the CONV layer implementation in particular, we can see that there is a sequence of states that is
executed especially many times, namely load input −→apply filter −→sum output.
Here, 3x3 input values are loaded from BRAM, they are multiplied with the filter slice, and the
products are summed up.
The first convolutional layer executes this sequence 16 · 3 · 32 · 32 = 49152 times. This means
that any clock cycles that is saved in the sequence saves almost 50000 clock cycles per inference
in the first layer alone. In an earlier version of the convolutional layer component, there was an
additional set address state that was used to set the right BRAM address so that it was ready
for the load input state. To load 9 values from BRAM, the state would alternate between set
address and load input 9 times, resulting in 18 clock cycles. Further, the products were summed
up sequentially in the sum output state, which took another 9 clock cycles. All in all, this sequence
took 2 · 9 + 9 + 1 = 28 clock cycles.
The obvious solution was to set the next address in the load input state instead of a separate
state and parallelizing the addition of products which reduced the number of clock cycles required
for this sequence to 9 + 1 + 1 = 11. In the context of the first layer, this meant a reduction in
compute time of 835584 clock cycles and in the context of the total model, this optimization in the
Page 36 of 50
==PAGE:38==
23.01.2022
convolutional layer component and a similar one in the max pooling layer component almost doubled
the number of inferences per second. However, this came at the cost of complicated combinational
logic to conduct address calculations ahead of time. They introduced such bad setup time violations
that the maximum operating frequency of the FPGA dropped from 80MHz to 61MHz. Fixing this
was a long process that is reflected in the source code of the CONV and POOL layers and it goes
to show that the removal of additional state has to be carefully weighted compared to the decreases
in operating frequency.
5.6
Tools
In order to accelerate the development process, a couple of tools were developed that proved incred-
ibly useful and are worth mentioning. These do not translate directly into the hardware implemen-
tation but contributed much to the outcome of this project.
The first one is a neural network simulator in Python that is completely decoupled from Ten-
sorflow and that was used for debugging and to develop the pseudocode for the hardware layer
behaviour descriptions. One major hurdle was that neural networks are black box models meaning
that there is no way to make sense of intermediate results in the hidden layers. The only values that
can easily be compared are the inputs and outputs of the last layer. If the output of the last layer
is not as expected, the there must be a problem in any of the hidden layers, but it is difficult to tell
which. The simulator works on the same extracted model parameter arrays (even though they are
not parsed to C syntax) as the actual hardware accelerator and allows to inspect any intermediate
layer and node, compare them to their hardware equivalent, and make debugging much easier.
Second, the entire model preparation pipeline was automated. With just a few lines of code, it is
now possible to prepare a new model for the hardware accelerator all the way from training to the
extracted C arrays that can be compiled and downloaded to Patmos on the FPGA. This makes it
simple to explore different model architectures and quickly test them on a corresponding hardware
implementation:
1 cd
model_prep/src
2 python
quant_pipeline .py --m cifar -ds cifar
--train
--qat
3 python
gen_c_arrs.py
Page 37 of 50
==PAGE:39==
23.01.2022
6
Results
6.1
Accuracy
As mentioned in Section 4.2, the absolute model accuracy is not important as it is a quality indi-
cator for the model architecture rather than its hardware implementation. More interesting is the
difference between floating point models and integer models.
The model accuracy is evaluated three times. The first time is in the model preparation pipeline26
after the floating point model has just finished training. The top-1 model accuracy was 63.9%.
After quantization-aware training and quantization, the top-1 model accuracy within the tensorflow
framework rose slightly to 65.2% which was confirmed when the accelerator benchmark27 that tested
the hardware implementation reached the same accuracy.
There are two take-aways from these results: First, the quantization from floating point format to
8-bit integer weights and 32-bit integer activations and biases did not deteriorate the model accuracy.
In fact, it improved. This could be a random event or it could be caused by the quantization aware
training which adds another few epochs of training. Second, the hardware implementation of the
model is correct. The fact that the accuracy of the quantized model does not change depending on
whether it is run on a CPU in the tensorflow framework or on the FPGA is a solid argument for the
holistic system behaving according to specification.
Note that there is an element of randomness associated with the training and quantization
process. The network parameters are randomly initialized before training, and so are the training
set and validation set splits. Therefore, results may slightly differ when being reproduced.
6.2
Speed
The inference speed of the accelerator is compared to that of the aforementioned Coral TPU dongle
and an Intel i7-10510U CPU @ 1.80GHz running Windows 10. The host for both the TPU dongle
and the accelerator is a Raspberry Pi 3 Model B V1.228. All platforms were benchmarked using the
scripts found in the repository’s benchmark folder29 that differentiate between gross execution time
which includes communication delays between the host and the peripherals and net execution time
which is simply the time it takes to run a single inference on an image. For the CPU, it does not
make sense to differentiate between the two as there is no communication to external components.
All test scripts run the full test set of 10000 Cifar10 images which constitutes the sample size N.
26https://github.com/bossebandowski/nopu/blob/main/model_prep/src/quant_pipeline.py
27https://github.com/bossebandowski/nopu/blob/main/benchmarks/acc_benchmark.py
28https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/raspberry-pi-3-model-b/
29https://github.com/bossebandowski/nopu/tree/main/benchmarks
Page 38 of 50
==PAGE:40==
23.01.2022
Figure 25: Comparison of the different inference times
Platform
Mean Gross
Mean Net
STD Gross
STD Net
IPS
Accelerator
0.029
0.018
4.0 · 10−2
< 10−5
35.0
CPU
0.0016
3.2 · 10−4
625
TPU
0.0022
0.0019
1.0 · 10−4
9.9 · 10−5
455
Table 4: Speed test results
Figure 25 visualizes the results of these experiments and Table 4 summarizes them. The CPU is
fastest with an inference time of 1.6 ms (625 IPS) followed by the TPU with a gross inference time
of 2.2 ms (455 IPS). The accelerator is the slowest of the bunch with a gross inference of 29 ms (35
IPS). These numbers can be regarded with high confidence given the large sample size and small
standard deviations of the readings. An exception is the standard deviation of the accelerator’s
gross inference time which is largely attributed to few communication failures that constitute hard
outliers. The host waits up to a full second for an acknowledgement before resending an image batch
and this is clearly visible in Figure 26. However, removing these outliers does not have a significant
effect on the mean value or the greater picture of the results which is that the TPU and the CPU
rival each other in terms of speed while the accelerator is an order of magnitude slower. There are
numerous explanations for this:
1. The communication between the host and the FPGA is slow. Comparing the gross and net
inference times, we can see that communication delays contribute to 13% of the TPU’s gross
inference time while the corresponding figure of the accelerator is 37%.
2. The CPU has an operating frequency of 1.8 GHz which is 22.5 times faster than that of the
accelerator. The accelerator’s implementation is clearly not parallelized enough to make up
for this disadvantage.
3. The TPU is a custom developed chip that promises 4 trillion operations per second30 and likely
has the same advantage as the CPU.
30https://coral.ai/docs/accelerator/datasheet/
Page 39 of 50
==PAGE:41==
23.01.2022
4. The accelerator’s current implementation’s bottleneck is memory accesses. For example, in the
loop of states that was analyzed in Section 5.5, there is only a single state where the BRAM
is not accessed (sum output). Only being able to read and write a single value per clock cycle
strictly limits how fast this sequence of states can be executed and therefore must be improved
upon.
5. There are several other potential optimizations and room for parallelization even though the
accelerator might not have the potential to reach the same speeds as the other platforms. Some
of them are described in Section 7.
Figure 26: Outliers in the accelerator’s gross execution time measurements
6.3
Power Consumption
A low energy consumption per inference was one of the most important design goals, but it proved
difficult to measure and compare without an elaborate setup. The test setup is the same as during
the speed tests with the Raspberry Pi acting as a host for the TPU and the accelerator. The power
consumption of the CPU was not measured. The main problem for comparability is two-fold: First,
the TPU only draws power from the Raspberry Pi’s USB port, but the FPGA dev board has its own
power supply which needs to be taken into account alongside the host’s power consumption. Second,
both the Raspberry Pi and the FPGA dev board have a high idle power consumption. Figure 27
shows the setup for the power consumption experiments. While running the benchmarks mentioned
before, 20 manual current readings were taken at a constant voltage yielding the following results:
Page 40 of 50
==PAGE:42==
23.01.2022
(a) Altera DE2-115 Development Board
(b) Raspberry Pi
Figure 27: Power consumption test setup
DUT
Voltage
[V]
Mean Current
[A]
STD Current
Mean Power
[W]
FPGA busy
12.1
0.373
0.0006
4.51
FPGA idle
12.1
0.364
0.0012
4.41
FPGA blinking
12.1
0.284
0.0005
3.44
RASPI + accelerator
5.17
0.292
0.0109
1.51
RASPI idle
5.17
0.286
0.0119
1.48
RASPI idle + TPU
5.17
0.361
0.0031
1.87
RASPI + TPU
5.17
0.531
0.0060
2.74
Table 5: Power consumption measurements with N=20. ”RASPI idle” and ”RASPI idle + TPU”
differ in that the latter is measured when the TPU is connected via USB which has a measurable
effect.
The quality of these results depends on the devices used for taking current measurements, namely
a Fluke 115 Multimeter31 and a USB Charger Doctor voltage and current meter32. They promise
less than 1% or ± 0.01A deviation respectively, which together with low standard deviations again
gives reason to be confident in the measured mean power consumption of the different platforms
and states.
The fundamental question is how the accelerator’s power consumption compares to that of the
TPU dongle. We can quickly investigate that by looking at the cumulated power consumption of
FPGA and Raspberry Pi when using the accelerator and the power consumption of the Raspberry
Pi alone when using the TPU dongle as shown in Figure 28a. The figure of the accelerator is nearly
twice as high with most of the energy being expended on the dev board. Using the results from the
31https://www.fluke.com/en-us/product/electrical-testing/digital-multimeters/fluke-115
32https://www.adafruit.com/product/1852#technical-details
Page 41 of 50
==PAGE:43==
23.01.2022
speed benchmark, we can quickly calculate the amount of energy used to run a single inference:
P = Power
[W = J/s]
S = Speed
[INF/s]
C = P
S
[J/INF]
The result is that the TPU uses roughly 0.006 J/INF while the accelerator requires 0.17 J/INF which
is far from the goal of reaching a similar performance in this metric. However, it seems as though
both of these figure are hardly comparable due to high base loads. Looking at the TPU first, running
inference on it increases the power consumption of the Raspberry Pi by 85% from 1.48W to 2.74W.
When the Pi communicates with the accelerator, its power usage hardly increases at all. On the
FPGA board, using the accelerator also has a small influence on the power consumption as it only
increases it by 2% compared to the idle state when it is waiting for input from the host (Figure 28b).
In order to determine whether the high base power consumption is related to this project or other
factors, we synthesized a simple blinking LED example33 that does not use any of the components
of this work and repeated the measurements. The findings were that this simplistic example still
has a relatively high power consumption of 3.44 W. This might suggest that a fair amount of the
energy is used outside the FPGA and that a different test setup or development board configuration
might be needed to get more insightful results.
(a) Comparison between the accelerator and TPU in
terms of power consumption
(b) Illustrating the power delta between idle and busy
when running the accelerator
Figure 28: Power consumption graphics
6.4
Synthesis Results
To synthesize the hardware design and configure the FPGA, Quartus lite 19.134 was used. The
synthesis report (Figure 29b) yields that roughly one third of the available resources are used.
This includes both the resources used for Patmos and for the accelerator.
A comparison with
the synthesis report of Patmos alone (Figure 29a) is interesting and helpful to understand which
resources the actual accelerator is using. Most notably, the accelerator is using 180 (33%) of the
inbuilt embedded multipliers which is hardly surprising given that both FC and CONV layers require
multiple parallelized multiplication operations. Further, the usage of BRAM for the intermediate
33https://github.com/schoeberl/chisel-examples/tree/master/hello-world
34https://fpgasoftware.intel.com/19.1/?edition=lite
Page 42 of 50
==PAGE:44==
23.01.2022
layer results is clearly visible, increasing the utilization of memory bits from 8% to 35%. Lastly,
the accelerator implementation requires roughly 18 000 additional logic elements which constitutes
a significant but not dramatic increase in LE utilization from 22% to 37%.
Looking at the implications of these results, it is safe to say that there are plenty of resources
available to implement both larger layers with more nodes that would result in an increase in
BRAM utilization and more different layer types and architecture features which require more logic
elements and potentially multipliers. Note that simply creating a deeper model with more layers
but no increase in the number of distinct layer types results in longer inference time but does not
require additional resources. Going forward, further parallelizations to facilitate speedups are also
feasible.
In terms of the maximum operation frequency, the synthesis report yields 79 MHz which is
close to Patmos’ target operating frequency of 80 MHz. Running at higher frequencies is hence
only feasible if both Patmos and the accelerator were updated accordingly, or if the accelerator was
completely reimplemented without using Patmos at all.
(a) Resource utilization of Patmos alone
(b) Resource utilization of the full system
Figure 29: Synthesis reports
6.5
Worst Case Execution Time
The worst case execution time (WCET) is used to deliver guarantees in real-time systems. Patmos
comes with a WCET analysis tool that can deliver an upper bound on the execution time of C
functions. However, this tool can not be used to assess the WCET of image classification on the
accelerator because the C compiler is unaware of the loop bounds that are imposed by the hardware
implementation. Hence, we will resort to a a simple manual assessment.
In general, there is little variability in the runtime of a single inference on the accelerator after the
image has been loaded. When measured, the net execution time is in fact constant at 1405550 clock
cycles but this is not good enough to deliver a guarantee on the WCET. The only process that could
potentially introduce variable execution time is the SRAM access. Both Patmos and the accelerator
have access to SRAM, and a round-robin arbiter determines which entity gets to access the memory
for the duration of a single burst. The arbiter checks for requests from one (co-) processor per clock
cycle. While the accelerator is running inference, Patmos is busy polling the accelerator states so
that the accelerator will never have to wait for Patmos to finish an SRAM access. However, it might
have to wait a single clock cycle for the arbiter the check the accelerator’s access requests. Having
Page 43 of 50
==PAGE:45==
23.01.2022
this in mind, we can find the upper bound for the net execution time of a single inference.
The only values in SRAM are the network parameters as elaborated in Section 5.2. All network
parameters are read exactly once. We can read 16 weights per SRAM burst or 4 biases or compression
factors. There is a potential delay of one clock cycle per SRAM burst. With this, we can calculate
the maximum delay ∆max:
W = 41280
number of weights
B = 108
number of biases
M = 48
number of compression parameters
A = W
16 + B + M
4
number of accesses (bursts)
∆max = A · 1
∆max = 2619
An upper bound for the WCET is hence the measured execution time plus the maximum delay:
WCET = 1405550 + 2619
= 1408169 clock cycles
Page 44 of 50
==PAGE:46==
23.01.2022
7
Future Work
As Section 6 shows, the implemented accelerator is functional but not competitive in terms of speed
and the power consumption could not be properly verified. A proper benchmark of the latter should
be one of the first steps in the future if this project is to be continued. In terms of development of
the accelerator, there are two general directions that could be taken: The existing capabilities can
be optimized for speed and resource utilization or one could work on supporting additional neural
network architectures.
There is much room for improvement in the existing layer components. One way of achieving a
better performance in terms of speed is to execute more calculations in parallel. For example, in the
CONV layer component, more than one filter could be applied to any given input map at the same
time to reduce the number of clock cycles required to calculate this layer type. This comes naturally
with an increase in design complexity and resource utilization but promises significant speedups.
Another way to achieve this would be more aggressive network compression. This would allow to
pack more network parameters into single words in SRAM, making it possible to load more in the
same number of accesses and overall reducing the number of required bursts. Another positive side
effect of this measure will be the reduction of required memory bits to store the network but it has
to be verified whether the network accuracy can be maintained. Finally, the bottleneck mentioned
in Section 6.2 which is memory access can and should be solved to a large degree by parallelizing
BRAM access. Combining these measures could increase the number of inferences per second to the
level of the TPU. However, if this goal could still not be achieved, a more radical measure would
be a redesign of the entire system to use systolic arrays for fast MAC operations like much of the
related work does (compare Section 3).
The support of additional neural network architectures is also crucial in the future. The Cifar10
data set is a solid proof of concept, but to create a truly useful system, model architectures are needed
that can be trained on much more complex image sets such as ImageNet. These architectures require
additional features like bypasses which would enable the implementation of ResNet (SOTA in 2015)
or squeeze-and-exite blocks which are used in SENet (SOTA 2017) and MobileNet (current SOTA
for small convolutional neural networks targeting mobile and edge devices). The latter also use more
advanced activation functions such as h-swish[23] which are yet to be introduced to this project. In
addition to these model backbone features, the implementation of an object detection head would
open a whole new range of computer vision applications that are especially prominent in real-time
and edge systems.
Another feature that is missing but that is not directly related to the accelerator internals is
a proper IO interface. The current ethernet-based solution with UDP packages and simple hand-
shaking is sufficient for demonstration purposes but does not fulfill common quality standards. The
reason why not much focus was put on the communication was that the goal remains to implement
a fast USB interface which is not possible with the current Altera DE2-115 board as it only has an
outdated USB chip. Hence, a move to a new communication interface would require porting the
project to more recent boards.
For convenience and demonstration purposes, it would be nice to use the flash memory to con-
figure the FPGA automatically when the board is connected to power. Further, Patmos should be
configured to automatically run the control programs of the accelerator after boot.
Page 45 of 50
==PAGE:47==
23.01.2022
8
Conclusion
We successfully managed to develop a working neural network hardware accelerator for image clas-
sification. It features the basic layer types of convolutional neural networks and its modular design
makes it feasible to quickly add new layer types. Further, its implementation is scalable and can
support larger CNNs than the 6 layer network that was used for benchmarking. We have a fully
automated pipeline to train new networks, quantize them, and extract all relevant parameters so
that they can be implemented in hardware. This enabled an iterative design process with multiple
models of increasing complexity being synthesized to an FPGA.
The accelerator is build as a coprocessor to Patmos which allows the use of pre-existing features
such as the Ethernet communication channel, the c compiler, WCET analysis, and the SRAM
controller. It can interface to any host with an Ethernet port and is thus the versatile standalone
system that it was supposed to become.
In terms of speed, it is roughly 10 times slower than the existing Coral Edge TPU dongle. This
barely meets the design goal of being in the same order of magnitude depending on whether we are
looking at gross or net execution time and at seems disappointing at first glance. However, there is
much identified potential for optimizations that promises significant speedups and might result in a
competitive performance in the future. Especially increased memory bandwidth through multiple
BRAM components and more parallelism in the layer components have the potential to improve
throughput by a significant factor. The power consumption could not be properly benchmarked
with the rudimentary available test setup and requires additional investigation.
Hence, the answer the question from the introduction has to be negative: No, the neural net-
work accelerator developed in this project is not cutting edge yet. The groundwork is laid with
performance benchmarks that are in the same order of magnitude as competing products, but there
remains a significant gap to be bridged. The proposed future work holds the potential of turning
the prototype developed in this project into a platform that provides fast and energy-efficient neural
network inference on the edge.
Page 46 of 50
==PAGE:48==
23.01.2022
References
[1] Titus J Brinker, Achim Hekler, Alexander H Enk, Carola Berking, Sebastian Haferkamp, Axel
Hauschild, Michael Weichenthal, Joachim Klode, Dirk Schadendorf, Tim Holland-Letz, et al.
Deep neural networks are superior to dermatologists in melanoma image classification. European
Journal of Cancer, 119:11–17, 2019.
[2] Junyi Chai, Hao Zeng, Anming Li, and Eric WT Ngai.
Deep learning in computer vision:
A critical review of emerging techniques and application scenarios.
Machine Learning with
Applications, 6:100134, 2021.
[3] Yunyang Xiong, Hanxiao Liu, Suyog Gupta, Berkin Akin, Gabriel Bender, Yongzhe Wang,
Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Mingxing Tan, Vikas Singh, and Bo Chen.
Mobiledets: Searching
for object detection architectures for mobile accelerators. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3825–3834, 2021.
[4] Yu Emma Wang, Gu-Yeon Wei, and David Brooks. Benchmarking tpu, gpu, and cpu platforms
for deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.10701, 2019.
[5] Kaiyuan Guo, Shulin Zeng, Jincheng Yu, Yu Wang, and Huazhong Yang. [dl] a survey of fpga-
based neural network inference accelerators. ACM Transactions on Reconfigurable Technology
and Systems (TRETS), 12(1):1–26, 2019.
[6] Tsung-Han Tsai, Yuan-Chen Ho, and Ming-Hwa Sheu. Implementation of fpga-based acceler-
ator for deep neural networks. In 2019 IEEE 22nd International Symposium on Design and
Diagnostics of Electronic Circuits & Systems (DDECS), pages 1–4. IEEE, 2019.
[7] Yufei Ma, Yu Cao, Sarma Vrudhula, and Jae-sun Seo. Optimizing the convolution operation to
accelerate deep neural networks on fpga. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration
(VLSI) Systems, 26(7):1354–1367, 2018.
[8] Ian Kuon and Jonathan Rose. Measuring the gap between fpgas and asics. IEEE Transactions
on computer-aided design of integrated circuits and systems, 26(2):203–215, 2007.
[9] Weisong Shi, Jie Cao, Quan Zhang, Youhuizi Li, and Lanyu Xu. Edge computing: Vision and
challenges. IEEE internet of things journal, 3(5):637–646, 2016.
[10] Martin Schoeberl, Wolfgang Puffitsch, Stefan Hepp, Benedikt Huber, and Daniel Prokesch.
Patmos: A time-predictable microprocessor. Real-Time Systems, 54(2):389–423, 2018.
[11] Luca Pezzarossa, Jakob Kenn Toft, Jesper Lœnbæk, and Russell Barnes. Implementation of
an ethernet-based communication channel for the patmos processor. Technical University of
Denmark, 2015.
[12] Clemens Pircher, Alexander Baranyai, Christoph Lehr, and Martin Schoeberl.
Accelerator
interface for patmos. In 2021 IEEE Nordic Circuits and Systems Conference (NorCAS), pages
1–7. IEEE, 2021.
[13] Xin Zhang, Yee-Hong Yang, Zhiguang Han, Hui Wang, and Chao Gao. Object class detection:
A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 46(1):1–53, 2013.
[14] Christian Szegedy, Alexander Toshev, and Dumitru Erhan. Deep neural networks for object
detection. 2013.
Page 47 of 50
==PAGE:49==
23.01.2022
[15] Panqu Wang, Pengfei Chen, Ye Yuan, Ding Liu, Zehua Huang, Xiaodi Hou, and Garrison
Cottrell. Understanding convolution for semantic segmentation. In 2018 IEEE winter conference
on applications of computer vision (WACV), pages 1451–1460. IEEE, 2018.
[16] Richard Szeliski. Computer vision: algorithms and applications. Springer Science & Business
Media, 2010.
[17] Jie Hu, Li Shen, and Gang Sun. Squeeze-and-excitation networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 7132–7141, 2018.
[18] Wang Zhiqiang and Liu Jun. A review of object detection based on convolutional neural network.
In 2017 36th Chinese Control Conference (CCC), pages 11104–11109. IEEE, 2017.
[19] L´eon Bottou et al. Stochastic gradient learning in neural networks. Proceedings of Neuro-Nımes,
91(8):12, 1991.
[20] Warren S Sarle. Neural networks and statistical models. 1994.
[21] Yoshua Bengio. Learning deep architectures for AI. Now Publishers Inc, 2009.
[22] Li Liu, Wanli Ouyang, Xiaogang Wang, Paul Fieguth, Jie Chen, Xinwang Liu, and Matti
Pietik¨ainen. Deep learning for generic object detection: A survey. International journal of
computer vision, 128(2):261–318, 2020.
[23] Andrew Howard, Mark Sandler, Grace Chu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Bo Chen, Mingxing Tan, Weijun
Wang, Yukun Zhu, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, et al. Searching for mobilenetv3. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 1314–1324,
2019.
[24] Prajit Ramachandran, Barret Zoph, and Quoc V Le. Searching for activation functions. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.05941, 2017.
[25] Benoit Jacob, Skirmantas Kligys, Bo Chen, Menglong Zhu, Matthew Tang, Andrew Howard,
Hartwig Adam, and Dmitry Kalenichenko. Quantization and training of neural networks for
efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 2704–2713, 2018.
[26] Wenlin Chen, James Wilson, Stephen Tyree, Kilian Weinberger, and Yixin Chen. Compressing
neural networks with the hashing trick. In International conference on machine learning, pages
2285–2294. PMLR, 2015.
[27] John D Owens, Mike Houston, David Luebke, Simon Green, John E Stone, and James C
Phillips. Gpu computing. Proceedings of the IEEE, 96(5):879–899, 2008.
[28] Pong P Chu. RTL hardware design using VHDL: coding for efficiency, portability, and scala-
bility. John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
[29] Norman Jouppi, Cliff Young, Nishant Patil, and David Patterson. Motivation for and evaluation
of the first tensor processing unit. IEEE Micro, 38(3):10–19, 2018.
[30] John Crowe and Barrie Hayes-Gill. Introduction to digital electronics. Elsevier, 1998.
[31] Martin Schoeberl, Florian Brandner, Stefan Hepp, Wolfgang Puffitsch, and Daniel Prokesch.
Patmos reference handbook. Technical University of Denmark, Tech. Rep, 2014.
Page 48 of 50
==PAGE:50==
23.01.2022
[32] Lei Deng, Guoqi Li, Song Han, Luping Shi, and Yuan Xie. Model compression and hardware
acceleration for neural networks: A comprehensive survey. Proceedings of the IEEE, 108(4):485–
532, 2020.
[33] Barret Zoph and Quoc V Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.01578, 2016.
[34] Forrest N Iandola, Song Han, Matthew W Moskewicz, Khalid Ashraf, William J Dally, and Kurt
Keutzer. Squeezenet: Alexnet-level accuracy with 50x fewer parameters and¡ 0.5 mb model size.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07360, 2016.
[35] Xiangyu Zhang, Xinyu Zhou, Mengxiao Lin, and Jian Sun. Shufflenet: An extremely efficient
convolutional neural network for mobile devices. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 6848–6856, 2018.
[36] Uday Kulkarni, SM Meena, Sunil V Gurlahosur, and Gopal Bhogar.
Quantization friendly
mobilenet (qf-mobilenet) architecture for vision based applications on embedded platforms.
Neural Networks, 136:28–39, 2021.
[37] Haotong Qin, Ruihao Gong, Xianglong Liu, Xiao Bai, Jingkuan Song, and Nicu Sebe. Binary
neural networks: A survey. Pattern Recognition, 105:107281, 2020.
[38] Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J Dally. Deep compression: Compressing deep neural net-
works with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149,
2015.
[39] Jiantao Qiu, Jie Wang, Song Yao, Kaiyuan Guo, Boxun Li, Erjin Zhou, Jincheng Yu, Tianqi
Tang, Ningyi Xu, Sen Song, et al. Going deeper with embedded fpga platform for convolutional
neural network. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM/SIGDA International Symposium on Field-
Programmable Gate Arrays, pages 26–35, 2016.
[40] Ahmed J Abd El-Maksoud, Abdallah Mohamed, Ahmed Tarek, Amr Adel, Amr Eid, Farida
Khaled, Fatma Khaled, Ziad Ibrahim, Eman El Mandouh, and Hassan Mostafa. Fpga design
of high-speed convolutional neural network hardware accelerator. In 2021 3rd Novel Intelligent
and Leading Emerging Sciences Conference (NILES), pages 376–379. IEEE, 2021.
[41] Christian Szegedy, Sergey Ioffe, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Alexander A Alemi. Inception-v4,
inception-resnet and the impact of residual connections on learning.
In Thirty-first AAAI
conference on artificial intelligence, 2017.
Page 49 of 50
==PAGE:51==
23.01.2022
Repository Contents
1 nopu/
2 |-- README.md
3 |-- requirements .txt
4 |-- hardware_src /
5 |
|-- CnnAccelerator .scala
6 |
|-- cnnacc/
7 |
|
|-- Config.scala
8 |
|
|-- LayerMaxPool .scala
9 |
|
|-- Layer.scala
10 |
|
|-- BramControl.scala
11 |
|
|-- LayerConv.scala
12 |
|
|-- LayerFc.scala
13 |-- model_prep/
14 |
|-- src/
15 |
|
|-- gen_c_arrs.py
16 |
|
|-- models.py
17 |
|
|-- quant_pipeline .py
18 |
|
|-- compare_output .py
19 |
|
|-- data_loader.py
20 |
|
|-- simulator.py
21 |
|-- datasets/
22 |
|-- models/
23 |
|-- tmp/
24 |-- scripts/
25 |
|-- run_ta.sh
26 |
|-- run_fpga.sh
27 |
|-- run_patemu.sh
28 |
|-- setup_patmos .sh
29 |
|-- build_fpga.sh
30 |
|-- build_patemu .sh
31 |-- hardware_config /
32 |
|-- altde2 -115. xml
33 |
|-- build.sbt
34 |
|-- altde2 -all.xml
35 |-- python -nopu/
36 |
|-- run_inf.py
37 |-- benchmarks/
38 |
|-- acc_benchmark .py
39 |
|-- save_test_set .py
40 |
|-- cpu_benchmark .py
41 |
|-- com_benchmark .py
42 |
|-- tpu_benchmark .py
43 |
|-- results/
44 |-- model_parameters /
45 |
|-- parameters.h
46 |-- hardware_test /
47 |
|-- hardware_test .c
48 |
|-- network -configs.h
49 |
|-- counter.h
50 |
|-- emulator_test .c
51 |
|-- images.h
52 |
|-- cop.h
Page 50 of 50
