==PAGE:1==
3D printed magnetic particle-ﬁlled
hydrogels for microactuators
Athina P. Georgali
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Micro and Nano Technology
Building 423,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
nanotech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This study uses the ferrimagnetic properties of Fe3O4 to engineer a material
proper for 3d-printing magnetically driven microactuators for contactless cell
maturation.
Due to the presence of the Fe3O4 particles, the sedimentation
process was studied, proving that it is delayed by the use of PEG1000.
Working curves are established in order to deﬁne LAP and QY concentration.
After the printing parameter optimization process, the optimal material was
selected in terms of print-ability and resolution.
The selected material and
exposure time was used to analyze the resolution in xy plane and z axis, by
comparing 3 diﬀerent-size vacancies and three diﬀerent-pillar diameters to the
original design dimensions, concluding to the fact that the smaller structures
have degraded resolution and higher standard deviations, compared to the larger
ones. Regarding the z-axis resolution analysis, the structures designed for the
analysis failed to be printed, preventing z-resolution analysis.
The swelling properties of the materials were tested by printing six pillars and
weighting both their wet and dry mass, as well as comparing the experimental
to the theoretical samples’ water content, in order to discover whether there is
post-print swelling. The data showed that the wet mass is 2.47 times greater
than the dry mass, as well as the fact that there is no post-print swelling.
Furthermore, the mechanical properties of the printed material were stud-
ied by performing compression tests in six samples, which were analysed as
Neo-Hookean solids, concluding in mean shear modulus equal to 0.23 MPa and
compressive strength equal to 0.9 MPa.
Finally, the proof of concept was tested to conclude whether or not there
is magnetic actuation on simple pillars in a presence of a Neodymium magnet,
grade number 35 ("width x length x height = 20 mm x 10 mm x 5 mm"). For
pillars placed 1 mm next to the magnet the actuation was 162.79 µm. The
actuation from below (distance 1.43 mm) was also tested, concluding that there
is not displacement and the actuation is zero.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Department of Micro- and Naotechnology.
The project is a 35 ECTS Master’s Thesis within the ﬁeld of Biomedical En-
gineering.
It was supervised by Prof.
Niels Bent Larsen and PhD Student
Christina Schmidleithner.
Lyngby, October 2021
(Athina P. Georgali)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to my supervisors, Prof. Niels Bent
Larsen and Christina Schmidleithner, for their feedback and guidance.
In loving memory of Nikolaos Mavroutsos.
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
List of Abbreviations
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Fundamental Actuator Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Project Workﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Background
9
2.1
Actuator Design Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Iron (II,III) Oxide Particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Hydrogels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Free radical Polymerization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.4
Exploring the ideal material concentrations and printing
parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Stereolithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Digital Light Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Analysis & Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.1
Sedimentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.2
Light Absorbance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4.3
Jacobs Working Curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.4
Compression & Neo Hookean Model . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Materials and Methods
21
3.1
Initial Material Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Sedimentation Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Working Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Printing Parameter Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
vi
3.5
Swelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5.1
Swelling Ratio
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5.2
Theoretical VS Experimental Water Content
. . . . . . .
26
3.6
Printing Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.6.1
xy Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.7
Compression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.8
Proof of Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.8.1
Actuation from below
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.8.2
Actuation on the side
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.8.3
Simple Actuator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Analysis & Results
33
4.1
Sedimentation Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.1
The eﬀect of Fe3O4 concentration
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.2
The eﬀect of PEG1000 concentration . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Working Curves Establishment- LAP and QY selection . . . . . .
38
4.3
Printing Parameter Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
Swelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5
Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.6
Compression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.7
Proof of Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Discussion
46
5.1
Theoretical and Experimental Sedimentation Results . . . . . . .
46
5.2
xy plane and z axis resolution observations
. . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Swelling Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4
Design Factors Aﬀecting Print-ability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.5
Proof of Concept - Technical issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.6
Proof of Concept - Hypothesis Rejection . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Conclusion
7
Outlook
A Appendix
A.1 Sedimentation- Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.2 Working Curves- Methods and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.3 Printing Parameter Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.4 Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.5 Swelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.6 Compression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.7 Proof of Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.7.1
Actuation from below
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.7.2
Simple Actuator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bibliography
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In 2006, a Japanese team lead by S. Yamanaka [Yamanaka and Takahashi, 2006]
discovered a method to devolve mature cells back into stem cells, which were
termed inducent pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). This discovery earned Dr. Ya-
manaka the Nobel Prize and created a new and highly promising sub-ﬁeld of
regenerative medicine. Since that breakthrough, the ﬁeld has produced a num-
ber of protocols for increasing the eﬃciency of producing cardiomyocytes derived
from human iPSCs ( [Yang et al., 2008], [Uosaki et al., 2011], [Elliott et al., 2011],
[W Burridge et al., 2012], [J H Chong et al., 2014a], [Dunn and Palecek, 2006].
Figure 1.1 illustrates the generation procedure of all types of cells from somatic
cells.
Figure 1.1: Generation of cardiovascular, neural, beta cells and hepatocytes
from iPSCs. Somatic cells such as dermal ﬁbroblasts or blood cells
isolated from the patient can be reprogrammed to iPSCs
[Mazzola and Di Pasquale, 2020]
==PAGE:10==
1.1 Research Goal
2
Some of the unresolved problems associated with hiPSC-CMs is that they
remain immature when compared to adult human cardiomyocytes. Such im-
maturity poses a lot of barriers in their practical utilization. Several studies
([Sinnecker et al., 2014], [Jung and Bernstein, 2014], [J H Chong et al., 2014b]
and [Shiba et al., 2016]) showed that transplanting these cells resulted in sub-
stantial restoration of the damaged tissue, but non-fatal ventricular arrhythmias
were observed which could be attributed to the immature state of the cells. To
address this immaturity problem, a number of methods have been explored,
including genetic manipulation, biochemical factors, electrical stimulation and
mechanical stress.
This work revolves around the concept of inducing such mechanical stress
through 3D-printed magnetic micro-actuators.
More speciﬁcally, we are at-
tempting to generate a material that a stereolithographic 3D-printer can use
to create such mechanical stress-inducing micro-actuators for cells maturation,
intending to in vitro studies only.
The reason and possible upsides behind the maturing of cells using 3D-
printed, magnetic actuators in order to induce mechanical stress are multi-
faceted.
First of all, the contactless nature of magnetic actuators prevent
contact-related infection and damage to cells. Furthermore, the fact that they
are designed in CAD software and subsequently 3D-printed brings about a num-
ber of beneﬁts. Using 3d printer, more complex shapes can be achieved than
with other techniques, such as injection molding. What’s more, these shapes
and, thus, the very function of the actuators, can be easily iterated upon on the
software-level and then deployed on the existing infrastructure with little need
for further modiﬁcations. Not only that, but the decoupled nature of designing
the actuators (in any CAD software) and building them (in the printers) means
that positive developments in either ﬁeld (such as more accurate printers) will di-
rectly result in the betterment of the actuators without the need of dramatically
changing any other part of the project. Also, the fact that both 3D-printing and
CAD are widely used, commercial technologies means that the cost of the equip-
ment will be lower, the learning-curve to use them less steep and technological
improvements on them more rapid than specialized equipment. On the other
hand, stereolithographic 3D printers do not allow the shaping of wide range of
materials, being limited to acrylates and epoxides. This study is an attempt to
circumvent this limitation by adding particles into an acrylate resin. All-in-all,
while more production-ready and scalable techniques do exist for producing ac-
tuators, 3D printing brings to the table a more qualitative, ﬂexible approach
that is quite valuable in the context of a research project.
1.1
Research Goal
The goal of the project was to print a material with magnetic properties that can
withstand multiple actuations while allowing high levels of detail (resolution)
in the xy plane and z axis. Towards that end, we used a di-acrylate precursor,
a light absorber and a photo-initiator to compose a common resin to act as the
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Fundamental Actuator Requirements
3
base before introducing ferrimagnetic particles, due to their magnetic properties.
Some of the challenges we faced, that will be further explored in Chapter 2, had
to do with resin composition. In short, each of the diﬀerent types of substance
that compose our material has a unique role within it that comes along with
potential detriments.
Higher concentrations of the di-acrylate precursor, for
example, increase the cross-linking between the diﬀerent layers of the material,
but too much could lead to overcuring. As such, the project largely revolves
around ﬁnding the right balance of substances to compose the optimal material
with through a series of practical experiments. Optimizing printing parameters
and feature development analysis are two vital steps of the research. Last but
not least, simple structures were printed to test our proof of concept and prove
that they are indeed magnetically actuated, ideally from below, so that they ﬁt
a 96 well plate and image them from above.
1.2
Fundamental Actuator Requirements
As already discussed, the aim of this project is to engineer a material suitable
for creating 3D-printed magnetic micro-actuators. In order to deﬁne the mate-
rial property requirements, it is essential to establish the ﬁnal, printed device
requirements.
The intended use of the actuator itself is cell maturation through its move-
ment, due to the magnetic strength inﬂuence. According to Christensen et al.
[Kjær Christensen et al., 2020], the device should consist of cylindrical pillars.
The rectangular posts were rejected due to the increased local stress, during cell
seeding.
The height of the pillars was deﬁned equal to 850 µm and the diameter
100-200 µm. The distance between the pillars, which is equivalent to the tissue
length was deﬁned equal to 1000 µm. The horizontal deﬂection of the pillars
should be 10-20 % of the tissue length (100 µm- 200 µm), in order to achieve
suﬃcient actuation, without plastic deformation of the pillars. The external
force needed to act against the contractile forces of the cells and provide suﬃcient
displacement was deﬁned, by the same study group, equal to 0.23 ± 0.03 mN
[Kjær Christensen et al., 2020]. Figure 1.2 illustrates the fundamental actuator
requirements, described above.
==PAGE:12==
1.3 Related Work
4
Figure 1.2: Illustration of the fundamental actuator requirements
1.3
Related Work
Before we dive deeper into the details of this work, it could be valuable to set
the stage for the reader by providing context. Diﬀerent modern microactuator-
related achievements will be presented, all focused around using the magnetic
properties of ferrimagnetic materials to generate mechanical output. Two types
of magnetic actuator will be explored. The ﬁrst type are alignment-based
actuators, which cause structure rotation through alignment along the mag-
netic ﬁeld lines. These actuators use a uniform magnetic ﬁeld and need to be
anisotropic in order to be actuated.
The second type, the one associated with this project, is gradient based
actuators. In this case, a polymer is embedded with particles and attracted
by magnets, with the attraction force proportional to the gradient of the mag-
netic ﬁeld. Below, research behind the diﬀerent types of actuators is presented,
starting with the alignment-based magnetic actuators.
In 2018, Seiji Azukizawa et. al. [Azukizawa et al., 2018] demonstrated a new
3d printed magnetic actuator by mimicking natural cilia. A magnetic elastomer
was used, consisting of a UV-curable resin dispersed with magnetic powder.
As shown in Figure 1.3, the pillars are exposed to a magnetic ﬁeld in order to
create chain-like particle clusters in the structure, that in turn will generate
momentum parallel to the magnetic ﬂux line.
The particle-clusters tested were parallel, in a 45◦direction and normal to
the beam. Figure 1.4 presents the relationship between the deformation of these
three kinds of beams and the angle of the applied magnetic ﬁeld.
This study is promising for creating magnetic actuators that mimic the meta-
chornal wave type of cilia movement. To achieve that, a rotational magnetic
ﬁeld is created and an intricate, well synchronized actuation becomes possible.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Related Work
5
Figure 1.3: Illustration of the experimental process [Azukizawa et al., 2018]
That said, cilia movement is quite complicated and further research is needed
to more accurately imitate it.
Figure 1.4: Displacement VS Angle of magnetic ﬁeld [Azukizawa et al., 2018]
Another example of alignment-based magnetic actuators is published by M.
Sendoh and his team in 2003 [Sendoh et al., 2003], who attempted to enable
autonomous moving functionality on capsules used endoscopically, in order to
more precisely and reliably discover disease in the gastrointestinal track.
In
this study, a magnetic actuator is proposed that can be moved wirelessly by
means of an external rotational ﬁeld, as shown in Figure 1.5. A tube-shaped,
permanent magnet was placed inside the capsule. A spiral-shaped actuator is
placed outside the capsule, rotating and creating a propelling force. As part of
this work, several spiral structures (p5-h3.0, p10-h3.0, p15-h3.0) were made by
resin and vinyl wires.
==PAGE:14==
1.3 Related Work
6
Figure 1.5: Illustration of the concept: Magnetic actuator used for wireless
movement of capsule endoscope [Sendoh et al., 2003]
The velocity of the actuator was examined using the setup shown in Figure
1.6. The actuator is placed in a silicon tube full of water to imitate the pressure
from the gastrointestinal track.
Figure 1.6: Illustration the velocity examination setup [Sendoh et al., 2003]
Figure 1.7 shows that the velocities for the diﬀerent spiral actuators (p5-h3.0,
p10-h3.0, p15-h3.0) are proportional to the frequency, which allows control of
that velocity through changing the frequency of the magnetic ﬁeld.
Figure 1.7: Actuator Velocity VS Magnetic Field Frequency
[Sendoh et al., 2003]
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Related Work
7
Magnetic actuators for use in a capsule endoscope have great potential, since
they are wireless and need no internal power source as the movement can be
controlled through changes in the magnetic ﬁeld. Their simple structure makes
them safe and fault-resistant, but in vivo tests are also required to consolidate
these claims.
Last but not least, and regarding the gradient-based type of magnetic ac-
tuators, the study closest to ours was held by Zhongying Ji et.al.
in 2017
[Ji et al., 2017]. They used iron oxide nanoparticles to create soft magnetic mi-
croactuators with the use of Digital Light Processing. As shown in Figure 1.8a,
a match-like structure was prepared with Digital Light Processing. The mag-
netic part is at the top (part I), which consists of magnetic resin and gives the
mechanical force under the magnetic ﬁeld. On the other hand, part II is the
region withholding the bending stress. Moreover, the higher the ferromagnetic
content, the more magnetic force is generated by the permanent magnet, and
the deﬂection is at its maximum (Figure 1.8e ). Figures 1.8 (fi) and 1.8 (fii)
present a digital photo of an multi-pillar structure in vertical and isometric view
respectively. Figure 1.8 (fiii) shows the multi-pillar structure under the bending
force of a permanent magnet.
Figure 1.8: 3d printed complicated structure with multiple matches.
[Ji et al., 2017]
The general idea was similar to our project, but with several notable diﬀer-
ences. Zhongying Ji and his team created pillar-actuators, using ferromagnetic
particles with a signiﬁcantly less weight percentage than ours (theirs being 0.25
to 1wt % as compared to ours: 15 wt % ). They also applied these particles
only to the top of the pillars, as indicated in Figure 1.8. The fact that they
used magnetic particles only on the top of the pillars allows the increase of their
height, which has a positive eﬀect on actuation. On the other hand, that same
approach leads to a decrease in the maximum limit of the magnetic particle
concentration into the resin, which negatively aﬀects actuation.
Having presented research examples of both alignment and gradient based
actuation, we can conclude that despite their common use of magnetic actuation,
they diﬀer in several key ways. Alignment-based actuators use the magnetic ﬁeld
==PAGE:16==
1.4 Project Workﬂow
8
lines to produce rotation, while gradient based actuators ideally use the maximal
gradient force to produce stronger linear mechanical output. Proper selection
of the type of magnetic actuator depends on the intended use.
In the case
that a rotational or complex movement is needed, a alignment-based magnetic
actuator should be used. On the other hand, gradient-based actuators mostly
support simple axial movements. Complex movements can also be supported,
but mostly through the geometry of the actuator and the placement of the
magnets. In our case, a gradient-based actuator is selected to accommodate the
complex movement required.
1.4
Project Workﬂow
The creation of the ideal material for composing 3d printed magnetic actuators
is a multi-step process, with several diﬀerent factors needing to be checked and
material modiﬁcations to be made in order to test each of these contributing
factors. Figure 1.9 demonstrates the workﬂow of the project. At the beginning,
the material property requirements were speciﬁed and the initial material se-
lected. Several tests were run to check the adequacy of the selected material,
until reaching to the ﬁnal selection. The theoretical background of these tests
will be introduced in the next Chapter (2). The experimental process will then
be presented in Chapter 3, with ﬁndings presented in Chapter 4 and discussed
in 5.
Figure 1.9: The workﬂow of the project
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Background
In this chapter, the background knowledge necessary to understand the project
and evaluate its results is provided. In short, it revolves around ﬁrst of all choos-
ing the correct materials and material concentrations to compose our magnetic
actuators with, then printing this material in 3d structures and ﬁnally testing
its eﬀectiveness.
Basic knowledge around four ﬁelds relevant to this project will be provided:
design requirements, material selection, 3d printing and material test-
ing. Subsequently, the actuator design requirements will be presented, as well
as some material-related knowledge pertaining to this work and Digital Light
Processing, a 3d printing technology. This section ends by explaining certain
experiment-pertaining concepts, carried out to ﬁnd the optimal material. An
example would be establishing the working curves, compression and sedimenta-
tion.
2.1
Actuator Design Requirements
As described in the previous Chapter, the aim of the current project is to en-
gineer a material suitable for 3d-printing magnetically driven micro-actuators
that will be used for cell maturation. The actuator design requirements are es-
tablished by the manufacturing process and the intended use is the magnetically
driven displacement of the device.
This formula obtained by Evans et. al. [Evans and Superﬁne, 2010], deﬁnes
the magnetic ﬁeld gradient (∇B) needed to achieve the ϕ actuation angle.
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Materials
10
∇B[ T
m] =
2 ∗E[ N
m2 ] ∗r2[m2] ∗ϕ
M[ A
M ] ∗f ∗L3[m3] ∗sinθ[Evans and Superﬁne, 2010]
(2.1)
In this Equation "(∇B)" stands for the magnetic ﬁeld gradient, "E" for
the Elastic modulus, "r" for the device’ s radius, "L" for the device’s
length, "M" for the magnetic saturation, "f" for the volume fracture of
magnetic particles, "θ" for the initial angle of the actuator relative to
the horizontal plane and "ϕ" for the actuation angle.
As described in this Equation, the magnetic ﬁeld gradient required for achiev-
ing ϕ actuation angle is proportional to the square of the device radius and in-
versely proportional to its initial angle relative to the horizontal plane and the
cubic power of the device’s length. Thus, we try to maximize the device length
and angle and minimize their radius in order to achieve better actuation. The
manufacturing constrains stand opposed to this attempt, so the optimal design
needs to be found to meet both the manufacturing and actuation requirements.
2.2
Materials
The choice of material is of paramount signiﬁcance to our project. Combinations
of diﬀerent particles cause the material to behave diﬀerently. For example, iron
oxide particles can be added to a compound to introduce magnetic properties
to it, which in our case induces mechanical actuation, and hydrogels due to their
formation properties. A brief introduction to both ﬁelds, as well as the great
importance of ﬁnding the optimal concentration of substances and the method
used to 3d print structures will be provided below, starting with iron oxides.
2.2.1
Iron (II,III) Oxide Particles
Magnetites are chemical compounds composed of iron and oxygen. It is sym-
bolized with Fe3O4 and is frequently used in laboratories as black pigment.
It is characterized by its magnetic properties and it is ferrimagnetic, meaning
that it has groups of atoms with opposing magnetic moments, but of unequal
magnitudes, so that they do not cancel out [Jolivet et al., 2004]. The formation
of iron (II,III) oxide follows the Schikorr reaction: Ferrous hydroxide is oxidized
by water and forms magnetite and molecular hydrogen, as described in Figure
2.1 [K Aligizaki et al., 2000].
Figure 2.1: Schikorr
Reaction
describing
iron
(II,III)
oxide
formation
[K Aligizaki et al., 2000]
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Materials
11
The special properties of iron (II, III) oxide are listed in the Table 2.1.
Molar Mass
Density
Saturation Magnetization
Fe3O4
231.533 g/mol
5 g/cm3
480 kA/m
Table 2.1: Iron (II, III) oxide properties
[Mascolo et al., 2013] [Evans and Superﬁne, 2010]
Below we continue with another part of this project, hydrogels and free
radical polymerization, starting with the hydrogels.
2.2.2
Hydrogels
Hydrogels are 3D cross-linked networks of ﬂexible polymer chains, capable of
containing a signiﬁcant amount of water into their networks, due to their hy-
drophilic structure [Li et al., 2020]. There are two types of polymers: natural
biopolymers and synthetic polymers. Natural biopolymers show remark-
able biocompatibility and low immune response. They have various applications
in tissue engineering [Chhibber et al., 2001], regenerative medicine and drug de-
livery systems (drugs, proteins, etc) [Jabbari et al., 2016], implantable devices
[Irimia Vladu, 2014] and diagnostic devices [A Peppas et al., 2016].
The sec-
ond type of polymer are the synthetic polymers, which are used in the cur-
rent study.
Their advantage over natural biopolymers is that there is less
variability between diﬀerent batches and more control over their architecture
[Švec et al., 2003]. The biochemical and mechanical properties of hydrogels can
be deﬁned from the preparation parameters, the polymer concentration of a
hydrogel and the cross-linking density [Li et al., 2020]. The printability of a
hydrogel material is deﬁned of two main factors: their rheological properties
and the crosslinking mechanisms. The term rheological is referred to the stress-
strain relationship (force-deformation) of materials under certain environmental
and loading conditions, focusing on the viscoelastic properties of the material
[Widyatmoko, 2017]. This is signiﬁcant to the present research due to the high
viscosity of the resin used. The viscosity of a polymeric solution is mainly deter-
mined by the concentration and molecular weight of the polymer in the solution
[Li et al., 2020].
2.2.3
Free radical Polymerization
Having presented the basic characteristics of hydrogels, it is very important to
dive deeper into hydrogel formation, an integral part of the 3d printing process
that will be presented in the next Section (2.3). The whole procedure, starting
from the stage of the untreated resin and ending in a cured resin is, brieﬂy:
1. Initiation
Activation of the LAP photoinitiator (Figure 2.2a) [Fairbanks et al., 2009].
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Materials
12
2. Propagation
Reactive monomers combine with monomers repeatedly, until reaching the
ﬁnal state [Yang et al., 2015]. These two reactions, responsible for hydro-
gel network formation, are also presented in Figure 2.2b.
3. Termination
The end of the reactions procedure
Figure 2.2: a. LAP cleaving reaction b. PEGDA network formation
[Fairbanks et al., 2009] [Yang et al., 2015]
2.2.4
Exploring the ideal material concentrations and print-
ing parameters
One of the most demanding challenges of this work was to ﬁnd the optimal
substance concentration for the resin. Each component within the resin has a
unique and vital contribution to the ﬁnal result and is important in achieving an
eﬀective printing. Optimising composition here is the key, since both insuﬃcient
and excessive use of any individual substance could cause problems. This is
clearly illustrated in Table 2.2, which presents the role of each substance when
used in the correct concentration and the disadvantages that come with excessive
use.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Stereolithography
13
Substances
Advantages
Disadvantages
PEGDA
Layer- to- layer
chemical bonds,
Stability
Overcuring,
Stiﬀness prevents
magnetic actuation
PEG1000
Prevents Sedimentation
Increased Viscosity
Fe3O4
Magnetic Actuation
Light Scattering.
Increased Viscosity
LAP
Initiation of polymerization
Overcuring
QY
Light absorbance,
z direction structure
Reduced layer-to-layer
adhesion
Table 2.2: The summary table presenting the diﬀerent substances used into
the resin, the advantages that each substance oﬀer to the material
when used in the right concentration, as well as the disadvantages
that come with the excessive use of them into the resin
After the resin is created, the last important step of the process would be
stereolithographic 3d-printing.
2.3
Stereolithography
Outside of making an eﬀective initial material selection, another important part
of this project is generating 3d printed structures and further testing the re-
liability and the characteristics of the 3d-printed material. 3d printing is the
additive manufacturing of a 3d object from a CAD model. Stereolithography
is a widely used type of 3d printing and a special type of Stereolithography is
Digital Light Processing.
2.3.1
Digital Light Processing
Digital light processing (DLP) is a type of Stereolithography used to built 3d
structures. DLP uses ultraviolet or blue light to project a single image of the
layer on the resin at once [Jun TaeHuh et al., 2020]. Uncured, liquid resin is
placed into a vat and exposed to UV light from the DLP light source. A projector
projects the image of the ﬁrst layer onto the resin, which causes the polymer to
harden. The same procedure is repeated until all the layers have been printed
and the 3d object is complete. Figure 2.3 presents the DLP setup for better
understanding of the fundamental principles of how DLP works.
==PAGE:22==
2.4 Analysis & Methods
14
Figure 2.3: Digital Light Processing (DLP) setup
[Printing and Prototyping, 2017]
Having discussed the basic knowledge of the materials and 3d printing tech-
nique used in the current project, it is essential to present the background behind
the Analysis & Methods that will be discussed in the next Chapter.
2.4
Analysis & Methods
After forming a new material and using it to create 3-dimensional structures,
the next step is testing it to determine how eﬃcient and reliable it is towards
its intended use. Tests should be both use- and material-centric and should
also be compatible with the 3d structure-building mechanism. In the following
paragraphs these tests will be further analysed, starting with sedimentation.
2.4.1
Sedimentation
The presence of the magnetic powder into the resin, makes it vital to test the
material for sedimentation. Sedimentation is the tendency of particles to move
downwards in a suspension and rest at the bottom of it, under the eﬀect of the
forces acting on them. In this case, the force acting on the particles is gravity.
The hydrodynamic force which drives the motion is the algebraic sum of gravity
and buoyancy, as shown in Figure 2.4 [Hill, 2020].
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Analysis & Methods
15
Figure 2.4: The hydrodynamic force is the diﬀerence between the gravity and
buoyancy
The motion of the particles in the suspension is a result of the hydrodynamic
force applied to them while also being aﬀected by cross-particle interactions.
More speciﬁcally, particles can interact with each other directly or indirectly,
building networks, as illustrated from the black lines of Figure 2.5(1) and Fig-
ure 2.5(2). For the indirect particle interaction, the network emerges from the
adsorption of the polymer chains of the suspension, on the surface of the par-
ticles and it happens in the low particle concentrated suspensions. For direct
particle interaction, there is a certain particle concentration threshold above
which the particles form a direct network and the polymer chains leave the par-
ticles’ surfaces. In a concentrated suspension, a moving particle can also induce
a secondary ﬂow around itself [Kourki et al., 2012]. Figure 2.5 illustrates the
structure of direct and indirect particle-to-particle interaction clusters, as well
as the structure of particles in the suspension over time. The sedimentation
velocity can be found by the change of sediment height over time. The upwards
force that opposes the sedimentation can be found using Stokes’ Law.
==PAGE:24==
2.4 Analysis & Methods
16
Figure 2.5: 1. Direct particle to particle interaction cluster, 2. Indirect par-
ticle to particle interaction network, 3. Particles in the solution
over the time. The black lines illustrate the network and the black
circles show the particles
[Kourki et al., 2012]
2.4.1.1
Stokes’ Law
Stokes’ Law is a mathematical equation expressing the force that opposes the fall
of small spherical particles into suspension. The force acting upwards, resisting
sedimentation, is given by Equation 2.2, where "r" is used for the spherical par-
ticle radius, "η" for the viscosity of the suspension and "ν" for the ﬂow velocity,
the relative velocity between the particle and the ﬂuid [Gregersen, 2021].
Fupwards = 6πrην
(2.2)
[Gregersen, 2021]
When the particle reaches terminal velocity, it does not further accelerate.
Stokes Law, solved for the terminal velocity (ut), gives the following equation
(2.3):
ut = d2g(ρp −ρf)
18µ
(2.3)
[Gregersen, 2021]
Equation 2.3 presents the terminal velocity found using Stokes Law. Factor
"d" refers to the particle diameter, factor "ρp" refers to the particle density and
"ρf" to the ﬂuid density. There are several assumptions made in deriving this
Equation:
• A spherical particle, of diameter "d", with smooth surface
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Analysis & Methods
17
• No eﬀect of other particles
• The particle is falling in a homogeneous liquid
• The particle’s size is greater than the molecules in the ﬂuid
Having analysed sedimentation eﬀect and Stokes Law, the next step is to an-
alyze some material and 3d printing related characteristics, light absorbance
and the working curves.
2.4.2
Light Absorbance
The Beer-Lambert Law is used to determine light absorbance in the selected
material. Beer-Lambert Law relates the amount of a material in a sample to
the absorption of light passing through it. It is given by the following Equation
(Equation 2.4):
A = ϵbc
(2.4)
In the equation above:
• A stands for the absorbance
• ϵ stands for the molar absorptivity, a measure of how well a compound
absorbs a given wavelength of light
• b stands for the path of light, or the distance that light has to travel
through the sample
• c stands for the concentration of the sample
Absorbance is measured by comparing the intensity of a beam of light as it
enters the sample (I0) and its intensity as it leaves the sample (I), as shown in
Figure 2.6. Therefore, the absorbance will be equal to A = log(I0/I), or equiv-
alently to A = −log(I/I0). If we substitute the latest version into the original
(Equation 2.4), substituting A and then solving for I, we have a new version
of the Beer-Lambert Law (2.5), which displays the exponential relationship be-
tween variables [Spitha et al., 2021].
==PAGE:26==
2.4 Analysis & Methods
18
Figure 2.6: Illustration of the initial and ﬁnal intensity of light as it enters a
b-length distance into the sample
I = I0e−ϵbc
(2.5)
Having explained light absorbance, described with the Beer Law, it is important
to introduce the working curves establishment, an eﬃcient way to test the resin
adequacy for DLP use.
2.4.3
Jacobs Working Curves
Next is testing the new resin.
The most widely used method for testing a
new photopolymer and its capability to be used as photocurable resin is by
establishing the Jacobs working curves, which give us information about the
essential printing parameters, the main of which are presented below:
• Cure Depth (Cd): the depth of the solidiﬁed resin
• Energy Dosage (E0): the energy of light at the surface
• Penetration Depth (Dp): the length of the penetration of the LED beam
into the resin.
The penetration depth is dependent on the absorbance
characteristics of resin [Li, 2020].
• Critical energy dosage (Ec): the energy needed to reach the gel point of
resin (loss of ﬂuidity and 3d network formation) at the laser wavelength
[H Lee et al., 2000].
A semi-logarithmic plot of Cure Depth VS Energy Dosage produces a
straight line, known as the Jacobs working curve. The slope of this line is
the Penetration Depth (Dp), while the interception of Jacobs curve with
the x axis gives us the Critical Energy Dosage (Ec), as indicated from the
Equation 2.6, [Bennett, 2017]:
Cd = Dp ∗ln(E0
Ec
)
(2.6)
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Analysis & Methods
19
The working curves establishment is an eﬃcient way to test the capability
of a new resin to be used for 3d printing.
2.4.4
Compression & Neo Hookean Model
2.4.4.1
Neo Hookean Model
The integrity and safety of material will be tested for with a simple compression
test. Our material is assumed to be a neo-Hookean solid. The neo-Hookean
solid is a modiﬁcation of Hooke’s law, used for predicting the behavior of hy-
perelastic materials.
The hyperelastic materials have the following characteristics:
• The stress-strain relationship is non linear, as illustrated in Figure 2.7.
• Hyperelastic materials can withstand large deformations.
• Hyperelastic materials are nearly incompressible, since the deformation is
a result of polymer chains straightening [WELSIM, 2020].
Figure 2.7: Elastic materials: Linear stress-strain relationship.
Hyperelastic materials:
Highly nonlinear stress-strain relation-
ship.
It is important to point out that this model neglects the loss of energy in
form of heat, and assumes perfect elasticity, meaning that the body regains its
initial conﬁguration after any applied force is removed. The formula that will
be used to analyze the compression data is given by Equation 2.7, where "σ"
stands for the compressive stress, "G" for the Shear Modulus and "λ" for the
extension, or in other words, the increase of length.
σ = G(λ −1
λ2 )[A Weiss et al., 1996]
(2.7)
==PAGE:28==
2.4 Analysis & Methods
20
How a cross-linked polymer will act as a neo-Hookean material is described
below:
• The polymer chains tend to coil up as much as possible in order to increase
their entropy, when the stress is applied.
• The applied stress results in strains that cause loss of this entropy.
• At a certain point, the material becomes too deformed and the polymer
chains too stretched, resulting in a huge increase in the Young’s Mod-
ulus of the material, which can not be predicted by the neo-Hookean
model. Hence, the material no longer behaves as a Neo Hookean solid
[Treloar, 2005].
Generally, Neo Hookean solid the simplest hyperelastic model and it is used
for predicting the mechanical behavior of hyperelastic incompressible materials
under uniaxial stress with non-large deformations.
Having introduced some of the basic background knowledge to this project,
the next step is to present the materials and methods used to ﬁnd the ideal
material for creating magnetically driven actuators.
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Materials and Methods
The preparation of the materials required to 3D print magnetically driven mi-
croactuators is a multi-step process. A number of factors are monitored and
tuned in order to bring the material to a state that suﬃciently fulﬁlls all of
the required properties we need to have. As such, consecutive tests were run
and the material was modiﬁed after each test according to the results. It is
important to note here that optimizing the performance of the material towards
a certain desired behavior can lead to the degradation of its performance on an-
other. As such, we need to establish a priority for each of these characteristics
depending on their necessity and discover a silver lining between competing op-
timization goals. The methods of examining each of these characteristics will be
analytically presented below, starting with the selection of an initial material.
3.1
Initial Material Selection
The initial choice of the resin composition was decided, based on a research held
by Rujing Zhang and Niels B. Larsen and in 2017 [Zhang and B Larsen, 2017].
Further experimental tests are to be performed for our results to be robust.
• Fe3O4 (Iron(II,III) oxide): Fe3O4 powder ("SIGMA ALDRICH, 310069-
25G") was used due to its magnetic properties and its low cost.
The
magnetic powder’s particles diameter was around 5µm. The initial con-
centration of iron (II,III) oxide into the resin was 15 wt %, but also tested
for 5, 10, 20 and 25 wt % for sedimentation, as presented in Section 3.2.
• PEGDA (Poly(ethylene glycol diacrylate -molecular weight 700): PEGDA
("ALDRICH, 1003092963") was used due to its crosslinking mechanisms
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Sedimentation Characterization
22
essential for the 3d printing. Initially the PEGDA concentration into the
resin is chosen to be 30 vol%.
• PEG1000 (Polyethylene glycol 1000): PEG 1000 ("SIGMA ALDRICH,
90112229 ") was used due to its high viscosity that according to the Stokes
Law, presented in Section 2.4.1.1, delays the sedimentation process within
the resin. PEG1000 was chosen, instead of other polymer chain lengths
PEGs, since it is viscous enough to delay the sedimentation process, but
it is also soluble into the water [Naokazu and Tetsuya, 1964]. Initially 30
vol % of PEG1000 was used, but 10, 20, 40 and 50 vol % PEG 1000 resins
were tested for their sedimentation properties.
• LAP (Lithium phenyl-2,4,6-trimethylbenzoylphosphinate): LAP ("SIGMA
CELLINK, 20210311") was used as the photoinitiator of the Digital Light
Processing. Initially the LAP concentration was 5mg/ ml.
• QY (Quinine Yellow): QY ("SIGMA ALDRICH, 309052-25G") was used
as the light absorber, and its initial concentration into the resin was 3
mg/ml
• Milli-Q Water: The rest of the resin, used as the media.
After having selected the initial material for the 3d printed magnetically driven
actuator, several tests were performed that resulted in modiﬁcations in its com-
position, starting with sedimentation tests.
3.2
Sedimentation Characterization
Sedimentation characterization is vital to this project due to the high density of
Fe3O4 particles, as explained in Section 2.4.1. The aim of this test is to ﬁnd the
ideal Fe3O4 and PEG1000 concentrations and it was separated in two diﬀerent
subtests.
The solutions used for the ﬁrst subset are presented in Table 3.1. As can be
seen from the table, the Fe3O4 concentration varies in order to help us observe
the eﬀect of diﬀerent Fe3O4 concentrations in the sedimentation process.
1
2
3
4
5
Fe3O4
5 wt %
10 wt%
15 wt %
20 wt %
25 wt %
PEG1000
0
0
0
0
0
PEGDA
30 vol %
30 vol %
30 vol %
30 vol %
30 vol %
Table 3.1: The 5 diﬀerent solutions used to examine the eﬀect of Fe3O4 con-
centration in the sedimentation process
The next solution-group is presented in Table 3.2. The examined, variable
substance into the solution is PEG1000 and this experiment aims to examine
the eﬀect of the varying PEG1000 concentrations in the sedimentation process.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Working Curves
23
1
2
3
4
5
Fe3O4
15 wt %
15 wt%
15 wt %
15 wt %
15 wt %
PEG1000
10 vol %
20 vol%
30 vol %
40 vol %
50 vol %
PEGDA
30 vol %
30 vol %
30 vol %
30 vol %
30 vol %
Table 3.2: The 5 diﬀerent solutions used to examine the eﬀect of PEG1000
concentration in the sedimentation process
The solutions presented in Table 3.1 and 3.2 were prepared and placed in
identical tubes, as shown in Figure A.1, to test the eﬀect of the diﬀerent Fe3O4
and PEG1000 concentrations on the sedimentation. LAP and QY were not used
due to their high cost and the fact that they do not aﬀect the sedimentation
process. This is due to their low concentration that does not aﬀect any of the pa-
rameters relevant to sedimentation, as mentioned in Stokes Law (Equation 2.2).
Subsequently, the sediment height of each solution was measured at frequent
time intervals (Figures A.2 and A.3).
The data was analysed in Origin 2019b software. The Sediment Height VS
Time plots were established and the sedimentation velocity of each solution was
deﬁned using the most points of the graph possible. At this point, the limit was
to keep R2 > 90%, to achieve suﬃcient accuracy and representative results. The
results of this analysis are presented in Section 4.1. Next, the working curve
establishment experimental procedure used to select the optimal LAP and QY
concentrations into the resin, is presented.
3.3
Working Curves
In this section, the LAP and QY concentrations were tested by establishing the
Jacob Working Curves. The experimental procedure here was simple. The ﬁrst
step was to prepare the diﬀerent solutions, presented in Table 3.3. The aim
is to test the eﬀect of QY and LAP concentration into the solution and their
capability to be used as photocurable resins. PEG1000 was not used, since it
does not play any role in deﬁning the printing parameters, explained in 2.4.3.
The wavelength of LAP is 365nm and the light intensity 10.9mW/cm2.
1
2
3
4
5
LAP (mg/mL)
5
5
5
10
10
QY (mg/mL)
-
3
6
3
6
Fe3O4 (wt %)
15
15
15
15
15
PEG1000 (vol %)
20
20
20
20
20
Table 3.3: The ﬁve diﬀerent resins that used to establish the working curves
The experimental procedure followed to obtain the data used to establish
the working curves for each resin is as follows:
==PAGE:32==
3.4 Printing Parameter Optimization
24
• Five diﬀerent resins were prepared (Table 3.3) and stirred right before the
use.
• A cover glass was placed carefully on the building platform and a droplet
of the ﬁrst resin was placed on this setup, as shown in Figure A.4.
• One layer was printed and the depth of the cured material was measured
using a caliper, after carefully removing the uncured material.
• The procedure was repeated for diﬀerent increasing exposure times, until
reaching a plateau of the cure material depth.
• The steps above were repeated for the rest of the resins.
• The whole process was repeated two more times.
Origin 2019b was used to analyze the data and the results of this analysis
are analytically presented in Section 4.2.
Having analyzed the working curves establishment experimental procedure,
we move forward to optimizing the printing parameters.
3.4
Printing Parameter Optimization
In this Section, several diﬀerent materials were printed, using diﬀerent designs
and diﬀerent exposure times for each layer to ﬁnd the optimal.
The ﬁrst step of the printing parameter optimization is the preparation of the
cover glass. Cover glasses were surface-treated in order to create free methacry-
late groups at the surface in a procedure adapted by Rujing Zhang and Niels
B. Larsen [Zhang and B Larsen, 2017]:
• The cover glass was treated with 0.3 mbar, 50 W plasma in atmospheric
air for 10 min ("Diener plasma surface technology").
• The cover glass was placed in a 2% v/v 3-(trimethoxysilyl) propyl methacry-
late ["Sigma-Aldrich, 440159"] solution in 95 % ethonol (ph 4-5) for 30
minutes.
• The cover glass was washed three times with 70% ethanol.
• The cover glass was washed with Milli-Q water three times.
• The cover glass was heated on a heating plate for 30 minutes in 150 °C.
The samples were designed in Autodesk Inventor 2019 software and sliced in
Slic3r (Open source 3D printing toolbox). The Digital Light Processing printer
used was designed and manufactured by Prof. Niels Bent Larsen. The DMD
==PAGE:33==
3.5 Swelling
25
pixel pitch is 10.8 µm. The slicing thickness was deﬁned as 20 µm and the
exposure time for each layer was deﬁned to be 9, 10.5 and 12 sec, with the
exception of the ﬁrst layers that were printed with 10 µm slicing thickness and
higher exposure time to ensure the proper adhesion of the printed layers to the
cover glass. An example of the exposure time and the thickness for the ﬁrst
layers of a print with general exposure time 12 sec is given in Table 3.4.
Layer
Thickness
(µm)
Exposure Time
(sec)
0
10
12
0
10
12
1
10
9
1
10
9
2
10
6
2
10
6
Table 3.4: Exposure times and Slicing thickness for the ﬁrst three layers of a
print with general exposure time 12 sec
The designs that printed for analyzing printing parameters optimization are
presented in Figures A.9, A.10 and A.11.
The experimental procedure started by printing the initial selected material
and gradually changing the printing parameters (materials concentrations and
exposure time) until reaching the optimum. For example, given an overexposed
to energy print, we would proceed to decrease the LAP and/or PEGDA concen-
tration and/or exposure time, making several combinations and/or adjustments
to our variable factors.
Having already completed the printing parameter optimization methods, we
move to the methods that used to analyze the swelling properties of the printed
samples.
3.5
Swelling
After ﬁnishing the printing parameter optimization, the swelling properties of
the printed samples were tested. The procedure was simple and it is described
below:
• Pillars were printed, using the resin selected in Section 3.4, in the design
presented in Figure A.18, (Figure 3.1).
• The wet mass of six samples was measured.
• A desiccator and silica gel were used and vacuum was applied. The samples
were left to dry for 3 days.
==PAGE:34==
3.5 Swelling
26
• The dry mass of the samples were measured again.
• The comparison between the wet and dry mass was held using Origin
2019b and is analyzed in Section 4.4.
Figure 3.1: The samples used for testing the swelling properties
3.5.1
Swelling Ratio
The swelling ratio was calculated by comparing the mean dry mass to the
mean wet mass of the six samples, using the Equation 3.1:
SwellingRatio = MeanWetMass
MeanDryMass
(3.1)
3.5.2
Theoretical VS Experimental Water Content
In order to investigate whether there is post-print swelling, the theoretical and
the experimental water content were compared. The experimental water content
was obtained as the percentage of the subtraction of the mean wet mass to the
mean dry mass. The estimation of the theoretical water mass was a little more
complicated and is presented in this subsection, starting with Equation 3.2,
which gives the water and PEG1000 mass in 1ml of resin.
MH2O + MP EG1000 = 1 −MP EGDA700 −MF e3O4
[VH2O×ρH2O]+[VP EG1000×ρP EG1000] = 1−[VP EGDA700×ρP EGDA700]−[VF e3O4×ρF e3O4]
(3.2)
The H2O and PEG1000 masses were estimated, since they will give the ﬁnal
water content. LAP and QY were neglected due to their small concentration in
the resin. The water volume of the swollen sample is equal to the sum of the
water and the PEG1000 volume into the resin, since when the print is placed
into water, PEG1000 dissolves and water takes its place. The water mass is
equal to the result of the Equation 3.2, since the density of water is equal to
1g/ml.
The total mass of 1ml of the print is calculated as presented in Equation 3.3.
Mprint = MH2O + MP EGDA700 + MF e304
(3.3)
==PAGE:35==
3.6 Printing Resolution
27
Again, LAP and QY were neglected due to their small concentrations. The
theoretical water content is given in Equation 3.4.
TheoreticalWaterContent = MH2O
Mprint
∗100%
(3.4)
The data was analysed using Origin 2019b software. The results of the swelling
analysis are presented in Section 4.4.
Next, the printing resolution is presented and analyzed.
3.6
Printing Resolution
In this step, the printing resolution in the xy plane and z axis is analyzed in
order to understand the accuracy of the imprinted design. Diﬀerent designs
were made to deﬁne the resolution in the z axis and the xy plane. The design
used to deﬁne the z resolution was unsuccessfully printed, a fact that will be
further discussed in Chapter 5. The designs used to deﬁne the xy Resolution
were printed successfully. These designs and their resolutions are presented in
Figures 3.2 and 3.3, with each design printed three times for result robustness.
Figure 3.2: The design that used to deﬁne xy plane and z axis Resolution
Figure 3.3: The design that used to deﬁne xy plane resolution
==PAGE:36==
3.7 Compression
28
3.6.1
xy Resolution
The square vacancies, as well as the pillar diameters, were imaged using a mi-
croscope ("Zeiss Axiscope 40 using a Zeiss 5x/0.13NA objective") and were
analysed in the ImageJ software.
Regarding the ﬁrst design, three diﬀerent-length square vacancies were mea-
sured from each print, as well as three square vacancies for each size and print.
Moreover, three measurements were taken for each square vacancy, presented
in Figures A.12-A.14. The resolution analysis was performed by comparing the
dimensions between the printed square vacancies and the design and it is further
analyzed in Section 4.5.
The second design was analyzed in the same way as the ﬁrst one. Three
samples were printed. From each sample three diﬀerent pillars were analyzed
from each diﬀerent diameter (200 µm, 300 µm, 400 µm) and from each pillar
three diﬀerent diameter measurements were taken and compared to the original
design. Next, the compression properties of the samples were tested.
3.7
Compression
The compression properties of the printed samples were tested using INSTRON
5967 Universal Testing System. The cross-head speed was deﬁned equal to 1
mm/min and a load cell 500N was used. Six samples were printed using the
selected resin, in the design shown in Figure A.19. The samples were tested and
the data selected was used to obtain the compression properties of the printed
material with the use of Origin 2019b software. The pillars were analyzed as a
Neo-Hookean solid.
3.8
Proof of Concept
The last step of the methodology is to test the magnetic actuation of the
materials.
Simple pillars were printed and actuated both from the side and
below, using a Neodymium magnet, grade number 35 (N35, "width × length ×
height = 20 mm × 10 mm × 5 mm").
3.8.1
Actuation from below
In order to test the magnetic actuation a simple process was followed:
• Two diﬀerent designs were printed (3.4a and 3.4b), but only the ﬁrst one
successfully. From the successful design, three samples were printed. As
==PAGE:37==
3.8 Proof of Concept
29
shown in Figure 3.4a, the pillars were printed in a 30 degree angle to
facilitate the actuation. Three pillars from each print were tested and the
2mm height and 30°angle pillars were used, since the 3mm height pillars
were not 3d-printable.
• The pillars were imaged in microscope ("Zeiss Axiscope 40 using a Zeiss
5x/0.13NA objective") before the actuation.
• A magnet (N35- 20*10*5mm) was put 1 mm below the pillars, as shown
in Figure 3.5.
• The same pillars were imaged in the microscope, with the presence of the
magnet.
• The displacement of each pillar due to the magnetic strength was found by
comparing the non actuated pillar to the actuated pillars, using ImageJ,
as presented in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.4: a. The design that printed three times to deﬁne the magnetic ac-
tuation of the pillars.
b. The design printed unsuccessfully to deﬁne the magnetic actu-
ation.
Figure 3.5: A. Non-actuated pillars , B. Actuated pillars
==PAGE:38==
3.8 Proof of Concept
30
Figure 3.6: A. Non-actuated pillars B. Actuated pillars
3.8.2
Actuation on the side
In order to test the side magnetic actuation, the same process is followed, as
described in 3.8.1, but using diﬀerent designs, presented in Figures 3.7a and
3.7b. The ﬁrst design was not printed successfully, so the prints of the second
design were used for the test. Only 3.5mm pillars were tested for actuation dis-
placement, since they have the greatest height, a factor that strongly inﬂuences
magnetic actuation, as illustrated from Equation 2.1, presented in Section 2.1.
The setup of the magnetic actuation is presented in Figure 3.8, and the dis-
placement of pillars 1mm, 3mm, 5mm, 7mm and 9mm away from the magnet
was measured. As shown in Figure 3.9, this is not an accurate displacement
estimation due to several factors that will be discussed analytically in Chapter
5.
Figure 3.7: a. The ﬁrst design for the deﬁnition of the actuation from the side
displacement
b. Straight Pillars design used to deﬁne the actuation on the side
displacement
==PAGE:39==
3.8 Proof of Concept
31
Figure 3.8: Experimental setup illustration of straight pillar Actuation from
the side
Figure 3.9: Micro- image of the actuated pillars: A. 1mm away from the mag-
net, B. 3mm away from the magnet, C. 5mm away from the mag-
net
3.8.3
Simple Actuator
A simple actuator, composed of two inclined pillars, as shown in Figure 3.10,
was designed and printed three times. This structure was also used to test the
actuation from the side and from below, since it could be considered a simpliﬁed
design of the desired actuator. Subsequently, actuation on the side and below
will be tested for this simple actuator.
Figure 3.10: Simple Actuator Design
==PAGE:40==
3.8 Proof of Concept
32
3.8.3.1
Actuation on the side
The actuation on the side was tested by putting a N35 magnet 1mm away of
the pillars.
The non-actuated pillars (Figure A.33) were compared with the
actuated, micro-images of which are presented in Figure A.34.
Figure 3.11
presents the calculation of the displacement due to magnetic actuation, as well
as the experimental setup of the test.
Figure 3.11: The actuation experimental setup and actuation orientation, as
well as the explanation of the displacement calculation.
The pillars’ displacement can be found by the subtraction of the
lengths of the blue lines
3.8.3.2
Below Actuation
Actuation from below was also tested on the simple actuator.
The magnet
was put in a diﬀerent direction (Figure 3.12), so that the actuation will be the
maximum due to the orientation of the magnetic ﬁeld. The distance between
the pillars and the magnet was 1.43 mm. The same experimental procedure,
described in Section 3.8, was repeated and the micro-images, shown in Figure
A.35 were obtained. The results of the analysis are presented in Section 4.7.
Figure 3.12: Simple Actuator- Actuation from below experimental setup
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Analysis & Results
In this Chapter, the results of the analysis of the various factors that aﬀect
the functionality of the material designed for 3d printed magnetically driven
actuators are presented in order to determine the optimal material for the needs
of this work. As presented in Chapter 3 and summarized in Figure 1.9, the
eﬀect of the Fe3O4 sedimentation was tested in two simple experimental setups.
Subsequently, working curves were established in order to deﬁne the optimal
LAP and QY concentrations in the resin. The next step was printing parameter
optimization and, after that, testing the material that resulted from this research
in terms of its swelling and compression properties, as well as its resolution in xy
plane and z axis. The ﬁnal step is the proof of concept analysis. This Chapter
presents that analysis and the results of the experiments discussed in Chapter
3, starting from Sedimentation Characterization and ending with the Proof of
Concept.
4.1
Sedimentation Characterization
4.1.1
The eﬀect of Fe3O4 concentration
The selected data was visualized by creating the Sediment Height VS Time plot
for the various Fe3O4 concentrations, presented in Figure 4.1.
Plotting the sediment height over time for its Fe3O4 concentration is a vital
tool to obtain sedimentation velocities for each solution. This is not the case for
5 and 10 wt % Fe3O4 solutions, since the sediment height decreases too abruptly
on the ﬁrst seconds of the measurements. This fact, in combination with the
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Sedimentation Characterization
34
Figure 4.1: Sediment Height VS Time for 5, 10, 15, 20 and 25 wt% Fe3O4
experimental error expected due to the time needed to take the measurements,
indicates that only the lowest limit of the sedimentation velocity could be reliably
presented.
Figure 4.2 presents that lowest limit for 5 and 10 wt % Fe3O4,
calculated from the slope of the ﬁrst two points of 3.1 solutions and Figure 4.3
presents the sedimentation velocities for the rest of the solutions.
Figure 4.2: a. The points in Sediment Height VS Time Graph used to obtain
the lowest limits of the sedimentation velocities of 5 and 10 wt %
Fe3O4 solutions plotted with the linear regressions,
b. The lowest limits of the sedimentation velocities of 5 and 10
wt% Fe3O4 solutions
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Sedimentation Characterization
35
Figure 4.3: a. The points in Sediment Height VS Time Graph that used to
obtain the sedimentation velocities of 15, 20 and 25 wt % Fe3O4
solutions, plotted with the lineexcesivear regressions.
b.
The sedimentation velocities of 15, 20 and 25 wt % Fe3O4
solutions
As presented in the previous Figures (4.2 and 4.3), it is clear that while
increasing the concentration of the Fe3O4 into the resin, the sedimentation
velocity decreases. Table 4.1 presents the lowest limits of the sedimentation
velocities for 5 and 10 wt% Fe3O4 resins, as well as the sedimentation velocities
of the rest of the solutions. The ideal solution has to be found so that Fe3O4
would be enough to provide the material with suﬃcient magnetic strength and
the sedimentation velocity is kept low, so that it does not aﬀect the printing
==PAGE:44==
4.1 Sedimentation Characterization
36
procedure and the homogeneity of the printed material.
At the same time,
excessive use of Fe3O4 could lead to increased viscosity of the resin and light
scattering during the 3d printing.
wt %
Fe3O4
Lowest Limit
of the Sedimentation Velocity
(mm/min)
Sedimentation
Velocity
(mm/min)
5
14
10
8.5
15
3.5
20
0.8
25
0.25
Table 4.1: The lowest limits of the sedimentation velocities for 5 and 10 wt
% Fe3O4 and the sedimentation velocities of 15, 20 and 25 wt %
Fe3O4
4.1.2
The eﬀect of PEG1000 concentration
The analysis of the sedimentation for varying PEG1000-concentration solutions
followed the same procedure explained in Subsection 4.1.1. Figure 4.4 presents
the sediment height over time and Figure 4.5 the sedimentation velocities for
the diﬀerent PEG1000-concentration resins.
Figure 4.4: Sediment Height VS Time for 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 vol % PEG1000
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Sedimentation Characterization
37
Figure 4.5: a. The points in Sediment Height VS Time Graph that used to
obtain the sedimentation velocities of 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 vol %
PEG1000 solutions, plotted with the linear regression.
b.
The sedimentation velocities of 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 %
PEG1000 solution.
As presented clearly in the Table 4.2, the high viscosity of PEG1000 delays
signiﬁcantly the sedimentation procedure. While increasing the PEG1000 con-
centration into the solution, the sedimentation velocity decreases. On the other
hand, using a high concentration of PEG1000 can lead to a resin too viscous to
be printable. The challenge here is to take advantage of the high viscosity of
PEG1000, without letting it be an inhibitor to the printing.
==PAGE:46==
4.2 Working Curves Establishment- LAP and QY selection
38
vol%
PEG1000
Sedimentation Velocity
(mm/min)
10
0.66
20
0.39
30
0.2
40
0.025
50
0.008
Table 4.2: The sedimentation velocities of 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 vol % PEG1000
4.2
Working Curves Establishment- LAP and QY
selection
The experimental procedure, analyzed in Section 3.3, ended with obtaining the
relationship between the exposure time and the cure depth for each resin (Table
3.3), which are presented in Figure A.7. Figure 4.6 presents the Jacobs working
Curves for the resin: 5mg/mL LAP, 6 mg/mL QY, 15 wt% Fe3O4 and 30
vol% PEGDA, based on the Equation 2.6. The Critical Energy (Ec) and
Penetration Depth (Dp) are obtained, as explained in Section 2.4.3. The
rest of the Jacobs Working Curves are quoted in the Appendix (Figures A.5-
A.8).
Table 4.3 summarizes the Critical Energy and the Penetration Depth
found for each resin.
Figure 4.6: a. Cure depth VS Exposure Time b. The Jacob Working Curve
for 5 mg/mL LAP, 6 mg/mL QY, 30 vol% PEGDA and 15 wt%
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Printing Parameter Optimization
39
1
LAP: 5
QY: 0
(mg/ mL)
2
LAP: 5
QY: 3
(mg/ mL)
3
LAP: 5
QY: 6
(mg/ mL)
4
LAP: 10
QY: 3
(mg/mL)
5
LAP: 10
QY: 6
(mg/mL)
Ec (mJ/cm^2)
16.5
16.8
15.4
15.2
12.4
Dp (µm)
89.5
42.6
36.7
44.6
36.8
Table 4.3: Critical Energy (E0) and Penetration Depth (Dp) for the 5 diﬀerent
resins
As expected, while increasing the concentration of the photoinitiator, the
Critical Energy decreases, and while increasing the absorber concentration, the
Penetration Depth decreases. The QY and LAP concentrations will be further
analyzed in the next Section (4.3), among other parameters.
4.3
Printing Parameter Optimization
Printing parameter optimization is a vital part of this research. A lot of diﬀerent
materials were printed in diﬀerent designs and exposure times in Section 3.4. In
this Section, the results of this research will be presented, as well as the material
selection that the optimization process lead to.
Figures 4.7, 4.8 and 4.9 summarize all the diﬀerent attempts that were made
to ﬁnd the optimal material concentration and exposure time for each diﬀerent
design, presented in Figures A.9, A.10 and A.11 respectively. Also, they present
images of the ﬁnal printed structures, as well as comments regarding their ad-
equacy to our project. All these attempts aimed to optimize the print-ability
and the xy resolution.
==PAGE:48==
4.3 Printing Parameter Optimization
40
Figure 4.7: Printing parameter optimization attempts for the design presented
in A.9. PEGDA, LAP and Fe3O4 concentrations are kept con-
stant at 30 vol%, 5mg/ml and 15 wt % respectively. In the last 2
attempts, two magnets were put on the upside of the building plat-
form to prevent the sedimentation. These attempts failed, since
they destroyed the resin’s homogeneity.
Figure 4.8: Printing parameter optimization attempts for the design presented
in A.11. QY concentration is kept constant at 3mg/ml.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Printing Parameter Optimization
41
Figure 4.9: Printing parameter optimization attempts for the designs pre-
sented in A.10 and A.10. The LAP concentration is kept constant
at 5mg/ml
A variety of diﬀerent materials was tested in diﬀerent layer exposure times
and designs to discover the optimal choice. As illustrated in Figure 4.7-4.9, there
were cases that the printed structures were shorter than they were designed to
be and other cases that the material was overexposed to energy, resulting in
resolution degradation. Moreover, it was observed that the only pillars that
were successfully printed were the pillars of greater diameter (0.5 mm).
The only combination of layer exposure time and material that was printed
successfully to the design’s height and had satisfactory xy resolution was selected
and is presented in Table 4.4. The selection of this material and exposure time
was inﬂuenced by printability and the fact that no important overcuring was
observed and neither had any loss of energy. The material was further tested,
as shown in the previous Chapter.
Exposure Time
10.5 sec
PEGDA
30 vol%
PEG1000
30 vol%
Fe3O4
15 wt%
LAP
5 mg/ml
QY
6 mg/ml
Table 4.4: Printing parameters optimization: The selected exposure time and
materials’ concentrations.
==PAGE:50==
4.4 Swelling
42
4.4
Swelling
After ﬁnishing the printing parameter optimization, we proceed by testing the
swelling properties of the printed samples. The experimental procedure is de-
scribed in Section 3.5. Figure 4.10 presents the wet sample mass in comparison
to the dry sample mass and is shown to be 2.47 (± 0.31) times greater. Fig-
ure 4.11 presents the mass percentage of theoretical water content compared
to the experimental one, concluding that there is only 1% diﬀerence between
them. Having satisfactory swelling results, we proceed to present the resolution
properties of the samples.
Figure 4.10: Wet Sample mass VS Dry Sample mass
Figure 4.11: Mass Percentage of the Theoretical VS Experimental water con-
tent
4.5
Resolution
After having discussed the swelling properties of the printed samples, the next
step is to analyze the resolution.
Regarding the design presented in Figure
==PAGE:51==
4.5 Resolution
43
3.2, the bar charts, shown in Figure 4.12, demonstrate the comparison between
the original design dimensions and the 3d printed sample measurements. As
observed in Figure 4.12, the standard deviation regarding the small square va-
cancies is higher in comparison to the medium and big square vacancies, since
the former were not printed accurately.
Regarding the design, shown in Figure 3.3, the comparison between the
original and design dimensions is depicted in Figure 4.13. Again, for smaller
structures, the standard deviation is slightly higher. For 0.4 mm diameter pillars
we have slightly better accuracy, compared to 0.2 and 0.3 mm.
Next, the properties of the material in compression are presented.
Figure 4.12: Original Design Dimensions VS 3d printed samples measure-
ments for the three diﬀerent-length vacancies. The original de-
sign dimensions are also presented on the right side of the ﬁgure,
as well as micro-images at the bottom of it.
==PAGE:52==
4.6 Compression
44
Figure 4.13: Original Design Dimensions VS 3d printed samples diameters for
the three diﬀerent-diameter pillars. The original design dimen-
sions are also presented on the right side of the ﬁgure, as well as
micro-images at the bottom of it.
4.6
Compression
The compression properties of the material were tested, as described in Section
3.7. As shown in Figure 4.14, the toughness, the compressive strength,
the fracture strength, as well as the shear modulus were obtained, and
presented in Table 4.5.
Figure 4.14: 1. Compressive stress VS Strain, 2. Shear Modulus
==PAGE:53==
4.7 Proof of Concept
45
Material Properties in Compression
Compressive Strength
0.9MPa
Stad. Dev. : 0.127
Fracture Strain
-0.52
Stad. Dev. : 0.012
Toughness
0.147 kJ/m3
Stad. Dev. : 0.017
Shear Modulus
0.24 MPa
Stad. Dev. : 0.0121
Table 4.5: The mean Compressive strength, Fracture Strain, Toughness and
Shear Modulus of the 6 samples, as well as the Standard deviations.
4.7
Proof of Concept
The ﬁnal step is to analyse the proof of concept. The ﬁrst design (3.7a) was not
printed successfully. Larger diameter pillars should be designed for the given
length (3.7b).
There was no displacement for either of the cases, described in Sections 3.8.1
and 3.8.3.2 that included actuation from below. Regarding the simple actuator’s
actuation from the side, described in Section 3.8.3.1, the displacement was found
equal to 162.79 µm.
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 5
Discussion
The main focus of this thesis was to investigate the feasibility of engineering
stereolithographic 3D printed materials loaded with ferrimagnetic particles that
can be used to generate magnetically driven actuators suitable for cell matura-
tion. Several tests were preformed to ﬁnd the optimal material concentrations
and printing parameters, as well as to estimate the adequacy of the material
for its intended use. In this Chapter, we discuss whether the experimental data
analysis support our hypothesis and lay out interesting observations that were
made.
5.1
Theoretical and Experimental Sedimentation
Results
A useful method of estimating the accuracy of our results is to compare the
theoretical expected results to the experimental results. The theoretical sed-
imentation velocity for the resin: 30 vol % PEGDA, 30 vol % PEG1000 and
15 wt% Fe3O4 in 293 Kelvin is estimated and compared to the experimental
sedimentation velocity of the same resin, as shown in Figure 4.5. Using the
Equation 2.3, that was presented in Section 2.4.1.1, the diﬀerent factors of the
equation are estimated and several assumptions are taken and presented below:
• Particle diameter: d= 5 × 10−6m.
The Fe3O4 particle diameter is
obtained from the label of the product "SIGMA ALDRICH, 310069-25G".
• Fluid Density: ρf = 1, 066 × 103kg/m3. The ﬂuid density was obtained
by adding the several substances of the ﬂuid, using their concentrations
==PAGE:55==
5.2 xy plane and z axis resolution observations
47
and densities, as presented below:
ρf = 30
100ρP EGDA + 30
100ρP EG1000 + 40
100ρH2O
(5.1)
PEG1000 and PEGDA densities were also acquired by the labels of the
products ("ALDRICH, 1003092963" and "SIGMA ALDRICH,90112229").
• Particle density: ρp = 5 × 103kg/m3. The Fe3O4 particle density is
obtained from the label of the product "SIGMA ALDRICH, 310069-25G".
• Dynamic viscosity: µ= 6.6 ×10−3 Pa s. The dynamic viscosity of the
resin was obtained from Debasmita Dash et al. research [Das et al., 2016].
The assumption used here to obtain the dynamic viscosity is that PEGDA
and PEG1000 contribute equally to the viscosity and that the total con-
centration of PEGDA and PEG1000 is 60 wt %, which is not far from 60
vol %, due to PEG1000 and PEGDA similar densities (1120 kg/m3 and
1120 kg/m3 respectively).
• The theoretical velocity is calculated equal to 8.05 ×10−6m/sec.
On the other hand, the experimental velocity, obtained from Figure 4.5, is 3.33
×10−6m/sec. As seen, both the theoretical and the experimental sedimentation
velocities share the same order of magnitude. The deviation between them is
attributed to the assumptions made during the theoretical analysis, as well as
to the possible experimental error. Moreover, the deviation could be attributed
to the fact that the theoretical analysis does not take into consideration the
particle-particle interaction, which aﬀects the experimental sedimentation ve-
locity.
5.2
xy plane and z axis resolution observations
In the current study, analysis of both z axis and the xy plane were attempted.
Regarding z axis resolution, analysis was not possible due to the insurmount-
able diﬃculty of printing complex structures with the selected material. More
speciﬁcally, the structures fell from the printing platform during the printing
process. This fact could be attributed to insuﬃcient QY concentration into the
resin and/or a lack of homogeneity, caused by the sedimentation process during
printing.
Regarding xy plane resolution, three diﬀerent sizes of pillars and vacancies
were measured and compared to the original design dimensions. The printed
square vacancies were smaller than in the designs, while the pillar diameters
measured were larger. This fact could be attributed to lateral material over-
polymerization, as well as light scattering that clearly undermines the print-
ing accuracy and reduces the xy plane resolution. Over-polymerization itself
could be attributed to an increased concentration of PEGDA and/or LAP into
the resin. In this case, more reactive monomers connect to form molecules that
will keep growing until two chains combine and terminate the reaction.
==PAGE:56==
5.3 Swelling Results
48
5.3
Swelling Results
The presence of PEG1000 into the resin made it a necessity to analyze the
swelling behavior of the material. The theoretical water content was found to
be almost identical to the experimental one, with only a 1% deviation that
could be attributed to measuring uncertainty. This leads to the conclusion that
there is no post-print swelling. That absence of post-print swelling is of vital
importance to ensure that all generated structures remain compliant with their
initial design and calculated properties, as well as avoiding the structure’s failure
that could be caused due to the opposite stresses coming from the hydrodynamic
forces, in presence of the water and the constraints caused from the one pillar’s
side ﬁxation onto the cover glass.
5.4
Design Factors Aﬀecting Print-ability
During most of the research stages of this work diﬀerent designs were printed and
used to analyse the adequacy of the material to be used for magnetic actuation.
We have already discussed how material composition inﬂuences the print-ability
of the structures. What’s left is to discuss is how the diﬀerent designs aﬀect
the print-ability of a given material. As mentioned in Section 3.8.1, in order
to test the actuation from below, two diﬀerent designs were printed, (3.4a and
3.4b). The ﬁrst design was printed successfully, unlike the second. This fact is
attributed to two diﬀerent factors:
1. The geometry of the structure in Figure 3.4b is more susceptible to the
inﬂuence of ﬂuid dynamics. The high viscosity of the resin leads to the
application of extra forces on the structure, which could fail at the pivot
point.
2. Every layer printed results in deterioration of the foil, which leads to in-
creased adhesion of the print to the foil and potential delamination during
the printing process. In the design presented in Figure 3.4a, the slope
from the base of the pillar results in the foil deteriorating on diﬀerent
spots, preventing the adhesion problem that could also be responsible for
the printing inability, seen in Figure 3.4b.
The last topic of discussion is proving the validity of our hypothesis. Sub-
sequently, technical problems of the proof of concept, as well as its evaluation
will be discussed below.
==PAGE:57==
5.5 Proof of Concept - Technical issues
49
5.5
Proof of Concept - Technical issues
The actuation of simple pillars were tested to prove the capability of the engi-
neered material to be used for the construction of 3d-printed magnetic actuators.
Actuation from the side was both analysed for pillars, as well as for simple actu-
ators. Regarding simple pillars, the actuation displacement estimation was not
possible due to the high length of the pillars (3.5 mm). For that same reason,
there was also diﬃculty in achieving a microscope focus that could both include
the base of the pillar and the top of it, the horizontal distance of which would
give us the ﬁnal displacement.
5.6
Proof of Concept - Hypothesis Rejection
The actuation from below is vital for creating magnetic actuators for cell matu-
ration. In order to be capable of imitating cardiac movement, it is essential that
the actuator follows the movement, shown in Figure 5.1. This movement can be
achieved by introducing and removing the magnet below the actuator. More-
over, it is important that the actuators will ﬁt a 96 well plate and be actuated
simultaneously, while imaged from above.
Figure 5.1: The repeated actuation-reset movement for cell maturation
Analyzing the experimental data, zero displacement was found when actuat-
ing from below, as presented in Section 4.7. This statement is further supported
by Equation 2.1, presented in Section 2.1.
Using this Equation, the theoretical magnetic ﬁeld gradient for 10◦angle
actuation is calculated :
∇B =
2×(713×103[P a])×(0.00035[m2])× π
18
(480×103[ A
m ])×0.03×(0.02[m3])×sin( π
6 )
∇B = 529.31 T
m
On the other hand, a COMSOL analysis, performed by supervisor Christina
Schmidleithner, investigating the magnetic ﬂux density (B), as well as the mag-
==PAGE:58==
5.6 Proof of Concept - Hypothesis Rejection
50
netic ﬁeld gradient (∇B) in two diﬀerent positions of the magnet (1 mm and
2 mm above the center of the narrow side of the magnet). Figure 5.2 presents
the magnetic ﬂux density norm and the magnetic ﬂux density of the magnet.
As presented in Table 5.1, the magnetic ﬁeld gradient (∇B) produced 1 mm
above the center of the narrow side of the magnet equals to 80 T/m, and even
less further away from it. It is obvious that this number is way smaller than
the magnetic ﬁeld gradient (∇B) needed for 10◦actuation, fact that clearly
explains the zero actuation, as well as the rejection of hypothesis.
Figure 5.2: COMSOL Analysis: The magnetic ﬂux density norm in diﬀerent
positions of the magnet is presented via the multi-slice and the
magnetic ﬂux density in logarithmic scale is presented via the yel-
low arrows
Position
Magnetic ﬂux density
Gradient of B
1mm above the center of
the narrow side of the magnet
0.335 T
120 T/m
2mm above the center of
the narrow side of the magnet
0.209T
80 T/m
Table 5.1: Comsol Analysis: The magnetic ﬂux density and the gradient of B,
depending on the distance from the center of the narrow side of the
magnet
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This project explored the possibility of engineering materials that could be used
to 3d-print magnetically driven micro-actuators.
The presence of Fe3O4 particles led to the necessity of analyzing the sedi-
mentation process. This analysis helped to deﬁne both the Fe3O4 and PEG1000
concentration, with the later used to delay the sedimentation due to its high
viscosity. Jacobs working curves were also established in an attempt to deﬁne
the LAP and QY concentration within the resin.
The optimal material, as well as the printing parameters were found after
a variety of experiments: PEGDA: 30 vol%, PEG1000: 30 vol%, Fe3O4: 15
wt%, LAP: 5mg/ml, QY: 6 mg/mg. During the experiments, a lot of diﬀerent
materials were printed with diﬀerent layer exposure times and designs. All of
them, except for the selected material with 10.5 sec deﬁned exposure time, failed
to be adequately printed due to lack of energy or not feasible xy resolution due
to overcuring and/or light scattering.
The selected material was then analyzed for its resolution both in xy plane
and z axis. Regarding xy plane, the resolution was shown to be higher for larger
structures and degraded for smaller ones. The swelling analysis of the structures
was promising and without post-print swelling.
The ﬁnal, but vital test was to prove the concept that the engineered 3d-
printed material can be magnetically actuated, ideally from below, so that the
samples will ﬁt a 96 well plate, while micro-imaged from above. As expected
from the theoretical analysis, this was not the case. The simple angle-pillar
actuator did not perform any displacement in the presence of a magnet from
below.
==PAGE:60==
Despite the sub-optimal results, the further study of materials and de-
signs for engineering magnetically driven micro-actuators for cell maturation
is strongly encouraged.
Diﬀerent designs can be printed using diﬀerent fer-
rimagnetic resins to ﬁnd the optimal solution to this problem and create an
eﬃcient and contactless agent for cell maturation.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 7
Outlook
After having presented the whole research held for the current Thesis, as well
as the discussion of the results, recommendations for future research and ideas
for further development are proposed.
To begin with, the beneﬁts of a magnetic actuator used for cell maturation
are many, with their main beneﬁt being that cell actuation can be contactless,
avoiding possible cell infection or damage. While the results of this study were
not very promising for creating the magnetic actuators, there are still ways to
improve them. A more eﬃcient design should be further tested. The match-
like pillar design has been already tested from Zhongying Ji et.al., in 2017
[Ji et al., 2017]. A structure that is composed of a match-like pillar of pure resin
and the magnetic part at the top (Figure 7.1) makes it possible to have greater
length, as well as parts of smaller radius, factors which facilitate the actuation, as
Equation 2.1 describes. As future research, this match-like structure should be
investigated by trying to maximize the solid loading at the top. It could also be
eﬃcient to increase the length of the structure, decrease the radius and actuate
the system with strong magnets. Actuation from below should be further tested
to ensure that the match-like actuator can be used for cell maturation in a 96
well plate, while imaged from above.
==PAGE:62==
Figure 7.1: A match like pillar loaded with Fe3O4 particles only at the top
==PAGE:63==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Sedimentation- Methods
The sedimentation analysis started with placing the diﬀerent a. Fe3O4 con-
centration resins and b.
PEG1000 concentration resins, in ﬁve diﬀerent but
identical tubes and measure the sediment height at regular time intervals, as
illustrated in the following Figures:
Figure A.1: a. The experimental setup with the varying Fe3O4 concentrations
b. The experimental setup with varying PEG1000 concentrations
==PAGE:64==
A.2 Working Curves- Methods and Analysis
Figure A.2: Display of the sedimentation process of varying Fe3O4 concen-
trations over the time
Figure A.3: Display of the sedimentation process of varying PEG1000 concen-
trations over the time
A.2
Working Curves- Methods and Analysis
The working curves were established to ﬁnd out the eﬀect of the diﬀerent LAP
and QY concentrations into the resin.
For this purpose, several resins were
tested and the Exposure Time Vs Cure Depth plots were obtained. The loga-
rithmic plots of Cure depth and Energy dosage gave the Jacobs working curves,
==PAGE:65==
A.2 Working Curves- Methods and Analysis
from which we drew important information. Figure A.4 describes the experi-
mental setup for the working curves establishment and Figures A.5-A.8 present
the working curves for each diﬀerent resin.
Figure A.4: Working Curves Establishment Experimental setup
Figure A.5: a. Cure depth VS Exposure Time b.The Jacob Working Curve
for 5mg/mL LAP, 0 mg/mL QY, 30 vol% PEGDA and 15 wt%
Fe3O4
==PAGE:66==
A.2 Working Curves- Methods and Analysis
Figure A.6: a. Cure depth VS Exposure Time b.The Jacob Working Curve
for 5mg/mL LAP, 3 mg/mL QY, 30 vol% PEGDA and 15 wt%
Fe3O4
Figure A.7: a. Cure depth VS Exposure Time b. The Jacob Working Curve
for 10mg/mL LAP, 3 mg/mL QY, 30 vol% PEGDA and 15 wt%
Fe3O4
==PAGE:67==
A.3 Printing Parameter Optimization
Figure A.8: a. Cure depth VS Exposure Time b. The Jacob Working Curve
for 10mg/mL LAP, 6 mg/mL QY, 30 vol% PEGDA and 15 wt%
Fe3O4
A.3
Printing Parameter Optimization
Diﬀerent designs were printed during the printing parameter optimization. Each
one of the designed structures gives us important information both for the se-
lected material and the exposure time.
For instance, the diﬀerent diameter
pillars of design, illustrated in Figure A.10, were used to explore the possibili-
ties of printing diﬀerent diameter structures, and the eﬀect of the diameter in
the print-ability. The square vacancies, given in the design presented in Figure
A.11, helps the xy resolution analysis and the z direction intrusions of the boxes,
shown in the same design are used to analyze the z direction resolution.
Figure A.9: Printing Parameter Optimization First Design
==PAGE:68==
A.4 Resolution
Figure A.10: Printing Parameter Optimization Second Design
Figure A.11: Printing Parameter Optimization Third Design
A.4
Resolution
The printing resolution is important to be analyzed both in xy plane and z direc-
tion. After the designs were printed three times, micro-images of the structures
were taken and compared to the original design dimensions. From each print
three diﬀerent structures were analyzed. From each structure three identical
shapes were analyzed (large, medium or small, square vacancy or pillar). This
procedure was repeated for all the diﬀerent shapes and pillars.
Three mea-
surements were taken of each vacancy or pillar. Figures A.12-A.14 present the
micro-image of the diﬀerent-size square holes and Figures A.15-A.17 the micro-
images of the diﬀerent pillar diameters.
==PAGE:69==
A.4 Resolution
Figure A.12: Three measurements were obtained in each small square vacancy
and then compared to the original design dimensions
Figure A.13: Three measurements were obtained in each medium square va-
cancy and then compared to the original design dimensions
==PAGE:70==
A.4 Resolution
Figure A.14: Three measurements were obtained in each big square vacancy
and then compared to the original design dimensions
Figure A.15: Three diameter measurements were obtained in each 0.2 mm
pillar and then compared to the original design dimensions
==PAGE:71==
A.5 Swelling
Figure A.16: Three diameter measurements were obtained in each 0.3 mm
pillar and then compared to the original design dimensions
Figure A.17: Three diameter measurements were obtained in each 0.4 mm
pillar and then compared to the original design dimensions
A.5
Swelling
In order to analyze the swelling properties of the material, the design illustrated
in Figure A.18 was printed.
==PAGE:72==
A.6 Compression
Figure A.18: The design used to deﬁne the swelling properties of the printed
pillars
A.6
Compression
The compression properties of the printed material were also analysed. The
design used for this purpose is given in Figure A.19. Figures 4.14 and A.20-
A.24 show all the printed samples’ compression analysis.
Figure A.19: The design used to deﬁne the compression properties of the 3d
printed samples
==PAGE:73==
A.6 Compression
Figure A.20: The compression properties of the second sample
Figure A.21: The compression properties of the third sample
Figure A.22: The compression properties of the forth sample
==PAGE:74==
A.7 Proof of Concept
Figure A.23: The compression properties of the ﬁfth sample
Figure A.24: The compression properties of the sixth sample
A.7
Proof of Concept
A.7.1
Actuation from below
Micro-images were taken for both non-actuated and actuated pillars. The actu-
ation was from below. The micro-images are presented in Figures A.25 -A.32:
==PAGE:75==
A.7 Proof of Concept
Figure A.25: A. Non actuated pillar B. Actuated pillar
Figure A.26: A. Non actuated pillar B. Actuated pillar
Figure A.27: A. Non actuated pillar B. Actuated pillar
==PAGE:76==
A.7 Proof of Concept
Figure A.28: A. Non actuated pillar B. Actuated pillar
Figure A.29: A. Non actuated pillar B. Actuated pillar
Figure A.30: A. Non actuated pillar B. Actuated pillar
==PAGE:77==
A.7 Proof of Concept
Figure A.31: A. Non actuated pillar B. Actuated pillar
Figure A.32: A. Non actuated pillar B. Actuated pillar
A.7.2
Simple Actuator
A.7.2.1
Actuation from the side
The simple actuator was printed and actuated from the side. Micro-images were
taken for both the non-actuated and actuated pillars (Figures A.33-A.34).
==PAGE:78==
A.7 Proof of Concept
Figure A.33: Non actuated pillars used to be compared with the actuated
pillars and ﬁnd out the displacement
Figure A.34: Actuated pillars displacement
A.7.2.2
Actuation from below
Actuation from below of the simple actuator was also tested. Figure A.35 shows
three non actuated simple actuators on the left side, as well as these three
actuated simple actuators on the right side.
==PAGE:79==
A.7 Proof of Concept
Figure A.35: a.
No actuated pillars b.
Pillars actuated with one magnet
below
==PAGE:80==
Bibliography
[A Peppas et al., 2016] A Peppas, N., Hilt, Z., Khademhosseini, A., and Langer,
R. (2016). Hydrogels in biology and medicine: From molecular principles to
bionanotechnology. Adv. Mater., 18:1345–1360.
[A Weiss et al., 1996] A Weiss, J., N Maker, B., and Govindjee, S. (1996). Fi-
nite element implementation of incompressible, transversely isotropic hyper-
elasticity,. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 135(1-
2):107–128.
[Azukizawa et al., 2018] Azukizawa, S., Shinoda, H., Tokumaru, K., and
Tsumori, F. (2018). 3d printing system of magnetic anisotropy for artiﬁcial
cilia. Journal of Photopolymer Science and Technology, 31:139–144.
[Bennett, 2017] Bennett, J. (2017). Measuring uv curing parameters of commer-
cial photopolymers used in additive manufacturing. Additive Manufacturing,
18:203–212.
[Chhibber et al., 2001] Chhibber, T., Dev Jayant, R., Bapurao Shinde, R., and
Lahooti, B. (2001). Hydrogels for tissue engineering. Chem. Rev., 101:1869–
1880.
[Das et al., 2016] Das, D., Mallika, C., and Mudali, K. M. (2016). Temperature
and concentration dependence of viscosity of binary mixtures of peg-1000 +
water. Chemical Product and Process Modeling, 12(2).
[Dunn and Palecek, 2006] Dunn, K. and Palecek, S. (2006). Engineering scal-
able manufacturing of high-quality stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes for car-
diac tissue repair. Front. Med., 24:110.
[Elliott et al., 2011] Elliott, D., R Braam, S., Koutsis, K., S Ng, E., Jenny, R.,
L Lagerqvist, E., Biben, C., Hatzistavrou, T., E Hirst, C., C Yu, Q., J P
Skelton, R., Ward-van Oostwaard, D., Mei Lim, S., Khammy, O., Li, X.,
M Hawes, S., P Davis, R., L Goulburn, A., Passier, R., W J Prall, O., w
Pouton, J. C., M Kaye, D., L Mummery, C., G Elefanty, A., and G Stanley,
E. (2011). Nkx2-5egfp/w hescs for isolation of human cardiac progenitors and
cardiomyocytes. Nat. Methods, 8:1037–1040.
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Evans and Superﬁne, 2010] Evans, B. and Superﬁne, R. (2010). pages 219–222.
[Fairbanks et al., 2009] Fairbanks, B., P Schwartz, M., N Bowman, C., and
Anseth, K. (2009).
Photoinitiated polymerization of peg-diacrylate with
lithium phenyl-2,4,6-trimethylbenzoylphosphinate: Polymerization rate and
cytocompatibility. Biomaterials, 30(35):6702–7.
[Gregersen, 2021] Gregersen, E. (2021). Stokes’s law. In Encyclopedia Britan-
nica.
[H Lee et al., 2000] H Lee, J., K Prud’homme, R., and A Aksay, I. (2000). Cure
depth in photopolymerization: Experiments and theory. Journal of Materials
Research volume, 16):3536–3544.
[Hill, 2020] Hill, A. (2020). Analytical Techniques in Biochemistry. Humana,
New York, NY.
[Irimia Vladu, 2014] Irimia Vladu, M. (2014). Green electronics: biodegradable
and biocompatible materials and devices for sustainable future. Chem. Soc.
Rev, 43:588–610.
[J H Chong et al., 2014a] J H Chong, J., Yang, X., W Don, C., Minami, E., Liu,
Y.-W., J Weyers, J., M Mahoney, W., Van Biber, B., M Cook, S., J Palpant,
N., A Gantz, J., James A Fugate and, V. M., Gough, M., and W Vogel,
K. (2014a). Human embryonic-stem-cell-derived cardiomyocytes regenerate
non-human primate hearts. Nature, 540:273–277.
[J H Chong et al., 2014b] J H Chong, J., Yang, X., W Don, C., Minami, E.,
Liu, Y.-W., J Weyers, J., M Mahoney, W., Van Biber, B., M Cook, S.,
Palpant, N., A Gantz, J., A Fugate, J., and Muskheli, V. (2014b). Human
embryonic-stem-cell-derived cardiomyocytes regenerate non-human primate
hearts. Nature, 520:273–277.
[Jabbari et al., 2016] Jabbari, E., Leijten, J., Xu, Q., and Khademhosseini, A.
(2016). The matrix reloaded: the evolution of regenerative hydrogels. Mate-
rials Today, 19(4):190–196.
[Ji et al., 2017] Ji, Z., Changyou, Y., Yu, B., Wang, X., and Zhou, F. (2017).
Multimaterials 3d printing for free assembly manufacturing of magnetic driv-
ing soft actuator. Advanced Materials Interfaces, 4(22).
[Jolivet et al., 2004] Jolivet, J.-P., Chanéaca, C., and Tronc, E. (2004). Iron
oxide chemistry. from molecular clusters to extended solid networks. Chemical
Communications, 5):481–487.
[Jun TaeHuh et al., 2020] Jun TaeHuh, J., J Yoo, A., and Atala Sang , J.
(2020). Principles of Tissue Engineering. Academic Press.
[Jung and Bernstein, 2014] Jung, G. and Bernstein, D. (2014). hipsc modeling
of inherited cardiomyopathies. Curr. Treat Options Cardiovasc. Med., 16:320.
[K Aligizaki et al., 2000] K Aligizaki, K., R de Rooij, M., and D Macdonald,
D. (2000).
Analysis of iron oxides accumulating at the interface between
aggregates and cement paste. Cement and Concrete Research, 30(12):1941–
1945.
==PAGE:82==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Kjær Christensen et al., 2020] Kjær Christensen, R., von Halling Laier, C.,
Kiziltay, A., Wilson, S., and Bent Larsen, N. (2020). 3d printed hydrogel
multiassay platforms for robust generation of engineered contractile tissues.
Biomacromolecules, 21(2):356–365.
[Kourki et al., 2012] Kourki, H., Hossein, M., and Famili, N. (2012). Particle
sedimentation: eﬀect of polymer concentration on particle–particle interac-
tion. Powder Technology, 221:137–143.
[Li et al., 2020] Li, J., ChengtieWu, K Chu, P., and Gelinsky, M. (2020). 3d
printing of hydrogels: Rational design strategies and emerging biomedical
applications. Materials Science and Engineering: R: Reports, 140.
[Li, 2020] Li, Y. (2020). Theoretical prediction and experimental validation of
the digital light processing (dlp) working curve for photocurable materials.
Additive Manufacturing, 37(2)):15–17.
[Mascolo et al., 2013] Mascolo, M. C., PeiYongbing Pei, Y., and A Ring, T.
(2013). Room temperature co-precipitation synthesis of magnetite nanopar-
ticles in a large ph window with diﬀerent bases. Materials, 6(12).
[Mazzola and Di Pasquale, 2020] Mazzola, M. and Di Pasquale, E. (2020). To-
ward cardiac regeneration: Combination of pluripotent stem cell-based ther-
apies and bioengineering strategies. Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotech-
nology, 8:455.
[Naokazu and Tetsuya, 1964] Naokazu, K. and Tetsuya, H. (1964). Dielectric
properties of polyethylene glycols : Dielectric relaxation in solid state (special
issue on polymer chemistry, i). Bulletin of the Institute for Chemical Research,
42(2-3):115–127.
[Printing and Prototyping, 2017] Printing, D. and Prototyping, R. (2017). Dif-
ferent types of 3d printing methods for 3d printers.
[Sendoh et al., 2003] Sendoh, M., Ishiyama, K., and Ara, K. (2003). Fabrication
of magnetic actuator for use in a capsule endoscope. IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics, 39(5):3232–3234.
[Shiba et al., 2016] Shiba, Y., Gomibuchi, T., Seto, T., Wada, Y., Ichimura,
H., Tanaka, Y., Ogasawara, T., Okada, K., Shiba, N., Sakamoto, K., Ido,
D., Shiina, T., Ohkura, M., Nakai, J., Uno, N., Kazuki, Y., Oshimura, M.,
Minami, I., and Ikeda, U. (2016). Allogeneic transplantation of ips cell-derived
cardiomyocytes regenerates primate hearts. Nature, 538:388–391.
[Sinnecker et al., 2014] Sinnecker, D., Laugwitz, K.-L., and Moretti, A. (2014).
Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes for drug development
and toxicity testing. Pharmacol. Ther., 143:246–252.
[Spitha et al., 2021] Spitha, N., S Doolittle, P., R Buchberger, A., and Paz-
icni, S. (2021).
Simulation-based guided inquiry activity for deriving the
beer–lambert law. Journal of Chemical Education, 98(5):1705–1711.
[Treloar, 2005] Treloar, L. R. G. (2005). The physics of rubber elasticity. Claren-
don Press.
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Uosaki et al., 2011] Uosaki, H., Fukushima, H., Takeuchi, A., Matsuoka, S.,
Nakatsuji, N., Yamanaka, S., and Yamashita, J. (2011). Eﬃcient and scalable
puriﬁcation of cardiomyocytes from human embryonic and induced pluripo-
tent stem cells by vcam1 surface expression. PLoS One, 18.
[W Burridge et al., 2012] W Burridge, P., Keller, G., D Gold, J., , and C Wu,
J. (2012). Production of de novo cardiomyocytes: human pluripotent stem
cell diﬀerentiation and direct reprogramming. Cell Stem, 10:16–28.
[WELSIM, 2020] WELSIM (2020). Neo-hookean hyperelastic model for nonlin-
ear ﬁnite element analysis.
[Widyatmoko, 2017] Widyatmoko, D. (2017). Sustainability of bituminous ma-
terials (Second Edition). Orthodontic Applications of Biomaterials.
[Yamanaka and Takahashi, 2006] Yamanaka, S. and Takahashi, K. (2006). In-
duction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult ﬁbroblast
cultures by deﬁned factors. Cell, 126 (4):663–76.
[Yang et al., 2008] Yang, L., H Soonpaa, M., D Adler, E., K Roepke, T., and
J Kattman, S. (2008). Human cardiovascular progenitor cells develop from a
kdr+ embryonic-stem-cell-derived population. Nature, 453:524–528.
[Yang et al., 2015] Yang, W., Yan, W., Yu, H., and Liang, W. (2015). Rapid
fabrication of hydrogel microstructures using uv-induced projection printing.
Micromachines, 6(12):1903–1913.
[Zhang and B Larsen, 2017] Zhang, R. and B Larsen, N. (2017). Stereolitho-
graphic hydrogel printing of 3d culture chips with biofunctionalized complex
3d perfusion networks. Lab on a Chip, 24.
[Švec et al., 2003] Švec, F., B Tennikova, T., and Deyl, Z. (2003). Monolithic
Materials: Preparation, Properties and Applications. Principles of Organic
Chemistry.
