==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master’s thesis
Combining bicycle and public transport - empirical study of large-scale
data sources
Author:
in collaboration with:
Rasmus Westberg Damgaard, s154682
January 23rd 2022
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This thesis is a graduation project for the Master’s programme in Transport and Logistics at the Technical
University of Denmark. The project period ran from August 2’nd 2021 to January 23’rd 2022.
The learning objectives for this thesis are presented in the introduction.
First I would like to thank my thesis advisors Associate Professor Thomas Kjær Rasmussen and Post.
Doc. Mads Paulsen from DTU. They have consistently held my motivation high during the project
period through weekly meetings, where they would assist in steering the project in an exciting and
rewarding direction. They were at all times ready to help when I had questions and would often immerse
themselves in details of preliminary ﬁndings with cheer, curiosity and constructive feedback.
I would also like to thank my colleagues at Traﬁkselskabet Movia, who repeatedly would follow up on
my thesis progression. Through presentations of preliminary ﬁndings, they would make suggestions that
were based on their knowledge from working daily with public transport. Furthermore, they assisted in the
delivery of data and in answering questions about real-world behaviour that was found to aﬀect the data.
Finally, a big thank you to my nearest friends and family, who assisted with constructive feedback,
support, a pair of fresh eyes for proofreading and providing a change of scenery when the home-oﬃce
became too monotonous.
A last thanks to Movia, DTU and H¨ovding for access to data.
Rasmus W. Damgaard
DTU Lyngby, Januar 2022.
1
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The public transport sector is important when looking for ways to create a more sustainable world. By
combining bicycle trips with public transport, the total travel time of journeys decrease and become a more
competitive alternative to car. The decision of using your bike in combination with a public transport trip
can be aﬀected by many diﬀerent factors. This thesis presents an inductive and statistical approach for
determining and quantifying the impact that diﬀerent factors have on this choice. These factors are created
through a combination of several data sources, consisting of revealed transport data (H¨ovding bicycle
GPS data and Rejsekort public transport ticketing system data), weather conditions, public transport
characteristics and bus-stop and station features. The ﬁrst part of the analysis used an aggregate logistic
regression, which showed that bus-stops that were part of the strategical bus-network, had a higher share of
bicycle check-ins. furthermore, it revealed that this share was lower for bus-stops with an increased average
length of bicycle trips arriving and for bus-stops with a higher average number of passengers aboard the
busses arriving. In order to increase the number of signiﬁcant variables, the second part of the analysis
used a dis-aggregate logistic regression and could through Random Utility Theory evaluate the individual
travelers preferences and the probability of bringing a bike on their public transport trip.
This model
showed, through interpretation of estimates, that the probability of taking the bike along on your public
transport trip increases, when: traveling outside rush hours, having a trip with less transfers or longer
distances, travelling with Metro or Train compared to bus, having colder or hotter temperatures compared
to 10-17 degrees Celsius and several other factors related to the location of boarding and weather conditions.
The conclusions drawn from the results and thus the insight gained, can be used as an inspiration for public
transport providers on which factors to focus on, when taking the next step towards a more sustainable and
attractive intermodal public transport system.
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
4
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Learning objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Reading instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Background
7
2.1
Intermodality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Accommodating intermodal transport in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Previous research on intermodal traveling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methodology
9
3.1
Logistic regression and Random Utility Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Model estimated parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Data
12
4.1
Rejsekorts data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Weather data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2.1
Wind gust and wind direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2.2
Precipitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2.3
Temperature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
Conzoom
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4
H˜ovding data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Models and Results
18
5.1
Aggregate logistic regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.1.1
Dependent variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.1.2
Independent variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.1.3
Model selection and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2
Dis-aggregate logistic regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2.1
Dependent variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2.2
Independent variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2.3
Variable correlation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2.4
Model Estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.5
Choice probability cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Discussion
33
7
Conclusion
35
References
37
8
Appendix
38
3
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
Denmark has a national ambition of reducing their CO2 emissions by 70% before 2030 in all sectors, in-
cluding the transport sector. A general consensus on how to reach this goal revolves around sustainable
development of transport systems. ”Soft traﬃc before public transport before private cars” is a catch-phrase
of a the engineering association IDA [1], who wishes to contribute their view on how to reduce emissions.
They conclude that 50% of CO2 emissions in the transport sector happen on the medium-long trips with
a length between 14 and 72 kilometers, which might seem counter-intuitive to their catch-phrase, as trips
this long often cannot be traversed solely by foot or bike. They present a solution method for reducing the
CO2 emissions, which is to invest in the bicycle infrastructure and the combination of biking and public
transport. In this way, future investments do not go into the expansion of existing road-network for private
transport, but into a societal behavioural change towards sustainable transport. Thus, resulting in a more
eﬃcient use of the current road-network.
According to the Danish Cyclists’ Federation, 27% of all access trips to train-stations in Denmark are done
by bike, whereas the egress trips from train-stations constitute only 8%.
Dutch experiences show that
these numbers could be increased to 43% and 10-15%, respectively, showing that other countries have found
methods for increasing intermodality in public transport, proving the potential of investing in inter-modal
commodities here in Denmark [2]. With these investments into the ﬁrst and last leg of journeys with public
transport, the catchment area of public transport stops and stations will expand and the public transport
coverage will increase, while the total travel time of public transport trips will become more competitive
with private transport travel time, as seen in ﬁgure 1 [3].
(a) Diﬀerence in travel time [minutes] to Copenhagen, be-
tween car and public transport using walk as access mode
to public transport.
(b) Diﬀerence in travel time [minutes] to Copenhagen, be-
tween car and public transport using bike as access mode
to public transport.
Figure 1: Diﬀerence in travel time between car and public transport for trips in the Capital Region ending
at Copenhagen H, given two diﬀerent access modes [3].
4
==PAGE:6==
The ﬁrst and last leg of journeys, better known as “the last mile problem”, is a big factor in the route and
mode choices of travelers. This transportation between transport hubs and personal origins/destinations is
often associated with major costs, as it does not happen in an eﬃcient part of the main transport network.
With this cost or time being an inconvenience to many travelers, they will instead opt for a personal vehicle
to carry out the entire journey, with the result of increasing traﬃc congestion and pollution.
Improving the ﬁrst and last leg of journeys is a challenge that, if initiated by public authorities, require
major investments, as the infrastructure must be improved to increase the eﬃciency between locations that
might not be worthwhile in the scope of optimizing investments. Luckily, other agents have this potential.
Most journey planner apps have adopted MaaS (Mobility as a service) and intermodal journeys, where the
last mile problem is alleviated by e.g., bike-sharing and advocating for the increasing focus on intermodal
commodities near transport hubs.
The transit agency Movia has initiated a 2-year experiment starting 21’st of June, 2021, allowing passengers
to bring along their bike in all ordinary busses outside the peak hours and nights between Friday and Sunday
[4]. Some municipalities have followed this example, and begun a trial where bringing the bike along on
your public transport trip, within the municipality, is free of charge [5]. It is the hope that this will increase
the mobility of their passengers, as they do their part to alleviate the last mile problem and attract new
customers to sustainable transport modes.
Similarly, and prior to the public transport busses and local trains, DSB has in their S-train system since
2010 operated with free bike carriage.
Following this decision, which gave rise to both an increase in
passengers and bike-on-board trips, they accommodated to a new demand by changing the layout of their
middle train wagon, such that these now have 28 bike holders instead of 14 [6]. This change in interior
design was possible due to the composition and size of S-trains. But it is an adaptation that is diﬃcult in
busses, given their limited space for anything other than people. This is a central improvement opportunity
to attract more public transport travelers who bring along bikes, not to mention a streamlining of rules and
prices for bike carriage [7].
By recognizing that Movia, with busses, stand before diﬀerent challenges than DSB and Metro, with trains,
this thesis will contribute to new knowledge with regards to the attractiveness of each transport mode for
bike-on-board journeys. Furthermore, it will statistically investigate what kind of impact diﬀerent bus-
stop or train-station features and journey characteristics have on the probability of bike-on-board journeys.
By knowing the impact and importance of these factors, the transition into a more intermodal-friendly
transport-system can be made on a more well-informed basis, thus improving the solutions towards fulﬁlling
the CO2 goals.
1.1
Problem statement
This thesis has an inductive and statistical approach towards gaining more knowledge about which factors
aﬀect a travelers decision to bring their bike along on public transport trips. Furthermore, it will attempt to
quantify the impact of these factors. The analysis will combine several data sources, consisting of revealed
transport data (H¨ovding bicycle GPS data and Rejsekort public transport ticketing system data), weather
conditions, public transport trip details and bus-stop and station characteristics. These data sources will
then be used in two diﬀerent models: The ﬁrst model is an aggregated logistic regression model, which can
estimate the inﬂuence of bus-stop characteristics on the share of bus passengers bringing their bike along
on their trip. The second model is a dis-aggregate logistic regression model, that can estimate what kind of
impact weather-, travel- and station characteristics has on the probability of travelers bringing along their
bike on trips with trains, busses, metro or a combination hereof. The analysis area is limited to Sjælland
and Sydhavsøerne. The analyzed time period diﬀers for the two models, where the ﬁrst model is using data
from January to May 2021 and the second model uses data from September 2019. The following research
questions are the basis for the research process:
• What impact does bus-stop features have on the share of bicycle check-ins at bus-stops?
• How does traveler, bus-stop/station and trip characteristics aﬀect the travelers decision of whether or
not to bring their bike on a public transport trip.
5
==PAGE:7==
1.2
Learning objectives
• Gain insights from reviewing academic literature within relevant ﬁelds.
• Understand the engineering-relevant work in a company and its products, working methods and busi-
ness/social context of a company.
• Independently use professional competencies in solving practical engineering problems.
• Plan and carry out engineering work based on relevant prerequisites and requirements.
• Collect, clean and combine large data sources.
• Use Python and GIS for data mining and for enriching data with additional information on e.g.,
weather.
• Develop illustrations from large-scale data to convey key insights and create foundation for the direc-
tion of further analysis.
• Develop statistical models that identify and describe relationships between intermodal journeys and
station/stop characteristics.
• Analyze and assess model results appropriately and identify potential shortcomings of the applied
methodology.
• Write a concise and structured academic report, conveying the project results and the methods for
achieving these.
• Present a written project orally
1.3
Reading instructions
Section 1 of this thesis initially contains an introduction of the research subject, where the problem at
hand is put into context by presenting the concerns of diﬀerent societal actors and their views on the
subject, along with some expected and sought for beneﬁts of alleviating the problem at hand. In addition to
this, a few current solutions on the marked are presented, followed by a brief introduction to some of their
shortcomings, which is wrapped up into a problem statement with research questions. Finally, it contains
the learning objectives of the thesis and these reading instructions.
Section 2 presents the concept of intermodality, the use of multiple transport modes and its role in the
current transport system. Then a summary of how intermodal solutions in relation to bike carriage currently
are implemented. The end of this section presents previous research within the subject.
Section 3 presents the methodology of the thesis, specifying the models used and the interpretation of
model outcomes, along with the underlying theory.
Section 4 accounts for the data sources used in the models, along with a walk-through of each data type
and the extent or limitations of these, along with how the data was processed.
Section 5 presents the results and is split into two similar parts, based on the two diﬀerent models. The
ﬁrst part is the aggregate logistic regression model, focusing on the relationship between the share of bicycle
check-ins and the bus-stops features in January-May 2021. The second model in this section is the dis-
aggregate logistic regression model, focusing on the relationship between travelers choosing to bring their
bike along on any public transport trip and a mix of individual and bus-stop/station related factors, in
September 2019. For each of these two parts, the dependent variable will initially be presented to establish
what kind of outcome is being modelled. Then the independent variables are presented to establish exactly
which factors are used to estimate the outcome. The model results are then interpreted in order to quantify
the impact of each factor on the outcome. This section ends with some case examples of how much these
factors impact the bicycle check-in probability.
Section 6 contains a critical review of the method used and a discussion of the choices made, data sources,
improvement opportunities and assumed beneﬁts of changing certain elements for potential future works.
Section 7 contains the conclusion of this thesis and its research questions.
6
==PAGE:8==
2
Background
This section will initially describe the concept of intermodal journeys, followed by a description of how
public transit agencies embrace and enforce this way of travelling, followed by a presentation of previous
research within this subject.
2.1
Intermodality
According to the International Encyclopedia of Human Geography, a basic deﬁnition of intermodality is
”transportation by more than one form of carrier during a single journey”, where other researchers deﬁni-
tions reﬂect that ”An intermodal approach sees the whole process of moving people or goods as a connected
system working together as opposed to separate modal systems working independently and/or competitively”
[20]. Intermodal transportation can thus happen for both passengers and godds, with many diﬀerent modes
of transport. The intermodal transportation in this thesis is based on the connection between public trans-
port and the bicycle.
2.2
Accommodating intermodal transport in Denmark
Since 2010 the S-trains in the Capital Region of Denmark have had bike carriage free of charge.
This
resulted in an inﬂux of passengers as well as an increase in the number of bicycles carried on the trains
[6]. This growth in passengers was accommodated by the danish railways by investing in better designed
bicycle carrier wagons, bicycle parking at the stations and campaigns focused on good practice for bicycle
travelers.
The transit agency handling bus operations on Sjælland and Sydhavsøerne in Denmark has from the 21’st
of June 2021 started a two-year experiment, which allowed bicycles aboard more bus lines than previously,
to evaluate the insight gained in relation to the experiences of other passengers, baby carriages and disabled
people [4]. They have in their mobility plan from September 2020 put focus on, among other things, how the
bicycle can be a more attractive access and egress mode for busses, if they together with the municipalities
can implement better station areas and better bicycle/walking paths. Movia has also introduced free bike
carriage in busses and local trains in two municipalities, in collaboration with the municipalities and Region
Sjælland, which started July 15th, 2020 and runs for two years. This will be subject to an evaluation on
how big an incitement it creates for bike carriage.
The European Cyclist Organisation ECF has released a report in July 2021, where they analyze the bicycle
friendliness of 69 European railway operators [22]. The analysis was based on six parameters and each
railway operator was rated with a score between 0% and 100%. The Danish national rail company ”DSB”
scored 37 % and was placed 29’th, where NS-DB intercity Berlin was 1’st with a score of 82%. The six
parameters and the score sheet of DSB is presented in Chapter 8, appendix one. Based on the report they
formulate the following suggestions:
• Focus on shared bicycles at stations.
• Provide less cost prohibitive tickets
• Improve number of booking channels
• Oﬀer details concerning bicycle carriage on websites in more languages.
• Incorporate a functionality on the website that shows which train lines oﬀer bike carriage.
2.3
Previous research on intermodal traveling
A master’s thesis done in 2016 by Anna Ildutova at DTU [6] used both logistic and multinomial regression
models to evaluate the impact that free bike carriage had on the number of passengers in S-trains before
and after implementation, along with some other factors. It showed that free bike carriage on the S-trains
does not have a signiﬁcant impact on the probability of taking the S-train, but do however have a signiﬁcant
impact on the probability of taking the S-train in combination with bike. It furthermore showed that most
7
==PAGE:9==
travelers who bring their bike along on the S-trains lives between 1.7 to 3.5 kilometers away from an S-train
station. For longer distances, most of the passengers would choose bus.
A study by Karel Martens from Tel Aviv University in 2004 [23] compares the use of bike-and-ride in
Netherlands, Germany and the UK. It was found that the share of bicycle in access trips is comparable
to general levels of bicycle ridership in each country, but only for train and other fast modes of public
transport. Similarities were also found in other characteristics in terms of access distances, with a majority
being between 2 and 5 kilometers, where the longest access trips were seen for faster modes of transport.
The study would also conclude the eﬀects of travel purposes and car availability.
The book ”Transport Models From Theory to Practise” by Jeppe Rich and Stefan E. Mabit from 2018
[11], which was created through a combination of many years of academic research, academic journals and
practical experience with diﬀerent projects, presented how model developments could support transport
policy-makers and operators to better design their transport systems.
Statistical research within the ﬁeld of combined use of bicycle and public transport, is limited. This thesis will
contribute to a more detailed behaviour-modelling for public transport in the ﬁeld of transport modelling,
along with inspiration for which factors to prioritize, when planning to improve the intermodal transport.
8
==PAGE:10==
3
Methodology
This section will present the methodology used in this thesis and specify the model with its underlying
theory. Initially the main analysis method is presented, along with the theoretical reasoning for using this
model. Afterwards, the calculations behind the model estimate parameters will be described, in order to
properly prepare the reader for the interpretation of model results.
To perform this analysis, two diﬀerent logistic regression models were employed. The ﬁrst model analyzed
the relationship between bus-stop features and the proportion that bicycle check-in travelers compose out of
the total number of boarding passengers per bus-stop in January-May 2021. Furthermore, it was combined
with three diﬀerent approaches of model selection (Forward, Backward and Brute-force) to ﬁnd the model
with most signiﬁcant features.
The second model was created based partly on the insight gained from
the ﬁrst model. This model analyzed the relationship between the probability of travelers bringing along
their bike on a public transport trip and a combination of factors on a more individual level, along with
some of the bus-stop and station speciﬁc features used in the ﬁrst model. The second model represents
a binary discrete choice model, which uses a framework of rational choice called Random Utility Theory,
using revealed preferences inferred from travelling records and its combination with relevant gathered data.
The models will each produce some estimates for the factors and the ﬁnal results consist of the researcher’s
interpretation of these signiﬁcant factor estimates.
A big part of this thesis is to gather data, which is a process that is based on assumed causal relationships.
This means that the data used to ﬁt the models and eventually assess the outcome, is very sensitive to the
researcher’s choices about the selection and treatment of data. Therefore, this has its own sections, where a
description of the data sources will be presented in section 4 and the process of turning this raw data into
usable input variables in section 5.1.1 for the aggregated model and 5.2.1 for the dis-aggregate model.
3.1
Logistic regression and Random Utility Theory
Discrete choice models are micro-models and are in this thesis calculated using a logistic regression. Micro-
models are often estimated using data collected at an individual level. In this thesis, all models will be
estimated using data related to individual traveler trips with public transport, using the check-in system
”Rejsekort”.
The goal of applying a discrete choice model is to understand the behavioral process that leads to a traveler’s
choice, taking a causal perspective [10]. The basis for discrete choice models is Randum utility theory, with
an underlying assumption that a traveler’s behaviour process and consequent choice between alternatives, is
related to the maximization of utility[11]. The behavioural process is collectively determined by a number
of factors, where some are observed by the researcher, and some are not. Among those observed, there can
be attributes yielding utility and attributes yielding dis-utility.
The basis for discrete choice models is that an individual can choose between a discrete and ﬁnite set of
alternatives. In this thesis the alternatives are ”taking public transport along with a bike” or ”taking public
transport without a bike”. This is deﬁned as the choice set Dn for the models in this report.
Given that the choices are discrete, there are certain criteria that must be met. The traveler may only choose
one alternative, requiring these to be mutually exclusive in the choice set. Furthermore, the choice set must
be exhaustive, meaning that it should include all possible alternatives such that the traveler cannot choose
an alternative that is not included in the choice set. The choice set presented above is clearly exhaustive
and mutually exclusive, given the binary ”with or without bicycle” nature of the alternatives.
The utility for an alternative i for a traveler n can be expressed as Uni, where the utility function is deﬁned
as:
Uni = Vni + εni,
∀n, i ∈Dn
(1)
Where the right-hand-side (RHS) Vni deﬁnes the representative utility and εni deﬁnes the error term, being
the impact of factors that are not included in the model. It is assumed that a traveler only chooses alternative
i over alternative j, if the utility calculated in equation (1) is higher:
Uni ≥Unj,
∀i ∈Dn,
i ̸= j
(2)
The utility function of the discrete choice model is similar to a regression model, considering the independent
9
==PAGE:11==
variables and error term on the RHS and dependent variable on the left-hand-side (LHS). However, it does
diﬀer from regression as we do not directly observe the utility Uni. This utility must be inferred from what
we do observe, which is:
• The chosen alternative
• Some attributes of each alternative
• Some attributes of the traveler
The representative utility uni in equation (1) is usually speciﬁed as a linear function
Vni = βxni
(3)
Which is linear in parameters, highly ﬂexible and less complicated to estimate than non-linear parameters.
The βni in equation (3) is the structural parameter and can be interpreted as marginal utility of changes
in the data xni. Along with the error term εni this is the total utility Uni. We seek to ﬁnd the structural
parameters βni that make these utilities consistent with the observed choices [12].
Since Uni is stochastic, given the error term εni in equation (1), we cannot with certainty calculate the
choices of the traveler, which is why the choices will be calculated as choice probabilities.
The choice
probability is denoted Pni and can be derived from the maximum utility choice in equation (2).
Pni = Pr(Uni > Unj,
∀j ̸= i)
(4)
Where the total utility Uni can be replaced by the RHS of equation (1)
Pni = Pr(Vni + εni > Vnj + εnj,
∀j ̸= i)
(5)
Which can be reformulated as
Pni = Pr(εnj −εni < Vni −Vnj,
∀j ̸= i)
(6)
This is the probability that the diﬀerence in error terms for the alternatives are less than the diﬀerence in
representative utility. This can be expressed as the cumulative distribution for the diﬀerence in error term.
The ”logit model” can be obtained by assuming that each εni is a independently identically distributed
(i.i.d.) extreme value, otherwise known as Gumbel and type 1 extreme value [10]. Where the density for
each error term is
f(εni) = e−εnie−e−εni
(7)
and the cumulative distribution is
F(εni) = e−e−εni
(8)
With equation (7) and (8), Pni can be written as conditional on εni
Pni|εni =
Y
j̸=i
F(Vni −Vnj + εni)
(9)
Where εni is ﬁxed by integrating
Pni =
Z ∞
−∞
Y
j̸=i
F(Vni −Vnj + εni)f(εni)dεni
(10)
Which, when solving the integral with the error terms assumed i.i.d. extreme values, results in a closed-form
expression for the choice probability:
Pni =
eVni
eVni + eVnj
(11)
This is the general formula for calculating the probability in multinomial model or when the generalized
costs diﬀers between two choices. When faced with a binary outcome of the model, where the choices are
binary and equal in generalized costs, the choice probability is much more simpliﬁed.
10
==PAGE:12==
A logistic regression can model the logit-transformed odds as a linear relationship of the independent vari-
ables x1, ...xk and estimates parameter values β0, β1, ..., βk using maximum likelihood method as presented
in equation 12 [15].
log(
p
1 −p) = β0 + β1x1 + ... + βkxk
(12)
Which can be reduced to the following simple formula, being the choice probability.
p =
e(β0 + β1x1 + ... + βkxk)
1 + e(β0 + β1x1 + ... + βkxk)
(13)
3.2
Model estimated parameters
The logistic model outputs βk values for each variable xk, but the output being in a log of odds format can
be somewhat tricky to interpret. Therefore, this subsection will brieﬂy present a comparison of probability
odds and log of odds.
Probability is the concept of how likely an event is to occur, or in other words, the number of successes
divided by the total number of tries. A success happening one time in four tries would result in a probability
of 0.25. The odds, or more precisely, the Odds Ratio is deﬁned as the chances of success divided by the
chances of failure. Given the same example with one success out of four tries, this would be one success
divided be three failures, resulting in odds 0.33. This is the calculation being done inside the brackets on
the LHS of equation (12). The log of odds is the logarithm of the odds ratio, which is the entire LHS of
equation (12).
The transformation between the three concepts is monotonic, which means that if the probability rises, so
does odds and log of odds. Probabilities range from 0 to 1, odds range from 0 to inﬁnity and log of odds
range from -inﬁnity to inﬁnity. As seen in table 1, any probability below or equal to 0.5 is equal to odds
between 0 and 1 and any probability above 0.5 is equal to odds between 1 and inﬁnity. This is central
as to why we bother with log of odds as the transformation gives values that are easy to understand and
interpret. Where 0 is the log of odds value for equal probabilities and an equal increase or decrease in odds
changes the log of odds symmetrically towards −∞or ∞.
probability
odds
log of odds
0.001
0.001
-6.907
0.25
0.33
-1.099
0.5
1
0
0.75
3
1.099
0.999
999
6.907
Table 1: Comparison between ﬁve corresponding values of probability, odds and log of odds
11
==PAGE:13==
4
Data
This section consists of several subsections, each describing a speciﬁc data-type from a speciﬁc source.
Each subsection will present the data derived from that particular data-type and present the data-handling
process of gathering and cleaning, if necessary.
The data in its ﬁnal model-input form and descriptive
statistics hereof, will be presented in section 5.1.2 and 5.2.2.
The data is gathered as follows:
• Weather conditions from The Danish Meteorological Institute
• Public transport trips from the electronic ticketing system ”Rejsekort”
• Demographic information in grid-format from the segmentation model ”conzoom”
• Public transport characteristics and bus-related data from the transit agency Movia
• Raw GPS data points by airbag bicycle helmets from H¨ovding
Data will be gathered from an analysis period of either or both September 2019 and Jan-May 2021, based
on which model uses the data. The data is geographically limited to an analysis area of Sjælland and
Sydhavsøerne.
4.1
Rejsekorts data
These data have been collected from both Movia and from DTU. Movia have delivered data from January
2021 to May 2021, used for the model in section 5.1 and DTU have delivered data from September 2019,
used for the model in section 5.2. The coordinates of each station is received from Rejseplanen API and
joined on this data, in order to allow for further computation [24].
Prior to this thesis, the researcher investigated the practical usage of Rejsekort, by trying out various trips
on the bus with the bike-on-board. Here it was experienced, for some bus trips, that bus drivers did not
know the proper check-in procedure and therefore checked the bike in on a children’s-ticket. The extent of
this problem is unknown, but it could indicate that some bike-on-board trips are lost. Furthermore, many
travelers who often bring along their bike tend to have a separate Rejsekort for their bike, to avoid the hassle
of having to change the check-in with the bus driver. In case some of those travelers use their Rejsekort
for the bike and a physical ticket, mobile ticket or seasonal ticket for themselves, the number of bicycle
check-ins could be overestimated since only the bicycle is registered in Rejsekort and not the traveler. This
is, however, considered a rarity.
All S-train trips has been removed, since bringing a bike along is free and thus not recorded in the Rejsekort
database, unless the traveler had the bike along on a another transport mode in the same trip, which is
considered a rarity. The surplus of non-bike check-in from the S-trains would then cause an underestimation
of the estimates calculated by the models. This choice of excluding the s-train trips removes 2,2 million trips
out of 10 million trips in the DTU Rejsekort dataset from September 2019. The Movia Rejsekort Dataset
only considers bus-trips and is therefore not impacted by this choice.
4.2
Weather data
The Danish Meteorological Institute writes in their annual comprehensive report [8], that the danish climate
and weather in general changes according to the prevailing wind direction, given its proximity to both the
sea and the European Continent. Due to the Gulf Stream originating in the tropical ocean and passing by
Denmark, which has a latitude equal to Hudson Bay in Canada and Siberia in Russia, it is considered to
be comparable warmer. The climate is correspondingly typical coastal, which entail changeable weather in
the summer and mild, humid weather during the winter. The predominantly westerly wind brings wind
and rain, as depressions move in a direction north of Denmark and brings passages of frontal systems that
consist of fronts with continued rain, followed behind by areas of showers and cold air. These tend to repeat
themselves in intervals of 1-2 days for up to several weeks at a time. The strongest winds occur in autumn
and early winter, when the air temperature diﬀerence between the still warm Southern Europe and rapidly
cooling Scandinavia is greatest.
Data regarding weather has been collected through DMI metObs API, in hourly intervals, for the analysis
period of September 2019. Given the scale of Sjælland and the coarse coverage of weather stations with
12
==PAGE:14==
the required measurements available, one station has been chosen as the weather-condition reference for
all observations. This station is Tessebølle and is located near Køge as seen marked with a blue square on
ﬁgure 2, along with the nearest 12 weather stations, which are colored according to the correlation between
their weather conditions and the weather-conditions at Tessebølle, for each of the weather-types.
(a) Correlation in precipitation
(b) Correlation in temperature
(c) Correlation in max wind gust
(d) Correlation in wind direction
Figure 2: Correlation between 12 weather-stations around Sjælland/Sydhavsøerne and Tessebølle.
This location is approximately, albeit a coastal city, in the middle of our analysis area and therefore assumed
representative for the whole analysis area, reinforcing that computing the nearest weather station per
observation will only have a marginal impact.
13
==PAGE:15==
4.2.1
Wind gust and wind direction
Maps over the strongest wind gusts and average wind direction are shown in ﬁgure 3 and 4, where the latter
shows that there’s a predominantly westerly wind in September 2019 and that the average wind direction
does not diﬀer with more than 45 degrees within the analysis area. The ﬁrst map reveals how the northern
coastal part of Sjælland is exposed to the strongest wind gusts, while the rest of the Capital Region along
with the interior of Lolland are less exposed than the majority of Region Sjælland, on average.
Figure 3: Map of strongest wind gust [m/s] in Denmark for September 2019 [13].
Figure 4: Map of average wind direction [cardinal and intercardinal directions] for September 2019 [13].
In order to compute a headwind and tailwind parameter for the modelling, the direction of each trip was
deﬁned according to an approximation, being the heading between the trip starting point and trip ending
point. Headwind is then present when the wind direction is within a range of 90 degrees opposite to the
heading. likewise, tailwind is when the wind is within a range of 90 degrees from the heading, being 45
degrees to each side.
4.2.2
Precipitation
The chosen analysis period is the autumn month of September 2019, which was the seventh wettest Septem-
ber since 1874 [9], with a country average of 130 mm precipitation that was geographically distributed as
seen on ﬁgure 5. The rain was spread over many days and with very few cloudbursts.
14
==PAGE:16==
Figure 5: Map of cumulative precipitation [mm] in Denmark for September 2019 [14].
4.2.3
Temperature
The nationwide temperatures had an average of 12.7 degrees Celcius, being 0.3 degrees Celsius colder than
the previous 10 year September average. The highest temperature measured was 26.3 degrees Celsius at
Hammer Odde on Bornholm and the lowest was 2.0 degrees Celsius at Tylstrup in Vendsyssel. In ﬁgure
6 the average temperature in the analysis area can be seen to be higher towards south and lower towards
north.
Figure 6: Map of average temperature [degrees Celsius] in Denmark for September 2019. [14].
4.3
Conzoom
Conzoom is a segmented data-source from June 2021, containing demographics within a 100 by 100 meter
square grid in Denmark. This has been used to ﬁnd the number of residents and students/workers within
a 400 meter radius of each station and bus-stop, using weighted network-based catchment area analysis in
ArcMap GIS. The number of residents are anonymized to clusters of three households [16], which might
marginally underestimate the number of residents around bus-stops and stations in rural parts of the analysis
area. Furthermore, the number of students within each of the 100 by 100 meter squares could be aﬀected
by universities and other institutions having all their aﬃliated students assigned to the square in which the
headquarters is located. This will cause a major overestimation of the number of students/workers in areas
with a headquarter of an institution with multiple locations.
15
==PAGE:17==
4.4
H˜ovding data
H¨ovding has provided raw data from their airbag bicycle helmets, which are gathered from users who have
their smartphone Bluetooth connected while riding and agreed to share their data. This data is gathered in
the period between September 2019 and May 2021 with a total of 11,223 users, 406,280 trips and 104,063,662
GPS points/observations. The majority of the trips were made in recent times, as the market share of
H¨ovding and the share of users actively allowing the app to track their location has increased, as seen in
ﬁgure 7.
Figure 7: The number of logged trips by H¨ovding per month for the year 2019, 2020 and 2021.
The data was converted from JSON to tabular data and arranged according to UserID, TripID and Date-
Time, in order to prepare for further processing, where the initial step consisted of converting the date-time
information from UTC to local time. The following step was to calculate the distance between each obser-
vation for each TripId for each UserID, using the trigonometric haversine distance formula below, requiring
the raw coordinate inputs to be converted from decimal degrees to radians.
distance = 2 · r · sin−1
s
sin2
φ2 −φ1
2

+ cos(φ1) · cos(φ2) · sin2
λ2 −λ1
2

Where r is radius of earth, φ1, φ2 are the latitude coordinates and λ1, λ2 are the longitude coordinates,
respectively, of the two observations. Given an average logging frequency of 3.04 seconds and average inter-
observation distances of 13.48 meters, an euclidean distance calculation could have been a viable alternative.
In this step, all observations with a distance higher than 100 meters were considered outliers, thus being
removed from the dataset, followed by a recalculation of the haversine distance. The cumulative distance is
then calculated for each trip.
This information will allow for an evaluation of the distances people travel by bike, in order to reach a
station or bus-stop. It is assumed that all trips ending within a radius of 50 meters of bus-stops or stations
are with the purpose of getting a public transport trip.
The data has not been map-matched, but has through a visual inspection of data along a major bicycle-road
in Copenhagen been assessed precise enough for its intended purpose, as seen on ﬁgure 8, where 50% of
observations are within 2.74 meters of the bike lane. These observations are a subset of the last 100 points
of trips ending at Nørreport St. It is therefore clear that it would be possible to discern the two bicycle lane
directions if necessary, reinforcing the choice not to perform map-matching.
16
==PAGE:18==
Figure 8: Map showing H¨ovding observations colored per quartile according to their distance from the bicycle
lane on Dronning Louises Bro, Copenhagen. The observations are from trips ending at Nørreport St.
In order to create additional station-characteristics, the ﬁrst and the ﬁnal observation of each trip performed
with H¨ovding airbag bicycle helmet are loaded into ArcMap GIS, along with a shapeﬁle containing all
stations and bus stops in the analysis area. Any trip that ends within a range of 50 meters of a bus-stop
or station is considered an access trip, which reduces the number of trips from 406,280 to 69,750. The data
is grouped by station and bus-stop ID and the minimum, maximum and average trip distance is found for
each of these, along with the number of trips. In ﬁgure 9 the last 100 observations of each trip ending at
Nørreport St. is shown. For trips with less than 100 observations, only the last half of observations has
been used, in order to maintain privacy.
Figure 9: H¨ovding GPS observations from all trips ending at Nørreport St.
17
==PAGE:19==
5
Models and Results
This section is split into two parts, where the ﬁrst part will present the results of the initial aggregate
logistic regression, considering the impact of bus-stop and station facilities on the share of bike-on-board
trips. The second part presents the results of the dis-aggregate logistic regression, in regard to what kind
of impact the journey characteristics have on the probability of bringing the bike-on-board.
Within section 5.1 and 5.2 the dependent and independent variables will be introduced, followed by a
presentation of the model results and interpretation hereof. The ﬁrst model is based only on bus-stops,
while the second model is based on both bus and station-related data. The dis-aggregate model estimates
are used to calculate the probability in eight diﬀerent cases in the end of this section.
5.1
Aggregate logistic regression
This model was the ﬁrst to be performed during this research process and sought insight into which bus-stop
parameters are important, when it comes to having a higher share of bicycle check-ins. The starting point
was a total of 13,594 bus-stops, which was reduced to 1,911 bus-stops in the model, after the dependent
variables were added, given the requirement for all variables to take on a value. The trips are based on
monthly passenger numbers and Rejsekort trips from January 2021 to May 2021.
5.1.1
Dependent variable
The dependent variable in this aggregate model is the bicycle check-in share of the total number of boarding
passengers at bus-stops.
The dependent variable is calculated per bus-stop ID, which means that the
variables take direction into account. Two bus-stops might have the same name but will have diﬀerent ID
for each direction. Furthermore, the share of bicycle check-ins is calculated as the number of Rejsekort
bicycle check-ins, divided by the number of boarding passengers. The number of boarding passengers is
retrieved from the Movia Business Intelligence database, which are scaled passenger numbers. This means
that these numbers are scaled to include the travelers who do not use the rejsekort system. Thus, the
share of bicycle check-ins is therefore going to be lower, as the bicycle check-ins only make up for the
Rejsekort-portion of the total check-ins. Currently it is not speciﬁed how big a share of the total passenger
numbers uses Rejsekort, but it is known that the share of bicycle-check ins will be underestimated. The
basic statistics of the bicycle check-in variable is shown in table 2, which will be commented underneath.
mean
std. dev
Min
1. quartile
median
3. quartile
max
BoB
share
0.0196%
0.1436%
0%
0%
0%
0.0068%
5.216%
Table 2: Descriptive statistics for the share of bicycle check-ins at bus-stops.
Table 2 shows that the mean share of bicycle check-ins at all bus-stops are 0.0196%. If this share was the
case for Buddinge St. with approximately 26,171 boarding passengers, there would be 513 bicycle check-ins.
According to the third quartile, 75% of the bus-stops have a bike-on-board share less than 0.0068%, which
means the top 25% bus-stops have a high average share, given the mean share of 0.0196%.
5.1.2
Independent variables
The following variables are used in the aggregated logistic regression model.
• H¨ovdingDist
The H¨ovdingDist feature, is based on the trips performed and logged with a H¨ovding bicycle hel-
met and ending within 50 meters of the bus-stop.
This gave rise to two variables for the model,
namely H¨ovdingDistMean, being the average distance travelers would travel to the bus-stop and
H¨ovdingDistCount, being the number of people traveling to the bus-stop.
18
==PAGE:20==
• Dpers and Npers
These are two variables denoting the number of residents (Npers) and number of workplaces (Dpers)
within a radius of 400m of the bus-stop.
• Skift
This variable denotes the revealed number of diﬀerent transfer possibilities the traveler has at each
bus-stop. An example of this is travelers who transfer during their trip at the bus-stop Engelsborgvej
(Buddingevej), are seen to switch to the S-train A-line going either direction or the S-train E-line in
one direction. This results in three transfer possibilities for this bus-stop.
• Boarding
The number of boarding passengers is, just like the dependent variable, based on the scaled passengers-
numbers from the Movia database for each bus-stop. The number of boarding passengers for this
independent variable, however, is calculated as the daily average number of boarding passengers for
all the lines servicing the bus-stop.
So, if two lines service a bus-stop, the number of boarding
passengers for this bus-stop is the sum of each lines number of boarding passengers, divided by two.
• Aboard avg
This is a value retrieved per line per bus-stop from the Movia Business Intelligence and is, just like
the Boarding Passengers variable, the average number of passengers present in the bus, when the
busses arrives at each bus-stop. This could be interpreted as the average crowdedness of the busses
arriving at bus-stops, but this also depends on the capacity of the bus, which was a diﬃcult parameter
to retrieve. Nevertheless, this variable might be able to reﬂect this, even though the capacity is not
considered.
• Ture Avg
This variable is based on Movia Business intelligence as well and denotes the average number of
departures per day, for each bus-stop.
• AntalLinjer
Denotes the number of bus lines servicing each bus-stop.
An example of this could be bus-stop
Nørreport St. with StopID 50460, which has bus-lines: 6A, 15E, 94N, 150S, 184 and 185. Which is a
total of 6 AntalLinjer. In the other direction, bus-line 15E, 150S, 184 and 185 stops at stopID 6582
(AntalLinjer=4), while 6A stops at StopID 52615 and 94N at a third StopID.
• Strategisk Nej
This is a binary variable that denotes if the bus-stop is located near a bus-line that is part of the
strategical bus-network, which is determined by law[17]. The strategical bus-network is prioritized
part of the transport network, with high frequency at all times, along with other important mobility
eﬀorts.
• Bus-stop type
Bus-stops can be physically integrated into the road geometry in many ways. The ﬁve most common
of these bus-stop types have been categorized into their own binary variables. All other bus-stop
types have been gathered into a category called ”other”. The ﬁve most common bus-stop types are
presented below.
19
==PAGE:21==
1. Buslomme
Buslomme can be seen in ﬁgure 10, which is a type of bus-stop pocket that will allow cars to
pass the bus while the passengers are boarding and alighting. If the road has a high number of
vehicles, this can result in major time being spent getting back out of the pocket despite of the
rule that normal traﬃc have to give way for busses.
Figure 10: Bus-stop type ”Buslomme”
2. Fremrykket Stop
Fremrykket Stop can be seen in ﬁgure 11 and is a type of bus-stop where the bus will act as a
barrier to the traﬃc behind. This will reduce the time spent by the bus trying to get back into
traﬃc. Furthermore, the bus-platform will be moved to the other side of the bicycle lane.
Figure 11: Bus-stop type ”Fremrykket stop”
3. I terminal
I terminal denotes the bus-stops that are located at terminals, with dedicated spots often sepa-
rated from other traﬃc and an example hereof is shown in ﬁgure 12. This kind of bus-stop type
could be expected to have a high number of passengers, as the terminals are often transport hubs
with high correspondence between transport modes.
Figure 12: Bus-stop type ”I terminal”
20
==PAGE:22==
4. I vejmidte
I vejmidte is shown in ﬁgure 13 and shows a bus-stop which is in the middle of the road, with its
own bus-lane. This type of bus-stop is the least frequent of the ﬁve presented here and is used
in places with Bus-Rapid-Transit like service.
Figure 13: Bus-stop type ”I vejmidte”
5. Ved vejside i kørebane
Ved vejside i kørebane is the most common bus-stop type outside of urban areas.
Here the
bus-stop is placed in the roadside. An example of this is presented in ﬁgure 14.
Figure 14: Bus-stop type ”Ved vejside i kørebane”
• Distance from stations
The last variable included in this model is the distance from stations. This is determined in ArcMap
GIS as the shortest route along a road network from each bus-stop to the nearest station, measured
in meters, for each of following station types: Train, S-train, Metro and Local-train.
5.1.3
Model selection and results
The model initially showed no signiﬁcant parameters when all variables were used to describe the depen-
dent variable. Therefore, the next approach was to use model selection methods, that could select the best
combination of independent variables to describe the dependent variable. The methods used were forwards
and backwards selection, in addition to a brute-force method. These will be presented in the following,
along with the selected model and the results of these. The code for forward and backward selection was
adapted from the website Datasklr [18].
Forward Selection
The forward model selection method uses the p-values attached to each variable estimate, that the model
calculates. This p-values represents the signiﬁcance of the variable and the threshold for a variable entering
the model is that it has a p-value of less than 0.001. This corresponds to a signiﬁcance level of 10%, when
it enters the model. The model itself start out with no variables and adds the most signiﬁcant variables,
21
==PAGE:23==
until there’s no more variables to add with a p-value less than the threshold. Figure 15 shows the iterations
performed:
Figure 15: Iterations of adding variables in the forward model selection.
This method shows that the model should include the features Aboard Avg, HovdingDistCount and AntalLinjer
in the model. The results of using these are presented in ﬁgure 16.
Figure 16: Resulsts of the logistic regression using the three variables found in the forward model selection.
The results reveal that this method only considers the p-values of the variables available in each iteration.
Therefore, the two ﬁrst variables that were added to the model, turns out to be insigniﬁcant once either
the second or third variable was added. The results seem to be inconclusive and the next step of ﬁnding a
model with more signiﬁcant variables is the backwards model selection method.
Backward selection
This method uses the same threshold of 0.001, but instead of having no variables in the model at start,
it has all the variables. It then proceeds by removing the least signiﬁcant variable, until all variables are
below the threshold. Figure 17 shows the iterations performed:
Figure 17: Iterations of adding variables in the backward model selection
These iterations ended up with a single signiﬁcant independent variable, namely Strategisk Nej. The
22
==PAGE:24==
estimate of this simple model can be seen in ﬁgure 18, where the estimate shows that a bus-stop being part
of the strategical bus-network increase in the share of bicycle check-ins.
Figure 18: Results of the backward model selection
Backward selection has a drawback similar to the forward selection, that it only considers the variables
in its current iteration, and this could have caused it to only ﬁnd that one signiﬁcant variable. This can
be mended with a step-wise model selection method, which unfortunately wasn’t implemented within this
research period. Instead, a brute-force approach was tested and will be presented as the last part of this
section.
Brute-force
In order to complete the brute-force calculation, the number of variables was reduced prior to computation.
The variables removed from the variable list were the variables related to the type of bus-stop, along with
the variable Strategisk Nej. This equals a total of 13 variables, which were found to have 8,192 unique
combinations. The Logistic regression model was ﬁtted to all these combinations of independent variables,
which resulted in 22 models with one or more signiﬁcant variables, where the threshold was a p-value of
0.001. The most signiﬁcant model is presented in ﬁgure 19.
Figure 19: results of the brute-force model selection
The estimates of the brute-force selected aggregate model showed that an increase in the average distance
traveled by bike to the bus-stops had a negative impact on the share of bicycle check-ins. Likewise, a higher
average number of passengers aboard the busses when they arrive at the bus-stop caused a negative impact.
Given models with a maximum of two signiﬁcant variables, it was decided that a dis-aggregate logistic
regression model would work a lot better, with potentially millions of observations instead of 1,911. This
model is presented in following section 5.2.
23
==PAGE:25==
5.2
Dis-aggregate logistic regression
This model was estimated using a total of 7,487,968 trips, performed in September 2019, by ﬁtting a logistic
regression model using maximum likelihood. This model deals with a binary outcome, being whether a pas-
senger brought a bike-on-board or not, ﬁtted to several diﬀerent independent variables. These variables have
been chosen due to their assumed inﬂuence on bike-on-board probability and includes trip characteristics,
weather conditions, traveler characteristics, time trends and bus-stop/station characteristics. The public
transport trips being investigated in this model are trips made with Bus, Metro and all trains that are not
S-train. The S-train trips was entirely removed since the bike fare is free and the bicycles are not required
to check in on the Rejsekort, unless the traveler would combine the trip with another public transport mode
and would have introduced a bias in favor of non-bicycle check-ins.
5.2.1
Dependent variable
The dependent variable in the dis-aggregate regression model denotes whether the public transport trip
was made with a bike-on-board or without a bike-on-board, respectively with value 1 for bike-on-board and
0 for no bike-on-board. From the 7,412,120 trips made, only 55,397 trips were made with bike-on-board,
meaning this is a heavily zero-skewed dataset, since the share of bike-on-board trips is only 0.75%. The
absolute values and the share of observations within each variable for these 55,397 Bike-on-Board trips are
shown on the two ﬁrst rows of table 3. Here the last row is the share of observations for each variable for
all trips with and without Bike-on-Board (BoB).
Morning
Rush
Afternoon
Rush
Bus
Bus
+
Metro
Metro
Train
Train
+
Bus
Train
Bus
Metro
Train
+
Metro
Temp
below
10
Temp
Between
10 and 17
Temp
above
17
Commuter
Tailwind
Headwind
Nowind
BoB
Trips
5,636
11,135
3,573
118
20,739
28,050
788
30
2,099
3,141
45,061
7,195
6,703
13,282
13,395
438
BoB
share
10.17%
20.10%
6.45%
0.21%
37.44%
50.63%
1.42%
0.05%
3.79%
5.67%
81.34%
12.99%
12.1%
23.98%
24.18%
0.79%
Total
share
16.1%
25.11%
40.43%
4.71%
13.49%
16.24%
17.75%
1.47%
5.91%
4.65%
82.15%
13.2%
21.2%
23.4%
23.23%
0.46%
Table 3: Number and share of observations within each category for trips with bike-on-board (BoB) and the
share of observations for trips with and without (Total).
In table 3 it can be seen that 6.45% of travelers who have BoB travel by bus, while this percentage is 40.43%
for travelers without bike-on-board.
Contrary to the aggregated model in section 5.1, these values are not underestimated, since both the bike-
on-board and non-bike-on-board trips are determined on the same data from Rejsekort. It is unknown how
many travelers bring along their bike on the public transport trip, when not using Rejsekort. But since
these latent trips are not considered in either group of the dependent variable, it is assessed as no direct
concern.
5.2.2
Independent variables
The variables used to ﬁt the model are presented in this subsection and consist of a mix of continuous and
categorical variables. To avoid complete quasi-separation, categorical variables has a reference variable,
which will be highlighted in the following.
• nlogDistTot
The Euclidean distance (in meters) from start-point to end-point for each trip. This is a numeric
non-negative variable, with values ranging from 0 to 600,000 (this high value is the case for a handful
of travelers who travel back and forth between Sjælland and Jylland without checking out). This can
be seen on the right histogram in ﬁgure 20. The DistTot is highly skewed and has therefore been
transformed using the natural logarithm. Resulting in more normally distributed data, as seen on the
left histogram.
24
==PAGE:26==
Figure 20: Histogram over normal trip distances and natural logarithm transformed trip distances.
The quantiles and standard data description of both distance variables can be seen on table 4. The min-
imum distance can be translated into the shortest distance traveled by public transport in September
2019. Furthermore, some long-distance trips have either been made to or from outside of the analysis
area, as mentioned earlier.
min
25%
quartile
50%
quartile
75%
quartile
max
mean
count
DistTot [m]
1
3,379
6,580
14,297
300,000
12,780
7,412,120
nlog DistTot [m]
0
8.13
8.79
9.57
13.26
8.86
7,412,120
Table 4: Descriptive statistics for total distance variable
• AntalSkift
Indicates the number of transfers during the trip.
The Rejsekort data contains a column, which
summarizes the travel activities for each trip, with a combination of the following 7 codes:
– Fi: First check-in.
– Co: Check-out.
– Su: Successive check-in, which happens when changing transport vehicle or mode.
– Tr: Check-in transfer, which is when you check-in within a certain time period after check-out.
– Io: Check-in and check-out at the same Rejsekort-stand, without taking a trip.
– In: Inspection, when ticket controllers scan the Rejsekort during trip.
In table 5 below is shown the number of transfers during trips in September 2019. It is apparent that
most trips have a small number of activities. But there are also some trips that have an excessive
amount of activities. This could be assumed to be someone travelling for leisure (i.e. not the fastest
route), or a traveler with many purposes at diﬀerent locations.
Number of transfers
0
1
2
3
4
5
>6
Number of trips
4,090,784
2,588,956
564,811
126,774
27,679
8,698
4,246
Table 5: Number of trips in data with a certain number of transfers.
• Morgenmyldre and Eftermiddagsmyldre
25
==PAGE:27==
Binary variables indicating whether the trip was started during either morning or afternoon peak
hour. These are two very simple variables, where the morning rush hour (Morgenmyldre) is deﬁned
by being a trip starting in the time between 07:00 and 09:00 and likewise for the afternoon rush hour
(Eftermiddagsmyldre) within the interval of 15:00 and 18:00.
• Temp<10 and Temp>17
Originally a continuous variable indicating average temperature of the hour leading up the start of
the trip. This has been converted into three binary categorical temperature variables. These seek
to investigate the inﬂuence of temperatures below 10 degrees Celsius, Temp<10 and temperatures
above 17 degrees Celsius, Temp>17. The third variable is the reference variable and has value 1 when
temperatures are between 10 and 17 degrees Celsius.
• Precip past1h
This is a continuous variable measuring the average amount of rain in mm during the hour leading up
to the start of the trip.
•
Wind gust always past1h
The variable is likewise continuous and measures the highest 3-second average wind gust in the hour
leading up to the start of the trip.
• ModalKomb
This is a categorical variable denoting the modal combination of public transport types used in each
trip.
These has been turned into binary variable for each modal combination, where the modal
combination with train is used as the reference variable.
• Modvind, Medvind and NoWind
Binary variables indicating, respectively, headwind, tailwind or no wind during the hour leading up
to the start of the trip. The reference variable for these variables are crosswind.
• Natbefolk, Dagbefolk and Paastigere
The ﬁrst two variables denote the number of thousand residents (Npers) and number of thousand
workplaces (Dpers) within a radius of 400m of the bus-stop, and Paastigere denotes the number of
thousand boarding passengers as the bus-stop or station.
• Commuter
Commuters are deﬁned as travelers who has at least one logged trip, on 20 or more unique days of
September 2019.
5.2.3
Variable correlation
In the correlation matrix below is shown the intervariable correlation. These are important to evaluate prior
to modelling, since confounding variables cause multicollinearity. Meaning that if two variables have high
correlation, then increasing one value would also increase the other. These correlations also reﬂect some
of tendencies in the data, like trips being shorter for busses and metro compared to trains, temperatures
being lower in the morning rush hour than in the afternoon rush hour, which all could have an impact on
the estimates presented in section 5.2.4. The correlations are all relatively low.
26
==PAGE:28==
Figure 21: Correlation matrix of variables in the dis-aggregate model.
5.2.4
Model Estimates
This section will go through the model output. Initially the signiﬁcance of the variables is brieﬂy com-
mented, then the variable estimates and their interpretation is presented and ﬁnally some calculations of
choice probability cases. The latter can illustrate the diﬀerence some of the variables can cause on the
probability of bringing the bike along on a public transport trip.
The data was ﬁtted to the data using a binary logistic regression model and the result can be seen in ﬁgure
22. Most of the variables in the model are signiﬁcant at a 1% signiﬁcance level, except the variable Modvind
which is signiﬁcant at a 5% signiﬁcance level, whereas ModalKomb Metro and Medvind are not signiﬁcant
at a 5% signiﬁcance level, but close to a 10% signiﬁcance level. These signiﬁcant features, along with their
estimates, are assessed as being good enough for interpretation, which will be presented after ﬁgure 22.
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 22: Model result summary.
The immediate results are obvious and can be seen as the Coef. estimates in ﬁgure 22. These estimates
are given as log of odds and are therefore comparable in size between the variables. But when combined
with the variable values xk, as in equation 13, the ﬁnal impact that each estimate has on the probability
of bringing along a bike can be proportionally larger. This is also the case in the interpretation of the esti-
mates of i.e. nlog DistTot and Temp<10, where the ﬁrst is a continuous variable that within the data has
values between 0 and 13,26, and the latter is a binary variable. Therefore, the ﬁnal impact of total trip dis-
tance can be much higher than the impact of low temperatures, even though the log of odds estimate is lower.
nlog DistTot has a signiﬁcant and positive coeﬃcient of 0.1813, which shows that an increase in total trip
distance has a positive impact on the willingness to bring along a bike. Since the variable is natural log
transformed, the impact on probability is higher for an increase in distance for short trips, compared to
long trips, as xk increases faster at low values.
AntalSkift Being the number of transfers, has a negative coeﬃcient of -0.9521, which shows that trans-
ferring is an obstacle that has a negative impact on the willingness to bring along a bike on your public
transport trip. AntalSkift has an obvious and signiﬁcant correlation with the trip distance, indicating that
an increase in either of these results in an increase of the other. This is not expected to have an impact
on the estimate for nlog DistTot, given that the analysis area is limited to Sjælland and Sydhavsøerne.
Hence, the longest trips would necessarily have transfers. There are some very long trips as presented in
table 4, which do not have a lot of transfers. This is a result of the rejsekortsdata used where some trips
might start in Jylland and end at Sjælland. But these are not frequent trips in the dataset.
Morgenmyldre and Eftermiddagsmyldre are binary variables indicating whether or not the trip was
started during the morning or afternoon rush hour. These variables have estimates of -0.5665 for morning
28
==PAGE:30==
rush hour and -0.3939 for afternoon rush hour, which is the impact compared to trips performed outside
of rush hours (09:00-15-00 or 18.00-07:00). When it comes to busses, it makes sense that this is a negative
parameter, since bikes are not allowed into the busses during rush hours, which also goes for some very
crowded metro stations. Furthermore, the morning rush hour tends to have a more concentrated peak in
passengers when compared to the afternoon rush hour. This justiﬁes the larger negative impact of morning
rush hour than afternoon rush hour, when compared with trips taken outside the rush hours.
Temp<10 and Temp>17 are likewise binary variables that indicate the impact on the willingness to bring
along the bike, given that the temperature is lower than 10-17 degrees Celsius or higher than 10-17 degrees
Celsius. This variable was originally continuous, but was divided into three categories in order to capture
the impact of ”cold” September temperatures and ”hot” September temperatures, compared to tempera-
tures in-between. These cutoﬀvalues were somewhat arbitrarily chosen, since they are based on an assumed
behavior in bicyclists during an autumn month. This could cause information loss if it was not based on
the following reﬂection[19]. The categories seek to investigate the premise of our data input, meaning that
i.e. cold temperatures (below 10 degrees Celsius) could manifest in travelers taking the bus/train for access
and egress trips, instead of the bike. Likewise with high temperatures, since travelers do not wish to arrive
sweaty at their destination. Furthermore, having hot temperatures could impact the mode choice in such
a way, that people using the bike for access and egress trips would choose to bike all the way to their
destination. Thus, being an option that is not reﬂected in the model. The reference of this variable are
trips made with 10-17 degrees Celsius, and for this temperature range one could assume that travelers are
not sure if they would want to bike given the uncertainty of being either hot or cold. The estimates for cold
temperatures and hot temperatures are, respectively, 0.1941 and 0.0447. Which seem to acknowledge the
last behaviour assumption made, where travelers are less willing to bring along a bike when the temperature
is between 10-17 degrees Celsius. When it is hotter, travelers are more willing to bring along their bike, but
not as much as when it is cold. There is, however, a correlation between the temperature variables and rush
hour variables, indicating a multicollinearity that aﬀects the precision of these estimates. The correlation
matrix in ﬁgure 21 shows that the afternoon rush hours generally have higher temperature and morning
rush hours generally have lower temperatures. The impact of this could result in a dilution of the estimates,
where either the impact of rush hours is less negative than what it could be or temperatures being less
positive. The size of the estimate is quite signiﬁcant and is not assessed to change a lot.
Precipitation past1h shows that the amount of rain in the hour prior to the trip has a positive inﬂuence
on the probability of having your bike along on the trip, with an estimate of 0.0707. Even though Septem-
ber 2019 was a very rainy month, only 26 hours of the month was found to have rain in the data, with a
maximum hourly precipitation of 4.0 mm. As seen in the section 4.2, there was a low correlation between
the rain at the representative weather station Tessebølle and the rain at other weather stations across the
analysis area. The fact that this estimate is then signiﬁcant at a 1% signiﬁcance level, could mean that the
amount of rain in the hour prior to the trip is a proxy for a similar weather-condition, that has an impact
on the willingness to bring a bike along on the trip. This proxy variable is not related to either temperature,
wind gust or wind direction according to the correlation matrix in ﬁgure 21
wind gust always pasth1 has a negative estimate of -0.0119, which is the smallest negative estimate of all
the variables. The wind gusts appear to be stronger during the afternoon, where temperatures are higher,
according to the correlation matrix in ﬁgure 21. The opposite is the case in the morning. This variable
ranges from 0 meters per second to 16.7 meters per second, with a median value of 7.4 for our data, which
means that the median total impact of this variable is βk · xk = −0.0119 · 7.4 = −0.08806, which could
negate the positive eﬀects of little more than 1 mm of rain.
ModalKomb variables show the impact that each combination of modes has on the willingness to bring along
the bike. The modal combination with only Metro shows that Metro travelers are marginally more likely
to bring their bike along, with an estimate of 0.0125, compared to train travelers. When comparing the
reference train mode with ModalKomb Bus, the estimate of -2.7701 shows that bus travellers are much more
unlikely to bring along their bike. This is in fact the case for any modal combination including a bus, where
bus+metro has the lowest estimate of -3.2329. This could be a result of the metro servicing high density
areas, where the bike is an easier alternative as access and egress trips than busses. Combining Train+Bus
shows an estimate of -2.7553, which is marginally less negative compared to trips using bus only, but a
29
==PAGE:31==
lot lower than using the reference mode, train. The ModalKomb variables with more than one mode has
implicit a higher value of the AntalSkift variable. This is also apparent in their correlations between 0.16
and 0.45, where the highest correlation is between AntalSkift and ModalKomb Train+Bus. While train has
a relatively high positive impact on the willingness to bring along the bike, the combination of bus and
train entails a higher value in AntalSkift. Furthermore, it can be assumed that many bike-on-board trips
for train, are trips where the access and egress trip by bus was replaced by a bike, which is also apparent
in the negative correlation of -0.38 between ModalKomb Bus and ModalKomb Train+Bus. The Train+Bus
modal combination does however have a positive correlation of 0.31 with nlog DistTot, making up for some
of the negative estimation. Combining all three transport modes: train, metro and bus, has an estimate
of only -2.5372, which is surprising given the implicit two AntalSkift on these trips. The combination
between Train and Metro has the smallest negative impact on the willingness to bring along the bike. The
design of the metro station being below street level could be an important factor, as to why this metro
has the highest positive estimate by itself and negative estimates when in combination with other modes.
Travelers who switch from either train or bus to metro must enter a limited space elevator, in order to
enter the metro. Furthermore, the function of the metro in the transport system is to transport a lot of
travelers short distances in dense urban areas, which is also reﬂected in the negative correlation between
nlog DistTot and ModalKomb Metro. These short trips could be faster to traverse by bike, but given the
estimate being positive for Metro only trips, there seems to be an advantage to bringing along bikes on
metro trips, which is ineﬀective when combined with other transport modes. This could also explain the
signiﬁcance of ModalKomb Metro at a 10% signiﬁcance level.
Modvind, Medvind and NoWind are all binary variables created from the wind direction data. The refer-
ence wind direction is crosswind, which is perpendicular to the direction of traveling. Given that there is
wind, the trips having headwind (Modvind) during the hour prior to the start of the trip has an estimate of
0.0344. This means that having headwind instead of crosswind could negate the negative eﬀect of around
2,81 m/s wind gusts. This is however only statistically signiﬁcant at a 5% signiﬁcance level. Tailwind
(Medvind) has a smaller positive impact on the willingness to bring along the bike, with an estimate of
0.0204, which is only statistically signiﬁcant at a 10% signiﬁcance level. The NoWind variable however, is
signiﬁcant at a 1% signiﬁcance level and shows that no wind at all has a positive eﬀect on the willingness to
bring along a bike, with an estimate of 0.1989, which was expected from the negative estimate of wind gusts.
Natbefolk and Dagbefolk are the ﬁrst two of three bus-stop and station characteristic variables. The
estimate of -0.0443 for Natbefolk and 0.0135 for Dagbefolk shows that public transport trips which start
at bus-stops or stations where the number of workplaces in a radius within 400 meters are higher, has a
higher willingness to bring along their bike. Correspondingly, the bus-stops and stations being in an area
with more households tends to have travelers with less willingness to bring along the bike.
Paastigere is a variable that could indicate many things, other than the number of passengers. Bus-stops
or stations with many passengers often has a high service frequency and have many transport options nearby
(transport hubs). This variable is signiﬁcant at a 1% signiﬁcance level and has a marginal estimate of -0.0003.
This variable is measured in number of passengers per month divided by a thousand and the maximum
value xk in the data is 550,27. This variable and its small negative estimate could with the largest bus-stops
and stations have a large impact on the willingness to bring the bike along, but a proportionally smaller
impact on bus-stops or stations with a low number of passengers. The variable has a high correlation (0.39)
with ModalKomb Metro and Dagbefolk (0.37), but a high negative correlation (-0.4) with ModalKomb Bus.
5.2.5
Choice probability cases
This section presents some traveler cases, where the choice probability from equation (13) in section 3.1 will
be calculated using the models estimates, in order to get a feeling of the impact that these can have on the
probability of bringing along the bike. One base case will initially be presented, followed by three variants
of the same trip, where one or more of the parameters have been changed.
The base case
Deﬁned as a long trip between Helsingør St. and Nykøbing F. St., which is a total distance of 146km
(nlog DistTot = 11.89). The trip starts during the morning rush hour and has a transfer at København
30
==PAGE:32==
H. (AntalSkift = 1, reference ModalKomb Tog=1), while the temperature is below 10 degrees Celsius
(Temp<10=1). In the hour prior to the start of trip it rained 0.7 mm, which corresponds to the median
amount of rain in the rainy hours of September 2019. The wind gusts are likewise median at 7,4 m/s while
the direction of wind is crosswind. The ﬁnal parameters necessary are all linked to Helsingør St. which
has 690 residents and 1,018 workplaces within a radius of 400 meters and 32,219 boarding passengers with
Rejsekort in the month of September 2019.
The outside rush hour case
The only change in this variant of the base case, is that it starts outside of the rush hour. The purpose
of this is to ﬁnd the marginal eﬀect of the rush hour on the probability of taking the bike along, given the
parameters of the base case.
Transfer train case
This case is similar to the base case, but because of track work, the trip is split into three diﬀerent trains
instead of two. This is an increase of the variable AntalSkift from 1 to 2.
The best case
This case is similar to the base case but has the purpose of showcasing the highest probability of bringing
along the bike on this speciﬁc trip. This happens when it rains a lot prior to the start of the trip (4 mm),
temperature is below 10 degrees Celsius and there’s no wind gusts nor any wind from any direction.
The estimate values, the input for the four case variants and the choice probability for each of these can be
seen in table 6.
Variable
Estimate
Base case
Ouside rush hour case
Transfer train case
The best case
const
-4.9267
nlog DistTot
0.1813
11.89
11.89
11.89
11.89
AntalSkift
-0.9521
1
1
2
1
Morgenmyldre
-0.5665
1
0
1
0
Eftermiddagsmyldre
-0.3939
0
0
0
0
Temp<10
0.1941
1
1
0
1
Temp>17
0.0447
0
0
0
0
precip past1h
0.0707
0.7
0.7
0.7
4
wind gust always past1h
-0.0119
7.4
7.4
7.4
0
ModalKomb Bus+Metro
-3.2329
0
0
0
0
ModalKomb Metro
0.0125
0
0
0
0
ModalKomb Bus
-2.7701
0
0
0
0
ModalKomb Tog+Bus
-2.7553
0
0
0
0
ModalKomb Tog+Metro
-0.8201
0
0
0
0
ModalKomb Tog+Bus+Metro
-2.5372
0
0
0
0
Modvind
0.0344
0
0
0
0
Medvind
0.0204
0
0
0
0
NoWind
0.1989
0
0
0
1
Natbefolk
-0.0443
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.69
Dagbefolk
0.0135
1.018
1.018
1.018
1.018
Commuter
-0.3073
0
0
0
0
Paastigere
-0.0003
195
195
195
195
Choice probability:
1.46%
2.55%
0.57%
4.22%
Table 6: Choice probabilities for the base case and three variants, along with model estimates βk and variable
input xk
.
The traveler in the base case has a 1.46% probability of taking the bike along and increases to a probability
of 2.55%, if the trip is started outside the rush hours. The Transfer train case shows that the probability
decreases by 0.89%, when AntalSkift increases by one unit. The best case shows a probability of 4.22%,
when there’s a lot of rain, no wind and the trip was started outside of the rush hour. The changes have been
made within realistic boundaries, which means that the 146km trip with two trains cannot be replaced with
31
==PAGE:33==
a combination of bus and metro variant, since this would require a change in the public transport system.
Likewise, Antalskift would not be able to assume the value 0, as there is no direct train connection between
Helsingør St. and Nykøbing F. St.
The changes in probabilities are only valid for this speciﬁc trip since the choice probability calculation is
non-linear. If one wanted to know the choice probability for another similar but shorter trip, perhaps one
starting at Helsingør St. and ending at Roskilde St., the trip would have exactly the same xk values as the
base case except the nlog DistTot variable. This trip would be approximately 54 kilometers long and the
base case and base variant choice probabilities would be as seen in table 7
Variable
Estimate
Base case
Ouside rush hour case
Transfer train case
The best case
const
-4.9267
nlog DistTot
0.1813
4.03
4.03
4.03
4.03
AntalSkift
-0.9521
1
1
2
1
Morgenmyldre
-0.5665
1
0
1
0
Eftermiddagsmyldre
-0.3939
0
0
0
0
Temp<10
0.1941
1
1
0
1
Temp>17
0.0447
0
0
0
0
precip past1h
0.0707
0.7
0.7
0.7
4
wind gust always past1h
-0.0119
7.4
7.4
7.4
0
ModalKomb Bus+Metro
-3.2329
0
0
0
0
ModalKomb Metro
0.0125
0
0
0
0
ModalKomb Bus
-2.7701
0
0
0
0
ModalKomb Tog+Bus
-2.7553
0
0
0
0
ModalKomb Tog+Metro
-0.8201
0
0
0
0
ModalKomb Tog+Bus+Metro
-2.5372
0
0
0
0
Modvind
0.0344
0
0
0
0
Medvind
0.0204
0
0
0
0
NoWind
0.1989
0
0
0
1
Natbefolk
-0.0443
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.69
Dagbefolk
0.0135
1.018
1.018
1.018
1.018
Commuter
-0.3073
0
0
0
0
Paastigere
-0.0003
195
195
195
195
Choice probability:
0.36%
0.63%
0.14%
1.05%
Table 7: Choice probabilities for the shorter base case and three variants, along with model estimates βk and
variable input xk
Here the probability of bringing a bike along on the base case is 0.36%, which increases to 0.63% in the
outside rush hour case. This is a choice probability increase of 75%, where the choice probability increases
between the original base case with probability 1.46% and the original outside rush hour case with probability
2.55%, has a probability increase of 74.70%.
32
==PAGE:34==
6
Discussion
The simplicity brought by using a logistic regression model, also called ”logit model”, comes with a price
where it sometimes turns out to not be very realistic. The realism could get lost when only two choices are
considered, being ”taking public transport with or without bike carriage”. With this choice set, the logistic
regression will assume that given an increase in probability of taking the bike along, the probability of not
taking it along will decrease. This might be partly true, but realistically it will also capture travelers from
other transport modes. This could be partially mended by using a multinomial logit model, where the other
modes of transport are included. This method will complicate matters and would still assume an unrealistic
equal proportion capture from the the newly added modes. The binary bike carriage choice presented in
this thesis and the logistic regression model works excellent by itself, but could also contribute with a lot
of detail if implemented in a nested logit model, with realistic market capturing within a public transport
nest. The model being restricted to the two binary outcomes could weaken the data robustness, in the sense
that even though low temperatures show an increase in probability of the bike carriage outcome, too low
temperatures might cause travelers to not choose between the binary choice set, but instead choose the car,
which is not an observed option and this traveler would therefore disappear from the data. This is assessed
as only having a marginal impact on the results in this thesis.
The logistic model does not directly consider the timing of choices, meaning that transfers during rush hours
might have less negative impact than transfers outside the rush hours, since the frequency of transport is
higher and result in a lower transfer-time. In extension hereof, it is not known if negative impact comes
from the time it takes to transfer, the hassle of having to handle the bike or a whole other option. This is
the case for many variables, just like precipitation which seemed to have low correlation when looking at
how representative Tessebølle weather station was, but turned out to be very signiﬁcant in the model. This
variable could have been a proxy for something entirely diﬀerent. In addition to this, the behavioural part of
travelers choices could have been investigated, which would entail a more data-driven approach to choosing
variables. The weather data used was based on the hour leading up to the start of the trip, but perhaps
the travelers decide on biking given the weather the day before travelling or at a completely diﬀerent time.
The chosen variables are however signiﬁcant and can be used for signiﬁcant interpretation.
Rejsekort is the main backbone of data in this thesis and upon the start of this project Movia delivered
the most recent data available, being data from the period of January until May 2021. This data was
used in the Aggregate Model, where it proved diﬃcult to evaluate relationships between the data and the
outcome. This diﬃculty could originate in three elements: Firstly, Covid-19 and its temporary restrictions,
which has had a signiﬁcant impact on many aspects of society and cause yet immeasurable changes in
public transport behaviour. Changes that make it hard to estimate models for the ﬁve observed months,
since the travelling behavior in some months could have been distorted caused by temporary restrictions
such as: face mask requirements, governmental regulations regarding maximum 50% capacity usage and seat
ticket requirements. Secondly, the period of January-May stretches over two seasons and it is presumed
that travel behaviour is not consistent between cold months and warmer months, which will result in data
and output relationships that might point in diﬀerent directions. Furthermore, the total passenger number
used as the denominator in the bicycle check-in share calculation, is a number that is based on Rejsekort
trips and then weighted and scaled according to budgeted passengers according to previous years seasonal
tendencies and periodic automatic passenger counts. The numerator however, being the number of bicycle
check-ins, is solely based on Rejsekort trips and the calculated share will therefore be underestimated with
a so far unknown factor. The third and last element which could have caused the diﬃculty in estimating
signiﬁcant relationships, were the sources of data being used for creating the independent variables. By
joining additional sources of data to the data set, the number of bus-stops were reduced, since some bus-
stops has not been visited by any H¨ovding bicycle trips, nor have any recorded data about bus-stop type.
Many variables, like the presence of bicycle racks at bus-stops, would have been too time consuming to
complete or gather and was removed early in the process, despite the expected usefulness of its analysis
results. Since writing this thesis, the researcher has been made aware of current and ongoing eﬀorts into
gathering this data. To avoid these three complicating elements, the Dis-aggregate Model was performed
using data from September 2019, which was before Covid-19 arrived in Denmark and is an early autumn
month without holidays, along with temperatures still being warm enough for bicycling to be attractive.
The models only shared three variables, partly to avoid the observation-reducing data sources, but also
because some bus-related variables for bus-stops would be diﬃcult to translate into variables for stations.
33
==PAGE:35==
The disadvantage of only using the month of September 2019, is that it could also be useful to know how
the results would change when using colder months or July with its holiday traﬃc. Furthermore, it could be
discussed how much use a pre-Covid-19 analysis is, if the travel behaviour is signiﬁcantly changed henceforth.
The thesis could advantageously have performed a questionnaire among travelers who bring their bike along
on the journey, in order to bottom-up identify relevant variables for the models, this could also allow for
an insight into why some travelers would park their bike at bus-stop facilities, instead of bringing it along,
thus capturing the insight that was hoped to be present in the bicycle H¨ovding data in the beginning of the
process. The only ﬁeldwork done for this thesis has been the researchers own experiences with bike-on-board
in busses and some casual talks with bus-drivers in regular busses and on the ferry-busses in Copenhagen.
34
==PAGE:36==
7
Conclusion
The aggregated logistic regression showed that data availability of bus-stop and station related infrastruc-
ture is scarce and requires better systematic data sources, in order to perform a statistically signiﬁcant
quantitative analysis at an aggregated level. In addition hereof, three diﬀerent kinds of model selection
methods were tested to select models with signiﬁcant variables. The forward model selection did not spec-
ify any noteworthy model, the backward and brute-force method however, successfully found models with
respectively one and two signiﬁcant variables. The backward selected model showed that being part of the
strategical bus-network had a positive impact on the share of bicycle check-ins. The brute-force method
found that an increase in the average distance traveled by bike to the bus-stops had a negative impact on
the share of bicycle check-ins. Likewise, a higher average number of passengers aboard the busses when
they arrive at the bus-stop caused a negative impact.
The dis-aggregate logistic regression model have shown that the probability of having the bike along on
your public transport trip increases with the distance they are travelling. In busses it is not allowed to
bring along the bike during the morning and afternoon rush hour, which by itself certainly should have an
eﬀect on the probability, but this is also the case for Metro and Train. As an extension hereof, it seems
that commuters (travelers who travel at least 20 days per month) are less likely to bring along their bike.
This eﬀect, through correlation analysis, has been assessed not to be caused by commuters mainly travelling
during rush hours.
The mode choice of travelers has a high impact on the probability of bringing along the bike as well, where
trips using only Metro is the most attractive mode, closely followed by trips only using Train. The impact
of traveling by bus has a large negative impact on the probability.
Most of the weather conditions have a very signiﬁcant impact on the probability of bringing along the bike.
When it comes to cold temperatures (under 10 degrees Celsius) and hot temperatures (above 17 degrees
Celsius), the probability is higher relative to the probability when the temperature is between 10 and 17
degrees Celsius. Rain prior to the trip start surprisingly has a positive impact on the probability of bringing
along the bike. The strength of the wind gusts, however, has a clear negative impact on the probability,
which decreases when wind gusts increase. This is also observed in another variable denoting whether there
is wind or not, where the probability increases with no wind. Having head- or tailwind has a positive impact
on the probability of bringing along your bike on a public transport trip, compared to having crosswind.
The quantiﬁable data related to the bus-stops and stations has shown that the number of residents within
a radius of 400 meters has a positive impact, while the number of workplaces has a negative impact on the
probability of bringing the bike along. A higher number of boarding passengers at the bus-stop or station
shows a negative impact on the probability.
Case studies using the model estimates has shown that small changes in variables of a base case could make
the probability of bringing along the bike range between 0.57% and 4.22%. A similar case study using a
shorter trip showed that the eﬀects of changing variables is not linear and the probability for the shorter trip
ranged from 0.14% to 1.05%. The focus on intermodal travelling is a prevalent in society. So far, the actions
taken towards improving intermodal traveling with bike and public transport, has been to improve bike-
lane conditions and available parking spots near the bus-stops and stations. This only partially motivate
intermodal journey, by improving the ﬁrst leg of the travelers trips. A contributing solution was the MaaS
bicycle services that would provide travelers with public shared bikes for the last leg of their trip. The
next step has been proposed as improving the on-board conditions for bringing along the bike. This thesis
and the conclusions drawn from the results and thus the insight gained, can be used as an inspiration for
public transport providers on which factors to focus on, when taking the next step towards a more attractive
intermodal public transport system.
35
==PAGE:37==
References
[1] IDA (March 2021), Cyklisme og cyklismen i kombination med kollektiv transport, https://ida.dk/
media/7961/cyklisme-og-kollektiv-transport-ida-baggrundsnotat.pdf, visited 16-01-2022.
[2] Cyklistforbundet, 2016, ”Cykling og kollektiv transport”, Holdningspapir vedtaget af Cyklistforbundets
landsmøde
2016.,
https://www.cyklistforbundet.dk/det-vil-vi/cyklistforbundet-mener/
kollektiv-transport/, visited 16-01-2022.
[3] Region
Hovedstaden
(2019),
Traﬁk-
og
mobilitetsplan
for
hovedstadsregionen,
https:
//www.regionh.dk/trafik/trafik_og_mobilitetsplan/Documents/Trafik-og_mobilitetsplan_
RegionHovedstaden_samlet_april2019.pdf, visited 16-01-2022.
[4] Moviatraﬁk, Nu ˚abner Movia for 2-˚arigt forsøg med cykler i alle almindelige busser, https://www.
moviatrafik.dk/presse/presse-og-nyheder/vis/?key=495725467518349, Visited 16-01-2022.
[5] Din
Oﬀentlige
Transport,
Forsøg
med
frit
cykelmedtag
i
Lolland
og
Guldborgsund
kommune
,
https://dinoffentligetransport.dk/nyheder/
fri-cykelmedtagning-i-lolland-og-guldborgsund-kommuner/, Visited 16-01-2022.
[6] Anna Il’dutova, Free carriage of bicycle on S-trains in the Greater Copenhagen region, DTU Department
of Transport, 2016.
[7] Jette
Gotsche
(2019),
Blog,
Hvordan
kan
den
kollektive
transport
blive
et
mere
attraktivt
tilbud
for
cyklisterne?,
https://passagerpulsen.taenk.dk/bliv-klogere/
blog-hvordan-kan-den-kollektive-transport-blive-et-mere-attraktivt-tilbud-cyklisterne,
visited 16-01-2022.
[8] John Cappelen (ed) (2020), Denmark - DMI Historical Climate Data Collection 1768-2019, DMI Report
20-02, https://www.dmi.dk/fileadmin/user_upload/Rapporter/TR/2020/DMIRep20-02.pdf, Vis-
ited 09-01-2022
[9] DMI,
Sammendrag
September
2019,
https://www.dmi.dk/fileadmin/user_upload/
Afrapportering/Maanedssammendrag/Sammendrag_2019_september.pdf, visited 20-01-2022.
[10] Kenneth Train (2002), Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation, Cambridge University Press, version
dated March 8, 2002.
[11] Jeppe Rich and Stefan E. Mabit, Transport Models, From Theory to Practise, Department of Manage-
ment Engineering, edition 9.0, October 2018.
[12] Matt Woerman, Topics in Advanced Econometrics (ResEcon 703) Week 3, Video 3, University of
Massachusetts Amherst, https://github.com/woerman/ResEcon703, visited 15-01-2022.
[13] DMI (2022), DMI Vejrarkiv, https://www.dmi.dk/vejrarkiv/, visited 17-01-2022.
[14] DMI (2019-10-01), M˚anedssammendrag september 2019, url https://www.dmi.dk/fileadmin/user_
upload/Afrapportering/Maanedssammendrag/Sammendrag_2019_september.pdf, visited 17-01-2022.
[15] UCLA
statistical
consulting,
FAQ:
How
do
I
interpret
odds
ratios
in
logistic
regression?,
https://stats.oarc.ucla.edu/other/mult-pkg/faq/general/
faq-how-do-i-interpret-odds-ratios-in-logistic-regression/, visited 18-01-2022.
[16] Conzoom, om conzoom, https://conzoom.dk/om-conzoom/, visited 22-01-2022.
[17] Movia, Forslag til Movias Mobilitetsplan 2020, bilag 1:
Forslag til strategisk net 2020-2023,
https://www.kk.dk/sites/default/files/agenda/6575a3ff-46d1-44a6-a5fb-8b71fcf9fdf2/
6d9d497c-e384-4153-832a-1620a2590370-bilag-3.pdf, visited 19-01-2022.
[18] Gellert
Toth,
Feature
Selection
with
Python,
https://www.datasklr.com/
ols-least-squares-regression/variable-selection, visited 19-01-2022.
36
==PAGE:38==
[19] Priya Ranganathan, C. S. Pramesh, Rakesh Aggarwal (2017) Common pitfalls in statistical analysis:
Logistic regression, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5543767/, visited 18-01-2022.
[20] A. R. Goetz (2009), international Encyclopedia of Human Geography, University of Denver, https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780080449104010245?via%3Dihub
[21] Movia
(2010)
Movias
Mobilitetsplan,
https://www.moviatrafik.dk/media/bgzdw3zi/
movias-mobilitesplan_sept2020.pdf
[22] European Cyclist Organisation ECF (2021), An analysis of the bicycle friendliness of European railway
operators, https://ecf.com/system/files/Cyclists_love_trains_report.pdf
[23] Karel Martens (2004),The bicycle as a feedering mode: experiences from three European countries,
Tel Aviv University, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1361920904000100#
aep-section-id10
[24] Rejseplanens
API,
https://help.rejseplanen.dk/hc/da/articles/
214174465-Rejseplanens-API/, visited 23-01-2022.
37
==PAGE:39==
8
Appendix
Appendix one: Scoring sheet of DSB by ECF [22]
38
