==PAGE:1==
DTU - TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
DTU FOOD - GENOMIC EPIDEMIOLOGY
Estimation of etiology proportions and
mortality of diarrheal diseases in African
LMIC using both meta-analysis and
metagenomics methods
Author:
Cecilie A. N. Thystrup
Supervisors:
Tine Hald
Sara M. Pires
Patrick M. K. Njage
Fatemeh A. Ghomi
January 23, 2022
==PAGE:2==
i
Acknowledgements
This thesis marks the end of my 5,5 years of education at the Danish Techni-
cal University (DTU). It is a bittersweet feeling to say goodbye to the comfort
of student life, but knowing all the skills I have obtained during my many
years as student will help me in the future, I am ready to take on a new ad-
venture as a graduate.
I would like to thank my supervisors for the opportunity to be a part of
such an incredible project. You have taught me so much about the complexity
of disease control and collaborations across countries, and I am very grateful
to have been a part of this project. Thank you to Tine Hald and Sara Pires for
allowing me to participate in activities related to the FOCAL project, for your
support and encouragement and your endless patience. Thank you to Patrick
Njage for teaching me about meta-analysis and provide insightful comments
to our weekly meetings. Thank you to Fatemeh Ghomi for answering my
questions about Computerome and helping me troubleshoot my code. Your
help has been highly appreciated.
Thank you to my friends and family who have supported me during my
thesis. And a special thanks to the kitchen of 12.2 at Tietgenkollegiet - you
have made the last six months of my life more amazing than you will know.
==PAGE:3==
ii
Abstract
Foodborne diseases (FBD) affect millions of people every year, with nearly
one in ten people falling ill worldwide. The growing globalisation makes this
a public health concern, especially for children and impoverished people in
low- and middle-income countries (LMIC).
The presented work expanded on the current research that had been done
in the "Foodborne Disease Epidemiology Surveillance and Control in African
LMIC" project (FOCAL), by estimating the etiology proportions of diarrhoeal
diseases and deaths caused by different foodborne pathogens. A system-
atic review and a meta-analysis were conducted to estimate the proportions
of diarrhoeal illnesses and deaths in the African region. The meta-analysis
showed that E. coli and rotavirus accounted for the largest proportions of di-
arrhoeal illnesses and deaths in the population, speciﬁcally the pathotypes
EPEC, EHEC and EAEC, while Salmonella spp. and V. cholerae accounted for
the lowest proportions. Metagenomics analysis was used to detect the pres-
ence of pathogens in sewage samples from four different African countries,
which showed a diverse distribution of pathogens in the samples. E. coli was
shown to be the most dominant pathogen among those studied. No signiﬁ-
cant difference in distribution was found between the samples. The detection
of diarrhoeagenic E. coli virulence factors in the sewage showed potential for
further analysis, and the detection of V. cholerae supported the use of metage-
nomics analysis for detection of outbreaks.
Overall, the results from the metagenomic analysis of the sewage corresponded
well with the results of the meta-analysis, indicating the potential of using
metagenomic analysis of sewage to support the ﬁndings of a meta-analysis
or population study in the future.
==PAGE:4==
iii
Resumé
Fødevare-bårne sygdomme rammer millioner af mennesker hvert år, og
næsten hver tiende person bliver syge på verdensplan. Den voksende glob-
alisering gør dette til en folkesundhedsproblem, især for fattige børn og vokse
fra lav- og mellemindkomstlande.
Denne afhandling udvidede den aktuelle forskning, der var blevet ud-
ført i "Foodborne Disease Epidemiology Surveillance and Control in African
LMIC"-projektet (FOCAL), ved at estimere de ætiologiske proportioner af
diarrésygdomme og dødsfald forårsaget af forskellige fødevarebårne pato-
gener. Et systematisk review og en meta-analyse blev udført for at estimere
andelen af diarrésygdomme og dødsfald i Afrika. Metaanalysen viste, at E.
coli og rotavirus bidrag med den største andel af diarrésygdomme og døds-
fald i befolkningen, mere speciﬁkt patotyperne EPEC, EHEC og EAEC, mens
Salmonella spp. og V. choleae bidrog med de laveste andele. Metagenom-
analyse blev brugt til at påvise tilstedeværelsen af patogener i spildevand-
sprøver fra ﬁre forskellige afrikanske lande, som viste en alsidig fordeling af
patogener i prøverne. E. coli viste sig at være det mest dominerende pato-
gen blandt de undersøgte. Der blev ikke fundet nogen signiﬁkant forskel
i fordelingen af patogener mellem prøverne. Ud fra resultaterne alene var
det ikke muligt at bestemme mængden af diarrégenisk E. coli virulensfak-
torer i spildevandet med sikkerhed, men undersøgelsen viste potentiale for
yderligere analyse. Detekteringen af V. cholerae i prøverne viste også et stort
potentiale for at bruge metagenomiske analyser til påvisning af sygdomsud-
brud.
Generelt stemte resultaterne fra den metagenomiske analyse af spildevan-
det godt overens med resultaterne af metaanalysen, hvilket indikererede po-
tentialet for at bruge metagenomisk analyse af spildevand til at understøtte
resultater fra en metaanalyse eller befolkningsundersøgelse i fremtiden.
==PAGE:5==
iv
List of Figures
2.1
Workﬂow of metagenomics data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1
Map of the African continent showing the sampling site of the
sewage samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1
Flowdiagram showing the process of identifying eligible arti-
cles included in the SR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Relative abundance of the ten diarrhoeal agents and unknown
etiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Heatmap showing the clr-transformed abundance of pathogens
(n=69).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
Heatmap showing the clr-transformed abundance of the se-
lected FBD-causing pathogens (n=13). . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
Clr-transformed abundance of the FBD-causing pathogens strat-
iﬁed by country, with error bars representing one standard de-
viation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.6
Clr-transformed abundance of the FBD-causing pathogens strat-
iﬁed by sewage status, with error bars representing one stan-
dard deviation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.7
Heatmap showing the clr-transformed abundance of the two
virulence factors from E. coli found in the sewage samples. . .
43
==PAGE:6==
v
List of Tables
3.1
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the systematic review. . . .
12
3.2
Pre-set databases used by KMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1
Estimated diarrhoea- and mortality envelopes
. . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Number of studies contributing to the pooled estimate of each
pathogen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Pooled effect size of INP studies for children <5
. . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Pooled effect size of OUT/COMM studies for children <5 . . .
27
4.5
Pooled effect size of INP studies for children ≥and adults . .
28
4.6
Pooled effect size of OUT/COMM studies for children ≥and
adults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.7
Estimated proportions and 95% CI for INP
. . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.8
Estimated proportions and 95% CI for OUT/COMM
. . . . .
32
4.9
Total estimates of diarrhoeal illnesses and cases per 100,000
for the <5 population, given in thousands, stratiﬁed by region,
with 95% UI. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.10 Total estimates of diarrhoeal illnesses and cases per 100,000 for
the ≥5 population, given in thousands, stratiﬁed by region,
with 95% UI. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.11 P-values from Egger’s test for asymmetry . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:7==
vi
Contents
Acknowledgements
i
Abstract
ii
Resumé
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
The burden of diarrhoeal diseases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Diarrhoeagenic pathogens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Metagenomic sequencing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.1
Reference mapping using KMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Transformation of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Metagenomic surveillance of pathogens in se-wage
. . . . . .
8
2.4.1
Detection of diarrhoeagenic pathogens and virulence
factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methodology
10
3.1
Systematic review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.1
Protocol and search strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.2
Eligibility criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.3
Relevance screening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.4
Data extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.5
Estimation of mortality- and diarrhoea envelopes . . .
14
3.2
Meta analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.1
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.2
Estimation of proportions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.3
Publication bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.4
Moderator analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Metagenomic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
==PAGE:8==
vii
3.3.1
Sample collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.2
Sample processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.3
Database selection and reference mapping
. . . . . . .
19
3.3.4
Post-processing analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Aggregation of reads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Clr-transformed abundance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Filtering of pathogens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Detection of virulence factors of E. coli . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Results
22
4.1
Systematic review and meta-analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.1
Estimated mortality- and diarrhoea envelope . . . . . .
23
4.1.2
Pooled proportion estimates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.3
Etiology proportions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.4
Publication bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.5
Moderator analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Metagenomic analysis of sewage samples . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2.1
Abundance of pathogens
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2.2
Abundance of FBD-causing pathogens
. . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.3
Abundance of virulence factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Discussion
44
5.1
Etiology proportions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.1.1
Limitations of the etiology estimates . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.1.2
Assessment of risk of bias and limitations in the meta
analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
Application of metagenomics to sewage samples . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Estimation of disease burden using both meta-analysis and
metagenomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4
Further perspectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Conclusion
52
Bibliography
53
A Appendix A: Search strings
62
A.1 Search string used in PubMed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2 Search string used in SCOPUS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.3 Search string used in Web of Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
==PAGE:9==
viii
B
Adjusted incidence rate (FOCAL Population Survey)
73
C List of pathogenic microorganisms
74
D Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
78
E
Detailed overview of the sewage samples
93
F
Forest plots
95
G Funnel plots
108
H Potential effect modiﬁers identiﬁed
114
==PAGE:10==
ix
List of Abbreviations
FBD
Foodborne Diseases
LMIC
Low and Middle Income Countries
FOCAL
Foodborne Disease Epidemiology Surveillance and Control in African LMIC
BoD
Burden of Disease
SR
Systematic Review
WGS
Whole Genome Sequencing
NGS
Next Generation Sequencing
VF
Virulence Factor
GATHER
Guidelines for Accurate and Transparent Health Estimates Reporting
AJOL
African Journals Online
HIV
Human Immunodeﬁciency Virus
UN
United Nations
GLMM
Generalised Logistic Mixed-Effect Model
CI
Conﬁdence Intervals
MAL-ED
MALnutrition and Enteric Disease
KMA
K-Mer Alignment
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Foodborne diseases (FBD) affect millions of people every year, with nearly
one in ten people globally falling ill after eating contaminated food. It is
a growing public health concern around the world, but especially children
and impoverished people in low- and middle-income countries (LMIC) are
affected by these diseases[1]. Due to the combination of poor nutrition, lack
of medical care and extensive exposure to contaminated sources, people from
LMIC carries the largest part of the burden of disease (BoD) with up to 30%
of the deaths being caused by FBD[2]. Although FBD are a long-term prob-
lem in developing countries, only few strategies have been implemented to
decrease the burden. Accurate and efﬁcient control of FDB requires knowl-
edge of transmission routes across different diseases, populations and ge-
ographical areas, as well as the number of people affected by the disease.
The "Foodborne Disease Epidemiology Surveillance and Control in African
LMIC" project (FOCAL)[3] aims to obtain evidence and guidelines for surveil-
lance, prevention and control of FBD in African LMIC.
One of the aims of the FOCAL project is to expand on the knowledge
of FDB by estimating the burden of disease (BoD) for foodborne illnesses in
African LMIC. Therefore, the aim of this thesis was to expand on the current
research that has been done in the FOCAL project, by estimating the etiology
proportions of diarrhoeal diseases and deaths caused by different foodborne
pathogens. Based on a systematic review (SR), a meta-analysis of studies on
diarrhoeal incidence in the African region was conducted. Additionally, the
usefulness of applying metagenomics data analysis on sewage samples, to
estimate the etiology proportions, was explored.
==PAGE:12==
2
Background
2.1
The burden of diarrhoeal diseases
Diarrhoeal diseases account for a considerable amount of the global burden
of disease[4], many of which can be attributed to FBD[5]. With more than
420,000 deaths annually, and an estimated US$110 billion lost in productivity
and medical expenses due to unsafe food in LMIC each year, the need for
food safety strategies is imminent[1]. In 2015, WHO presented the ﬁrst-ever
report estimating the burden of FBD for 31 agents on a global and regional
level[6]. This report estimated the incidence of a large number of pathogens
contributing to the cause of diarrhoeal disease. However, there are other
pathogens not commonly transmitted through food that also contributes to
a large part of the diarrhoeal envelope. Despite the large impact on public-
health and the global economy, few developing countries have prioritised the
implementation of surveillance and control strategies. One of the main chal-
lenges of FBD is the transmission routes, which occurs not only through a va-
riety of foods, but also through contact between animals and human (zoono-
sis), water- or soil contamination and humans inbetween[7]. Another is the
rapidly evolving globalization, which has increased the demand for a larger
variety of foods, resulting in an extensive and complex global food chain.
More people consume food prepared in public areas, and with a growing
world population, the industrialization of agriculture and animal production
must rise to meet new challenges in regards to food safety. To provide such
safety is difﬁcult in countries with poor sanitation and infrastructure, which
may reﬂect why only few developing countries have implemented suitable
control strategies[7].
Therefore, it is important to apply a ’One Health’ strategy to achieve bet-
ter food safety and increase public health overall. The ’One Health’ approach
aims to combine the knowledge from multiple sectors and use it in a global
perspective[8].
It is particularly important for FBD, because unsafe food
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2. Background
3
poses a global threat to the public health, especially for the most vulnera-
ble. For this reason, the identiﬁcation of the sources and risk factors will help
estimating the burden of FBD[6].
2.2
Diarrhoeagenic pathogens
Diarrhoeal diseases are caused by a number of bacteria, viruses and para-
sites, many of which are commonly transmitted through food, but typically
also have a range of other transmission routes[9].
Researchers have identiﬁed more than 250 pathogens causing FBD, with
some of the most prevalent being Campylobacter spp., Escherichia coli (E. coli),
Shigella spp., Salmonella spp., Staphylococcus aureus and Vibrio cholerae (V. cholerae).
Other microorganisms like norovirus, or parasites such as Cryptosporidium
spp., and Entamoeba histolytica (E. histolytica) can also be involved[10, 11, 12].
Campylobacter jejuni is a member of the genus Campylobacter spp., and C.
jejuni infections are one of the most common causes of diarrhoeal illnesses
worldwide. They colonize the intestines of both mammals and birds, and
the transmission route of C. jejuni is via contaminated food products. Their
ideal growth environment is between 30 −46◦C, which makes them ﬁt for
growing in a saharan- and sub-saharan climate. Most cases of campylobac-
teriosis are associated with eating raw or uncooked meat, especially from
birds, unpasteurized milk or contaminated water[13].
E. coli is also one of the foodborne pathogens that causes the highest
number of FBD worldwide. While not all types of E. coli causes diarrhoea,
ﬁve pathotypes have been identiﬁed as being involved in process: i) En-
teropathogenic E. coli (EPEC), ii) enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), which
is also known as shiga-toxin-producing E. coli (STEC), iii) enterotoxigenic E.
coli (ETEC), iv) enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) and v) enteroaggregative E. coli
(EAEC/EEEC)[14, 15]. Some of these pathotypes produce toxins that can kill
the host cells, like the heat-labile (LT) or heat-stable (ST) toxins produced by
ETEC, or the cytotoxin produced by EHEC/STEC[16, 13]. Others produce
adhesin proteins that destroys the infrastructure of the cell, like intimin (eae)
produced by EPEC or EAEC[16, 17], or attaches to the surface of the host
cell, like the Shigella virulence gene ipaH, produced by EIEC[18]. Many of
these pathotypes are very infectious and are transmitted through many dif-
ferent mediums, including food and water. The contamination often occurs
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2. Background
4
when manure from cattle or other animals is used as fertilizer for agricultural
crops[13].
Norovirus is a non-enveloped RNA virus belonging to the Norovirus genus
in the Caliciviridae family. Since humans are the only known reservoir, trans-
mission occurs via the fecal-oral route and can spread directly between peo-
ple or through foodborne, waterborne of environmental fomites[19]. Noroviruses
are the leading cause of foodborne illnesses, and are found to cause a siginif-
icant amount of gastroenteritis in LMIC[20].
Shigella spp. is a member of the Enterobacteriaceae family and consists of
four species: Shigella dysenteriae, Shigella ﬂexneri, Shigella boydii and Shigella
sonnei. They can grow at temperatures ranging from 6 −48◦C, which means
that they are found in a variety of different food, like salads, chicken, shellﬁsh
and other fresh produce. They are found mostly in environments with poor
sanitation and hygiene, and the transmission route is usually by person-to-
person, although shigellosis can occur after ingestion of contaminated foods
as well. Shigella-infections are mostly related to international travel, but S.
ﬂexneri and S. dysenteriae have been found to be the cause of major epidemics
in Africa, affecting immunocompromised and/or elderly individuals, as well
as malnourished children[13].
Like Shigella spp., Salmonella spp. is a member of the Enterobacteriaceae
family and one of the most common causers of enteric food infections. Salmonella
spp. cultures the intestines of most livestock and many wild animals, and in-
fections usually occurs when food is contaminated with animal feces (fecal-
oral transmission)[13]. They are usually found in eggs, meat and poultry, and
can survive at negative degrees for a long period of time[21]. Both species of
Salmonella causes diarrhoea, with the serovar Typhi causing typhoid fever as
well[22].
Staphylococcus spp. are found many places in nature, like on the skin, in
the mouth, mammary glands and upper respiratory tracts of mammals and
birds. Outside the body, S. aureus can survive for long period of time, which
makes them incredibly resistant. They have also been found in meat and shell
ﬁsh, along with dairy products and ready-made salads. The transmission
route of S. aureus is typically though direct contact between contaminated
food and people, indirectly via skin fragments or through droplets. S. aureus
can cause different types of infections, but staphylococcal food poisoning is
characterised by diarrhoea and can cause severe debilitating illnesses[13].
Another pathogen found to cause diarrhoea, especially in Africa, is Vibrio
cholerae. Their optimal growth temperature is 10 −43◦C, which means that
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. Background
5
they are especially well suited for spreading in a tropical or temperal climate.
V. cholerae can enter the body through ingestion of contaminated food, like
oysters or crustaceans but can also spread after exposure to a contaminated
water source[13]. They cause severe diarrhoea and dehydration and remains
a much larger burden of disease in Africa, compared to other continents[23].
Other non-bacterial agents responsible for diarrhoeal illness and death
in Africa is Entamoeba histolytica and Cryptosporidium spp. Both of these are
parasitic protozoa, that can be present in water, foods and soil contaminated
with feces. The most important transmission route for these parasites are
through the fecal-oral route, and the presence of these protozoa in waste wa-
ter is a large concern for the public health in developing countries[24, 25].
Some agents of diarrhoea not commonly transmitted through food in-
clude the RNA viruses rotavirus and astrovirus, which causes over 100,000
deaths in Africa annually[26].
Human rotavirus (HRV) is especially heinous for children under the age
of ﬁve, and causes watery diarrhoea, vomiting and severe dehydration. Ro-
tavirus is ubiquitous in nature, which means that unlike other diarrhoeal
agents, they are not more prevalent in areas with poor sanitation and hy-
giene. The transmission route is usually through the fecal-oral route, either
person-to-person or through contaminated objects in the environment[27]. In
2009, rotavirus vaccines was introduced in the WHO African region, and ac-
cording to multiple studies, the proportion of hospital admissions for acute
gastroenteritis caused by rotavirus declined between 20% and 50% in se-
lected countries after the introduction of the vaccine[28, 29, 30]. Despite this,
it is still a major risk factor diarrhoea[31].
Human astrovirus (HAstV) can also cause severe diarrhoea for all age
groups, but is especially predominant in young children. The virus is trans-
mitted via the fecal-oral route and is occuring in contaminated water and
shellﬁsh. The viruses are also quite resistant to alcohol disinfection, which
means that they can survive on surface for longer period of time[32].
2.3
Metagenomic sequencing
Metagenomic sequencing is the process of studying genetic material from en-
vironment samples, human microbiome or other environments with multiple
communities. The advances in DNA sequencing has enabled the possibility
of detecting microorganisms in their natural environment, which means that
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2. Background
6
pathogens that could not be quantiﬁed previously can now be detected us-
ing metagenomics. This provides a unique glimpse into the life of uncultured
microorganisms. Metagenomics can provide knowledge of the abundance of
pathogens, genes or other functionalities of microbial communities through
the analysis of genomic data[33]. This also makes metagenomics an advan-
tageous method for surveillance, because it can be used in diverse micro-
bial communities, such as feces, water samples, etc.[34]. An overview of the
workﬂow of the metagenomics data analysis used in this project is shown in
ﬁgure 2.1.
FIGURE 2.1: Flowdiagram showing the workﬂow of the metagenomics data
analysis used in this project.
Metagenomic data analysis generally consists of three steps. The sam-
ple preparation step starts with sampling, where a plethora of microorgan-
isms from a soil-, feces- or water-sample are collected and prepared for se-
quencing. Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) methods are used to generate
high-throughput sequences from the genomes present in the samples, which
are then trimmed for short or low-quality reads and adaptor sequences[35].
The remaining reads are then mapped to reference databases to detect char-
acteristics like abundance, taxonomy or phylogenetic proporties. The post-
alignment analysis is carried out using a selection of bioinformatics tools[36].
2.3.1
Reference mapping using KMA
KMA[37] (k-mer alignment) is a reference-based mapping tool developed
by Clausen et al. in 2018[37]. Together with a novel sorting scheme used
to identify the best matching template, KMA is able to map raw reads di-
rectly against redundant databases. This makes KMA stand out against other
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Background
7
known mappers. KMA works by using heuristic k-mer mapping, ﬁne align-
ment, ConClave scoring and reference assembly to create sequences that are
mapped to a variety of genomes or genes.
To brieﬂy summarise the methods utilized by KMA, after trimming the
reads, the algorithm matches k-mers between the query sequence and the
database to identify if the sequence should be discarded from further anal-
ysis. The matching k-mers are then used to create a mapping score based
on matches or mismatches. If the query sequence has a positive mapping
score in k-mer space, the query is accepted and the potential template pos-
sibilities are limited by linking the matching k-mers to their respective tem-
plate sequences. To ﬁnetune the alignment of the sequences, the Needleman-
Wunsch[38] algorithm is used to align the regions of mismatching k-mers
identiﬁed, using a k-mer indexed hash map. Finally, KMA ﬁnds the most
likely template for each query sequence using the novel scoring scheme,
ConClave. This scoring scheme is able to choose the best-aligning template
per query sequence using a unique score (the ConClave score), based on the
alignment score summed together for each template. Since KMA will always
try to ﬁnd a match for a read, the aligned fragment count is a good indicator
of the total number of fragments that are actually aligned with the reference
genome[37].
2.3.2
Transformation of data
When working with metagenomics data, there will often be some discrep-
ancy betweem the number of fragments mapped to each reference gene or
genome. When many different genomes are present in a sample, the number
of reads mapped to a sample will most likely differ, and this can give varying
sequencing depths for each gene or genome present in a sample. Therefore,
the centered log-ratio transformation is often used to account for differences
in sequencing depth. The clr transformation is useful for quantifying abun-
dance, because it maintains the same ratio from a sample with few fragments
and a sample with many fragments[39]. The clr transformation is given as
clr(xi) = ln
 x1,i
g(xi)

, ..., ln
 xD,i
g(xi)

(2.1)
where xi is the ith sample and g(xi) is its geometric mean, which is calcu-
lated as
D√x1 · x2 · ... · xD,i[39]. When the clr-transformation is used in relation
to abundance, negative values will indicate that a given gene (or genome)
is present in a sample, but found in smaller quantities than other genomes
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Background
8
present in the sample. This is reﬂected in the geometric mean, which is cal-
culated from the total number of genes or genomes found in a particular
sample. A positive value therefore indicates that a speciﬁc gene or genome
is present in larger quantities relative to the geometric mean of that sample.
2.4
Metagenomic surveillance of pathogens in se-
wage
Using metagenomic sequencing as a surveillance method is a relatively new
approach, with a large, unknown potential. It has been utilized for surveil-
lance of global antimicrobial resistance gene dissemination through interna-
tional ﬂights[40], and in 2019, metagenomic techniques were used to moni-
tor Aerobacter and Aeromonas in sewage from rural Ethiopia[41]. It has also
proven useful in the case of tracking the transmission of polio across com-
munities, as part of the global polio eradication program[42, 43]. However,
one of the pitfalls of using metagenomics for surveillance on a global level
can be the overwhelming amount of data generated. Usually, sewage comes
from a large, non-hospitalized population, and measures the frequency of
speciﬁc genes or genomes present in a population, which cannot be used
directly to quantify the prevalence of a speciﬁc phenotype in a collection of
isolates. On the other hand, using metagenomics for sewage surveillance can
lead to characterisation of microbial agents present in communities that are
not usually assessed using conventional methods, and can provide a baseline
for populations when the goal is to monitor the effects of interventions[44].
2.4.1
Detection of diarrhoeagenic pathogens and virulence
factors
Virulence factors (VF) are molecules that assists the bacteria in colonising the
host at the cellular level. These virulence factors can be secreted or associ-
ated with the membrane or cytosol in a number of bacteria[45]. For E. coli, a
number of virulence factors are present on some strains that can cause diar-
rhoeal disease in humans. Therefore, one of the ways that metagenomics can
be used is to detect the presence of speciﬁc virulence factors in order to de-
termine whether a pathogen is pathogenic. Metagenomics has already been
applied on sewage for the detection of virulence factors, both in E. coli and
other bacterial species, which provided insights into the relative contribution
of different pathogenic strains[46, 47]. Previous studies conducted in Africa
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Background
9
detected that EAEC, ETEC and EPEC were most prevalent in the population,
with very few cases of EIEC and STEC observed[48, 49]. These studies were
not conducted using metagenomics, but tested for the presence of virulence
factors using conventional methods like culturing or Polymerase Chain Re-
action (PCR) methods. Therefore, it would be useful to compare the detection
of VF using metagenomics with these results.
==PAGE:20==
10
Methodology
3.1
Systematic review
A protocol describing the review process used for this SR was developed by
Pires et al. at the National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark
in March 2021[50]. This protocol describes the approach of the systematic
review as well as the overall objective, which was to update the SR previously
conducted by Pires et al. in 2015[51]. Two review questions were proposed
to obtain the objective of estimating etiology-proportions of diarrhoeal cases
and deaths in the general community in Africa:
1. What are the proportions of diarrhea cases and deaths caused by differ-
ent pathogens in children and adults in the African region?
2. What is the distribution by age, sex and sub-region?
3.1.1
Protocol and search strategy
The Guidelines for Accurate and Transparent Health Estimates Reporting
(GATHER)[52] were used to ensure best reporting practices were followed
during the systematic review’s implementation and dissemination. This in-
cluded deﬁning the framework of the project and the indicator, populations
and time period for which the estimates were mapped out. For this system-
atic review, the indicator was deﬁned as the proportion of feaces samples
that were positive for a selection of diarrhoeagenic pathogens, and the pop-
ulation was deﬁned as individuals in in-patient1 and out-patient facilities as
well as the general community2 in the African region. This included people
of all ages and genders. Since the aim was to update the aforementioned SR
1In-patient facilities referred to a hospital setting, where patients were admitted for more
than 24 hours for severe diarrhoea
2Out-patient facilities referred to any health care services where the patients were not
admitted or admitted less than 24 hours. Community setting referred to the general popu-
lation, where the patients were not in contact with the health care system.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3. Methodology
11
by Pires et al., the search was restricted to publications conducted in the time
period between January 1st 2014 and April 30th 2021.
Eight FBD-causing pathogens were included in this SR, including some
subtypes of diarrhoeagenic E. coli. These pathogens included Salmonella spp.,
Shigella spp., E. coli, V. cholerae, E. histolytica, Cryptosporidium spp., Campy-
lobacter spp. and norovirus. Other diarrhoeagenic pathogens not commonly
transmitted through food were also included in the SR. These were rotavirus,
astrovirus and S. aureus. Speciﬁcally V. cholerae of the type ’Vibrio01’, non-
typhoid Salmonella spp. as well as typical and/or atypical EPEC and ETEC
were included.
A targeted search for relevant literature was conducted in June 2021. Three
electronic databases were searched automatically using the different combi-
nations of terms as stated above. This included PubMed[53], Scopus[54] and
Web of Science[55]. Different combinations of the words "diarrhoea", "di-
arrhea", "etiology", "mortality", "cause of death", "gastroenteritis" and "inci-
dence" were used to identify studies reporting the proportion of diarrhoea
episodes, and the search string was tailored to ﬁt each database individu-
ally (see appendix A for search strings). To broaden the search and min-
imise the risk of publication bias, grey literature was hand-searched and in-
cluded in the systematic review. This included scientiﬁc reports and public
health websites, African Journals Online (AJOL)[56], ProQuest[57] Disserta-
tions and Theses and records from African CDC[58].
3.1.2
Eligibility criteria
The inclusion and exclusion criteria for articles included in the systematic
review are listed in Table 3.1. All types of publications collecting diarrhoeal
samples or testing for diarrhoeal agents in outpatient, inpatient and commu-
nity settings were included in the systematic review, along with prospective
studies for morbidity and mortality. Surveillance reports were also included.
All studies must have had a surveillance period of more than 12 months, to
account for seasonal variation in the prevalence of the different pathogens.
Publications in all languages were marked as eligible, with publications
in languages other than English and Danish being translated using Google
Translate or by researchers from the FOCAL group. People from all ages were
included for the purpose of estimating the incidence of diarrhoeal diseases
in both children less than ﬁve years of age, older children (5-18 years of age)
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3. Methodology
12
TABLE 3.1: Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the systematic review.
Category
Criteria
Inclusion criteria
Studies collecting diarrhoea samples
Studies testing in outpatient, inpatient and community
settings
Studies conducting surveillance for at least 12 months
Prospective studies for morbidity and mortality
All languages
All ages
Pathogens infecting humans
Studies published between 01-01-2014 and 30-04-2021
Exclusion criteria
Patients with clinical signs of dysentery
Studies conducted in special populations
Individual or outbreak case reports
Antibiotic-associated diarrhea
Hospital-acquired diarrhea
Studies with a recall period of > 4 weeks
and adults.
The following were excluded from the SR:
• Studies that enrolled patients with clinical signs of dysentery or hospital-
acquired diarrhoea, studies conducted in special populations such as
travellers, refugees and immigrants or outbreak case reports and stud-
ies enrolling patients based on HIV status. This was done to ensure that
the study population would represent the general population.
• Studies with a recall period of more than four weeks. This was done to
avoid introducing recall bias into the study.
• Studies that had inaccessible results or insufﬁcient reporting.
3.1.3
Relevance screening
Articles or other citations that passed the eligibility criteria were screened
by a team of researchers involved in the FOCAL project3. First, the citations
3S. M. Pires, B. Desta, C. Monjane, C. Ayolabi, D. Belina, E. Buys, E. Hugho, G. Bakanni,
N. Machava, O. Fayemi, S. Majowicz and C. A. N. Thystrup
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3. Methodology
13
were screened based on title and abstract. If the citations passed the initial
screening step, they were passed on to a more thorough screening based on
the full text of the article. Both steps were carried out by pairs of researchers
involved in the systematic review, where each pair went through a subset
of the articles to determine the eligibility of each article based on a number
of questions. The researchers would screen the ﬁrst 25 citations together to
ensure that both agreed on how to apply the screening criteria. The remain-
ing citations would then be screened independently by each researcher, and
if any disagreements occurred, these would be resolved by a third reviewer.
Citations that did not pass the ﬁrst screening step were excluded once two
or more reviewers agreed and references that were incomplete or lacked in-
formation were excluded in the second step as well to avoid excluding im-
portant data. De-duplication was done using the software EndNoteX9 and
corrected using manual curation.
In the ﬁrst step of the screening process, the following questions were
used to determine whether a citation was eligible, as obtained from the pro-
tocol[50].
1. Is it a study collecting diarrhoea samples in the community, in outpatients or
inpatient (hospitals) in an African population?
YES, UNSURE →Include
NO →Exclude
2. Is the study conducting laboratory testing on diarrhoea samples for the pres-
ence of two or more etiologies?
YES, UNSURE →Include
NO →Exclude
3. Is the study conducted over at least 12 months?
YES →Include
NO →Exclude
4. Is the study conducted in special populations (travellers, cancer patients, etc.)
YES →Exclude
NO →Include
5. Does the study focus on antibiotic-associated diarrhoea or hospital-acquired
diarrhoea?
YES →Exclude
NO →Include
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3. Methodology
14
Articles or records that fulﬁlled these sets of criteria were passed on to
the second part of the screening. The following questions were then used to
ﬁnally determine if the article could be included in the systematic review:
1. Does the study test faeces samples for any of the pathogens of interest?
YES →Include
NO →Exclude
2. Does the study present number of tested and number of positive samples, or
number of tested samples and percentage of positives?
YES →Include
NO →Exclude
3.1.4
Data extraction
The studies that passed the relevance screening were assessed by one re-
viewer and data from relevant studies were extracted into Microsoft®Excel,
which was compliant with GATHER[52] guidelines. The total number of
diarrhoeal stool samples and total number of samples positive for a given
pathogen were extracted. Other variables extracted from the studies included
ﬁrst author’s last name, year of publication, year(s) of study, country, region,
type of study, study design and age group(s). Articles that presented their
results stratiﬁed by age or age-group were split into several smaller studies.
Any studies regarding co-infections were not treated separately, and were
therefore included in the total number of positive samples.
3.1.5
Estimation of mortality- and diarrhoea envelopes
The population estimates were obtained from the United Nations, Depart-
ment of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Devision (2020)[59]. To get
the total number of diarrhoeal illnesses in the population, the population
estimates for each region were multiplied with the incidence proportions ob-
tained from the FOCAL Population Survey[60]. In this retrospective, cross-
sectional study, participants from the general population was asked to report
cases of diarrhoea, which were then used to calculate the annual adjusted in-
cidence rate (IR) for the four countries involved in the project. This included
Tanzania, Ethiopia, Mozambique and Nigeria. An overall adjusted annual
IR was also calculated. To estimate the incidence of diarrhoeal disease in
the general population, the IRs were assumed to represent the IR in the re-
gion that each country belonged to. Since the northern and central regions
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3. Methodology
15
of Africa were not represented in the population survey, the overall IR was
used as proxy for these regions. Also, since Tanzania and Ethiopia both be-
longed to the east-African region, the adjusted annual IR for this region was
represented as the mean of both IRs. The original IRs from the population
survey are presented in Appendix B.
The total number of diarrhoeal deaths (the "diarrhoeal mortality enve-
lope") were obtained from WHO[61], which gave the number of diarrhoeal
deaths attributed to different regions of Africa in 2017, for the population of
children younger than ﬁve years of age. Due to the lack of recent data, these
estimates were used as proxy to represent the number of diarrhoeal deaths in
the African region in 2020, both for children younger than ﬁve years of age,
and the rest of the population.
3.2
Meta analysis
The meta-analysis was conducted in R (version 4.1.1, 2021-08-10) using the
Meta package (version 5.1.0)[62].
3.2.1
Data processing
In order to get the proportions of the different pathogens for both diarrhoeal
cases and deaths, the data was grouped into two categories, dependent on
whether they were conducted in an in-patient or out-patient facility/commu-
nity. It was assumed that the distribution of pathogens observed in an out-
patient and community setting represented the contribution of pathogens in
diarrhoeal cases. Similarly, it was assumed that the distribution of pathogens
observed in an in-patient facility represented the contribution of pathogens
present among deaths caused by diarrhoea.
Studies conducted in both in-patient, out-patient and community settings
where it was not possible to distinguish the groups from each other, were
included in the out-patient/community setting groups.
Due to the lack of studies conducted in older children and adults, it was
not possible to stratify data based on age-groups, other than below and above
ﬁve years of age. No studies testing for S. aureus were found in the SR and
therefore, no estimates were calculated for this pathogen.
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3. Methodology
16
3.2.2
Estimation of proportions
Since the studies were conducted over a period of many years in different
countries and under different circumstances, it was likely that the studies
would yield different results. To account for the variance in the effect of
the individual studies, a random-effects model was ﬁtted to the data[63].
This model assumed that an observed effect size was inﬂuenced not only
by sampling error, but also an unknown source of error[64]. This unknown
source of error was investigated using the risk of bias assessment, where the
statistical heterogeneity was calculated using τ2, H2 statistic and the Hig-
gins’ and Thompson’s I2 value[65].
The between-study variability in the
proportion estimates were estimated using the maximum-likelihood estima-
tor[66]. To avoid overestimation of the proportion estimate, the data was
logit-transformed before pooling[67]. The prevalence data was then pooled
using a Generalised Logistic Mixed-Effect Model (GLMM), and Knapp-Hartung
adjustments were used to calculate the conﬁdence interval (CI) around the
pooling effect[68]. A chi-squared test was conducted using a signiﬁcance
level of 0.1 to determine the statistical signiﬁcance of the estimated propor-
tions[69]. Outliers were inspected using forest plots and identiﬁed using the
leave-one-out method, where the pooled effects were recalculated after omit-
ting one study at a time[70]. Publication bias was also assessed using funnel
plots[71].
Since the data was assumed to contain substantial between-heterogeneity,
a moderator analysis was also conducted[72]. The studies were separated
by pathogen and split into two or more subgroups, based on the moderator
variables identiﬁed a priori. These variables were selected based on the as-
sumption that the prevalence of the different pathogens would vary between
regions and study-settings, and could hypothetically increase or decrease the
risk of bias. Due to the lack of studies, especially in the in-patient, above ﬁve
years of age-category, pathogens whose prevalence could not be estimated
were imputed from other pathogens in the same study-setting. For instance,
if no studies in the "in-patient, above ﬁve years of age"-category were in-
vestigating norovirus, the pooled estimate from the "in-patient, below ﬁve
years of age"-category was imputed, assuming that the prevalence would be
somewhat similar across the two age groups. This was done to ensure that
all pathogens of interested would be estimated, despite the lack of data.
To account for diarrhoea with an unknown cause, an unknown etiology
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3. Methodology
17
was introduced to the etiology estimates. The unknown etiology was es-
timating by subtracting 1 with the sum of the pooled estimates, which es-
timated the unknown etiology to be approx. 10% for the out-patient and
community estimates. Consulting the MAL-ED[73] study from 2014, who
estimated the unknown etiology of diarrhoeal cases to be about 7% for chil-
dren younger than ﬁve years, it was decided to use the estimated etiology
proportion of 10% for all age-groups and settings in this study. The pooled
estimates and the unknown etiology proportion in each of the four categories
were then summed to ensure that they did not sum to more than 100% and
normalised by dividing them with the sum of the pooled estimates in each of
the four categories.
To estimate the etiology-speciﬁc incidence for each of the pathogens in
each of the four categories, the normalised proportion estimates were mul-
tiplied by the respective estimates for the total number of deaths and ill-
nesses of diarrhoea (the "diarrhoeal mortality envelope" and the "diarrhoeal
envelope"). For comparison reasons, the number of diarrhoeal illnesses and
deaths were divided by 100,000, which gave the number of diarrhoeal ill-
nesses and deaths per 100,000 people in the different regions.
3.2.3
Publication bias
Assessing publication bias was done in order to examine the validity of the
results. Since many of the studies included in the meta-analysis were small
studies, funnel plots were used to inspect the small-study effects. For pathogens
with 10 or more studies contributing to its pooled estimate, Egger’s Regres-
sion Test[74] was used to test for asymmetry in the plot.
3.2.4
Moderator analysis
A moderator analysis was conducted post hoc to check for inﬂuential studies
in each of the estimates, by ﬁtting a mixed-effect model to the data. Expected
moderators included the setting of the study (in-patient and out-patient/community)
and age group of the participants. Other modiﬁers deﬁned a priori included
the area from where the study had been conducted (i.e. a study conducted in
an urban or a rural area) and the African region.
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3. Methodology
18
3.3
Metagenomic analysis
The aggregation of reads, clr-transformation and calculation of absolute abun-
dance were done using different Python scripts (version 3.8.8) written for the
purpose, which is available on GitHub4.
3.3.1
Sample collection
Figure 3.1 shows the country and area from where the sewage samples had
been collected, as well as the number of samples taken in that area.
FIGURE 3.1: Map of the African continent. Countries highlighted in green have
been sampled. Green circle points to the area where the samples were taken and
the white box depicts the number of samples taken from each country that had
been included in the metagenomics analysis.
A total of 31 samples were collected over a period of 14 months between
December 4th 2019 and February 4th 2021. The samples were taken every six
months in four different countries, and included sewage from urban and ru-
ral areas. The urban samples were obtained in communal public toilets (e.g.
4Available at https://github.com/ceci4323/FOCAL_thesis_2021
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3. Methodology
19
open markets), communal septic tanks and wastewater treatment plants, and
the rural samples were obtained in septic tanks (elementary schools), pit la-
trines (household or community) or communal public toilets (e.g. open mar-
kets). However, due to the quality of some of the samples, only 21 were
sequenced and pre-processed for the metagenomics analysis.
3.3.2
Sample processing
Prior to this thesis, the samples were DNA extracted, sequenced and trimmed
at the National Food Institute at DTU using an Illumina HiSeq 3000 plat-
form with paired end reads. The trimming of the reads was done using
BBDuk2[75] and FastQC[76] and adapters were removed, before being anal-
ysed.
3.3.3
Database selection and reference mapping
As part of the metagenomics pipeline, the reads were mapped against a num-
ber of annotated databases using the in-house mapping method KMA avail-
able on Computerome[77]. The tool was run using the command-line tool
kma_wrapper using default parameters. The command used to run the tool
was given as
#!/bin/bash
/home/projects/cge/apps/kma_wrapper.pl -i [list of reads]
-P [list of databases to map against] -d 11
#-d 11 refers to line 11 in the list of databases,
#specifying the databases listed in table 3.2
Table 3.2 shows the pre-set databases used by KMA for reference map-
ping. The version of the database, given in the date of when the database
was downloaded, is noted in the right column. All databases were down-
loaded from GenBank[53].
The ﬁles containing the mapping statistics for each sample were down-
loaded and used for further analysis in the post-processing step.
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 3. Methodology
20
TABLE 3.2: Pre-set databases used by KMA
KMA database
Speciﬁc database
Version
Genomic
Bacteria
2021_09_22
Archaea
2021_09_21
Protozoa
2021_10_25
Plasmid
2021_09_22
Bacteria (Draft)
2021_09_22
Virus
2021_09_22
Fungi
2021_09_22
3.3.4
Post-processing analysis
Aggregation of reads
The .mapstat-ﬁle contained the number of fragments for each read that were
aligned to the different genomes.
To get the number of fragments mapped to each pathogen species across
all the reads in a sample, reads belonging to each individual pathogen were
summed. This allowed the individual reads to be mapped to each species
and thus gave the abundance for each pathogenic species in a sample.
Clr-transformed abundance
To account for the difference in sequencing depth, the summed fragment
counts were transformed using the clr-transformation to get the abundance
of all pathogens in each sample.
The abundance for each pathogen was
summed and divided by the number of samples taken in each country to
account for the different number of samples obtained from each country,
Filtering of pathogens
The samples were ﬁltered using a list of pathogenic organisms, available in
Appendix C, and screened for the bacteria and parasites investigated in the
systematic review. Viruses were not detected in the sewage samples, since
the samples had been processed using a DNA library.
The clr-transformed abundance was visualised in a heatmap, and the data
was stratiﬁed based on sewage status and country, in order to look for differ-
ences in the distribution of pathogens.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3. Methodology
21
Detection of virulence factors of E. coli
To be able to distinguish diarrhoeagenic E. coli from other types of E. coli
present in the samples, the sewage samples were screened for virulence fac-
tors as well.
After selecting the reads mapped to E. coli, the reads were
mapped against a database containing virulence factors5 from GenBank[78]
using the following command:
#!/bin/bash
/home/projects/cge/apps/kma_wrapper.pl -i [list of reads]
-P .../VFDB_20200506
The fragments were also summed and clr-transformed to give the abso-
lute abundance of each virulence factor in all the samples. The samples were
then ﬁltered using a list of diarrhoeagenic E. coli virulence genes from SSI
Diagnostica[17], which comprises the following:
• vtx1, vtx2: Present in VTEC/STEC strains.
• eae: Present in EAEC/EEEC/EPEC strains.
• eltA, estA-human: Present in ETEC strains.
• ipaH: Present in EIEC strains.
5Version: 20200506
==PAGE:32==
22
Results
4.1
Systematic review and meta-analysis
Eleven pathogens and ﬁve subtypes of E. coli (EAEC, EPEC, EHEC, ETEC,
EIEC and STEC) were investigated in the SR. A detailed description of each
of the studies is available in Appendix D and the number of relevant studies
included in the SR is summed up in ﬁgure 4.1 below.
FIGURE 4.1: Flowdiagram showing the process of identifying eligible articles
included in the SR. n = number of articles, and N = number of studies.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4. Results
23
TABLE 4.1: Estimated diarrhoea- and mortality envelopes
Diarrhoeal disease envelope
Adjusted
annual
incidence rate
(IR)*
Population
estimates (2020)
in thousands
for
children <5
Population
estimates (2020)
in thousands for
children ≥5 and
adults
Diarrhoeal
envelope
children < 5 (in
thousands)
Diarrhoeal envelope
children
≥5 and adults (in
thousands)
Central
Africa
0.5
30,781
148,815
15,390
74,408
Eastern
Africa
0.64
67,968
377,438
43,160
239,673
Northern
Africa
0.5
29,087
217,145
14,543
108,573
Southern
Africa
0.56
6,770
60,734
3,791
34,011
Western
Africa
0.35
65,305
336,557
22,857
117,795
Mortality envelope
Total number of deaths attributed to diarrhoea (2017) in thousands
Central
Africa
34.8
Eastern
Africa
98.2
Northern
Africa
1.6
Southern
Africa
8.1
Western
Africa
193.3
*IR is calculated across all age groups.
The literature search yielded 14,623 records before de-duplication and ex-
clusion, based on the initial criteria. 1,978 articles were screened by the team
of researchers and assessed for eligibility. 36 articles were then included in
the systematic review, from which 321 smaller studies were extracted.
4.1.1
Estimated mortality- and diarrhoea envelope
The estimated mortality- and diarrhoea envelopes are shown in table 4.1.
Left column in table 4.1 shows the adjusted annual incidence rate (IR) of di-
arrhoea in Ethiopia, Mozambique, Nigeria and Tanzania from October 2020
to September 2021, given in people-per-year (PPY). Middle columns show
the population- estimates of children below and above ﬁve years of age and
adults, obtained from United Nations, Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, Population Division (2020)[59]. The mortality estimates were ob-
tained from OurWorldInData[61] are shown below.
4.1.2
Pooled proportion estimates
The pooled estimated proportions of the different pathogens are shown in
table 4.3, 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6. In general, more studies were found to investigate
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4. Results
24
children below ﬁve years of age (younger children) than older children (≥5
years of age) and adults. Table 4.2 shows the number of studies contributing
to each of the pooled estimates. Forest plots depicting the pooled proportion
estimates are available in Appendix F.
TABLE 4.2: Number of studies contributing to the pooled estimate of each
pathogen.
INP
OUT/COMM
Pathogen
Children <5
Children ≥5 and adults
Children <5
Children ≥5 and adults
Rotavirus
14
1
28
0
Norovirus
13
0
20
0
Astrovirus
4
0
11
0
Campylobacter spp.
7
0
14
0
Cryptosporidium
9
1
18
7
E. histolytica
4
11
11
5
EHEC
0
4
5
0
EPEC
1
5
13
1
ETEC
7
0
23
2
EAEC
1
5
8
1
EIEC
0
3
3
1
STEC
1
0
8
1
V. cholerae
5
0
5
0
Salmonella spp.
2
0
13
2
Shigella spp.
6
0
15
2
S. aureus
0
0
0
0
Total
74
30
195
22
Rotavirus had the highest estimated proportions of diarrhoea in in-patient
facilities for both younger children (0.254, 95% CI 0.202-0.314) and above
(0.359, 95% CI 0.242-0.495). Cryptosporidium (0.179, 95% CI 0.112-0.256) and
EPEC (0.18, 95% CI 0.153-0.21) were estimated to contribute largely to the
burden of disease in population of younger children. Norovirus was esti-
mated to have a low proportion for younger children as well (0.087, 95% CI
0.063-0.12).
For diarrhoeal cases in the out-patient/community setting, EAEC (0.177
95% CI 0.103-0.287) and ETEC (0.11, 95% CI 0.084-0.138) had the largest es-
timated proportions for all age groups. Rotavirus was estimated to have a
large proportion of diarrhoeal cases in an out-patient/community setting for
younger children (0.167, 95% CI 0.126-0.216).
The meta-analysis showed high between-study heterogeneity and vari-
ability for most of the pooled estimates, which indicated that the data was
very heterogeneous. The chi-squared test assessed whether the heterogene-
ity in the pooled estimates were due to intervening effects. Some pooled
estimates gave a low p-value (<0.1), which indicated that these proportions
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4. Results
25
were inﬂuenced by variation in effect size, that could not be attributed to
chance alone.
Table 4.3 shows the pooled effect size of the pathogens from studies con-
ducted in younger children in an in-patient setting. No studies tested for
EHEC and EIEC, which is why no effect sizes have been reported for these
subtypes of E. coli. Only one study was available for the estimates of EPEC,
EAEC and STEC so no p-value could be calculated for these estimates.
TABLE 4.3: Table showing the pooled effect size of the studies conducted in
children <5 years of age, in an in-patient setting.
Studies with pop. <5 years of age
INP
Pathogen
Number of
studies
Proportion
95% CI
p-value
Heterogeneity
(τ2)
Variability
(I2)
Rotavirus
14
0.118
[0.061;
0.216]
<0.0001
1.156
97.8%
[97.2%;98.3%]
Rotavirus
(Inﬂ. cases removed1) 8
0.254
[0.202;
0.314]
<0.0001
0.092
88.2%
[77.8%;95.5%]
Norovirus
13
0.074
[0.049;
0.11]
<0.0001
0.486
96.0%
[94.4%;97.1%]
Norovirus
(Inﬂ. cases removed2)10
0.087
[0.063;
0.12]
<0.0001
0.192
88.2%
[80.4%;92.9%]
Astrovirus
4
0.015
[0.0003;
0.432]
<0.0001
5.266
95.6%
[91.5%;97.7%]
Campylobacter spp.
7
0.036
[0.008;
0.142]
<0.0001
2.422
98.8%
[98.4%;99.1%]
Campylobacter spp.
(Inﬂ. cases removed3) 6
0.026
[0.006;
0.112]
<0.0001
1.963
98.5%
[97.9%;99.0%]
Cryptosporidium
9
0.177
[0.129;
0.242]
<0.0001
0.234
97.5%
[96.5%;98.2%]
Cryptosporidium
(Inﬂ. cases removed4) 5
0.179
[0.122;
0.256]
<0.0001
0.113
95.2%
[91.4%;97.3%]
E. histolytica
4
0.004
[0.0002;
0.075]
0.499
0.895
0.0%
[0.0%; 84.7%]
EHEC
0
-
-
-
-
-
EPEC
1*
0.18
[0.153;
0.21]
-
-
-
ETEC
7
0.069
[0.044;
0.106]
<0.0001
0.236
94.8%
[91.6%;96.8%]
EAEC
1*
0.04
[0.023;
0.069]
-
-
-
EIEC
0
-
-
-
-
-
STEC
1*
0.007
[0.003;
0.017]
-
-
-
V. cholerae
5
0.001
[0.0;
0.043]
0.1979
6.0665
33.5%
[0.0%; 74.9%]
Salmonella
spp.
2
0.004
[0.0;
1.0]
0.9996
7.4175
0%
Shigella spp.
6
0.036
[0.008;
0.153]
<0.0001
2.032
97.7%
[96.6%;98.5%]
*Point prevalence (Only 1 study available), CI was approximated.
1Removed as outliers: Zimmermann, 2019 (1aG1, 1cG1, 1dG1), Mayindou, 2016 (1aG2, 1bG2, 1cG2)
2Removed as outliers: Zimmermann, 2019 (1cG1, 1dG1), El Qazoui, 2014 (1G4)
3Removed as outliers: Hungerford, 2014 (3bG6)
4Removed as outliers: Zimmermann, 2019 (1aG1, 1cG1), Gasparinho, 2016 (3G3), Iturriza-Gómara, 2019 (6aG6)
Rotavirus had the largest estimated proportion (0.254, 95% CI 0.202-0.314),
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4. Results
26
after the removal of inﬂuential studies. The estimate showed considerable
between-study heterogeneity (I2>75%), which the low p-value (p-value <0.1)
also conﬁrmed. Norovirus (0.087, 95% CI 0.063-0.12) and Campylobacter spp.
both had lower pooled estimates after the removal of inﬂuential studies and
showed similar between-study heterogeneity as rotavirus (I2>75%, p-value<0.01).
As did astrovirus, which had a considerably lower pooled proportion es-
timate (0.015, 95% CI 0.0003-0.432).
EPEC had a large estimated propor-
tion (0.18, 95% CI 0.153-0.21) of diarrhoea for younger children in an in-
patient setting. As only one studied contributed to this estimate, it is difﬁcult
to determine the validity of this estimate. Cryptosporidium had the second
largest estimate (0.179, 95% CI 0.122-0.256) after the removal of inﬂuential
studies, and also had signiﬁcant between-study heterogeneity (I2>75%, p-
value<0.01). E. histolytica, STEC, V. cholerae, and Salmonella spp. had the
lowest estimated proportions. These estimates showed little heterogeneity
(I2<40%), which could indicate that these studies were largely homogenous.
Table 4.4 show the pooled estimates of the pathogens from studies con-
ducted in younger children, in an out-patients and community setting. As
with the studies conducted in the in-patient setting, the between-study het-
erogeneity was high for most of the pathogens.
Inﬂuential studies were
found for rotavirus, norovirus, astrovirus, Campylobacter spp., Cryptosporid-
ium, EPEC, ETEC, EAEC, Salmonella spp. and Shigella spp. Removal of these
reduced the between-heterogeneity signiﬁcantly for norovirus, astrovirus,
Cryptosporidium, EPEC and Salmonella spp., which made the estimates more
robust. EAEC was estimated to have the highest proportion of diarrhoea in
younger children in studies conducted in an out-patient or community set-
ting (0.177, 95% CI 0.103-0.287), followed by rotavirus (0.167, 95% CI 0.127-
0.216) and norovirus (0.09, 95% CI 0.06-0.138). Substantial between-study
heterogeneity was present (I2>50%, p-value<0.1 ) for all of these estimates,
even after the removal of outliers. Very little between-study heterogeneity
was found for E.histolytica, EHEC, V. cholerae (I2<7.5%), which could indicate
that these estimates were more representative of the true effect size, although
the small number of studies likely contributed to this.
Table 4.5 shows the pooled effect size of studies conducted in older chil-
dren and adults, in an in-patient setting. Only few studies investigated the
prevalence of pathogens in this category. No studies were reported for norovirus,
astrovirus, Campylobacter spp., ETEC, STEC, V. cholerae, Salmonella spp., and
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4. Results
27
TABLE 4.4: Table showing the pooled effect size of the studies conducted in
children <5 years of age, in an outpatient- or community setting.
Studies with pop. <5 years of age
OUT/COMM
Pathogen
Number of
studies
Proportion
95% CI
p-value
Heterogeneity
(τ2)
Variability
(I2)
Rotavirus
28
0.049
[0.025;
0.094]
<0.0001
3.056
97.6%
[97.2%;98.0%]
Rotavirus
(Inﬂ. cases removed1)19
0.167
[0.127;
0.216]
<0.0001
0.767
80.5%
[75.1%;89.0%]
Norovirus
20
0.019
[0.009;
0.04]
<0.0001
2.262
93.0%
[90.6%;94.8%]
Norovirus
(Inﬂ. cases removed2)17
0.09
[0.06;
0.138]
0.001
1.044
59.3%
[30.6%;76.2%]
Astrovirus
11
0.01
[0.005;
0.032]
<0.0001
1.489
91.8%
[87.4%;94.7%]
Astrovirus
(Inﬂ. cases removed3) 9
0.021
[0.014;
0.03]
0.0003
0.827
70.9%
[44.4%;84.7%]
Campylobacter spp.
14
0.027
[0.008;
0.089]
<0.0001
4.277
99.0%
[98.7%;99.2%]
Campylobacter spp.
(Inﬂ. cases removed4)11
0.046
[0.032;
0.066]
<0.0001
1.727
85.2%
[75.2%;91.2%]
Cryptosporidium
19
0.029
[0.016;
0.054]
<0.0001
1.385
93.0%
[90.4%;94.9%]
Cryptosporidium
(Inﬂ. cases removed5)15
0.04
[0.027;
0.056]
<0.0001
0.623
68.4%
[46.0%;81.5%]
E. histolytica
11
0.001
[0.0;
0.07]
0.3727
6.334
7.5%
[0.0%; 63.2%]
EHEC
5
0.033
[0.011;
0.097]
0.9872
0
0.0%
[0.0%; 79.2%]
EPEC
13
0.067
[0.025;
0.074]
<0.0001
0.061
88.7%
[82.5%;92.7%]
EPEC
(Inﬂ. cases removed6)12
0.067
[0.048;
0.092]
0.0014
0.178
65.1%
[33.6%;81.6%]
ETEC
19
0.059
[0.036;
0.096]
<0.0001
1.382
97.8%
[97.4%;98.2%]
ETEC
(Inﬂ. cases removed7)16
0.11
[0.084;
0.138]
<0.0001
0.039
70.8%
[47.3%;83.8%]
EAEC
8
0.129
[0.056;
0.27]
<0.0001
1.15
98.2%
[97.5%;98.7%]
EAEC
(Inﬂ. cases removed8) 7
0.177
[0.103;
0.287]
<0.0001
0.156
91.7%
[83.7%;95.8%]
EIEC
3
0.021
[0.0006;
0.429]
0.0068
1.367
80.0%
[36.7%;93.7%]
STEC
8
0.052
[0.009;
0.255]
<0.0001
4.233
76.7%
[53.5%;88.3%]
V. cholerae
5
0.003
[0.0003;
0.033]
0.4079
2.13
0.0%
[0.0%; 79.2%]
Salmonella
spp.
13
0.005
[0.001;
0.016]
<0.0001
3.302
88.9%
[82.8%;92.8%]
Salmonella spp.
(Inﬂ. cases removed9)11
0.009
[0.005;
0.017]
0.0773
1.17
40.7%
[0.0%; 70.8%]
Shigella spp.
15
0.026
[0.015;
0.045]
<0.0001
1.199
90.5%
[86.1%;93.6%]
Shigella spp.
(Inﬂ. cases removed10)11
0.026
[0.006;
0.026]
<0.0001
1.074
80.9%
[68.4%;88.5%]
1Removed as outliers: Japhet, 2019 (1aG5, 1bG5, 1cG5), Mansour, 2014 (2G5), Hungerford, 2014 (3bG6), Acacio,
2019 (4G1), Imade, 2015 (5bG6), Iturriza-Gómara, 2019 (6bG6), Ouédraogo, 2016 (11G6)
2Removed as outliers: Nhampossa, 2015 (4aG4), Imade, 2015 (5bG6, 5cG6)
3Removed as outliers: Japhet, 2019 (1aG5), Hungerford, 2014 (3aG6)
4Removed as outliers: Chuckwu, 2020 (1G3), Hungerford, 2014 (3aG6), Iturriza-Gómara, 2019 (6bG6)
5Removed as outliers: Acacio, 2019 (4G1), Nhampossa, 2015 (4bG4), Tellevik, 2015 (4G5)
6Removed as outliers: Iijima, 2017 (4G6)
7Removed as outliers: Mansour, 2014 (2G5), Gosselin, 2018 (4G3), Prah, 2021 (7G4)
8Removed as outliers: Iijima, 2017 (4G6)
9Removed as outliers: Ashie, 2017 (2aG1), Mansour, 2014 (2G5)
10Removed as outliers: Mansour, 2014 (2G5), Acacio, 2019 (4G1), Nhampossa, 2015 (4cG4), Iturriza-Gómara, 2019
(6bG6)
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 4. Results
28
Shigella spp., and only one study was used to estimate the proportion of ro-
tavirus and Cryptosporidium. The between-study heterogeneity was high for
E. histolytica, even after the removal of inﬂuential studies, whereas EHEC,
EAEC and EIEC showed moderate between-study heterogeneity. This in-
dicated that these estimates were inﬂuenced by some unknown error, that
could not be entirely contributed to the variability in sampling. No hetero-
geneity of importance was found for EPEC. This indicated that the pooled
estimate for EPEC was homogenous and thus gave a more accurately rep-
resentation of the true effect. However, the chi-squared test showed no sta-
tistical signiﬁcance for the estimates of EHEC, EPEC, EAEC and EIEC (p-
value>0.05), which meant that the between-heterogeneity could not be con-
ﬁrmed for these estimates.
TABLE 4.5: Table showing the pooled effect size of the studies conducted in
children ≥5 years of age and adults, in an inpatient-setting.
Studies with pop.≥5 years of age
INP
Pathogen
Number of
studies
Proportion
95% CI
p-value
Heterogeneity
(τ2)
Variability
(I2)
Rotavirus
1*
0.359
[0.242;
0.495]
-
-
-
Norovirus
0
-
-
-
-
-
Astrovirus
0
-
-
-
-
-
Campylobacter
spp.
0
-
-
-
-
-
Cryptosporidium
1*
0.057
[0.0184;
0.1613]
-
-
-
E. histolytica
11
0.005
[0.004;
0.006]
<0.0001
0.134
95.4%
[93.3%; 96.8%]
E. histolytica
(Inﬂ.
cases
removed1)
10
0.06
[0.056;
0.063]
<0.0001
0.039
87.8%
[78.2%; 93.2%]
EHEC
4
0.154
[0.042;
0.431]
0.1438
0.26
44.6%
[0.0%; 81.5%]
EPEC
5
0.196
[0.09;
0.377]
0.6972
0.0415
0.0%
[0.0%; 79.2%]
ETEC
0
-
-
-
-
-
EAEC
5
0.341
[0.053;
0.827]
0.0693
2.302
54.0%
[0.0%; 83.0%]
EIEC
3
0.299
[0.05;
0.775]
0.2179
0.174
34.4%
[0.0%; 78.6%]
STEC
0
-
-
-
-
-
V. cholerae
0
-
-
-
-
-
Salmonella
spp.
0
-
-
-
-
-
Shigella spp.
0
-
-
-
-
-
*Point prevalence (Only 1 study available), CI was approximated.
1Removed as outliers: Ramos, 2014 (3bG5)
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4. Results
29
Table 4.6 shows the pooled estimates for the studies conducted in the
population of older children and adults, in an out-patient and community
setting. No studies estimates the prevalence of rotavirus, norovirus, astro-
virus, Campylobacter spp., EHEC and V. cholerae in this category, and thus, no
estimates were calculated. Only one study was available for EPEC, EAEC,
EIEC and STEC, which made the conﬁdence intervals for these estimates
very large. Both the estimates for E. histolytica, Salmonella spp. and Shigella
spp. showed high between-study heterogeneity (I2 > 90%), which was also
conﬁrmed by the p-value (p-value<0.05). The estimates for Cryptosporidium
and ETEC showed somewhat lower heterogeneity (33.7% and 10.7%, respec-
tively), but no conﬁdence intervals were reported for the variability of ETEC,
which could indicate that the studies contributing to the estimate did not
share a common true effect size.
TABLE 4.6: Table showing the pooled effect size of the studies conducted in
children ≥5 years of age and adults, in an outpatient- or community setting.
Studies with pop. ≥5 years of age
OUT/COMM
Pathogen
Number of
studies
Proportion
95% CI
p-value
Heterogeneity(τ2)
Variability(I2)
Rotavirus
0
-
-
-
-
-
Norovirus
0
-
-
-
-
-
Astrovirus
0
-
-
-
-
-
Campylobacter sp.
0
-
-
-
-
-
Cryptosporidium
7
0.01
[0.008;
0.02]
0.1711
0.843
33.7%
[0.0%; 71.9%]
E. histolytica
5
0.2
[0.1;
0.34]
<0.0001
0.36
94.9%
[90.8%; 97.2%]
EHEC
0
-
-
-
-
-
EPEC
1*
0.028
[0.011;
0.056]
-
-
-
ETEC
2
0.067
[0.008;
0.392]
0.29
0
10.7%**
EAEC
1*
0.044
[0.022;
0.077]
-
-
-
EIEC
1*
0.008
[0.001;
0.028]
-
-
-
STEC
1*
0.071
[0.043;
0.111]
-
-
-
V. cholerae
0
-
-
-
-
-
Salmonella spp.
2
0.023
[0.0;
0.997]
0.0013
0.864
90.4%
[65.1%; 97.4%]
Shigella spp.
2
0.076
[0.0;
1.0]
<0.0001
1.749
98.1%
[95.6%; 99.2%]
*Point prevalence (Only 1 study available), CI was approximated.
** No conﬁdence interval for the variability was reported.
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 4. Results
30
4.1.3
Etiology proportions
The etiology proportions for the in-patient and out-patient/community stud-
ies and their 95% CI are shown in table 4.7 and 4.8. Generally, the same
pathogens seem to be causing the majority of diarrhoeal deaths across both
age-groups, assuming that the distribution of pathogen abundance was the
same for in-patients and diarrheal deaths. Similarly for the diarrhoeal cases,
a few pathogens seemed to be dominant across all age groups, with few
exceptions, as seen in table 4.7.
The pathogens with the highest propor-
tion of deaths in younger children were estimated to be rotavirus (17.3%,
95% CI 13.7-22.5%), entero-pathogenic E. coli (EPEC) (12.3%, 95% CI 10.4-
15.4%), Cryptosporidium (12.2%, 95% CI 8.3-18.5%) and enterohemorrhagic E.
coli (EHEC) (10.5%, 95% CI 2.9-30.4%), which accounted for more than 40%
of the diarrhoeal deaths all together, after normalisation.
TABLE 4.7: Table showing the estimated proportions and their 95% CI for chil-
dren <5 and ≥5 years of age, and adults in an in-patient setting.
INP
Estimated proportions [95% CI]
Estimated proportions (Normalised) [95% CI]
<5
≥5
<5
≥5
Rotavirus
0.254
[0.202;0.314]
0.359 [0.242;0.45]
0.173 [0.137;0.225]
0.197 [0.132;0.28]
Norovirus*
0.087 [0.063;0.12]
0.087 [0.063;0.12]
0.06 [0.043;0.093]
0.048 [0.034;0.075]
Astrovirus*
0.015 [0.0;0.432]
0.015 [0.00;0.432]
0.011 [0.0;0.305]
0.009 [0.0;0.246]
Campylobacter spp.*
0.026
[0.006;0.112]
0.026
[0.006;0.112]
0.019 [0.004;0.088]
0.015 [0.003;0.071]
Cryptosporidium
0.179
[0.122;0.256]
0.057
[0.018;0.161]
0.122 [0.083;0.185]
0.032 [0.01;0.098]
E. histolytica
0.004 [0.0;0.075]
0.059
[0.056;0.063]
0.003 [0.0;0.063]
0.033 [0.03;0.044]
EHEC**
0.154
[0.042;0.431]
0.154
[0.042;0.431]
0.105 [0.029;0.304]
0.085 [0.023;0.245]
EPEC
0.18 [0.153;0.21]
0.196
[0.0895;0.3768]
0.123 [0.104;0.154]
0.108 [0.049;0.215]
ETEC*
0.069
[0.044;0.106]
0.069
[0.044;0.106]
0.048 [0.03;0.084]
0.038 [0.024;0.068]
EAEC
0.04 [0.023;0.069]
0.341
[0.053;0.827]
0.028 [0.015;0.059]
0.187 [0,029;0.462]
EIEC**
0.299 [0.05;0.775]
0.299 [0.05;0.775]
0.203 [0.034;0.537]
0.164 [0.027;0.433]
STEC*
0.007
[0.003;0.017]
0.007
[0.003;0.017]
0.006 [0.002;0.024]
0.005 [0.002;0.019]
V. cholerae*
0.001 [0.0;0.043]
0.001 [0.0;0.043]
0.002 [0.0;0.041]
0.001 [0.0;0.033]
Salmonella spp.*
0.004 [0.0;1.0]
0.004 [0.0;1.0]
0.003 [0.0;0.69]
0.003 [0.0;0.556]
Shigella spp.*
0.036
[0.008;0.153]
0.036
[0.008;0.153]
0.025 [0.005;0.115]
0.02 [0.004;0.093]
Unknown***
0.1
0.1
0.069
0.055
Total
1.456
1.81
1.0
1.0
*Estimated proportions (and 95% CI) were imputed from the in-patient <5 group.
**Estimated proportions (and 95% CI) were imputed from the in-patient ≥group.
*** No 95% CI available for the Unknown estimates.
For the population of older children and adults, the relative proportion
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4. Results
31
of diarrhoeal deaths were highest for rotavirus (19.7%, 95% CI 13.2-28%), en-
teroaggregative E. coli (EAEC) (18.7%, 95% CI 2.9-46.2%) and enteroinvasive
E. coli (EIEC) (16.4%, 95% CI 2.7-43.3%). The pathogens with the lowest rela-
tive proportions were V. cholerae (0.2%, 95% CI 0-4.1%), Salmonella spp. (0.3%,
95% CI 0-69%) and Shiga toxin-producing E. coli (STEC) (0.6%, 95% CI 0.2-
2.4%).
The pathogens with the highest relative proportions for younger children
were enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC) (18.2%, 95% CI 10.5-31.1%) and ro-
tavirus (17.1%, 95% CI 13-23.8%) which together accounted for more than
35% of the diarrhoeal cases overall after normalisation, as seen in table 4.8.
The proportion of diarrhoea in out-patient facilities and communities were
assumed to represent the number of diarrhoeal cases in the population. Norovirus
was estimated to have a lower proportion of 9.3% (CI 5.9-15.9%) for cases in
younger children, attributed to diarrhoea. V. cholerae, Salmonella spp. and
E. histolytica had the lowest relative proportions of all the pathogens con-
tributing to diarrhoea in younger children (0.4%, 95% CI 0-5.2%, 1%, 95% CI
0.5-6.4% and 0.2%, 95% CI 0-8.9%, respectively).
For older children and adults, the proportion of diarrhoeal cases were
highest for E. histolytica (19.1%, 95% CI 9.7-35.3%) and rotavirus (16.3%, 95%
CI 12.2-22.9%) with both pathogens accounting for more than 35% of the to-
tal diarrhoeal cases after normalisation. Norovirus was estimated to have a
lower proportion of 8.9% (CI 5.5-15.5%), which was similar to what was esti-
mated in younger children. Salmonella spp. had a higher relative proportion
for older children and adults (3.2%, 95% CI 0-9.7%). The pathogens with the
lowest incidence of diarrhoeal cases were V. cholerae (0.6%, 95% CI 0-5.5%),
EIEC (1.1%, 95% CI 0.1-5%), astrovirus (2.3%, 95% CI 1.3-5.2%) and EPEC
(3%, 95% CI 1.1-7.7%).
The relative contribution for diarrhoea of the ten diarrhoeal agents is
shown in ﬁgure 4.2. E. coli had the highest relative proportion of diarrhoea in
in-patient and out-patient facilities and communities, across all age groups.
Speciﬁcally entero-invasive E. coli (EIEC) had the highest contribution to di-
arrhoeal deaths for all age-groups, assuming that the abundance in the in-
patient studies represented the diarrhoeal deaths. The relative proportions
of EAEC, EPEC and rotavirus were high for diarrhoeal deaths in younger
children as well. The proprotion of norovirus-attributed diarrhoeal deaths
were lower in both age groups. Cryptosporidium also contributed to a larger
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 4. Results
32
TABLE 4.8: Table showing the estimated proportions and their 95% CI for chil-
dren <5 and ≥5 years of age, and adults in an out-patient/community setting.
OUT/COMM
Estimated proportions [95% CI]
Estimated proportions (Normalised) [95% CI]
<5
≥5
<5
≥5
Rotavirus*
0.167
[0.127;0.216]
0.167
[0.127;0.216]
0.171 [0.13;0.238]
0.163
[0.122;0.229]
Norovirus*
0.09 [0.058;0.138]
0.09 [0.058;0.138]
0.093
[0.059;0.159]
0.089
[0.055;0.155]
Astrovirus*
0.021 [0.014;0.03]
0.021 [0.014;0.03]
0.022
[0.014;0.049]
0.023
[0.013;0.052]
Campylobacter spp.*
0.046
[0.032;0.066]
0.046
[0.032;0.066]
0.048
[0.033;0.085]
0.047
[0.031;0.086]
Cryptosporidium
0.041 [0.027;0.06]
0.014
[0.008;0.024]
0.043
[0.028;0.079]
0.016
[0.007;0.046]
E. histolytica
0.001 [0.0;0.07]
0.196
[0.102;0.344]
0.002 [0.0;0.089]
0.191
[0.097;0.353]
EHEC*
0.033
[0.011;0.097]
0.033
[0.011;0.097]
0.035
[0.011;0.117]
0.034 [0.01;0.116]
EPEC
0.067
[0.048;0.092]
0.028
[0.011;0.056]
0.07 [0.049;0.112]
0.03 [0.011;0.077]
ETEC
0.108
[0.084;0.138]
0.067
[0.008;0.392]
0.112
[0.086;0.159]
0.067
[0.008;0.398]
EAEC
0.177
[0.103;0.287]
0.044
[0.022;0.077]
0.182
[0.105;0.311]
0.045
[0.021;0.096]
EIEC
0.021 [0.0;0.429]
0.008
[0.001;0.028]
0.023
[0.001;0.456]
0.011 [0.001;0.05]
STEC
0.052
[0.009;0.255]
0.071
[0.043;0.111]
0.054
[0.009;0.279]
0.071
[0.041;0.129]
V. cholerae*
0.003 [0.0;0.033]
0.003 [0.0;0.033]
0.004 [0.0;0.052]
0.006 [0.0;0.055]
Salmonella spp.
0.009
[0.005;0.017]
0.03 [0.0;0.997]
0.01 [0.005;0.064]
0.032 [0.0;0.977]
Shigella spp.
0.026
[0.015;0.045]
0.076 [0.0;1.0]
0.028
[0.016;0.064]
0.076 [0.0;0.98]
Unknown**
0.1
0.1
0.103
0.099
Total
0.961
0.993
1.0
1.0
*Estimated proportions (and 95% CI) were imputed from the in-patient <5 group.
** No 95% CI available for the Unknown estimates.
proportion of diarrhoeal deaths in younger children.
Rotavirus generally had the largest relative contribution to the propor-
tion of diarrhoeal illnesses for all age groups, assuming that the studies con-
ducted in the out-patient facilities and communities represented the num-
ber of diarrhoeal illnesses. STEC had almost no contribution of diarrhoeal
deaths, but had a larger contribution to the diarrhoeal cases. For older chil-
dren and adults, E. histolytica had a signiﬁcantly higher proportion of diar-
rhoeal illnesses, compared to younger children. Similarly, the relative pro-
portion of Shigella spp. was higher for this age-group than children less than
ﬁve years of age.
The total estimates of diarrhoea illnesses and deaths per 100,000 for both
age-groups are presented in table 4.9 and 4.10. The estimates are given in
thousands. The largest number of diarrhoeal cases in younger children per
100,000 people were caused by enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC) (18,200 95%
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4. Results
33
FIGURE 4.2: Relative abundance of the ten diarrhoeal agents and unknown eti-
ology for diarrhoeal deaths (INP) and cases (OUT/COMM) in children <5 and
the population ≥5 years of age.
UI 10,500-31,100) and rotavirus (17,100 95% UI 13,000-23,800), with ETEC
(11,200 95% UI 8,600-15,899) and norovirus (9,299 95% UI 5,899-15,899) as
the second and third highest contributors.
According to these estimates,
eastern Africa (43,272 95% UI 23,625-98,831) had the highest number of di-
arrhoeal cases per 100,000 people, indicating that the burden of diarrhoea
was higher in this region. Western Africa also contributed signiﬁcantly to
the burden of diarrhoeal disease with 22,916 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants
(95% UI 12,513-52,343. Fewest cases of diarrhoea were estimated to be in the
southern African region, with 3,800 (95% UI 2,074-8,680) cases occurring in
the <5 population per 100,000 people. E. histolytica (201 95% UI 0-8,900) and
V. cholerae (400 95% CI 0-5,200) caused the least amount of diarrhoeal cases
per 100,000 people, according to these estimates.
The pathogens causing the highest number of deaths in younger chil-
dren were enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) with 20,299 deaths (95% UI 3,400-
53,700) and rotavirus with 17,300 deaths (95% UI 13,699-22,501) per 100,000
people.
Other pathogens with a high mortality included Cryptosporidium
(12,200 95% UI 8,300-18,500), E. coli subtypes EPEC (10,499 95% UI 2,901-
30,401) and EHEC (12,300 95% UI 10,401-15,400) as well as norovirus (6,000
95% UI 4,300-9,300). The burden of diarrhoeal deaths per 100,000 people for
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4. Results
34
the ten selected pathogens were highest in Western Africa (53,567 95% UI
27,964-170,716) with more than 50% of the deaths per 100,000 people occur-
ring in this region.
The pathogen causing the highest number of diarrhoeal cases in the pop-
ulation of older children and adults were E. histolytica and rotavirus with
10,101 (95% UI 9,699-35,300) and 16,300 (95% UI 12,200-22,900) cases per
100,000 people respectively, according to these estimates. Other pathogens
contributing to the burden of disease in this age group were norovirus (8,900
95% UI 5,500-15,500) and enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) (6,700 95% UI 800-
39,799). The highest number of diarrhoeal cases per 100,000 people were also
found to be eastern Africa for this age group (41,722 95% UI 17,398-158,501).
The pathogens contributing to the fewest cases of diarrhoea for older chil-
dren and adults, were V. cholerae (600 95% UI 0-5,500) and enteroinvasive E.
coli (EIEC) (1,100 95% UI 101-5,000), according to these estimates. Rotavirus
(19,700 95% UI 13,200-28,001) and enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC) (18,700
95% UI 2,901-46,201) contributed the most to the total number of diarrhoeal
deaths per 100,000 people in the ≥5 population. E. coli subtypes EIEC (16,400
95% UI 2,701-43,299) and EPEC (10,800 95% UI 4,900-21,501) also contributed
to a large part of the total number of deaths in this age group. Fewest deaths
per 100,000 people were caused by V. cholerae (99 95% 0-3,301) and Salmonella
spp. (300 95% CI 0-55,600).
4.1.4
Publication bias
The pooled proportion estimates were inspected for publication bias using
funnel plots, but due to limited number of studies, it was difﬁcult to detect
any asymmetry for the majority of the estimates. To support the evidence of
the funnel plots, Egger’s Regression test was used to test for asymmetry for
estimates with ten or more studies contributing to the pooled proportions.
Table 4.11 shows the p-value obtained from the Egger’s Regression test. Fun-
nel plots for the estimates are available in Appendix G.
Inspection of the funnel plots showed minimal asymmetry for the ma-
jority of the estimates. The funnel plots for the estimates of Campylobacter
spp., Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) in out-patient facilities or communities
showed some asymmetry in the plot, but the insigniﬁcant p-value from the
Egger’s regression test could not conﬁrm this (p-value>0.05). The Egger’s
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4. Results
35
TABLE 4.9: Total estimates of diarrhoeal illnesses and cases per 100,000 for the <5 population, given in thousands, stratiﬁed by region, with
95% UI.
Pathogen
Central Africa
Eastern Africa
Northern Africa
Southern Africa
Western Africa
Total
9 countries
(30,781 pop.*, 34.8 deaths**)
20 countries
(67,968 pop.*, 98.2 deaths**)
7 countries
(29,087 pop.*, 1.6 deaths**)
5 countries
(6,770 pop.*, 8.1 deaths**)
17 countries
(65,305 pop.*, 193.3 deaths**)
Illnesses (95%
CI)
Deaths
(95%
CI)
Illnesses (95%
CI)
Deaths
(95%
CI)
Illnesses (95%
CI)
Deaths (95%
CI)
Illnesses
(95% CI)
Deaths (95%
CI)
Illnesses (95%
CI)
Deaths
(95%
CI)
Illnesses (95%
CI)
Deaths
(95%
CI)
Rotavirus
2,639
(2,006-
3,672)
1,792
(1,419-
2,331)
7,399
(5,625-
10,299)
5,057
(4,004-
6,577)
2,493
(1,896-
3,470)
81 (64-106)
650 (494-905)
416 (329-541)
3,919
(2,979-
5,454)
9,954
(7,883-
12,946)
17,100 (13,000-
23,800)
17,300 (13,699-
22,501)
Norovirus
1,435
(910-
2,453)
622 (446-964)
4,024
(2,553-
6,880)
1,754
(1,257-
2,718)
1,356
(860-
2,318)
28 (20-44)
353 (224-604)
144 (103-223)
2,131
(1,352-
3,644)
3,452
(2,474-
5,351)
9,299
(5,899-
15,899)
6,000
(4,300-
9,300)
Astrovirus
339 (216-756)
114 (0-3,160)
952
(606-
2,120)
322 (0-8,915)
321 (204-714)
5 (0-143)
84 (53-186)
26 (0-733)
504 (321-1,123)
633 (0-17,549)
2,200
(1,400-
4,899)
1,100
(0-
30,500)
Campy-
lobacter
spp.
741
(509-
1,312)
197 (41-912)
2,077
(1,428-
3,678)
555
(117-
2,572)
700
(481-
1,239)
9 (2-41)
182 (125-323)
46 (10-211)
1,100
(756-
1,948)
1,093
(230-
5,063)
4,800
(3,299-
8,500)
1,900
(400-
8,799)
Cryp-
tosporid-
ium
664
(432-
1,219)
1,264
(860-
1,917)
1,861
(1,212-
3,418)
3,566
(2,426-
5,407)
627
(408-
1,152)
57 (39-87)
163 (106-300)
293 (199-444)
985 (642-1,810)
7,020
(4,776-
10,645)
4,300
(2,800-
7,899)
12,200
(8,300-
18,500)
E. histolyt-
ica
31 (0-1,373)
31 (0-653)
87 (0-3,851)
88 (0-1,841)
29 (0-1,298)
1 (0-30)
8 (0-338)
7 (0-151)
46 (0-2,040)
173 (0-3,625)
201 (0-8,900)
300 (0-6,300)
EHEC
540
(170-
1,805)
1,088
(300-
3,150)
1,515
(476-
5,063)
3,069
8848-
8,886)
510
(160-
1,706)
49 (14-143)
133 (42-445)
252 (70-730)
802 (252-2,861)
6,041
(1,669-
17,492)
3,500
(1,100-
11,700)
10,499
(2,901-
30,401)
EPEC
1,080
(756-
1,728)
1,274
(1,078-
1,596)
3,029
(2,120-
4,846)
3,595
(3,040-
4,501)
1,021
(714-
1,633)
58 (49-72)
266 (186-426)
296 (250-370)
1,604
(1,123-
2,567)
7,077
(5,984-
8,861)
7,000
(4,899-
11,200)
12,300 (10,401-
15,400)
ETEC
1,728
(1,327-
2,453)
497 (311-870)
4,846
(3,721-
6,880)
1,403
(877-
2,455)
1,633
(1,254-
2,318)
23 (14-39)
426 (327-604)
115 (72-202)
2,567
(1,971-
3,644)
2,762 (1,726)
11,200 (8,600-
15,899)
4,800
(3,000-
8,399)
EAEC
2,808
(1,620-
4,799)
290 (155-611)
7,875
(4,544-
13,457)
818
(438-
1,725)
2,654
(1,531-
4,535)
13 (7-28)
692
(399-
1,182)
67 (36-142)
4,171
(2,406-
7,127)
1,611
(863-
3,395)
18,200 (10,500-
31,100)
2,799
(1,499-
5,901)
EIEC
355 (15-7,036)
2,103
(352-
5,564)
995
(43-
19,732)
5,933
(994-
15,696)
335 (15-6,649)
95 (16-252)
87 (4-1,733)
488 (82-1,290)
527 (23-10,450)
11,680 (1,956-
30,898)
2,299
(100-
45,600)
20,299
(3,400-
53,700)
STEC
833
(139-
4,305)
62 (21-249)
2,337
(389-
12,073)
175 (58-701)
787
(131-
4,068)
3 (1-11)
205 (34-1,060)
14 (5-58)
1,237
(206-
6,394)
345
(115-
1,381)
5,399
(899-
27,900)
599 (200-2,400)
V. cholerae
62 (0-802)
21 (0-425)
173 (0-2,250)
58 (0-1,198)
58 (0-758)
1 (0-19)
15 (0-198)
5 (0-99)
92 (0-1,192)
115 (0-2,359)
400 (0-5,200)
200 (0-4,100)
Salmonella
spp.
154 (77-540)
31 (0-7,149)
433
(216-
1,515)
88 (0-20,168)
146 (73-510)
1 (0-342)
38 (19-133)
7 (0-1,658)
229 (115-802)
173 (0-39,701)
1,000
(500-
3,500)
300 (0-69,000)
Shigella
spp.
432 (247-988)
259 (52-1,191)
1,212
(692-
2,769)
731
(146-
3,361)
408 (233-933)
12 (2-54)
106 (61-243)
60 (12-276)
642 (367-1,467)
1,438
(288-
6,617)
2,800
(1,600-
6,400)
2,500
(500-
11,499)
Un-
known***
1,589
715
4,457
2,017
1,502
32
392
166
2,360
3,970
10,300
6,900
Total
15,430 (8,424-
35,241)
9,645
(5,035-
30,742)
43,272
(23,625-
98,831)
27,212
(14,205-
86,721)
14,580 (7960-
33,301)
436
(228-
1,393)
3,800 (2,074-
8,680)
2,236 (1,168-
7,128)
22,916 (12,513-
52,343)
53,567
(27,964-
170,716)
99,998 (54,596-
228,396)
93,096 (48,600-
296,700)
*Population data for 2020, obtained from UN[59].
**Total number of diarrhoeal deaths for children <5 in 2017, obtained from OurWorldInData[61].
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4. Results
36
TABLE 4.10: Total estimates of diarrhoeal illnesses and cases per 100,000 for the ≥5 population, given in thousands, stratiﬁed by region,
with 95% UI.
Pathogen
Central Africa
Eastern Africa
Northern Africa
Southern Africa
Western Africa
Total
9 countries
(148,815 pop.*, 34.8
deaths**)
20 countries
(377,438 pop.*, 98.2 deaths**)
7 countries
(217,145 pop.*, 1.6
deaths**)
5 countries
(60,734 pop.*, 8.1 deaths**)
17 countries
(336,557 pop.*, 193.3
deaths**)
Illnesses (95%
UI)
Deaths
(95%
UI)
Illnesses (95%
UI)
Deaths
(95%
UI)
Illnesses (95%
UI)
Deaths (95%
UI)
Illnesses (95%
UI)
Deaths (95%
UI)
Illnesses (95%
UI)
Deaths
(95%
UI)
Illnesses (95%
UI)
Deaths
(95%
UI)
Rotavirus
2,111
(1,580-
2,966)
2,041
(1,368-
2,901)
6,801
(5,090-
9,554)
5,758
(3,858-
8,184)
3,081
(2,306-
4,328)
93 (62-132)
965
(722-
1,356)
473 (317-673)
3,342
(2,502-
4,696)
11,335 (7,595-
16,111)
16,300 (12,200-
22,900)
19,700 (13,200-
28,001)
Norovirus
1,153
(712-
2,008)
497 (352-777)
3,713
(2,295-
6,467)
1,403
(994-
2,192)
1,682
(1,039-
2,929)
23 (16-35)
527 (326-918)
115 (82-180)
1,825
(1,128-
3,178)
2,762
(1,956-
4,315)
8,900
(5,500-
15,500)
4,800
(3,400-
7,499)
Astrovirus
298 (168-674)
93 (0-2,549)
960 (542-2,170)
263 (0-7,190)
435 (246-983)
4 (0-116)
136 (77-308)
22 (0-591)
472
(267-
1,066)
518 (0-14,154)
2,301
(1,300-
5,201)
900 (0-24,600)
Campy-
lobacter
spp.
609
(402-
1,114)
155 (31-736)
1,961
(1,293-
3,588)
438 (88-2,075)
888
(586-
1,625)
7 (1-33)
278 (184-509)
36 (7-171)
964
(636-
1,763)
863
(173-
4,085)
4,700
(3,101-
8,599)
1,499
(300-
7,100)
Cryp-
tosporid-
ium
207 (91-596)
332
(104-
1,015)
668 (292-1,919)
935
(292-
2,864)
302 (132-869)
15 (5-46)
95 (41-272)
77 (24-235)
328 (144-943)
1,841
(575-
5,639)
1,600
(700-
4,599)
3,200
(1,000-
9,799)
E. histolyt-
ica
2,474
(1,256-
4,572)
342 (311-456)
7,969
(4,047-
14,728)
965
(877-
1,286)
3,610
(1,833-
6,672)
16 (14-21)
1,131
(574-
2,090)
79 (72-106)
3,917
(1,989-
7,238)
1,899
(1,726-
2,532)
19,101 (9,699-
35,300)
3,301
(3,000-
4,401)
EHEC
440
(130-
1,503)
881
(238-
2,538)
1,419
(417-
4,840)
2,484
(672-
7,161)
643
(189-
2,192)
40 (11-115)
201 (59-687)
204 (55-589)
697
(205-
2,379)
4,891
(1,323-
14,097)
3,400
(1,000-
11,601)
8,500
(2,299-
24,500)
EPEC
389 (142-997)
1,119
(508-
2,228)
1,252
(459-
3,213)
3,157
(1,432-
6,284)
567
(208-
1,455)
51 (23-101)
178 (65-456)
259 (118-517)
615
(226-
1,579)
6,214
(2,819-
12,371)
3,001
(1,100-
7,700)
10,800
(4,900-
21,501)
ETEC
868
(104-
5,155)
394 (249-705)
2,795
(334-
16,605)
1,111
(701-
1,988)
1,266
(151-
7,522)
18 (11-32)
397 (47-2,356)
91 (58-163)
1,374
(164-
8,161)
2,186
(1,381-
3,913)
6,700
(800-
39,799)
3,800
(2,400-
6,801)
EAEC
583
(272-
1,243)
1,937
(300-
4,787)
1,877
(876-
4,005)
5,466
(848-
13,504)
850
(397-
1,814)
88 (14-217)
266 (124-568)
449
(70-
1,110)
923
(431-
1,969)
10,760 (1,669-
26,583)
4,499
(2,100-
9,599)
18,700
(2,901-
46,201)
EIEC
142 (13-648)
1,699
(280-
4,486)
459 (42-2,086)
4,794
(789-
12,656)
208 (19-945)
77 (13-203)
65 (6-296)
394
(65-
1,040)
226 (21-1,025)
9,436
(1,554-
24,914)
1,100
(101-
5,000)
16,400
(2,701-
43,299)
STEC
920
(531-
1,671)
52 (21-197)
2,962
(1,711-
5,382)
146 (58-555)
1,342
(775-
2,438)
2 (1-9)
420 (243-764)
12 (5-46)
1,456
(841-
2,645)
288
(115-
1,093)
7,100
(4,101-
12,900)
500 (200-1,900)
V. cholerae
78 (0-712)
10 (0-342)
250 (0-2,295)
29 (0-965)
113 (0-1,039)
0 (0-16)
36 (0-326)
2 (0-79)
123 (0-1,128)
58 (0-1,899)
600 (0-5,500)
99 (0-3,301)
Salmonella
spp.
414 (0-12,655)
31 (0-5,761)
1,335
(0-
40,762)
88 (0-16,251)
605 (0-18,465)
1 (0-261)
189 (0-5,784)
7 (0-1,336)
656 (0-20,034)
173 (0-31,991)
3,199
(0-
97,700)
300 (0-55,600)
Shigella
spp.
984 (0-12,694)
207 (41-964)
3,171
(0-
40,887)
585
(117-
2,718)
1,436
(0-
18,522)
9 (2-44)
450 (0-5,802)
48 (10-223)
1,558
(0-
20,095)
1,151
(230-
5,351)
7,599
(0-
98,000)
2,000
(400-
9,300)
Unknown
1,282
570
4,130
1,608
1,871
26
586
132
2,030
3,165
9,899
5,501
Total
12,952 (5,401-
49,208)
9,790 (3,803-
30,442)
41,722
(17,398-
158,501)
27,622
(10,726-
85,873)
18,899 (7,881-
71,798)
444
(173-
1,381)
5,920 (2,468-
22,492)
2,268
(883-
7,059)
20,506 (8,554-
77,899)
54,375
(21,116-
169,048)
99,999 (41,702-
379,898)
94,499 (36,701-
293,803)
*Population data for 2020, obtained from UN[59].
**Total number of diarrhoeal deaths for children <5 in 2017, obtained from OurWorldInData[61].
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4. Results
37
TABLE 4.11: Table showing the p-value obtained from the Egger’s test testing
for asymmetry. InS = Insufﬁcient number of trials (n<10).
INP
OUT/COMM
Pathogen
<5
≥5
<5
≥5
Rotavirus
InS (8)
InS (1)
p-val: 0.0858 (19)
InS (0)
Norovirus
p-val: 0.3091 (10)
InS (0)
p-val: <0.0001 (17)
InS (0)
Astrovirus
InS (4)
InS (0)
InS (9)
InS (0)
Campylobacter spp.
InS (6)
InS (0)
p-val: 0.3293 (11)
InS (0)
Cryptosporidium
InS (5)
InS (1)
p-val: 0.001 (15)
InS (7)
E. histolytica
InS (4)
p-val: <0.0001 (10)
p-val: 0.0029 (11)
InS (5)
EHEC
InS (0)
InS (4)
InS (5)
InS (0)
EPEC
InS (1)
InS (5)
p-val: 0.1389 (11)
InS (1)
ETEC
InS (7)
InS (0)
p-val:0.1419 (12)
InS (2)
EAEC
InS (1)
InS (5)
InS (8)
InS (1)
EIEC
InS (0)
InS (3)
InS (3)
InS (1)
STEC
InS (1)
InS (0)
InS (8)
InS (1)
V. cholerae
InS (5)
InS (0)
InS (5)
InS (0)
Salmonella spp.
InS (2)
InS (0)
p-val: 0.0111 (11)
InS (2)
Shigella spp.
InS (6)
InS (0)
p-val: 0.6411 (11)
InS (2)
test for the estimates of E. histolytica, norovirus and Cryptosporidium were sta-
tistically signiﬁcant (p-value<0.05), which indicated that some publication
bias was present in these estimates.
4.1.5
Moderator analysis
The mixed-effect model was tested on the two modiﬁer variables identiﬁed
a priori. Some estimates were not investigated due to an insufﬁcient number
of studies. Appendix H shows the potential effect modiﬁers investigated,
stratiﬁed for each pathogen. In general, it was difﬁcult to draw any con-
clusions overall for the estimates of the different pathogens, since very few
modiﬁers were found to be signiﬁcant. However, for some estimates, the
moderator analysis showed that some of the between-heterogeneity could
be explained due to different variables in the studies. For the studies in-
vestigating the prevalence of norovirus in both in-patient- and out-patient
facilities and communities for younger children, the place from where the
study had been conducted (urban vs. rural) remained a signiﬁcant source
of heterogeneity for the estimates (p-value<0.05). For the studies reporting
rotavirus and Shigella spp. in an out-patient or community setting for older
children and adults, the region and setting (rural vs. urban) from where the
study was conducted seemed to produce signiﬁcant sources of heterogeneity
within studies (p-val<0.05). Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) had both region
and study area (urban vs. rural) as signiﬁcant sources of between-study het-
erogeneity (p-val<0.05)
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4. Results
38
4.2
Metagenomic analysis of sewage samples
4.2.1
Abundance of pathogens
The metagenomic analysis of the 21 sewage samples revealed a diverse dis-
tribution of microorganisms across the different countries. A total of 325,552
genomes were found in the samples, consisting of bacterial species, fungi,
protozoa, archaea and other microorganisms commonly found in sewage.
All non-pathogenic genomes were removed to investigate the abundance
of pathogenic organisms in the samples. Figure 4.3 shows the abundance
of 69 out of the 77 pathogenic microorganisms investigated in this project.
No reads were mapped to Giardia lamblia, Trypanosoma brucei gambiense, Try-
panosoma brucei rhodesiense, Tryptosoma cruzi, Leishmania braziliensis sensu lato,
Plasmodium orale, Brucella mekitensis and Clostridium difﬁcile, which is why
none of these pathogens are present on the heatmap. Overall, the abundance
was higher for bacterial genomes than parasites.
Since parasites are not
commonly found in the intestines of healthy individuals, this corresponded
well to the expected abundance in the sewage samples. The most abun-
dant bacterial pathogens across all samples were E. coli, K. pneumoniae, P.
aeruginosa, S. enterica, C. perfringens and S. salivarius. Due to their ubiquitous
presence in human sewage, the prevalence of these pathogens could not be
directly linked to speciﬁc pathogenic infections in the population of these
countries. However, the high abundance of V. cholerae present in the samples
from Ethiopia and Mozambique could suggested an increased prevalence of
cholera-infections.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4. Results
39
FIGURE 4.3: Heatmap showing the clr-transformed abundance of pathogens
(n=69).
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4. Results
40
4.2.2
Abundance of FBD-causing pathogens
Screening for the FBD-causing pathogens included in the systematic review
showed similar distribution of pathogens across all four countries, which are
presented in ﬁgure 4.4. The bacterial genomes were most abundant in the
samples, while the parasites had less abundance overall. Again E. coli had
the highest abundance of all the FBD-causing pathogens. Salmonella spp. and
Shigella spp. both showed high abundance in the samples, with the exception
of S. bongori, which was expected since this bacterial species of Salmonella is
most frequently associated with reptiles[79].
FIGURE 4.4: Heatmap showing the clr-transformed abundance of the selected
FBD-causing pathogens (n=13).
To investigate potential differences in regards to sampling, the pathogens
were stratiﬁed by country and sewage status. Stratiﬁcation by country showed
no signiﬁcant difference in distribution of the the FBD-causing pathogens, as
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4. Results
41
shown in ﬁgure 4.5. The error bars on the ﬁgure gives an indication of the
precision of the abundance estimates, which are shown to be very large for
most of the pathogens. The abundance of E. coli was still the highest across
all countries, along with S. enterica and S. dysenteriae. This implied that the
distribution of FBD-causing pathogens were similar across the different re-
gions of Africa that the samples had been taken from. The abundance of C.
jejuni was high in Nigeria but lower in Ethiopia, Mozambique and Tanzania.
This could suggest some link between the prevalence of this pathogen and
the possibility of infected individuals in Nigeria.
FIGURE 4.5: Clr-transformed abundance of the FBD-causing pathogens strati-
ﬁed by country, with error bars representing one standard deviation.
Similarly, the abundance of V. cholerae seemed to be somewhat larger in
Mozambique than the other three countries, which could also suggest a link
between cholera-infections in Mozambique and the high abundance of V.
cholerae in the sewage samples. The abundance of the parasites C. hominis,
C. parvum and E. histolytica varied across the different countries, supporting
the suggestion that, unlike E. coli, Salmonella spp. and Shigella spp., the distri-
bution of parasites did differ between different regions of Africa. However,
due the large uncertainty intervals for the abundance of the parasites, it was
not possible to conclude if this was true.
Stratifying by sewage type showed no notable difference in the distribu-
tion of the FBD-causing pathogens, as shown in ﬁgure 4.6. The abundance
of E. coli and Shigella spp. were a little higher in the rural samples, just as
V. cholerae had a higher abundance in urban samples. The abundance of the
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4. Results
42
parasites C. hominis, C. parvum and E. histolytica was very low and did not
differ signiﬁcantly between the rural and the urban samples. However, as
with the previous plot, due the large uncertainty intervals for the abundance
of the parasites, it was not possible to conclude if a difference in abundance
was truly present.
FIGURE 4.6: Clr-transformed abundance of the FBD-causing pathogens strati-
ﬁed by sewage status, with error bars representing one standard deviation.
4.2.3
Abundance of virulence factors
Figure 4.7 shows the abundance of the virulence factors of diarrhoeagenic
E. coli present in the sewage samples. Only two out of six virulence factors
of diarrhoeagenic E. coli were found in the samples, and both had very low
abundance, compared to other virulence factors. The virulence factor eae,
commonly found in enteroaggregative (EAEC) and enteropathogenic (EPEC)
E. coli, was present in samples from all four countries, whereas eltA, found
in enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC), was only found in Mozambique and Nige-
ria. This supported the assumption that diarrhoeagenic E. coli strains were in
fact present in the sewage samples, albeit the abundance of these virulence
factors being very low. Despite this, the fact that the metagenomics analy-
sis was able to detect virulence factors indicated that metagenomics analysis
could be used to detect the prevalence of virulence factors in sewage other
pathogens as well.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4. Results
43
FIGURE 4.7: Heatmap showing the clr-transformed abundance of the two viru-
lence factors from E. coli found in the sewage samples.
==PAGE:54==
44
Discussion
The results of this project provided information on the incidence and mor-
tality of eleven different pathogens causing diarrhoea in the African region.
This can aid in highlighting the importance of different pathogens across dif-
ferent regions and age groups, but there are certain challenges associated
with estimating burden of disease, especially in areas with low ressources.
5.1
Etiology proportions
The largest proportions of diarrhoeal cases and deaths were attributed ro-
tavirus and E. coli. This suggested that targeted interventions may be neces-
sary to reduce the burden of disease for these pathogens in the African con-
tinent. For rotavirus, vaccines programs have already been introduced into
the national immunisation program for a long list of countries, with evidence
showing a large reduction in diarrhoeal deaths caused by this pathogen. This
was not reﬂected in the result of this study. However, this could be due to
the time frame of the studies included, which could result in any reduction
in rotavirus prevalence not being detected in the studies included.
The burden of diarrhoeagenic E. coli was estimated to be high across all
African regions, which suggests that more efforts should be made for these
infections to be effectively combated. Speciﬁcally entero-invasive E. coli (EIEC)
had the highest contribution to diarrhoeal deaths for all age-groups, assum-
ing that the abundance in the in-patient studies represented the diarrhoeal
deaths.
This was unexpected considering the low prevalence of EIEC in
Africa, found in other studies[48, 49]. As only few studies contributed to the
estimate of this E. coli pathotype, this was likely due to bias. Other pathogens
such as Shigella spp., Cryptosporidium and E. histolytica were also found to im-
pact the burden of diarrhoeal disease, albeit in a much lower quantity relative
to rotavirus and E. coli. These differences are important to consider when
new strategies or surveillance methods should be implemented. It is also
important to consider the potential disease burden of other pathogens not
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5. Discussion
45
investigated in this study. The parasite Giardia lamblia is commonly found in
contaminated food, soil, or water and can cause severe diarrhoeal disease[5],
but was not investigated in this study. Previous studies estimated the burden
of disease for this pathogen to be high, which emphasised the importance of
other pathogens as well.
Other studies previously estimated the contribution of different pathogens
for the burden of diarrhoeal disease. One study from 2013 estimated that ro-
tavirus, Cryptosporidium, ETEC and Shigella spp. were the most important
causes of disease[80]. Another study from Pires et al.[51] estimated EPEC,
ETEC, Cryptosporidium,Shigella and norovirus to be of most importance[51].
These studies generally supported the results of this study, which estimated
that E. coli and rotavirus were the most important causes of disease in the
African region.
This study highlighted the pathotypes EAEC, EPEC and
ETEC to be the largest contributors to the proportion of diarrhoeal disease
in the population, which was supported by these studies as well. The etiol-
ogy estimates for the mortality of Cryptosporidium was found to be larger for
younger children in this study, but were found to cause signiﬁcant mortality
for the rest of the population. Shigella spp. was also found to contribute to
a larger proportion of the diarrhoeal deaths in this study, but only for older
children and adults. This discrepancy could potentially be explained by the
lack of data for these pathogens, especially in the older age group. Some
ﬁndings of this study did not correlate to earlier studies, however. E. his-
tolytica was found to be a large contributor to the burden of disease in older
children and adults, which none of the other studies concluded. In this study,
however, few studies investigating older children and adults were available
for the meta-analysis, which led to the imputation of estimates from other
categories. Since E. histolytica was one of the only pathogens investigated in
the older age group, this could lead to overestimation of the proportion of
diarrhoea attributed to this pathogen. In this study, norovirus was estimated
to have a smaller impact on the proportions of diarrhoeal disease in smaller
children than what earlier studies estimated. This was unexpected when
considering that it is the leading cause of foodborne illnesses worldwide[19].
Both the study from Pires et al.[51] and the MAL-ED study[73] estimated
that norovirus was the most important cause of diarrhoea in young children,
which this study did not support.
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 5. Discussion
46
5.1.1
Limitations of the etiology estimates
The difﬁculties of determining accurate estimates of regional incidence and
mortality in LMIC are also reﬂected in this project. The level of uncertainty in
these results may suggest limitations in ascribing any conclusions regarding
the etiology proportions, and therefore, the results should be assessed with
caution.
The lack of data representing deaths attributed to different pathogens re-
sulted in using studies conducted in an in-patient facility as proxy for the
number of deaths attributed to each pathogen. For some pathogens like ro-
tavirus and E. coli, this might lead to overestimation of the mortality, since
people hospitalized with infections from these pathogens will not necessar-
ily die. However, for pathogens like V. cholerae, using these studies as proxy
for deaths might lead to underestimation of the true number of deaths caused
by this disease.
Assuming that the number of diarrhoeal deaths of children <5 years of
age could represent the proportion of diarrhoeal deaths in the rest of the
population is likely en overestimation, since previous studies have shown
that children are more likely to die from diarrhoea than adults[81]. However,
due to the lack of data, it was not possible to explore to which extend these
numbers differed. The lack of more recent data estimating the diarrhoeal
deaths in different regions meant the the results from 2017 had to be used as
proxy. This would make the results less accurate and more prone to either
under- or overestimation of the number of deaths occurring in recent years.
For pathogens that lacked data in certain categories, the estimated pro-
portions were extrapolated. For instance, since no studies investigating ro-
tavirus in an out-patient or community setting for older children and adults
were available, it was assumed that the proportion was similar to the one es-
timated for the younger children, and therefore could represent the propor-
tion for that pathogen. However, it is likely that the distribution of pathogens
contributing to diarrhoeal diseases for younger children was different from
those for older children and adults. For instance, the mortality of V. cholerae
infections were estimated to be very low in this study, despite accounting for
differences in the population. As other studies have suggested, the propor-
tion of people who die from cholera is higher in Africa than elsewhere, which
should be reﬂected in the proportion estimates[23].
The lack of studies also meant that many countries were not represented
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5. Discussion
47
in the data, because most of the studies were conducted in the same coun-
tries. Therefore, in order to get the estimates on a regional level, it was as-
sumed that the distribution of pathogens in the selected countries could rep-
resent the proportion pathogens in the whole region. However, it is likely
that some of the countries in the regions had a different distribution of eti-
ologies, which was either over- or underestimated in this study.
Including the proportion of diarrhoea caused by an unknown etiology,
was done to help avoiding overestimation of the incidence and mortality of
the other pathogens. However, subtracting the sum of the etiology propor-
tions from 1 is not an inherently ﬂawless method and depends on the pro-
portions of the other pathogens included in the study.
5.1.2
Assessment of risk of bias and limitations in the meta
analysis
A large part of this meta-analysis was built on the assumption that the data
collected was representative of the prevalence of diarrhoeal disease in the
African population. This could introduce some biases into the analysis, that
in turn could overestimate the prevalence of a speciﬁc pathogen or reinforce
results that are actually invalid. Therefore, it was important to assess the risk
of bias introduced in a meta analysis.
Publication bias can increase the number of false positive results in a
meta-analysis. Therefore, publication bias was assessed for each of the es-
timates using a funnel plot, which suggested that minimal publication bias
was present. This improved the validity of the results. However, the num-
ber of studies contributing to each estimate was very limited and therefore,
it was difﬁcult to determine the strength of these results.
Other reporting biases that could have distorted the evidence obtained
included citation bias, language bias and outcome reporting bias. By search-
ing for grey literature, the search for eligible studies has been expanded and
therefore, the risk of publication bias have been reduced.
The degree of heterogeneity was another important limitation in meta
analysis. The results from the meta-analysis showed high heterogeneity for
many of the estimates, which implied that the true effect sizes varied from
the estimated effect sizes. Therefore, potential modiﬁer variables were inves-
tigated to determine if the heterogeneity could be associated with subgroups
having a different effect. These potential modiﬁer variables were determined
a priori when writing the protocol for the systematic review. However, the
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 5. Discussion
48
heterogeneity remained high for most of the estimates, even after conduct-
ing a subgroup analysis. Furthermore, due to the low number of studies
contributing to each estimate, few conclusions could be made. Therefore, the
ambiguity of the results from the moderator analysis strongly suggested that
any indications from the sub-group analysis should be deemed exploratory
and not used for any conclusions.
5.2
Application of metagenomics to sewage sam-
ples
One of the most important parts of disease control is the implementation of
strategies that can be used to combat diseases. The application of metage-
nomics analysis to sewage samples is a new, growing ﬁeld with many undis-
covered possibilities, and thus could prove advantageous for obtaining data
representative for communities and entire populations. A major advantage
of metagenomics is the ability to compare the results of one study across
different samples or laboratories, which can be used to give an unbiased rep-
resentation of the diversity of pathogens in a sample. For the same reason,
metagenomics can play supporting role in individual studies, where metage-
nomics analysis can support conventional cultivation methods for detection
of microorganisms in a sample. This can increase the sensitivity for detection
and enable the discovery of unknown pathogens.
The application of metagenomics analysis to the sewage samples from
the FOCAL study revealed a diverse distribution of pathogens. The most
abundant pathogenic bacterial species found in the samples, corresponded
to species found in other studies investigating sewage[82, 83, 84]. The abun-
dance of pathogens commonly found in the human gut microbiota indicated
that human stool contributed signiﬁcantly to the sewage composition in gen-
eral. Sewage samples obtained from rural communities showed similar dis-
tribution of bacterial strains as samples obtained from urban areas.
This
suggested that there was no signiﬁcant difference between where and how
the sewage had been sampled. Similarly, the abundance of pathogens was
not found to be signiﬁcantly different between the four countries, which
indicated that the distribution of pathogens in sewage was similar across
different regions. The higher prevalence of V. cholerae in some of the sam-
ples indicated that outbreaks leading to changes in the sewage composition
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5. Discussion
49
would be detectable. In April 2020, WHO reported an outbreak of cholera in
the province of Cabo Delgado, Mozambique, reporting over 300 conﬁrmed
cases[85]. The samples from Mozambique taken between April 26th and De-
cember 4th 2020 showed a higher abundance of V. cholerae than the other
countries, indicating a great potential of using metagenomics analysis for
detection of outbreaks across different regions. This could aid in combating
diarrhoeal diseases by providing real-time data on potential outbreaks and
community surveillance in areas with low resources.
Despite the promising results of utilising metagenomics for pathogen de-
tection in sewage, several uncertainties remain. One of the challenges of
working with sewage samples is the variability in the composition of genomes.
The large number of microbial genomes found in the samples also reﬂected
this. This complexity increases the difﬁculties of attempting to detect speciﬁc
pathogenic strains, which was also found to be the case in this project. The
virulence factors of E. coli were found in such small quantities that it was dif-
ﬁcult to conclude anything regarding the abundance of the different strains,
but it is reasonable to suggest that the metagenomics analysis should be sup-
ported by culture-based techniques for the results to be anything other than
insigniﬁcant. Many pathogens found in the human gut microbiota are also
opportunistic, and therefore, their abundance in sewage cannot give a clear
indication of whether a pathogen is causing diarrhoea or not.
One of the major challenges of metagenomics is the mapping of the reads
to the correct genomes. Since metagenomics is performed on communities of
microorganisms, the levels of abundance between the organisms will likely
differ and this can complicate the identiﬁcation of pathogens even further.
If the pathogens of interest are only present in low abundance, there is a
chance that these pathogens will not be present in a sample, simply because
reads might be assigned to the wrong genome. No accurate and precise tools
have been developed to solve this, and the challenge of mapping ambigu-
ous reads to short sequences therefore remain. This is partly due to the fact
that many current sequencing technologies produce shorter reads, which
can create multiple hits with identical alignment scores[86]. More modern
third-generation sequencing tools like PacBio[87] and Oxford Nanopore[88]
have since been developed, which could alleviate the issue, but has not been
widely used for metagenomic analysis of sewage samples yet. However, for
pathogens with higher abundance, the mapping is more trustworthy, and the
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5. Discussion
50
results will therefore more accurately reﬂect the real abundance. Although
the need for veriﬁcation of the mapping would increase the validity of the re-
sults, it is reasonable to suggest that metagenomics can be used for detection
of pathogens and provide a rough indication of the abundance of pathogens
in speciﬁc populations.
5.3
Estimation of disease burden using both meta-
analysis and metagenomics
The results from the meta-analysis showed that the estimated proportions
were highest for E. coli and rotavirus, compared to the other pathogens inves-
tigated in the study. While the metagenomics analysis did not allow for an
examination of the prevalence of RNA viruses, the abundance of pathogens
from the sewage samples showed high abundance of E. coli as well. It was not
possible to detect diarrhoeagenic virulence factors with certainty, and there-
fore, it could not be concluded if diarrhoeagenic E. coli was abundant in the
sewage. Since non-pathogenic E. coli is one of the most abundant pathogens
in the human intestine, it is likely that a large part of the bacteria found in
sewage belonged to these strains.
It is difﬁcult to compare the methods of metagenomic analysis and meta
analysis directly, due to the their widely different application methods and
aims. Meta-analysis aims to estimate the overall proportion of different pathogens
in published (or unpublished) literature, while metagenomics is used to de-
tect the composition of a community of microorganisms as a whole. While
sewage cannot directly determine the burden of disease, it can help detect
the presence of pathogens not commonly found in the human microbiota.
This can be used as an indicator of the presence of different pathogens in a
predetermined population.
Meta-analysis is often better at analysing the prevalence of etiologies among
diarrhoea patients, since it summarises the number events (illnesses or deaths)
of a given pathogen, but is severely limited by the data available for the
study. As mentioned previously, publication bias and heterogeneity can of-
ten arise in a meta-analysis when working with real data, which can lead
to misleading conclusions. However, the use of metagenomic analyses as a
supplement to a meta-analysis could help validate the results of the meta-
analysis, particularly if conducted in the same population and in the same
time frame as the meta-analysis.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5. Discussion
51
5.4
Further perspectives
To increase the validity of this study and make the results more impactful,
some further work could be performed.
The meta-analysis provided information on the incidence and mortal-
ity of ten pathogens causing diarrhoeal disease. However, to compare the
impact of the different pathogens in the population, the burden of disease
would needed to be estimated in terms of disability adjusted life years (DALY).
The FOCAL project aims to combine the results of this meta-analysis with the
results from the population surveys for diarrhoeal incidence.
In terms of metagenomics, the mapping of the reads would need to be
veriﬁed in some way for the results to be valid. There is a possibility that
the majority of the reads all map to the same place on the genome, which
would decrease the possibility that a speciﬁc genome is actually present in
the sample. Current research have implied that the mapping can be partially
veriﬁed by plotting the nucleotide depth variance against the number reads.
This can aid to disclose how much of the actual genome is mapped by the
reads.
Furthermore, since the abundance of viral genomes in the sewage was not
characterised, further analysis could include sequencing the samples using
an RNA library as well. This could support the results of the meta-analysis
and provide further characterisation of the pathogens present in the sewage.
==PAGE:62==
52
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to expand on the current research that had been
done in the FOCAL project, by estimating the etiology proportions of di-
arrhoeal diseases and deaths caused by different foodborne pathogens. A
systematic review was conducted and a meta-analysis was used to estimate
the proportions of diarrhoeal illnesses and deaths in the African region. The
usefulness of applying metagenomics analysis on sewage was explored, with
the aim of investigating whether this method could be used in concordance
with the meta-analysis to determine the etiology proportions and contribu-
tions to estimate the burden of disease.
The meta-analysis showed that E. coli and rotavirus accounted for the ma-
jority of diarrhoeal illnesses and deaths in the population, speciﬁcally the
pathotypes EPEC, EHEC and EAEC. The metagenomics analysis showed
a diverse distribution of pathogens, with E. coli being the most dominant
pathogen among those studied. No signiﬁcant difference in distributions
were found between the samples. The detection of E. coli virulence factors
gave no signiﬁcant conclusions regarding the presence of diarrhoeagenic E.
coli in the sewage, but showed potential for further analysis. Overall, the re-
sults from the metagenomic analysis of the sewage corresponded well with
the results of the meta-analysis, indicating the potential of using metage-
nomic analysis of sewage to support the ﬁndings of a meta-analysis or popu-
lation study. The detection of V. cholerae also showed great potential of using
metagenomics analysis for detection of outbreaks.
In conclusion, the etiology proportions for ten different pathogens caus-
ing diarrhoea were estimated, and the number of deaths and illnesses at-
tributed to diarrhoea were reported. It was concluded that metagenomics
analysis of sewage could be beneﬁcial for researchers to increase the accu-
rary of the burden of disease estimates. The estimated etiology proportions
will be applied in the FOCAL project to estimated the BoD of FBD.
==PAGE:63==
53
Bibliography
[1]
World Health Organization (WHO). Foodborne diseases. URL: https://
www.who.int/health-topics/foodborne-diseases#tab=tab_2 (vis-
ited on 01/07/2022).
[2]
UNICEF. Diarrhoea. URL: https://data.unicef.org/topic/child-
health/diarrhoeal-disease/ (visited on 01/22/2022).
[3]
University of Waterloo. Foodborne disease in Africa (FOCAL project). URL:
https://uwaterloo.ca/foodborne-disease-epidemiology-group/
research/africa (visited on 01/07/2022).
[4]
Christopher J L Murray et al. “Disability-adjusted life years (DALYs)
for 291 diseases and injuries in 21 regions, 1990–2010: a systematic
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010”. In: The Lancet
380.9859 (Dec. 2012), pp. 2197–2223. DOI: 10.1016/s0140- 6736(12)
61689-4. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(12)61689-4.
[5]
World Health Organization (WHO). Diarrhoeal disease. URL: https://
www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/diarrhoeal-disease
(visited on 01/08/2021).
[6]
World Health Organization. WHO estimates of the global burden of food-
borne diseases: foodborne disease burden epidemiology reference group 2007-
2015. World Health Organization, 2015, 255 p.
[7]
World Health Organization (WHO). Food safety. URL: https://www.
who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/food-safety (visited on
01/08/2022).
[8]
World Health Organization (WHO). One Health. URL: https://www.
who.int/news- room/questions- and- answers/item/one- health
(visited on 01/08/2020).
[9]
R.V. Tauxe et al. “Evolving public health approaches to the global chal-
lenge of foodborne infections”. In: International Journal of Food Microbi-
ology 139 (May 2010), S16–S28. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2009.10.
014. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2009.10.014.
==PAGE:64==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
54
[10]
Center for Disease Control (CDC). Foodborne Germs and Illnesses. URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/foodsafety/foodborne-germs.html (visited
on 01/09/2022).
[11]
Ntambwe Malangu. “Risk Factors and Outcomes of Food Poisoning in
Africa”. In: Signiﬁcance, Prevention and Control of Food Related Diseases.
InTech, Apr. 2016. DOI: 10.5772/62274. URL: https://doi.org/10.
5772/62274.
[12]
Tânia A.T. Gomes et al. “Diarrheagenic Escherichia coli”. In: Brazilian
Journal of Microbiology 47 (Dec. 2016), pp. 3–30. DOI: 10.1016/j.bjm.
2016.10.015. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bjm.2016.10.015.
[13]
Thomas Bintsis and. “Foodborne pathogens”. In: AIMS Microbiology 3.3
(2017), pp. 529–563. DOI: 10.3934/microbiol.2017.3.529. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.3934/microbiol.2017.3.529.
[14]
A. Garcia, J. G. Fox, and T. E. Besser. “Zoonotic Enterohemorrhagic
Escherichia coli: A One Health Perspective”. In: ILAR Journal 51.3 (Jan.
2010), pp. 221–232. DOI: 10.1093/ilar.51.3.221. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1093/ilar.51.3.221.
[15]
Matthew A. Croxen et al. “Recent Advances in Understanding Enteric
Pathogenic Escherichia coli”. In: Clinical Microbiology Reviews 26.4 (Oct.
2013), pp. 822–880. DOI: 10.1128/cmr.00022-13. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1128/cmr.00022-13.
[16]
N. Høiby and P. Skinhøj. Kompendium i mikrobiologi og infektionsmedicin.
1st ed. FADL’s Forlag, 2015. ISBN: 978-87-7749-781-0.
[17]
SSI DIAGNOSTICA. DEC PCR Kit. URL: https://ssidiagnostica.
com/international/solutions/pcr/dec-pcr-kit/ (visited on 01/08/2022).
[18]
M. J. C. Beld and F. A. G. Reubsaet. “Differentiation between Shigella,
enteroinvasive Escherichia coli (EIEC) and noninvasive Escherichia coli”.
In: European Journal of Clinical Microbiology & Infectious Diseases 31.6
(Sept. 2011), pp. 899–904. DOI: 10.1007/s10096- 011- 1395- 7. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10096-011-1395-7.
[19]
B. Lopman. Global Burden of Norovirus and Prospects for Vaccine Devel-
opment (CDC). URL: https://www.cdc.gov/norovirus/downloads/
global-burden-report.pdf (visited on 01/20/2022).
[20]
Mans. “Norovirus Infections and Disease in Lower-Middleand Low-
Income Countries, 1997–2018”. In: Viruses 11.4 (Apr. 2019), p. 341. DOI:
10.3390/v11040341. URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/v11040341.
==PAGE:65==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
55
[21]
SILVIA A. DOMINGUEZ and DONALD W. SCHAFFNER. “Survival
of Salmonella in Processed Chicken Products during Frozen Storage”.
In: Journal of Food Protection 72.10 (Oct. 2009), pp. 2088–2092. DOI: 10.
4315/0362-028x-72.10.2088. URL: https://doi.org/10.4315/0362-
028x-72.10.2088.
[22]
Center for Disease Control (CDC). Typhoid Fever and Paratyphoid Fever.
URL: https://www.cdc.gov/typhoid-fever/index.html (visited on
01/09/2022).
[23]
Center for Disease Control (CDC). Cholera - Vibrio cholerae infection. URL:
https : / / www . cdc . gov / cholera / africa / index . html (visited on
01/10/2022).
[24]
Łukasz Pielok et al. “Massive Cryptosporidium infections and chronic
diarrhea in HIV-negative patients”. In: Parasitology Research 118.6 (Apr.
2019), pp. 1937–1942. DOI: 10.1007/s00436-019-06302-0. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s00436-019-06302-0.
[25]
Micaella Kantor et al. “Entamoeba Histolytica: Updates in Clinical Man-
ifestation, Pathogenesis, and Vaccine Development”. In: Canadian Jour-
nal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 2018 (Dec. 2018), pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.
1155/2018/4601420. URL: https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/4601420.
[26]
Naor Bar-Zeev et al. “Impact of monovalent rotavirus vaccine on diarrhoea-
associated post-neonatal infant mortality in rural communities in Malawi:
a population-based birth cohort study”. In: The Lancet Global Health 6.9
(Sept. 2018), e1036–e1044. DOI: 10.1016/s2214-109x(18)30314-0. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1016/s2214-109x(18)30314-0.
[27]
World Health Organization (WHO). Rotavirus: Vaccine Preventable Dis-
eases Surveillance Standards. World Health Organization (WHO), 2018.
[28]
Evans M. Mpabalwani et al. “Impact of Rotavirus Vaccination on Di-
arrheal Hospitalizations in Children Aged 5 Years in Lusaka, Zambia”.
In: Clinical Infectious Diseases 62.suppl 2 (Apr. 2016), S183–S187. DOI:
10.1093/cid/civ1027. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ1027.
[29]
Leslie A. Enane et al. “Impact of Rotavirus Vaccination on Hospital-
izations and Deaths From Childhood Gastroenteritis in Botswana”. In:
Clinical Infectious Diseases 62.suppl 2 (Apr. 2016), S168–S174. DOI: 10.
1093/cid/civ1210. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ1210.
==PAGE:66==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
56
[30]
George Armah et al. “Impact and Effectiveness of Monovalent Rotavirus
Vaccine Against Severe Rotavirus Diarrhea in Ghana”. In: Clinical In-
fectious Diseases 62.suppl 2 (Apr. 2016), S200–S207. DOI: 10.1093/cid/
ciw014. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciw014.
[31]
Michelle J. Groome et al. “Temporal Association of Rotavirus Vaccine
Introduction and Reduction in All-Cause Childhood Diarrheal Hos-
pitalizations in South Africa”. In: Clinical Infectious Diseases 62.suppl
2 (Apr. 2016), S188–S195. DOI: 10 . 1093 / cid / civ1204. URL: https :
//doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ1204.
[32]
Stephen N.J. Korsman et al. “Astroviruses”. In: Virology. Elsevier, 2012,
p. 91. DOI: 10.1016/b978- 0- 443- 07367- 0.00038- 0. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-443-07367-0.00038-0.
[33]
Laura Coughlan et al. “Biotechnological applications of functional metage-
nomics in the food and pharmaceutical industries”. In: Frontiers in Mi-
crobiology 6 (2015). ISSN: 1664-302X. DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00672.
URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmicb.2015.
00672.
[34]
Torsten Thomas, Jack Gilbert, and Folker Meyer. “Metagenomics - a
guide from sampling to data analysis”. In: Microbial Informatics and
Experimentation 2.1 (Feb. 2012). DOI: 10.1186/2042-5783-2-3. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1186/2042-5783-2-3.
[35]
Prudhvi Lal Bhukya and Renuka Nawadkar. “Potential Applications
and Challenges of Metagenomics in Human Viral Infections”. In: Metage-
nomics for Gut Microbes. InTech, May 2018. DOI: 10.5772/intechopen.
75023. URL: https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.75023.
[36]
T. Greco et al. “Meta-analysis: pitfalls and hints”. In: Heart Lung Vessel
5.4 (2013), pp. 219–225.
[37]
Philip T. L. C. Clausen, Frank M. Aarestrup, and Ole Lund. “Rapid
and precise alignment of raw reads against redundant databases with
KMA”. In: BMC Bioinformatics 19.1 (Aug. 2018). DOI: 10.1186/s12859-
018-2336-6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-018-2336-6.
[38]
Saul B. Needleman and Christian D. Wunsch. “A general method ap-
plicable to the search for similarities in the amino acid sequence of two
proteins”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 48.3 (Mar. 1970), pp. 443–453.
DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(70)90057-4. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0022-2836(70)90057-4.
==PAGE:67==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
57
[39]
Gregory B. Gloor et al. “Microbiome Datasets Are Compositional: And
This Is Not Optional”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology 8 (Nov. 2017). DOI:
10.3389/fmicb.2017.02224. URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.
2017.02224.
[40]
Thomas Nordahl Petersen et al. “Meta-genomic analysis of toilet waste
from long distance ﬂights a step towards global surveillance of infec-
tious diseases and antimicrobial resistance”. In: Scientiﬁc Reports 5.1
(July 2015). DOI: 10.1038/srep11444. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1038/srep11444.
[41]
Kishor Acharya et al. “Metagenomic water quality monitoring with a
portable laboratory”. In: Water Research 184 (Oct. 2020), p. 116112. DOI:
10.1016/j.watres.2020.116112. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2020.116112.
[42]
H. Asghar et al. “Environmental Surveillance for Polioviruses in the
Global Polio Eradication Initiative”. In: Journal of Infectious Diseases 210.suppl
1 (Oct. 2014), S294–S303. DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiu384. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiu384.
[43]
T. HOVI et al. “Role of environmental poliovirus surveillance in global
polio eradication and beyond”. In: Epidemiology and Infection 140.1 (Aug.
2011), pp. 1–13. DOI: 10.1017/s095026881000316x. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1017/s095026881000316x.
[44]
Frank M. Aarestrup and Mark E. J. Woolhouse. “Using sewage for
surveillance of antimicrobial resistance”. In: Science 367.6478 (Feb. 2020),
pp. 630–632. DOI: 10.1126/science.aba3432. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.aba3432.
[45]
Aditya Kumar Sharma et al. “Bacterial Virulence Factors: Secreted for
Survival”. In: Indian Journal of Microbiology 57.1 (Nov. 2016), pp. 1–10.
DOI: 10.1007/s12088-016-0625-1. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12088-016-0625-1.
[46]
Xin Lu et al. “Bacterial Pathogens and Community Composition in Ad-
vanced Sewage Treatment Systems Revealed by Metagenomics Analy-
sis Based on High-Throughput Sequencing”. In: PLOS ONE 10.5 (May
2015). Ed. by Horacio Bach, e0125549. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0125549. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0125549.
==PAGE:68==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
58
[47]
Xiawei Jiang et al. “Whole Genome Sequencing of Extended-Spectrum
Beta-Lactamase (ESBL)-Producing Escherichia coli Isolated From a Wastew-
ater Treatment Plant in China”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology 10 (Aug.
2019). DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.01797. URL: https://doi.org/10.
3389/fmicb.2019.01797.
[48]
Luyanda Msolo, Benson C. Iweriebor, and Anthony I. Okoh. “Perva-
siveness of diarrheagenic E. coli pathotypes and Salmonella species
among gastroenteritis patients in some selected pastoral hinterlands
of the Amathole district municipality, Eastern Cape, South Africa”. In:
Human Microbiome Journal 17 (Aug. 2020), p. 100074. DOI: 10.1016/j.
humic.2020.100074. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humic.2020.
100074.
[49]
Habeeb Kayode Saka et al. “Diarrheagenic Escherichia coli Pathotypes
From Children Younger Than 5 Years in Kano State, Nigeria”. In: Fron-
tiers in Public Health 7 (Nov. 2019). DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2019.00348.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2019.00348.
[50]
Protocol: Systematic review of etiology of diarrhea in different age groups in
African countries. 2021.
[51]
Sara M. Pires et al. “Aetiology-Speciﬁc Estimates of the Global and
Regional Incidence and Mortality of Diarrhoeal Diseases Commonly
Transmitted through Food”. In: PLOS ONE 10.12 (Dec. 2015). Ed. by
Linda Anne Selvey, e0142927. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142927.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0142927.
[52]
G. A. Stevens et al. “Guidelines for Accurate and Transparent Health
Estimates Reporting: the GATHER statement”. In: Lancet 388.10062 (Dec.
2016), e19–e23.
[53]
National Center for Biotechnology Information Bethesda (MD): Na-
tional Library of Medicine (US). National Center for Biotechnology Infor-
mation (NCBI). 1988. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ (visited
on 06/30/2021).
[54]
Elsevier. Scopus. 2004. URL: https : / / www . scopus . com/ (visited on
06/30/2021).
[55]
Clarivate. Web of Science. URL: https://www.webofknowledge.com/
(visited on 06/30/2021).
[56]
AJOL. African Journals Online. URL: https://www.ajol.info/index.
php/ajol (visited on 06/30/2021).
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[57]
Clarivate. ProQuest. URL: https : / / www . proquest . com (visited on
06/30/2021).
[58]
African Union (AU). African CDC. URL: https://africacdc.org/ (vis-
ited on 06/30/2021).
[59]
Department of Economic United Nations and Population Division So-
cial Affairs. “World Population Prospects 2019: Online Edition.” In:
Rev. 1 (2019). https://population.un.org/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/.
[60]
B. N. Desta. “FOCAL Population Survey: Updates”. Prepared for: FO-
CAL 3rd Annual Virtual Meeting, October 13-14 2021.
[61]
Hannah Ritchie Bernadeta Dadonaite and Max Roser. “Diarrheal dis-
eases”. In: Our World in Data (2018). https://ourworldindata.org/diarrheal-
diseases.
[62]
Sara Balduzzi, Gerta Rücker, and Guido Schwarzer. “How to perform
a meta-analysis with R: a practical tutorial”. In: Evidence-Based Mental
Health 22 (2019), pp. 153–160.
[63]
S. G. Thompson, R. M. Turner, and D. E. Warn. “Multilevel models for
meta-analysis, and their application to absolute risk differences”. In:
Stat Methods Med Res 10.6 (Dec. 2001), pp. 375–392.
[64]
Mathias Harrer et al. Doing Meta-Analysis With R: A Hands-On Guide.
1st. Boca Raton, FL and London: Chapman
Hall/CRC Press, 2021.
ISBN: 9780367610074.
[65]
Guido Schwarzer, James R. Carpenter, and Gerta Rücker. Meta-Analysis
with R. Springer International Publishing, 2015. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-
319-21416-0. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-21416-0.
[66]
Wolfgang Viechtbauer. “Bias and Efﬁciency of Meta-Analytic Variance
Estimators in the Random-Effects Model”. In: Journal of Educational and
Behavioral Statistics 30.3 (Sept. 2005), pp. 261–293. DOI: 10.3102/10769986030003261.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3102/10769986030003261.
[67]
Mark W Lipsey and David B Wilson. Practical Meta-Analysis. SAGE,
2001.
[68]
G. Knapp and J. Hartung. “Improved tests for a random effects meta-
regression with a single covariate”. In: Stat Med 22.17 (Sept. 2003), pp. 2693–
2710.
[69]
JPT Higgins et al. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of interven-
tions. URL: http://www.training.cochrane.org/handbook.
==PAGE:70==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
60
[70]
Wolfgang Viechtbauer and Mike W.-L. Cheung. “Outlier and inﬂuence
diagnostics for meta-analysis”. In: Research Synthesis Methods 1.2 (Apr.
2010), pp. 112–125. DOI: 10.1002/jrsm.11. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1002/jrsm.11.
[71]
Joseph Lau et al. “The case of the misleading funnel plot”. In: BMJ
333.7568 (Sept. 2006), pp. 597–600. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.333.7568.597.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.333.7568.597.
[72]
Naike Wang. “How to Conduct a Meta-Analysis of Proportions in R:
A Comprehensive Tutorial”. In: (June 2018). DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.
27199.00161.
[73]
J. A. Platts-Mills et al. “Pathogen-speciﬁc burdens of community di-
arrhoea in developing countries: a multisite birth cohort study (MAL-
ED)”. In: Lancet Glob Health 3.9 (Sept. 2015), e564–575.
[74]
M. Egger et al. “Bias in meta-analysis detected by a simple, graphical
test”. In: BMJ 315.7109 (Sept. 1997), pp. 629–634. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.
315.7109.629. URL: https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.315.7109.629.
[75]
DOE Joint Genome Institute. BBTools. URL: https://sourceforge.net/
projects/bbmap/ (visited on 01/07/2022).
[76]
FastQC. June 2015. URL: https://qubeshub.org/resources/fastqc.
[77]
Computerome. The Danish National Supercomputer for Life Sciences - Com-
puterome. URL: https://www.computerome.dtu.dk/about (visited on
01/08/2022).
[78]
L. Chen. “VFDB: a reference database for bacterial virulence factors”.
In: Nucleic Acids Research 33.Database issue (Dec. 2004), pp. D325–D328.
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki008. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
gki008.
[79]
Gerard J. Tortora, Christine L. Case, and Berdell R. Funke. Microbiology
; An Introduction. 9th. Pearson, 2008. ISBN: 978-8131722329.
[80]
Karen L Kotloff et al. “Burden and aetiology of diarrhoeal disease in
infants and young children in developing countries (the Global Enteric
Multicenter Study, GEMS): a prospective, case-control study”. In: The
Lancet 382.9888 (July 2013), pp. 209–222. DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(13)
60844-2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(13)60844-2.
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
61
[81]
Gautam Sarker et al. “Risk correlates of diarrhea in children under 5
years of age in slums of Bankura, West Bengal”. In: Journal of Global
Infectious Diseases 7.1 (2015), p. 23. DOI: 10.4103/0974-777x.150887.
URL: https://doi.org/10.4103/0974-777x.150887.
[82]
S. M. Diergaardt et al. “The occurrence of campylobacters in water
sources in South Africa”. In: Water Res 38.10 (May 2004), pp. 2589–2595.
[83]
K. Jones. “Campylobacters in water, sewage and the environment”. In:
Journal of Applied Microbiology 90.S6 (June 2001), 68S–79S. DOI: 10.1046/
j.1365-2672.2001.01355.x. URL: https://doi.org/10.1046/j.
1365-2672.2001.01355.x.
[84]
V. V. Mabasa et al. “Environmental Surveillance for Noroviruses in Se-
lected South African Wastewaters 2015–2016: Emergence of the Novel
GII.17”. In: Food and Environmental Virology 10.1 (Aug. 2017), pp. 16–28.
DOI: 10.1007/s12560-017-9316-2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12560-017-9316-2.
[85]
World Health Organization (WHO). Responding to cholera in Mozam-
bique. URL: https : / / www . who . int / health - cluster / news - and -
events/news/cholera-response-Mozambique/en/ (visited on 01/17/2022).
[86]
Hannah E. Roberts et al. “Short and long-read genome sequencing method-
ologies for somatic variant detection genomic analysis of a patient with
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma”. In: Scientiﬁc Reports 11.1 (Mar. 2021).
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-85354-8. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-021-85354-8.
[87]
E. E. Schadt, S. Turner, and A. Kasarskis. “A window into third-generation
sequencing”. In: Human Molecular Genetics 19.R2 (Sept. 2010), R227–
R240. DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq416. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/
hmg/ddq416.
[88]
Oxford Nanopore Technologies. Oxford Nanopore Sequencing. URL: https:
//nanoporetech.com/ (visited on 01/17/2022).
==PAGE:72==
62
Appendix A: Search strings
A.1
Search string used in PubMed
((((diarrhea AND morbidity AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat])
AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta-Analysis[ptyp]
OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp]
OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Con-
trolled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR
English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp]
OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non
U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR
Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Val-
idation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR
adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH])
OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))) OR (diarrhea AND mortal-
ity AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh])
AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta- Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Con-
trolled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clin-
ical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp]
OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR
Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N
I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Re-
search Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S
Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND
(child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR mid-
dle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH]
OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))) OR (diarrhea AND etiology AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat]
==PAGE:73==
Appendix A. Appendix A: Search strings
63
: “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR
Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp]
OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clini-
cal Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative
Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Repub-
lished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp]
OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support,
N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR
Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t,
Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin
Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR ado-
lescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle
age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))))
NOT (((diarrhea AND morbidity AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat])
AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta-Analysis[ptyp]
OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp]
OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Con-
trolled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR
English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp]
OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non
U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR
Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Val-
idation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR
adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH])
OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))) OR (diarrhea AND mortal-
ity AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh])
AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Con-
trolled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clin-
ical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp]
OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR
Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N
I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Re-
search Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S
Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND
==PAGE:74==
Appendix A. Appendix A: Search strings
64
(child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR mid-
dle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH]
OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))) OR (diarrhea AND etiology AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat]
: “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR
Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp]
OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clini-
cal Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative
Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Repub-
lished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp]
OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support,
N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR
Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t,
Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin
Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR ado-
lescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle
age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))))
AND cancer)) NOT ((((diarrhea AND morbidity AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat]
: “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR
Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp]
OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clini-
cal Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative
Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Repub-
lished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp]
OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support,
N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR
Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t,
Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin
Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR ado-
lescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle
age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH])))
OR (diarrhea AND mortality AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat])
AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta-Analysis[ptyp]
OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp]
OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Con-
trolled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR
English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp]
OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp]
==PAGE:75==
Appendix A. Appendix A: Search strings
65
OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non
U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR
Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Val-
idation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR
adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH])
OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))) OR (diarrhea AND etiology
AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh])
AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Con-
trolled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clin-
ical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp]
OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR
Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N
I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Re-
search Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S
Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND
(child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR mid-
dle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH]
OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH])))) NOT (((diarrhea AND morbidity AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat]
: “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR
Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp]
OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clini-
cal Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative
Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Repub-
lished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp]
OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support,
N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR
Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t,
Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin
Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR ado-
lescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle
age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH])))
OR (diarrhea AND mortality AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat])
AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta-Analysis[ptyp]
OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp]
==PAGE:76==
Appendix A. Appendix A: Search strings
66
OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Con-
trolled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR
English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp]
OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non
U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR
Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Val-
idation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR
adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH])
OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))) OR (diarrhea AND etiology
AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh])
AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Con-
trolled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clin-
ical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp]
OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR
Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N
I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Re-
search Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S
Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND
(child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR mid-
dle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH]
OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH])))) AND cancer)) AND Traveler’s Diarrhea))
NOT (((((diarrhea AND morbidity AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat])
AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta- Analysis[ptyp]
OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp]
OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Con-
trolled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR
English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp]
OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non
U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR
Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Val-
idation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR
adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH])
==PAGE:77==
Appendix A. Appendix A: Search strings
67
OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))) OR (diarrhea AND mortal-
ity AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh])
AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Con-
trolled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clin-
ical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp]
OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR
Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N
I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Re-
search Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S
Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND
(child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR mid-
dle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH]
OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))) OR (diarrhea AND etiology AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat]
: “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR
Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp]
OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clini-
cal Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative
Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Repub-
lished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp]
OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support,
N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR
Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t,
Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin
Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR ado-
lescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle
age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))))
NOT (((diarrhea AND morbidity AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat])
AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta-Analysis[ptyp]
OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp]
OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Con-
trolled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR
English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp]
OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non
U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR
==PAGE:78==
Appendix A. Appendix A: Search strings
68
Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Val-
idation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR
adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH])
OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))) OR (diarrhea AND mortal-
ity AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh])
AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Con-
trolled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clin-
ical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp]
OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR
Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N
I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Re-
search Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S
Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND
(child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR mid-
dle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH]
OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))) OR (diarrhea AND etiology AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat]
: “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR
Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp]
OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clini-
cal Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative
Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Repub-
lished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp]
OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support,
N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR
Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t,
Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin
Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR ado-
lescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle
age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))))
AND cancer)) NOT ((((diarrhea AND morbidity AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat]
: “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR
Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp]
OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clini-
cal Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative
Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Repub-
lished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp]
==PAGE:79==
Appendix A. Appendix A: Search strings
69
OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support,
N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR
Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t,
Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin
Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR ado-
lescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle
age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH])))
OR (diarrhea AND mortality AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat])
AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta-Analysis[ptyp]
OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp]
OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Con-
trolled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR
English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp]
OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non
U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR
Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Val-
idation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR
adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH])
OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))) OR (diarrhea AND etiology
AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh])
AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Con-
trolled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clin-
ical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp]
OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR
Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N
I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Re-
search Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S
Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND
(child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR mid-
dle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH]
OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH])))) NOT (((diarrhea AND morbidity AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat]
: “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR
Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp]
==PAGE:80==
Appendix A. Appendix A: Search strings
70
OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clini-
cal Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative
Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Repub-
lished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp]
OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support,
N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR
Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t,
Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin
Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR ado-
lescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle
age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH])))
OR (diarrhea AND mortality AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat])
AND (Humans[Mesh]) AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta-Analysis[ptyp]
OR Randomized Controlled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase I[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp]
OR Clinical Trial, Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Con-
trolled Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR
English Abstract[ptyp] OR Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp]
OR Multicenter Study[ptyp] OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non
U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR
Research Support, U S Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Val-
idation Studies[ptyp]) AND (child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR
adult[MeSH:noexp] OR middle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH])
OR aged[MeSH] OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH]))) OR (diarrhea AND etiology
AND ((“2014/01/01”[PDat] : “2021/04/30”[PDat]) AND (Humans[Mesh])
AND (Clinical Trial[ptyp] OR Meta-Analysis[ptyp] OR Randomized Con-
trolled Trial[ptyp] OR Review[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase I[ptyp] OR Clin-
ical Trial, Phase II[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial, Phase III[ptyp] OR Clinical Trial,
Phase IV[ptyp] OR Comparative Study[ptyp] OR Controlled Clinical Trial[ptyp]
OR Corrected and Republished Article[ptyp] OR English Abstract[ptyp] OR
Evaluation Studies[ptyp] OR Journal Article[ptyp] OR Multicenter Study[ptyp]
OR Research Support, N I H, Extramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, N
I H, Intramural[ptyp] OR Research Support, Non U S Gov’t[ptyp] OR Re-
search Support, U S Gov’t, Non P H S[ptyp] OR Research Support, U S
Gov’t, P H S[ptyp] OR Twin Study[ptyp] OR Validation Studies[ptyp]) AND
(child[MeSH:noexp] OR adolescent[MeSH] OR adult[MeSH:noexp] OR mid-
dle age[MeSH] OR (middle age[MeSH] OR aged[MeSH]) OR aged[MeSH]
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A. Appendix A: Search strings
71
OR aged, 80 and over[MeSH])))) AND cancer)) AND Traveler’s Diarrhea))
AND Case report)
A.2
Search string used in SCOPUS
TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "diarrhea" ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY("diarrhoea") AND ( TITLE-
ABS-KEY ( "gastroenteritis" ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY("mortality")) OR (TITLE-
ABS-KEY ( "etiology" ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "pathogen" ) OR TITLE-ABS-
KEY ( "incidence" ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "morbidity" ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY
( "cause of death" ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY("diarrhea")) AND PUBYEAR > 2013
AND NOT DOCTYPE ( cp ) AND NOT DOCTYPE ( ed ) AND NOT DOC-
TYPE ( le ) AND NOT DOCTYPE ( no ) AND KEY ("human") AND NOT
PUBYEAR = 2022 AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "Case report" ) AND NOT
TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "hospitalized acquired diarrhea" ) AND NOT TITLE-ABS-
KEY ( "antibiotic associated diarrhea" ) AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "cancer
patient" ) AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "traveler" ) AND NOT TITLE-ABS-
KEY ("refugees") AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY ("migrants") OR TITLE-ABS-
KEY ("prospective study") AND TITLE-ABS-KEY ( diarrhea AND sample*
) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY ( diarrhea AND agent ) AND NOT ( ABS ( "chil-
dren under 5" ) OR ABS ( "children below 5") OR ABS ("children < 5" )
OR ABS ("children under ﬁve") OR ABS ("children below ﬁve") ) OR ABS
( daycare* AND outbreak* ) OR ABS ( adult AND care* AND outbreak*
) AND NOT ( ABS ( recall AND period AND below 4 week* ) OR ABS
( recall AND period AND under 4 week* ) OR ABS ( recall AND period
AND below AND four AND week* ) OR ABS ( recall AND period AND
under AND four AND week* ) ) AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY("cross sec-
tional study") AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY("animal") AND NOT TITLE-ABS-
KEY("neonatal") AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY("COVID-19") AND NOT TITLE-
ABS-KEY("infant") AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY("SARS-CoV-2") AND NOT
TITLE-ABS-KEY("cancer") AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY("HIV mortality") AND
NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY("diabetes") AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY("dysentery")
AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY("under-ﬁve") AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY("childbirth")
AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY("animal") AND ( LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"South
Africa" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Egypt" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AF-
FILCOUNTRY,"Nigeria" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Ethiopia" ) OR
LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Kenya" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Uganda"
) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Ghana" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUN-
TRY,"Tunisia" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Morocco" ) OR LIMIT-TO
==PAGE:82==
Appendix A. Appendix A: Search strings
72
( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Cameroon" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Malawi"
) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Algeria" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUN-
TRY,"Zambia" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Zimbabwe" ) OR LIMIT-
TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Burkina Faso" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Sudan"
) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Senegal" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUN-
TRY,"Mozambique" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Congo" ) OR LIMIT-
TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Rwanda" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Cote
d’Ivoire" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Benin" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFIL-
COUNTRY,"Botswana" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Gambia" ) OR
LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Mali" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Madagascar"
) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Democratic Republic Congo" ) OR LIMIT-
TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Sierra Leone" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Namibia"
) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Libyan Arab Jamahiriya" ) OR LIMIT-
TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Gabon" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Togo" )
OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Guinea-Bissau" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFIL-
COUNTRY,"Niger" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Liberia" ) OR LIMIT-
TO ( AFFILCOUNTRY,"Angola" ) )
A.3
Search string used in Web of Science
Search terms and combination (̸=1 OR ̸=2 OR ̸=3 OR ̸=4)
̸= 1
Diarrhea* OR diarrhoea*
AND
incid* OR Occur*
̸=2
Diarrhea* OR diarrhoea*
AND
mortal* OR Gastroent*
̸=3
Diarrhea* OR diarrhoea*
AND
Etiol* OR aetiol* OR pathog* OR
Cause of death
̸=4
Diarrhea* OR diarrhoea*
AND
Child* OR young* OR adolecent*
OR infant*
==PAGE:83==
73
Adjusted incidence rate (FOCAL Population
Survey)
FIGURE B.1: Point Prevalence, Incidence, and Duration of Illness in Ethiopia,
Mozambique, Nigeria, and Tanzania, October 2020 – September 2021
==PAGE:84==
74
List of pathogenic microorganisms
Below is a list of microorganisms with pathogenic abilities (n=77)[16].
• Staphylococcus aureus
• Staphylococcus epidermidis
• Staphylococcus saprophyticus
• Streptococcus pyogenes
• Streptococcus agalactiae
• Streptococcus salivarius
• Streptococcus sanguinis
• Streptococcus oralis
• Streptococcus mutans
• Streptococcus pneumoniae
• Enterococcus faecalis
• Listeria monocytogenes
• Corynebacterium diphtheriae
• Mycobacterium tuberculosis
• Bacillus anthracis
• Bacillus cereus
• Clostridium tetani
• Clostridium botulinum
• Clostridium difﬁcile
==PAGE:85==
Appendix C. List of pathogenic microorganisms
75
• Clostridium perfringens
• Neisseria meningitidis
• Neisseria gonorrhoeae
• Moraxella catarrhalis
• Bordetella pertussis
• Bordetella parapertussis
• Brucella abortus
• Brucella mekitensis
• Brucella suis
• Francisella tularensis
• Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
• Pasteurella multocida
• Pseudomonas aeruginosa
• Legionella pneumophila
• Escherichia coli
• Shigella dysenteriae
• Shigella ﬂexneri
• Shigella boydii
• Shigella sonnei
• Salmonella enterica
• Salmonella bongori
• Klebsiella pneumoniae
• Proteus vulgaris
• Proteus mirabilis
• Yersinia pestis
==PAGE:86==
Appendix C. List of pathogenic microorganisms
76
• Yersinia enterocolitica
• Vibrio cholerae
• Vibrio vulniﬁcus
• Campylobacter jejuni
• Helicobacter pylori
• Treponema pallidum
• Borreliella burgdorferi
• Leptospira interrogans’,
• Chlamydia trachomatis
• Chlamydia psittaci
• Chlamydia pneumoniae
• Rickettsia prowazekii
• Rickettsia conorii
• Orientia tsutsugamushi
• Mycoplasma pneumoniae
• Mycoplasma hominis
• Entamoeba histolytica
• Cryptosporidium hominis
• Cryptosporidium parvum
• Giardia lamblia
• Trichomonas vaginalis
• Toxoplasma gondii
• Plasmodium falciparum
• Plasmodium vivax
• Plasmodium orale
==PAGE:87==
Appendix C. List of pathogenic microorganisms
77
• Plasmodium malariae
• Plasmodium knowlesi
• Leishmania chagasi
• Leishmania braziliensis sensu lato
• Leishmania mexicana
• Trypanosoma brucei gambiense
• Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense
• Tryptosoma cruzi
==PAGE:88==
78
Detailed description of the studies included
in the SR
Table showing the studies included in the systematic review (n=232).
CA = Central Africa, EA = Eastern Africa, NA = Northern Africa, SA =
Southern Africa, WA = Western Africa.
==PAGE:89==
Appendix D. Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
79
TABLE D.1: Detailed description of the studies included in the SR.
11G6
Astro
Ouédraogo
2016
2011-2012
Burkina Faso
WA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Prosp. CCS
<5
5
263
13
1aG5
Astro
Japhet
2019
2012-2013
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Case-control
<5
5
9
3
1bG5
Astro
Japhet
2019
2012-2013
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Case-control
<5
5
21
1
1cG5
Astro
Japhet
2019
2012-2013
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Case-control
<5
5
21
0
1dG5
Astro
Japhet
2019
2012-2013
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Case-control
<5
5
1
0
3G1
Astro
Arowolo
2019
2015-2017
Nigeria
WA
Urban
INP
INP
Cross. sec.
<5
4
175
34
3G3
Astro
Gasparinho
2016
2012-2013
Angola
CA
Urban
INP
INP+OUTP
Cross. sec.
<5
>11
274
7
3aG6
Astro
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
6
527
58
3bG6
Astro
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
INP
INP
CCS
<5
6
684
0
4G1
Astro
Acacio
2019
2007-2012
Mozambique
SA
Urban
OUT
Unknown
Case-control
<5
4
820
13
4aG4
Astro
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
1292
18
4bG4
Astro
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
735
16
4cG4
Astro
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
352
5
6aG6
Astro
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
14
527
13
6bG6
Astro
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
INP
INP
CCS
<5
14
684
12
1aG1
Campy
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Kenya
EA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1778
171
1bG1
Campy
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Mali
WA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
3404
52
1cG1
Campy
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
The Gambia
WA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1933
39
1dG1
Campy
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1217
22
1G3
Campy
Chuckwu
2020
2016-2017
South Africa
SA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
505
254
2aG4
Campy
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
160
7
2bG4
Campy
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
66
4
2cG4
Campy
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
105
2
2dG4
Campy
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
25
0
2G5
Campy
Mansour
2014
2004-2007
Egypt
NA
Rural
OUT
COMM
Case-control
<5
5
4001
238
==PAGE:90==
Appendix D. Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
80
ID
Pathogen
First Author,
Last name
Year of
Publication
Years of
study
Country
Region
Urban,
rural, mixed
Typestudy
(new)
Typestudy
Study Design
Age
Group
Path.
count
t
n
2G6
Campy
Hassan
2014
2004-2007
Egypt
NA
Rural
OUT
COMM
Props. Cohort
<5
3
4001
240
3G3
Campy
Gasparinho
2016
2012-2013
Angola
CA
Urban
INP
INP+OUTP
Cross. sec.
<5
>11
257
0
3aG6
Campy
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
6
527
190
3bG6
Campy
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
INP
INP
CCS
<5
6
684
150
4G1
Campy
Acacio
2019
2007-2012
Mozambique
SA
Urban
OUT
Unknown
Case-control
<5
5
821
37
4G3
Campy
Gosselin
2018
2009-2011
Tanzania
EA
Urban
OUT
COMM
Pros. RT
<5
6
123
3
4aG4
Campy
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
431
24
4bG4
Campy
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
233
9
4cG4
Campy
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
120
0
6aG6
Campy
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
INP
INP
CCS
<5
14
684
113
6bG6
Campy
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
14
527
102
1aG1
Crypto
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Mali
WA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
3404
337
1bG1
Crypto
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
The Gambia
WA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1933
233
1cG1
Crypto
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Kenya
EA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1778
196
1dG1
Crypto
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1217
193
1aG6
Crypto
Bitilinyu-Bangoh
2019
2014-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
INP
INP
RCT
<5
3
175
31
1bG6
Crypto
Bitilinyu-Bangoh
2019
2014-2015
Kenya
EA
Unknown
INP
INP
RCT
<5
3
120
25
2G2
Crypto
Msolo
2020
2017-2018
South Africa
SA
Rural
INP
INP
Cross. sec.
>5
2
53
3
2aG3
Crypto
Garzón
2017
2013-2015
Sao Tome
and Principe
WA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
52
3
2bG3
Crypto
Garzón
2017
2013-2015
Sao Tome
and Principe
WA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
78
3
2cG3
Crypto
Garzón
2017
2013-2015
Sao Tome
and Principe
WA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
80
3
==PAGE:91==
Appendix D. Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
81
ID
Pathogen
First Author,
Last name
Year of
Publication
Years of
study
Country
Region
Urban,
rural, mixed
Typestudy
(new)
Typestudy
Study Design
Age
Group
Path.
count
t
n
2dG3
Crypto
Garzón
2017
2013-2015
Sao Tome
and Principe
WA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
71
2
2eG3
Crypto
Garzón
2017
2013-2015
Sao Tome
and Principe
WA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
76
1
2fG3
Crypto
Garzón
2017
2013-2015
Sao Tome
and Principe
WA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
70
1
2gG3
Crypto
Garzón
2017
2013-2015
Sao Tome
and Principe
WA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
74
0
2aG4
Crypto
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
160
6
2bG4
Crypto
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
105
6
2cG4
Crypto
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
66
2
2dG4
Crypto
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
25
0
3G2
Crypto
Muadica
2021
2017-2019
Mozambique
SA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Pros. Cross. sec.
>5
>2
807
11
3G3
Crypto
Gasparinho
2016
2012-2013
Angola
CA
Urban
INP
INP+OUTP
Cross. sec.
<5
>11
337
101
3aG4
Crypto
Naguib
2018
2015-2016
Egypt
NA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
>5
2
141
3
3bG4
Crypto
Naguib
2018
2015-2016
Egypt
NA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
>5
2
74
2
3cG4
Crypto
Naguib
2018
2015-2016
Egypt
NA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
>5
2
136
2
3dG4
Crypto
Naguib
2018
2015-2016
Egypt
NA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
>5
2
190
1
3eG4
Crypto
Naguib
2018
2015-2016
Egypt
NA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
>5
2
27
0
3fG4
Crypto
Naguib
2018
2015-2016
Egypt
NA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
>5
2
17
0
3aG6
Crypto
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
INP
INP
CCS
<5
6
684
185
3bG6
Crypto
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
6
527
11
4G1
Crypto
Acacio
2019
2007-2012
Mozambique
SA
Urban
OUT
Unknown
Case-control
<5
4
820
147
4G3
Crypto
Gosselin
2018
2009-2011
Tanzania
EA
Urban
OUT
COMM
Pros. RT
<5
6
123
9
4aG4
Crypto
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
1292
84
4bG4
Crypto
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
735
110
==PAGE:92==
Appendix D. Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
82
ID
Pathogen
First Author,
Last name
Year of
Publication
Years of
study
Country
Region
Urban,
rural, mixed
Typestudy
(new)
Typestudy
Study Design
Age
Group
Path.
count
t
n
4cG4
Crypto
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
352
29
4G5
Crypto
Tellevik
2015
2010-2011
Tanzania
EA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Case-control
<5
3
701
114
6aG6
Crypto
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
INP
INP
CCS
<5
14
684
190
6bG6
Crypto
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
14
527
43
3G3
EAEC
Gasparinho
2016
2012-2013
Angola
CA
Urban
INP
INP+OUTP
Cross. sec.
<5
>11
301
12
4G1
EAEC
Acacio
2019
2007-2012
Mozambique
SA
Urban
OUT
Unknown
Case-control
<5
5
821
284
4aG4
EAEC
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
1292
423
4bG4
EAEC
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
735
152
4cG4
EAEC
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
352
56
4G6
EAEC
Iijima
2017
2007-2009
Kenya
EA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
5
306
138
7G4
EAEC
Prah
2021
2016-2018
Ghana
WA
Unknown
OUT
OUTP
Pros. CC
<5
1>
57
6
7aG6
EAEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
>5
6
252
11
7bG6
EAEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
126
10
8aG6
EAEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
31
23
8bG6
EAEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
24
16
8cG6
EAEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
10
3
8dG6
EAEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
5
1
8eG6
EAEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
11
0
9G6
EAEC
Onanuga1
2014
2008-2009
Nigeria
WA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Pros. Cohort
<5
5
201
21
7G4
EHEC
Prah
2021
2016-2018
Ghana
WA
Unknown
OUT
OUTP
Pros. CC
<5
1>
57
2
7aG6
EHEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
57
3
7bG6
EHEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
33
1
7cG6
EHEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
25
0
==PAGE:93==
Appendix D. Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
83
ID
Pathogen
First Author,
Last name
Year of
Publication
Years of
study
Country
Region
Urban,
rural, mixed
Typestudy
(new)
Typestudy
Study Design
Age
Group
Path.
count
t
n
7dG6
EHEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
11
0
8aG6
EHEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
19
5
8bG6
EHEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
31
2
8cG6
EHEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
5
2
8dG6
EHEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
11
1
4G6
EIEC
Iijima
2017
2007-2009
Kenya
EA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
5
306
25
7G4
EIEC
Prah
2021
2016-2018
Ghana
WA
Unknown
OUT
OUTP
Pros. CC
<5
1>
57
1
7G6
EIEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
>5
6
252
2
8aG6
EIEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
19
8
8bG6
EIEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
5
2
8cG6
EIEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
11
1
9G6
EIEC
Onanuga1
2014
2008-2009
Nigeria
WA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Pros. Cohort
<5
5
201
1
12aG6
Enta
von Huth
2019
2015-2017
Guinea-Bissau
WA
Urban
OUT
COMM
Cohort
>5
>1
189
71
12bG6
Enta
von Huth
2019
2015-2017
Guinea-Bissau
WA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Cohort
>5
>1
377
58
12cG6
Enta
von Huth
2019
2015-2017
Guinea-Bissau
WA
Urban
OUT
COMM
Cohort
>5
>1
237
51
12dG6
Enta
von Huth
2019
2015-2017
Guinea-Bissau
WA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Cohort
>5
>1
471
40
1aG6
Enta
Bitilinyu-Bangoh
2019
2014-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
INP
INP
RCT
<5
3
175
0
1bG6
Enta
Bitilinyu-Bangoh
2019
2014-2015
Kenya
EA
Unknown
INP
INP
RCT
<5
3
120
0
2aG3
Enta
Garzón
2017
2013-2015
Sao Tome
and Principe
WA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
52
0
2bG3
Enta
Garzón
2017
2013-2015
Sao Tome
and Principe
WA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
78
0
2cG3
Enta
Garzón
2017
2013-2015
Sao Tome
and Principe
WA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
80
0
2dG3
Enta
Garzón
2017
2013-2015
Sao Tome
and Principe
WA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
71
0
2eG3
Enta
Garzón
2017
2013-2015
Sao Tome
and Principe
WA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
76
0
2fG3
Enta
Garzón
2017
2013-2015
Sao Tome
and Principe
WA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
70
0
==PAGE:94==
Appendix D. Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
84
ID
Pathogen
First Author,
Last name
Year of
Publication
Years of
study
Country
Region
Urban,
rural, mixed
Typestudy
(new)
Typestudy
Study Design
Age
Group
Path.
count
t
n
2gG3
Enta
Garzón
2017
2013-2015
Sao Tome
and Principe
WA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
74
0
3G3
Enta
Gasparinho
2016
2012-2013
Angola
CA
Urban
INP
INP+OUTP
Cross. sec.
<5
>11
341
1
3aG5
Enta
Ramos
2014
2007-2012
Ethiopia
EA
Rural
INP
INP+OUT
Retrospec. Obs.
>5
9
4601
262
3bG5
Enta
Ramos
2014
2007-2012
Ethiopia
EA
Rural
INP
INP+OUT
Retrospec. Obs.
>5
9
6776
242
3cG5
Enta
Ramos
2014
2007-2012
Ethiopia
EA
Rural
INP
INP+OUT
Retrospec. Obs.
>5
9
3403
216
3dG5
Enta
Ramos
2014
2007-2012
Ethiopia
EA
Rural
INP
INP+OUT
Retrospec. Obs.
>5
9
2438
163
3eG5
Enta
Ramos
2014
2007-2012
Ethiopia
EA
Rural
INP
INP+OUT
Retrospec. Obs.
>5
9
2592
158
3fG5
Enta
Ramos
2014
2007-2012
Ethiopia
EA
Rural
INP
INP+OUT
Retrospec. Obs.
>5
9
2118
142
3gG5
Enta
Ramos
2014
2007-2012
Ethiopia
EA
Rural
INP
INP+OUT
Retrospec. Obs.
>5
9
2438
140
3hG5
Enta
Ramos
2014
2007-2012
Ethiopia
EA
Rural
INP
INP+OUT
Retrospec. Obs.
>5
9
2272
121
3iG5
Enta
Ramos
2014
2007-2012
Ethiopia
EA
Rural
INP
INP+OUT
Retrospec. Obs.
>5
9
1836
111
3jG5
Enta
Ramos
2014
2007-2012
Ethiopia
EA
Rural
INP
INP+OUT
Retrospec. Obs.
>5
9
2234
111
3kG5
Enta
Ramos
2014
2007-2012
Ethiopia
EA
Rural
INP
INP+OUT
Retrospec. Obs.
>5
9
1193
67
4aG4
Enta
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
1292
118
4bG4
Enta
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
735
78
4cG4
Enta
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
352
43
4G5
Enta
Tellevik
2015
2010-2011
Tanzania
EA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Case-control
<5
3
701
0
5G4
Enta
Njuguna
2016
2012
Kenya
EA
Mixed
OUT
OUTP
Matched CC
>5
>5
284
68
6aG6
Enta
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
INP
INP
CCS
<5
14
684
10
6bG6
Enta
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
OUT
COMM
CCS
<6
14
527
1
4G3
EPEC
Gosselin
2018
2009-2011
Tanzania
EA
Urban
OUT
COMM
Pros. RT
<5
6
123
2
4aG4
EPEC
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
1292
135
==PAGE:95==
Appendix D. Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
85
ID
Pathogen
First Author,
Last name
Year of
Publication
Years of
study
Country
Region
Urban,
rural, mixed
Typestudy
(new)
Typestudy
Study Design
Age
Group
Path.
count
t
n
4bG4
EPEC
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
735
64
4cG4
EPEC
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
352
24
4G6
EPEC
Iijima
2017
2007-2009
Kenya
EA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
5
306
51
6aG6
EPEC
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
INP
INP
CCS
<5
14
684
123
6bG6
EPEC
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
14
527
45
7G4
EPEC
Prah
2021
2016-2018
Ghana
WA
Unknown
OUT
OUTP
Pros. CC
<5
1>
57
3
7aG6
EPEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
>5
6
252
7
7bG6
EPEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
126
7
7cG6
EPEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
57
4
7dG6
EPEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
25
2
7eG6
EPEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
33
1
7fG6
EPEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
11
0
8aG6
EPEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
24
8
8bG6
EPEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
31
6
8cG6
EPEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
19
3
8dG6
EPEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
5
1
8eG6
EPEC
Omolajaiye
2020
2015-2017
South Africa
SA
Unknown
INP
OUT/INP
Props. Cross sect
>5
6
11
0
9G6
EPEC
Onanuga1
2014
2008-2009
Nigeria
WA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Pros. Cohort
<5
5
201
9
1aG1
ETEC
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Kenya
EA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1778
176
1bG1
ETEC
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Mali
WA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
3404
176
1cG1
ETEC
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1217
119
1dG1
ETEC
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
The Gambia
WA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1933
84
2aG4
ETEC
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
160
11
2bG4
ETEC
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
66
8
2cG4
ETEC
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
105
5
2dG4
ETEC
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
25
1
2G5
ETEC
Mansour
2014
2004-2007
Egypt
NA
Rural
OUT
COMM
Case-control
<5
5
4001
756
==PAGE:96==
Appendix D. Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
86
ID
Pathogen
First Author,
Last name
Year of
Publication
Years of
study
Country
Region
Urban,
rural, mixed
Typestudy
(new)
Typestudy
Study Design
Age
Group
Path.
count
t
n
2G6
ETEC
Hassan
2014
2004-2007
Egypt
NA
Rural
OUT
COMM
Props. Cohort
<5
3
4001
632
3G3
ETEC
Gasparinho
2016
2012-2013
Angola
CA
Urban
INP
INP+OUTP
Cross. sec.
<5
>11
301
7
4G3
ETEC
Gosselin
2018
2009-2011
Tanzania
EA
Urban
OUT
COMM
Pros. RT
<5
6
123
3
4aG4
ETEC
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
735
94
4bG4
ETEC
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
1292
109
4cG4
ETEC
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
352
30
4G6
ETEC
Iijima
2017
2007-2009
Kenya
EA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
5
306
50
5G4
ETEC
Njuguna
2016
2012
Kenya
EA
Mixed
OUT
OUTP
Matched CC
>5
>5
284
16
6G5
ETEC
Trainor
2016
1997-2007
Malawi
SA
Urban
INP
INP
<5
4
1941
205
6aG6
ETEC
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
14
527
71
6bG6
ETEC
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
INP
INP
CCS
<5
14
684
68
7G4
ETEC
Prah
2021
2016-2018
Ghana
WA
Unknown
OUT
OUTP
Pros. CC
<5
1>
57
25
7aG6
ETEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
>5
6
252
20
7bG6
ETEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
126
20
7cG6
ETEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
57
11
7dG6
ETEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
33
8
7eG6
ETEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
25
1
7fG6
ETEC
Odetoyin
2017
2008-2011
Nigeria
WA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
Cross. Sec
<5
6
11
0
9G6
ETEC
Onanuga1
2014
2008-2009
Nigeria
WA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Pros. Cohort
<5
5
201
11
11G6
Noro
Ouédraogo
2016
2011-2012
Burkina Faso
WA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Prosp. CCS
<5
5
263
55
1aG1
Noro
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
The Gambia
WA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1933
189
1bG1
Noro
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Kenya
EA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1778
89
1cG1
Noro
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Mali
WA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
3404
77
1dG1
Noro
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1217
29
1G3
Noro
Chuckwu
2020
2016-2017
South Africa
SA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
505
101
==PAGE:97==
Appendix D. Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
87
ID
Pathogen
First Author,
Last name
Year of
Publication
Years of
study
Country
Region
Urban,
rural, mixed
Typestudy
(new)
Typestudy
Study Design
Age
Group
Path.
count
t
n
1G4
Noro
El Qazoui
2014
2011
Morocco
NA
Urban
INP
INP
Pros. Cross. sec.?
<5
2
335
54
1aG5
Noro
Japhet
2019
2012-2013
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Case-control
<5
5
21
6
1bG5
Noro
Japhet
2019
2012-2013
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Case-control
<5
5
21
1
1cG5
Noro
Japhet
2019
2012-2013
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Case-control
<5
5
9
0
1dG5
Noro
Japhet
2019
2012-2013
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Case-control
<5
5
1
0
3G1
Noro
Arowolo
2019
2015-2017
Nigeria
WA
Urban
INP
INP
Cross. sec.
<5
4
175
9
3G3
Noro
Gasparinho
2016
2012-2013
Angola
CA
Urban
INP
INP+OUTP
Cross. sec.
<5
>11
342
13
3aG6
Noro
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
INP
INP
CCS
<5
6
684
83
3bG6
Noro
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
INP
INP
CCS
<5
6
331
44
3cG6
Noro
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
6
339
30
3dG6
Noro
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
INP
INP
CCS
<5
6
219
24
3eG6
Noro
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
INP
INP
CCS
<5
6
72
11
3fG6
Noro
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
6
192
8
3gG6
Noro
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
6
70
5
3hG6
Noro
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
INP
INP
CCS
<5
6
61
4
3iG6
Noro
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
6
30
2
4aG4
Noro
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
1292
57
4bG4
Noro
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
735
35
4cG4
Noro
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
352
16
5aG6
Noro
Imade
2015
2011-2012
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
3
223
8
5bG6
Noro
Imade
2015
2011-2012
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
3
82
3
5cG6
Noro
Imade
2015
2011-2012
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
3
63
2
5dG6
Noro
Imade
2015
2011-2012
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
3
35
2
5eG6
Noro
Imade
2015
2011-2012
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
3
26
1
5fG6
Noro
Imade
2015
2011-2012
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
3
11
0
==PAGE:98==
Appendix D. Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
88
ID
Pathogen
First Author,
Last name
Year of
Publication
Years of
study
Country
Region
Urban,
rural, mixed
Typestudy
(new)
Typestudy
Study Design
Age
Group
Path.
count
t
n
5gG6
Noro
Imade
2015
2011-2012
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
3
6
0
6aG6
Noro
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
INP
INP
CCS
<5
14
684
83
6bG6
Noro
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
OUT
COMM
CCS
<6
14
527
45
11G6
Rota
Ouédraogo
2016
2011-2012
Burkina Faso
WA
Urban
OUT
OUT
Prosp. CCS
<5
5
263
167
1aG1
Rota
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Mali
WA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
3404
417
1bG1
Rota
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1217
342
1cG1
Rota
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
The Gambia
WA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1933
318
1dG1
Rota
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Kenya
EA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1778
252
1aG2
Rota
Mayindou
2016
2012-2013
Democratic
Republic
of Congo
CA
Urban
INP
INP
Cross. sec.
<5
2
338
170
1bG2
Rota
Mayindou
2016
2012-2013
Democratic
Republic
of Congo
CA
Urban
INP
INP
Cross. sec.
<5
2
199
83
1cG2
Rota
Mayindou
2016
2012-2013
Democratic
Republic
of Congo
CA
Urban
INP
INP
Cross. sec.
<5
2
71
37
1dG2
Rota
Mayindou
2016
2012-2013
Democratic
Republic
of Congo
CA
Urban
INP
INP
Cross. sec.
<5
2
20
9
1eG2
Rota
Mayindou
2016
2012-2013
Democratic
Republic
of Congo
CA
Urban
INP
INP
Cross. sec.
<5
2
27
5
1G3
Rota
Chuckwu
2020
2016-2017
South Africa
SA
Mixed
OUT
COMM
Cross. sec.
<5
>3
505
118
1G4
Rota
El Qazoui
2014
2011
Morocco
NA
Urban
INP
INP
Pros. Cross. sec.?
<5
2
335
89
1aG5
Rota
Japhet
2019
2012-2013
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Case-control
<5
5
21
20
1bG5
Rota
Japhet
2019
2012-2013
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Case-control
<5
5
21
14
1cG5
Rota
Japhet
2019
2012-2013
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Case-control
<5
5
9
6
1dG5
Rota
Japhet
2019
2012-2013
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Case-control
<5
5
1
1
2aG1
Rota
Ashie
2017
2012-2014
Ghana
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
4
132
42
2bG1
Rota
Ashie
2017
2012-2014
Ghana
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
4
155
16
==PAGE:99==
Appendix D. Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
89
ID
Pathogen
First Author,
Last name
Year of
Publication
Years of
study
Country
Region
Urban,
rural, mixed
Typestudy
(new)
Typestudy
Study Design
Age
Group
Path.
count
t
n
2cG1
Rota
Ashie
2017
2012-2014
Ghana
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
4
60
14
2G2
Rota
Msolo
2020
2017-2018
South Africa
SA
Rural
INP
INP
Cross. sec.
>5
2
53
19
2aG4
Rota
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
160
19
2bG4
Rota
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
105
13
2cG4
Rota
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
66
6
2dG4
Rota
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
25
0
2G5
Rota
Mansour
2014
2004-2007
Egypt
NA
Rural
OUT
COMM
Case-control
<5
5
4001
151
3G1
Rota
Arowolo
2019
2015-2017
Nigeria
WA
Urban
INP
INP
Cross. sec.
<5
4
175
29
3G3
Rota
Gasparinho
2016
2012-2013
Angola
CA
Urban
INP
INP+OUTP
Cross. sec.
<5
>11
342
86
3aG6
Rota
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
INP
INP
CCS
<5
6
684
130
3bG6
Rota
Hungerford
2014
2012-2015
Malawi
SA
Unknown
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
6
527
0
4G1
Rota
Acacio
2019
2007-2012
Mozambique
SA
Urban
OUT
Unknown
Case-control
<5
4
820
31
4G3
Rota
Gosselin
2018
2009-2011
Tanzania
EA
Urban
OUT
COMM
Pros. RT
<5
6
123
11
4aG4
Rota
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
1292
321
4bG4
Rota
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
735
143
4cG4
Rota
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
352
39
5aG6
Rota
Imade
2015
2011-2012
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
3
223
63
5bG6
Rota
Imade
2015
2011-2012
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
3
82
31
5cG6
Rota
Imade
2015
2011-2012
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
3
63
20
5dG6
Rota
Imade
2015
2011-2012
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
3
35
7
5eG6
Rota
Imade
2015
2011-2012
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
3
26
4
5fG6
Rota
Imade
2015
2011-2012
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
3
11
1
5gG6
Rota
Imade
2015
2011-2012
Nigeria
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUT
Cross. Sec
<5
3
6
0
6aG6
Rota
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
INP
INP
CCS
<5
14
684
237
6bG6
Rota
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
14
527
8
==PAGE:100==
Appendix D. Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
90
ID
Pathogen
First Author,
Last name
Year of
Publication
Years of
study
Country
Region
Urban,
rural, mixed
Typestudy
(new)
Typestudy
Study Design
Age
Group
Path.
count
t
n
2aG1
Salmo
Ashie
2017
2012-2014
Ghana
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
4
60
11
2bG1
Salmo
Ashie
2017
2012-2014
Ghana
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
4
155
7
2cG1
Salmo
Ashie
2017
2012-2014
Ghana
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
4
132
2
2aG4
Salmo
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
160
3
2bG4
Salmo
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
66
1
2cG4
Salmo
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
105
1
2dG4
Salmo
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
25
0
2G5
Salmo
Mansour
2014
2004-2007
Egypt
NA
Rural
OUT
COMM
Case-control
<5
5
4001
1
3G3
Salmo
Gasparinho
2016
2012-2013
Angola
CA
Urban
INP
INP+OUTP
Cross. sec.
<5
>11
343
0
4G1
Salmo
Acacio
2019
2007-2012
Mozambique
SA
Urban
OUT
Unknown
Case-control
<5
5
821
7
4aG4
Salmo
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
1292
12
4bG4
Salmo
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
735
2
4cG4
Salmo
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
352
0
5G4
Salmo
Njuguna
2016
2012
Kenya
EA
Mixed
OUT
OUTP
Matched CC
>5
>5
284
3
5G5
Salmo
Terfassa
2018
2015-2016
Ethiopia
EA
Rural
OUT
OUT
Cross-sectiona
>5
2
422
30
6aG6
Salmo
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
INP
INP
CCS
<5
14
684
30
6bG6
Salmo
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
14
527
5
1aG1
Shige
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
The Gambia
WA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1933
162
1bG1
Shige
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Kenya
EA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1778
130
1cG1
Shige
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1217
57
1dG1
Shige
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Mali
WA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
3404
51
2aG1
Shige
Ashie
2017
2012-2014
Ghana
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
4
132
8
2bG1
Shige
Ashie
2017
2012-2014
Ghana
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
4
155
5
2cG1
Shige
Ashie
2017
2012-2014
Ghana
WA
Mixed
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
4
60
3
2aG4
Shige
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
160
3
==PAGE:101==
Appendix D. Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
91
ID
Pathogen
First Author,
Last name
Year of
Publication
Years of
study
Country
Region
Urban,
rural, mixed
Typestudy
(new)
Typestudy
Study Design
Age
Group
Path.
count
t
n
2bG4
Shige
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
25
1
2cG4
Shige
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
105
0
2dG4
Shige
El-Shabrawi
2015
2007-2009
Egypt
NA
Urban
OUT
OUTP
Case-control
<5
6
66
0
2G5
Shige
Mansour
2014
2004-2007
Egypt
NA
Rural
OUT
COMM
Case-control
<5
5
4001
40
2G6
Shige
Hassan
2014
2004-2007
Egypt
NA
Rural
OUT
COMM
Props. Cohort
<5
3
4001
42
3G3
Shige
Gasparinho
2016
2012-2013
Angola
CA
Urban
INP
INP+OUTP
Cross. sec.
<5
>11
343
0
4G1
Shige
Acacio
2019
2007-2012
Mozambique
SA
Urban
OUT
Unknown
Case-control
<5
5
821
46
4G3
Shige
Gosselin
2018
2009-2011
Tanzania
EA
Urban
OUT
COMM
Pros. RT
<5
6
123
7
4aG4
Shige
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
352
20
4bG4
Shige
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
735
20
4cG4
Shige
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
1292
7
5G4
Shige
Njuguna
2016
2012
Kenya
EA
Mixed
OUT
OUTP
Matched CC
>5
>5
284
67
5G5
Shige
Terfassa
2018
2015-2016
Ethiopia
EA
Rural
OUT
OUT
Cross-sectiona
>5
2
422
9
6aG6
Shige
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
INP
INP
CCS
<5
14
684
108
6bG6
Shige
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
14
527
30
1aG1
Vibrio01
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1217
12
1bG1
Vibrio01
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Kenya
EA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1778
7
1cG1
Vibrio01
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
Mali
WA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
3404
0
1dG1
Vibrio01
Zimmermann
2019
2007-2011
The Gambia
WA
Unknown
INP
INP+OUTP
Retrospec. Cohort
<5
7
1933
0
4G1
Vibrio01
Acacio
2019
2007-2012
Mozambique
SA
Urban
OUT
Unknown
Case-control
<5
5
821
13
4aG4
Vibrio01
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
784
9
==PAGE:102==
Appendix D. Detailed description of the studies included in the SR
92
ID
Pathogen
First Author,
Last name
Year of
Publication
Years of
study
Country
Region
Urban,
rural, mixed
Typestudy
(new)
Typestudy
Study Design
Age
Group
Path.
count
t
n
4bG4
Vibrio01
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
784
4
4cG4
Vibrio01
Nhampossa
2015
2007-2011
Mozambique
SA
Rural
OUT
INP+
OUTP+
COMM
Pros. CC
<5
>13
784
0
6aG6
Vibrio01
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
INP
INP
CCS
<5
14
684
9
6bG6
Vibrio01
Iturriza-Gómara
2019
2013-2016
Malawi
SA
Urban
OUT
COMM
CCS
<5
14
527
0
==PAGE:103==
93
==PAGE:104==
Appendix E. Detailed overview of the sewage samples
94
Detailed overview of the sewage samples
Sample no.
SampleID
Country
Sample location
Sample category
Speciﬁc source
Sampling date
1009182
47011591
Tanzania
Moshi
Waste water
Urban
04/12/2019
1009183
27011191
Nigeria
Abeokuta
Human
Urban
10/12/2019
1009184
27021192
Nigeria
Ofada
Human
Rural
12/12/2019
1009185
17011591
Ethiopia
Harar
Waste water
Urban
25/02/2020
1009186
17011592
Ethiopia
Kersa
Waste water
Rural
24/04/2020
1009187
37041192
Mozambique
Santa Montannha
Human
Rural
22/04/2020
1009188
37031192
Mozambique
Michanfutene
Human
Rural
26/04/2020
1009189
37011191
Mozambique
Polana Caniço
Human
Urban
26/04/2020
1009190
37021191
Mozambique
Costa do Sol
Human
Urban
26/04/2020
1009191
47051592
Tanzania
Kilema Lamombi
Waste water
Rural
03/06/2020
1009192
27031191
Nigeria
Abeokuta
Human
Urban
10/03/2020
1009193
27041192
Nigeria
Ofada
Human
Rural
13/06/2020
1009194
17021592
Ethiopia
Kersa
Waste water
Rural
27/08/2020
1009195
17021591
Ethiopia
Harar
Waste water
Urban
26/08/2020
1009196
37081192
Mozambique
E.S. Santa Montana H.J.
Human
Rural
04/12/2020
1009197
37071192
Mozambique
E.S. Minchafutene
Human
Rural
04/12/2020
1009198
37051191
Mozambique
Triunfo
Human
Urban
11/11/2020
1009200
27051191
Nigeria
Abeokuta
Human
Urban
16/12/2020
1009201
27061192
Nigeria
Ofada
Human
Rural
18/12/2020
1009202
17031591
Ethiopia
Harar
Waste water
Urban
05/02/2021
1009203
17031592
Ethiopia
Kersa
Waste water
Rural
04/02/2021
==PAGE:105==
95
Forest plots
FIGURE F.1: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of ro-
tavirus in children <5 years of age, in an in-patient setting.
FIGURE F.2: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
norovirus in children <5 years of age, in an in-patient setting.
==PAGE:106==
Appendix F. Forest plots
96
FIGURE F.3: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of as-
trovirus in children <5 years of age, in an in-patient setting.
FIGURE F.4: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
Campylobacter spp. in children <5 years of age, in an in-patient setting.
FIGURE F.5: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
Cryptosporidium in children <5 years of age, in an in-patient setting.
==PAGE:107==
Appendix F. Forest plots
97
FIGURE F.6: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of E.
histolytica in children <5 years of age, in an in-patient setting.
FIGURE F.7: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
ETEC in children <5 years of age, in an in-patient setting.
FIGURE F.8: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of V.
cholerae in children <5 years of age, in an in-patient setting.
==PAGE:108==
Appendix F. Forest plots
98
FIGURE F.9: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
Salmonella spp. in children <5 years of age, in an in-patient setting.
FIGURE F.10: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
Shigella spp. in children <5 years of age, in an in-patient setting.
FIGURE F.11: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
rotavirus in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community setting.
==PAGE:109==
Appendix F. Forest plots
99
FIGURE F.12: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
norovirus in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community setting.
FIGURE F.13: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
astrovirus in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community setting.
==PAGE:110==
Appendix F. Forest plots
100
FIGURE F.14: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
Campylobacter spp. in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community
setting.
FIGURE F.15: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
Cryptosporidium in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community set-
ting.
==PAGE:111==
Appendix F. Forest plots
101
FIGURE F.16: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of E.
histolytica in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community setting.
FIGURE F.17: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
EHEC in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community setting.
FIGURE F.18: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
EPEC in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community setting.
==PAGE:112==
Appendix F. Forest plots
102
FIGURE F.19: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
ETEC in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community setting.
FIGURE F.20: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
EAEC in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community setting.
FIGURE F.21: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
EIEC in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community setting.
==PAGE:113==
Appendix F. Forest plots
103
FIGURE F.22: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
STEC in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community setting.
FIGURE F.23: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of V.
cholerae in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community setting.
FIGURE F.24: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
Salmonella spp. in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community
setting.
==PAGE:114==
Appendix F. Forest plots
104
FIGURE F.25: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
Shigella spp. in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient or community setting.
FIGURE F.26: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of E.
histolytica in children >5 years of age and adults, in an in-patient setting.
FIGURE F.27: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
EHEC in children >5 years of age and adults, in an in-patient setting.
==PAGE:115==
Appendix F. Forest plots
105
FIGURE F.28: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of E.
histolytica in children >5 years of age and adults, in an in-patient setting.
FIGURE F.29: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
EAEC in children >5 years of age and adults, in an in-patient setting.
FIGURE F.30: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
EIEC in children >5 years of age and adults, in an in-patient setting.
==PAGE:116==
Appendix F. Forest plots
106
FIGURE F.31: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
Cryptosporidium in children >5 years of age and adults, in an out-patient or com-
munity setting.
FIGURE F.32: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
ETEC in children >5 years of age and adults, in an out-patient or community
setting.
FIGURE F.33: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
Salmonella spp. in children >5 years of age and adults, in an out-patient or com-
munity setting.
==PAGE:117==
Appendix F. Forest plots
107
FIGURE F.34: Forestplot plot representing publications reporting the effect of
Shigella spp. in children >5 years of age and adults, in an out-patient or commu-
nity setting.
==PAGE:118==
108
Funnel plots
FIGURE G.1:
Funnel plot representing publications reporting the effect of
norovirus in children <5 years of age, in an in-patient setting.
==PAGE:119==
Appendix G. Funnel plots
109
FIGURE G.2:
Funnel plot representing publications reporting the effect of
norovirus in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient and community setting.
==PAGE:120==
Appendix G. Funnel plots
110
FIGURE G.3: Funnel plot representing publications reporting the effect of astro-
virus in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient and community setting.
FIGURE G.4:
Funnel plot representing publications reporting the effect of
Campylobacter spp. in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient and commu-
nity setting.
==PAGE:121==
Appendix G. Funnel plots
111
FIGURE G.5: Funnel plot representing publications reporting the effect of Cryp-
tosporidium in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient and community setting.
FIGURE G.6: Funnel plot representing publications reporting the effect of EPEC
in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient and community setting.
==PAGE:122==
Appendix G. Funnel plots
112
FIGURE G.7: Funnel plot representing publications reporting the effect of ETEC
in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient and community setting.
FIGURE G.8:
Funnel plot representing publications reporting the effect of
Salmonella spp. in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient and community
setting.
==PAGE:123==
Appendix G. Funnel plots
113
FIGURE G.9:
Funnel plot representing publications reporting the effect of
Shigella spp. in children <5 years of age, in an out-patient and community set-
ting.
==PAGE:124==
114
Potential effect modiﬁers identiﬁed
TABLE H.1: Table showing the potential effect modiﬁers used for subgroup anal-
ysis for the proportion estimates of the different pathogens
Studies conducted in an in-patient facility with children <5 years of age
Pathogen
Potential
effect
modiﬁer
Number
of
studies
Pooled esti-
mate
95% CI
I2
p-value
(Between
studies)
p-value
(Within stud-
ies)
Norovirus
Region
Western
Africa
2
0.094
[0.039;0.211]
74.5%
0.0011
0.3214
Eastern
Africa
1
0.05
[0.041;0.061]
-
Central
Africa
1
0.038
[0.022;0.064]
-
Southern
Africa
6
0.121
[0.104;0.141]
0.0%
Sewage
status
Unknown
7
0.098
[0.066;0.143]
89.1%
0.2349
<0.0001
Urban
3
0.066
[0.021;0.19]
90.5%
Studies conducted in an out-patient facility or community with children <5 years of age
Pathogen
Potential
effect
modiﬁer
Number
of
studies
Pooled esti-
mate
95% CI
I2
p-value
(Between
studies)
p-value
(Within stud-
ies)
Rotavirus
Region
Southern
Africa
3
0.225
[0.125;
0.370]
74.0%
0.0069
<0.0001
Western
Africa
10
0.224
[0.172;
0.286]
65.5%
Northern
Africa
4
0.1
[0.050;
0.189]
0.0%
Eastern
Africa
1
0.088
[0.041;0.179]
-
Sewage
staus
Mixed
11
0.226
[0.179;
0.281]
61.3%
0.0023
0.0028
Urban
5
0.097
[0.057;
0.159]
0.0%
Rural
2
0.221
[0.022;0.784]
87.0%
Norovirus
Region
Western
Africa
10
0.121
[0.064;0.217]
69.9%
0.252
0.0001
Southern
Africa
6
0.076
[0.036;0.155]
93.6%
Sewage
status
Urban
1
0.208
[0.087;0.42]
-
0.0808
0.0007
==PAGE:125==
Appendix H. Potential effect modiﬁers identiﬁed
115
Mixed
10
0.126
[0.076;0.203]
69.9%
Unknown
4
0.064
[0.024;0.16]
23.2%
Rural
1
0.047
[0.017;0.121]
-
Campylobacter
spp.
Region
Northern
Africa
5
0.058
[0.049;0.069]
0.0%
0.3079
0.4996
Eastern
Africa
1
0.024
[0.008;0.073]
-
Southern
Africa
2
0.05
[0.005;0.336]
0.0%
Sewage
status
Urban
5
0.033
[0.017;0.065]
0.0%
0.0661
0.6077
Rural
3
0.059
[0.045;0.075]
0.0%
Cryptosporidium
Region
Western
Africa
7
0.023
[0.01;0.054]
0.0%
0.0462
0*
Northern
Africa
4
0.034
[0.009;0.118]
0.0%
Southern
Africa
3
0.063
[0.016;0.222]
97.0%
Eastern
Africa
2
0.115
[0.001;0.966]
83.9%
Sewage
status
Mixed
7
0.024
[0.01;0.054]
0.0%
0.0288
0*
Urban
6
0.063
[0.031;0.123]
83.1%
Unknown
1
0.019
[0.006;0.059]
-
Rural
2
0.099
[0.001;0.917]
97.3%
EPEC
Region
Eastern
Africa
1
0.016
[0.004;0.063]
-
0.0155
0.6851
Southern
Africa
4
0.091
[0.071;0.115]
42.7%
Western
Africa
7
0.051
[0.032;0.081]
0.0%
Sewage
status
Urban
3
0.059
[0.023;0.139]
75.9%
0.1322
0.1239
Rural
3
0.088
[0.05;0.15]
58.3%
Unknown
6
0.054
[0.028;0.102]
0.0%
ETEC
Region
Northern
Africa
5
0.094
[0.051;0.166]
79.4%
0.5995
<0.0001
Southern
Africa
4
0.106
[0.059;0.182]
81.5%
Eastern
Africa
1
0.162
[0.08;0.301]
-
Western
Africa
6
0.117
[0.068;0.194]
71.0%
Sewage
status
Urban
7
0.093
[0.061;0.139]
75.1%
0.2742
<0.0001
Rural
4
0.112
[0.065;0.186]
94.3%
Unknown
5
0.148
[0.078;0.263]
0.0%
Salmonella spp.
Region
Western
Africa
2
0.031
[0.0;0.705]
47.9%
0.0131
0*
==PAGE:126==
Appendix H. Potential effect modiﬁers identiﬁed
116
Northern
Africa
4
0.014
[0.003;0.056]
0.0%
Southern
Africa
5
0.007
[0.004;0.012]
0.0%
Sewage
status
Mixed
2
0.031
[0.0;0.75]
47.9%
0.0173
0.6424
Urban
6
0.01
[0.005;0.019]
Rural
3
0.006
[0.001;0.025]
Shigella spp.
Region
Western
Africa
3
0.046
[0.015;0.129]
0.0%
0.0023
0.2162
Northern
Africa
5
0.011
[0.007;0.017]
0.0%
Eastern
Africa
1
0.057
[0.027;0.116]
-
Southern
Africa
2
0.037
[0.004;0.294]
82.3%
Sewage
status
Mixed
3
0.044
[0.007;0.231]
0.0%
0.3877
0.01
Urban
5
0.019
[0.005;0.062]
0.0%
Rural
3
0.024
[0.005;0.106]
95.2%
*P-value = 0 due to impossible samples present under null hypothesis.
