==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Health Technology
AI for Immunological Molecules group
Protein language and neural network models
improve B-cell epitope prediction
Joakim N. Cliﬀord (s163730)
Supervisor: Associate professor Paolo Marcatili
Master Thesis
Sunday 23rd January, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Project Title: Protein language and neural network models improve B-cell epitope prediction
Period: 23/08/2021 - 23/01/2022
Institute: Department of Health Technology, AI for Immunological Molecules (AIM).
ECTS points: 30 ECTS
Supervisor: Associate professor Paolo Marcatili (pamar@dtu.dk)
Students: Joakim Nøddeskov Cliﬀord (s163730@student.dtu.dk)
Dansk titel: Protein sprog og neurale netværks modeller forbedrer B-celle epitop forudsigelse
Dansk beskrivelse: B-celle epitop forudsigelse er af stor interesse på grund af dens praktiske app-
likationer i sygdoms ætiologi, overvågning og analyse af immune systemet, udvikling af diagnostiske
analyser og konstruktion af epitop baseret vaccinationer. Det er dog en kostelig og tidskrævende proces,
der kræver omfattende eksperimental screenings analyser. For at modvirke dette har forskere udviklet
in silico forudsigelse værktøjer, der kan signiﬁkant reducere arbejdsbyrden ved at producere en liste af
de mest potentielle epitop kandidater. På trods af stor indsats har der været meget lidt fremgang i dette
felt over de sidste årti. I det her speciale viser vi, at protein sprog og neurale netværks modeller kan
bruges til at signiﬁkant forbedre både linear og ikke-linear epitop forudsigelse.
i
==PAGE:3==
1
Abbreviations
Abbreviations
RFC
Random Forest Classiﬁer
BERT
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
ESM
Evolutionary Scale Modeling
FFNN
FeedForward Neural Networks
CNN
Convolutional Neural Networks
LSTM
Long Short-Term Memory
ROC
Receiver Operator Curve
AUC
Area Under the Curve
F1
Harmonic mean between precision and recall
MCC
Matthews Correlation Coeﬃcient
PAMP
Pathogen Associated Molecular Pattern
APC
Antigen-Presenting Cells
MHC
Major Histocompatibility Class
TCR
T-Cell Receptor
pMHC
Peptide MHC
CTL
Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes
Th
T-helper
Treg
T-regulatory
BCR
B-Cell Receptor
Ig
Immunoglobulin
FC
Fragment Crystallizable
FAB
Fragment Antigen Binding
CDR
Complementary Determining Region
ANN
Artiﬁcial Neural Network
RNN
Recurrent Neural Network
SVM
Support Vector Machine
KNN
K-Nearest Neighbors
PDB
Protein DataBank
GI
Gini Impurity
CE
Cross Entropy
FC
Fully Connected
TPR
True Positive Rate
FPR
False Positive Rate
TP
True Positive
TN
True Negative
FP
False Positive
FN
False Negative
BP2
BepiPred2 dataset
BP2HR
BepiPred2 Homology Reduced dataset
BP3
BepiPred3 dataset
BP3HR
BepiPred3 Homology Reduced dataset
BP3C50ID
BepiPred3 Collasped at 50% Identity dataset
BP3NS
BepiPred3 Non-Synthetic dataset
MMseqs2
Many-against-Many sequence searching 2
HMM
Hidden Markov Model
LYRA
Lymphocyte Receptor Automated Modelling
MUSCLE
MUltiple Sequence Comparison by Log-Expectation
KL-divergence
Kullback-Leibler divergence
RSA
Relative surface accessibility
Ab-speciﬁc
Antibody-speciﬁc
AgAb
Antigen-Antibody
ii
==PAGE:4==
2
Abstract
B-cell epitope identiﬁcation is of great interest due to its practical applications in immune monitoring,
disease etiology, diagnostic assay development and designing epitope-based vaccines.
It is, however,
a costly and time-consuming process requiring extensive experimental assay screening.
To this aim,
researchers have developed in silico prediction methods that signiﬁcantly reduce identiﬁcation workloads
by predicting lists of the most potential epitope candidates. Despite great eﬀort, there has been little
advancement in this ﬁeld over the last decade. In this thesis, we show that protein language and neural
network models can be used to signiﬁcantly improve both linear and conformational epitope prediction.
All code is available as a github repository: code link.
iii
==PAGE:5==
3
Acknowledgements
I am very grateful to my supervisor Paolo Marcatili for providing this exciting project as well as providing
excellent advice and guidance.
I would also like thank the entire "AI for Immunological Molecules
group" for awesome inputs and ideas during weekly meetings. This group included Magnus Haraldson
Høie, Anna-Lisa Schaap-Johansen, Sebastian Nymann Deleuran, Annika Kofod Petersen and Frederik
Steensgaard Gade.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Abbreviations
ii
2
Abstract
iii
3
Acknowledgements
iv
4
Introduction
3
4.1
Innate and adaptive immunity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4.2
Humoral response and antibodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.3
B-cell epitope prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.4
Machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4.1
Random forest classiﬁers (RFC)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4.2
Feedforward neural networks (FFNN)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4.3
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4.4
Long short term memory cells (LSTM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.4.5
BERT and ESM-1b transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.4.6
Cross-validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4.7
Bias-variance trade-oﬀ, overﬁtting, underﬁtting and regularization
. . . . . . . . .
19
4.5
Evaluative metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5.1
ROC and AUC scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5.2
Confusion matrices and threshold-dependent metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Methods
25
5.1
B-cell epitope prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.1
BP2 datasets: BP2 and BP2HR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.2
BP3 datasets: BP3, BP3HR, BP3C50ID and BP3NC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.3
B-cell epitope prediction on BP2 and BP3 datasets with RFCs . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.4
B-cell epitope prediction on BP3 datasets with FFNN, CNN and LSTM . . . . . .
27
5.1.5
External test set evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Ab-speciﬁc B-cell epitope prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Results
32
6.1
B-cell epitope prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.1.1
Dataset description and analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.1.2
RFCs trained on BP3 datasets outperform those trained on BP2 datasets . . . . .
34
6.1.3
Models using the ESM-1b transformer perform best on the BP3 external test set .
36
6.1.4
High performance variability when evaluating individual test set antigens
. . . . .
39
6.1.5
Epitope residue ratios and CE loss scores have an unexpected positive correlation .
41
6.1.6
Adding sequence lengths to ESM-1b encodings improves performance
. . . . . . .
42
6.1.7
Visual inspection in PyMOL shows prediction of both linear and conformational
epitopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.1.8
BP3C50ID models generalize on non-collapsed antigens
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.1.9
Epitope probability scores are correlated with NetSurfP-2.0 computed relative sur-
face accessibility (RSA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Ab-speciﬁc B-cell epitope prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
Discussion
51
1
==PAGE:7==
8
Conclusion
53
9
References
54
10 Appendix
58
10.1 Extra dataset statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
10.2 FFNN (ESM-1b+SeqLen) CE or AUC and epitope residue ratio correlation plots . . . . .
60
2
==PAGE:8==
4
Introduction
The goal of this thesis is to investigate the hypothesis that protein language and neural network models
can improve B-cell epitope prediction. The protein language model used is a Bidirectional Encoder Rep-
resentations from Transformers (BERT) model called Evolutionary Scale Modeling (ESM). Speciﬁcally,
it is a hyperparameter tuned version called ESM-1b. The neural networks are FeedForward Neural Net-
works (FFNN), Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) or Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) models.
Performances are compared to a Random Forest Classiﬁer (RFC) similar to the one in "BepiPred-2.0:
improving sequence-based B-cell epitope prediction using conformational epitopes" [15][47][24].
In this introduction, relevant immunology and biology focused on B-cells and humoral immunity is
introduced. The ﬁeld and history of in silico B-cell epitope prediction is discussed, as well as how it
can be deﬁned as a machine learning task/problem. We then delve into the machine learning models:
RFCs FFNNs, CNNs, LSTMs and transformers. We also discuss cross-validation and the bias-variance
trade-oﬀ. Finally, the main evaluative metrics used in this thesis are introduced. This includes threshold-
independent metrics: ’Receiver Operator Curve’ (ROC) and ’Area Under the Curve’ AUC. As well as
threshold dependent scores: confusion matrices, recall, precision, F1-score and MCC (Matthews Corre-
lation Coeﬃcient).
4.1
Innate and adaptive immunity
Innate immunity is a nonspeciﬁc defense mechanism that initializes immediately or within several hours
after pathogen exposure. It can be divided into immediate innate immunity and early induced innate
immunity (also known as the ﬁrst and second line of innate immune defense). Immediate innate immunity
occurs immediately or within 0-4 hours of exposure. It includes the physical barrier that pathogens
have to get through (our skin or the tight junctions between cells) and innate soluble eﬀectors, which
antagonize pathogens that get through. It also serves as a support to early induced innate immunity,
as the complement system make foreign microbes targets for phagocytes. Phagocytes are named after
their ability to ’phagocytose’. They protect the body by ingesting harmful molecules, bacteria and dead
or diseased cells. These cells include macrophages, neutrophils, dendritic and mast cells. Early induced
innate immunity occurs 4 - 96 hours after pathogen exposure, and it is mediated by innate cellular eﬀector
cells. Most of these cells originate from the myeloid stem cell, including aforementioned phagocytes as
well as eusinophils and basophils. They are activated through interaction with ’pathogen associated
molecular patterns’ (PAMPs) and complement system proteins. PAMPs are molecular motifs and some
examples are lipopolysaccharides, endotoxins and bacterial ﬂagellins (ﬁgure 1) [3][39].
3
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1: An overview of the eﬀector immune cells present in innate (left) and adaptive immunity (right). The
ﬁgure was adapted from the paper "Cytokines in cancer pathogenesis and cancer therapy"[16]
While the innate immunity provides general protection against pathogens, the adaptive immunity medi-
ates an immunological protection with pathogen-speciﬁc memory. The main adaptive immune cells are
T- and B-cells, and their activation or eﬀector function is predicated on specialized receptors recognising
speciﬁc pathogenic targets, antigens. More speciﬁcally, they recognize segments within cognate antigens
called epitopes. Antigen-presenting cells (APC), most notable of these being dendritic cells, travel to the
lymph node during an infection, and present potential epitopes on major histocompatibility class (MHC)
to T-cells. These presented epitopes are peptides processed from proteins, and if a T-cells receptor (TCR)
can interact with a peptide MHC (pMHC), it may become activated. B-cells recognize epitopes directly
on the pathogens antigen, and this could constitute any exposed solvent region.
Cytokines secreted
concurrently by dendritic cells inﬂuence activation and the subclass that naive T- or B-cells diﬀerenti-
ate into. Some of the activated T- and B-cells become memory cells, and provide long-term protection
against pathogens. T-cells with CD8 and CD4 co-receptors, become cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL)
and T-helper (Th) or T-regulatory (Treg) cells respectively. CTLs kill diseased or malfunctioning cells,
when its TCR recognizes a pMHC class I molecule. This targets intracellular infections and cancerous
or otherwise malfunctioning cells. MHCI molecules are expressed by all nucleated cells, and it is only
not expressed in red blood cells, which do not have a nucleus. Th cells recognize epitopes presented
on MHC class II, which prompt it to amplify an immune response. There are 3 main Th subclasses:
Th1 (cell-mediated immunity against intracellular pathogens), Th2 (antibody-mediated immunity), and
Th17 (inﬂammatory response and defense against extracellular bacteria). Treg cells suppress other im-
mune cells, preventing autoimmunity and restricting chronic inﬂammatory diseases. MHCII molecules
are expressed by aforementioned dendritic cells as well as macrophages and B-cells, which as a group are
termed professional APCs. However, studies have also revealed cases of mast, basophils and eusinophils
expressing MHC class II, even though it is not their main function (ﬁgure 1) [51][64][25].
4
==PAGE:10==
4.2
Humoral response and antibodies
B-cells are activated in the presence of antigens when epitopes interact with B-cell receptors (BCR),
and they constitute the humoral response by secreting antigen-speciﬁc molecules known as antibodies.
Antibodies are essentially secreted BCRs and therefore similar in structure, except for a transmembrane
region. Molecular B-cell activation mechanisms are still an area of active research, but it has been estab-
lished that activation is done independently and dependently of T-cells. T-cell independent activation is
typically short-lived and triggered by BCR interaction with nonprotein antigens such as polysaccharides,
lipopolysaccharides or complement system proteins. These activated B-cells become plasma cells, which
secrete pentameric immunoglobulin M (IgM) class antibodies, and none of them become memory B-cells.
T-cell dependent activation is more complex, but elicits a stronger immune response. B-cells that attach
to pathogenic antigens may internalize antigen-attached BCRs, process the antigen into peptides and
present it to Th cells on MHCII molecules. Interaction between pMHCII and TCR prompts a Th cell
cytokine release that results in B-cell clonal expansion into memory and plasma cells. Initially, plasma
cells secrete IgM antibodies, but a prolonged cytokine release instigates class switching, which changes
production to IgG, IgA, IgD or IgE. The speciﬁc class produced depends on the cytokines released by
Th cells, which is in turn characterized by infection type (ﬁgure 2) [44][5].
Figure 2: T-cell independent and dependent activation of B-cells result in diﬀerent humoral responses. A T-cell
independent activation is characterized by a BCR recognizing nonprotien antigens, such as a polysaccharides,
and results in pentameric IgM secretion. T-cell dependent activation requires both T- and B-cell activation.
Activated B-cells may internalize antigen-attached BCRs and present them to activated Th cells. This results in
their clonal expansion into memory B- and plasma cells. The ﬁgure was adapted from ﬁgures in [1].
Antibodies secreted by plasma cells speciﬁcally target pathogenic antigens, eliminating them or render-
ing them no longer infectious. Three distinguished mode of actions are neutralization, opsonization and
5
==PAGE:11==
complement activation. Neutralization simply means that bound antibodies obstruct the pathogen from
interacting and infecting other cells. Opsonization is when phagocytes target the ’Fragment Crystal-
lizable’ (FC) region of pathogen-attached antibodies, which may induce phagocytosis of the pathogen.
Finally, antibodies can activate the complement system, which enhances opsonization or directly kills
pathogens [60][53].
Antibodies are Y-shaped glycoproteins consisting of 4 chains, 2 light and 2 heavy chains. These are
divided into constant and variable regions called FC and ’Fragment Antigen Binding’ (FAB) respec-
tively. The FAB regions are situated at the upper dividing tips, while the FC region is the stem of the
antibody. It is on the FC region that an antibody will be glycosylated and it also distinguishes the
ﬁve antibody isotopes IgA, IgG, IgD, IgE and IgM. These are in turn characterized by heavy chains α
(alpha), γ (gamma), δ, (delta) δ, ϵ (epsilon) and µ (mu) respectively. There are also 2 light chain types,
kappa (κ) and lambda (λ), which can occur with any of the heavy chain types. A functional diﬀerence
between the two types has yet to be discovered, but an antibody must consist exclusively of one light
chain type. The antibody is kept together by a hinge region and disulﬁde bonds. The hinge region
is ﬂexible, allowing the binding of epitope pairs at various distances and the formation of complexes
(dimers, trimers, etc.). Light and heavy FAB regions contain hypervariable areas called complementary-
determining regions (CDRs), which give antibodies their unique and speciﬁc antigen binding site. These
regions constitute antibodies paratopes and there are 6 in total; LCDR1, LCDR2, LCDR3, HCDR1,
HCDR2 and HCDR3 (ﬁgure 3) [65][40][41].
Figure 3: An antibody is a glycoprotein consisting of 2 light and 2 heavy chains. These can be divided into
constant and variable regions.
FAB regions are situated in the upper dividing tips of the antibody, and it
includes the CDR regions, which determine the antigen binding site. The FC region is the stem of the antibody
and distinguishes antibody isotope: IgM, IgD, IgG, IgE and IgA. The antibody is kept together with a hinge
region and disulﬁde bonds.
6
==PAGE:12==
4.3
B-cell epitope prediction
There is great interest in B-cell epitope identiﬁcation for a numerous practical reasons, including immune
monitoring, disease etiology, diagnostic assay development, and designing epitope-based vaccines. It is,
however, a costly and time-consuming process requiring extensive experimental assay screening.
To
this aim, researchers have developed in silico prediction methods that signiﬁcantly reduce identiﬁcation
workloads by predicting lists of the most potential epitope candidates. In this section, I describe the
history of these tools, as well as their general workings and limitations [51].
B-cell epitopes can be any exposed solvent region of variable chemical nature, but most are proteins,
and this has been been the target for prediction methods. There are two B-cell epitope types: linear
and conformational (also known as continuous and discontinuous). Linear and conformational epitopes
consist of sequential and scattered solvent-exposed residues respectively. Most B-cell epitopes are con-
formantional (approximately 90%), and linear epitopes are more rare. Even so, linear epitopes have
been very well studied, as they can be more readily produced and used for practical applications, such
as immmunoassay diagnostic reagents (ﬁgure 4) [62][51].
Figure 4: Linear epitopes consist of continuous residues situated next to each other. If the antigen is denatured,
then these linear epitopes should still be able to bind their respective antibodies (a). A conformational epitope
consists of discontinuous residues brought together by protein fold. If the antigen is denatured, these epitopes
will no longer bind respective antibodies, as they depend on tertiary structure (b). This illustration is borrowed
from am excellent review article "Fundamentals and Methods for T- and B-Cell Epitope Prediction" by Jose L.
Sanchez-Trincado, Marta Gomez-Perosanz, and Pedro A. Reche [51].
Initial linear epitope prediction tools were based on amino acid propensity scales of B-cell epitope physic-
ochemical features. For instance, Hopp and Wood used hydrophilicity calculations for B-cell epitope pre-
diction under the assumption that hydrophilic residues cover most of a proteins surface, and are therefore
all potential epitope residues [22][21]. Subsequent studies, however, have shown that a proteins surface
contains approximately the same amount of hydrophilic and hydrophobic residues [33]. The currently
available tool PREDITOP uses an algorithm that takes hydrophilicity, ﬂexibility, surface accessibility
and secondary structure properties as input. The tool PEOPLE uses the same parameters, but also
7
==PAGE:13==
considers β-turns [45][4]. Another method introduced by Kolaskar and Tongaonkar was based on simple
antigenicity scales derived from physicochemical properties and amino acid frequencies of experimen-
tally determined B-cell epitopes [28]. In 2005, Blythe and Flower demonstrated that the models created
thus far on amino acid propensity scales had poor performance, and were unreliable for B-cell epitope
prediction [9]. This prompted the development of machine learning methods, which include ABCpred,
LBtope, BCPREDS, SVMtrip and BepiPred. ABCpred was based on artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs),
speciﬁcally recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [50]. LBtope used both support vector machines (SVM)
and K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) [55].
BCPREDS and SVMtrip also used SVMs but while SVMtrip
used ﬁxed tripeptide composition vectors as input, then BCPREDS eliminated the need for ﬁxed length
vectors by using various string kernels [19][67].
Figure 5: A simpliﬁed overview of the approach used for B-cell epitope prediction in "BepiPred-2.0: improving
sequence-based B-cell epitope prediction using conformational epitopes" (left) is shown. Here, each residue is
mapped to feature vectors of size 189, compared to binary labels where 0=Non epitope residue and 1=epitope
residue, and a RFC updated accordingly. Epitope residues are annotated as residues within 4Å of the antibodies
light or heavy chain. The general approach used in this thesis, is to ﬁt FFNNs, CNNs or LSTMs on ESM-1b
encoded residues of size 1280. The example AgAb complex with PDB accession 1A2Y is from the article "A
mutational analysis of binding interactions in an antigen-antibody protein-protein complex" [24][14].
8
==PAGE:14==
Finally, BepiPred is based on random forests trained on antigens structurally annotated from antigen-
antibody (AgAb) complexes. These structures were obtained from the protein databank (PDB). Each
amino acid can be annotated as sparsely encoded feature vectors of size 21 (20 amino acids + 1 padding
token). Furthermore, as we want RFCs to receive signals from more than just single amino acids, we
encode sliding windows of amino acids. The window size used is 9, resulting in each encoding being of
size 9 · 21 = 189. These sliding windows are also why padding tokens are needed, because otherwise we
cannot encode amino acids at the starts and ends of a sequence. BepiPred-2.0 is the most recent version,
and diﬀers from earlier works by only being trained on crystal structures, which are generally presumed
to be of higher quality, and also resulted in better performance. It achieved an AUC performance of
0.596 on an external 5 protein test set (ﬁgure 5) [8][24].
Conformational B-cell epitope prediction tools are generally not as well established. One major rea-
son for this, is that these predictions generally require information of an antigens tertiary structure.
This is only available for a fraction of proteins, as the experimental process for determining protein
structure is an arduous process. Nevertheless, there exists several structure-based methods. CEP was
the ﬁrst to be introduced, and it relies entirely on predicting solvent-exposed residues [30]. This was
followed by DiscoTope, which also includes amino acid statistics, and spatial information for predicting
B-cell epitopes [6]. Other methods, such as PEPITO and SEPPA utilize physicochemical and geomet-
rical amino acid properties [59][58]. Reported AUC scores for all of the above conformational B-cell
epitope prediction tools is around 0.7, but an independent study found lower performances scores, where
SEPPA achieved an AUC score of 0.62, and the others around 0.5 [66]. The methods EPITOPIA and
EPSVR rely on Naïve Bayes classiﬁers and support vector regressors. Reported AUC is around 0.6 for
both methods[48][32]. Aforementioned methods are not antibody-speciﬁc, but such methods have also
been developed . EpiPred and PEASE use docking-like approaches to match up antibody and antigen.
For example, the tool PEASE uses a machine learning model trained on 120 AgAb complexes, which
takes pairs of antibody sequence and antigen structure as input to identify CDRs and candidate epitopes
[29][54]. Mimotope-based methods is another approach used by MIMOX, PEPITOPE, EpiSearch, and
MIMOPRO. Mimotopes are peptides selected from a library of peptides that have aﬃnity for antibodies
raised against native antigens. As input, these methods require a set of mimotopes, and the tertiary
antigen structure [23][35][49][11]. The tools discussed thus far, require structural information as input,
but the method CPTOPE is able to identify conformational epitopes from primary sequence alone. It
uses SVMs trained on physicochemical, and sequence-derived features of conformational B-cell epitopes.
It achieves a relatively decent AUC performance on an external test set of 0.632 [7].
The approach used in this thesis allows both linear and conformational B-cell epitope prediction from
primary sequence. Dataset construction is based on antigens structurally annotated from AgAb struc-
tures, and similar to BepiPred, epitopes were annotated as residues within 4 Å of the light or heavy
chain. But the models are instead based on recent developments in naturally language processing, and
speciﬁcally the development of the transformer architecture ﬁrst described in "Attention Is All You Need"
and later works done in the paper "Biological structure and function emerge from scaling unsupervised
learning to 250 million protein sequences" [63][47]. I describe transformers in greater detail in section
4.4.5, but brieﬂy, their use of attention-based mechanisms allow long distance biological signals, such
as conformational epitopes, to be captured. This means that if the signal is strong enough, then two
conformational epitope residues can be predicted, regardless of how far apart they are. In comparison,
the 9-sized sliding window used for BepiPred2 RFCs limits predictions to linear epitopes or conforma-
tional epitopes, that are within 9 residues of each other. B-cell epitope prediction can be thought of as
a sequence to sequence learning task, mapping primary sequence to a binary sequence of same length,
9
==PAGE:15==
where 0=Non epitope resiude and 1=epitope residue. Primary sequences can be encoded using the same
approach as BepiPred2, where each amino acid is mapped to a vector of size 189 using sparse and BlO-
SUM62 encodings, or using the ESM-1b transformer to map each amino acid to a vector of size 1280.
Hereafter, machine learning models such as RFCs, FFNNs, CNNs or LSTMs can be trained to map these
encodings to binary label sequences (ﬁgure 5).
10
==PAGE:16==
4.4
Machine learning
In this section, I introduce the machine learning models used for B-cell epitope prediction. These models
include RFCs, FFNNs, CNNs and LSTMs. I also describe transformers, and speciﬁcally the ESM-1b
transformer which was used with all models, except the RFC. All models were also trained on sparse or
BLOSUM62 encodings.
4.4.1
Random forest classiﬁers (RFC)
RFCs are large numbers of decision trees working together as an ensemble. A signiﬁcant beneﬁt of using
RFCs, is that resulting decision trees are interpretable and can give insight to feature importances. In
biology, they have been used for B-cell epitope prediction as both BepiPred-1.0 and BepiPred-2.0 use
RFCs [24].
Decision trees have tree-like structures where a datapoint starts at the top node, and ﬂows down through
the trees nodes. At each node, we ask a question about the datapoint feature/attribute. This could be
something simple, for instance, if someones weight is above or below 120 kg. Depending on the answer,
the datapoint will go in diﬀerent directions. When it ends at the bottom leaf node, we interpret that as
the classiﬁcation, and the path it took as the classiﬁcation rules (ﬁgure 6).
Figure 6: A simple decision tree for some arbitrary disease classiﬁcation. Internal and leaf nodes are indicated
in green and blue respectively.
Training and constructing a decision tree, is an iterative process of setting classiﬁcation rules about all
data features at each tree node, starting from the top. After setting a rule, we compute the information
gain, which is a measurement for dataset separation, if it were to be split into daughter nodes according to
the rule. A commonly used score for calculating information after a split, is the Gini Impurity (GI) score.
Equation 1 shows us how to compute this score at one daughter node. Here, pi is the ith class probability,
estimated from the class frequency present at the daughter node. To compute the GI score for the entire
split, we compute the GI score for both daughter nodes and use equation 2. This equation weighs the
GI scores by the total number of datapoints (N1 and N2) present in each node. By continuously trying
diﬀerent features and thresholds that maximize GI score, a best possible tree is built.
GIdnode = 1 −
X
i
p2
i
(1)
GIsplit =
N1
N1 + N2 · GIdnode1 +
N2
N1 + N2 · GIdnode2
(2)
11
==PAGE:17==
A RFC is simply a collection of the above described decision trees. The choices of features and thresholds
is a randomized process, meaning that a lot of diﬀerent decision trees are made. For instance, in this
study most of the RFCs have forest sizes in the range 200-300. In order to make RFC classiﬁcations,
a majority voting scheme is used, where datapoints are classiﬁed, as the class that the majority of all
decision trees voted for.
4.4.2
Feedforward neural networks (FFNN)
The ﬁrst computational models for ANNs were introduced by Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts
already in 1943. This ﬁeld has in more recent years experienced a resurgence due to computational
power increases and models becoming more precise. In biology, FFNNs have been applied to obtain
state of the art predictions for peptide binding to known MHC molecules. Given the large timespan
since its inception, there is a lot of associated jargon to this ﬁeld. In this section, I explain some of its
basic intuitions, as well as the FFNNs [36][46].
Figure 7: A simple FFNN illustration with a single hidden layer. The input, hidden and output have 4, 3 and
2 nodes respectively. Arrows indicate the weights that connect layers.
A FFNN has input, hidden and output layers. The input layer is where data comes in, and the output
layer is simply the outputs of the network. The input and output layers will have a number of nodes,
corresponding to the number of datapoint features, and classes that we want to predict. Between the
input and output layer, there are hidden layers. The input, hidden and output layer are all connected
with what is termed as weights. These are simply numbers, that can be tweaked to make our network
perform better. If we are using a model, which has not been trained on any data before, the weights will
be initialized randomly or in some customized fashion. Information passes through the network, by each
node obtaining the sum of products from all connected nodes in the previous layer. This product is the
weight connecting the previous and current node, multiplied with the previous nodes output. Hidden
layers are equipped with activation functions of which there are several types (sigmoid, tanh, ReLU and
etc.). Activation functions introduce non-linearity, allowing the detection of more complex patterns.
This passing of data through the network is termed forward propagation (ﬁgure 7).
12
==PAGE:18==
When forward propagation reaches the output layer, a loss function (also called a cost function) is
used to evaluate the ’goodness’ of the network. There are many loss functions, and they can be be
customized to ﬁt a speciﬁc learning task. A very general classiﬁcation loss function used in this thesis, is
a cross entropy loss function (CE). In equation 21, D is a set of datpoints, d is the index for one speciﬁc
datapoint, C is the number of classes in the classiﬁcation task, c is the index for a speciﬁc class, yd,c
is a binary vector indicating the correct datapoint label, pd,c are class probabilities outputted from the
model. The latter is computed from the output layer, using a softmax function that ensures that the sum
of all output nodes is 1, which we then interpret as respective class probabilities. Intuitively, this setup
ensures that we only accumulate the negative logarithm of probability assigned to the correct class.
CE =
D
X
d=0
−
C
X
c=0
yd,c · log(pd,c)
(3)
As we want to minimize our loss function, we need to ﬁnd weight updates that minimize it. This is done
by using something called gradient descent, which is initialized by ﬁrst computing partial derivatives
of our loss function with respect to model weights. The resulting vector is a gradient (a gradient is a
vector of partial derivatives), which contains the ’weight nudges’ that will result in the most change for
the loss function. As we want to minimize our loss function and not ’overshoot’ a global minimum, we
multiply this gradient with a negative learning rate. The learning rate is just some decimal, and we
have in this thesis, for instance, used learning rates of 0.001, 0.0005 and 0.0001. These weight nudges
are then used to update model weights, and move us closer to a minimum. This process of updating
weights is done iteratively, as batches of training data are run through the model. As one can imagine,
computing all partial derivatives for a large model with millions of parameters is a complicated task.
The algorithm which does this task eﬃciently, is called back-propagation, and it exploits the chain rule
of diﬀerentiation.
4.4.3
Convolutional neural networks (CNN)
CNNs are a class of a neural networks, which have achieved state of the art performance for image
classiﬁcation, language translation and voice recognition. In biology, they have been applied for protein
folding, prediction of protein binding, prediction of contact maps and protein-protein interactions [38].
Figure 8: A CNN used for image feature extraction and classiﬁcation. The ﬁgure was taken from [2]. Feature
maps are obtained, by passing the image through convolution and pooling layers. These feature maps are ﬂattened
before being sent through a fully connected (FC) layer for classiﬁcation. Finally, a softmax activation function
is used on the output layer to obtain class probabilities for horse, zebra and dog.
13
==PAGE:19==
A CNN consists of convolutional, pooling, striding and fully connected (FC) layers. Convolutional layers
are the main components of a CNN, and are what allow pattern detection. Using image detection as an
example, image patterns are detected by matrix of weights called a kernel, which slides over pixel values,
performing dot product multiplication. Coloured images have 3 values for each pixel corresponding to
the 3 channels: R (red), G (green) and B (blue). This means that for coloured image pattern detection,
we need to use 3 kernels when sliding across image pixels. These collections of kernels are termed ﬁlters.
The resulting output will then typically be sent through some activation function, such as ReLU, in
order to introduce model non-linearity. All of this as a whole, is termed a convolutional layer, and the
output is called a feature map.
Feature maps are passed to subsequent convolutional, pooling or striding layers. Pooling and striding
layers are both ways of reducing feature map dimensions. Pooling layers reduce dimensions by averaging
its values, while striding layers do it by sliding across the feature map, and then skipping some values.
By reducing the dimension we can detect more global patterns. Pooling or striding layers can be thought
of as averaging pixel values for larger areas, so initially, a CNN will detect local patterns, but as we delve
deeper inside the model, it will detect more global and complex patterns. On top of a CNN, there will
be a FC layer, which converts feature maps to target outputs. A FC layer is the same as a FFNN, and
we can think of this as a way of collecting the patterns detected by convolutional layers. A key property
of a CNN, is that the weights used to produce feature maps can be reused for other learning problems.
This repurposing of weights is often done in image classiﬁcation, and is called ’transfer learning’ (ﬁgure 8).
Similarly to the FFNN, a loss function is used to determine the ’goodness’ of the models output. Gradient
descent and back-propagation is then used to update model weights accordingly.
4.4.4
Long short term memory cells (LSTM)
LSTMs are a special kind of RNN, that have been applied for speech recognition, and other language
modeling tasks. They were ﬁrst introduced by Hochreiter & Schmidhuber in 1997, and then reﬁned in
other works. In contrast to FFNNs, where datapoints are fed through and classiﬁed individually, RNNs
handle data recurrently, so that previous datapoints impact fututre datapoint classiﬁcations. From a
human perspective, this way of processing data makes sense, as we usually always have some ’train of
thought’ that impacts our decisions [20].
Model outputs at diﬀerent sequence positions are called hidden states. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 9,
where some arbitrary sequence, X, is sent through an RNN and hidden states, h, are computed at every
sequence position. These hidden states are computed by the current datapoint, xt, and the previous
hidden state fed through a FFNN with an activation function.
In order to make sequence position
classiﬁcations, we can either make predictions directly on the hidden states, or send them through
another FFNN, with a ﬁnal output size corresponding to the number of classes. If we only run through
the sequence from left to right, as shown in the ﬁgure, very little sequential signal is accumulated for
hidden states at the beginning of the sequence. To remedy this, it is typical to use a bidirectional RNN,
which also parses sequence data from right to left.
14
==PAGE:20==
w
Figure 9: An illustration of a RNN and LSTM was adapted from the excellent blog: Understanding LSTM
Networks by Christopher Olah. Purple, green and blue boxes indicate hidden state, recurrent module and a
speciﬁc position/timestep respetively.
The recurrent module in the RNN is an FFNN with some activation
function. The LSTM forget, input and output gates for position/timestep, xt are indicated in red, green and
orange boxes respectively. The LSTM cell state, Ct is also indicated in blue. Pink dots indicate position-wise
multiplication and yellow boxes are FFNNs with sigmoid or tanh activation [43].
Vanilla RNNs suﬀer from not being able to maintain long-term dependency signals, and important accu-
mulated sequential signals may be drowned out. For instance, imagine a vanilla RNN had to predict the
missing word in the following text "I am from Germany....... I speak {?} ﬂuently". This RNN might be
able to predict some language based on words "speak" and "ﬂuently. However, if it has lost the long-term
signal from "I am from Germany", then it is improbable that it would guess "German".
LSTMs are built speciﬁcally to solve learning problems, where predictions depend on long-term de-
pendencies. Similar to vanilla RNNs, they handle data recurrently, but they have a lot more going on
inside each cell. In ﬁgure 9, the upper horizontal line in the LSTM cell, is called the cell state. It is along
this line, that information can ﬂow unhindered, and long term dependencies maintained. The LSTM
does, however, have so-called gates that allow it to add or remove cell state information. From left to
right, these are called forget, input and output gates. Each gate contains a FFNN, which is indicated
with a ’W’ in the equations hereunder. The forget gate, Ft, is where the LSTM determines what infor-
mation should be forgotten from the current cell state. The current datapoint, xt, and previous hidden
state, ht−1, is passed through a FFNN with sigmoid activation, which outputs a binary vector. This
vector is then pointwise multiplied with the current cell state, to determine what components should be
forgotten (eq. 4).
Ft = σ(Wf · [ht−1, xt] + bf)
(4)
The input gate, It, consists of two parts, and is where the LSTM determines what information should be
added to the cell state. The current datapoint, xt, and previous hidden state, ht−1, are passed through
a FFNN with sigmoid activation, which determines what cell state components are updated. Then, a
15
==PAGE:21==
FFNN with tanh activation determines what these values should be (eq. 5 and eq. 6).
It = σ(Wi · [ht−1, xt] + bi)
(5)
˜Ct = tanh(WC · [ht−1, xt] + bC)
(6)
To get the new cell state, Ct, It and ˜Ct are pointwise multiplied. This is then added to the output from
the forget gate multiplied with the previous cell state, Ct−1 (eq. 7).
Ct = Ft · Ct−1 + It · ˜Ct
(7)
In the output gate, the LSTM decides what hidden state should be outputted. The current datapoint,
xt, and previous hidden state, ht−1, are passed through a FFNN with sigmoid activation. The new cell
state is passed through a FFNN with tanh activation. Both outputs are then pointwise multiplied to get
the current hidden state, ht, (eq. 8 and 9) [43].
Ot = σ(Wo · [ht−1, xt] + bo)
(8)
ht = Ot · tanh(Ct)
(9)
Gate FFNN weights are trainable through gradient descent and backpropagation. For B-cell epitope
prediction, a FFNN that mapped hidden states two target ouputs, ’epitope residue’ or ’not a epitope
residue’ was placed atop of a bidirectional LSTM.
4.4.5
BERT and ESM-1b transformers
The transformer architecture has achieved a great a deal of traction for language modeling, since the
release of "Attention Is All You Need", where it outperformed state of the art complex recurrent or
convolutional neural networks, while also being more parallelizable and requiring signiﬁcantly less time
to train. Subsequently, a lot of research has been done using the vanilla transformer architecture or
variants of it. In particular, this thesis relies on the work done with evolutionary scale modeling for
transformers in the paper ’Biological structure and function emerge from scaling unsupervised learning
to 250 million protein sequences’. One of these transformers was trained on the UR50 dataset, which
consisted of cluster representatives from clustering at 50% sequence identity on all protein sequences
that were currently on UniParc. The resulting hyperparameter tuned model was named ESM-1b. On
a side note, these transformers are of a speciﬁc type, called BERT, and were ﬁrst described in ’BERT:
Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding’. This architecture was
speciﬁcally designed to create transformers on unlabeled text-like datasets. A key transformer property
is that similarly to CNNs, pretrained models can be used for transfer learning, and ﬁnetuned to a new
learning problem. In this study, the aim was to ﬁnetune FFNNs, CNNs and LSTMs for B-cell epitope
prediction on pretrained ESM-1b encodings (ﬁgure 10) [63][47][15][13].
16
==PAGE:22==
Figure 10: The pretrained ESM-1b was coupled with a FFNN, CNN and LSTM (1., 2. and 3.). In this thesis,
antigens or/and antibodies were encoded by the ESM-1b transformer. Then FFNNs, CNNs or LSTMs were
ﬁnetuned for the speciﬁc task of predicting if amino acids residues are part of an epitope. The image is from the
paper ’Attention is all you need’ and modiﬁed to illustrate the work done in this thesis [63].
Because transformers have become commonplace, and explaining their entire architecture quite extensive,
then an exhaustive background explanation is omitted. Here, I present a condensed overview of how a
protein is passed through a BERT transformer, as well as a general idea for how they can be trained. The
BERT transformer is almost identical to the vanilla transformer encoder block, and so I refer readers
to the original paper "Attention Is All You Need", which provides an excellent in-depth transformer
explanation [63].
An input protein is mapped through an embedding layer, which maps each residue to a numerical vector
representation of ﬁxed embedding size. Next, positional information must be added, because unlike an
RNN or LSTM where positions are iterated over sequentially, the transformer has no way of learning
sequence order. This is done by adding sine and cosine values. Let the entire protein embedding be the
2-D matrix, X ∈Rl·d where l and d is the sequence length and each residues embedding size. To this
matrix, we want to add a positional embedding matrix of same dimension, P, which contents are deﬁned
17
==PAGE:23==
in eq 10 and eq. 11. In these equations, i and j are amino acid and embedding positions respectively.
Pi,2j = sin

i
10000
2j
d

(10)
Pi,2j+1 = cos

i
10000
2j
d )

(11)
In other words, for each residue embedding, we add sine and cosine values to every even and odd j index
respectively, over the embedding length. Residue positions early in the sequence will receive values from
sine or cosine functions with longer wave lengths. Conversely, later residue positions receive values from
sine or cosine functions with shorter wavelengths. In this way, positional information is added.
The next step is to pass the embedded protein through the multi-headed attention layer. In each of
these heads, self-attention is applied.
This is the powerhouse in transformers, and what allows for
learning long-distance dependencies across sequences.
Furthermore, the process can be parallelized,
making training more time eﬃcient. In each attention head, the embedded protein undergoes ’Scaled
Dot-Product Attention’, where it is fed through 3 linear projections, creating what is termed as the
query, key and value vectors (Q, K and V ). A dot product between Q and K is computed and the entire
matrix divided by the square root of the dimension of query, and key (dk). Finally, a softmax function is
applied, such that each row sums to 1. In the resulting QK matrix, each row represents a residue, and
columns are attention weights that determine how much attention should be placed on other residues.
The matrix is multiplied with V . In this multiplication, lower QK scores result in irrelevant amino acids
being diminished, and higher QK scores result in values remaining the same. The entire process can be
described in one equation (eq. 12).
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QKT
√dk
) · V
(12)
To make this process multi-headed, the same protein embedding is projected through diﬀerent learnable
linear projections for key, query and value vectors. Finally, each attention head output is concatenated,
and added to the original protein embedding through a residual connection. This is then passed through
a ﬁnal FFNN. This concludes the transformer encoder block [63].
1 of 2 ways to train a BERT encoder described "BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers
for Language Understanding", and a similar method used to train the ESM-1b transformer, is to randomly
replace a fraction of amino acids with special mask tokens. The ESM-1b transformer is trained to predict
these masked tokens, and learn above described attention mechanisms, by minimizing the loss function
described in eq 13. It is a negative log likelihood type function, where x is some protein sequence, M is
a set masked indices, xi is one masked residue and x/M is the partially masked sequence. In intuitive
terms, the model must learn to attend across unmasked residues in order to predict masked sites [47][15].
LMLM =
E
x∼X E
M
X
i∈M
−logp(xi|x/M)
(13)
4.4.6
Cross-validation
The goal of any predictive model is to have it trained on a dataset, and then generalize on never before
seen data. Datasets should therefore always be split into 2 parts, a training set that we ﬁt our models
on, and a validation set for estimating its generalization capabilities. Cross-validation is the process of
making diﬀerent training and validation splits. Each split is called a ’fold’, and from each fold there
will be a resulting model. If we tune hyperparameters on the validation sets, such as neural network
architecture or the learning rate, then validation performance metrics will be too optimistic. This is
18
==PAGE:24==
because hyperparameters will be speciﬁcally tuned to work well on the validation set, and the models
may therefore not have as good performance on other data. To avoid this, an external test set should
be set aside for a ﬁnal model evaluation. In a cross-validation setup, it is also important that there is
little or no similarity across sets, as this can lead to an underestimation of generalization error. To avoid
this, datasets can be clustered beforehand, and partitioned into training, validation and an external test
set. A similar approach was used in this thesis, where antigens were clustered on sequence similarity (for
more details, see method sections 5.1.1 or 5.1.2) (ﬁgure 11).
Figure 11: A 5-fold cross-validation setup with an external test set ensures a generalization error, that is not
too optimistic. Training and validation sets are indicated in green and yellow respectively, while the external
test set is coloured red. For each fold, hyperparameter tuning is done, and the model which performs best on the
validation set is chosen. Fold or ensemble models are then evaluated on the external test set.
In this thesis, 5-fold cross-validation setups was used. The resulting ﬁve models can be evaluated indi-
vidually, or as an ensemble on the external test set. An ensemble model is a combination of all models,
which will typically generalize better than any individual model. The tradeoﬀ, of course, is that the
model is 5 times larger, and therefore outputs predictions signiﬁcantly slower (see method section 5.1.5,
for exact details on how ensemble evaluation was done).
4.4.7
Bias-variance trade-oﬀ, overﬁtting, underﬁtting and regularization
Bias is the average diﬀerence of model test predictions to the correct value. A model with high bias
tends to be oversimpliﬁed, and not truly ﬁtted on training data. The model is said to be ’underﬁt’.
Variance is the variability of model predictions on test datapoints. A model with high variance is ﬁtted
too well on the training set, and will perform well on this data. But it will not generalize on test data.
The model is said is to be ’overﬁt’. For example, if the 5 models of the ensemble discussed in the the
cross-validation section (4.4.6), repeatedly make the wrong decision we could say that the model has
high bias. Furthermore, if these models have high variability in their predictive value, then one would
say that the model also has high variance. Oppositely, variance would be low if the models all output
almost the same wrong predictive value. Ideally, we want low variance and bias (ﬁgure 12).
19
==PAGE:25==
Figure 12: The bias-variance tradeoﬀis shown with a simple bulls eye illustration. Model predictions are shown
with ’X’ while the true values are the center of the bulls eye. An ideal model has both low bias and variance.
The goal of the bias-variance trade-oﬀis to ﬁnd models, which are not too complex, so that they don’t
overﬁt on the training set and have high variance. But at the same time, they also need to be complex
enough to capture important training set trends. This is why its called a trade-oﬀ, because you can’t
increase and decrease complexity at the same time.
A simple way to change model complexity, is to change the number of model parameters. By adding or
removing parameters, we increase and decrease model complexity respectively. Regularization is another
important way of reducing model complexity, and one common method of regularization also used in
this thesis, is L2 regularization (eq. 14)
L2 Loss = Error(ytrue, ypred) + λ ·
N
X
i=0
w2
i
(14)
The error function comparing true values, ytrue, and model predictions, ypred, could for example be
the CE function discussed in section 4.4.2. The symbol λ is called the weight decay or regularization
parameter, i are indexes for weights in a weight vector w, and N is total number of model weights. If
λ is set to be high, then to reduce the right term of the equation, the model is encouraged to use low
weight values. Oppositely, if a low λ is used, the model is allowed to use higher weight values without
producing high loss. By tweaking λ , we can control model complexity, and how well it generalizes on
test sets. The ideal λ is one that is large enough to set unimportant weights to low values, and not too
large so that the model can’t learn important data trends.
20
==PAGE:26==
Finally, another regularization method is dropout. It was ﬁrst introduced by "Improving neural net-
works by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors" Geoﬀrey E. Hinton, and the idea is simply to
randomly turn oﬀneural network nodes during training. It approximates training an ensemble model
in an eﬀective parallelized manner, by making training more noisy, and forcing nodes to take more or
less responsibility for model predictions. Dropout rates are the rates, at which nodes are left out during
training. For instance, the dropout rates used in this thesis ranged from 0.6-0.75 [18].
21
==PAGE:27==
4.5
Evaluative metrics
The main evaluative metrics used in this thesis can be divided into threshold-independent metrics, such
as ROC curves and AUC scores.
And threshold-dependent scores which include confusion matrices,
accuracy, precision, recall F1-score and MCC.
4.5.1
ROC and AUC scores
A ROC is a plot used to illustrate, and evaluate binary classiﬁcation performance. Unlike accuracy, the
certainty of predictions is taken into account, making it a more informative evaluative scheme. It is
created by computing true positive rates (TPR), and false positive rates (FPR) at diﬀerent classiﬁcation
thresholds (eq. 15 and eq. 16). In these equations, true positives (TP) and false positives (FP) are
correctly and incorrectly predicted positives respectively. True negatives are (TN) are correctly predicted
negatives.
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
(15)
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
(16)
These rates can be plotted in simple scatter plot fashion with FPR and TPR on the x and y axis
respectively.
The resulting plot is a ROC curve.
ROC curve performance can be evaluated by the
AUC, which is simply the area under the plotted curve, ranging from 0 to 1. This value will be 0.5 for
completely random binary classiﬁcation (ﬁgure 13) [37].
Figure 13: A ROC curve illustrates model performance for some arbitrary classiﬁcation task. The x and y axis
are the false and true positive rates respectively (FPR and TPR). The dashed line along the diagonal indicates a
complete random performance, and the jagged line illustrates model performance. The AUC of 0.85 is a decent
score that tells us that 0.85 of the entire plotting entire area is under the jagged line.
22
==PAGE:28==
The absence of important predictive data features, or some datapoints simply being erroneous, are data
quality issues which aﬀect model performance and the overall AUC score.
In such cases, it can be
interesting to inspect model performance only on easy-case datapoints, where this is not as much of an
issue. Furthermore, in many real-case applications, users are mostly interested in selecting top-scoring
predictions, as candidates for further analysis. For instance in the case of this study, we are interested
in the top-scoring epitope residue predictions. In this regard, a so-called AUC10 score, which focuses on
datapoints assigned the highest probability, is a useful evaluative scheme. An AUC10 score is computed
as the area of the curve going from 0 to 0.1 on FPR axis. The largest area possible for an area going
from 0 to 0.1 on the FPR axis is 0.1, as this only occurs in a best case scenario when a TPR of 1 is
achieved. The area that we compute is therefore divided by 0.1, setting the AUC10 score in a range of
0 to 1.
4.5.2
Confusion matrices and threshold-dependent metrics
Threshold-dependent performance, meaning that a speciﬁc classiﬁcation threshold must be chosen, can be
illustrated using a confusion matrix. For binary classiﬁcation this becomes 4-windowed square containing
TN, FP, false negatives (FN) and TP. Horizontal and vertical axis correspond to model predictions and
the true values respectively. A good model performance is therefore one where most datapoints are in
the windows along the diagonal (ﬁgure 14).
Figure 14: A confusion matrix illustrates threshold-dependent performance for some arbitrary learning task.
The true negatives or positives and predicted negatives or positives are on the vertical and horizontal axis
respectively.
A simple overall evaluative metric of an confusion matrix is accuracy, which is the ratio between correctly
classiﬁed datapoints and the total number of datapoints.
However, when working with unbalanced
datasets, meaning that there are signiﬁcantly more instances of one class, then accuracy is no longer a
23
==PAGE:29==
reliable measure, as it provides an overoptimistic score for majority class classiﬁcation. In this study, for
example, we are working with unbalanced datasets where there is an approximate ratio of 10 to 1 in favor
of non-epitope residues. If a trained classiﬁer were to simply predict all residues as being non-epitopes
we would then get a good accuracy of around 0.9, even though none of the classiﬁcations are actually
useful.
Two useful evaluative metrics are recall and precision. Recall, also known as sensitivity, is the ratio of
correctly predicted positives out of the total number of positives, and a classiﬁer with high recall is able
to retrieve most of the positives in a dataset. But as it may identify many negatives as positives as well,
it is important to also consider model precision. Precision, also called speciﬁcity, is the ratio between
correctly predicted positives and all predicted positives. Ideally, we want a model that can identify most
positives and at the same time not identity too many false positives (eq. 17 and eq. 18) [61].
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(17)
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(18)
The F1-score combines these two metrics and is a popular evaluative metric for many classiﬁcation
problems. It can be found by computing the harmonic mean between precision and recall. A most
signiﬁcant drawback of the F1-score, however, is that does not take the number of TN into account. To
clarify, there would be no diﬀerence in F1-score, for a classiﬁcation of 86 FN out of 90 total negatives,
and 86 FN out of 1000 total negatives. The F1-score ranges from 0 to 1, where a score close to 1 is
obtained if both precision and recall is high. Conversely, a low F1-score is obtained if both precision and
recall are low (eq 19).
F1 = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(19)
MCC is a better representation of a binary confusion matrix as it takes all 4 windows (TN, FP, FN and
TP) into account. Its values range from -1 to 1. The two extreme values, -1 and 1, indicate that all
datapoints have been falsely or truthfully classiﬁed respectively. A value of 0 means that the model has
no predictive power, as then there are equally many false and true predictions (eq. 20) [12].
MCC =
TP · TN −FP · FN
p
(TP + FP) · (TP + FN) · (TN + FP) · (TN + FN)
(20)
24
==PAGE:30==
5
Methods
This section describes the workﬂow for dataset creation as well as how machine learning models were
constructed, tuned and evaluated. The work done in this paper can be divided into 2 tasks ’5.1 B-cell
epitope prediction’ and ’5.2 Antibody-speciﬁc (Ab) B-cell epitope prediction’.
5.1
B-cell epitope prediction
A total of 6 datasets named BepiPred2 (BP2), BepiPred2 homology reduced (BP2HR), BepiPred3
(BP3), BepiPred3 homology reduced (BP3HR), BepiPred3 collasped at 50% identity (BP3C50ID) and
BepiPred3 non-collapsed (BP3NC) were constructed. BP2 and BP2HR were constructed to recreate
models from earlier work done on B-cell epitope prediction, ’BepiPred-2.0: improving sequence-based
B-cell epitope prediction using conformational epitopes’.
BP3, BP3HR, BP3C50ID and BP3NC are
updated datasets that incorporate AgAb complexes, which have accumulated since this paper was pub-
lished. For all datasets except BP3NC, some sort of epitope annotation collapse was done. This epitope
collapse strategy was done to remove the inconsistency of similar antigens having diﬀerent annotations,
but it also has a homology reducing eﬀect. In fasta format, these datasets are antigen sequences where
epitopes have been annotated with capitalization. These antigens were ESM-1b encoded, BLOSUM62
or sparsely encoded. ESM-1b encoding was done using a pretrained ESM-1b transformer, which maps
each residue to a vector of size 1280. For BLOSUM62 and sparse encodings, each antigen was split into
sequence windows of length 9, and each amino acid residue represented by a one-hot or BLOSUM62
valued vector of size 21 (20 amino acid residues + 1 padding token). With this encoding, each residue
becomes represented as a vector of size 189. Lastly for some of the analysis, sequence lengths were added
to antigen residue ESM-1b encodings, making each encoding a vector of size 1281 [24][47].
RFCs, FFNNs, CNNs, and LSTMs were cross-validated on above datasets using sparse, BLOSUM62
or ESM-1b encodings. Performance was compared on an external test set, which either consisted of
the 5 antigens used for ﬁnal evaluation in the BepiPred2 paper, or an additional 10 antigens randomly
selected. It should be noted, that due to how the epitope collapse strategy combines antigen clusters into
single sequences, then the 5 PDB accession names don’t all correspond to the ones given in BepiPred2
paper.
5.1.1
BP2 datasets: BP2 and BP2HR
A dataset of 776 antigen sequences with epitope residues annotated by capitalization, was obtained from
the dataset section on the BepiPred-2.0 prediction server: BepiPred-2 Datasets. Antigens were clus-
tered at 0.95 sequence identity with a local installment of the MMseqs2 (Many-against-Many sequence
searching) clustering tool, and all cluster epitope annotations collapsed into a single sequence. Described
brieﬂy, the longest sequence was chosen as an initial template and globally pairwise aligned to the second
longest sequence. Any epitope residue annotations not already in the template were added, and residues
that replaced gaps were added. The latter case gave rise to some insertions. Global pairwise alignments
were done with BioPythons pairwise2 module, which uses an implementation of the Needleman-Wunsch
algorithm. The same ﬁve antigens used for a ﬁnal evaluation in the BepiPred2 paper were placed in
an external test set. However, as the BP3 dataset construction revealed new epitope residues, annota-
tions were updated. After these steps, there were 233 antigens remaining. and the dataset was called
BepiPred2 (BP2). A 5-fold cross-validation dataset was constructed by clustering at 0.7 sequence identity
and partitioning entire antigen clusters into partitions, thus avoiding redundancy across cross validation
folds [57][42][24].
25
==PAGE:31==
In order to assess the eﬀect of reducing homology within each partition, a 5-fold cross-validation dataset
was also constructed from only 0.7 sequence identity cluster representatives. This dataset consisted of
185 antigens and was called BP2HR.
5.1.2
BP3 datasets: BP3, BP3HR, BP3C50ID and BP3NC
A PDB structural dataset was constructed by ﬁrst downloading the entirety of the PDB database in fasta
format, which at the time consisted of 664321 sequences. Light and heavy chains were identiﬁed using
the same lambda, kappa and heavy hidden markov model (HMM) proﬁles as the Lymphocyte Receptor
Automated Modelling (LYRA) software at expected values of 1e-18. A total of 8960 and 10236 sequences
were identiﬁed as light and heavy chains respectively. Of the light chains, 1592 and 1453 could be ex-
clusively assigned to lambda and kappa chains, while 5915 chains could not be discerned. There were
also 483 sequences, which could be assigned both heavy and light chain HMMs. AgAb complexes were
identiﬁed as entries, that consisted of a heavy, light and an additional unidentiﬁed chain presumed to be
the antigen. A total of 3148 entries met these conditions. For 2969 entries, light and heavy chains were
assigned as separate chains. The remaining 179 entries contained sequences that had been assigned both
heavy and light chains HMM proﬁles. The retrieved AgAb complexes were quality ﬁltered by obtaining
a list of entries from the SABDAB Database using resolution and R-factor cutoﬀs of 3.0 and 0.3. This
yielded 3793 entries at the time, where 1818 entries were shared with the entries obtained from HMM
proﬁling the PDB database. [26][8][17].
Epitope residues were annotated as amino acids, where atoms on the antigen and antibody were within
4 Å of each other. After combining epitope residue annotations of identical sequences, and removing
antigens with unknown characters, complete negatives, peptides deﬁned as sequences of length 39 or
less and sequences with length above 1024, 1466 antigens were left. The sequences were then clustered
at a minimum sequence identity of 0.95, and annotations collapsed as in section 5.1.1. The resulting
603 antigens were then clustered at a minimum sequence identity of 0.2. From the resulting clusters,
the ﬁve antigens selected in the BepiPred2 paper as well as 10 other cluster representative antigens,
were partitioned into a ﬁnal test set. All clustering was done using a local installment MMseqs2. Anti-
gens belonging to the same cluster as the ﬁve antigens of the BepiPred2 paper were removed entirely,
resulting in a dataset size of 582 antigens. This dataset was named BepiPred3 (BP3). A 5-fold cross-
validation dataset was constructed from the remaining antigens by clustering at 0.7 sequence identity
and partitioning antigens of the same cluster into the same partitions, thus avoiding redundancy across
cross-validation folds [57][24].
In order to assess the eﬀect of homology reduction within each partition, a 5-fold cross-validation dataset
was also constructed from only the 0.7 sequence identity cluster representatives. This dataset consisted of
383 antigens, and was named BepiPred3 homology reduced (BP3HR). Finally, a dataset was constructed
by clustering and collapsing annotations at 0.5 sequence identity, resulting in 358 antigens. This dataset
was named BepiPred3 collasped at 50% identity (BP3C50ID), and the same 15 antigens were selected
for external test set evaluation. This dataset can be thought of as a homology reduced dataset, but also
one that removes the inconsistency of very similar sequences having very diﬀerent epitope annotations.
This annotation collapse of clusters into single sequences can result in sequence insertions. Especially
models trained on the BP3C50ID dataset may not generalize as well on non-collapsed antigens. To in-
vestigate this, a dataset consisting of ESM-1b encodings from non-collapsed sequences was constructed.
26
==PAGE:32==
The 1466 BP3 seqeunces were clustered at 20% sequence identity, and the 15 test and other antigens of
the same cluster were placed in an external test set. The remaining sequences were clustered at a 70%
identity, and put into 5 partitions. For each cluster, multiple sequence alignments (MSA) were done us-
ing a local installment of the MUSCLE multiple sequence alignment tool. Then ESM-1b encodings were
picked from the alignments. If any residue was positively annotated, an ESM-1b encoding was randomly
picked from a sequence, where it was annotated as part of an epitope. If there were no positives at a
position, a random ESM-1b encoding was picked from a sequence, that wasn’t a gap. Corresponding
sequence length were also concatenated to each ESM-1b encoding. The resulting number of positional
ESM-1b encodings for each of the partitions were 19345, 18340, 18373, 15907 and 19730 respectively.
For the external test set, 2615 positional ESM-1b encodings were obtained. The dataset was named
BepiPred3 non-collapsed (BP3NC) [34][10].
5.1.3
B-cell epitope prediction on BP2 and BP3 datasets with RFCs
RFCs were trained on 5-fold cross-validation setups of sparse or BLOSUM62 encodings of all datasets
except BP3NC. During cross-validation, forest sizes ranging from 25-300 were tested and the optimal
forest size chosen on a validation AUC score basis (table 1).
All models were evaluated on an external test dataset of ﬁve antigens, and the BP3 and BP3C50D
models were also evaluated on the external test set of 15 antigens, which served as a baseline for the
deep learning models in this study.
Table 1: The optimal forest size of RFCs were trained on BP2, BP2HRR, BP3, BP3HR and BP3Clus50ID. The
tested forest size ranged from 25-300, and the optimal size chosen on a validation AUC score basis.
Datasets
Fold1
Fold2
Fold3
Fold4
Fold5
BP2 (Sparse)
225
250
250
275
275
BP2 (BLOSUM62
275
250
225
300
225
BP2HR (Sparse) )
225
225
200
250
300
BP2HR (BLOSUM62)
175
225
225
125
125
BP3 (Sparse)
125
250
175
275
275
BP3 (BLOSUM62)
300
225
300
275
250
BP3HR (Sparse)
250
225
250
275
225
BP3HR (BLOSUM62)
225
200
300
300
250
BP3Clus50ID (Sparse)
225
225
175
225
300
BP3Clus50ID (BLOSUM62)
275
275
275
250
300
5.1.4
B-cell epitope prediction on BP3 datasets with FFNN, CNN and LSTM
FFNNs, CNNs and LSTMs were trained on BP3 and BP3C5ID using sparse, BLOSUM62 or ESM-
1b encodings. All models underwent hyperparameter tuning, and the best model chosen by CE loss
score averaged across all validation splits. The hyperparameter tuning varied over learning rates, weight
decays, dropout rates and diﬀerent architectural setups.
The FFNN consisted of an input layer with 1280 or 189 nodes depending on whether ESM-1b or BLO-
SUM62 and sparse encodings were used. Each residue input was passed through 3 linear layers, where
the number of nodes varied for diﬀerent datasets and encodings. Between the input and ﬁrst layer, ﬁrst
and second layer, second and third layer, ReLU activation and varying degrees of dropout were used.
The output from these layers was passed to a ﬁnal layer consisting of 2 nodes, whereupon a softmax
function mapped each node output to a class probability. Finally, cross entropy loss was used to obtain
classiﬁcation loss scores, which were backpropagated through the network. All model weights, including
the LSTM and CNN, were updated using an Adam optimizer with varying degrees of learning rate and
weight decay (table 2).
27
==PAGE:33==
Table 2: FFNNs were trained on datasets BP3 and BP3Clus50ID using sparse, BLOSUM62 or ESM-1b encod-
ings. For each setting, diﬀerent architectures and training parameters were tested. The best model was chosen
on CE loss score averaged across validation splits.
FFNN hyperparameters
LR
Weight decay
Layers
Dropout
BP3 (Sparse)
0.0001
0.01
[90, 45, 30]
[0.75,0.75,0.6]
BP3 (BLOSUM62)
0.0005
0.01
[150,120,45]
[0.75,0.75,0.6]
BP3 (ESM-1b)
0.0001
0.01
[180,90,45]
[0.7,0.7,0.7]
BP3Clus50ID (Sparse)
0.0001
0.005
[150,120,64]
[0.7,0.7,0.7]
BP3Clus50ID (BLOSUM62)
0.0001
0.005
[150,120,64]
[0.75,0.75,0.6]
BP3Clus50ID (ESM-1b)
0.0001
0.005
[180,90,45]
[0.7,0.7,0.7]
The CNN consisted of 2 1-dimensional convolutional layers with diﬀerent kernel sizes. The input dimen-
sion to the convolutional layers was (batch size, 1280 or 189, longest sequence length), and each sequence
was padded according to the longest sequence in the batch. A small batch size of 4 was used for the
FFNN, CNN and LSTM. The kernel for each convolutional layer convolutes across sequence positions of
each antigen in the batch. This can be done with diﬀerent number of kernels, also sometimes referred
to as the output channel. Each position is mapped to an output that matches the speciﬁed number
of kernels. These outputs were then passed through max pooling layers with stride 4, whereafter each
positional output was passed through a ﬁnal 3-layer densenet consisting of 64, 32 and 2 nodes. The
classiﬁcation error, backpropagation and weight updating was done in a similar fashion as the FFNN
(table 3).
Table 3: CNNs were trained on datasets BP3 and BP3Clus50ID using sparse, BLOSUM62 or ESM encodings.
For each setting, diﬀerent architectures and training parameters were tested. The best model was chosen on CE
loss score averaged across validation splits. A 3-layered FFNN consisting 64, 32 and 2 nodes was put atop of all
CNNs
CNN hyperparameters
LR
Weight decay
Nr. of kernels
Dropout
Kernel
BP3 (Sparse)
0.0001
0.005
108
[0.75,0.75]
[3,5]
BP3(BLOSUM62)
0.0005
0.01
108
[0.7,0.7]
[3,5]
BP3 (ESM-1b)
0.001
0.005
108
[0.7,0.7]
[3,5]
BP3Clus50ID (Sparse)
0.0001
0.005
108
[0.7,0.7]
[3,5]
BP3Clus50ID (BLOSUM62)
0.0005
0.01
108
[0.75, 0.75]
[5,7]
BP3Clus50ID (ESM-1b)
0.0001
0.01
112
[0.75,0.75]
[1,3]
When working with ESM-1b encodings, a 3-layered FFNN consising of 1280, 680 and 128 nodes was
added before a bidirectional LSTM. The idea was that the FFNN could extract the ESM-1b dimensions
and biological signal important B-cell epitope prediction. Between the input and ﬁrst layer, ReLU ac-
tivation and a dropout rate of 0.7 was used. This output was fed through a bidirectional single layered
LSTM with input dimension (batch size, sequence length, 128) and a hidden state size of 50. As the
LSTM was bidirectional, a total of 100 hidden states were obtained for each position in a sequence. Each
positions hidden state was fed through a FFNN with an input layer of size 100, and 3 layers consisting
of 64, 32 and 2 nodes. Between the input and ﬁrst layer, ﬁrst and second layer, ReLU activation and
dropout rates of 0.75 were used.
For the BLOSUM62 and sparse encodings, a bidirectional single layered LSTM with input dimension
(batch size, sequence length, 189) and hidden state of 100 was used. Each positions hidden state was
then fed through a densenet with an input layer size of 200 and 3 layers consisting 120, 48 and 2 nodes.
Between the input and ﬁrst layer, ﬁrst and second layer, ReLU activation and dropout rates of 0.7 were
used. A learning rate of 0.0001, weight decay of 0.005 and an Adam optimizer was used when train-
ing both LSTMs. An extensive hyperparameter tuning was done for the LSTM, experimenting with
diﬀerent LSTM layer sizes, dropout rates between LSTM layers, varying dropout rates for the dense
networks before and after the LSTM, the weight decay values and the hidden state sizes. In the end,
28
==PAGE:34==
using single-layered LSTMs and adding high dropout rate before and after LSTM had performance on
par with multi-layered LSTMs.
After having found optimal hyperparameters for above-mentioned models, they were re-trained on their
respective dataset. A model for each crossvalidaiton fold was obtained by choosing the ones that yielded
the best validation CE loss and AUC scores.
It was investigated whether a combination of ESM-1b and BLOSUM62 encodings could be beneﬁcial on
the Clus50ID dataset. For the FFNN and CNN, the same architectures used to train ESM-1b encodings
was used, except that the input layer or channel size was set to 1489, and the weight decay decreased
to 0.005. For the LSTM, the only changes made was setting the hidden state size to 75 and the weight
decay to 0.0075. Antigen ESM-1b encodings were also combined with corresponding sequence lengths.
This experiment was only done for a FFNN using the same architecture and training parameters as when
training Clus50ID FFNN ESM-1b models in table 2, except the input layer was now set to 1281 and all
dropout rates to 0.65.
Finally, a FFNN with input layer of size 1281 was trained on ESM-1b encodings + sequence lengths
of the BP3NC dataset.
The same architecture and training parameters as the BP3 FFNN ESM-1b
model were used (table 2).
5.1.5
External test set evaluation
All models were evaluated on an external test set of the 5 antigens from the BepiPred2 paper or a test
set containing 10 more antigens.
For consistency and fairness, all models with the exception of the
BP3NC models were evaluated on the BP350ID external test set. The classiﬁcation threshold used for
each fold model was one that maximized the MCC score on respective validation splits. For each test
set evaluation, all fold model predictions were concatenated to a single vector, and a 5 times duplicated
label vector was also constructed. The evaluative metrics AUC, AUC10, MCC, recall, precision, F1-score
and accuracy were computed on these 2 vectors. For ensemble models, the AUC or AUC10 scores were
computed by averaging the probability each models assigns for epitope residue classiﬁcation. For the
remaining threshold-dependent metrics, a majority voting scheme including all 5 fold models was used
[24].
29
==PAGE:35==
5.2
Ab-speciﬁc B-cell epitope prediction
The quality ﬁltered 1818 set of PDB entries contained 7431 AgAb complexes. AgAb complexes that
were identical in sequence and annotation, contained unknown characters, only non-epitope residues, a
sequence length below 39 or above 1024 were removed, leaving a set of 2133 complexes. This set contained
92 AgAb complexes with single chain antibodies, where light and heavy chains had to be identiﬁed using
the LYRA kappa and heavy HMM proﬁles. In 5 cases, the single chain could not be separated into light
and heavy chains. The resulting antigens and antibodies were clustered local installment of MMseqs2
at 0.70 and 0.95 sequence identity respectively. AgAb complexes were then clustered into 90% antibody
or 70% antigen sequence identity clusters using an approach illustrated in algorithm 1. This resulted
in 249 AgAb clusters, and 11 of these clusters were put in a external test set. These clusters contained
85 AgAb complexes, and 11 of the 15 test antigens used earlier in ’5.1 B-cell epitope prediction’. The
remaining 4 antigens could not be used, because they were part of a large cluster containing 1026 AgAb
complexes. The 238 AgAb clusters were distributed into 5 partitions such that they contained 1207, 248,
214, 191 and 183 AgAb complexes [57][26].
Algorithm 1 AB90%AG70% sequence identity partitioning
ab90ag70_clusters = [ ]
ab90 = [ 90% sequence identity antibody clusters ]
ag70 = [ 70% sequence identity antigen clusters ]
#collect ab90ag70 sequence identity clusters
while ab90 ! = [ ] and ag70 ! = [ ] do
ab90ag70 = Randomly pick ab90 cluster
clus_done=False
#collect 1 ab90ag70 sequence identity cluster
while clus_done=False do
#add ab90 or ag70 clusters to ab90ag70 if id in ag70 or ab90
clus_size = len(ab90ag70)
if any ab90ag70 ids in ag70 then
ab90ag70 += ag70 cluster ids
end if
if any ab90ag70 ids in ag90 then
ab90ag70 += ag90 cluster ids
end if
#if no new clusters added to ab90ab70, stop collecting
if clus_size = len(ab90ag70) then
clus_done = True
end if
end while
#add ab90ag70 cluster to list of ab90ag70 clusters
#remove ag90 and ag70 ids added to cluster from ab90 and ag70
ab90ag70_clusters += ab90ag70
remove ab90ag70 ids from ag90
remove ab90ag70 ids from ag70
end while
extract ab90ag70 clusters for external test set
#put remaining ab90ag70 clusters into 5 partitions
sort ab90ag70_clusters by size
for ab90ag70 in ab90ag70_clusters do
add ab90ag70 to partitions 1,2, 3, 4 or 5
end for
30
==PAGE:36==
AgAb complexes were encoded with the pretrained ESM-1b transformer.
Each antigen residue was
embedded as a vector of dimension 1280, while entire light and heavy chain were embedded as 2 single
1280 vectors. After adding respective sequence lengths, each encoding had a size of 1281. An architecture
that consisted of two FFNN that took light or heavy chains encodings as input, and a ﬁnal FFNN that
combined their outputs with antigen residue ESM-1b encodings was used. The light and heavy chain
FFNN had input layers of size 1281, and the ﬁnal FFNN had input size of 1281+75+75. A weight decay
and learning rate of 0.005 and 0.0001 respectively was used (table 4)[47].
Table 4: FFNNs were trained on an ab-speciﬁc dataset where antigen, light and heavy chains were ESM-1b
encoded. The best model from each fold was chosen as the model with on validation CE loss and AUC.
Hyperparameters
Layers
Dropout
Light chain FFNN
[150, 75]
[0.7]
Heavy chain FFNN
[150,75]
[0.7]
Final FFNN
[180,90,45]
[0.7,0.7,0.7]
For comparison, a model with the same architecture as ’Final FFNN’ was trained only on antigen residue
ESM-1b encodings.
31
==PAGE:37==
6
Results
The results for non-speciﬁc and ab-speciﬁc B-cell epitope predictions are described in sections ’6.1 B-cell
epitope prediction’ and ’6.2 Ab-speciﬁc B-cell epitope prediction’.
6.1
B-cell epitope prediction
For non-speciﬁc B-cell epitope prediction, a structure-based dataset constructed from PDB AgAb com-
plexes was used. These datasets were BP2, BP2HR, BP3, BP3HR, BP3C50ID and BP3NC (see methods
section 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 for more details). After a brief dataset analysis, we compare RFCs cross-validated
on BP2 or BP3 datasets, and investigate how BLOSUM62 or sparse encodings impact models.
We
also look at how homology reduced datasets such as BP2HR, BP3HR or BP3C50ID compare to BP2
or BP3. Evaluations were done on an external test set of the 5 antigens also used in the BepiPred2
paper This showed that BP3 RFCs generally performed better, the best of which was the BP3C50ID
(BLOSUM62) RFC, obtaining AUC, AUC10 and MCC scores of 0.638, 0.087 and 0.169 on the exter-
nal test set. Furthermore, BLOSUM62 models and homology reduction seemed to aﬀect performance.
We cross-validated RFCs, FFNNs, CNNs and LSTMs on BP3 and BP3C50ID datasets using sparse,
BLOSUM62 or ESM-1b encodings. Evaluation was done on a expanded external test, including the 5
antigens from earlier and an additional 10 randomly selected antigens. Neural networks outperformed
RFCs consistently for all encodings, and those that used ESM-1b encodings always performed better
than counterpart models using sparse or BLOSUM62 encodings. The best performing model was the
BP3C50ID FFNN (ESM-1b), obtaining AUC, AUC10 and MCC scores of 0.697, 0.118 and 0.220. In-
dividual test antigen evaluations showed high performative variability, and an investigation of FFNNs
using both ESM-1b and BLOSUM62 encodings showed small performance increases. A strong positive
correlation between epitope residue ratios and CE loss scores was uncovered. Furthermore, it was shown
that the addition of sequence lengths to ESM-1b encodings improved performance and the resulting
model was the best performing model in this thesis, obtaining AUC, AUC10 and MCC scores of 0.714,
0.143 and 0.241 on the external test set. A PyMOL visual analysis indicated higher precision, when pre-
dicting only on residues receiving the highest positive probabilities. It was also illustrated that predicted
epitope residues could constitute both linear and conformational epitopes. We presented evidence that
the BP3C50ID FFNN (ESM-1b+SeqLen) model generalized on the BP3NC dataset, and performance
was on par with FFNNs trained on this dataset. Lastly, a moderate correlation was uncovered between
relative surface accessibility (RSA) and epitope probability scores. This also uncovered a group of easy
to predict negatives with very low RSA and epitope probability scores [24].
6.1.1
Dataset description and analysis
The ﬁve datasets BP2, BP2HR, BP3, BP3HR and BP3C50ID were constructed as described in method
sections, 5.1.1 and 5.1.2. These consisted of 233, 185, 582, 383 and 358 antigens. BP3 datasets con-
tain more antigens and therefore obviously contain more epitope residues. The epitope residue ratio,
deﬁned as epitope residue counts divided by the total amino acid count, is also higher in these datasets.
The homology reduction and epitope collapse strategy used for the BP3C50ID dataset enriches epitope
residues, as it boasts the highest epitope ratio and average epitope residues per sequence (table 5).
32
==PAGE:38==
Table 5: Summary statistics were computed for the ﬁve datasets BP2, BP2HR, BP3, BP3HR and BP3C50ID.
The statistics are number of antigens, number of epitope residues (Epi. res.), epitope residue ratio (Epi. res.),
average number of epitopes per sequence (Epi. pr. seq.) and average linear epitopes length (Lin. epi. len.)
Datasets which obtained the highest value in a statistical category are marked in bold.
Antigens
Epi. res.
Epi. res. ratio
Epi. pr. seq
Lin. epi. len.
BP2
233
2071
0.104
23.04
4.092
BP2HR
185
1644
0.103
23.95
4.281
BP3
582
6333
0.116
24.81
3.718
BP3HR
383
4282
0.115
25.70
3.742
BP3C50ID
358
4802
0.132
31.61
3.709
The average linear epitope length of size 2 and above is higher in BP2 datasets, which is interesting,
as this diﬀerence is not apparent in ﬁgure 15, which shows linear epitope length count ratios. For each
dataset, ratios were computed as linear epitope counts relative to the counts of all other linear epitope
lengths. In this illustration, linear epitope length count ratios are more or less on par across datasets.
Shorter linear epitopes are most common, and for all datasets the most common epitope length is 1,
indicating the presence of discontinuous and isolated epitope residues.
Figure 15: Linear epitope lengths were counted and divided by the total counts of all other linear epitope
lengths within a respective dataset. These count ratios are shown on the y-axis, and the corresponding epitope
lengths on the x-axis.
Lastly, a Kullback–Leibler divergence (KL-divergence) plot illustrates which amino acids are overrepre-
sented and underrepresented as epitope residues. Epitope residue frequency (Epifreq) relative to other
residues was computed, and divided by respective background frequencies (AAbgfreq) (see tables 17 and
18 in the appendix section 10.1 for these values). Then plugged into the KL-divergence formula,
KL = Epifreq · ln
 Epifreq
AAbgfreq

(21)
Leucine (L) and other nonpolar amino acids are underrepresented, while polar residues, such as glutamic
acid (E) or lysine (K), are overrepresented.
This makes sense, as polar residues are more likely to
have surface accessibility, and are therefore more capable of antibody interaction. Oppositely, nonpolar
33
==PAGE:39==
residues are less capable of antibody interaction [31].
Figure 16: The KL-divergence of epitope residues relative to the amino acid background frequencies displayed in
table 18. A negative KL-divergence indicates under-representation of the respective amino acid, while a positive
score indicates over-representation. The amino acids L, G, A, V, I, C are underrepresented, and the amino acids
E, K, N, D, R, Q are over-represented. Amino acids S, T, F, P, Y, M, W, H also deviate from a KL-divergence
value of 0 but not by much.
6.1.2
RFCs trained on BP3 datasets outperform those trained on BP2 datasets
RFCs were cross-validated on datasets BP2, BP2HR, BP3, BP3HR and BP3C50ID. For each dataset,
fold models were evaluated in terms of AUC, AUC10, MCC, recall, precision, F1-score and accuracy on
an external test set containing the 5 antigens from the BP2 paper (see method sections 5.1.3 and 5.1.5
for more details)[24].
Models trained on BP3 datasets (BP3, BP3HR or BP3C50ID) compared to those trained on BP2 datasets
(BP2 or BP2HR), have better performance in almost all evaluative metrics, and most importantly in
terms of AUC and MCC. The best evaluation metric scores are marked in bold, and with the exception
of accuracy and precision, all bold markings are scored by models from BP3 datasets. This performance
boost is perhaps not surprising, as BP3 datasets incorporate more antigens. The use of BLOSUM62
encodings instead of sparse encodings increases AUC, and it also seems to increase MCC scores with the
exception of BP3 and BP3HR. BLOSUM62 encodings contain information about amino acid similarity,
and are more informative than sparse encodings, making this a nice display of how biological informa-
tion can contribute to model performance. The epitope collapse strategy used for the BP3C50ID dataset
enhances B-cell epitope predictions, as the BP3C50ID (BLOSUM62) obtain the best performance in
terms of AUC and MCC. Homology reduction impacts the MCC, but there isn’t a consistent AUC per-
formance increase overall. However, as the BP3C50ID dataset is the most homology reduced dataset,
and the BP3C50ID (BLOSUM62) models boast the best scores in terms of AUC, MCC, positive recall
or F1-score, then it is not far-fetched to say that it likely has an eﬀect (table 6).
34
==PAGE:40==
Table 6: RFCs were cross-validated on sparse or BLOSUM62 encodings of datasets BP2, BP2HR, BP3, BP3HR
and BP3C50ID. The best models in terms of validaiton AUC were evaluated on an external test set.
The
evaluative metrics used were AUC, AUC10, MCC, recall, precision, F1-score and accuracy. The best score within
a metric category is marked in bold.
Models
AUC
AUC10
MCC
Recall
Precision
F1-score
Accuracy
BP2 (Sparse)
0.565
0.072
0.015
0.002
0.429
0.005
0.743
BP2 (BLOSUM62)
0.599
0.081
0.042
0.080
0.328
0.128
0.722
BP2HR (Sparse)
0.568
0.084
0.062
0.418
0.292
0.344
0.591
BP2HR (BLOSUM62)
0.594
0.098
0.097
0.274
0.34
0.303
0.677
BP3 (Sparse)
0.629
0.100
0.114
0.364
0.337
0.35
0.653
BP3 (BLOSUM62)
0.633
0.097
0.102
0.31
0.337
0.323
0.667
BP3HR (Sparse)
0.619
0.087
0.157
0.542
0.339
0.417
0.611
BP3HR (BLOSUM62)
0.63
0.105
0.133
0.471
0.334
0.391
0.623
BP3C50ID (Sparse)
0.616
0.105
0.143
0.52
0.332
0.406
0.609
BP3C50ID
(BLO-
SUM62)
0.638
0.087
0.169
0.566
0.342
0.427
0.61
In ﬁgure 17, a ROC curve comparison of BP2HR (BLOSUM62) and BP3C50ID (BLOSUM62) clearly
shows that BP3C50ID (BLOSUM62) is superior, as it performs best for all folds and the ensemble model.
(a) BP2HR (BLOSUM62)
(b) BP3C50ID (BLOSUM62)
Figure 17: A ROC curve comparison of BP2HR (BLOSUM62) and BP3C50ID (BLOSUM62) on the external
test set. The x and y axis are the false and true positive rates respectively (FPR and TPR). Dashed lines along
the diagonal indicates a completely random performance, and the remaining lines are fold model performances.
In conclusion, the use of the updated BP3 datasets and BLOSUM62 encodings improve performance. It
also seems that homology reduction improves performance, but these results were controversial. Models
from the BP3C50ID dataset performed best, and we therefore continue with both this dataset as well as
BP3 for the remaining machine learning evaluations.
35
==PAGE:41==
6.1.3
Models using the ESM-1b transformer perform best on the BP3 external test set
RFCs, FFNNs, CNNs and LSTMs were cross-validated on BP3 or BP3C50ID, and models with the
best validation CE loss and AUC were chosen. These models were evaluated on an external test set of
15 antigens, using a classiﬁcation threshold optimized on validation splits. The evaluative metrics were
AUC, AUC10, MCC, recall, precision, F1-score and accuracy. With the exception of the RFC, all models
were trained on sparse, BLOSUM62 and ESM-1b encodings. RFC training with ESM-1b encodings was
also attempted, but as this yielded performance worse than random, these results are not shown (see
method sections 5.1.3, 5.1.4 and 5.1.5 for more details). Neural networks FFNN, CNN, LSTM model
outperform RFCs in almost all metrics. Most importantly, as they outperform the RFC in terms of AUC,
AUC10 or MCC, it suggests that the more complex neural networks are indeed needed for B-cell epitope
prediction. Furthermore, as all models using ESM-1b encodings consistently outperform their sparse or
BLOSUM62 counterparts, then addition of the protein language model ESM-1b must have a signiﬁcant
performance eﬀect. In some instances, the BLOSUM62 variant models outperform their sparse model
counterparts. But this is not consistent overall, and there is no apparent diﬀerence for BP3 RFC, BP3
CNN, BP3C50ID FFNN and BP3C50ID CNN (table 7 and 8).
Table 7: RFCs, FFNNs, CNNs and LSTMs were cross-validated on the BP3 dataset. The best models in terms
of validation CE loss and AUC score were evaluated on an external test set of 15 antigens. The evaluative metrics
used were AUC, AUC10, MCC, recall, precision, F1-score and accuracy. The best score within a metric category
is marked in bold.
Models
AUC
AUC10
MCC
Recall
Precision
F1-score
Accuracy
RFC (Sparse)
0.604
0.096
0.074
0.356
0.236
0.284
0.658
RFC (BLOSUM62)
0.604
0.088
0.072
0.324
0.237
0.274
0.674
FFNN (Sparse)
0.617
0.108
0.132
0.564
0.250
0.346
0.595
FFNN (BLOSUM62)
0.637
0.109
0.163
0.620
0.260
0.366
0.593
FFNN (ESM-1b)
0.677
0.116
0.184
0.610
0.275
0.379
0.620
CNN (Sparse)
0.629
0.104
0.145
0.577
0.255
0.354
0.600
CNN (BLOSUM62)
0.629
0.070
0.157
0.618
0.257
0.363
0.588
CNN (ESM-1b)
0.664
0.102
0.180
0.535
0.284
0.371
0.656
LSTM (Sparse)
0.609
0.087
0.113
0.634
0.233
0.340
0.534
LSTM (BLOSUM62)
0.635
0.101
0.149
0.677
0.245
0.360
0.543
LSTM (ESM-1b)
0.652
0.103
0.165
0.551
0.272
0.364
0.634
BP3 overall average
0.632
0.099
0.139
0.551
0.255
0.346
0.609
Table 8: RFCs, FFNNs, CNNs and LSTMs were cross-validated on the BP3C50ID dataset. The best models in
terms of validation CE loss and AUC score were evaluated on an external test set of 15 antigens. The evaluative
metrics used were AUC, AUC10, MCC, recall, precision, F1-score and accuracy. The best score within a metric
category is marked in bold.
Models
AUC
AUC10
MCC
Recall
Precision
F1-score
Accuracy
RFC (Sparse)
0.593
0.091
0.104
0.535
0.237
0.328
0.585
RFC (BLOSUM62)
0.611
0.096
0.129
0.593
0.245
0.347
0.576
FFNN (Sparse)
0.631
0.104
0.153
0.716
0.243
0.363
0.522
FFNN (BLOSUM62)
0.630
0.103
0.155
0.730
0.243
0.364
0.516
FFNN (ESM-1b)
0.697
0.118
0.220
0.658
0.289
0.401
0.627
CNN (Sparse)
0.635
0.101
0.154
0.746
0.240
0.364
0.504
CNN (BLOSUM62)
0.636
0.101
0.158
0.723
0.245
0.366
0.523
CNN (ESM-1b)
0.685
0.115
0.205
0.585
0.293
0.390
0.653
LSTM (Sparse)
0.606
0.092
0.113
0.732
0.225
0.344
0.469
LSTM (BLOSUM62)
0.641
0.103
0.147
0.542
0.261
0.353
0.622
LSTM (ESM-1b)
0.685
0.116
0.214
0.596
0.297
0.396
0.655
BP3C50ID overall av-
erage
0.641
0.104
0.159
0.651
0.256
0.365
0.568
The best performing models for both datasets were the FFNN ESM-1b variants. On the BP3 dataset, it
36
==PAGE:42==
achieves AUC, AUC10, MCC scores of 0.677, 0.116 and 0.184. And on the BP3C50ID it achieves AUC,
AUC10, MCC scores of 0.697, 0.118 and 0.220. It is interesting that the FFNN (ESM-1b) performed
better than CCN (ESM-1b) or LSTM (ESM-1b). The FFNN was trained on single residue ESM-1b
encodings without the appliance of any sliding window, indicating that each ESM-1b positional encoding
must contain a very meaningful biological signal. It was, however, our hypothesis that using a neural
network with convolution or a recurring scheme, such as the CNN or LSTM, would reveal some time-
series dependent signal that could give a performance boost. Lastly, it is also apparent that models
trained on the BP3C50ID dataset have better performance than those trained on the BP3 dataset. On
the BP3C50ID dataset, all ESM-1b variant models achieve MCC scores above 0.2 as well as better
AUC scores. This observation is clariﬁed by averaging the performance metrics within each dataset. As
BP3C50ID models also performed best when comparing RFCs on BP2 and BP3 datasets (section 6.1.2),
then there is substantial evidence pointing to the homology reduction and epitope collapse strategy
improving performance (table 7 and 8).
(a) RFC (BLOSUM62)
(b) FFNN (ESM-1b)
(c) CNN (ESM-1b)
(d) LSTM (ESM-1b)
Figure 18: BP3C50ID dataset ROC curve comparisons illustrate the performance superiority on the 15 antigen
external test of neural networks FFNN (ESM-1b), CNN (ESM-1b) or LSTM (ESM-1b) over the RFC (BLO-
SUM62). The x and y axis are the false and true positive rates respectively (FPR and TPR). Dashed lines along
the diagonal indicates a completey random performance, and the remaining lines are the performances of diﬀerent
fold models.
37
==PAGE:43==
ROC curve comparisons further corroborate that RFCs are outperformed by FFNNs, CNNs or LSTMs,
as they have higher AUC scores across all folds. Latter models obtain AUC scores close to and above
0.7, while the RFCs best performing fold model obtains an AUC of 0.62. Model types also seem to agree
upon which data fold generalizes on the test set, because in all cases fold 1 or 5 and fold 4 generalize
poorly and well respectively. The ensemble model also performs well, but is always outperformed by the
fold 4 model. However, it is likely that if we evaluated on larger external test sets that the ensemble
model would ultimately perform best, as it should have a larger generalization spectrum (ﬁgure 18).
(a) FFNN (Sparse)
(b) FFNN (BLOSUM62)
(c) FFNN (ESM-1b)
(d) FFNN (ESM-1b)
Figure 19: BP3C50ID FFNN ROC curve comparisons illustrate the diﬀerence of using sparse, BLOSUM62 or
ESM-1b encodings. The x and y axis are the false and true positive rates respectively. Dashed lines along the
diagonal indicates a completely random performance, and the remaining lines are the performances of diﬀerent
fold models. Also, a confusion matrix illustrates threshold-dependent performance of the best FFNN (ESM-1b)
model. The true negatives or positives and predicted negatives or positives are on the vertical and horizontal
axis respectively.
Finally, a ROC curve comparison of BP3C50ID FFNNs illustrate the eﬀect of using diﬀerent encodings.
While there seems to be little diﬀerence between the sparse and BLOSUM62 variant models, then there
is a deﬁnite overall increase when ESM-1b encodings are used. ESM-1b variant models obtain AUC
performances above or close to 0.7, while the best performing sparse and BLOSUM62 variants obtain
38
==PAGE:44==
AUC scores of 0.642 and 0.6422. A confusion matrix illustrates the threshold-dependent performance of
the best performing FFNN (ESM-1b) fold model in terms of MCC. This was the fold 4 model, which
obtained an MCC score of 0.251 (results not shown). It recalls many of the epitope residues, but has a
lacking precision of 0.285, and therefore accumulates quite a few false positives. But it is more precise
when looking at the top predictions, for instance, when looking at the top 200 epitope predictions,
precision increases to 0.395 (ﬁgure 19).
6.1.4
High performance variability when evaluating individual test set antigens
The BP3C50ID FFNN (ESM-1b) from previous section 6.1.3, was evaluated on individual 15 test set
antigens. Overall, performance varies signiﬁcantly across antigens. On the lower end, antigens 4xakA,
4ypgD, 3pnWO, 6y6cA, 6vtwa obtain AUC scores ranging from 0.543-0.586. The antigen 7jumA and
the ﬁve antigens 7chzI, 5f72K, 4qciD, 5th9A, 6hgaB achieve an AUC score of 0.603 and in the range
of 0.698-0.775 respectively. Lastly, antigens 7lj4B and 2xwtC obtain AUC scores of 0.903 and 0.830
respectively. The antigens 5d8jA and 6u6uR achieve no performance (table 9).
Table 9:
FFNN (ESM-1b) performance on BP3C50ID test antigens.
PDB acessions are shown in the ﬁrst
column where the capital letter indicates the antigen chain ID. Performance was evaluated using non-threshold
dependent metrics AUC and AUC10 as well as threshold-dependent metrics MCC, recall precision, F1-score and
accuracy. ∆Thresh is the absolute averaged distance between fold model thresholds used on the entire test set,
and thresholds optimized for a speciﬁc antigen.
PDB
AUC
AUC10
MCC
Recall
Precision
F1-score
Accuracy
∆Thresh
7lj4B
0.903
0.436
0.429
0.787
0.333
0.468
0.815
0.024
4xakA
0.547
0.076
0.02
0.707
0.321
0.441
0.437
0.053
4ypg
0.574
0.055
0.091
0.661
0.427
0.519
0.521
0.027
7chzI
0.728
0.202
0.266
0.759
0.463
0.575
0.601
0.047
5d8jA
0.472
0.066
-0.009
0.523
0.192
0.281
0.477
0.138
3pnwO
0.565
0.058
0.048
0.35
0.361
0.355
0.584
0.062
6y6cA
0.543
0.041
0.014
0.489
0.235
0.317
0.519
0.08
5f72K
0.76
0.146
0.247
0.494
0.279
0.357
0.775
0.061
6u6uR
0.497
0.004
-0.019
0.408
0.12
0.185
0.544
0.061
4qciD
0.775
0.337
0.175
0.878
0.231
0.366
0.429
0.151
7jumA
0.603
0.079
0.182
0.987
0.289
0.447
0.362
0.059
5th9A
0.698
0.067
0.07
0.112
0.197
0.143
0.849
0.098
6hgaB
0.729
0.005
0.107
0.433
0.087
0.144
0.766
0.035
2xwtC
0.83
0.267
0.356
0.853
0.291
0.434
0.677
0.038
6vtwA
0.586
0.075
0.063
0.933
0.329
0.486
0.37
0.118
Classiﬁcation thresholds which maximized the validation MCC score were chosen for external test set
evaluation (see method section 5.1.5 for more details). These thresholds were 0.174, 0.136, 0.155, 0.136
and 0.155 for the 5 fold models respectively. The ’∆Thresh’ score is the averaged absolute diﬀerence
between these thresholds and thresholds that would maximize the diﬀerence between true positive and
false positive rates for a speciﬁc antigen. Although it is not consistent overall, it does seem like antigens
with poor performance have high ’∆Thresh’ scores, which means that an antigens optimal threshold
varies signiﬁcantly from what is used during evaluation. This dependency is especially exempliﬁed by
antigens, such as 4qciD and 5th9A, which have poor MCC relative to their AUC, but when optimized
thresholds are used, overﬁt MCCs of 0.550 and 0.264 are obtained. Although these are over-ﬁtted values,
the large MCC score increase suggests that it is diﬃcult to pick a threshold that generalizes for all test
antigens.
39
==PAGE:45==
(a) Antigen 6u6uR (worst case)
(b) Antigen 7lj4B (best case)
Figure 20:
ROC curve comparisons of BP3C50ID FFNN (ESM-1b) on test set antigens 6u6uR and 7lj4B
illustrate the best and worst case scenarios respectively. The x and y axis are the false and true positive rates
respectively (FPR and TPR). Dashed lines along the diagonal indicate a completely random performance, and
the remaining lines are the performances of diﬀerent fold models.
A ROC curve comparison illustrates a worse than random and ideal performance for antigens 6u6uR and
7lj4B. For 7lj4B, the early increase in TPR shows that the majority of epitope residues can be captured
at a threshold, which doesn’t incorporate too many false positives. This is also indicated by a relatively
high AUC10 of 0.436. Conversely, 6u6uR evaluation fails to capture epitope residues at a threshold,
where the FPR is better than random (ﬁgure 20).
The 4xakB and 7jumA antigens were particularly interesting, because we found that FFNN, CNN and
LSTM (BLOSUM62) would consistently outperform ESM-1b variant models for these antigens. It might
be that something is learned from ESM-1b encodings that does not generalize on these antigens, but this
is entirely speculative. In any case, models were constructed to investigate whether using both ESM-1b
and BLOSUM62 encodings could improve performance (see method section 5.1.4 for more details).
Model performances on 4xakA or 7jumA are compared to that of earlier constructed FFNNs, CNNs
and LSTMs (section 6.1.3). The AUC or MCC increases consistently when comparing ESM-1b to (ESM-
1b, BLOSUM62) models. LSTM (ESM-1b, BLOSUM62) obtains an AUC of 0.669 on 7jumA, which
is an absolute increase of 0.084 compared to LSTM (ESM-1b). Overall however, BLOSUM62 variant
models still perform better on 4xakA and 7jumA (table 10).
Table 10: FFNNs, CNNs and LSTMs were cross-validated on an (ESM-1b, BLOSUM62) encoded BP3C50ID
dataset. The best models in terms of validation CE loss and AUC score were evaluated on test antigens 4xakB
and 7jumA. AUC and MCC scores are compared to that of earlier scores of BP3C50ID FFNN (ESM-1b).
Models
4xakA AUC
4xakA MCC
7jumA AUC
7jumA MCC
FFNN (ESM-1b)
0.547
0.020
0.603
0.182
FFNN (BLOSUM62)
0.624
0.172
0.739
0.312
FFNN (ESM-1b, BLOSUM62)
0.560
0.062
0.644
0.183
CNN (ESM-1b)
0.536
0.033
0.590
0.184
CNN (BLOSUM62)
0.644
0.178
0.724
0.325
CNN (ESM-1b, BLOSUM62)
0.572
0.087
0.631
0.189
LSTM (ESM-1b)
0.531
0.021
0.585
0.102
LSTM (BLOSUM62)
0.634
0.144
0.719
0.291
LSTM (ESM-1b, BLOSUM62)
0.607
0.078
0.669
0.156
40
==PAGE:46==
The (ESM-1b, BLOSUM62) models were also evaluated on the full 15 antigen test set. Compared to
the ESM-1b models in table 8, there is an AUC increase of 0.002, 0.006, 0.016 for the FFNN, CNN and
LSTM respectively. There is also an increase in AUC10 for all models and especially the LSTM model
improves by 0.03. The MCC score, however, only improves for the FFNN and not consistently across all
models.
Table 11: FFNNs, CNNs and LSTMs were cross-validated on an (ESM-1b, BLOSUM62) encoded BP3C50ID
dataset. The best models in terms of validation CE loss and AUC score were evaluated on the external BP3C50ID
test set of 15 antigens. The evaluative metrics used were AUC, AUC10, MCC, recall, precision, F1-score and
accuracy. The best score within a metric category is marked in bold.
Models
AUC
AUC10
MCC
Recall
Precision
F1-score
Accuracy
FFNN (ESM-1b, BLOSUM62)
0.699
0.136
0.221
0.758
0.272
0.400
0.568
CNN (ESM-1b, BLOSUM62)
0.691
0.130
0.203
0.559
0.296
0.387
0.664
LSTM (ESM-1b, BLOSUM62)
0.701
0.146
0.198
0.653
0.276
0.388
0.608
6.1.5
Epitope residue ratios and CE loss scores have an unexpected positive correlation
Epitope residue ratios for each BP3C50ID validation split antigen, were computed as the total number
of epitope residues divided by the total number of residues in the antigen. These ratios were plotted
against the antigen-wise CE loss and AUC scores computed by BP350ID FFNN (ESM-1b). This totaled
343 datapoints (ﬁgure 21).
(a)
(b)
Figure 21: Validation antigen epitope ratios (x-axis) plotted against BP3C50ID FFNN (ESM-1b) CE losses
(y-axis) uncover a strong linear positive correlation. The same epitope ratios (x-axis) plotted against BP3C50ID
FFNN (ESM-1b) AUC scores (y-axis) show that the majority of antigens obtain performance better than random.
For each antigen, it is likely the case that there are missing annotations for some epitope residues, because
there aren’t enough decent quality AgAb structures. It was therefore our hypothesis that we might be
able to see a negative correlation between the CE loss and the epitope residue ratio, indicating that anti-
gens with few annotations, presumably due them being missing, had worse performance. But we instead
obtained a strong positive correlation. Visually, it is very apparent that as epitope residue increases, so
does the CE loss. This trend is also indicated by a pearsons correlation coeﬃcient of 0.975, indicating a
very strong linear relationship. Due to the class imbalance in favor of non-epitope residues, the model
will in general be biased to place high probability on the non-epitope residues. This is exempliﬁed by
epitope classiﬁcation thresholds being on the lower end. For instance in the case of BP3C50ID FFNN
(ESM-1b), these were 0.174, 0.136, 0.155, 0.136 and 0.155 for each fold model respectively. This means,
that even in cases where the probability for positive epitope residue is assigned to be above one of these
thresholds, and thus correctly predicted, it would still give a high CE loss. It therefore makes sense that
antigens with many positive residues will get high CE loss scores. Finally, the assumption that if an
41
==PAGE:47==
antigen is sparsely annotated, then it is due to missing annotations is of course not always true (ﬁgure
21a).
Epitope residue ratios plotted against AUC scores, show that a majority of 190 antigens are located
in the upper left corner with an AUC above 0.6 and epitope residue ratio between 0.0 and 0.2. Out
of the 343 validation split antigens, 316 antigens achieve AUC scores higher than 0.5 and 134 antigens
achieve an AUC above 0.7. Furthermore, there visually seems to be a very weak negative correlation
between AUC score and epitope residue ratio, also indicated by pearsons and spearman correlation
coeﬃcents of -0.222 and -0.2076 respectively. This plot suggests that given an appropriate threshold,
the model may output meaningful epitope predictions, but also that antigens with less epitope residues
relative to size perform better (ﬁgure 21b).
6.1.6
Adding sequence lengths to ESM-1b encodings improves performance
It was observed that antigens which received high CE loss were small and tended to have more epitopes
relative to their length. Validation epitope residue ratios were computed as in section 6.1.5, and plotted
against corresponding sequence lengths. Although, it is not so straightforward as the positive correlation
found in ﬁgure 21a, then there seems to be a negative trend, indicating that smaller antigens tend to
have relatively more epitope residues. Oppositely, this means that larger antigens have generally less
epitope residues relative to their size. This trend is also indicated by a spearman correlation coeﬃcient
of -0.576, suggesting a moderate to strong monotonic relationship. This sprung the idea, that including
sequence lengths as input could improve performance, as then the model could learn the relation between
epitope residue ratio, and an antigens size (ﬁgure 22).
Figure 22: Validation antigen epitope ratios (x-axis) plotted against corresponding sequence lengths (y-axis)
uncover a moderate negative monotonic relationship with a spearman coeﬃcient of -0.576.
A FFNN was trained on the BP3C50ID dataset with the same architecture and parameters as BP3C50ID
42
==PAGE:48==
FFNN (ESM-1b), except an extra node was added to the input layer (see method section 5.1.4 for more
details). The resulting models were then evaluated on the 15 antigen test set, where it obtained an
AUC, AUC10 and MCC of 0.714, 0.143 and 0.241 respectively (table 12). This is better than any of
the models constructed thus far. For comparison, the best other model constructed was the BP3C50ID
FFNN (ESM-1b) from table 8, which obtained AUC, AUC10 and MCC scores of 0.697, 0.118 and 0.220
respectively.
Table 12: A FFNN was cross-validated on ESM-1b and sequence length encoded BP3C50ID dataaset. The best
models in terms of validation CE loss and AUC were evaluated on the external BP3C50ID test set of 15 antigens.
Models
AUC
AUC10
MCC
Recall
Precision
F1-score
Accuracy
FFNN (ESM-1b+SeqLen)
0.714
0.143
0.241
0.735
0.287
0.413
0.603
A ROC curve also illustrates a performance boost, as now all models folds obtain AUC scores above 0.7,
which has not been the case for any earlier constructed models (ﬁgure 23).
Figure 23: A ROC curve of BP3C50ID FFNN (ESM-1b+SeqLen) performance on the 15 antigen external test
set shows a performance boost compared to earlier constructed models. The x and y axis are the false and true
positive rates respectively (FPR and TPR). The dashed line along the diagonal indicates a completely random
performance. The remaining lines are performances of diﬀerent fold models.
Lastly, correlation plots between CE or AUC scores and epitope residue ratios similar to those in previous
section 6.1.5 were constructed. This was done to see if sequence length inclusion changed anything, but
as almost identical plots and correlations coeﬃcients were achieved, these were not included (appendix
section ’10.2 FFNN (ESM-1b+SeqLen) CE or AUC and epitope residue ratio correlation plots’).
43
==PAGE:49==
6.1.7
Visual inspection in PyMOL shows prediction of both linear and conformational
epitopes
A visual analysis was done by inspecting external test antigens from PDB accessions 2XWT, 7CHZ and
4QCI in PyMOL. For each antigen, the 20 residues assigned the highest probability of being epitopes by
the BP3C50ID FFNN (ESM-1b+SeqLen) ensemble, were marked in orange and compared with the true
labels (ﬁgure 24) [52].
Figure 24: A PyMOL visual inspection of the top-20 predictions on external test set antigens reveal overlapping
epitope patches with true epitope residues. The PDB accessions for these test set antigens were 2XWT, 7CHZ
and 4QCI. Antigens are indicated in green. The 20 residues assigned the highest probability of being part of an
epitope by the BP3C50ID FFNN (ESM-1b+SeqLen) ensemble are marked in orange (upper). The true epitope
residues are also indicated in orange (bottom) [52].
The top-20 precision scores are 0.45, 0.7 and 0.5 for the 3 antigens. This is signiﬁcantly better than
the corresponding overall precision scores of 0.27, 0.46 and 0.21 respectively. Visually, it also seems
that predicted regions coincide with true labels. In the case of 7CHZ, there are many missing epitope
patches in the prediction labeled AgAb structure, as it only includes the top-20 predictions, and there
are quite a few more in the true labeled structure. It must also be stated that we don’t know for sure
if all epitopes are accounted for in the true labels. There might be some epitopes that the BP3C50ID
FFNN (ESM-1b+SeqLen) ensemble picks up on, but there has yet to be any experimentally determined
AgAb structure to verify it (ﬁgure 24).
So far, we have demonstrated and evaluated general B-cell epitopes prediction, and yet distinguished
linear and conformational B-cell epitope predictions. To show that predicted epitopes can constitute
both linear and conformational B-cell epitopes, the PDB accessions 2XWT and 7CHZ were inspected in
44
==PAGE:50==
PyMOL. In these structures, all residues predicted as being epitopes by the BP3C50ID FFNN (ESM-
1b+SeqLen) ensemble were inspected. Then 4 examples of what visually seemed to be conformational
epitopes were marked in blue. Hereafter, residues which were not part of an epitope in the true labels
were marked in red. Below each structure, corresponding primary sequence segments clearly indicate
the presence of linear epitope predictions. For example "IDVT" and "EEDFR" in the 2XWT structures
or "SGPYELK" and "SFVQGEESNDKIP" in the 2CHZ structures.
Conformational epitopes can be
observed by inspecting both tertiary structures, and corresponding primary sequence segments. They
are discontinuous in primary sequence and the 2CHZ epitope residues are especially far away from each
other. Despite this, the protein fold brings these residues close enough in tertiary structure to form an
epitope. Even though there are erroneous predictions, then these sort of predictions are impressive, as
almost all current tools are structure-based, and yet here it seems to be done from primary sequence
alone (see section 4.3 for more details B-cell epitope prediction tools) (ﬁgure 25).
Figure 25: A PyMOL visual inspection of BP3C50ID FFNN (ESM-1b+SeqLen) ensemble predictions on exter-
nal test set antigens 2XWT and 7CHZ, reveal both linear and conformational epitope predictions. Red and blue
are false and true conformational epitope predictions respectively. For each structure, a corresponding sequence
segment indicates how far apart conformational epitopes are in primary sequence [52]
.
6.1.8
BP3C50ID models generalize on non-collapsed antigens
The BP3C50ID dataset has insertions resulting from collapsing antigens annotations at 50 % sequence
identity, and a model trained on this dataset may therefore not generalize well on non-collapsed antigens.
To investigate this, a new dataset called BP3NC was constructed using ESM-1b encodings from non-
collapsed antigens, as described in method section 5.1.2. A FFNN was cross-validated on the BP3NC
dataset and models with the best validation CE loss and AUC chosen. These models were evaluated on
the BP3NC external test set, which was constructed from the 15 antigens external test set. For com-
parison and to investigate how well BP3C50ID models generalize on non-collapsed antigens, BP3C50ID
(ESM-1b+SeqLen) was also evaluated on the test set. The evaluative metrics were AUC, AUC10, MCC,
recall, precision, F1-score and accuracy (see methods 5.1.4 and 5.1.5 for more details).
45
==PAGE:51==
The BP3NC (ESM-1b+SeqLen) models achieve AUC, AUC10 and MCC scores of 0.711, 0.116 and
0.220 respectively. The BP3C50ID FFNN (ESM-1b) has a similar performance of 0.709, 0.147 and 0.226
for AUC, AUC10 and MCC respectively. This is only a slightly worse, than what was seen earlier on
collapsed antigens in table 12, suggesting that it generalizes on non-collapsed antigens. It was expected
that training on ESM-1b encodings from non-collapsed antigens could give the BP3NC FFNN model
a performance boost above BP3C50ID (ESM-1b+SeqLen). However, they instead achieve very similar
performance, indicating that collapsing annotations did not signiﬁcantly aﬀect how well the ESM1-b
could realistically encode antigens (table 13).
Table 13: A FFNN was cross-validated on ESM-1b and sequence length encoded BP3NC dataset. The best
models in terms of validation CE loss and AUC score as well as the BP3C50ID FFNN (ESM-1+SeqLen) were
evaluated on the external BP3NC test set. The evaluative metrics used were AUC, AUC10, MCC, recall, precision,
F1-score and accuracy. The best score within a metric category is marked in bold.
Models
AUC
AUC10
MCC
Recall
Precision
F1-score
Accuracy
BP3NC (ESM-1b+SeqLen)
0.711
0.116
0.220
0.636
0.294
0.402
0.639
BP3C50ID (ESM-1b+SeqLen)
0.709
0.147
0.226
0.707
0.284
0.405
0.605
A ROC curve comparison reveals that both models obtain AUC scores above 0.7 for all folds.
The
BP3C50ID (ESM-1b+SeqLen) models fare better at the beginning of the curve. Oppositely, the BP3NC
(ESM-1b+SeqLen) models fare better at the middle and towards the end of the curve. This diﬀerence
is also indicated by BP3C50ID (ESM-1b+SeqLen) having a higher AUC10 value (ﬁgure 26).
(a) BP3NC (ESM-1b+SeqLen)
(b) BP3C50ID (ESM-1b+SeqLen)
Figure 26: ROC curve comparisons of BP3NC (ESM-1b+SeqLen) and BP3C50ID (ESM-1b+SeqLen) on the
BP3NC test set are similar, but diﬀer slightly in the beginning and middle-end. The x and y axis are the false and
true positive rates respectively (FPR and TPR). Dashed lines along the diagonal indicate a completely random
performance, and the remaining lines are the performances of diﬀerent fold models.
46
==PAGE:52==
6.1.9
Epitope probability scores are correlated with NetSurfP-2.0 computed relative sur-
face accessibility (RSA)
RSA is important for B-cell epitope prediction, because if a residue is not on the antigens surface, then
antibody interaction is not possible. It is therefore not far-fetched to hypothesize that residues with
low RSA are generally more unlikely to be epitope residues, and vice versa. This was investigated by
plotting the RSA values of all residues from the 15 antigen external test set against corresponding epitope
probabilities scores outputted by the BP3C50ID (ESM-1b+SeqLen) ensemble model. RSA values were
computed by uploading the 15 antigen sequences to the NetSurfP-2.0 online tool, which among other
things, computes RSA per residue [27].
Figure 27: RSA values for amino acids (x-axis) plotted against corresponding epitope probability scores (y-
axis) reveal a moderate positive correlation. These RSA values were computed using the NetSurfP-2.0 online
tool on the 15 antigen external test set. Corresponding positive epitope probability scores were computed by the
BP3C50ID (ESM-1b+SeqLen) ensemble model. Each dot corresponds to a residue, and blue or yellow indicate if
it is part of an epitope or not. A red rectangle encapsulates an area dense with non epitope residues, stretching
from 0.0-0.07 and 0.0-0.075 on the x- and y-axis. There are also two linear correlation plots for non-epitope
(yellow) and epitope residues (blue). Spearman and pearson correlation coeeﬃcents comparing RSA and epitope
probability scores was computed on all residues [27].
47
==PAGE:53==
In the external test set, there are 2163 non-epitope (blue) and 507 epitope (yellow) residues respectively.
Visually, there seems to be a positive correlation between residues RSA values and positive epitope
probability scores, which corroborates with our hypothesis. The trend is also validated by spearman
and pearson correlation coeﬃcients of 0.562 and 0.548 respectively. An interesting observation we can
make is the small area indicated by a red rectangle, which has a high density of nonepitope residues
receiving both low RSA and epitope probability scores. This area includes 265 non-epitope resiudes,
which is approximately 0.123 of the total non-epitope residues. These residues suggest a group of easy
to predict non-epitopes due to their very low RSA value. There are also 4 epitope residues in this group,
but this accounts for less than 1% of the total epitope residues. In general, it also seems that epitope
and non-epitope residues are diﬃcult to distinguish. To indicate that they are distinguishable, two linear
regressions for non-epitopes (blue) and epitope (yellow) residues are drawn. The epitope linear regression
generally spans across an area of higher positive epitope probability scores. Also as one would expect,
the average RSA value for epitope residues is higher than for non-epitope residues, 0.423 and 0.319
respectively. A two-sided t-test was also done for both RSA and epitope probability scores, to show that
epitope and non-epitope residues constitute two diﬀerent groups. The null hypothesis was that they were
not two diﬀerent groups. In both cases, very small p-values of 2.070e-40 and 3.707e-109 when comparing
RSA values and epitope probability scores respectively, suggest that it is very unlikely that they are of
the same group (ﬁgure 27).
48
==PAGE:54==
6.2
Ab-speciﬁc B-cell epitope prediction
An ab-speciﬁc FFNN was 5-fold cross-validated on ESM-1b encoded dataset containing 2043 AgAb com-
plexes. For comparison, a non-speciﬁc FFNN similar to those in the previous section ’6.1 B-cell epitope
prediction’ was trained only on the antigens of this dataset. The best performing model in terms of
validation CE loss and AUC score were re-evaluated on individual AgAb complexes of respective val-
idation splits, as well as an external test set of 85 AgAb complexes (see method section 5.2 for more
details). Overall, the ab-speciﬁc models obtain small validation performative increases compared to the
non-speciﬁc models, but this could not be observed on the external test set. Furthermore, a subsequent
study where the external test set antibodies were shuﬄed when evaluating ab-speciﬁc models, showed
very little change in performance (results not shown). This indicated that the signal for making epitope
predictions came entirely from antigen ESM-1b encodings, and that the proposed ab-speciﬁc approach
doesn’t work.
The ab-speciﬁc and non-speciﬁc FFNNs were evaluated on validation sets, and individual AUC scores
computed for each of the 2043 validation AgAb complexes. AUC scores above 0.5, 0.6, 0.7 or 0.75 were
counted. The ab-speciﬁc model obtains 63 more AgAb complexes with an AUC above 0.5 compared to
the non-speciﬁc model. It also obtains 444 complexes above 0.75, which is signiﬁcantly more than the
non-speciﬁc model which obtains 350. Validation AUC for both model types was above 0.7, but perfor-
mance is in favor of the ab-speciﬁc model, as they consistently perform better across all folds except fold
2. It is interesting that the MCC is generally not as good, as what was observed for models in ’B-cell
epitope prediction 6.1’, even though AUC scores are relatively decent. This could be due to no homlogy
reduction or epitope collapse strategy done for this dataset, and there are therefore potential annotative
inconsistencies (table 14 and table 15).
Table 14: Ab-speciﬁc and non-speciﬁc FFNNs were re-evaluated on 2043 validation AgAb complexes. AUC
scores for each AgAb complex was computed and scores above 0.5, 0.6, 0.7 and 0.75 counted.
AUC >
Nr. of AgAb complexes (Ab-speciﬁc)
Nr. of AgAb complexes (Non-speciﬁc)
0.5
1761
1698
0.6
1346
1265
0.7
716
593
0.75
444
350
Table 15: The best performing ab-speciﬁc and non-speciﬁc FFNN from each fold was evaluated on respective
validation splits in terms AUC and MCC. The best score within a metric category is marked in bold.
Folds
AB-speciﬁc AUC
AB-speciﬁc MCC
Non-speciﬁc AUC
Non-speciﬁc MCC
Fold1
0.670
0.132
0.662
0.122
Fold2
0.701
0.181
0.711
0.173
Fold3
0.715
0.174
0.710
0.165
Fold4
0.768
0.172
0.754
0.158
Fold5
0.701
0.170
0.692
0.154
On the external test set, the ab-speciﬁc and non-speciﬁc display very similar performance. AUC and
AUC10 scores are around 0.8 and 0.26 respectively. The MCC is also very similar, and the ab-speciﬁc
model is only slightly better. Precision is very poor, but by evaluating only on the top 200 positive
predictions, it increases signiﬁcantly.
For instance, if this is done for the ab-speciﬁc fold models it
increases to 0.31-0.385.
49
==PAGE:55==
Table 16: Ab-specifc and non-speciﬁc FFNN were cross-validated on the ab-speciﬁc dataset. The best models
in terms of validation CE loss and AUC score were evaluated on the external test set of 85 AgAb complexes.
Models
AUC
AUC10
MCC
Recall
Precision
F1-score
Accuracy
Ab-speciﬁc
0.800
0.262
0.233
0.749
0.160
0.264
0.675
Non-speciﬁc
0.799
0.265
0.211
0.777
0.144
0.243
0.624
External test set performance for all model folds was evaluated with ROC curves and a confusion matrix
of the best performing model in terms of MCC. Fold models obtain similar AUC performances of around
0.8, and this consistent test set generalization suggests that models are not overﬁt on respective training-
validation splits. Ensembles perform best, obtaining AUC scores of 0.8067 and 0.8056 for ab-speciﬁc and
non-speciﬁc setups. Overall, there is very little performance diﬀerence between ab-speciﬁc and non-
speciﬁc models. The same is true for their confusion matrices, where both model types display high true
negative rate and the positive recall captures the majority of epitope residues (ﬁgure 28).
(a) Ab-speciﬁc
(b) Ab-speciﬁc
(c) Non-speciﬁc
(d) Non-speciﬁc
Figure 28: A ROC curve comparison of Ab-specifc and non-speciﬁc FFNNs reveal an almost identical perfor-
mance across all folds. The x and y axis are the false and true positive rates respectively (FPR and TPR). Dashed
lines along the diagonal indicates a completely random performance, and the remaining lines are the performances
of diﬀerent fold models. Confusion matrices illustrate very similar threshold-dependent performances. The true
negatives or positives and predicted negatives or positives are on the vertical and horizontal axis respectively.
50
==PAGE:56==
7
Discussion
RFCs trained on BP3 datasets outperform those trained on BP2 datasets when evaluated on the 5 anti-
gen external test set. The BP3 datasets contain more antigens, and this is a likely explanation for a
performance boost. BLOSUM62 instead of sparse encodings seems to improve performance as it consis-
tently increases AUC scores. The MCC scores were not as consistent, as it actually decreases for BP3 and
BP3HR models when BLOSUM62 encoding are used. Despite this, the majority of models have better
MCC scores when BLOSUM62 encodings are used, and so there is more evidence pointing to BLOSUM62
being the more informative encoding. Homology reduction improved all MCC performances, but the same
improvements could not be consistently observed for AUC scores. The BP3C50ID dataset RFCs had the
best performance, achieving AUC and MCC scores of 0.638 and 0.169. And since the epitope collapse
strategy used for this dataset signiﬁcantly reduces homology, then this indicated that there was an eﬀect.
In any case, when moving forward with nerual networks we evaluated on a larger external test set of
15 antigens, and trained on non-homology or homology reduced datasets, BP3 or BP3C50ID respectively.
These evaluations showed that neural networks FFNN, CNN or LSTM consistently performed better
than RFCs, regardless of whether sparse, BLOSUM62 or ESM-1b encodings were used. These ﬁndings
are all strong indicators, that the more complex neural network setup is needed for B-cell epitope predic-
tion. Furthermore, models using ESM-1b encodings would always outperform their sparse or BLOSUM62
counterparts. This indicates that the inclusion of proteins language models, such as ESM-1b, can have
a profound performance eﬀect. The best performing neural networks were the FFNNs trained on single
residue ESM-1b encodings. This was unexpected, as it was our hypothesis that a neural network with
convolution or a recurring scheme such as the CNNs or LSTMs, would uncover time-series dependent
signals, making them superior to FFNNs. But perhaps the attention-based mechanism employed by the
ESM-1b transformer encodes each residue with a time-series dependent signal, that suﬃciently considers
adjacent residues. When comparing models trained on BP3 and BP3C50ID, it is apparent that the latter
models generally have better performance. As this was also true when comparing RFCs on BP2 and BP3
datasets, there is substantial evidence pointing to the homology reduction and epitope collapse strategy
being beneﬁcial for performance.
Evaluation on individual test antigens revealed a high performative variance. In the best and worst cases,
AUC scores were 0.903 and 0.472 respectively. For antigens, 4qciD and 5th9A, it seemed that threshold-
dependent performances, such as MCC, were poor relative to their AUC score. A investigation of how
thresholds optimized for individual test antigens, diﬀer from the threshold used on the entire test set,
showed larger diﬀerences for 4qciD and 5th9A, indicating that it is diﬃcult to pick a threshold that ﬁts
all antigens. This also suggests that a more rigorous classiﬁcation threshold tuning could improve results.
But if these models are to be deployed as some B-cell epitope predictive service, then it is perhaps better
to avoid this issue altogether, by using a variable threshold similar to how it is currently done for the
BepiPred2 predictive service. It was also observed that for antigens, 4xakB and 7jumA, the BLOSUM62
models performed better than the ESM-1b models. It could be that the ESM-1b variants learn something
that does not generalize on these antigens, but this is entirely speculative. Even so, it was investigated
what performance could be achieved if both BLOSUM62 and ESM-1b encodings were used. Compared to
when only ESM-1b encodings were used, performance on aforementioned antigens and the entire 15 test
antigens increased. The performance increases on the entire test set were small, but it seemed to signiﬁ-
cantly increase AUC10 scores. Future models could therefore include both ESM-1b and BLOSUM62 [24].
Furthermore, we found that performance improved by adding antigen sequence lengths to ESM-1b en-
codings. This was probably due to models learning the correlation between sequence length and epitope
51
==PAGE:57==
residue ratios. That is, smaller and larger antigens will have more and less eptiopes relative to their
size respectively. The resulting model, FFNN BP3C50ID (ESM-1b+SeqLen), obtained the overall best
performance of AUC, AUC10 and MCC of 0.714, 0.143 and 0.241 respectively. Also, a visual inspection
in PyMOL indicated higher precision for the top-20 predicted epitope residues, as well as illustrating
that predictions included both linear and conformational epitopes.
The observed superiority of BP3C50ID over BP3 models is likely in part due to the epitope collapse strat-
egy, which removes instances where similar sequences can have very diﬀerent epitope annotations. The
drawback of this, however, is that the resulting antigens contain insertions that could impact how trained
models generalize on non-collapsed antigens. This was tested by reevaluating the FFNN BP3C50ID
(ESM-1b+SeqLen) on the non-collapsed BP3NC 15 antigen external test set. Comparison to a FFNN
trained on the BP3NC dataset, showed no signiﬁcant performative diﬀerence. This indicated that FFNN
BP3C50ID (ESM-1b+SeqLen) models generalize on non-collapsed antigens, and that sequence collapse
does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect how well the ESM-1b transformer can encode antigens. Even so, it would
be interesting to do a more thorough investigation of how collapsing at varying sequence identities cre-
ates insertions, and what performance is obtained when resulting models are evaluated on non-collapsed
antigens.
A positive correlation was established between NetSurfP-2.0 predicted RSA values and correspond-
ing epitope probability scores, outputted by the BP3C50ID (ESM-1b+SeqLen) ensemble model. In this
study, a group of easy-to-predict negatives with low values of aforementioned scores was found. Antibody
interaction with residues not present at an antigens surface should not be possible, and low RSA values
suggest that residues are likely not at an antigens surface. So this ﬁnding was a nice display of how such a
biological fact, is actually something that can be detected by protein language and neural network models.
Ab-speciﬁc models were also attempted and performance compared to non-speciﬁc models. There seemed
to be some small performance increases on the validation set, but external test set performance was more
or less on par. Furthermore, when shuﬄing antibodies during external test set evaluation, it did not
impact performance. These ﬁndings suggest that the models are not actually using antibodies, and are
instead, solely using antigen ESM-1b encodings to make B-cell epitope predictions. Moreover, as a side
note, we were concerned about partition 1 having 6 times more AgAb complexes, and so considered
using a critical node detection approach to remove AgAb complexes, that force clusters to be merged.
However, as the resulting fold models had consistent external test set performance, we did not pursue
this. In retrospect, the approach used for creating antibody-speciﬁc models was too simple. By averag-
ing all light and heavy chain residue ESM-1b encodings into 2 separate 1280 vectors, it can very easily
drown out the signal that represents antibody speciﬁcity. Another issue, is that the densenets used to
extract light and heavy chain features cannot capture mutual signals between light and heavy chains. It
would have been interesting to instead have located and used light or heavy chain CDR region ESM-1b
encodings, as the signal for antibody speciﬁcity would have been stronger. An interesting approach more
likely to succeed, would be too use the light attention approach introduced in the paper "Light Attention
Predicts Protein Location from the Language of Life" on light and heavy chains separately. In short,
it is a CNN-like neural network architecture that can attend and potentially learn which light or heavy
chain amino acid patches are important for B-cell epitope prediction. Alas, given the short timespan of
the project, we were unable to explore these possibilities and it is a theme for future research [56].
52
==PAGE:58==
8
Conclusion
Our hypothesis that protein langauge and neural network models could improve B-cell epitope prediction
was conﬁrmed. The best performing model was a FFNN trained on ESM-1b encodings, which obtained
AUC, AUC10 and MCC of 0.714, 0.143 and 0.241 on 15 antigen external test set. In comparison, the
best performing baseline RFC trained on BLOSUM62 encodings obtained AUC, AUC10 and MCC of
0.611, 0.096 and 0.129. Moreover, individual test antigen evaluations revealed that thresholds were not
optimally set, and so a more rigorous threshold ﬁnetuning could perhaps further improve performances.
A visual analysis showed that predictions constituted both linear and conformational B-cell epitopes,
which is impressive as models were constructed from primary sequences alone. We were also able to
conﬁrm a homology reduction and epitope collapse strategy that seemingly improves performance. In
addition, we presented evidence that this strategy does not aﬀect model performance, when evaluating
on antigens that have not been collapsed. We have also attempted to construct ab-speciﬁc models, but
the proposed method did not fare better than non-speciﬁc models. Permitted more time, we would
have attempted more sophisticated methods that used CDR regions and attention-based mechanisms.
Regardless, the work presented here strongly suggests that protein language and neural network models
improve B-cell epitope prediction.
53
==PAGE:59==
9
References
References
[1] (2016).
B
lymphocytes
and
humoral
immunity.
https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
microbiology/chapter/b-lymphocytes-and-humoral-immunity/. Accessed: 2022-07-01.
[2] (2020).
Blog
on
convolution
neural
networks.
https://developersbreach.com/
convolution-neural-network-deep-learning/. Accessed: 2022-04-01.
[3] (2021). The Innate Immune System: An Overview. [Online; accessed 2022-01-06].
[4] Alix, A. J. (1999). Predictive estimation of protein linear epitopes by using the program people.
Vaccine, 18(3-4):311–314.
[5] Allman, D., Wilmore, J. R., and Gaudette, B. T. (2019). The continuing story of t-cell independent
antibodies. Immunological Reviews, 288(1):128–135.
[6] Andersen, P., Nielsen, M., and Lund, O. (2006). Prediction of residues in discontinuous b-cell epitopes
using protein 3d structures. Protein Science, 15(11):2558–2567.
[7] Ansari, H. R. and Raghava, G. P. (2010). Identiﬁcation of conformational b-cell epitopes in an antigen
from its primary sequence. Immunome Research, 6(1):6.
[8] Berman, H. M., Westbrook, J., Feng, Z., Gilliland, G., Bhat, T. N., Weissig, H., Shindyalov, I. N.,
and Bourne, P. E. (2000). The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Research, 28(1):235–242.
[9] Blythe, M. J. and Flower, D. R. (2005). Benchmarking b cell epitope prediction: Underperformance
of existing methods. Protein Science, 14(1):246–248.
[10] C. Edgar, R. (2010). Muscle: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high throughput.
[11] Chen, W. H., Sun, P. P., Lu, Y., Guo, W. W., Huang, Y. X., and Ma, Z. Q. (2011). Mimopro: A
more eﬃcient web-based tool for epitope prediction using phage display libraries. Bmc Bioinformatics,
12(1):199.
[12] Chicco, D. and Jurman, G. (2020). The advantages of the matthews correlation coeﬃcient (mcc)
over f1 score and accuracy in binary classiﬁcation evaluation. BMC Genomics, 21.
[13] Consortium, T. U. (2020). UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase in 2021. Nucleic Acids
Research, 49(D1):D480–D489.
[14] Dall’Acqua, W., Goldman, E. R., Lin, W., Teng, C., Tsuchiya, D., Li, H., Ysern, X., Braden, B. C.,
Li, Y., Smith-Gill, S. J., and Mariuzza, R. A. (1998). A mutational analysis of binding interactions in
an antigen-antibody protein-protein complex. Biochemistry, 37(22):7981–7991.
[15] Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. (2019). Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirec-
tional transformers for language understanding.
[16] Dranoﬀ, G. (2004). Cytokines in cancer pathogenesis and cancer therapy. Nature Reviews Cancer,
4(1):11–22.
[17] Dunbar, J., Krawczyk, K., Leem, J., Baker, T., Fuchs, A., Georges, G., Shi, J., and Deane, C. M.
(2013). SAbDab: the structural antibody database. Nucleic Acids Research, 42(D1):D1140–D1146.
54
==PAGE:60==
[18] E. Hinton, G., Srivastava, N., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and R. Salakhutdinov, R. (2014).
Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors.
[19] EL-Manzalawy, Y., Dobbs, D., and Honavar, V. (2010). Predicting linear b-cell epitopes using string
kernels.
[20] Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. (1997).
Long short-term memory.
Neural computation,
9(8):1735–1780.
[21] HOPP, T. and WOODS, K. (1983). A computer-program for predicting protein antigenic determi-
nants. Molecular Immunology, 20(4):483–489.
[22] Hopp, T. P. and Woods, K. R. (1981). Prediction of protein antigenic determinants from amino
acid sequences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
78(6):3824–3828.
[23] Huang, J., Gutteridge, A., Honda, W., and Kanehisa, M. (2006). Mimox: A web tool for phage
display based epitope mapping. Bmc Bioinformatics, 7(1):451.
[24] Jespersen, M. C., Peters, B., Nielsen, M., and Marcatili, P. (2017).
Bepipred-2.0: improving
sequence-based b-cell epitope prediction using conformational epitopes.
Nucleic Acids Research,
45(W1):W24–W29.
[25] Kambayashi, T. and Laufer, T. M. (2014). Atypical mhc class ii-expressing antigen-presenting cells:
Can anything replace a dendritic cell? Nature Reviews Immunology, 14(11):719–730.
[26] Klausen, M. S., Anderson, M. V., Jespersen, M. C., Nielsen, M., and Marcatili, P. (2015). Lyra, a
webserver for lymphocyte receptor structural modeling. Nucleic Acids Research, 43(W1):W349–W355.
[27] Klausen, M. S., Jespersen, M. C., Nielsen, H., Jensen, K. K., Jurtz, V. I., Sønderby, C. K., Sommer,
M. O. A., Winther, O., Nielsen, M., Petersen, B., and Marcatili, P. (2019). Netsurfp-2.0: Improved
prediction of protein structural features by integrated deep learning. Proteins: Structure, Function,
and Bioinformatics, 87(6):520–527.
[28] Kolaskar, A. S. and Tongaonkar, P. C. (1990). A semi-empirical method for prediction of antigenic
determinants on protein antigens. Febs Letters, 276(1-2):172–174.
[29] Krawczyk, K., Liu, X., Baker, T., Shi, J., and Deane, C. M. (2014).
Improving b-cell epitope
prediction and its application to global antibody-antigen docking. Bioinformatics, 30(16):2288–2294.
[30] Kulkarni-Kale, U., Bhosle, S., and Kolaskar, A. S. (2005). Cep: A conformational epitope prediction
server. Nucleic Acids Research, 33(2):W168–W171.
[31] KULLBACK, S. and LEIBLER, R. (1951). On information and suﬃciency. Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, 22(1):79–86.
[32] Liang, S., Zheng, D., Standley, D. M., Yao, B., Zacharias, M., and Zhang, C. (2010). Epsvr and
epmeta: Prediction of antigenic epitopes using support vector regression and multiple server results.
Bmc Bioinformatics, 11(1):381.
[33] Lins, L., Thomas, A., and Brasseur, R. (2003). Analysis of accessible surface of residues in proteins.
Protein Science, 12(7):1406–1417.
55
==PAGE:61==
[34] Madeira, F., Park, Y. M., Lee, J., Buso, N., Gur, T., Madhusoodanan, N., Basutkar, P., Tivey, A.
R. N., Potter, S. C., Finn, R. D., and Lopez, R. (2019). The embl-ebi search and sequence analysis
tools apis in 2019. Nucleic acids research, 47(W1):W636—W641.
[35] Mayrose, I., Penn, O., Erez, E., Rubinstein, N. D., Shlomi, T., Freund, N. T., Bublil, E. M., Ruppin,
E., Sharan, R., Gershoni, J. M., Martz, E., and Pupko, T. (2007). Pepitope: Epitope mapping from
aﬃnity-selected peptides. Bioinformatics, 23(23):3244–3246.
[36] McCulloch, W. S. and Pitts, W. (1943). A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity.
The Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 5(4):115–133.
[37] Melo, F. (2013). Area under the ROC Curve, pages 38–39. Springer New York, New York, NY.
[38] Min, S., Lee, B., and Yoon, S. (2017). Deep learning in bioinformatics. Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics,
18(5):851–869.
[39] Murphy, K., Weaver, C., and Janeway, C. A. (2017a). Janeway’s immunobiology, pages 1–106.
Garland Science,.
[40] Murphy, K., Weaver, C., and Janeway, C. A. (2017b). Janeway’s immunobiology, pages 146–148.
Garland Science,.
[41] Murphy, K., Weaver, C., and Janeway, C. A. (2017c). Janeway’s immunobiology, pages 141–142.
Garland Science,.
[42] Needleman, S. B. and Wunsch, C. D. (1970). A general method applicable to the search for simi-
larities in the amino acid sequence of two proteins. Journal of Molecular Biology, 48(3):443–453.
[43] Olah,
C.
(2015).
Understanding
lstm
networks.
https://colah.github.io/posts/
2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/.
[44] PARKER, D. (1993). T-cell - dependent b-cell activation. Annual Review of Immunology, 11(1):331–
360.
[45] Pellequer, J. L. and Westhof, E. (1993). Preditop: a program for antigenicity prediction. Journal
of Molecular Graphics, 11(3):204–10, 191–2.
[46] Reynisson, B., Alvarez, B., Paul, S., Peters, B., and Nielsen, M. (2020).
Netmhcpan-4.1 and
netmhciipan-4.0: improved predictions of mhc antigen presentation by concurrent motif deconvolution
and integration of ms mhc eluted ligand data. Nucleic Acids Research, 48(1):W449–W454.
[47] Rives, A., Meier, J., Sercu, T., Goyal, S., Lin, Z., Liu, J., Guo, D., Ott, M., Zitnick, C. L., Ma, J.,
and Fergus, R. (2021). Biological structure and function emerge from scaling unsupervised learning to
250 million protein sequences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 118(15):e2016239118.
[48] Rubinstein, N. D., Mayrose, I., Martz, E., and Pupko, T. (2009).
Epitopia: A web-server for
predicting b-cell epitopes. Bmc Bioinformatics, 10(1):1471.
[49] S Negi, S. and Braun, W. (2010). Automated detection of conformational epitopes using phage
display peptide sequences.
[50] Saha, S. and Raghava, G. P. (2006). Prediction of continuous b-cell epitopes in an antigen using
recurrent neural network. Proteins: Structure, Function and Genetics, 65(1):40–48.
56
==PAGE:62==
[51] Sanchez-Trincado, J. L., Gomez-Perosanz, M., and Reche, P. A. (2017). Fundamentals and methods
for t- and b-cell epitope prediction. Journal of Immunology Research, 2017:2680160.
[52] Schrödinger, LLC (2015). The PyMOL molecular graphics system, version 1.8.
[53] Sebina, I. and Pepper, M. (2018). Humoral immune responses to infection: common mechanisms
and unique strategies to combat pathogen immune evasion tactics. Current Opinion in Immunology,
51:46–54.
[54] Sela-Culang, I., Ashkenazi, S., Peters, B., and Ofran, Y. (2015). Pease: Predicting b-cell epitopes
utilizing antibody sequence. Bioinformatics, 31(8):1313–1315.
[55] Singh, H., Ansari, H. R., and Raghava, G. P. (2013). Improved method for linear b-cell epitope
prediction using antigen’s primary sequence. Plos One, 8(5):e62216.
[56] Stärk, H., Dallago, C., Heinzinger, M., and Rost, B. (2021). Light attention predicts protein location
from the language of life. bioRxiv.
[57] Steinegger, M. and Söding, J. (2017). Mmseqs2 enables sensitive protein sequence searching for the
analysis of massive data sets. Nature Biotechnology, 35(11):1026–1028.
[58] Sun, J., Wu, D., Xu, T., Wang, X., Xu, X., Tao, L., Li, Y. X., and Cao, Z. W. (2009). Seppa:
A computational server for spatial epitope prediction of protein antigens. Nucleic Acids Research,
37(2):W612–W616.
[59] Sweredoski, M. J. and Baldi, P. (2008). Pepito: improved discontinuous b-cell epitope prediction
using multiple distance thresholds and half sphere exposure.
[60] Tay, M. Z., Wiehe, K., and Pollara, J. (2019). Antibody dependent cellular phagocytosis in antiviral
immune responses. Frontiers in Immunology, 10:332.
[61] Ting, K. M. (2016). Confusion Matrix, pages 1–1. Springer US, Boston, MA.
[62] Van Regenmortel, M. H. V. (2019). What is a b cell epitope. Hiv/aids: Immunochemistry, Reduc-
tionism and Vaccine Design, pages 3–15.
[63] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., and
Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need.
[64] Vignali, D. A., Collison, L. W., and Workman, C. J. (2008). How regulatory t cells work. Nature
Reviews Immunology, 8(7):523–532.
[65] Woof, J. M. and Burton, D. R. (2004). Human antibody-fc receptor interactions illuminated by
crystal structures. Nature Reviews Immunology, 4(2):89–99.
[66] Xu, X. L., Sun, J., Liu, Q., Wang, X. J., Xu, T. L., Zhu, R. X., Wu, D., and Cao, Z. W. (2010). Eval-
uation of spatial epitope computational tools based on experimentally-conﬁrmed dataset for protein
antigens. Chinese Science Bulletin, 55(20):2169–2174.
[67] Yao, B., Zhang, L., Liang, S., and Zhang, C. (2012).
Svmtrip: A method to predict antigenic
epitopes using support vector machine to integrate tri-peptide similarity and propensity. Plos One,
7(9):e45152.
57
==PAGE:63==
10
Appendix
10.1
Extra dataset statistics
The average sequence length across datasets BP2, BP2HR, BP3, BP3HR and BP3C50ID are 222.1 232.0
213.6, 224.2 and 238.4. Average sequence length is similar across datasets, ranging from 213.6 - 238.4
(table 5). However, this average can be misleading and skewered by long sequences. Individual sequence
length counts binned into intervals and divided by counts of all other intervals, shows that the 3 most
common sequence length intervals are actually 100-150, 150-200 and 50-100 (ﬁgure 29).
Figure 29: Sequence lengths were counted and divided by the counts all other sequence length within a respective
dataset. These count ratios are shown on y-axis, and the corresponding sequence lengths on the x-axis.
Epitope residue frequency relative to other residues within the same respective datasets shows a consensus
for amino acids serine (S), glutamic acid (E), lysine (K), aspartic acid(D), arginine (R) (table 17).
58
==PAGE:64==
Table 17: Epitope frequencies show that the top 6 most frequent amino acid witihn each dataset are serine (S),
glutamic acid (E), lysine (K), aspartic acid(D), arginine (R). These are marked in bold and other freqeunt amino
acids are glycine (G), asparagine (N), tryptophan (T). Frequencies were computed by counting epitopes for each
amino acid residue, and then dividing by the total epitope residue count within each respective dataset.
AA
BP2
BP2HR
BP3
BP3HR
BP3C50ID
L
6.184%
6.184%
5.948%
6.247%
6.060%
G
6.426%
6.455%
6.606%
5.922%
5.691%
A
4.526%
4.694%
4.162%
4.287%
4.354%
V
4.768%
4.830%
4.286%
4.175%
4.372%
S
6.985%
6.928%
6.675%
6.959%
7.130%
I
4.917%
4.649%
3.961%
3.718%
3.847%
T
6.091%
6.161%
6.565%
6.187%
6.263%
E
7.432%
7.560%
7.569%
8.269%
8.191%
F
3.651%
3.746%
3.331%
3.423%
3.385%
K
7.357%
7.290%
7.853%
7.995%
7.868%
N
5.793%
5.529%
6.814%
6.176%
6.282%
D
6.426%
6.432%
6.849%
6.938%
6.909%
P
4.973%
5.236%
5.180%
5.465%
5.378%
R
7.152%
7.019%
7.153%
6.999%
7.093%
Q
4.973%
4.920%
5.187%
5.323%
5.295%
Y
4.004%
3.882%
4.134%
4.043%
4.031%
C
1.639%
1.760%
1.530%
1.554%
1.457%
M
1.881%
1.828%
1.593%
1.707%
1.670%
W
2.254%
2.234%
1.870%
1.788%
1.790%
H
2.570%
2.663%
2.735%
2.824%
2.933%
Table 18: Amino acid frequencies across BP2, BP2HR, BP3, BP3HR and BPC50ID. Amino acid frequencies
were computed by counting all 20 amino acid residues in and then dividing by the total amino acid count for the
respective dataset.
AA
BP2
BP2HR
BP3
BP3HR
BP3C50ID
L
8.743%
8.873%
8.432%
8.743%
8.777%
G
7.168%
7.240%
6.996%
7.057%
6.932%
A
6.355%
6.494%
6.201%
6.374%
6.480%
V
6.896%
6.962%
6.858%
6.854%
6.895%
S
7.023%
7.032%
6.894%
7.071%
7.146%
I
5.584%
5.529%
5.587%
5.427%
5.404%
T
5.990%
5.937%
6.464%
6.158%
6.089%
E
6.025%
5.970%
5.886%
5.970%
5.945%
F
4.160%
4.245%
4.090%
4.181%
4.168%
K
5.598%
5.585%
5.695%
5.639%
5.683%
N
5.136%
4.828%
5.529%
4.994%
4.977%
D
5.051%
5.149%
5.145%
5.404%
5.452%
P
4.829%
4.914%
4.844%
4.842%
4.790%
R
4.757%
4.770%
4.547%
4.608%
4.701%
Q
3.944%
3.968%
3.919%
4.041%
4.090%
Y
3.791%
3.772%
3.630%
3.696%
3.693%
C
2.856%
2.717%
3.163%
2.876%
2.736%
M
1.870%
1.845%
1.826%
1.863%
1.882%
W
1.924%
1.880%
1.906%
1.826%
1.751%
H
2.301%
2.288%
2.388%
2.376%
2.408%
59
==PAGE:65==
10.2
FFNN (ESM-1b+SeqLen) CE or AUC and epitope residue ratio corre-
lation plots
(a)
(b)
Figure 30: Validation antigen epitope ratios (x-axis) plotted against Clus50ID FFNN (ESM-1b+SeqLen) CE
losses (y-axis) uncover a strong linear positive correlation.
The same epitope ratios (x-axis) plotted against
FFNN (ESM-1b+SeqLen) AUC scores (y-axis) show that the majority of antigens obtain performance better
than random.
60
