==PAGE:1==
Master of Science
Master Thesis in Design & Innovation Engeneering
Title: Integrating electromechanical prop-
erties into polymer needles
Author: Caroline Giessing & Rune Spiegelhauer Ottesen
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Prof. Torben Lenau
Co-supervisors: M.Sc. Eng. Allan Wandall
DTU Mechanics
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Niels Koppels Allé
Building 404
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
As we live in a world, where metal materials are increasingly scarce, the single-use
product culture must be revised. However, some fields of work, such as the world of
medicine, depend on single-use items to minimise the risk of contamination without
relying on expensive sterilisation processes, which are more expensive economically,
environmentally and time-wise.
This thesis will examine the innovation potential in implementing composite poly-
mers as the electroconductive material in existing metal needle electrodes used in the
field of neurophysiological examinations. The project is conducted in collaboration
with Ambu A/S, why product analysis of needle electrodes, supplied by Ambu A/S,
will set the base for an analysis of technical requirements for existing needle elec-
trodes concerning requirements for the clinical application. Three electroconductive
3D filaments are selected for testing and validation of electromechanical properties
in the scope of neurophysiology. Finally, the thesis answers the following hypothesis,
which summarises the motivation and target of the conducted study:
Existing metal needles/electrodes can be replaced with conducting polymer needles,
& Electrical properties of conducting polymer composites are suﬀicient for neurologi-
cal measurements.
Carbon-reinforced polymer (ProtoPasta), Copper reinforced polymer (Electrifi) and
Graphene reinforced polymer (Koltron G1) were discussed and tested.
Time and
frequency-dependent resistance tests are conducted to test for pure resistance. This
was found in Electrifi and ProtoPasta. Koltron G1 showed instability thus deselected
at an early stage.
A Noise test was conducted, testing the inherent noise of the
conductive core. This test concluded an insignificant noise, empathising the poten-
tial of the polymer composite. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was
performed on a batch of ProtoPasta test needles to test measuring properties in the
electrode-body fluid interface proving unwanted capacitance with a phase shift angle
from -84 to -2 degrees. Thus, the electrode potential must be considered optimised
in future research. It is concluded that conductive polymer composites have the right
behaviour and electrical properties as-is. However, the material composition could
be optimised for a better interface to increase capacitance and impedance.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Throughout the conduction of this thesis, we have received a great deal of support,
assistance and expertise.
Thanks to our supervisor Torben Anker Lenau, Associate Professor, Department
of Mechanical Engineering, for the weekly meetings, constructive feedback and great
support through the entire process. Furthermore, thanks to our co-supervisor Allan
Wandall, research assistant, Department of Mechanical Engineering, for sharing your
oﬀice, patience and skills especially prototyping and guidance through research.
Thanks to Ambu A/S, for taking part in this project, and for making your prod-
ucts, facilities and expertise available throughout the study. Thanks to Thea Rank
Falkenberg, Director, Front-End and Technology Development and Mike Hoff Hagel-
skjær, Front-End PMD Manager, for participating in milestone meetings and offering
your time, expertise, and support.
Thanks to Daniel Hansen, R&D Engineer, Ambu and Martin Nors Skov, R&D Engi-
neer, Ambu, for supporting and helping us with testing and validation. We wouldn’t
have been able to reach the level of testing without your assistance and expertise. So
thanks for that.
Thanks to Martin Ballegaard, Clinical Associate Professor, for introducing and demon-
strating the clinical use of neurophysiological products. Thank you for your time,
expertise and cooperation.
Finally, we would like to thank Kaj-Åge Henneberg, Associate Professor, Department
of Health Technology, DTU & Benny Edelsten, Laboratory Engineer, for helping us
with technical knowledge and expertise. Furthermore, thank you for putting equip-
ment at our service.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
KPI’s
Key point indicators
CNS
Central Nervous System
PNS
Peripheral Nervous System
EEG
Electroencephalogram
EMG
Electromyography
ENG
Electroneurography
MUAP
Motor Unit Action Potential
MEP
Motor Evoked Potentials
AC
Alternating current
DC
Direct current
R
Resistance
I
Current
V
Voltage/Volts
C
Capacitance
Z
Impedance
TM
Test Masterial
VNI
Volume neutral impedance
PP
Protopasta Preform
EP
Electrify Preform
Phi
Phase shift angle, Φ
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abbreviations
v
Contents
vii
Introduction
1
0.0.1
Report structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1
Background & needle electrode requirements
5
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Historical development of syringes, needle and electrodes . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Neurophysiology & Biological signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3.1
Biomedical signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.4
Biosensors and clinical scenery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
1.4.1
Clinical application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.4.2
Clinical site and instrumentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.5
Product analysis of Needle electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.5.1
Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.5.2
Needle electrodes at Ambu A/S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.6
Findings and conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2
Electrical properties & polymer composites
25
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.2
Electrical circuits in relation to neurophysiology . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.2.1
The role of electrical impedance in needle electrodes . . . . . .
31
2.3
The electrochemical interface between needle electrodes and biological
fluids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.4
Material selection of polymer composites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.4.1
Introducing polymer composites
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.4.2
Description of selected materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
2.4.2.1
Proto-Pasta - Composite Conductive Fiber PLA . . .
40
2.4.2.2
Koltron G1 – Graphen reinforced polymer resin
. . .
42
2.4.2.3
Electrifi – Copper reinforced biodegradable polyester
44
2.5
Findings and conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3
Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
49
3.1
Test of material properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:11==
Contents
ix
3.1.1
Testing selected polymer composites for pure resistance
. . . .
51
3.2
The process of prototyping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.3
The role of processing for material properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
3.4
Test of impedance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
3.5
Noice test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
3.6
Findings and conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
3.7
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Conclusion
81
Appendices
83
AppendixA
Expert interview with Mike Haglskjær
85
AppendixB
Expert interview with Martin Ballegaard
87
AppendixC
Data analysis - Material Resistance
89
AppendixD
Dimensions on tested samples and benchmark needle
91
AppendixE
The role of processing
95
AppendixF
Electrochemichal Impedance Test
97
AppendixG
Data analysis - Noise Test
99
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Introduction
This paper is the written part of our final master thesis from The Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, Master of Science in Design & innovation engineering.
The motivation behind this study is to investigate whether electro-conductive nee-
dles can be innovated, designed, and produced by leveraging new research and knowl-
edge on electrically conductive polymer composites, inspired by the technology behind
polymer needles and existing electrically conductive polymers and -composites.
The design of needle electrodes, seen on the market today, which dates back to the
1970s, are single-use items and metal-based. The development of the electrodes has
been standing still for decades while materials such as metals, e.g. steel and silver,
are becoming more and more scarce as the world drains the planet of raw materials
which can’t be reproduced. Thus new researchers must investigate where these scarce
metals can be spared and substituted with alternative materials.
The introduction of electroconductive composite polymers offers a unique opportu-
nity for an innovative solution to an otherwise stagnant product. Electro-conductive
polymers and polymer composites are today seen used for 3D printed circuit boards,
smart textiles and other smart-technology products requiring electro-conductive ma-
terial properties. This study will investigate the ability and appliance of polymer
composites to act as the main material in needle electrodes used as biosensors in the
field of neurophysiology. This study is conducted in collaboration with Ambu A/S,
thus Ambu’s product portfolio of neurophysiological needle electrodes will be analysed
with a focus on technical requirements, clinical needs and gaining relevant knowledge.
These needle electrodes will act as a gateway into the world of neurophysiology and
as the base of comparison when the Prototyped composite needle electrodes are made
and will help set some key point indicators for the composite needles to follow.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
Through three sub-reports, resp. Part 1, 2 and 3, the following hypothesis will be
tested and discussed.
• Existing metal needles/electrodes can be replaced with conducting polymer nee-
dles.
• Electrical properties of conducting polymer composites are suﬀicient for neuro-
logical measurements.
0.0.1
Report structure
The report is divided into 3 parts. Each part is assigned a series of research questions
which are continuously examined and finally answered. A final discussion, based on
all three parts, will conclude the project by answering the initial project hypotheses.
Part 1: Background & needle electrode requirements
• What is the area of application?
• What products are represented at Ambu A/S?
• What are the technical requirements for needle electrodes?
Part 2: Explanation of electrical properties & polymer composites
• What does an bio electrical circuit consist of, and how does it impact neuro-
physiological examinations?
• What are the immediate electrical properties of the selected polymer composites
and how do they compare with metals?
• What polymer composites are suited for testing as needle electrodes?
Part 3: Test & validation of polymer needles
• How does processing affect material properties?
• Does the prototype test needles perform as a pure resistor?
• What is the impedance of the composite needles tested in and out of the envi-
ronment?
==PAGE:15==
Introduction
3
• What is the inherent noise of composite needles tested in the environment?
Discussion and conclusion
• How does the tested composite perform as needle electrode?
• What alternative materials could be of interest in future studies?
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Background & needle
electrode
requirements
1.1
Introduction
Part 1 conducts a sociotechnical study, expert interviews and literature research were
done to examine the field of neurophysiology, with curiosity towards needle electrodes.
The needs for needle electrodes, why and how they are used and further examination
of existing products, including the main functionalities and requirements that precede
their designs and further explanation of the application of materials will try to be
answered throughout part 1. Thus the following research questions are defined.
• What is the area of application?
• Which products are represented at Ambu A/S?
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Background & needle electrode requirements
• What are the technical requirements for needle electrodes?
Part 1 is summarised by a list of key point indicators (KPI’s) including the main
needs and technical requirements for needle electrodes which will form the foundation
of the further work in Part 2 and 3
In the 2nd part technicalities and material properties are further elaborated and
detailed in relation to existing needles electrodes and prototype composite needle
electrodes. The results of this section will also be used as a basis for experiments
performed in Part 3.
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Historical development of syringes, needle and electrodes
7
1.2
Historical development of syringes, needle and
electrodes
Neuro conduction studies (NCS) and electromyography (EMG) are linked to the dis-
covery of electricity (1600-1700), followed by the learning that nerves and muscle
tissues can react to, and produce, electricity (1770 by Galvani) [1, 2]. From 1929,
studies on measuring and detecting motor unit action potential (MUAP) in animals,
and later in humans, from healthy and injured nerves, was undertaken by neurophys-
iologists and later by neurologists [1]. Fig.1.1 show Galvani’s experiment that proves
electrical activity without metals involved. Modern neurophysiological examinations
benefits from the equipment developed capable of detecting and amplifying small
bio-electrical currents.
Figure 1.1. Experiments by Galvani ”(a) The 1794 experiment: when the severed nerve
end touches the muscle, the leg contracts. (b) The 1797 experiment: when the severed right
sciatic nerve end touches the intact left sciatic nerve, both legs contract” [2]
Today we have a great variety of specified equipment and instruments designed
and specialised to examine diseases and damaged nerves of the nervous system. The
most commonly used sensors are surface electrodes and needle electrodes applied to
measure the muscle unit activity non-invasivly and invasivly, respectively. However, it
has come to our attention that the danish produced needle electrodes have not been
reiterated or redesigned since the 1970’s which motivates this study to investigate
how needle electrodes could join the innovation of outsourcing metals in the medical
industry despite their well functioning state.
Modern tendencies in the medical industry are to convert from metals to plastics,
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Background & needle electrode requirements
to reduce costs, make lighter and smaller products, utilise the flexibility and precision
of new plastic processing and optimised sterilisation [3]. This transition is more com-
plex when substituting metals with plastics, in sensors and electrodes, as the material
properties of metals have a sublime electrical conductivity where polymers are known
for good insulating properties. Although, the evolution of polymer composites are
opening up for new materials which may have the potential to substitute the metals
in electrodes and sensors and still be able to detect small and weak signals as those
measured from the nervous system.
1.3
Neurophysiology & Biological signals
Neurophysiology is the specialisation of structure, function and disorders of the hu-
man nervous system where electrodes and sensors are used to monitor and locate
activity. The human nervous system is a highly complex system that control, regu-
late and coordinate our body activity, senses and movements. The nervous system
consists of two main systems, the central nervous system, CNS, and the peripheral
nervous system, PNS. The brain and spine form the CNS, in which the electrical sig-
nals fluctuate to and from which the PNS is responsible for transporting via sensory
receptors and neural elements. [4,5].
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Neurophysiology & Biological signals
9
==PAGE:22==
10
1 Background & needle electrode requirements
Figure 1.2. Illustration and text is made by Rune S. Ottesen & Caroline Giessing with
knowledge and inspiration from following references [4–6], [Appendix A, B]
1.3.1
Biomedical signals
An electrical sensor, in neurophysiology, has the purpose of sensing the biological
signals in muscles and nerves. By reading these signals, one can monitor and locate
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Neurophysiology & Biological signals
11
failures on the nervous system based on muscle activity, brain activity or simulations
of vision, smell, impulses, and reflexes.
Biomedical signals can be classified within six physical natures being chemical,
optical, magnetic, electric, thermal and acoustic signals [7]. The biological signals,
measured from needle electrodes, are classified as electrical signals.
The electric signals, which are also called bio-electric signals or bio-potentials,
originate from the electric potential released due to the intra- and extracellular ion
currents produced in the organs or cells (muscle/nerve) [7]. The ion concentration
gradients causing these bio-electric signals are Na+, Cl−and K+ as seen in Fig.1.3.
Figure 1.3. The ion currents producing electric signals are caused by Na+, Cl−and K+ as
they move across the cell membrane and generate a potential in muscle and nervecells. The
intra- and extracellular concentrations are visualised where big letters = High concentration
and small letters = small concentrations. [8]
Biomedical signals are monitored as voltages, electrical field strengths and poten-
tials generated from muscles and nerves and, as already indicated in Fig.1.2, these
bioelectrical signals differs in range depending on the body area/organs they are mea-
sured from and the desired test type (Fig.1.2). Hence biosensors are designed for
identifying and diagnosing specific levels of bio-electrical signals. As seen from Tab.
1.1 the bio-electric signals are incredibly small and measure from 1µV to 10mV in
the frequency range between 0.5Hz and 10kHz which in term sets high requirements
for the biosensors applied and the assisting amplifiers and computations.
As listed in Tab. 1.1 the voltage of bio-signals, measured by needle electrodes, are
incredibly small which means that the conductivity of the needle must be low enough
to read of the biological signal without drowning in impedance or noise. Both at
the clinical site and at the developers table, the terminology impedance stands out as
highly crucial for needle electrodes. Impedance is in short terms the total opposition
==PAGE:24==
12
1 Background & needle electrode requirements
Table 1.1. Gathering of electric biosignals of interest. *[MIN - MAX] range” indicates the
full span of the dynamic- and frequency range, across the different classifications, respectively.
[5]
in an electrical circuit. Neurologists could experience ”too high” impedance from dry
skin and hair (when using surface electrodes), from surrounding noise or insuﬀicient
positioning of the needle electrode, or either corrosion on the measuring area or bad
wiring, Appendix B. Hence, if the inherent noise or the impedance are too high the
biological signal will be strangled thus impossible to examine. To exemplify this three
frames from the interview with Neurologist Martin Ballegaard is seen in Fig. 1.4.
(a) Signal with high frequency noise
(b) Stabilising signal by adjusting ground wire
(c) Stable signal measuring relaxed muscle
Figure 1.4. Noise caused by unstable wiring
==PAGE:25==
1.4 Biosensors and clinical scenery
13
1.4
Biosensors and clinical scenery
Neurophysiological examinations, are designed to conduct bio-electric signals either
invasively or non-invasively. Either way, the sensors interact with an electrolyte and
convert ion-based signals to electron-based signals, which is the power compatible
with the computer.
Thus, biosensors are classified as electrochemical sensors. [8]
The electrochemical interface between ions and electrons, liquid and solid materials,
complicate the function of the sensor and sets some critical requirements for the
materials applied for the active sensor as the materials must be willing to cooperate
in translating ion-based biological potentials into an electron-based current. If the
interface between the material and the body fluids are not cooperative it will result in
an significant increase of impedance. (Impedance and interface is further elaborated
in section 2.2.1 and 2.3).
1.4.1
Clinical application
Only specialised doctors and neurologists can conduct these examinations as it takes
craftmanshift and know-how to perform an useful examination. The medical tests
are most often conducted on neurophysiological clinics where the conditions are safe
and sterile. Based on a meeting with neurologist Martin Ballegaard [Appendix B] at
Roskilde university hospital the user journey in Fig. 1.5 are created. Five steps are
conducted to prepare the needle electrode for use.
1. The needle is unpacked from the sterilised packaging
2. The protection cover is removed and the needle is now exposed to oxygen and are
capable of injuring the patient and the doctor.
3. The reusable wires are attached to the electrode and the other end to the bio-
amplifier.
In the case exemplified in Fig.
1.5, a monopolar needle is used which
requires the additional use of an reference- and ground surface electrode which are
attached to the patient close to the measured area. This will vary according to the
type of examination and the applied electrode.
4. During use the doctor positions the needle after the first penetration to get the best
connection. This is an adaptive process supported by the visuals on the screen and
the sound of the signal supplied by the computed instruments. From the meeting with
Martin Ballegaard it is understood that an examination can take anywhere from a
==PAGE:26==
14
1 Background & needle electrode requirements
Figure 1.5. Exemplified user journey and clinical application of a monopolar needle elec-
trode. By Rune S. Ottesen & Caroline Giessing with knowledge and material from expert
interview Martin BallegaardB
few minutes to several hours depending on the type of examination. Århus University
states that the duration of a typical examination lays within 1-3 hours.
5. Post use the reusable wire is detached and sterilised by disinfectant and restored
where the needle is rendered harmless by transporting it to and dispose of it in the
yellow container for hazardous objects.
As interpreted from the visit to the neurology department, impedance and signal
quality are tested prior to the start of measurement, regardless of the type of needle
used. However some needles, such as the concentric needle, requires a higher precision
that other, e.g. the subdermal needle. Thus it is assumed that all needles must be
able to withstand twisting and adjustment of the needle without taking damage.
==PAGE:27==
1.4 Biosensors and clinical scenery
15
Figure 1.6. Exemplified instrumentation and clinical scenery. By Rune S. Ottesen & Car-
oline Giessing with knowledge and material from expert interview with Martin Ballegaard.
[Appendix B]
1.4.2
Clinical site and instrumentation
The neurophysiological departments are supplied with instruments, amplifiers and
computers designed for measuring and examining biological signals.
The clinical sites are attempted isolated from 50Hz/240V current running in the
danish power supply which otherwise would be significantly affecting the tests. Also,
lights and other electrical devices, are attempted to be minimised to reduce the elec-
trical noise that they supply. Although it’s not possible to avoid noise as multiple
factors, including the body itself, is providing noise intercepted by the electrodes,
which potentially drowns the small biomedical signal. Thus bio-amplifiers and differ-
ent filters and analysis tools are applied to isolate the bio-electrical signal and opt-out
the stochastic noise. [9] See Fig. 1.6 for an exemplified illustration of how the clinical
scenery is taken out.
==PAGE:28==
16
1 Background & needle electrode requirements
From Fig. 1.6 a bio-signal output from an EMG-examination is exemplified illus-
trating a relaxed and activated muscle. This data visualisation has already undergone
filtering and averaging and supplies the doctor with a picture of the muscle activity in
the measured state. Data is recorded and can post to the patient contact be further
analysed and tweaked, where stochastic noise can be reduced and the data sorted
(e.g., by frequency or time interval).
==PAGE:29==
1.5 Product analysis of Needle electrodes
17
1.5
Product analysis of Needle electrodes
1.5.1
Introduction
This section will focus on research question 2; which products are represented at Ambu
and the competing market? and will give a overview of the products in question and
provide suﬀicient background knowledge for later analysis to come.
The electrode products mentioned in section1.4 the electrodes used in the Neuro-
physiological examinations can in general be divided into Invasive and non-invasive
electrodes, which in general refers to needle electrodes and surface electrodes respec-
tively. There are several products on the market with different specifications and
applications within the field of neurophysiology. However, this thesis will focus on
the products of danish medical company Ambu A/S as they represent design devel-
opment and sale of needle electrodes world wide. It will furthermore be scoped to
research needle electrodes given the innovative potential in regards to the substitution
of metals with polymer composites.
In Ambu’s product catalogue four needle electrodes were found to have the initial
innovative potential. These are the Ambu®Neuroline Monopolar, concentric, Inoject,
subdermal (single and Twisted Pair) needle electrodes.
1.5.2
Needle electrodes at Ambu A/S
In the search for empirical data on existing electrodes, their specifications and design,
a literature study combined with an interview with experts from Ambu A/S, Info box
1.5.2 and Roskilde university hospital were conducted.
Ambu A/S is a danish medical product development company, currently em-
ploying 4500 dedicated people across the world, and er specialised in the field
of medical technology. Their vision is to save lives and improve patient care
while providing their customers with innovative solutions and optimised work-
flow [10]. They are specialised in developing single-use medical products, which
Ambu A/S
==PAGE:30==
18
1 Background & needle electrode requirements
entails the development and production of single-use needle electrodes used
for electromyography, EMG, and electroencephalography, EEG, in the medical
branch of neurology. [11]
From the interview with a Front-End PMD Manager at Ambu, Mike Hagelskjær,
in-depth knowledge about the 4 types of needle electrodes, The AMBU Neuroline
Monopolar, Concentric, Inoject and The subdermal, were learned as well as their
technical specifications. From the interview with Head of Clinical Neurophysiology
at Zealand University Hospital, Martin Ballegaard, the user experience journey and
knowledge about the usage of electrodes and examinations were gained.
Measurement of the body’s electrical signals requires a system that involves a
sensor, an amplification system and a display. In the case of invasive EMG and EEG
examinations, the sensor is a needle electrode. When elaborating on the system indi-
cation of ”a sensor”, an active electrode, a reference electrode and a ground electrode
are needed to stabilise and measure body signals [12].
Needle type
Recording area
Lengths
Thickness
[mm2]
[mm]
[mm]
Concentric
0.02-0.07
25, 30, 35, 38, 50, 75
0.3, 0.36, 0.40, 0.45,
5.0, 5.5
Monopolar
0.3-0.33
25, 38, 50, 75
0.36, 0.45, 0.5
Inoject
N/A
25, 30, 35, 38, 50, 75
0.3, 0.36, 0.40, 0.45,
5.0, 5.5
Subdermal
Full needle
12
0.4
Table 1.2. Ambu needle recording area
The Ambu ®Neuroline concentric needle electrode is a combined needle where
the active electrode and the reference electrode are centred in the same design. The
concentric needle is applied for measuring muscle activity, EMG. As seen in Fig.1.7,
the needle is designed in three layers with three different materials and three different
functionalities. The outer layer functions as the reference electrode and is made of
stainless steel. The inner layer is the active electrode of the needle and is made of
silver, AgCl(Ag), which has higher electro conductive properties than stainless steel
as seen in Tab.1.3. Between the two layers is a layer of epoxy which works as an
electrical insulator, preventing the two electrodes from interfering with each other.
For non-concentric needles, the reference electrode is a surface electrode, positioned
as close to the reference electrode as possible. Although Ambu is utilising a sliver
core, other materials are used by other companies such as steel [13] , tungsten [14] or
platin [12].
The entire needle is coated with silicone to reduce friction during penetration,
whom greatly helps the user experience for the person which the needle are used
==PAGE:31==
1.5 Product analysis of Needle electrodes
19
Figure 1.7. The Ambu®concentric needle overview
Metal
Conductivity, σ [S/m]
Resistivity, ρ = 1
σ [Ω· m]
Silver
6.3 × 107
1.59 × 10−8
Tungsten
1.79 × 107
5.6 × 10−8
Platinum
9.43 × 106
10.6 × 10−8
Stainless Steel
1.45 × 106
69 × 10−8
Table 1.3. Electrical conductivity and resistivity of applied metals in needle electrodes. [15]
upon. This does degrade the signal quality of the conductive surface, but only affects
the quality of the signal by an small amount, which is thought to have no significant
impact on the user from a signal perspective The recording area (area of the active
electrode) of the needle varies from 0.02 −0.07mm21.2 which enables it to measure
up to 20 muscle fibres. The needles come in various lengths,2.5−7.5cm, which makes
it possible to find the best fit in regards to the size of the muscle and the layer of fat
between muscle and skin.
The Ambu ®Neuroline Monopolar needle electrode also work as the active
electrode. It’s designed for EMG examinations and consists of a solid stainless steel
needle with an insulating acrylic coating. The coating is applied to minimise the size
of the recording area, thus reducing the number of measured muscle units, which
concretes the study.
The bigger the recording area is, the more muscle units are
measured. See Fig.1.8.
The Monopolar needle is competing with the concentric needle, but are not sold
on the Danish market as well as other European countries. Even though it’s cheaper
in production it is not used in Denmark due to the lower quality of signal precision
==PAGE:32==
20
1 Background & needle electrode requirements
Figure 1.8. Ambu®monopolar needle overview
compared to the concentric needle electrode.
This is due to the larger recording
area of the Monopolar needle the long distance between the active electrode (the
needle) and the reference electrode (surface electrode), which are both integrated
into the concentric needle, and possibly the better conductivity of the silver core i the
concentric needle. The larger recording area and distance between electrodes result
in higher signal noise, which leads to poorer measuring conditions. The Monopolar
needle is only sold to international markets e.g. the American market [Appendix A].
The needle is available in length 25−75[mm], thickness 0.36−0.5[mm], recording
area more than 20 muscle fibres [16–19].
Finally The Ambu®Neuroline Subdermal needle electrode is applied for elec-
troencephalography, EEG, examinations which is a recording of signals and impulses
of the brain. See Fig.1.9. The Subdermal needle is applied for examination of the
brain when a traditional surface cup-electrode isn’t suﬀicient. The needle is inserted
into the subcutaneous layer and brings the electrode closer to the source (cortex) and
removes the impedance from the skin. The Subdermal needle is solid stainless steel
and has no insulating coating which means that the entire needle is acting as the
active electrode. Most often seven needles are applied during an examination
This electrode is only available in one 12mm length and thickness 0.4mm. The
wire is connected to the needle and is one-time use.
The Ambu ®Neuroline Inoject needle electrode differs from the rest of the
needle electrodes as it is hollow and allows injection like a syringe. This type of needle
==PAGE:33==
1.5 Product analysis of Needle electrodes
21
Figure 1.9. The Ambu®Subdermal needle overview
electrode is applied for injection of Botox as a blockage in the synapse between nerve
and muscle e.g. in case of vibrating fibres, dystonia. Similar to the Monopolar, this
needle is made of stainless steel with an electrically insulation acrylic coating defining
the recording area at the tip of the needle. See Fig.1.10 [Appendix A].
The needle is available in length 25 −75[mm], thickness 0.3 −5.5[mm]
Figure 1.10. The Ambu®Inoject needle overview
==PAGE:34==
22
1 Background & needle electrode requirements
1.6
Findings and conclusion
Looking back at the initial research questions for Part 1 a summary of the main
findings are concluded below.
• What is the area of application?
• Which products are represented at Ambu?
• What are the technical requirements for needle electrodes?
What is the area of application?
Needle electrodes are applied in neurophysiological examinations to monitor and
record on nerve and muscle activity in the human body. The biological signals has
varying dynamic range and frequency range dependent on the area of the body. The
full dynamic range including all examinations conducted with needle electrodes are
from 1µV to 10 mV. The total frequency range spans from 0.5 Hz to 10kHz. The
needles must be able to penetrate the skin and withstand bending and twisting dur-
ing the doctor’s adjustments without compromising the measuring properties and
without breaking.
Which products are represented at Ambu?
Existing needle electrodes in Ambu catalogue are Ambu Neuroline Concentric Needle,
Ambu Neuroline Monopolar Needle, Ambu Neuroline Subdermal Needle, and Ambu
Neuroline Inject Needle.
From the analysis and work conducted in Part 1 it’s concluded that the needles
are onetime use. The needle has a cut-off of appx. 13 degrees and two grindings on
the tip of the needle to allow easy penetration and a smooth insertion into the skin an
muscle. The needles are expected to have a stable and consistent measuring ability for
up to several hours during the examinations. For the use in medical examination it is
a criteria that the equipment are sterile, which in the needle electrodes case are done
either by Ethylene Oxide(EO or EtO) and irradiation(gamma/e-beam) sterilisation
[20]. There are however multiple sterilisation processes available depending on what
type of product needs to be sterilised based on material, packaging, shape and size.
Material applied, in existing product on the marked, as the conductive core is Silver
(Ag(AgCl)), Stainless steel, Platinum and Tungsten.
==PAGE:35==
1.6 Findings and conclusion
23
What are the technical requirements for needle electrodes?
The needle electrode must be geared to measure the small bio-signals in cooperation
with the clinical equipment, filters and bio amplifiers. Thus, needle electrodes must
have consistent measuring properties, low resistance and must not contain loud in-
herent noise as this could cause the bio-signal to drown. The last point of interest
found are the interface between electrode and testing environment, being the body
fluid. Thus the needle must be able to translate a flow of ion-based current to an
electron-based current to avoid high impedance which risk to drown the bio signal.
In regards to the Technical criteria of the needle electrodes, findings about fre-
quency range, impedance, noise and interface are regarded as key point indicators
(KPI’s) for the innovation, processing and testing of polymer composite needles in
part 3. However, it’s necessary for the project to dive into these technical therms
and phenomenons before such tests can be conducted. Therefore, the KPI’s sets the
motivation for the research conducted on electro-technical matters in Part 2. The
KPI’s can be seen summarised in Tab. 1.11.
Figure 1.11. Key point indicator table version 1, based on the knowledge gained through
out Part 1
==PAGE:36==
24
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 2
Electrical properties &
polymer composites
2.1
Introduction
Part 2 will explain the electrical properties used by needle electrodes in the field of
neurophysiology as well as correlate them to polymer composites. This is be done by
answering the following research questions;
• What does an bio electrical circuit consist of, and how does it impact neuro-
physiological examinations?
• What are the immediate electrical properties of the selected polymer composites
and how do they compare with metals?
• What polymer composites are suited for testing as needle electrodes?
Firstly, the electro technical questions will be answered based on literature research,
expert consultations with Electrical Engineer and Laboratory Engineer, Department
of Mechanical Engineering, Benny Edelsten, DTU, and Kaj-åge Henneberg, Associate
Professor, Department of Health Technology, DTU, and preemptive tests to get a
hands on approach to electrical circuits.
==PAGE:38==
26
2 Electrical properties & polymer composites
Secondly, the polymer composites are investigated and defined and finally three
3D filament polymer composites materials are selected for the prototyping of polymer
composite needle electrodes, conducted and tested in Part 3. The composite study
and material selection are based on literature research, guidance by the project super-
visor Torben Lenau, Associate Professor, M.Sc. Ph.D., DTU and co-supervisor Allan
Wandall, Research Assistant at the Department of Mechanical Engineering, DTU,
and accumulated findings from Part 1 and 2.
==PAGE:39==
2.2 Electrical circuits in relation to neurophysiology
27
2.2
Electrical circuits in relation to neurophysiology
An electrical circuit can be viewed as a path for transmitting electrons through a
closed loop. Electricity can be described as an electrical circuit consisting of three
basic components voltage, current and resistance, which all affect each other expressed
by Ohm’s law. Eq.2.1.
Understanding what electricity is and how the main components depend on each
other, the electricity can be considered as a water hose as illustrated by FreeingEnergy
[21] in Fig. 2.1, 2.2.
Figure 2.1.
Voltage is power source e.g. pressure in the pipe, measured in volts (V).
Current is the capacity e.g, the diameter of the pipe, measured in Amps. Resistance
is the opposition to flow, e.g. sand in a pipe restricting the flow, measured in Ohm (Ω).
Illustration by Bill Nussey, FreeingEnergy. [21]
For an electrical system, as for a water pipe system, all three components rely on
each other, meaning that if one changes, the two others changes too, as illustrated
with the water pipe example in Fig. 2.2. Ohm’s law describes the relation by eq. 2.1.
V = I × R
(2.1)
==PAGE:40==
28
2 Electrical properties & polymer composites
Figure 2.2. The size of the current and the amount of resistance in the materials constitutes
the voltage [21]
Voltage [V]
Voltage can be described as electrical potential energy per unit of charge between two
points. Voltage is like the pressure that pushes water through the water pipe. Thus,
voltage is the power source “pushing” electrons between two points, generating an
electric current. See Fig. 2.3.
Figure 2.3. From left to right water, electricity and an electrical diagram of an electric
circuit is illustrated. [21]
Voltage is measured in volts (V) which is further described by joules over coulombs,
as shown in equation 2.2
1V = 1 J
C =
Joule
Coulomb
(2.2)
The voltage is happening from a negatively charged end to a positive charge end.
In the case of electrode measurements, the electrodes act as the positive pole, which
enables the migration of electrons, transformed from the biological tissue, to flow from
the body to the needle. Where an average Danish socket holds 240V, a biological
potential, on the occasion of a neurophysiological study, is in a range between 0-10
==PAGE:41==
2.2 Electrical circuits in relation to neurophysiology
29
mV as seen in Tab.
1.1.
Therefore sensors with good conductivity and minimal
resistance are required to register the small-scale biopotentials.
Current [I]
Electrical current is the expression of the movement of electrical charges, which can
both be an electron or ion based charge [22]. The Si unit for this current is Ampere
[A] and refers to the number of electrons or ions flowing through a certain point per
second. Amps are measured in coulombs per second, and the correlation is viewed in
equation 2.3.
1A = 1C/s = 6.24 × 1018 (electrons/ions) [23]
(2.3)
For an AC circuit, the current can be explained, through ohm’s law, using the
equation 2.4. Note that the resistance, R, is represented by the impedance, Z.
I = V
Z
(2.4)
The current through an electrical circuit can be described as either direct current
(DC) or alternating current (AC). This describes the direction and fluctuation of
the electron flow, Fig.2.4(a). DC have a constant flow of electrons, where AC are
constantly fluctuating the current path at a set frequency range.
As seen in Fig.
2.4(b),2.4(c). A DC-circuit is defined by voltage, current, and resistance, where the
power source are providing the voltage and current, and the materials carrying the
electron flow through the circuit provides the resistance.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.4.
a) A simple electrical circuit b) DC is a steady flow of electrons in one
direction [24] where AC change direction periodically with fluctuating flow of electrons c)
The difference between high and low frequency of AC
R = V
I
(2.5)
==PAGE:42==
30
2 Electrical properties & polymer composites
Ohm’s law, however, is not directly applicable for analysing components of an
AC circuit as the total opposition in that case is annotated as Impedance, Z, which
can include both inductive reactants and capacitive reactants relying on the change
of voltage and frequency.
When considering the human body as an electrical circuit, the type of current
depends on the body part and the specification of the applied equipment, such as
filtering settings. The human body generates both direct and alternating potentials,
although when measuring neuro- and muscle-potentials AC describes them best and
is therefore applied when conducting neurophysiological examinations.
Electrical resistance
Resistance is the measure of an object’s opposition to the flow of electrons, like the
sand in the pipes, blocking the flow of water, or the light bulb and the electric circuit
Fig.2.3. Resistance is measured in the Si unit Ohms (Ω), which is an expression of
(V/A) and is present in all circuits e.g., in the present as inherent resistance of the
materials, wires or connectors, or in the present as a resistor which is often used
to downscale the voltage to avoid overload of electrical components. Equation 2.6
describes resistance by Ohm’s Law.
R = V
I
(2.6)
Electrical resistivity, ρ, is volume independent of specimen geometry and is related
to R through the expression in eq.2.7,
ρ = RA
l
(2.7)
where the resistance, R, is multiplied by the area and divided by the length. The
unit for electrical resistivity is ohm-meters (Ω· m). The resistivity will be applied
when testing the electrical resistance of polymer composites, as to compare across
geometries and size variance.
Electrical conductivity
Electrical conductivity, σ, is used to specify the electrical character of a given material.
The conductivity is simply found by the reciprocal function of electrical resistivity as
in eq. 2.8
==PAGE:43==
2.2 Electrical circuits in relation to neurophysiology
31
σ = 1
ρ
(2.8)
The SI unit of conductivity is siemens per meter ( s
m) but is mostly converted to
and seen as (Ω· m)−1.
Materials in regards to conductivity are divided into three categories namely, con-
ductors, semiconductors, or insulators. Conductors lie in the range of 104(Ω· m)−1
and above. Metals are generally great conductors and averages about 107(Ω· m)−1.
Semi-conductors ranges from 10−6 to 104(Ω·m)−1 and insulators in the range of 10−7
to 10−20(Ω· m)−1. [24,25] An overview of material groups and their conductivity can
be seen in Fig.2.5
Figure 2.5. Conductivity of 4 material groups. [25]
Concerning needle electrodes a high conductivity is desired, meaning the resistance
must be minimised and considered in the selection of materials for a needle electrode.
2.2.1
The role of electrical impedance in needle electrodes
The total opposition to alternating current can be calculated as the impedance, Z,
which represents the total accumulated resistance in a circuit, provided to a varying
==PAGE:44==
32
2 Electrical properties & polymer composites
current (AC) at a given frequency [Hz]. Impedance consists of a real part, Z’=Re(Z),
and an imaginary part, Z”=Im(Z).
Z = Z′ + iZ′′
(2.9)
Capacitive reactance is present in electrical circuits with one or more capacitors.
Capacitors store and release energy which creates an energy shift or a distortion of
electron flow. In other words, capacitors work as batteries.
The presence of capacitance in relation to neurophysiological examinations will
cause inconsistent measuring abilities, why the materials applied as the electrical
conductor must not be a capacitor. [24]
Figure 2.6. Illustration of electrical impedance by resistance, Z’, capacitance, Z”, and the
size of impedance define by the length of Z
The total impedance can be calculated by eq.2.10.
|Z| =
√
Z′2 + Z′′2
(2.10)
As illustrated in Fig.2.6, impedance possesses both magnitude and phase where
the resistance only has magnitude. This means that pure resistance can be inter-
preted as impedance with a phase angle of zero degrees. Furthermore, a phase angle
of -90 degrees would indicate the behaviour of a capacitor providing a signal delay.
Thus electrical impedance is the combination of pure resistance, signal attenuation,
capacitance and signal distortion.
==PAGE:45==
2.2 Electrical circuits in relation to neurophysiology
33
In relation to the testing of new needles, it’s important to state whether the ma-
terial applied behaves as a pure resistor. This can be concluded by testing resistance
over a range of frequencies. If the material is a pure resistor the resistance will not
change, thus showing constant and linear resistance and having a phase shift angle of
0 degrees. If this is the case the material has magnitude (attenuation) of the signal
but supply a constant attenuation which is easier to remove by analytic filters and
bio amplifiers.
This concludes that an electrode with an conductive reactance will have an in-
creasing electrical conductivity as the frequenc of a signal increases.
As implied in the above section the electrode characteristics and associated in-
strumentation are significantly affecting the recordings of neurophysiological exami-
nations such as EMG [26]. Therefore electrodes without interface interaction must
not have capacitive behaviour in the frequency range applied for the specific neuro-
physiological examination, [0 −10kHz].
==PAGE:46==
34
2 Electrical properties & polymer composites
2.3
The electrochemical interface between needle
electrodes and biological fluids
This section describes the electrical interface between the needle electrode and human
body fluids to understand the translation between ion-based and electron-based cur-
rent. However, the studies of impedance and the electrochemical interfaces, between
sensors and biological tissue is highly complex and requires years of specialisation.
Therefore, only the most basic concepts of the interface concerning needle electrodes
and bio signals are elaborated in this study.
As indicated in Fig. 2.7, it is important when measuring biological signals to con-
sider the interface between the electrode and the body fluid, as is it an essential factor
for ensuring good signal quality. Even though the material used for the conductive
core in a needle electrode is measured as a pure resistor, capacitance can occur in
the interface with an electrolyte. In an interface between a solid and a liquid, like
a needle electrode and the body fluid, a double charge layer will occur as ions and
electrons must interact [27]. This is the initiator for the half cell potential between
the two components, which creates the exchange of ions and electrons between them.
Figure 2.7. Illustration of interface between an needle electrode and bodyfluids
==PAGE:47==
2.3 The electrochemical interface between needle electrodes and biological fluids
35
The interface between needle electrodes and body fluids is depicted and described
in Fig. 2.7 where the needle have penetrated the skin and the measuring area is in
contact with the relevant muscle fibres and body fluids. The primary ions communi-
cating potentials in the body is Cl−, Ka+, Na+ and water H+ and O−. Therefore
the properties of the needle, and the needles willingness to cooperate with these ions,
are key, to obtaining consistent measuring properties. Thus the conductivity and
the composition of materials plays an important role in transporting the biopotential
from ions to electrons.
The electrode in Fig. 2.7 is depicted as a Silver-Silver(I)Chloride Ag(AgCl) based
needle, which is the material used as the core electroconductive material in the Ambus
®Neuroline concentric needles. What makes this needle so good for use in neurological
examinations is its material properties of high conductivity, gained from the silver,
but also its interface transference of ions. The good interface is due to the Chloride
(Cl) part in Ag(AgCl) metal. It enables an easy reaction between the needle and the
ions in the body fluid. This exchange is made whenever a signal impulse is received
and transported.
Making the exchange of ions and electron are done through half cell reactions,
which consist of two half cell potentials [28]. The half cell potential refers to one half
of the overall cell potential [29] which leads to a redox reaction between atoms. An
example of an redox reaction can be seen in equation 2.11 and in Fig. 2.7, which is
based on Silver(I)Chloride.
Ag(s) + Cl−⇌AgCl + e−
(2.11)
Fig.2.8 can be seen as a general interpretation of the electrical circuit that is made
between the needle electrode and the body fluid [30]. The electrical circuit consists
of four ”components”: two resistors, Resistor 1(R1), representing the resistance in
Figure 2.8. Halfcell potential in needle interface with body fluids illustrated, as well as a
simplified circuit illustration
==PAGE:48==
36
2 Electrical properties & polymer composites
the electrode and Resistor 2(R2) representing the resistance in the body fluid, one
Capacitor (C) representing the capacitance that arises in the electrode in the interface
with the body fluid, and finally one Electrode potential(E1) which is the half cell
potential, explained as the willingness to exchange ions and electrons between the
electrode and body fluid. As seen in Fig: 2.8 three things can influence the interface:
1. Type of material, referring to conductivity and the interface reaction it has with
the body fluid.
2. The electrolyte composition, which is unchangeable in the case of body fluids.
3. Temperature, which for the body fluid works best under normal body temper-
ature.
About the testing needles made from Protopasta, the interface is not as favourable
as the Ag(AgCl) needles. The ionic exchange comes from the oxidisation of carbon
black with Oxygen atoms from water meaning that a splitting of water molecules
have to occur. This is a more complex process than the redox of SilverChloride as
can be seen in Fig.2.9, showing the given molecular process
Given the difference in oxidation process of the two shown process, Carbon black
and Ag(AgCl), it should be clear that an interface that enables easy halfcell reactions
are preferable. It is therefore important to look into the different natural ions in
the body that could facilitate this reaction such as sodium, Potassium, Calcium and
magnesium.
Figure 2.9.
A Schematic of the oxidization of Carbon black with water , taken from
”Influence of environmental conditions on carbon black oxidation by reactive oxygen inter-
mediates” [31]
==PAGE:49==
2.4 Material selection of polymer composites
37
2.4
Material selection of polymer composites
Applied materials
The construction of needle electrodes is mainly composed of metals for electric con-
ductivity and coated by polymers for insulation. In this section, we take a closer look
into the materials applied in existing products taking a stand in Ambu’s portfolio
of needle electrodes which are the following.
Ambu®Neuroline Concentric, Ambu
Neuroline Monopolar, Ambu Neuroline Inoject and Ambu Neuroline Subdermal.
2.4.1
Introducing polymer composites
Composite materials are materials made from different parts and elements combin-
ing material qualities such as mechanical, physical, aesthetic, and economic qualities.
Thus composite materials are known for their excellent mechanical and physical prop-
erties, with great engineering applicability such as aeronautical, automotive, electron-
ics, marine, sports and textile applications with many more [32].
Over the last few decades, composite materials have been highly included in the
evolution of technology and product designs and are a competing player in the in-
dustry due to their lightweight and exceptional mechanical properties. According to
Godara S.et.al [32], composites are stated to be weight-economically materials and
continue to strive to be price effective and further price dominant.
If you take a moment and look around in 2022, you will notice that polymers are
integrated into almost every single product around you. Polymers have in many years
played a head role in the advanced application as they are versatile, lightweight, elastic
and flexible, which further allows them to be fabricated, both time and cost-eﬀicient.
Although, there are applications where polymers alone can’t live up to requirements,
which is why polymer composites are highly favourable to industry [33].
The aim of this study is to test if polymer composites can replace the metals in
electrically conductive sensors with the aim of reducing economic, environmental and
human costs. In the medico industry, polymers are taking over in many applications
and tools, as sterilisation of long term materials (such as metals) are more energy
consuming than reproducing new products, and it contributes to cheaper and easier
recycling of plastic single-use products. Thus polymers are essential to use, but not
==PAGE:50==
38
2 Electrical properties & polymer composites
suﬀicient in all situations as properties such as thermal or electrical conductivity are
lacking but provided by metals. [3,33]
Figure 2.10. Illustration by Park, SH., Hwang, J., Park, GS. et al. ”Modeling the electrical
resistivity of polymer composites with segregated structures.” [34] showing the individual and
combined structures of a electrical conductive polymer composite
Polymer composites are polymer-based composite materials consisting of one
matrix and one or more reinforcement(s). Most polymer composites apply thermosets
and thermoplastics as the base material (the matrix resins) that penetrate and bond
to the reinforcement. Thermosets have low viscosity, while thermoplastics are recy-
clable and reusable. The combined reinforced material may be metals, ceramics or
glass based on fibres or particles. [33] Fig. 2.10 showcase an example of how an elec-
trically conductive fibre/polymer composite takes out and how the electrical network
is interconnected in the polymer structure.
As illustrated earlier by Fig. 2.5 material types are divided across electrical con-
ductivity. Polymers and ceramics are positioned in the low end of the conductivity
scale, going from 10−8Ωm to 10−18Ωm, these materials are categorised as electrical
insulators while metals are at the high end of the range between 102Ωm and 108ωm
categorised as electrical conductors. In the midsection from 10−6 −104Ωm we find
==PAGE:51==
2.4 Material selection of polymer composites
39
semiconductors which are composite materials where insulators and conductors are
combined. Fig. 2.11 show an additive conductivity range where conductive polymers
and polymeric composites are compared on a conductivity scale in Ωcm.
Figure 2.11.
Conductivity range of conductive polymers and polymer composites - Re-
production of Fig. 1 in Kaur. et. al. Electrically conductive polymers and composites for
biomedical applications [35]
Within the evolution of polymer composites, the electrical conductive 3D filament
has also emerged in the industry and included in several studies for testing and
application for electronic devices. 3D printing is an incredible technology allowing
flexibility and rapid prototyping of complex geometries and combined materials. 3D
printers are still evolving in size and materials and are compatible with printing
polymers, metals and composites.
As this study strives to test combined prototyping by 3D printing followed by
thermal drawing, the choosing of test materials are limited to existing electrical con-
ductive polymer composites as 3D filaments.
When it comes to 3D printing of electrical circuits this procedure is quite atyp-
ical as most researchers utilise 3D printed paths in either textiles or electronics for
completing electric circuits. This study tries to take advantage of the flexibility of
3D printing by printing designed preforms with customised geometries of insulating
material externally and conducting material internally. The 3D printed preforms will
be thermally drawn to downscale the needle size, which leaves us with test needles
according to the desired geometry that can test on and compare with existing needle
electrodes. Thus suitable electroconductive 3D filaments are found for the testing
phase.
==PAGE:52==
40
2 Electrical properties & polymer composites
2.4.2
Description of selected materials
The selection of materials is conducted based on the set requirements and criteria,
listed in Tab.
2.1, which frames the main properties that the composites should
meet. The requirements are made with innovation in mind. Therefore, the number
of requirements are set to a minimum to avoid too many restrictions.
As seen in Tab. 2.1, the selected materials must all be 3D filaments, electrically
conductive and polymer-based composites. Furthermore, the materials must have
some degree of viscosity to undergo the processing of thermal drawing, which the
second processing requires.
Table 2.1. Set requirements for material selection based on previous listed KPI’s
We have striven to test three of the best conductive polymer composites with
different reinforcements to test the different composite types on the market.
2.4.2.1
Proto-Pasta - Composite Conductive Fiber PLA
One of the tested materials is the conductive PLA from Proto-Pasta, which is a carbon
fibre-reinforced polymer resin. The composition of the composite is 65% polylactide
resin, 21.43% Carbon Black and 12% undefined PLA [36]. See Tab. 2.2.
==PAGE:53==
2.4 Material selection of polymer composites
41
Table 2.2. Specifications for ProtoPasta Electrically Conductive PLA [36–38]
Carbon Black is a non-metal material that is applied for a great variety of products
such as tires, conveyor belts, cables, rubber shoes, dry batteries, automotive interior,
ink, and paint [39]. This filament is a medium-cost (app. 71 USD/kg) material with
a 15 Ωcm resistivity. However, other carbon-based filaments are found on the market
e.g., ”the conductive graphene filament”, called Black Magic, which has a favourable
volume resistivity of 0.06 Ωcm but goes to an indicative price of 550 USD/kg. A
study on “Electrically conductive filament for 3D-printed circuits and sensors” [40]
evaluates and test different competing product up against low price (>10 USD/kg)
carbon-based filament.
A stress test is conducted on filaments (containing 25% CB) where an insignifi-
cant change is seen on the volume resistivity post the stress test. This is a positive
observation for this study as the clinical application, section 1.4.1, proved that the
needle will undergo stress by small bends and twisting during an examination. Thus,
a short test is conducted on a ProtoPasta Test needle showing the when the needle
is stressed the Resistance increases immediate although, when the stress is released
the resistance goes back to the baseline. This test can be seen in Appendix E.
Another taking from the study, conducted by S.W. Kwok et.al [40] is that carbon-
based filaments are stated to have a significantly longer shelf life, years, than other
metals e.g., silver, which is one of the preferred metals used for biosensors.
As mentioned, the filament has an app. kilo price of 450 Danish Kroner (71 USD),
==PAGE:54==
42
2 Electrical properties & polymer composites
Figure 2.12.
Illustration of material composition and chemical structures of resp.
the
PLA matrix, the structure of the carbon fiber and a the composite structure in the filament
applied for testing. [25,36,41]
providing a volume resistivity of 30 Ωcm after being 3D printed and a resistance of
600 Ohms. The mechanical properties include higher strength and better flexibility
than most PLA filaments, thus lower brittleness which we, according to our KPI’s
and set criteria, wish to minimise. The filament applied is 2.85 mm in diameter and
requires a melting temperature of 215-230 deg C.
2.4.2.2
Koltron G1 – Graphen reinforced polymer resin
Koltron is a high-cost electrically conductive filament based on polymer and graphene.
Graphene is a single atomic layer of graphite, which constitutes carbon fibres, and is
one of the newest nanocarbon. See Fig. 2.13. Graphene is composed of hexagonally
sp2-bonds holding an extreme strength, flexibility, and toughness [42].
Graphene
materials are known for being the ultimate material.
Firstly due to their perfect
structure with no vacancies and only carbon atoms, and secondly due to the nature
of unbonded electrons, which move a lot faster at room temperature than electrons
in some metals and semiconductors. [25]
Koltron G1 has a volume resistivity of 2 Ωcm and is known for its thermally and
electrically conductive properties and its resistance to chemicals, UV light, and high
temperatures [44]. See Tab.2.3.
==PAGE:55==
2.4 Material selection of polymer composites
43
Figure 2.13.
Carbon structures.
a.
Graphite is parallel layers of graphene whit the
presence of an electrical field parallel to the planes. b. Graphene is a single-layer-atom of
pure carbon which allows high strenght and no vacancies. c.Nanotubes are the newest nano-
member of the carbon family, also applied for carbon nano tube (CNT) composites. [25].
Illustration is a reproduction of Fig. 1 in Skoda MDudek IJarosz A et al. [43]
The applicability of Koltron G1 has a great variety of products from electromag-
netic interference and radio magnetic interference, portable and printed electronics
and shielding of capacitive sensors [44]. Koltron G1 is included in the study to test a
graphene polymer composite.
Table 2.3. Specifications for Koltron G1 3D filament [44]
==PAGE:56==
44
2 Electrical properties & polymer composites
2.4.2.3
Electrifi – Copper reinforced biodegradable polyester
Multi3D’s Electrifi is a high-cost electrically conductive 3D filament based on bio-
degradable polyester and copper. This conductive filament is the leading product,
on the market for conductive filaments, with a volume resistivity of 0.006Ωcm. The
low resistivity is provided by the metal reinforcement, copper, which holds a vol-
ume resistivity of 1.72 · 10−6Ωcm [45].
The filament is patent protected.
Thus,
details on material composition are minimised to PET and Copper. In Fig. 2.14 the
chemical structure of PET and a copper bonded polymer is viewed to indicate the
structural bonds. The honeycomb structure recurs in this filament, as seen in the
carbon-reinforced polymers.
Figure 2.14.
On the left: Chemical structure of polyester which constitute the matrix
material of Electrifi. On the right: A copper atom in a complex copper-polymer structure to
exemplify a chemical bonding of the copper atom. Middle: Applied filament from Multi3D.
[25,45]
This filament is selected to test on a metal-based composite and to include a
filament competing as one of the most conductive polymer composites on the market
alongside the carbon-based Black Magic. Although the low resistivity is compromising
the set criteria for material selection, namely “as high viscosity as possible” as this
filament comes out very brittle and is observed to have a low viscosity, see Tab.2.4.
The stability of the filament is tested by the suppliers that state to show no change
in conductivity in room temperature (21 deg C ±0.5 deg C) for at least a month. This
meets our requirement and KPI of a minimum change in measuring property over
time [45].
==PAGE:57==
2.4 Material selection of polymer composites
45
Table 2.4. Specifications for Electrifi 3D filament [45]
==PAGE:58==
46
2 Electrical properties & polymer composites
2.5
Findings and conclusion
To conclude main findings of Part 2 the initial research questions are answered.
• What does an bio electrical circuit consist of, and how does it impact neuro-
physiological examinations?
• How does the interface between electrode and body fluids affect electrical con-
ductivity?
• What polymer composites are suited for testing as needle electrodes?
What does an electrical circuit consist of, and how does it impact
neurophysiological examinations?
In the world of neurophysiology, there are great demands on electrical properties,
technical equipment and measuring electrodes, as electricity constitutes the commu-
nication between the human being and the body. The body forms an electrical circuit
of alternating current, voltage and resistance, all the basics of an electrical circuit.
By diving into concepts such as frequency, resistance and impedance, it is found that
impedance is the important factor when working with AC circuits. Impedance is con-
trolled by frequency and consists of pure resistance and capacitance, in other words,
a magnitude and a phase angle. The presence of resistance attenuates the magnitude
of the signal, and the presence of capacitance creates a phase shit angle that distorts
the signal.
One of the key point indicators states that the needle electrode must have as
low impedance as possible, and we further learned from part one that consistent
measuring properties are important. In order to full fill that the conductive material
applied must have a phase shits angle of zero, i.e. no capacitive reactance as this
will cause the needle to distort the biosignal and cause uneven measuring ability and
further limit the ability to test as low frequencies. This means that the needle must
be a pure resistor with low resistance i.e. high conductivity.
==PAGE:59==
2.5 Findings and conclusion
47
How does the interface between electrode and body fluids affect electrical
conductivity?
The interface between needle electrode and body fluids forms an electrochemical in-
terface, which under the wrong conditions means large distortions of the measured
biosignal, in other words high impedance. The high impedance is due to the needle
and the body fluid forming an electrical circuit with two parallel resistors where one
is in solid form and electron-borne and the other is in liquid form and ion-borne.
This creates capacitance, no matter what metal you apply for the needle. Therefore
it is important to have a conductive material with a high electrode potential and are
willing to react with the electrolytes of the body. Therefore, Ag(AgCl) is used as the
active electrode in Ambu’s concentric needle, as silver Ag has high conductivity and
AgCl has Cl in common with NaCl which is one of the substances released from the
membrane in case of muscle or nerve activity.
What polymer composites are suited for testing as needle electrodes?
In section 2.1, polymer composites where investigated followed by the selection of
three polymer composites selected from following requirements. The selected materi-
als:
1. must be of polymer composites
2. must be a 3D filament
3. must have a conductivity higher than 10−7Ωcm
4. must be a pure resistor
5. preferred to have a high viscosity
The selected materials are listed in Tab.2.5 showing their properties. The table
shows the selection of three semiconductors. All three materials are 3D filaments
to support rapid prototyping by 3D printing and thermal drawing.
Furthermore,
the materials are selected from the best conductive filaments on the market.
To
determine whether the selected materials are pure resistors or not, a resistance test,
over frequency, must be conducted. Therefore, all filaments will undergo a test of
material resistance and stability before moving into the phase of prototyping.
==PAGE:60==
48
2 Electrical properties & polymer composites
Table 2.5. Summary of electrical properties of selected polymer composite materials and
metals applied for current needle electrodes
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 3
Test & validation of
polymer needles
electrodes
The purpose of this study is to explore whether Existing metal needles/electrodes
can be replaced with conducting polymer needles. and whether the Electrical
properties of conducting polymer composites are suﬀicient for neurological
measurements.
Part 1 empathised important qualities and technical requirements of existing metal
needles where the functional an electro technical requirements were accumulated as
KPI’s, see Fig.3.1.
To deeply understand the electronic requirements in the KPI’s and how to achieve
these qualities in a polymer composite, Part 2 investigates the definition of electri-
cal circuits concerning neurophysiology and further selects three test materials for
performance testing, going into Part 3.
So, to state that conducting polymer needle electrodes can replace existing metal
needle electrodes, the polymer composite needles must test for pure resistance, that
is, no change in resistance across the frequency range [0.5Hz-10kHz]. Furthermore,
==PAGE:62==
50
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
Figure 3.1. Key point indicator table version 1, based on the knowledge gained through
out phase 1
impedance spectroscopy in 0.9% saline solution must be carried out to test how the
polymer needles interact in a simulated environment as seen in the body. Finally,
an inherent noise test has to be carried out, to see whether the polymer composites
needles are making inherent noise, causing the biosignal to drown. Thus, the inherent
noise should be lower than 1µV, which is the min range of the biopotentials dynamic
range [1µV - 10mV].
The following research questions will be addressed, throughout the test and vali-
dations of Part 3.
• How does processing affect material properties?
• Does the prototype test needles perform as a pure resistor?
• What’s the impedance of the composite needles tested in and out of the envi-
ronment?
• What’s the inherent noise of composite needles tested in the environment?
==PAGE:63==
3.1 Test of material properties
51
3.1
Test of material properties
In Part 2, the 3D filaments ProtoPasta, Koltron, and Electrifi was selected for testing
polymer composites in the role of needle electrodes. However, it’s necessary to gain
a better understanding of how these materials behave, and how the tested electrical
properties match the properties given by the suppliers, stated in Tab. 2.2, 2.3, 2.4
and versus the KPI’s set for the electrode needles.
3.1.1
Testing selected polymer composites for pure resistance
Introduction
In these tests, the resistance, R, is measured on all three composite filaments. Two
resistance tests are conducted, one measuring resistance over time and the other
testing resistance over frequency.
Hence, to test for time stability and capacitive
reactance. The sociotechnical study in Part 1, empathised the importance of needle
electrodes having consistent measuring properties, which was further amplified by
theory in part 2, stating that high impedance causes significant opposition to the
biosignal. Therefore, the applied material must behave like a pure resistor that is
stable over time and has no capacitive behaviour. Thus, the materials are tested by
a DC resistance test. The results will provide a good metric for comparing the three
materials, based on their properties, and will help determine whether the selected
composites hold the potential for working as the electrically conductive element in
needle electrodes.
Figure 3.2. Filament sample size and shape
==PAGE:64==
52
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
Method & Material
Two tests were conducted, with two different test setups, as seen in Fig. 3.3. Test
Setup 1 was used to perform the material resistance test over time, and test setup
2, was used to perform a frequency-dependent resistance test.
A combination of
professional and self-developed equipment and tools were applied for all experiments.
Figure 3.3. Illustration of test setups and main settings for performing resistance tests
The first test, depicted in Fig. 3.3, was conducted to test the material resistance
over time. Three samples of each material were tested twice for a period of 5 min-
utes. The interval of 5 minutes were chosen to monitor stability over time as well as
reproducibility. To meet a more realistic time interval, a 1-hour test was conducted
on all three materials as to look for long term instabilities. Link to data analysis are
found in Appendix C.
==PAGE:65==
3.1 Test of material properties
53
Experience gained from the preemptive tests were the need for a good contact
interface between the tested material sample and the wires connected to the
multimeter. First, the cables were connected, directly to the test sample, by
crocodile beaks, which caused an unstable contact interface resulting in a fluc-
tuating resistance. The error were most likely caused by the penetration of
the crocodile beak spikes into the filament material over time, as depicted in
Fig.3.4.
To correct this instability, a fixation board was constructed and applied
for the final tests, Fig. 3.3. The fixation board works by tightening a screw
which pushes down a copperplate, connected to a wire, down onto the filament
generating a solid and stable contact interface to the filament.
The second observed source of error was the influence of re-testing on mate-
rial samples, which proved to affect the resistance. The observed shifts in the
results between the measurements, may be due to the quality of the equipment
as well as a change in the contact interface. The resistance test will be repeated
on better equipment, later in the process, to solve this uncertainty.
Preemptive test and sources of error - Contact interface
Figure 3.4. Change of contact interface over time, when applying crocodile beaks
Test setup 2, depicted in Fig. 3.3, stands similar to the previous setup, besides
the implementation of an oscilloscope, to provide the frequency sine wave. If the
materials are acting as pure resistors, the resistance will, in this test, be stable over
the frequency range, which is the desired outcome. If the impedance is not stable,
the composites have a capacitive reactance, which means that the composites have
higher resistance at lower frequencies and can build up an electrical charge over
time, resulting in inconsistent measuring properties, thus redundant electrodes for
neurophysiological examinations.
==PAGE:66==
54
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
Results - Resistance over time
Fig. 3.5 show the analysis of the 5 min tests conducted on ProtoPasta, Electrifi and
Koltron G1, respectively. The purpose of this analysis is to quantify the stability of
each material. The graphs represent three different materials resp. TM4, TM5 and
TM6 (TM= test material) all measured twice without changing the contact interface.
However, we see a fluctuation in the test results between the test materials. This
issue is considered in Info box 3.2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.5.
Graph a, b and c is individual analysis of resp.
Protopasta, Electrifi and
Koltron G1 measuring resistance over a 5 min period. Thus, be aware that the y-axis is
fitted to the individual material. Graph d shows a 1-hour test of all three materials compared.
Protopasta
In Fig. 3.5(a) the resistance of Protopasta is seen in a ranges from around 360 to 415Ω.
The resistance is stable and does not deviate significantly over the 5 minutes, besides
within the first 10 seconds. Looking at the 1-hour test in Fig. 3.5(d) Protopasta also
show stability over a longer period of time.
Electrify
By looking at Fig. 3.5(b), Electrifi also looks stable. The Resistance is between 8 to
==PAGE:67==
3.1 Test of material properties
55
18 Ωand averages at approximately 9.6Ω. The stability of Electrifi is also confirmed
by the one-hour test in Fig. 3.5(d).
Koltron
In Fig. 3.5(c) the 5 min resistance test results are seen for Koltron G1. The resistance
ranges from 3473 - 6254 Ωand averages at around 5162Ω. The resistance is rather
unstable, seen by the fluctuating graphs over time. Looking at the graph for Koltron
G1 TM4_1 in Fig.3.5(c) the resistance goes from around 8000 Ωat 10 seconds and
drops to around 6750 Ωafter 80 seconds. Looking at the one-hour test the tendency
is repeated by a fluctuating resistance ranging between 4200 Ωand 3200Ω.
Results - Resistance over frequency
Measuring resistance over frequency the resistance is found across a range from 10Hz
to 10kHz. As the equipment, used for this test, doesn’t provide useful results between
0-10Hz, these frequencies are not tested.
Figure 3.6.
Graph of material resistance over frequency monitoring and comparing the
three materials behaviour across frequencies. Each data point represents the average of 2
min monitoring.
From Fig.3.6 Electrifi is seen with the lowest resistance followed by Protopasta.
Both Electrifi and Protopasta are has linear tendencies across frequencies showing
that they are independent to frequency thus no sign of capacitance in the material.
Koltron G1 however is seen to dive in resistance between 10 and 100 Hz and show
linear resistance in the span of 100Hz to 10kHz.
==PAGE:68==
56
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
Discussion & Conclusion
As the tests were conducted on 3 filament test samples for each of the three material
types, it is not possible to make any major statistical validation of the data, but it
can provides us with a rough estimation of the resistance, behaviour and stability of
the materials.
Looking at Fig.3.5(d), ProtoPasta and Electrifi show behaviour matching that of
a pure resistor by having a constant resistance over time and no signs of capacitive
reactance across frequency while also having a relatively low resistance.
Looking at Koltron G1, the material properties stand out from Electrifi and Pro-
toPasta by having an unexpectedly high resistance. The resistance shows changing
behaviour over time, implying instabilities in the material, and a dive in resistance
across frequencies demonstrates a capacitive tendency.
As the resistance of Pro-
toPasta and Electrifi are tested operating the same method, equipment and test
setup, the instabilities are considered as being caused by the material. Thus, it’s
concluded that Koltron does not live up to the requirements of low resistance, stable
resistance over time and no capacitive reactance. Based on these tests, along with
dialogue and guidance with the project supervisors and representatives from Ambu,
it’s decided to exclude Koltron G1 moving forward in the project.
==PAGE:69==
3.2 The process of prototyping
57
3.2
The process of prototyping
Figure 3.7. Illustration of the design and geometries of the 3D printed preforms
In Fig.3.7 it is seen that four preforms was 3D printed parallel to the process of
thermal drawing, as adjustment were made during the process, where the distribution
between the core and the shell was tweaked upon. The 3D printed Bones was produced
to test how the processing affects material resistance at each process stage.
==PAGE:70==
58
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
The Preforms consist of an insulating shell of PETG and a conductive core of
respectively ProtoPasta and Electrifi, while the Bone consist of the electro conductive
material only. To simulate a needle electrode the core is insulated by an polymer shell
to control the size of the measuring area. This is similar to the Ambu®Neuroline
Monopolar Needle, which has an epoxy coating to define the measuring area, Fig.1.8.
Figure 3.8. 3D printing - Setup and print settings for the applied materials
As illustrated in Fig. 3.8, all components are printed vertically, with (92% lines)-
infill pattern, to align the material fibres and achieve a better conductivity than if
printed horizontally. Later on, the preform is drawn along the printed layers, instead
of across the layers, to prevent the conductive fibres apart [45]. The print settings
were generally following supplier instructions, although the print settings for Electrifi
required multiple test prints and tweaking to make it work since the filament proved
to be highly porous and generates lumps when heated. Both ProtoPasta and Electrifi
requires a tough nozzle due to tare from the hard particles. ProtoPasta was printed
on an Ultimaker 2+, and Electrifi on Creality Ender-3 Pro [46,47].
==PAGE:71==
3.2 The process of prototyping
59
Figure 3.9. Illustration of thermal drawing and the performed steps
As mentioned in the KPI’s and further reflected upon in the material selection,
the material viscosity has a key function when moving into the thermal drawing of
the preforms. Fig.3.10 illustrates the influence of viscosity during thermal drawing.
At too low viscosity a drop-down of material occurs. Due to missing material co-
herence, the preform either breaks off or drags a silk thin line, which was experienced
when drawing the Electrifi preforms.
At too high viscosity the material will not make a dropdown. A vertically pull
force was found needed, which can result in stress to the material as well as uneven
traction if the material temperature is too hot or cold. High viscosity was observed
for the ProtoPasta preforms where the PETG melted and dropped without pulling
with the core as illustrated in Fig. 3.10.
==PAGE:72==
60
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
Figure 3.10. Illustrating the affect of viscosity and observed conditions during tests
The optimum viscosity will provide a drop-down that, by gravity, will make a
plastic deformation without breaking off or necking down to a thin thread. This is
the optimal situation for thermal drawing as the geometry stays intact and the speed
can be controlled, thus resulting in a consistent product and production. Optimum
viscosity can be obtained from pure PETG, indicating that the materials could be
optimised for this process.
To meet the challenges with material viscosity the temperature must be adjusted
which for further studies should be tested and specified but are not within this study.
The printed preforms are thermally drawn to downscale the designed geometry.
Afterwards, the insulating layer is stripped off in one end of the testing needle elec-
trode leaving the conductive core exposed. The other end of the needle electrode is
then cut at an angle of 20 degrees to allow air bubbles to slide from the measuring area
when inserted in saline solution. A step-guide is seen in Fig.3.9 and the specifications
applied for the thermal drawing are viewed in Tab.3.1.
==PAGE:73==
3.2 The process of prototyping
61
Table 3.1
Comment A: The PETG shell, during thermal-drawing of preform 1 and 2, melted
and created a drop-down before the ProtoPasta core. Preform 1 was inserted into a
preheated oven at 240◦C. Preform 2 was inserted into a 50% heated oven (120◦C),
hoping for the heat to get to the core before the PETG made drop-down. This was
without success.
Comment B: The thickness of the core were reduced by 5% and the thickness of
the shell increased by 5% for Preform 3 and 4, in the hopes of getting the ProtoPasta
core to make a dropdown. This did not prove successful for either preform. Preform
3 and 4 was pulled, by hand, on a newton meter to track the pulling force applied
on the material. This was not optimal but yielded some samples that were deemed
usable for further testing.
Comment C: The Electrifi turned out to have a very low viscosity resulting in
multiple breaks during thermal drawing. The melting points of electrifi (140◦C) and
PETG (220◦C) are deviated by 80◦C from each other, causing the electrifi to overheat.
Even at 180◦C, the Electrify core overheats, while the PETG shell does not get enough
temperature to obtain plastic deformation. The core of these needles was found to
have internal bubbles and even entire gaps within the shell after the thermal drawing
process.
It must be recognised that the procedure, of which the test samples for this
thesis is prototyped, lacks detailing and information such as the exact pull
force applied, the pulling speed and the exact temperature of the material when
drawn. Due to the diﬀiculties in production, the preforms were heated in the
oven, taken out of the oven, and drawn at room temperature by hand. As the
temperature of the preform decreased the pull force increased. Thus the drawn
product was examined and the most uniform sections were selected for step 3
Missing data and sources of error
==PAGE:74==
62
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
and 4 in Fig. 3.9.
3.3
The role of processing for material properties
Introduction
Prior to this study it was decided that the polymer composites needles should be
prototyped through 3D printing and thermal drawing. As the electrical properties
of a polymer composite changes according to the processes that it undergoes, the
electrical resistivity has been measured at all stages of our prototyping. These tests
are conducted to monitor the change of electrical conductivity through the following
stages: 3D filament (“original stage”), 3D printed filament (1st processing) and ther-
mal drawing (2nd processing). The illustration in Fig. 3.11 communicates the three
stages of prototyping where the third and final stage is referred to as “The test needle
electrodes”.
Figure 3.11. Caption
Method
An impedance spectroscopy is conducted on 3D filament, 3D printed ”Bone” samples
and 3D printed + thermal drawn samples. The test is conducted as a resistance [Ω]
measurement over time [sec], over a test period of 2 minutes to test for consistency
==PAGE:75==
3.3 The role of processing for material properties
63
over time. The results are then converted to resistivity as to compare the results
across the different geometries and sizes.
As implied by the suppliers of the 3D
filaments (Tab. 2.13 & 2.4), the resistivity increases after being 3D printed. Thus we
expect to see an increase of resistivity across prototype stages. This is expected for
both materials. Test setup 3, see Fig. 3.12, is applied for conducting these tests. The
measured dimensions on the test needle are found in Appendix D, these are used to
estimate resistivity.
Figure 3.12
Results & Analysis
Fig. 3.13 and Tab. 3.2 represents the development of material resistivity across the
stages of processing. From the original data [Ω] the resistivity [Ωcm] is calculated
and the averages are plotted in Fig. 3.13(a), 3.13(b) respectively. Electrifi lacks data
on 3D print + Thermal dawing as the test electrode needles had too high resistivity
to give results, due to the air bubbles and inconsistent core. Looking at the results
for ProtoPasta, the resistivity increases by 12% when 3D printed. A big jump in
==PAGE:76==
64
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
resistivity is also registered after thermal drawing. Fig. 3.13(a) show the big increase
of resistivity and Tab.3.2 adds that it’s is an 219% increase going from the stage of
3D print to Thermally drawn test electrodes.
(a) ProtoPasta resistivity - from filament to test needle
(b) Electrifi resistivity - from filament to 3D Print
Figure 3.13. Material resistivity across processing for ProtoPasta and Electrifi respectively
Electrifi on the other hand show an decrease of resistivity during the processing
of 3D printing which was unexpected. The resistivity falls from 0.1Ωcm to 0.05Ωcm
which is a 50% decrease as seen from Fig.
3.13(b) and Tab.
3.2.
As mentioned
previously the thermal drawing of electrify resulted in unusable test samples, however
all test results and data analysis can be found in Appendix E.
Table 3.2. Avg. resistivity and percentage deviation across process stages.
==PAGE:77==
3.3 The role of processing for material properties
65
Discussion & Conclusion
From the results, it clarified, that the processing of the filaments impacts the mate-
rial resistivity to increase, meaning that the materials ability to conduct electricity
worsens.
A critical consequence is the incapacitation of Electrifi, which after thermal draw-
ing, has lost its ability to conduct electricity. The reason for this is assumed to be
caused by air bubbles in the conductive core, which cuts off the flow of electrons. In
the case of ProtoPasta, a 219% increase in resistivity is monitored in the transition of
thermal drawing. From previously stated sources of error, the thermal drawing could
be optimised by monitoring the exact temperature and the exact force applied to the
material.
It’s seen, from this test, that the materials are designed for 3D printing and that
the process of 3D printing is stable and consistent. In terms of thermal drawing, the
process is not optimal at this stage and needs more testing and trials to make it work,
a clear area of interest and a focal point when moving into future research and testing.
In regards to the KPI’s and overall research questions, it can be concluded that even
though the resistance changes due to the production methods the resistance stays
stable over time and acts as a pure resistor, which qualifies the materials to continue
the testing phase.
==PAGE:78==
66
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
3.4
Test of impedance
Introduction
In this section, the impedance test called the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
(EIS) or just impedance spectroscopy test were conducted for the 3d printed and
thermally drawn test needle electrodes. These tests will be discussed in regards to
the method and results that they yielded and will be put about the earlier test and
results. The EIS is a complex technique for use in electrochemical research [48], [49].
It is an electrochemical technique that makes it possible to measure the impedance
of a system concerning the frequency of the AC potentials.
From an EIS recording via PalmSense4 potentiostat, the output provides the size
of the impedance, |Z|, a Real part Z(Re) and an Imaginar part Z(Im). Z(Re) and
Z(Im) is applied to interpret the magnitude of the resistance, Z(Re), and the signal
distortion, Z(Im). Thus, the Z(Im) is the phase shift, Φ, measured in degrees°. For a
phase shift angle of 0°, the Z(Im) is 0, thus pure resistance. If the Z(Im) lies between
0 and -90°, then capacitative properties are discovered. Due to the interface, a phase
shift angle will be expected, although it must be more or less constant to remain
consistent measuring properties despite the interface.
This test will help answer the research questions
• What is the impedance of the composite needles tested in and out of the envi-
ronment?
• How does the tested composite perform as needle electrode?
The expected results of the test is that some indication of capacitance in the
system due to the interface and exchange of electrons. The impedance is expected
to be higher than the ambu monopolar needels electrodes, but are expected to follow
the general tendencies of the monopolar electrodes.
Methode
The method and setup used for testing the impedance in the testing environment
are very similar to the one in test setup 3 (Fig.3.12), the big difference being the
addition of the relevant testing environment. The normal test environment of needle
electrodes is inside the body in contact with muscle fibres and body fluids. Given the
==PAGE:79==
3.4 Test of impedance
67
Figure 3.14. The 3d printed and thermal drawn test sample made and deemed suitable
for testing
stage of innovation in this project, it was not an environment that was able for testing.
Instead, a 0.9% saline solution was used for the testing of interface impact in regards
to both the EIS test and Noise test which will be discussed in section 3.5. It is the
same test environment used the tests done at Ambu A/S. To implement the interface
aspect a glass container with the saline solution was added to the setup. To make a
setup that would allow for consistency in the test setup and make it repeatable, a lid
with fixation features were made, which can be seen in Fig.3.15(a and b).
In regards to the clamping mechanism for connecting the needles to the poten-
tiostat, the same principal as in the board setup from the previous tests were used,
meaning fastening the test subject between copper plates connected to a wire, insuring
a good connection.
(a) Saline solution setup, Top view
(b) Saline solution setup, Side view
Figure 3.15.
Electrochemical Impedance spectroscopy setup: Saline solution glass con-
tainer setup
==PAGE:80==
68
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
Given the similarities to test setup 3, the test cycle are identical besides the setup
of the interface and test needles. The system and the setup can be seen in Fig.3.16.
Figure 3.16. Impedance Spectroscopy with interface
The lid for the setup was made to ensure consistent placement of the needles
and the reference needle, in regards to how deep it is inserted and length to the
reference electrode. Given the varying dimension of the test needles electrodes
and the curvature of them, a 100% precise placement ended up not being pos-
sible. The influence of both the vertical and horizontal distance between the
electrodes was tested and was found to have little to no impact on the results.
The only influential parameter was the submerge of the needles in the saline
solution, which should be around 10mm or more to ensure a good connection
to the solution.
In regards to the copper plates used for creating optimal connections to the
test subjects, in all setups, 1-5, the oxidised layer on the copper plates were
Addressing error margins in EIS setup
==PAGE:81==
3.4 Test of impedance
69
removed before testing, to ensure a good connection.
Results
The results have been summarised in 6 graphs shown in Fig. 3.17, 3.18 and 3.19.
All the graphs display the volume neutral impedance(VNI) calculated based on
the needle sizes about the tested frequency range of 1-20.000 Hz.
The 5 first graphs display the VNI of the tested preform batch needles as well
as a couple of reference monopolar electrodes from Ambu A/S. The chosen scale is
logarithmic, as to best display the whole range of VNI of the tested needle electrodes.
The last graph in Fig.3.19, displays the impedance as shown in Fig. 3.17 but with
the associated phase shift values plotted as well. Link to full data analysis are found
in Appendix F.
Figure 3.17. Comparrison graf of Impedance between test samples and reference electrodes
Discussion
As seen in the graphs in Fig. 3.17 and 3.18(d) the VNI over the frequency range
tested on for the monopolar electrodes from Ambu and the composite needle elec-
trodes made are following likewise tendencies in its VNI over the frequency. A good
quality seen is the stabilisation of the VNI at higher frequencies which hints towards
frequency Independence. This means that the needle does not act as a capacitor at
higher frequency ranges which is a very positive point of indicator. The composite
needle electrodes are however still seen to have a generally higher VNI than that of
==PAGE:82==
70
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
(a) Preform 1 Volume neutral impedance
(b) Preform 3 Volume neutral impedance
(c) Preform 4 Volume neutral impedance
(d)
Volumen neutral impedance over fre-
quency for Ambu neuroline monopolar needle
electrodes
Figure 3.18.
Volumen neutral impedance test for the Propopasta preform test sampels
and the monopolar refrence electrodes
Figure 3.19. Impedance and phaseshift averages of the tested material
==PAGE:83==
3.4 Test of impedance
71
the monopolar steel electrode and a little less consistent in its VNI values. This is
seen as an indicator of the potential for improvement the electrodes have. However,
the impedance of the composite electrodes is within a range of impedance that is
estimated to be low enough for further testing.
The evaluation of the data does not only rely on the VNI in itself but also on
the phase shift which is directly linked to the impedance as mentioned in previous
sections (Sec. 2.2.1) and Fig.2.6.
In Fig. 3.19 the phase shift graph for the monopolar vs the PP average is very
different. The monopolar phase shift is very steady at around negative 65-70 degrees,
which means that the signal is being distorted and dampened, but given the steady
value, it can easily be transformed to usable data. on the other side, the PP average
phase shift is much more varying between negative 2-84 degrees. At higher frequencies,
the phase shift is quite low which is good but lack of stability is a potential problem.
At this point, it is uncertain how big an impact it will have on the reading of biosignal
but it is assumed that it will have a negative impact. It is believed that measuring
bigger potentials and testing of signal receiving is possible with the given phase shift
and conductivity of the testing needle electrodes.
==PAGE:84==
72
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
3.5
Noice test
introduction
In this section, a noise test of the composite test needle electrodes will be presented
and evaluated. The test will measure the inherent noise of both the composite test
needle electrodes and also the Ambu monopolar needles to provide a point of refer-
ence. Inherent noise is a term used for noise created by circuits or devices, which
is generated naturally within the device and not as a result of external influences
or by the generation of unintended feedback as described by the European union
terminology database.
This test will help answer the research question ”What is the inherent noise of
composite needles tested in the environment” and ”How does the tested composite
perform as needle electrode?” as well as address the KPI of Low inherent noise in the
material
Figure 3.20. A depiction of the general Noise test setup. On the left a Faraday cage is
seen where the test is conducted. the middle and the right picture shows the general setup
==PAGE:85==
3.5 Noice test
73
Methode
Following setup depicted in Fig.3.20 the test can be described as creating an electrical
field in the saline solution, as illustrated in Fig. 3.21 without any outside noise due
to the use of a faraday cage. A Faraday cage is a physical phenomenon where the
electromagnetic wave in the area can be excluded from a finite volume of space by the
enclosure (the cage) made of electrically conductive material, as described in ”Physics
Education(2011), A mobile phone Faraday Cage” [50]
The base noise is measured from one steel plate to the other, setting the lowest
amount of noise possible in the system. The inherent noise of the composite needle
electrodes is measured by inserting them at the same distance as the steel plates and
using the software made by Ambu A/S to determine the noise. The test setup was
made based on how Ambu A/S tested their needles at the current date and were
adjusted, with help from an Ambu expert, to accommodate for the design of the
composite needle electrodes.
Figure 3.21. Noise setup and principle.
Results
The accumulated test results can be seen in Fig. 3.22 and display the noise in µV
over a frequency range of 1-10.000Hz. The results displayed are the average values of
the 3 ProtoPasta Preform samples. It is an accumulated sample size of 19 individual
==PAGE:86==
74
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
test samples of composite test needle electrodes, from 3 different batches. Six tests
of monopolar needles from Ambu A/S, and a reference noise test made between the
two steel plates. A link to the full data analysis is found in Appendix G.
Figure 3.22. This graph shows an accumulation of the noise data collected from all the
composite test needles as well as some Ambu monopolar needles for reference. The baseline
for the noise in the system can also be seen
Discussion
The data shows that the composite test needle electrodes are within the same level of
inhering noise at the Monopolar needles from Ambu A/S. By looking at Fig.3.22 it
can be seen that the average inherent noise are lower for the composite electrodes in
the range of 100-3.000 Hz, about the same from 3.000-5.000 Hz, and slightly higher
from 5.000-10.000 HZ. All this is in an average noise range of around 0.02 µV (setting
aside the data from the first 10 Hz which twists the average). The graph named Steel
reference plates were measured to find the minimum level of inhering noise in the
system, which can be seen to be just below the tested data, at 0.01µV. This value
can be regarded as being 0µV as stated by an Ambu A/S employee and expert in the
field, Martin Nors Skov.
This noise data of the composite needles can for now be seen as a good indicator for
the possibility of using composite materials as an electrically conductive material in
needle electrodes. None of the data points to a significant increase in noise, distortion
of signals or additional noise interference. Based on the data it is assumed that the
composite needle electrodes, in regards to noise, would follow the KPIs set and be able
to intercept signals above a µV of 0.02 in most frequencies, which is nearly identical to
that of the Monopolar needle electrodes from AMBU A/S. Given the dynamic range
of the voltage measured in the neurophysiological tests as described in section 1.3.1
and seen in Fig. 1.1 the lowers value is 1µV meaning the composite needle electrodes
should be able to work within the signal range, for most of the frequency range.
==PAGE:87==
3.6 Findings and conclusion
75
As this has only been tested for the material ProtoPasta, containing Carbon Black,
it will of course be a necessary test to do again for any other possible composite
materials found in further development.
As seen in Fig.3.22 a spike occurs in the interval of 1004-1005Hz showing a high
increase in the noise for all test samples. This is most likely due to external
factors such as other electrical products being powered nearby given the consis-
tency of appearance in every test. The graph does not show the whole voltage
range since the scaling of the graph would make the data from 150-10.000 Hz
unreadable and provide very little information.
The full data range can be
found in Appendix G.
The noise value from the Steel plates reference could be subtracted from the
measured values of the tested samples, as the noise of the samples is accumula-
tive. This was not done as there more than likely always will be some source of
noise interference in a test or system which lead to the decision of keeping the
baseline in the data and graph.
Notes and errors in the noise data
3.6
Findings and conclusion
To conclude main findings of Part 3 the initial research questions are answered.
• How does processing affect material properties?
• Does the prototype test needle perform as a pure resistor?
• What’s the impedance of the composite needles tested in and out of the envi-
ronment?
• What’s the inherent noise of composite needles tested in the environment?
How does processing affect material properties?
A DC resistance test was performed on all the two remaining polymer composites
Electrifi and ProtoPasta. The output proved a decrease in electrical conductivity,
thus an increase of resistance. The impact of 3D printing was of minor character
==PAGE:88==
76
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
where as the thermal drawing caused a 219% increase in resistivity for ProtoPasta
and caused Electrifi to dysfunction as an electrical conductor.
Does the prototype test needle perform as a pure resistor?
Several tests were conducted. The first tests conducted on all three 3D filaments,
Electrifi, ProtoPasta and Koltron G1 proved that Electrifi and ProtoPasta have stable
conductive properties over time indicating pure resistance.
However, Koltron G1
showed unstable conductive properties, why this material was excluded from further
tests.
An impedance test was performed on Electrifi and ProtoPasta showing that Elec-
trifi behaves as a pure resistor with a phase shift angle of zero as a filament and as
3D printed. Although the thermal drawing didn’t work for Electrifi, why there are
no data for this stage. ProtoPasta proved to be a pure resistor as filament, 3D print
and thermal drawn.
What’s the impedance of the composite needles tested in and out of the
environment?
From the above question on pure resistance, ProtoPasta was stated as being a pure re-
sistor. However, the impedance measured as electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
proved that capacitance arises in the interface between the electrode and the body
fluids as electrons and ions must cooperate. It was further found that the monopolar
needle also showed capacitance in the interface, however with a phase shift angle
between negative 65-70 degrees indicating more or less constant capacitance. The
composite needle showed a phase shift angle fluctuating between negative 2-85 de-
grees. This means that the polymer composite distorts the biosignal due to missing
electrode potential in the interface with body fluids.
What’s the inherent noise of composite needles tested in the environment?
The inherent noise of the composite needle lies in the same range as the tested Ambu
Neuroline Monopolar needle. The inherent noise of the ProtoPasta composite needles
lies in the range between 0.015 to 0.02µV, which allows biosignals down to 0.02 µV
if only considering the inherent noise.
==PAGE:89==
3.7 Discussion
77
3.7
Discussion
As all research questions have been concluded, the general results, findings and KPI’s
will be discussed based on the two discussion questions:
• How does the tested polymer composite perform as a needle electrode?
• What alternative materials could be of interest in future studies?
Figure 3.23. Key point indicator table version 1, based on the knowledge gained through
out phase 1
First, the materials ProtoPasta and Electrify was found to be suitable materials
for testing, due to their pure resistance, when measured over the given frequency
range of 0.5-10.000 Hz, tested in Section 3.1.1 and stated from the KPI’s, Fig.3.23.
Thus, the Impedance concerning the interface and the inherent noise of the composite
test needle electrodes could be further tested.
The impedance test showed that the interface does play a huge part in the
impedance and Volume neutral impedance(VNI) as capacitive tendencies were ob-
served. However, capacitive reactants was observed on both the composite electrodes
and Ambu’s Neuroline Monopolar Needle electrode, used as benchmark. However,
the phase shift of the Monopolar electrode was seen to be more stable across the
freq. range whit ϕ = [−75, −65]. For the composite electrodes, ϕ = [−84, −2] which
does mean a distortion of the measured biosignal. This was found to be influenced
by the interface between the electrode materials and the body fluid and how well the
ion-electron exchange occurs.
==PAGE:90==
78
3 Test & validation of polymer needles electrodes
The overall impedance and VNI are seen to be around a factor 10 higher than
the monopolar electrode but follows better tendencies from 1000Hz and above of
being frequency independent in its VNI. The composite needle electrodes averages at
around 150 Z·A
L
[Ωcm] over the frequency range (500-10.000Hz) while the monopolar
needles are at 16 Z·A
L
[Ωcm].
Considering the applicability of ProtoPasta in neurophysiological examinations
the high impedance is assumed to render its applicability to low-frequency measure-
ments useless. However, the appliance for high-frequency examinations could still be
possible with the right filtering to equalise the biosignal distortion at known frequen-
cies.
Besides the finding of arising capacitance in the interface between electrode and
bodyfluids, positive results were found in the noise tests, which suggests the potential
of polymer composites in use as needle electrodes.
The Noise tests showed that the inherent noise of the composite needles and the
Ambu Neuroline Monopolar Needle tested as a benchmark, are close to similar. The
monopolar needle shows a slight decrease over frequency whereas the composite needle
show linear inherent noise. Both the monopolar needle and the composite needles lie
below 0.02µV, which, comparing the dynamic range set in the KPI’s, are considered
insignificant.
Overall the tendencies of the tested composite needle electrode are evaluated as
quite promising, given that no data, at this point in the innovation process, points
towards direct incapability of measuring biological signals with composite materials.
The results are seen to follow the guidelines of the KPI’s but off cause leave room
for improvement, mainly in regards to the impedance and interface of the composite
needle electrodes.
From the limited knowledge, achieved from this study, it is not possible to state
what materials or reinforcements are the most suited for the application. However,
the electrode potential (or the half cell potential) are improved by materials that are
willing to cooperate with the ions from salt(NaCl), calcium (K+), sodium(SO) and
water (H2O) carrying the biopotentials in the body. Thus, this should be the main
criteria for selecting materials for further studies.
Introducing other potential polymer composites on the market
A way of improving the impedance or interface would be the introduction of another
more favourable material.
This thesis has taken a starting point in the world of
electroconductive 3D filaments, but only tested on three of many composites. Three
==PAGE:91==
3.7 Discussion
79
new candidates for testing electroconductive composite needle electrodes are selected
as they hold other, yet similar, properties than the tested materials.
Carbon nanotubes is a molecular structure of ordinary carbon atoms which also
were the basis of the conductivity in ProtoPasta. What makes Carbon nanotubes a
good, and a better candidate for conducting electricity is the tube structure of carbon
which helps the electron flow within the material, resulting in conductivity from
> 103Scm−1 and up to 105Scm−1 [35, 51]. This will possibly lower the impedance
about the use of ProtoPasta but does nothing better regarding the interface aspect.
Polypyrrole (PPy is another good candidate for the use in the electrodes. It is
one of the most investigated conductive materials for use in biomedical applications
due to its high conductivity [25], which lies around 107.5×103Scm−1 [35]. Given the
structure of Polypyrrole, and its ability to react with electrolytes, such as sodium [52]
and Chloride [53], it is believed that the interface with body fluids will be better as
a reference to carbon.
Thirdly Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)(PEDOT) could be considered as
the conductive material. The conductivity of this polymer composite is in the low
range compared to the others, measuring from 0.4-400 Scm1 [35]. The material is
seen as a great biocompatible material, but are not found to have the best ion-electron
conduction [54], which leads to the notion that it won’t have a better interface than
that of ProtoPastas carbon interface.
A notion about Koltron G1 could be made in regards to its conductive capabili-
ties. As more knowledge about the material was gained, koltron were found to have
positive properties in regards to production, having high viscosity and strength, and
having low inherent noise. Furthermore, Koltron G1 is a graphene-based material that
utilises the same carbon atoms in its structure but is structured in a two-dimensional
layer carbon layer. This leads to the notion that the conductivity should be better
than the result showed and are therefore a candidate for further retesting, in a further
development phase.
==PAGE:92==
80
==PAGE:93==
Conclusion
Existing metal needles/electrodes can be replaced with conducting polymer
needles
Through this innovation project, we have become wiser about whether polymer com-
posites are suitable for use as needle electrodes in the field of neurophysiology. Based
on expert interviews, research and experiments, it’s concluded, that polymer com-
posites have potential as used in needle electrodes. This is based on results from
noise tests, which show insignificant property noise of 0.02 µV, which is on a par with
needles used in the current market. In addition, the resistance tests show that the
polymer composite ProtoPasta behaves like a pure resistor and is stable over time
and frequency, which is of great importance for clinical application.
Electrical properties of conducting polymer composites are suﬀicient for
neurological measurements.
Looking at the main electrical requirements stated in the KPI’s the polymer composite
checks off 4 out of 5 boxes.
1. The needle should be able to operate within the frequency range from
0.5Hz to 10kHz, which is tested and concluded that both the Electrifi and
ProtoPasta have consistent conductivity across the scoped frequency range.
2. The needle should be able to detect signals within the dynamic range
from 1µV to 10mV. As the inherent noise of ProtoPasta is tested below 1µV,
the biosignals can be recorded without drowning from the noise that occurred
in the needle electrode. Furthermore, the resistance test was performed on a
10mV voltage, which confirms that the composite needle electrodes can record
a voltage within the scoped dynamic range.
==PAGE:94==
82
Conclusion
3. The noise within the signal should be low enough to measure a biosig-
nal of 1µV. This is confirmed from the inherent noise test which showed an
appx. average noise of 0.02 µV in the composite needle electrodes in the major-
ity of the frequency range. Thus, an insignificant noise.
4. The material (as is) must act as a pure resistor with no capacitance.
This is confirmed by the resistance test, performed on the carbon fibre (Pro-
toPasta) and copper reinforced (Electrifi) polymer composites, conducted on
the fixation board in section 3.1.1.
5. The electrochemical impedance should be low and consistent. The
impedance test confirmed that a phase shift angle between [-2, -84] occur in
the interface between the electrode and the body fluid. Therefore this KPI is
not met as the phase angle causes a significant increase of impedance as the
frequency drops. Furthermore, the biosignal is distorted, which makes it hard
to analyse.
It’s concluded that the electrical properties of the conducting polymer composites,
ProtoPasta and Electrifi, meet the electronically requirements for needle electrodes.
Although, the electrochemical interface (testes on ProtoPasta) does challenge the
electrical capabilities in the testing environments of neurophysiological examinations.
However, This does not conclude the inability for composite materials to work within
the neurological field as electroconductive, but concludes that more tests and studies
are needed. This motivates further material studies testing other potential polymer
composites, such as Carbon Nanotube, Polypyrrole (PPy) or PEDOT, suggested in
the discussion, to continue the evolution of substituting polymers with metals in the
medical industry to improve environmentally and financial issues.
==PAGE:95==
Appendices
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX A
Expert interview with
Mike Haglskjær
Date: 26/08/2021
Location: Ambu A/S, Ballerup Denmark
Attending: Mike Haglskjær, Front-End PMD Manager at Ambu, Rune S. Ottesen
& Caroline Giessing
Summary: Review of Ambu’s needles with a focus on the technical aspect as well
as the clinical need. There was review of the Ambu Neuroline Subdermal needle,
Monopolar needle, Inoject needle and Concentric needle as well as cup electrodes,
corkscrew, and reference electrodes (Surface electrodes).
Rune and Caroline were
presented with prototypes as well as original products and brought products home.
Review of Ambu’s various products that are of interest to the project. Short tour on
Ambu.
Click here for link to appendix pdf If the thesis is received physically the ap-
pendix is found on the next page. Thus, the appendix is not accounted for in the
original page numbering.
==PAGE:98==
86
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX B
Expert interview with
Martin Ballegaard
Date: 06/09/2021
Location: At neurophysiological clinic at Zealand University Hospital
Attending: Martin Ballegaard Head of Clinical Neurophysiology at Zealand Univer-
sity Hospital, Rune S. Ottesen & Caroline Giessing
Summary: Guided tour on the clinical site. A sit down in one of the clinical ex-
amination rooms followed by a demonstration of how the examination is prepared,
conducted, and examined. Both examinations using surface and needle electrodes
were presented. An EMG examination by needle electrode and an evoked potential,
EMG and ENG examination by surface electrodes were presented. Lastly, Caroline
and Rune interviewed Martin Ballegaard with questions on clinical preferences, ap-
plication, and areas of interest.
Click here for link to appendix pdf.
If the thesis is received physically the
appendix is found on the next page. Thus, the appendix is not accounted for in the
original page numbering.
==PAGE:100==
88
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX C
Data analysis -
Material Resistance
This document is the data analysis and the raw data on The Material resistance
of the original filament, testing resistance over time and frequency. The
Raw data is measured at DTU using equipment supplied by DTU.
Click here to enter the Excel-File
==PAGE:102==
90
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX D
Dimensions on tested
samples and
benchmark needle
This appendix explains the procedure of measuring test needle dimensions.
Fur-
thermore dimension tables are found for ProtoPasta Preform 1-4. The length, shell
diameter, estimated core diameter and recording area can be found.
The document are also found by online. Click here to enter the file
==PAGE:104==
Length
Recording 
Area
Core - 80%
Shell - 15%
Gap- 5%
Preform 1-2
Core - 75%
Shell - 20%
Gap- 5%
Preform 3-4
Diameter(Core) = Diameter(Shell)*0.8 
The diameter of the conductive core is 
found from the outer diameter by multiply-
ing with the distribution percentage.
 
See below : 
Diameter(Core) = Diameter(Shell)*0.75
IDENTIFICATION & ESTIMATION OF TEST 
NEEDLE DIMENSIONS 
The cut-oﬀ is done by hand and 
will vary from needle to needle. 
Althoughit is assumed that all 
needles have an avg. angle 
cut-oﬀ on 20 degrees
v=20º
Estimating the mesuring Area:
By creating a CAD model with a 
20º cut-oﬀ and the diameter of 
the core the area is found by the 
build in analysis tool. 
Finding diameter(Core) 
1 of 3
==PAGE:105==
NEEDLES - DIMENSION TABLES
ProtoPasta test needles
2 of 3
==PAGE:106==
SUMMARY - DIMENSIONS
Amu Neuroline Monopolar needles 
3 of 3
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX E
The role of processing
This document is the data analysis and the raw data from performed resistance test
over time measurements.
The data analysis is made in Excel which can be found through the following link:
Click here to enter the Excel-File
==PAGE:108==
96
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX F
Electrochemichal
Impedance Test
This document is the data analysis and the raw data from The Impedance Spec-
troscopy measuring Impedance over Frequency in a 0.9% Salin solusion.
The Raw data is measured at Ambu A/S by equipment supplied by Ambu A/S. A
potentiostat compatible with PSTrace is applied to collect the data. Further, Excel
is applied for data analysis.
Click here to enter the Excel-File
==PAGE:110==
98
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX G
Data analysis - Noise
Test
This document is the data analysis and the raw data from The Inherent noise test
in a 0.9% salin solution. The Raw data is measured at Ambu A/S by equipment
supplied by Ambu A/S. A faraday cage is applied to insulate the test from undesired
noise. Ambu software is applied to collect the data. Furthermore, Excel is applied
for data analysis.
Click here to enter the Excel-File
==PAGE:112==
100
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
[1]
A. Carter, “The Origin of Electricity,” www.eeweb.com 2012.
[2]
M. Kazamel, P. P. Warren, E. Adrian, and L. Galvani, “History of electromyog-
raphy and nerve conduction studies: A tribute to the founding fathers,” Elsevier,
2017.
[3]
I. Advanced Plastiform, “Why the Medical Industry is Choosing Plastic over
Metal,” www.advancedplastiform.com 2021.
[4]
Highland Hospital, “What is a Neurologist? - Neurology - Highland Hospital -
University of Rochester Medical Center,” www.urmc.rochester.edu.
[5]
J. D. Bronzino, “The biomedical engineering handbook: Biomedical engineering
fundamentals,” findit.dtu.dk 2006.
[6]
“Neurology - Divisions of the Nervous System - YouTube,” www.youtube.com.
[7]
N. Dey, A. S. Ashour, W. S. Mohamed, and N. G. Nguyen, “Biomedical Signals,”
in SpringerBriefs in Speech Technology, pp. 7–20, Springer Science and Business
Media B.V., 2019.
[8]
Khan Academy, “Membrane potential (resting membrane potential) (article) |
Khan Academy,” www.khanacademy.org.
[9]
E. Colding-Jørgensen and T. Wesenbjerg Kjær, Klinisk Neurofysologi. Køben-
havn: Forfatterne og Munksgaard, 1 ed., 2017.
[10] “Ambu - Engangselektroder til neurologi,” https://www.ambu.dk/neurologi
2021.
[11] “Ambu - Vores virksomhed,” www.ambu.dk/om-os 2021.
[12] N. Mazzaro, “Concentric and Monopolar electromyographic (EMG) needles,”
pp. 1–3, 5 2007.
==PAGE:114==
102
Bibliography
[13] spes
Medica
S.r.l.,
“EN_Disposable-Concentric-EMG-Needle,”
www.technomed.nl.
[14] . Natus medical Incorporated,
“Healthcare solutions with one thing in
mind TECA ® Elite Disposable Concentric Needle Electrodes,” tech. rep.,
neuro.natus.com.
[15] A. M. P. Helmenstine, “Table of Electrical Resistivity and Conductivity,”
www.thoughtco.com 2019.
[16] Ambu A/S, “Indication for use Ambu ® Neuroline Monopolar,” tech. rep.,
www.ambu.com.
[17] Ambu A/S, “Ambu ® Neuroline Inoject Neurology Needle Electrode-Single Use,”
tech. rep., www.ambu.com.
[18] Ambu A/S, “Ambu ® Neuroline Subdermal Needle Electrode Ambu ® Neuroline
Twisted Pair Subdermal Needle Electrode,” tech. rep., www.ambu.com.
[19] Ambu A/S, “Specifications Materials,” tech. rep., www.ambu.com.
[20] i. GIPA, “A Comparison of Gamma, E-beam, X-ray and Ethylene Oxide Tech-
nologies for the Industrial Sterilization of Medical Devices and Healthcare Prod-
ucts,” 2017.
[21] B. Nussey, “Understanding the basics of electricity by thinking of it as water,”
11 2019.
[22] Wikipedia.org, “Electric current - Wikipedia,” https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Electric_current.
[23] Collins English Dictionary, “Coulomb definition and meaning | Collins English
Dictionary,” www.collinsdictionary.com.
[24] C. Shamieh and G. McComb, Electronics for dummies. Wiley Pub, 2009.
[25] W. D. Callister and D. G. Rethwisch, Materials science and engineering. Wiley,
9. ed., si version ed., findit.dtu.dk 2015.
[26] Khambete
ND,
Shashidhara
J,
Bhudvaneshwar
GS,
and
Sivakumar
R,
“Impedance Measurement System for Concentric Needle Electrodes ,” Biomedical
Technolog Wing, 1995.
[27] Wikipedia, “Double layer (surface science) - Wikipedia,” en.wikipedia.org.
[28] Chemistry
LibreTexts,
“Half-Cell
Reaction
-
Chemistry
LibreTexts,”
chem.libretexts.org 2020.
[29] Chemistry
LibreTexts,
“The
Cell
Potential
-
Chemistry
LibreTexts,”
www.chem.libretexts.org 2021.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
103
[30] S. Dhodawat, “Needle electrode EL306,2.3.3 - YouTube,” www.youtube.com
2020.
[31] G. I. Razdyakonova, O. A. Kokhanovskaya, and V. A. Likholobov, “Influence
of environmental conditions on carbon black oxidation by reactive oxygen in-
termediates,” Procedia Engineering, vol. 113, pp. 43–50, www.researchgate.net
2015.
[32] S. S. Godara, A. Yadav, B. Goswami, and R. S. Rana, “Review on history and
characterization of polymer composite materials,” Materials Today: Proceedings,
vol. 44, pp. 2674–2677, 2021.
[33] A. Afzal and Y. Nawab, “Polymer composites,” Composite Solutions for Ballis-
tics, pp. 139–152, www.linkinghub.elsevier.com 2021.
[34] S. H. Park, J. Hwang, G. S. Park, J. H. Ha, M. Zhang, D. Kim, D. J. Yun, S. Lee,
and S. H. Lee, “Modeling the electrical resistivity of polymer composites with
segregated structures,” Nature Communications 2019 10:1, vol. 10, pp. 1–11,
www.nature.com 2019.
[35] G. Kaur, R. Adhikari, P. Cass, M. Bown, and P. Gunatillake, “Electrically con-
ductive polymers and composites for biomedical applications,” www.rsc.org/
advances, doi = 2015.
[36] Proto-pasta, “Technical specifications - Translucent / Sparkly (HTPLA),”
www.cdn.shopify.com.
[37] “Electrically Conductive PLA 3D Printer Filament by ProtoPlant INC. — Kick-
starter,” Kickstarter.com 2015.
[38] “Conductive PLA – ProtoPlant, makers of Proto-pasta,” www.proto-pasta.com
2022.
[39] “What
is
Carbon
Black?
|
Carbon
Black
101
|
Birla
Carbon,”
www.birlacarbon.com.
[40] S. W. Kwok, K. H. H. Goh, Z. D. Tan, S. T. M. Tan, W. W. Tjiu, J. Y. Soh,
Z. J. G. Ng, Y. Z. Chan, H. K. Hui, and K. E. J. Goh, “Electrically conductive
filament for 3D-printed circuits and sensors,” Applied Materials Today, vol. 9,
pp. 167–175, 12 2017.
[41] R. Yeetsorn, M. W. Fowler, and C. Tzoganakis, “A Review of Thermoplas-
tic Composites for Bipolar Plate Materials in PEM Fuel Cells,” Nanocom-
posites with Unique Properties and Applications in Medicine and Industry,
www.intechopen.com 2011.
[42] Sandvik Coromant, “Graphene – et materiale der måske kan ændre verden,”
www.sandvik.coromant.com.
==PAGE:116==
104
Bibliography
[43] P. H. C. Camargo, K. G. Satyanarayana, and F. Wypych, “Nanocomposites:
synthesis, structure, properties and new application opportunities,” Materials
Research, vol. 12, pp. 1–39, www.scielo.br 2009.
[44] “Koltron G1 - 1.75mm - 100g - Black - add:north,” addnorth.com.
[45] “FAQs | Multi3D,” https://www.multi3dllc.com/faqs/.
[46] “Ultimaker 2+,” www.3deksperten.dk.
[47] “Creality 3D - Ender-3 Pro,” 3deksperten.dk.
[48] PalmSens BV, “Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) - PalmSens,”
www.palmsens.com.
[49] PalmSens BV, “PSTrace5 User Manual,” www.idm-instrumentos.es 2019.
[50] M. M. J. French, “A mobile phone Faraday cage,” Physics Education, vol. 46,
pp. 290–293, www.iopscience.iop.org 2011.
[51] Y. Wang and G. J. Weng, “Electrical Conductivity of Carbon Nanotube-
and Graphene-Based Nanocomposites,” Micromechanics and Nanomechanics of
Composite Solids, pp. 123–156, link.springer.com 2018.
[52] J. Stejskal, M. Trchová, P. Bober, Z. Morávková, D. Kopecký, M. Vrňata,
J. Prokeš, M. Varga, and E. Watzlová, “Polypyrrole salts and bases: superior
conductivity of nanotubes and their stability towards the loss of conductivity by
deprotonation,” RSC Advances, vol. 6, pp. 88382–88391, www.pubs.rsc.org 2016.
[53] X. B. Chen, J. Devaux, J.-P. Issf, and D. Billaud, “THE STABILITY OF
POLYPYRROLE ELECTRICAL CONDUCTIVITY,” Tech. Rep. 94, 1994.
[54] A. Sanchez-Sanchez, I. del Agua, G. G. Malliaras, and D. Mecerreyes, “Con-
ductive Poly(3,4-Ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT)-Based Polymers and Their
Applications in Bioelectronics,” Smart Polymers and Their Applications, pp. 191–
218, 1 2019.
