==PAGE:1==
Deposition and surface characterization
of small mass-selected entities
author
Carlos Pérez Espinar - s193098
Supervisors
Rikke Plougmann
Julius Lucas Needham
Karl Krøjer Toudahl
Jakob Kibsgaard
Ib Chorkendorﬀ
January 23, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This master thesis is submitted as the conclusion of work done from the 23rd of August
2021 to 23rd of January 2022, under the supervision of Jakob Kibsgaard, Ib Chorkendorﬀ,
Rikke Plougmann, Julius Lucas Needham and Karl Krøjer Toudahl. It accounts for the last
30 ECTS points required to obtain a MSc degree in Physics and Nanotechnology at the
Technical University of Denmark.
Thesis Structure
This master thesis is divided into four diﬀerent chapters. Chapter 1 introduces the
project and how it is related to the current energy crisis. Platinum is introduced as a cata-
lyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction. In chapter 2, the diﬀerent experimental techniques
that have been used throughout the project are explained in detail. In chapter 3, a liter-
ature review study is presented to explain why the project took this research line and the
experimental results are discussed in depth. In chapter 4, the project is summarized and an
outlook discussing further possibilities is given.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Jakob Kibsgaard and Ib Chorkendorﬀfor giving me the opportunity
of working in this project under their supervision. I would like to especially thank Rikke,
Julius and Karl for their patience and for training me on how to use the equipment. I would
also like to thank Alexander for the fruitful discussion that we have had. Overall, it has
been a very rewarding experience.
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this work, a cluster source in combination with a time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter is used to
deposit Pt single-atoms, dimers and nanoparticles on a gold polycrystalline substrate with
the aim of creating a catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction. The catalysts will be tested
electrochemically in a 3-electrode-cell. Two diﬀerent loadings were used, 4.6 ng cm-2 and
12.1 ng cm-2. Using such a low coverage had important implications, that is, the laboratory
equipment does not have tools capable of atomic-scale resolution therefore the samples could
not be adequately characterized. Samples where single-atoms and dimers had been deposited
were found to have a poorer performance compared to other systems investigated by previous
PhD students. The nanoparticles displayed irreproducible behaviors, thus it is not possible
to draw solid conclusions about their performance in the hydrogen evolution reaction.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The energy challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Sustainability and green fuels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Pt as a catalyst . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Experimental setup
6
2.1
UHV chambers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
The cluster source system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
DC magnetron sputtering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Gas aggregation zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
Controlling the mass distribution of small entities . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.4
Time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.5
Deposition of small entities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Characterization methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.1
Hemi-spherical analyzer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2
Low energy ion scattering spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.3
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.4
Electrochemistry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Results and discussion
21
3.1
Au as a substrate of Pt entities: a literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Experimental procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Pt nanoparticles for HER
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.1
Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.2
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Pt single-atoms and dimers for HER
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4.1
Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.5
Catalytic performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Conclusion and outlook
38
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
III
Nomenclature
IV
References
V
iii
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
1.1
The energy challenge
One of the 17 challenges of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), set by the
United Nations in 2015, is to create “aﬀordable and clean energy” [1]. According to the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), 73% of human-caused greenhouse gases
come from energy production [1]. This increase in greenhouse gases has a direct impact
on the temperature of the planet, in addition to indirectly contributing to environmental
pollution [1].
The best known and most remarkable greenhouse gas is CO2, which is a direct product
of burning fossil fuels. According to organizations like the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), the global average atmospheric carbon dioxide in 2020 was around
410 ppm, as it can be seen in ﬁgure 1, setting a new record despite the economic slowdown
due to the Covid-19 pandemic [2].
Not only CO2, but also methane, nitrous oxide and
certain greenhouse gases show the same tendency as ﬁgure 1. In fact, the levels of methane
have doubled since pre-industrial time and in general, this huge increase is caused by human
activities [3].
Figure 1: Concentration of CO2 in Earth’s atmosphere in parts per million from 800000
years ago up to present. The levels of CO2 oscillate in time, however the maximum has
never surpassed 300 ppm until our current times, where there is a dramatic increase of the
CO2 levels. From [3].
Since the end of the 19th century, we can see that the increase in the concentration
of greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, is correlated with an abnormal rise in the
Page 1 of 38
==PAGE:6==
1.1
The energy challenge
temperature of the planet. The anomalous temperature is deﬁned as the deviation from the
average temperature of the planet compared to 1961-1990 and, in ﬁgure 2, it is shown that
today the temperature anomaly is around 1◦C. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, human actions have contributed the most to this temperature increase [4].
In addition, the European Commission aﬃrms that an accelerated increase in the anomalous
temperature could result in severe consequences for the planet [5].
Figure 2: Global average temperature deviation compared to the temperature of the planet
between the years 1961-1990.
Climate change does not just have an environmental impact, but it also have social and
economical implications [5]. NASA suggests that the only way to stop climate change is
by going to the energy sources that are triggering these changes [6]. Throughout 2021, we
have seen news in mass media indicating that something was happening with the energy
resources of the planet. As an example of this, we have the announcement of the Austrian
government warning its citizens for a possible blackout, of indeﬁnite duration, in Europe
[7]. Another striking event that has been dragging since 2020 is the global chip shortage
caused by the demand for integrated circuits or semiconductors (commonly called chips)
being greater than current supply capacity [8]. The crisis of chips is mainly caused by the
strict energy quotas imposed on China, which is very diﬃcult to maintain due to nearly 60%
of the Chinese economy is powered by coal and many factories have closed in an attempt to
cut carbon emissions [8].
Almost 200 countries met for the COP26 to tackle the climate crisis, with the main
aim of cutting down the greenhouse gas emissions [9]. The European Union has proposed to
become carbon neutral by 2050, recognizing the need to a substitute for fossil fuels. On top
of that, the European Commission has proposed that Europe should become climate-neutral
with a greenhouse gas emission rate of 0% by 2050. This is stated in the European Climate
Law, published on March 4, 2020 [10]. The objective of the European policies is aligned
with the target of the Paris Agreement to try to stop the advance of global warming below
2◦C. On the other hand, this initiative can only be achieved if industrial policies, ﬁnance,
Page 2 of 38
==PAGE:7==
1.2
Sustainability and green fuels
research and society relate to the innovative technological solutions that are provided. As
an example, we have “Net-zero by 2050” which is the transition of the entire energy industry,
in which more than 30 countries participate [11]. The Net-zero by 2050 report analyzes the
causes and consequences of an ecological transition to a sustainable model that does not have
to sacriﬁce economic growth for ecological growth. Furthermore, the report also examines
key uncertainties, such as the roles of bioenergy, carbon capture and behavioral changes in
society [11].
1.2
Sustainability and green fuels
Society needs more resources as it becomes more complex. These days everything is
interconnected and, for example, things like complex networks, the ease of being able to buy
a ticket for an international ﬂight or the simple fact that we carry around mobile phones
and that they are actually essential for daily activities, has a very high energy cost. Fossil
fuels have a very high energy return on investment and this allows society not to collapse
[12]. However, fossil fuels pollute the environment and are not sustainable in the sense that
one day they will run out. It is therefore essential to think about energy alternatives so that
the entire society makes an energy transition towards sustainable and non-polluting energy
sources. The alternatives that today could be good candidates for this transition are solar
energy and wind turbines. However, solar panels only work on sunny days and wind turbines
only work when there is enough air currents to move the blades. One way to alleviate this
problem is to store this energy in the form of chemical bonds, in batteries. In any case,
catalysts are needed to speed up chemical reactions that would otherwise take too long to
occur.
In this transition towards more sustainable energies, water splitting devices are a promis-
ing option. The working principle of these devices consists of extracting the hydrogen that
is in the water to use it as feedstock to produce, for example, ammonia or methanol or
to be used as fuel to produce energy. However, this method requires the costs of a water
splitting device to be low and the energy production to be eﬃcient. Another similar route
that is being studied today are photoelectrochemical water splitting devices, which directly
use solar energy to split water. Nevertheless, there are still many barriers that make them
ineﬃcient and not scalable [13].
1.2.1
Pt as a catalyst
A catalyst can be deﬁned as an element that accelerates a chemical reaction but does
not participate in the reaction itself. A classic schematic of how a catalyst works is shown in
ﬁgure 3. If we have two reactants A and B, in order for them to react and form the product
AB, an energy barrier ∆E must be overcome. The catalyst oﬀers another pathway in which
the potential barrier is lower but it yields the same product and with the same enthalpy for
Page 3 of 38
==PAGE:8==
1.2
Sustainability and green fuels
the overall reaction. If the reactants bind two strongly to the catalyst, the active sites will
be quickly covered and the catalyst will not yield a good performance. On the other hand, if
the catalyst is very inert, the reactants will not bind to the surface and it will be ineﬀective
in catalyzing the reaction. This is is known as the Sabatier principle, and for the hydrogen
evolution reaction (HER), hydrogen binds a bit strongly to the platinum catalyst.
Figure 3: Potential energy diagram with gaseous reactants.
The catalyst creates a new
pathway in which the energy barrier is lower. Borrowed from [14].
The study of catalysts is an electrochemical phenomenon. The splitting of water reaction
can be written as
2H2O ⇀
↽2H2 + O2
(1)
this process can be separated in two half-cell reactions [14], that is, the anode reaction
for the oxygen evolution:
2H2O ⇀
↽4H+ + 4e−+ O2
(2)
and the cathode reaction for the hydrogen evolution:
Page 4 of 38
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Sustainability and green fuels
4H+ + 4e−⇀
↽2H2
(3)
In this project, a new catalyst for HER will be investigated.
This new catalyst will be
prepared with highly dispersed Pt entities on a polycrystalline gold substrate. The aim is to
see if the distribution of the Pt entities has any kind of enhancement that could improve the
performance of platinum. The catalyst will be created with state-of-the-art tools such as the
cluster source of the Omicron system, which is capable of depositing mass selected entities
thanks to a magnetron sputter head, connected to a time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter. Single-atoms
(SA), dimers and nanoparticles will be deposited on the gold stub with very low loading,
see table 1. The gold polycrystalline stubs will be prepared and characterized before the
deposition of Pt entities, but since we do not have tools capable of atomic-scale resolution,
the catalysts cannot be characterized adequately.
Page 5 of 38
==PAGE:10==
2
Experimental setup
In this section, a complete description of the Omicron setup is provided. An overview
of the characterization methods and a comprehensive and complete description of the exper-
imental methods is thoroughly discussed.
2.1
UHV chambers
All surface science experiments must be carried out at extremely low pressures. When
a closed system is pumped to the lower limit of 10−10 mbar, that is what we call ultra
high vacuum (UHV) conditions. To study surfaces of materials, these experiments must be
carried out at UHV conditions to ensure that there is no contamination in the environment.
Avoiding gas phase scattering coming from characterization techniques, introducing samples
in the system or even when annealing a sample (to avoid ﬂooding the chambers) is essential
to have well-controlled experiments.
In this lab, 4 types of pumps are used in combination in order to always maintain and
achieve UHV conditions:
• Roughing pump: it is used to bring the system down from ambient pressure to
∼10−3 mbar. Once the pressure is low enough, the turbo-molecular pump takes over.
• Turbo-molecular pump: it is used to pump the vacuum chambers down to UHV
conditions or when high dynamic gas loads are to be pumped. The molecular pump is an
axial compressor which captures gas on the upper stages of the rotatory blades and is pushed
to the lower stages and “expelled” through a fore-vacuum pump [15].
• Ion pump: it works by generating strong magnetic ﬁelds and it is used to help the
turbo-molecular pump to sustain UHV conditions.
• Titanium sublimation pump: the TST pump is used in conjunction with the
turbo-molecular and ion pump to remove reactive gases from the vacuum environment.
There are many reasons for opening the system and exposing it to ambient pressure.
Among them, the most remarkable ones are the following: ﬁrst, the maintenance of the
chambers mainly because they can get dirty due to some leak or technical failure; second, a
routine inspection, etc. Usually, after venting the system and making the necessary repairs,
it must be baked. In this way, all the dirt stuck on the walls comes oﬀand the turbo pump
can suck it easily. This is the best way to recover UHV conditions in a couple of days.
Page 6 of 38
==PAGE:11==
2.2
The cluster source system
2.2
The cluster source system
The setup used throughout this project is commonly known as the “Omicron system”
and is made up of two parts: the cluster source and a couple of chambers where the char-
acterization is carried out. The setup is shown in ﬁgure 4 and 5. In fact, these pair of
chambers are two independent units that work for the same purpose: to create and char-
acterize samples designed with atomic-scale resolution. The cluster source that has been
used is called “Nanobeam 2011, Birmingham Instruments” and the characterization cham-
ber, “Multiscan Lab XP, Scienta Omicron GmbH”. Both systems are under UHV conditions
and connected through valves, so that both creation and characterization can be done “in
situ” in the cleanest way possible.
Figure 4: Illustration of the cluster source used in this project. Borrowed from [16].
Figure 5: Left: analysis chamber, right: preparation chamber. There is another chamber
between these two called TPD chamber. In this picture, the TPD chamber was undergoing
repairs and it can only be seen the small stage where the copper block is located.
Within the characterization chambers, we ﬁnd: the preparation chamber, the analysis
chamber and the TPD chamber, as shown in ﬁgure 5. As mentioned before, the preparation
Page 7 of 38
==PAGE:12==
2.2
The cluster source system
chamber is connected to the cluster source. The samples are introduced into the system
through the load lock. With the help of a mechanical and an electronic arm, the samples
can be easily moved between the chambers or placed in strategic points such as in front of
the cluster source to make depositions or in front of the sputter gun. Besides, a wabble
stick is utilized to move samples between the electronic arm, the small heating stage used
for annealing and the TPD chamber. The TPD chamber is an extra chamber designed by a
former PhD student of the group in his master thesis [17]. Furthermore, it is a dependent
chamber since it does not have its own turbo-molecular pump but rather depends on the
analysis and preparation chamber to sustain the vacuum. The TPD chamber did not play an
essential role in my master thesis project. However, I spent countless hours trying to repair
the QMS, together with my supervisor, Julius. Finally, the analysis chamber is the cleanest
chamber of all since, unlike the preparation chamber, it is not exposed to a low pressure
when a sample is introduced or taken out of the system. For this reason, this chamber is
ideal for characterizing samples that are created with the cluster source. The chamber has
several built-in microscopes and surface sensitive methods, including SEM, STM, ISS, XPS
and AES.
Another important point are the repairs and maintenance of the system. Whenever is
needed to repair or ventilate the system, it is mandatory to bake everything for 24 hours in
order to recover UHV conditions. Usually, working with UHV involves covering the setup
with aluminum foil and heating to about 150 ◦C with heat tape. Luckily, the Omicron setup
comes with an automatic heating system, so actually there is no need of covering it with
aluminum foil. A picture of the setup being baked is shown in ﬁgure 6.
Figure 6: A picture of the Omicron system being baked. The walls and cointers help to
prevent the heat from dissipating into the environment.
Page 8 of 38
==PAGE:13==
2.2
The cluster source system
2.2.1
DC magnetron sputtering
The nanoparticle production process starts in the magnetron sputter head. This ﬁrst
process consists of sputtering a circular material, known as target, whose particles that are
released can be be utilized to create small entities or clusters. A sketch of a magnetron
sputter is shown in ﬁgure 7.
Argon is the gas used for sputtering. It ﬂows through some leads and is injected into the
system near the spot close to the target material. The target is usually made of a metallic
material and, in the case of this project, platinum was used. It is typically biased so that
it can attract the Ar+ ions once the Ar gas is ionized. The electrons that are removed in
the ionization process are kept conﬁned as a plasma at a distance close to the target thanks
to the magnetic ﬁeld generated by a circular array of magnets positioned behind the target.
This plasma causes a circular erosion in the target known as “racetrack”.
Figure 7: Illustration of a magnetron sputter head in detail. From [18].
2.2.2
Gas aggregation zone
The atoms that are sputtered oﬀare the ones contributing to the production of small
entities. The chamber where this process happens, shown in ﬁgure 8, and where the mag-
netron sputter is located is called gas aggregation zone. This zone is cooled to around -200◦C
Page 9 of 38
==PAGE:14==
2.2
The cluster source system
with a shroud containing LN2 that surrounds it. The Ar atoms can also help the metallic
particles that were sputtered oﬀto reach thermal equilibrium with the walls of the chamber.
He is introduced to tune the aggregation conditions of the nanoparticles since it acts as a
good nucleation center for metallic atoms. It has a very small mass and is not very reactive,
therefore it does not contribute to the sputtering process nor does it have a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the temperature distribution of the chamber.
Furthermore, since a binary
collision between metallic atoms cannot create a dimer because violates conservation of
energy and momentum, it is in this sense that He facilitates the formation of small entities
[19]. The process of creating a dimer is a three-body collision, where the noble gases help in
the formation of bigger entities:
M + M + Ar/He →M2 + Ar/He
Nanoparticles will grow by atom-addition or by cluster-cluster collisions. The small
entities generated in the aggregation zone undergo a supersonic expansion due to the pressure
gradient that is created between the aggregation zone (which has a pressure between 0.01-1
mbar during clustering) and the lens system (which has a pressure of 10-4 mbar). As shown
in ﬁgure 8, the electrically charged nanoparticles are accelerated with a potential of 500 eV
and subsequently focused in a lens system. The experience of previous users of the cluster
source shows that large nanoparticles have a tendency to be negatively charged and smaller
ones (such as SA) to be positively charged [20].
Figure 8: Sketch of the aggregation zone. The chamber is cooled with LN2 through the
cooling shroud. The nanoparticles aggregate inside the chamber with the aid of He and exit
through the skimmer, undergoing supersonic expansion. From [17].
Page 10 of 38
==PAGE:15==
2.2
The cluster source system
2.2.3
Controlling the mass distribution of small entities
The mass distribution of the small entities depends on the following factors: Ar and He
ﬂow rate, sputter power, temperature, lens potentials, aggregation zone length and size of
the exit aperture. To maximize the deposition rate of nanoparticles, these parameters have
to be modiﬁed manually. However, there is no universal recipe that works for all materials.
It is therefore a trial and error exercise that must be done before each deposition. Previous
depositions, which are registered in the database, also help to tune the system. From all the
experience accumulated by the users of the cluster source, a series of tips can be extracted,
which can serve as a guide for the tuning of the conditions of the cluster source. As a rule
of thumb, we can say that the size of clusters increases as they spend more time in the gas
aggregation zone. Taking this into account:
• By increasing the ﬂow of He, the pressure increases and more massive clusters can be
generated. For smaller entities, this means they do not need to spend that much time in the
aggregation zone. Consequently, it has the eﬀect of shifting the mass distribution towards
higher masses.
• By shortening the length of the aggregation zone, clusters spend less time in the
chamber, which means that the mass distribution will be shifted towards lower masses.
• Closing the exit aperture will increase the pressure, helping the cluster to grow bigger.
• Increasing the magnetron power will lead to a higher ﬂux of particles.
In reality, it is diﬃcult to get two depositions to work with the same parameters because
temperature plays an important role. The cluster source should be cooled for at least two
hours at -200◦C to achieve thermal equilibrium throughout the gas aggregation zone. In
general, it is diﬃcult to ensure that we have achieved a homogeneous thermal equilibrium
since the thermocouple only measures the temperature in a speciﬁc point of the chamber.
Another factor that aﬀects the reproducibility of the depositions is the amount of remaining
target. Since the plasma leaves a donut-shaped mark, the target develops a circular racetrack
when sputtered. The conditions between two depositions are not the same since the target is
modiﬁed after each deposition process to such an extent that it has to be changed periodically
when the material runs out.
2.2.4
Time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter
The particles that are generated in the aggregation zone are electrically charged. These
ions are accelerated using electromagnetic lenses, focused in a narrow beam and directed to
a time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter. According to Newton’s second law, the acceleration experienced
by a charged particle is given by:
Page 11 of 38
==PAGE:16==
2.2
The cluster source system
⃗a = q
m
⃗E
(4)
According to equation (4), the acceleration experienced by the small entities is proportional
to the applied electric ﬁeld, with a constant of proportionality equal to q/m, where q is the
charge and m the mass of the corresponding particle. Thanks to the q/m ratio, it is possible
to ﬁlter the particles in a lateral time of ﬂight ﬁlter like the one shown in ﬁgure 9.
Figure 9: Illustration of a TOF mass ﬁlter. Filtering is done by applying pulses of an electric
ﬁeld. The mass-to-charged sorted entities exit through the exit aperture and are deposited
on the sample. From [17].
When a nanoparticle enters the TOF mass ﬁlter, it experiences a vertical acceleration at
the bottom plate governed by equation (4). Later, on the top plate they experience another
pulse that returns them to the original trajectory, but now laterally displaced as a function of
the q/m ratio. Thanks to this combination of pulses, it is possible to ﬁlter the nanoparticles.
Most of the small entities created in the cluster source will, generally, be electrically
charged with an elemental charge, which can be positive or negative depending on their size.
The problem is that since the ﬁltering eﬃciency depends on the ratio, and not on an absolute
quantity, the small entities with a ratio of 2q/2m, 3q/3m,...Nq/Nm would be ﬁltered in the
same way as those with a ratio of q/m. In practice, the only higher order which can pose a
problem is 2q/2m because the cluster source can be conﬁgured in such a way that the mass
distribution is suﬃciently narrow on the desired mass.
The exit aperture of the TOF mass ﬁlter is ﬁnite, which means that the particle beam
will have a width. The mass spectrum will therefore be a convolution between the exit
aperture and the mass of the small entities. This width will therefore determine the resolution
of the mass spectrum. The diameter of the exit aperture can be modiﬁed with a resolution
of:
Page 12 of 38
==PAGE:17==
2.2
The cluster source system
m
∆m = [20, 50]
(5)
where m is the mass of the deposited small entities, ∆m is the uncertainty of m, and
the interval [20, 50] gives the resolution for the maximum and minimum value of the exit
aperture. The cluster source operates at m/∆m = 20 in normal working conditions, so the
beam current is maximum and allows faster depositions.
2.2.5
Deposition of small entities
When a particle leaves the TOF mass ﬁlter through the exit aperture, it is deposited
in a sample located behind a metallic “ﬂag”. The ﬂag is a ﬂat piece of metal with a circular
hole of ∼4.5 mm in diameter that is placed in front of the sample for covering it and for
doing pre-deposition mass spectrums, which are really helpful for tuning the conditions of
the cluster source. To accomplish this, the ﬂag is connected to an electrometer that measures
the deposition current. Almost all small entities are single-charged hence, it is reasonable to
assume that the deposition current is a direct measure of the amount of particles per second
that are being deposited.
Entities have been previously accelerated with a potential of 500 V, therefore by applying
a bias to the sample and the ﬂag they can be attracted towards the surface of the sample
and, at the same time, have their kinetic energy modiﬁed. The deceleration of the small
entities before they impact against the sample is a parameter that plays a crucial role when
designing the distribution of entities on the surface of the sample. In this sense, we can
diﬀerentiate two regimes: the soft landing regime and the hard landing regime. The soft
landing regime consists of reducing the kinetic energy of the particles below the cohesive
energy of the constituent particle atoms [21]. This will ensure that the particles settle safely
on the surface with minimal changes to the geometry of the cluster. As a rule of thumb,
the energy per atom deposited is approximately less than 1 eV [22]. On the other side,
the hard landing regime is the regime where the kinetic energy of the particles is capable
of signiﬁcantly altering the geometry of the cluster or even the surface of the sample. The
boundary between these two regimes is not well deﬁned since it depends on various factors
such as temperature, surface energy and hardness of the material [21]. As a consequence of
their mass, smaller clusters will need a lower braking potential diﬀerence and larger cluster
will need a larger one. As a general rule in our lab, a braking potential of 45 V is applied to
nanoparticles, 9 V to dimers and 1.5 V to single-atoms. An explanatory picture is shown in
ﬁgure 10.
Page 13 of 38
==PAGE:18==
2.2
The cluster source system
Figure 10: Top: illustration of a nanoparticle in the soft landing regime. Bottom: illustra-
tion of a nanoparticle in the hard landing regime. From [21].
Before introducing a sample into the UHV system, it must be thoroughly cleaned.
Firstly, the sample holder and the gold stub is cleaned with ethanol and left for 10 min in a
sonicator. Once ﬁnished, the sample can now be introduced into the preparation chamber,
through the load lock. The method used for cleaning the sample consists of performing
several sputtering sessions with Ar during 10 min, with a current on the sample typically
between 1-2 µA followed by annealing at 900 K for 10 min in the heating stage. The argon
is dosed until the preparation chamber has a pressure of 1 · 10−6 mbar and is ionized and
accelerated at 1.5 kV towards the surface of the sample. Experience shows that it is necessary
to repeat this sputtering and annealing process at least 3 times to achieve a clean surface.
This cleaning procedure was taken from Jakob Kibsgaard PhD thesis.
On the other side, remember that the cluster source must be cooled down using LN2 at
approximately -200 ◦C for at least two hours. By maintaining a constant low temperature
Page 14 of 38
==PAGE:19==
2.3
Characterization methods
during the process of deposition, it is ensured that the mass distribution does not shift much.
The next step of the deposition process is to open the He and Ar valves of the cluster source
and tune the parameters of the system according to the rules given in section 2.2.3. Once
these points have been covered, the sample may be raster scanned thanks to the electronic
arm that is in the preparation chamber.
This rastering allows to have a homogeneous
distribution of particles on the sample. Integrating the net deposition current as a function
of time, we can estimate the coverage and predict the time needed to reach the desired
coverage, during the deposition. The coverage is deﬁned as the ratio of the area or number
of sites that the deposited nanoparticles occupy by the total area or number of sites on the
sample. To estimate the coverage, we assume that the nanoparticles are spherical and thus,
the projected surface of a single entity is given by A = 4πr2, where r is the radius. However,
for dimers, where geometry does matter, some considerations must be taken. For a detailed
explanation, see the appendix.
2.3
Characterization methods
In this section, an overview of the characterization methods used in this project will be
given. A brief introduction to electrochemistry will also be presented in the last sub-section.
2.3.1
Hemi-spherical analyzer
The hemi-spherical analyzer is used to measure the energy of ions and electrons when
we carry out an ISS or XPS measurement. It is made up of two hemi-spheres, an entrance
slit and a detector, as shown in ﬁgure 11.
Figure 11: Representation of a hemi-spherical analyzer. Borrowed from [23].
Charged particles are ﬁltered through a retarding grid at the entrance slit and a potential
diﬀerence between the two hemispheres.
The electrons that manage to go through are
Page 15 of 38
==PAGE:20==
2.3
Characterization methods
detected in the exit slit, where a channeltron is mounted. In the channeltron, the electrons
bombard a second-emissive material which causes a cascade eﬀect that can be detected with
a pre-ampliﬁer [23]. The resolution is a constant percentage of the pass energy (1%) and
the pass energy is typically 5 eV to 100 eV, therefore it is more convenient to use low pass
energies if we want to obtain a better resolution. However, minimizing the pass energy also
minimizes the signal-to-noise ratio, therefore an optimal balance between these two must be
found.
2.3.2
Low energy ion scattering spectroscopy
Low energy ion scattering spectroscopy, often called ISS (Ion scattering spectroscopy),
is an experimental technique that consists of ionizing atoms (usually noble gases) and accel-
erating them against a sample in order to measure the kinetic energy of the backscattered
ions. This technique is extremely surface-sensitive since the scattering cross-section is of
the order of Å2. Nearly all the ions that penetrate inside the surface are neutralized and,
typically, only < 1% can be detected with the hemi-spherical analyzer.
Figure 12: Schematics of the underlying physics of an ISS experiment. Mi and E0 are the
mass and kinetic energy of the incident He+ ion, Ms is the mass of an atom on the surface
and θ is the scattering angle. Borrowed from [23].
This collision is elastic and can be easily modeled by applying the laws of energy con-
servation and momentum conservation to a binary collision between the incident ion and
a particle on the surface of the sample. By combining the conservation equations, we can
isolate the kinetic energy of the scattered ion as a function of its initial kinetic energy (E0),
mass of the ion (Mi) and the particle (Ms), and scattering angle (θ):
Page 16 of 38
==PAGE:21==
2.3
Characterization methods
E1
E0
=
"p
M 2
s −M 2
i sin2(θ) + Mi cos(θ)
Ms + Mi
#2
(6)
Thanks to equation (6) we can determine the mass of the unknown species found on the
surface of the sample. By knowing the mass we can therefore determine the type of element.
It is in this sense that ISS gives a qualitative idea of the elements that are on the surface of
the sample, but not quantitatively.
If in equation (6) the mass of the incident ion is plotted as a function of the target mass
(and keeping the scattering angle constant) we can see that the resolution of the method
decreases as the mass of the target increases. Figure 13 is an example where this equation
has been plotted and the resolution for diﬀerent groups of the periodic table can be visually
appreciated. The curves of helium, as well as those of neon and argon correspond to diﬀerent
scattered ions. We can see that heavier ions, like Ar, have better resolution than light ions
like He. However, using heavy ions can damage the surface of the sample since, instead of
elastic collisions, we would be sputtering oﬀthe atoms of the surface. The challenges will be
related to issues with the resolution because in the Omicron setup only He is available for
performing ISS. Regarding technical aspects, the ISS setup is located in the analysis chamber.
The samples were placed on the stage and were tilted at a scattering angle of 146.7◦and
manually aligned with the help of a peephole, also located in the analysis chamber. To
perform ISS experiments, the chamber was dosed with He until a pressure of 5 · 10−8 mbar
was reached. Helium gas was typically ionized with 1 kV and 10 mA of emission current.
Figure 13: Illustration of the mass resolution of ISS. The solid black line correspond to He,
the dash-dotted line to Ne and the dotted line to Ar. The coloured regions in yellow and
grey indicate the masses of diﬀerent elements of the periodic table. Borrowed from [23].
Page 17 of 38
==PAGE:22==
2.3
Characterization methods
Samples that are introduced through the load lock usually contain dirt and a layer of
adventitious carbon on the surface. This causes to have contaminants on the sample and
translates into large and non-desired signals in the spectrum. Contaminants can also be
present in the preparation or analysis chamber but their concentration will be much lower.
For this reason, it is very important to have a good cleaning procedure. In our case, cycles
of sputtering with Ar and annealing in the heating stage were done until the signal of the
gold peak did not change much from one cycle to another.
2.3.3
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy is an experimental technique that consists of measur-
ing the kinetic energy of the photoelectrons that are emitted when X-rays impact on the
sample. With this kinetic energy, the binding energy of the photoelectrons can be computed
and thus, information of the chemical composition and oxidation states can be found. It
is a type of experiment based on the photoelectric eﬀect. By imposing the conservation of
energy on the photon-atom interaction, we obtain a very simple equation:
Ekin = hν −EB −Φ
(7)
where Ekin is the kinetic energy of the photoelectrons, hv is the energy of the photon that
hits the sample, φ is the work function of the sample and Ebin is the binding energy of the
photoelectron before being emitted. With all this information we can map the orbital states
of the probed material. The only unknown quantity in the experiment is Ebin, thus it can
be calculated based on the other contributions. The binding energy of each photoelectron
is characteristic and unique. Thanks to this property, we can characterize the surface of the
sample with the help of the hemi-spherical analyzer. The Omicron setup has a Mg anode to
generate X-rays. The X-ray generation mechanism consists of bombarding the anode with
highly energetic electrons. Then, these highly energetic electrons remove the electrons from
the electronic shells of Mg and the electronically excited anode relaxes and emits photons
with the same energy as the energy diﬀerence between the transition from the excited state
and the ﬁnal state of the electron.
For the case of the Mg anode, the transitions from
the 2p3/2 or 2p1/2 levels to the groundstate have an energy of 1253.6 eV, with ± 0.5 eV of
uncertainty due to the spin-orbital splitting of the energy levels. However, there are other
possible transitions that make the emission spectrum complicated. These transitions have
a lower probability, but they result in satellites in the spectrum if a monochromator is not
used. Furthermore, due to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle we will obtain a spread of
around 1 eV for the most intense magnesium radiation line, called MgKα12 [23].
Page 18 of 38
==PAGE:23==
2.3
Characterization methods
Figure 14: Mean free path of the electrons as a function of the energy for diﬀerent elements
of the periodic table. Borrowed from [23].
The penetration depth of photoelectrons onto a material depends on the type of material.
Figure 14 is known as the universal curve and gives information about the mean free path
for diﬀerent elements of the periodic table. The energy range goes from 20 to 2000 eV with a
maximum penetration of 10 nm, meaning that in general, electrons will not penetrate much
into a material.
2.3.4
Electrochemistry
The samples preprared with the cluster source are used as catalysts for the hydrogen
evolution reaction.
The methods for determining the catalytic activity and stability are
based on electrochemical methods. Although I was not part of these experiments, I have
participated in the discussions with my colleagues and I have worked in collaboration with
Alexander, the other master student in charge of the electrochemical measurements. For
this reason, a brief overview of the diﬀerent electrochemical experiments will be presented
in this sub-section.
Electrochemical reactions are reactions that involve transfer of electrons between an
electrolyte and an electrode, and can be separated into two half-cell reactions: the reduction
reaction, which takes place in the cathode, and the oxidation reaction, which takes place in
the anode. By applying a potential diﬀerence between the two electrodes it is possible to
shift the reaction from the equilibrium.
In ﬁgure 15 we have an example of a 3-electrode-cell, which is the working tool for
measuring the catalytic activity and stability, sometimes simply called catalytic performance.
Page 19 of 38
==PAGE:24==
2.3
Characterization methods
Figure 15: Illustration of a 3-electrode setup. Borrowed from [24].
The samples prepared with the cluster source were placed in the working electrode (WE).
This is where the reaction we want to study takes place. The other reaction happens in the
counter electrode (CE). Lastly, the reference electrode, as its name suggests, is an electrode
which has a well-know electrode potential and is used to determine the potential of the two
half-cell reactions. In this way, the current generated by the electrochemical reaction can be
measured against the potential that is used to drive it [25].
The most widely used type of electrochemical experiment is the cyclic voltrammetry
(CV). It consists of plotting the current in the WE as a function of the applied voltage,
which is normally scanned over a wide range of negative and positive values. This is done to,
for example, study the stability of the catalyst. Nonetheless, there are other techniques such
as chronoamperometry that are less common but, perhaps, are more suited to certain types
of experiments. However, the best and most straightforward way to measure the intrinsic
activity of a catalyst is through the turnover frequency (TOF), which tells you the number of
molecules converted per unit of time and per active site. The TOF of the catalysts prepared
in this project will be discussed in the next section.
Page 20 of 38
==PAGE:25==
3
Results and discussion
In this section, the experimental data measured in the laboratory is presented. The
eﬀects of particle coverage, catalytic performance and experimental issues are discussed in
detail. Besides, the initial goal of the project will be explained and how it was redeﬁned
after doing a bibliographic research.
3.1
Au as a substrate of Pt entities: a literature review
The substrate on which the platinum small entities have been deposited corresponds to
a gold polycrystalline stub. The initial motivation of this project was not to work with a
polycrystalline surface but to use the nucleation sites of the Au (111) herringbone recon-
struction as anchor points to deposit a catalyst material. In the beginning of the project, we
had a general idea of what catalyst material could we deposit but we had not yet chosen it.
The gold herringbone reconstruction has been widely studied both experimentally and
theoretically through ﬁrst-principles calculations [26] and it was used by Jakob Kibsgaard
in his PhD thesis to study MoS2, which has the property of being deposited “easily” in
privileged sites for the nucleation of clusters, called elbow sites. The reconstruction of the
(111) surface of gold occurs in response to the strong tensile stress caused by the fact that
the superﬁcial density of the gold atoms is altered compared to the corresponding bulk
structure [27]. The surface unit cell contains 23 atoms distributed in 22 bulk sites, which
results in the formation of fcc and hcp domains that expand parallel to each other, creating
a herringbonelike pattern as it can be seen in ﬁgure 16. We can also distinguish two types of
ridges: x-ridges and y-ridges. The main diﬀerence is that in the x-ridges there is a dislocation
in the elbow sites where a gold atom with a reduced coordination number is connected to
another with an increased coordination number, thus causing a change in the electronic
density that could favor the interaction with ad-atoms [28]. On the other hand, the y-ridges
are only characterized by a geometric shift in the crystal lattice.
Page 21 of 38
==PAGE:26==
3.1
Au as a substrate of Pt entities: a literature review
Figure 16: STM images of the gold herringbone reconstruction. The elbow sites are formed
in the domain boundaries and can be of two types: bulged or pinched. In an STM image,
what is represented is actually the electronic density of states. Borrowed from [28].
Deposition and nucleation in the elbow sites has been studied for many elements of
the periodic table. For example, the most popular ones that are known to nucleate in these
special sites are Co [29], Ni [30] and Pd [31]. Over the years there has been a growing interest
in the community for ﬁnding new structures that could facilitate the understanding of single-
atom catalysis. A recent review article published by E. Charles H. Sykes and co-workers [32]
went over the diﬀerent types of single-atom alloys so far examined in the literature. The
term single-atom alloy or SAA refers to a heterogeneous catalyst in which metallic atoms,
often called dopants, are atomically dispersed on a metallic substrate, often called host. The
system that is studied in this project, Pt entities on Au, falls into this category. In order to
study SAA systems, two new concepts must be introduced: the aggregation energy and the
segregation energy. A positive segregation energy indicates that the dopant is more stable
in the host surface layer while a negative segregation energy indicates that the dopant is
more stable in the bulk. In the same way, a positive aggregation energy will tend to disperse
the dopant atoms and thus form a SAA, while a negative aggregation energy indicates that
the dopant atoms will tend to spontaneously sinter into clusters or nanoparticles. In this
literature review it is shown that the aggregation energy of a Pt/Au(111) SAA is close to
zero, as it can be seen in ﬁgure 17, which suggests that the system is able to disperse the Pt
atoms into isolated sites and, to a lesser extent, form small ensembles. This is due to the
fact that the density functional theory (DFT) values shown in ﬁgure 17 are, according to
the authors, computed neglecting entropic contributions which favor the dispersion of the
dopants atoms.
Page 22 of 38
==PAGE:27==
3.1
Au as a substrate of Pt entities: a literature review
These data (ﬁgure 17) predicts that platinum is capable of binding and staying in the
Au (111) surface. However, it is not entirely clear if it does so exclusively in the elbow sites
of the herringbone reconstruction. Apparently, this question had already been investigated
more than 20 years ago by Stig Helveg in a STM study. The ﬁndings were that Pt does not
nucleate randomly, but it does so in a disordered way through an exchange mechanism: “the
alloying is found to proceed preferentially on the upper terrace near step edges or near the
stacking fault domain boundaries, separating the Au fcc and hcp regions” [33]. A ﬁgure of
Pt entities on a Au (111) surface can be seen clearly in ﬁgure 18 and also in small inset of
ﬁgure 17. Now, it is therefore evident that it is not possible to use the elbow sites of the
herringbone reconstruction as anchor points for Pt entities.
Figure 17: Theoretical predictions, calculated through DFT simulations, of the aggregation
energy for diﬀerent systems that are thermodynamically disposed to form SAA. The two
insets correspond to STM images of Pt atoms dispersed on a Cu (111) surface and small Pt
clusters on a Au (111) surface. Borrowed from [32].
Page 23 of 38
==PAGE:28==
3.2
Experimental procedure
Figure 18: STM image of Pt atoms on a Au (111) surface. Borrowed from [33].
On account of the results found in the literature, the Pt/Au(111) system was ruled out.
Besides, the new gold stubs that were purchased for this project were not properly polished,
so they had to be shipped back to the company. On top of that, the STM in the basement
of DTU Physics is not operational and it has not been possible to ﬁx it yet. Since the only
tool at our disposal capable of atom-size resolution was not available, there is no point in
trying to tweak the distribution of small entities because it is not going to be possible for
us to “see” them. Overall, using the (111) crystalline structure was no longer a convenient
option and hence, polycrystalline gold stubs were chosen instead as a substrate material. The
catalyst would be platinum since our electrochemical results could be compared with data
from previous PhD projects in SurfCat, where Pt nanoparticles were deposited on HOPG
stubs for studying HER. Furthermore, in the hypothetical case that we would have deposited
only in the elbow sites, the loading would have been extremely low. Approximately 40 times
less than the one used in the project, which would have made it impossible to perform
electrochemical experiments.
3.2
Experimental procedure
Before introducing the samples in the Omicron system, the ﬁrst step is to mount the gold
polycrystalline stubs in a sample holder. The sample holders have a hole of approximately
5 mm of diameter in which the gold stubs ﬁts perfectly. They also have a small hole on the
side, in which there is a small screw that is used to keep the gold stub ﬁxed, thus preventing
them from falling out when they are manipulated with the transfer arm that is inside the
preparation chamber. However, we encountered problems with certain samples as the small
screw somehow lost strength and the gold stubs ended up coming out of their place and
Page 24 of 38
==PAGE:29==
3.2
Experimental procedure
falling to the ﬂoor of the preparation chamber. This unfortunate event happened two times.
After that, it was decided to attach a molybdenum mask on top of the sample holder to
prevent the stub from falling again, as it is shown in ﬁgure 19. Hence, samples 1-9 were
prepared without a Mo mask and samples 10-18 were prepared with a Mo mask, adding up
to a total of 18 samples. They are numbered chronologically, therefore sample 1 was the ﬁrst
one to be crafted and sample 18 is the last one. Among these 18 samples, the most relevant
data will be presented and discussed in this section. A summary table is provided in table
1.
Loading
12.1 ng cm−2
4.6 nm cm−2
Samples
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Type
SA
Dimer
SA
Dimer
SA
SA
SA
NP
Table 1: Number of samples prepared and loading deposited throughout the project. The
type of small entities deposited on the samples were SA, dimers and 2 nm (of diameter)
NPs. Due to lack of time issues, no trimers were deposited and, instead, it was preferred
to make more SA, dimers and NPs samples in order to guarantee the reproducibility of the
electrochemical data. Sample 13 does not exist.
Figure 19: Image of a sample where a Mo mask is attached on top, preventing the gold stub
from falling. In this one, it can be seen a small bright spot in the stub due to it was touched
accidentally with the tip of a screwdriver. Consequently, it was sent back to Alexander for
polishing the surface again.
The ﬁrst step for cleaning the polycrystalline gold stubs was to submerge them in a
beaker containing ethanol and sonicating them for 10 min. After this, the samples were
introduced into the preparation chamber through the load lock. The preparation procedure
of the samples was carried out introducing two samples at the same time in UHV. The
method for cleaning the gold polycrystalline stubs once they are in the UHV system was the
same for all of them. The procedure is very simple, it consists of doing cycles of sputtering
and annealing until the ISS signal of the gold peak does not change too much between two
cycles. A cycle corresponds to:
• Sputtering the sample with Ar+ at 1.5 kV with a current on the sampple between 1-2
µA, for 10 min. The preparation chamber is dosed with 10−6 mbar of Ar.
Page 25 of 38
==PAGE:30==
3.2
Experimental procedure
• Annealing the sample in the heating stage at 900K for 10 min.
This recipe for cleaning the surface of the stubs is in fact a procedure for generating
a clean surface with a regular herringbone pattern if the surface exposed was actually the
(111) surface. After each cycle of sputtering and annealing, an ISS was performed to measure
the gold signal and the level of contamination in the sample. The criterion for deciding if a
sample was clean enough, consisted of comparing the current ISS spectrum with the previous
one. If the intensity of the Au peak is similar to the one measured in the previous cycle,
then the surface would be clean. Doing a bit of trial and error with the ﬁrst samples, we
realized that the maximum intensity of the gold peak was found between 70000 counts/s
and 80000 counts/s and the number of cycles needed to clean the surface of a stub was 3. In
ﬁgure 20, an example of an ISS spectrum used to keep track of the contamination is shown.
Practically, all of the spectra recorded had the same features as 20, so eventually we stopped
recording all of the ISS in between the cycles.
Page 26 of 38
==PAGE:31==
3.2
Experimental procedure
Figure 20: ISS spectrum of a polycrystalline gold stub before (cycle 0) and after (cycles 1,2
and 3) exposing it to repetitions of sputtering and annealing. The ion source was 1 kV He+
with 0.1 mA emission current, the analysis chamber is dosed with 5 · 10−8 mbar of He and
the analyzer angle is kept constant at 146.7◦and a constant retard ratio of 5 eV. The ion
beam was scanned in a 1x1 raster pattern.
In ﬁgure 20, The Au line has the highest intensity, as expected, and is followed by a small
argon bump that increases its signal as the number of cycles increases. This phenomenon
might be explained by the fact that we are sputtering with Ar+. Therefore, there must be
some argon atoms left on the surface. However, argon is a noble gas and does not like to
react with other elements, so it is feasible that the atoms that we “see” in the ISS spectrum
are not anchored but rather mobile or weakly bound to the surface. Lastly, we can see other
contaminants such as Na, F and O to a lesser extent. These contaminants probably come
from the adventicious carbon signal that can be seen in cycle 0, from the UHV chambers
or maybe they are inherent to the gold stubs. The adventicious carbon signal is caused by
the atmospheric elements that have been deposited on the gold stub as it has been exposed
previously to atmospheric pressure for a long period of time. That leads to traces of of
chemical residues in small amounts. Nonetheless, after 3 cycles, contaminants are present in
much lesser measure compared to gold, and so they should not interfere with the deposition
and electrochemical measurements of Pt entities.
Page 27 of 38
==PAGE:32==
3.3
Pt nanoparticles for HER
3.3
Pt nanoparticles for HER
3.3.1
Preparation
The NPs deposited have a radius of 2 nm and a mass of 54000 amu, assuming that
they are perfect spheres. For further understanding the spherical approximation, see the
appendix. In total, this corresponds to 2.76 · 1012 Pt atoms or a loading of 4.6 ng cm-2.
Although a polycrystalline surface, as its name suggests, is composed of many crystal planes,
for a fcc structure like bulk gold the plane which has a lower surface energy is the (111)
plane. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that most planes that can be found on the
polycrystalline gold surface are (111). Because of this argument, the coverage of Pt entities
on gold was calculated on the basis that the surface is actually a perfect (111) bulk crystal
plane. Such low coverages allow us to study the behaviour of small entities.
The cluster source was tuned to deposit 2 nm Pt NPs homogeneously in a 5x5 mm raster
pattern, so that the NPs are uniformly distributed on the surface. Figure 21 shows a mass
distribution before and after the deposition of NPs. The peak of the mass spectrum does not
need to lie exactly on the desired mass. You just tune to get a mass distribution where you
get a decent signal from the mass you are interested in. We assume that all masses measured
are mostly single-mass single-charge, as it is easier to remove or add a single electron to a
nanoparticle or atom than to add or remove more. The ratio single/double of ﬁgure 21 is
approximately 2, which actually sub-standard, but the Pt target was running out and this
is the best one could get. The distribution is shifted towards higher masses in the post-
deposition spectrum and the current is reduced, which is likely a temperature eﬀect. The
other mass spectra for the depositions NPs are similar to ﬁgure 21.
Page 28 of 38
==PAGE:33==
3.3
Pt nanoparticles for HER
Figure 21: Mass spectrum of pre and post deposition of 2 nm Pt NPs with a mass of 54 · 103
amu. The NPs are negatively charged making the current to be negative.
Once the mass distribution of the cluster source is as optimal as possible, we are ready
to deposit on the sample. The sample is biased to 45 V to achieve the soft landing regime
of the NPs. Figure 22 shows the deposition current as a function of time. There is a leak
current of around 2 pA, which comes from the value of the resistance between the sample
and the ground. Once the beam is “unblanked”, deposition begins. The deposition current
being oscillatory is just an eﬀect caused by the 5x5 raster pattern,
Page 29 of 38
==PAGE:34==
3.3
Pt nanoparticles for HER
Figure 22: Deposition current corresponding to the deposition of a 2 nm Np. The loading
used was 4.6 ng cm-2 of platinum.
3.3.2
Characterization
The great limitation of this project is the lack of characterization tools available to
study a system with such a small loading. ISS is a technique that loses resolution if the
target mass is large, so overall it is deﬁnitely an unsuitable tool. The mass of platinum is
approximately 195 amu and the mass of gold is approximately 197 amu, which means that
it is going to be even harder to characterize the samples with ISS since the peak of gold and
platinum will overlap. Bearing this in mind, no post-deposition ISS spectrum was recorded,
except for the last sample that corresponds to a NP deposition. It was only recorded for the
purpose of showing some data to proof that is actually pointless and no new information is
gained by recording a post-deposition ISS spectrum. This spectrum is shown in ﬁgure 23.
As expected, the gold and platinum signal are indistinguishable. However, two things can be
noted: the post-deposition peak is shifted to the right and the intensity is much lower than
the pre-deposition curve. First of all, it does not make much sense that the post-deposition
peak is shifted to the right since the mass of platinum is slightly lower than gold, so it should
be shifted to the left in any case. This is most likely due to a lack of resolution and might
be ﬁxed by taking smaller steps in the energy scan. Secondly, the decrease of the gold signal
is a bit more tricky to understand. It may be due to the fact that when the deposition is
carried out, the preparation chamber is no longer in UHV conditions and it is possible that
a small amount of contaminants could have been also deposited on the surface. However,
Page 30 of 38
==PAGE:35==
3.3
Pt nanoparticles for HER
this explanation does not seem very convincing since the signal from O, F, Na and Ar is
practically the same before and after depositing platinum. It is most likely that since the
surface structure has changed after deposition, the electronic structure is also altered in such
a way that the cross-section for the neutralization of He+ is lowered.
Figure 23:
ISS spectrum corresponding to pre and post deposition of NPs.
The pre-
deposition intensity corresponds to three cycles of sputtering and annealing.
No XPS was carried out to characterize the samples, except for the last sample which
was done only for educational purposes. XPS is not a suited technique for this project. In
addition, the coverages used in this project are so small that they are actually below the
detection limit of the device. In ﬁgure 24, an XPS spectrum is shown in the region where
one would expect to see a platinum signal. However, only the signal that appears is the 4f
Au peak. Two other peaks that are shifted approximately 5 eV and 9 eV with respect to the
4f Au peak are most likely ghost peaks coming from the same Mg transition line.
Page 31 of 38
==PAGE:36==
3.4
Pt single-atoms and dimers for HER
Figure 24: XPS survey scan corresponding to the deposition of 2 nm Pt NPs on a gold
polycrystalline stub, with a loading of 4.6 ng cm-2. The X-ray source is Mgα (1253.6 eV),
the step distance is 0.3 eV and the constant analyzer energy is 50 eV.
3.4
Pt single-atoms and dimers for HER
Catalysis is a surface phenomenon. In theory, if the surface exposure area of the catalytic
material is increased, its HER current density should improve as well. The ratio A/V ∝r−1,
where A is the area, V the volume and r the radius of the particle tells us that decreasing
the radius would yield a large surface to volume ratio and thus this would make the catalyst
more eﬃcient. Nonetheless, the nature of certain types of catalysts such as SAA might be
inﬂuenced by quantum mechanical eﬀects. As pointed out by some authors, the number of
sites increases when the mass loading increases. However, this is not the same as improving
the intrinsic catalytic activity [34]. The interesting feature and the opportunity that SAA
systems bring, is therefore to study the behavior of the active sites from a fundamental point
of view, always with the focus on determining the “dream system” where no atoms remain
inactive in the substrate.
In section 3.1, SAA-like systems were analyzed and discussed from a solid-state physics
point of view, but not from an electrochemical point. In this section the deposition of small
entities such as SA and dimers will be discussed. As mentioned in previous sections, the
plan was also to deposit trimers but due to lack of time they were discarded. Taking into
account the arguments made in 3.3 about the problems of characterizing a system with such
Page 32 of 38
==PAGE:37==
3.4
Pt single-atoms and dimers for HER
a small loading, neither ISS nor XPS post-deposition spectra were taken. XPS would make
sense if, for example, we wanted to study the catalytic activity as a function of loading. A
very important issue should be noted here since some SA and dimer samples have diﬀerent
loadings: remember that samples 1-9 used a higher loading, corresponding a 1% of coverage
with SA in terms of the HOPG lattice and samples 10-18 used a lower loading, which
corresponds to a 1% coverage with SA in terms of the (111) fcc lattice.
3.4.1
Preparation
The steps prior to the deposition of the gold stubs were exactly the same as for the
NPs, that is: sonication with ethanol and 3 cycles of sputtering and annealing once they
are introduced in the Omicron setup. For the case of Pt SA, the cluster source was tuned
to get a signal as high as possible centered in the mass of the platinum atom, according to
the indications given in the section 2.2.3. An example of a mass spectrum in which a SA
has been deposited is shown in ﬁgure 25. In the spectrum, a clear Pt SA and to a lesser
extent, a dimer, appear in the graph. The single/double ratio is one order of magnitude
diﬀerence, approximately 15. The entity with a mass of around 235 amu would correspond
to Pt1Ar+. In the case of dimers, the cluster source was also adjusted to achieve the highest
signal possible, see ﬁgure 26.
Figure 25: Mass spectrum of Pt single-atoms. Two are elements are detected in the spectrum
which, due to their mass, they must be Pt1Ar+ and Pt2+ dimers.
For the depositing of SA and dimers, a potential of 1.5 V and 9 V was used to achieve
the soft landing regime. An example of Pt SA deposition can be seen in ﬁgure 27.
Page 33 of 38
==PAGE:38==
3.4
Pt single-atoms and dimers for HER
Figure 26: Mass spectrum of Pt dimers. Even though the signal of dimers is not very big, it
it enough to carry out a deposition.
Figure 27: Deposition current corresponding to the deposition of Pt single-atoms. In this
particular case, a loading of 4.6 ng cm-2 was deposited.
Page 34 of 38
==PAGE:39==
3.5
Catalytic performance
3.5
Catalytic performance
In this sub-section, the results obtained by Alexander will be discussed. None of the
graphs shown here were plotted by me. However, it is essential to show them since they give
us information about whether the corresponding sample is a good or a bad catalyst for HER.
Regarding technical aspects, the gold stubs were mounted on a rotating disk electrode in a
3-electrode electrochemical cell. Iridium was used in the CE and Hg/HgSO4 in the reference
electrode. The rotation rate of the WE was set to 1600 rpm. The electrolyte was 0.1 M
perchloric acid for samples 1-9 and 0.5 sulfuric acid for samples 10-18.
Figure 28 shows the TOF for the most relevant samples. Just by taking a closer look
at ﬁgure 28, we can see that in general all the samples show quite poor activity. In ﬁgure
28a and 28b we can see for the ﬁrst nine samples (except 1, 2 and 7 which are not shown
in the graphs), the activity goes to 0 when the potential is also close to 0, indicating the
performance is poor since the catalyst will not activate the reaction by itself, unless we go
to higher potentials. There is only one curve that deviates from the rest, but this is most
likely due to an experimental error or the uncertainty associated with the tafel plots, which
is higher close to the origin. The black dots in the graphs under the name of “3.8 nm NP”
correspond to data from a previous PhD student that used a catalyst made up of 3.8 nm
NPs deposited on a HOPG substrate [35] for HER. None of the samples exceeds the activity
of the 3.8 nm NPs on HOPG.
In ﬁgure 28c we can see that the activity of dimers 10 and 11 is in general similar to
that of SAs. This indicates that a single Pt site is more ineﬃcient than having two Pt sites
together. One explanation for this is that in the production of hydrogen, an H+ that ﬁnds
an active site needs to meet another proton to generate H2. It seems reasonable to think
that for dimer sites, the H+ does not have to travel as far to ﬁnd its partner to react, thus
facilitating the reaction. However, the diﬀerence in TOF between the best SA and the dimers
is not very big, less than one order of magnitude. The most striking thing is actually the
lack of reproducibility of the data of Figure 28d. Here, it is zoomed in at a region of high
potentials and compares the activity of dimers and SA. It is clearly seen that the activity
of the SA is diﬀerent from each other by at least one order of magnitude, which makes it
diﬃcult for drawing conclusions.
Figure 28e shows that the activity for NPs is not reproducible at all. Some NPs show
more activity than SA and dimers and others less, which makes it impossible for interpreting
the results. There were no problems in the NP deposition. Also I doubled checked the
deposition current proﬁles and none of the show strange spikes or features. One reason for
the irreproducibility of the data for samples 10-18 might be that some molybdenum of the
mask used to prevent the gold stubs from falling out might have deposited on the stub.
However, if Mo had been accidentally deposited we could see it in the post-deposition ISS
spectrum, thus this explanation can be ruled out. It could also be because for some samples,
and old polycrystalline stub was used instead of the newly bought stubs, but it is very
improbable that this is causing the problem. Mass-transport limitations are also present in
Page 35 of 38
==PAGE:40==
3.5
Catalytic performance
the ﬁrst nine samples and all of them were manipulated carefully, so it seems that it would be
necessary to investigate with an appropriate tool such as an STM to verify what is actually
happening in the surface of the gold stub.
With the available reproducible data, we can conclude that the platinum on polycrys-
talline gold system is a poor catalyst for HER. There is no kind of synergistic eﬀect between
Au and Pt nor having Pt as highly dispersed entities on the gold substrate that could enhance
the performance of the catalyst. In one of the review articles review by E. Charles H. Sykes,
it is shown that the system Pt/Au displays sharp electronic features around the Fermi en-
ergy, corresponding to the d-orbitals of the isolated ad-atom in the SAA [32]. Consequently,
it could be possible that the d band is shifted upwards, leading to stronger bonding of the
hydrogen atoms with the platinum. Hydrogen atoms have a harder time reacting and that
turns into lower TOFs, as seen in 28a and 28b. Even though platinum is the best catalyst
for the HER, it is located slightly the left in a volcano plot [36]. The Pt on gold system
might be shifting the platinum to the left making it more tightly bound and therefore less
reactive.
Page 36 of 38
==PAGE:41==
3.5
Catalytic performance
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 28: HER Tafel comparison for the most relevant samples. Remember that for sample
1-9 a loading of 12.1 ng cm-2 was used and for samples 10-18 a loading of 4.6 ng cm-2. The
back dots correspond to data from a previous PhD student of the group that tested Pt on
HOPG and have been included to compare our catalysts with a well studied model system.
Page 37 of 38
==PAGE:42==
4
Conclusion and outlook
This aim of this project was to gain insight in the catalytic properties of small Pt entities,
for the hydrogen evolution reaction. The Omicron setup was used to prepare and characterize
the samples. These Pt entities were generated using a cluster source and mass selected using
a time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter. The deposited entities were platinum single-atoms, dimers and
2 nm nanoparticles on a polycrystalline gold surface. Two diﬀerent loadings were used, in
order to benchmark hydrogen evolution reaction. The gold stubs were cleaned through cycles
of sputtering and annealing, kept in UHV and characterized mainly with ISS. The loadings
used in this project were very small, around 4.6 ng cm-2 and 12.1 ng cm-2, which are below
the detection limit of XPS. Additionally, ISS does not have enough resolution to resolve the
platinum and gold peaks. Therefore we do not have methods capable of characterizing the
system properly. The samples were measured electrochemically in a 3-electrode-cell with a
rotating disk electrode. The turnover frequency was determined for the diﬀerent samples and
compared with a model system from a previous PhD student that consisted of Pt entities on
a HOPG substrate. For the ﬁrst nine samples, the electrochemical data is fairly reproducible
and, therefore, we can conclude that the system of Pt entities on polycrystalline gold is a
bad catalyst compared to other systems such as the Pt entities on HOPG. For the rest of the
samples, the electrochemical data is not reproducible, so we cannot draw any solid conclusion.
Especially for nanoparticles, where we do not have any reproducible measurements.
The results of this project are not promising. However, the issue with the reproducibility
of the electrochemical data is a fundamental problem that needs to be addressed. The most
appropriate technique to use would be, as previously mentioned in the project, the STM.
Scanning tunneling microscopy, is the process of approaching an atomically sharp tip towards
a surface and measure the tunneling current created by the potential diﬀerence between the
tip and the surface of the sample. This technique gives information about the local density
of states at the fermi level [23]. With an STM we can obtain atomic resolution of the sample,
thus being able to examine the surface. A ﬂat surface is needed to utilize STM, so a single
crystal is needed such as the Au (111), instead of the polycrystalline gold.
Page 38 of 38
==PAGE:43==
List of Figures
1
Concentration of CO2 in Earth’s atmosphere in parts per million from 800000
years ago up to present. The levels of CO2 oscillate in time, however the
maximum has never surpassed 300 ppm until our current times, where there
is a dramatic increase of the CO2 levels. From [3]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Global average temperature deviation compared to the temperature of the
planet between the years 1961-1990. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3
Potential energy diagram with gaseous reactants. The catalyst creates a new
pathway in which the energy barrier is lower. Borrowed from [14]. . . . . . .
4
4
Illustration of the cluster source used in this project. Borrowed from [16]. . .
7
5
Left: analysis chamber, right: preparation chamber. There is another cham-
ber between these two called TPD chamber. In this picture, the TPD chamber
was undergoing repairs and it can only be seen the small stage where the cop-
per block is located. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
6
A picture of the Omicron system being baked. The walls and cointers help to
prevent the heat from dissipating into the environment. . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
7
Illustration of a magnetron sputter head in detail. From [18]. . . . . . . . . .
9
8
Sketch of the aggregation zone. The chamber is cooled with LN2 through the
cooling shroud. The nanoparticles aggregate inside the chamber with the aid
of He and exit through the skimmer, undergoing supersonic expansion. From
[17].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
9
Illustration of a TOF mass ﬁlter.
Filtering is done by applying pulses of
an electric ﬁeld. The mass-to-charged sorted entities exit through the exit
aperture and are deposited on the sample. From [17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
10
Top: illustration of a nanoparticle in the soft landing regime.
Bottom:
illustration of a nanoparticle in the hard landing regime. From [21]. . . . . .
14
11
Representation of a hemi-spherical analyzer. Borrowed from [23]. . . . . . . .
15
12
Schematics of the underlying physics of an ISS experiment. Mi and E0 are
the mass and kinetic energy of the incident He+ ion, Ms is the mass of an
atom on the surface and θ is the scattering angle. Borrowed from [23]. . . . .
16
13
Illustration of the mass resolution of ISS. The solid black line correspond to
He, the dash-dotted line to Ne and the dotted line to Ar. The coloured regions
in yellow and grey indicate the masses of diﬀerent elements of the periodic
table. Borrowed from [23]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
14
Mean free path of the electrons as a function of the energy for diﬀerent ele-
ments of the periodic table. Borrowed from [23]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
15
Illustration of a 3-electrode setup. Borrowed from [24].
. . . . . . . . . . . .
20
16
STM images of the gold herringbone reconstruction.
The elbow sites are
formed in the domain boundaries and can be of two types: bulged or pinched.
In an STM image, what is represented is actually the electronic density of
states. Borrowed from [28]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
I
==PAGE:44==
List of Figures
17
Theoretical predictions, calculated through DFT simulations, of the aggrega-
tion energy for diﬀerent systems that are thermodynamically disposed to form
SAA. The two insets correspond to STM images of Pt atoms dispersed on a
Cu (111) surface and small Pt clusters on a Au (111) surface. Borrowed from
[32].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
18
STM image of Pt atoms on a Au (111) surface. Borrowed from [33]. . . . . .
24
19
Image of a sample where a Mo mask is attached on top, preventing the gold
stub from falling. In this one, it can be seen a small bright spot in the stub
due to it was touched accidentally with the tip of a screwdriver. Consequently,
it was sent back to Alexander for polishing the surface again. . . . . . . . . .
25
20
ISS spectrum of a polycrystalline gold stub before (cycle 0) and after (cycles
1,2 and 3) exposing it to repetitions of sputtering and annealing. The ion
source was 1 kV He+ with 0.1 mA emission current, the analysis chamber is
dosed with 5 · 10−8 mbar of He and the analyzer angle is kept constant at
146.7◦and a constant retard ratio of 5 eV. The ion beam was scanned in a
1x1 raster pattern.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
21
Mass spectrum of pre and post deposition of 2 nm Pt NPs with a mass of
54 · 103 amu.
The NPs are negatively charged making the current to be
negative. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
22
Deposition current corresponding to the deposition of a 2 nm Np. The loading
used was 4.6 ng cm-2 of platinum. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
23
ISS spectrum corresponding to pre and post deposition of NPs.
The pre-
deposition intensity corresponds to three cycles of sputtering and annealing.
31
24
XPS survey scan corresponding to the deposition of 2 nm Pt NPs on a gold
polycrystalline stub, with a loading of 4.6 ng cm-2. The X-ray source is Mgα
(1253.6 eV), the step distance is 0.3 eV and the constant analyzer energy is
50 eV.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
25
Mass spectrum of Pt single-atoms.
Two are elements are detected in the
spectrum which, due to their mass, they must be Pt1Ar+ and Pt2+ dimers. .
33
26
Mass spectrum of Pt dimers. Even though the signal of dimers is not very
big, it it enough to carry out a deposition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
27
Deposition current corresponding to the deposition of Pt single-atoms. In this
particular case, a loading of 4.6 ng cm-2 was deposited. . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
28
HER Tafel comparison for the most relevant samples. Remember that for
sample 1-9 a loading of 12.1 ng cm-2 was used and for samples 10-18 a loading
of 4.6 ng cm-2. The back dots correspond to data from a previous PhD student
of the group that tested Pt on HOPG and have been included to compare our
catalysts with a well studied model system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Page II of X
==PAGE:45==
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Number of samples prepared and loading deposited throughout the project.
The type of small entities deposited on the samples were SA, dimers and 2
nm (of diameter) NPs. Due to lack of time issues, no trimers were deposited
and, instead, it was preferred to make more SA, dimers and NPs samples in
order to guarantee the reproducibility of the electrochemical data. Sample 13
does not exist. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
Page III of X
==PAGE:46==
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
AES
Auger electron spectroscopy
CE
Counter electrode
DFT Density functional theory
EPA
United States Environmental Protection Agency
h
Planck’s constant
HER Hydrogen evolution reaction
ISS
Ion scattering spectroscopy
NP
Nanoparticle
QMS Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer
SA
Single-atom
SAA
Single-atom alloy
SDG
Sustainable Development Goals
STM Scanning tunneling microscope
TOF Time of ﬂight
TOF Turnover frequency
TPD Temperature programmed desorption
UHV Ultra high vacuum
UNDP Sustainable Development Goals
WE
Working electrode
XPS
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
Page IV of X
==PAGE:47==
References
References
[1] United
Nations
Development
Programme.
https://www.undp.org/
sustainable-development-goals?utm_source=EN&utm_medium=GSR&utm_content=
US_UNDP_PaidSearch_Brand_English&utm_campaign=CENTRAL&c_src=CENTRAL&
c_src2=GSR&gclid=CjwKCAiAzrWOBhBjEiwAq85QZ2A0Tl-8MXF52H3C6KPaiG7C_
JV0cIecA3WzkWw3boqCiWIUPRdTjBoCUUkQAvD_BwE, 2021. Online; accessed 11 January
2022.
[2] Rebecca
Lindsey.
https://www.climate.gov/news-features/
understanding-climate/climate-change-atmospheric-carbon-dioxide.
On-
line; accessed 7 January 2022.
[3] Climate
Change
Indicators:
Atmospheric
Concentrations
of
Greenhouse
Gases.
https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/
climate-change-indicators-atmospheric-concentrations-greenhouse-gases.
Online; accessed 7 January 2022.
[4] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). https://www.ipcc.ch/report/
ar5/wg1/. Online; accessed 19 January 2022.
[5] European
Commission.
https://ec.europa.eu/clima/climate-change/
climate-change-consequences_en. Online; accessed 19 January 2022.
[6] NASA:
Sustainability
and
Government
Resources.
https://climate.nasa.gov/
solutions/resources/. Online; accessed 19 January 2022.
[7] Federal Ministry of Defence, Austria. https://www.bundesheer.at/archiv/a2021/
blackout/blackout.shtml, 2021. Online; accessed 8 January 2022.
[8] Mail
Online
News.
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-10049943/
How-Chinas-energy-crisis-push-price-boob-job.html, 2021. Online; accessed 7
January 2022.
[9] European Climate Foundation. https://europeanclimate.org/cop26/. Online; ac-
cessed 19 January 2022.
[10] European Commission: Climate Action. https://ec.europa.eu/clima/eu-action/
european-green-deal/european-climate-law_es. Online; accessed 20 January 2022.
[11] S. Bouckaert, A. F. Pales, C. McGlade, U. Remme, and B. Wanner, “Net zero by 2050.
a roadmap for the global energy sector,” tech. rep., International Energy Agency.
[12] Wikipedia contributors, “Energy return on investment — Wikipedia, the free en-
cyclopedia.”
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Energy_return_on_
investment&oldid=1066065393, 2022. Online; accessed 22 January 2022.
Page V of X
==PAGE:48==
References
[13] C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters, and T. F.
Jaramillo, “Benchmarking hydrogen evolving reaction and oxygen evolving reaction
electrocatalysts for solar water splitting devices,” Journal of the American Chemical
Society, February 2015.
[14] I. Chorkendorﬀand J. W. Niemantsverdriet, Concepts of Modern Catalysis and Kinetics.
Wiley-VCH, 2013.
[15] Vacuum
Science
World.
https://www.vacuumscienceworld.com/blog/
working-with-turbomulecular-vacuum-pumps. Online; accessed 7 January 2022.
[16] Y.-R. Zheng, J. Vernieres, Z. Wang, K. Zhang, D. Hochﬁlzer, K. Krempl, T.-W. Liao,
F. Presel, T. Altantzis, J. Fatermans, S. B. Scott, N. M. Secher, C. Moon, P. Liu, S. Bals,
S. V. Aert, A. Cao, M. Anand, J. K. Nørskov, J. Kibsgaard, and I. Chorkendorﬀ, “Mon-
itoring oxygen production on mass-selected iridium-tantalum oxide electrocatalysts,”
Nature Energy, 2021.
[17] J. Ejler, “Mass-selected copper nanoparticles for CO2 electroreduction,” Master’s thesis,
Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[18] Y. Huttel, Gas-Phase Synthesis of Nanoparticles. Wiley, 2017.
[19] A. Bodin, Synthesisy of Nanoparticle Model Systems for Sustainable Catalysis by Gas
Aggregation. PhD thesis, Technical Unversity of Denmark, 2017.
[20] J. L. Needham, “Surface characterization and temperature programmed desorption of
small mass-selected entities,” Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
[21] V. Popok, I. Barke, E. E. Campbell, and K.-H. Meiwes-Broer, “Cluster-surface interac-
tion from soft landing to implantation,” Surface Science Reports, 2011.
[22] K. K. Toudahl, “Deposition and characterization of small mass selected entities for
sustainable chemical reactions,” Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[23] I. Chorkendorﬀ, “Lecture notes in surface physics/chemistry.” Technical University of
Denmark.
[24] J. Kibsgaard, “Lecture notes of the MSc course Experimental Surface Physics,” 2020.
[25] N. M. Secher, Mass-Selected Model Systems in Catalysis - from Nanoparticles to Single
Atoms. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
[26] Y. Wang, N. S. Hush, and J. R. Reimers, “Simulation of the Au(111) - 22 x
√
3 surface
reconstruction,” Physical Review B, June 2007.
[27] R. Needs, M. Godfrey, and M. Mansﬁeld, “Theory of surface stress and surface recon-
struction,” Surface Science, June 1990.
Page VI of X
==PAGE:49==
References
[28] J. Kibsgaard, Atomic-scale investigation of MoS2-based hydrotreating model catalysts.
PhD thesis, University of Aarhus, Denmark, 2008.
[29] B. Voigtländer, G. Meyer, and N. M. Amer, “Epitaxial growth of thin magnetic cobalt
ﬁlms on Au(111) studied by scanning tunneling microscopy,” Physical Review B, April
1991.
[30] D. Chambliss, R. Wilson, and S. Chiang, “Nucleation of ordered Ni island arrays on
Au(111) by surface-lattice dislocations,” Physical Review Letters, November 1990.
[31] C. Casari, S.Foglio, F. Siviero, A. L. Bassi, M. Passoni, and C. E. Bottani, “Direct
observation of the basic mechanisms of Pd island nucleation on Au(111),” Physical
Review B, May 2009.
[32] R. T. Hannagan, G. Giannakakis, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, and E. C. H. Sykes,
“Single-atom alloy catalysis,” Chemical Reviews, 2020.
[33] M. Ø. Pedersen, S. Helveg, A. Ruban, I. Stensgaard, E. Lægsgaard, J. K. Nørskov, and
F. Besenbacher, “How a gold substrate can increase the reactivity of a pt overlayer,”
Surface Science, March 1999.
[34] J. N. Hansen, H. Prats, K. K. Toudahl, N. M. Secher, K. Chan, J. Kibsgaard, and
I. Chorkendorﬀ, “Is there anything better than pt for her?,” ACS Energy Letters, March
2021.
[35] J. N. Hansen, From Single Atoms to Clusters: Measuring Catalytic Activity for Energy
Conversion. PhD thesis, Technical Unversity of Denmark, 2021.
[36] A. B. Laursen, A. S. Varela, F. Dionigi, H. Fanchiu, C. Miller, O. L. Trinhammer,
J. Rossmeisl, and S. Dahl, “Electrochemical hydrogen evolution: Sabatier’s principle
and the volcano plot,” Journal of Chemical Education, September 2012.
Page VII of X
==PAGE:50==
References
Appendix A
Spherical approximation
In order to estimate the projected coverage of the deposited nanoparticles, we must
make some assumptions: 1) the deposited particles are perfect spheres and 2) they have a
homogeneous density and is equal to the bulk Pt density. With formula of the volume of a
sphere, V = 4πr3/3 and through the deﬁnition of density ρ = m/V , we can compute the
diameter of the NPs:
d =
6m
πρ
1/3
where m is the mass of the NP and ρ the density of platinum. the projected coverage is then
the ratio between the sum of all the NPs deposited and the geometric aperture area:
CovNP =
πr2
Aaperture
NQRf
where r is the radius of the nanoparticles, NQ is the total number of deposited entities
and Rf is the raster factor. The raster factor is a geometrical correction that must be applied,
which accounts for the rastering. This factor isequal to Astub/Adep.
Small entity approximation
For SA and dimers, the spherical approximation is not valid. The planar density of Pt
on a (111) fcc crystal plane is ρ2D = 1/(2
√
3r2), where r is the Van der Waals atomic radius
of Pt. The projected coverage is then:
Cov =
m
ρ2DAaperture
NQRf
where m is the mass of the corresponding entity, NQ the total number of deposited entities,
Aaperture the geometric area of the aperture and Rf the raster factor.
Page VIII of X
==PAGE:51==
References
Project Plan and Evaluation
Goal
Deposit small mass-selected entities and use surface sensitive methods, specially TPD,
XPS and ISS, to understand the experimental work behind the preparation of samples that
could be interesting for the ﬁeld of catalysis.
Learning objectives
• Understand the relevant scientiﬁc literature and formulate ways of studying new sam-
ples, useful for the ﬁeld of catalysis, with the tools available in the lab.
• Asses and apply relevant surface sensitive methods to prepare and characterize samples
and analyze the results.
• Participate in high level academic discussions with scientiﬁc faculty in the SurCat
group during weekly meetings.
• Link the analyzed systems in relation to the energy challenge.
Timeline
• August-September: Learn how to use the Omicron and the cluster source set up.
Help to ﬁx and learn how to operate the XPS.
• October-November: Carry out surface sensitive experiments to characterize the pre-
pared samples. Discuss and asses if these samples are relevant to the ﬁeld of catalysis.
If no relevant results are found during this time, consider changing the focus of the
project.
• December: Continue developing small-mass selected systems depending on the results
of the last month and ﬁnishing the project.
• January: Writing the report.
Evaluation of the timeline
• August-September: The time here was used to learn how to use the setup. A lot of
time was spent doing repairs to the UHV system and little by little I became familiar
Page IX of X
==PAGE:52==
References
with the tools in the lab.
• October-November-December: Depositions began to with old polycrystalline gold
stubs. Single-atoms, dimers and NPs were deposited but not trimers due to lack of
time. A lot of time was spent on ﬁxing the TPD chamber. Covid did not have any
impact on the project.
• January: One last measurement and deposition was taken at the beginning of the
year. Overall, the project went went according to the plan except for minor tweaks in
the initial goals and not being able to use the STM.
Page X of X
