==PAGE:1==
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
A Study of Social Capital and Hybrid­remote Work
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
A Study of Social Capital and Hybrid­remote Work
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
Louise Damborg Frederiksen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Technology, Management
and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering (Industrial Engineering and Management), MSc
Eng.
Louise Damborg Frederiksen ­ s185238
Signature
Date
ii
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
23/01/2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
When the Covid­19 pandemic hit Denmark in 2020, many employees were forced to relo­
cate their working stations to their homes and switch to a work day that consisted of remote
work. The change in work form and everyday life for many people makes it relevant to in­
vestigate the experiences of those employees and what they have learnt from the period
of remote work.
The goal of this thesis is to investigate public office employees’ experiences of social capital
doing hybrid­remote work. The thesis contains a chapter on the theory of what organisa­
tional social capital and remote work is, before the report moves on to data collection and
analysis.
The data collection in this thesis consisted of a fishbone workshop with public office em­
ployees, which was held at an annual conference hosted by HK. A fishbone workshop is an
exercise where the participants brainstorm the causes of chosen effects, with the effects
in this case being the good an bad experiences from working from home. Following the
workshop, the data was categorised and analysed to find the most prominent themes in
the participants’ experiences of working remotely. In this case the most prominent good
experiences were flexibility, productivity, efficiency and trust. The most prominent bad ex­
periences were isolation, communication, work/life balance and management.
The results from the workshop analysis was then utilised to investigate how well the existing
questionnaire of psychosocial work environment, DPQ, covered these prominent themes.
It was found that certain themes were not covered completely by the existing DPQ ques­
tionnaire and other questionnaires were investigated to localise questions to cover these
areas. Especially questions regarding isolation and remote work were required from other
questionnaires. 14 questions were found from four different questionnaires to achieve cov­
erage of these missing areas.
The thesis ends with a discussion on the connections between social capital and remote
work relating to the experiences found at the workshop, as well as a discussion on the
variable focus on the individual or team as a whole. Finally the generalisation of the findings
and analysis is discussed.
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
iii
==PAGE:6==
Resume
I forbindelse med Corona epidemien, der ramte Danmark i 2020, blev mange medarbejdere
sendt hjem og skulle pludseligt skifte til en hverdag med distancearbejde. Skiftet i arbejds­
form og hverdag var en omvæltning for mange og det er derfor relevant at undersøge,
hvilke oplevelser medarbejdere, der har været hjemsendt, har taget med sig i perioden
med distancearbejde.
Målet for dette speciale er at undersøge kommunale medarbejderes oplevelser med at
arbejde hjemmefra i forhold til social kapital. Specialet indeholder et teoriafsnit, der søger
at forklare hvad social kapital betyder i en organisation og hvad det indebærer, samt en
forklaring af hvad distancearbejde er, før rapporten bevæger sig videre til dataindsamling
og analyse.
Dataindsamlingen, i dette speciale, bestod af en fiskebensworkshop, som blev udført på
en årlig konference afholdt af HK. En fiskebensworkshop er en øvelse, hvor deltagerne
kan brainstorme hvilke årsager der er til udvalgte effekter. Målet med denne workshop var
at indsamle oplevelser fra deltagerne om hvad de havde lært af perioden med at arbejde
hjemme i forbindelse med Corona. Workshoppen søgte at lokalisere både gode og dårlige
oplevelser fra deltagerne, for at skabe et helhedsbillede af hvad de havde taget med fra
perioden med distancearbejde. Efterfølgende blev dataene fra workshoppen kategoriseret
og analyseret for at lokalisere de oftest omtalte oplevelser og samle dem i to fiskebensdi­
agrammer. I dette tilfælde var de oftest nævnte gode oplevelser fleksibilitet, produktivitet,
effektivitet og tillid. De oftest nævnte dårlige oplevelser var isolation, kommunikation, ar­
bejde/private balancen og ledelse.
Disse resultater benyttes til at undersøge spørgeskemaet DPQ, der omhandler det psyko­
sociale arbejdsmiljø, for at få et overblik over hvordan et eksisterende arbejdsmiljø spørge­
skema dækker oplevelserne fra fiskebens workshoppen. Her blev der fundet at DPQ ikke
dækkede visse områder, af de oplevelser der var oftest nævnt på workshoppen, og andre
spørgeskemaer blev derfor undersøgt for at lokalisere spørgsmål der kunne hjælpe med at
dække de manglende områder i DPQ. Specielt oplevelser relateret til isolation og distan­
cearbejde krævede undersøgelse af andre spørgeskemaer. I alt blev der fundet yderligere
14 spørgsmål spredt ud over 4 spørgeskemaer.
Specialet afsluttes med en diskussion om forbindelserne mellem social kapital og distance­
arbejde i forhold til de oplevelserne, der blev indsamlet på workshoppen. Samtidig diskute­
res der også hvordan fokus kan være på enten den individuelle medarbejder eller teamet
som en helhed, samt generaliseringsgraden af analysen.
iv
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:7==
Reading Guide
This section contains an overview of the different chapters in this thesis and their contents.
The reading guide also contains an overview of the Excel sheets that have been uploaded
separately in a zip­file.
Chapter 1: Introduction
Introduction to the thesis topic as well as purpose statement, research questions and learn­
ing objectives.
Chapter 2: Background and Related Work
Theoretical knowledge on the topics of social capital and remote work as well as their con­
nection to organisational communication. This chapter answers RQ1 and RQ2.
Chapter 3: Methodology
The methodology used in the project period including a process overview and description
of the different phases of the project.
Chapter 4: Fishbone Workshop Findings and Analysis
Findings from fishbone workshop done at an annual conference with HK with public office
employees. This chapter answers RQ3.
Chapter 5: Investigating Questionnaires
Analysis and investigation of existing surveys on work environment, well­being and remote
work for further analysis of the findings from Chapter 4. This chapter answers RQ4.
Chapter 6: Discussion
Discussion of the findings from the fishbone workshop, questionnaire analysis in relation
to the theory from Chapter 2 and the applicability of the analysis in a generalised setting.
This chapter also contains suggestions for future work.
Chapter 7: Conclusion
Concluding thoughts and summary of the thesis including answers to the research ques­
tions posed at the beginning of the report.
Excel Sheets
The following table shows an overview of the Excel sheets connected to this report. The
Excel documents have been uploaded separately in a zip­file.
Document
Description
HK Kommunal Workshop
Collection of findings from the fishbone workshop done
with HK. The document contains an overview sheet and
sheets corresponding to the different divisions as well as
two sheets summarising all good and bad experiences
Question Overview
Overview of the questions found for analysis in Chapter 5.
The document contains a sheet with an overview and after
that is split into the different surveys
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Resume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Reading Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Purpose Statement and Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Learning Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background and Related Work
5
2.1
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Social Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Hybrid­remote Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Organisational Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methodology
17
3.1
Snowball Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Fishbone Diagram Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Using Questionnaires for Further Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Fishbone Workshop Findings and Analysis
25
4.1
Fishbone Diagrams from Annual HK Conference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Fishbone Workshop Findings and Social Capital
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Investigating Questionnaires
35
5.1
Coverage of Themes in Existing Psychosocial Questionnaire . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Additional Questions from Other Questionnaires
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Discussion
49
6.1
Social Capital and Remote Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
The Individual vs the Team Focus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.3
Using Semi­structured Interviews to Make the Additional Questions Stronger
52
6.4
Generalisation and Coverage of Remaining Themes . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.5
Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7
Conclusion
55
7.1
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.2
Conclusions to Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Bibliography
59
vi
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The Covid­19 pandemic, which hit the world in 2020, effectively accelerated the digitali­
sation in many workplaces, making remote work a common thing in many people’s lives
(Secher, 2021). Following the pandemic, the demand for flexibility in the work day has
increased, with more than every third Danish employee wishing to increase the amount
of remote work days they have and 82% wishing for more flexibility in general (Lumholt,
2021).
The pandemic has presented a chance for a re­evaluation of the norms or working and how
they affect people’s work and work/life balance (Bøttcher, 2021). Several municipalities
aim to use what the pandemic has taught them with the move from forced remote work to it
becoming an active choice in their work patterns (Kokholm, 2021). The pandemic­induced
remote work should be a stepping stone to investigating new patterns, how social capital
plays into the effectiveness of a company and how the social capital can be increased while
keeping employee well­being in mind.
The fundamental idea behind social capital is the value to be found in strong internal re­
lations in a company (Arbejdsmiljøweb, 2020). It is not an economic value, but there is a
connection between a high level of social capital and increased productivity, work quality
and results from solving the core task. High social capital also points toward better well­
being and job satisfaction (Arbejdsmiljøweb, 2020). There are many definitions of social
capital, with different angles, where the focus of this thesis is on the sociological angle.
Specifically organisational social capital. The three key concepts of organisational social
capital are trust, justice and cooperation, meaning that when these three concepts are
strong in an organisation it can improve the employees’ abilities to solve the key tasks of
the organisation (Olesen et al., 2008).
Telework, or remote work, is any work done outside of the regular office space with telecom­
munications devices (Lamond et al., 1997). It can increase productivity and immersion,
with specific work tasks fitting remote work better than in­office. However, too much re­
mote work can affect well­being and motivation, giving an increased feeling of isolation
and decreased affiliation to the company and co­workers. The optimal would therefore be
finding the right balance between well­being and productivity in a hybrid work form (Arbe­
jdsmiljø København, 2021). Investigating experiences of remote work can uncover what
people find advantageous from the work form and why being in­office would sometimes be
better according to them.
A key factor for working remotely is trust between employees and their leaders (Ipsen
et al., 2021). But from a manager perspective, it also requires systematic follow up on
progression to ensure moving forward on solving the core task (Ipsen et al., 2021). It
is important to find the balance where trust is established, ensuring the managers see
progress and the employees do not feel that their manager is looking over their shoulder
at all times or surveying them. Trust is important to both employees and managers as it
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
1 of 60
==PAGE:10==
relates to an employee’s autonomy and ability to make decisions (Poulsen & Ipsen, 2017).
Since productivity, well­being and job satisfaction are all themes that are affected by both
social capital and remote work it is interesting to investigate the connections between social
capital and remote work. The goal of this thesis is to investigate how employees from public
offices have experienced social capital in regards to hybrid­remote work.
1.1
Purpose Statement and Research Questions
This preliminary search and investigation have led to a purpose statement as seen below.
The purpose of this thesis is to investigate employees’ experience of social capital doing
hybrid­remote work
With this purpose statement, four research questions are raised:
• RQ1: What is social capital?
• RQ2: What is hybrid­remote work?
• RQ3: How do employees experience hybrid­remote work from a social capital per­
spective?
• RQ4: Which elements of existing surveys cover the subject of social capital and which
surveys should be included, if the goal is to collect experiences of remote work?
1.1.1
Empirical/Practical Considerations
In this master thesis, there are some practical considerations to keep in mind.
This thesis is done in collaboration with HK Kommunal in Denmark as part of a larger
research project, between HK Kommunal and DTU, spanning three years. This means,
that all collected data in regards to the case will be in danish and only what is used in the
main body of the report will be translated to English.
There has been many different approaches to how remote work has been handled. As this
is a collaboration with, the data collected will pertain that of the case organisation with the
analysis and discussion being based on those findings and will not necessarily reflect all
companies’ experiences or needs. This also applies to the additional questions suggested
in Chapter 5, as they are based on findings from the HK workshop and can be biased. A
discussion of this is done in Chapter 6.
1.1.2
Scope
The scope of this thesis is to investigate how employees in public offices have experienced
working from home. This includes both the positive and negative experiences, they have
found throughout working remotely. Using these findings, the goal is to investigate ques­
tionnaires on work environment and well­being to see how well the existing surveys cover
the findings from the employees. With respect to the experience findings, other question­
naires are investigated to locate additional questions on areas where the original work
environment questionnaires are found to be missing comprehension.
With these research questions and considerations in mind, a list of eight learning objectives
have been created.
2 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Learning Objectives
The learning objectives of the thesis have been developed with inspiration from Bloom’s
Taxonomy (Persaud, 2021). The eight learning objectives can be seen in the item list below.
• Research and summarise existing information within the thesis focus area
• Execute collaboration with a case company to study hybrid work in public offices
• Collect data from relevant stakeholders
• Analyse collected data and reflect with connection to existing surveys
• Recommend additional survey questions to cover findings from data analysis
• Apply qualitative tools and methods to obtain information within the thesis scope
• Relate and compare obtained information to presented existing literature
• Discuss and reflect upon analytical choices and present their implications and limita­
tions
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
3 of 60
==PAGE:12==
4 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:13==
2
Background and Related Work
This chapter contains a description of how the literature review was done and how different
types of methods were used in finding relevant literature. This chapter also answers the
first two research questions pertaining to what social capital and hybrid­remote work is. The
final section in the chapter studies organisational communication relating to virtual teams.
2.1
Literature Review
As this thesis subject is contemporary, and in collaboration with a company, the information
search began with regular search engines, such as Google. This was done to investigate
if the company had posted anything themselves regarding the area as well as general in­
formation posted by news media and governmental entities. This lead to different news
articles about governmental rules and the Covid­19 situation in general in Denmark specif­
ically. This searching method yielded results in both Danish and English. Several articles
from a previous course were also found relevant for the subject.
Following the initial search, Scopus was used to acquire relevant articles for the thesis
subject in a more methodical way. All Scopus searches were limited to the years 2020 and
2021, for relevant material, as well as to English being the written language. The focus
points of the first search string are the general themes of hybrid­remote work, cooperation,
social capital and well­being. The first search string was purposefully kept general in the
terms used to investigate as to see what search results came from it.
Search String 1
”telework” OR ”tele work” OR ”distance work” OR ”distancework” OR ”hybrid work” OR
”remote work” OR ”wfh” OR ”work from home”
AND ”trust” OR ”collaboration” OR ”cooperation” OR ”co­operation”
AND ”social capital”
AND ”well­being” OR ”wellbeing” OR ”sadness” OR ”loneliness” OR ”discontent” OR
”depress” OR ”dissatisfaction” OR ”alone” OR ”isolated” OR ”isolation”
The first search string, shown above, yielded 72 articles with the limitations mentioned
before. They were however not specifically concerned with Covid­19 and remote work
because of the pandemic. Because of this I found it relevant to elaborate the search string
with a statement pertaining to Covid­19, marked with orange in search string 2.
The search string began in a simpler format, with known terms from previous literature or
courses, but was built out as different terms were found through different methods, such
as articles from the google search and using Thesaurus to identify synonyms for the words
already in the string. Thesaurus was also used to find antonyms for the different words to
extent the search string’s language. Reading articles from the searches, snowball sam­
pling was used. Snowball sampling is done by utilising relevant material to find further
information by e.g. investigating the reference lists from relevant articles to find other rel­
evant articles (Mark Saunders, 2006). Specifically if a certain pieces of information was
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
5 of 60
==PAGE:14==
found relevant in one article, the reference to that information was investigated further in
search of additional information of the same sort. This method is described in Section 3.1.
Search String 2
”telework” OR ”tele work” OR ”distance work” OR ”distancework” OR ”hybrid work” OR
”remote work” OR ”wfh” OR ”work from home”
AND ”trust” OR ”collaboration” OR ”cooperation” OR ”co­operation”
AND ”social capital”
AND ”well­being” OR ”wellbeing” OR ”sadness” OR ”loneliness” OR ”discontent” OR
”depress” OR ”dissatisfaction” OR ”alone” OR ”isolated” OR ”isolation”
AND ”covid­19” OR ”covid” OR ”corona” OR ”coronavirus” OR ”corona virus” OR
”pandemic”
Search string 2 is an extension of search string 1 with the addition of the Covid­19 aspects,
limiting the results to 34 articles. The reason I find both search strings relevant is that even
though an article is not necessarily centred around Covid­19, it can still be relevant to the
overall subject themes of hybrid­remote work and social capital. Search string 2, however,
adds to the results if they are also related to Covid­19 in any way.
A library search was also done to find further references on the subject of social capi­
tal. Guidance and suggestions from the supervisors were also taken into account to find
relevant information for the thesis in all subjects of social capital, remote work and organ­
isational communication. Previous relevant course literature lists were also visited for po­
tential sources on especially remote work. With this source material, the two first research
questions are answered in Sections 2.2 and 2.3.
2.2
Social Capital
Social capital is a multidimensional concept and as such, does not have one singular or
clear definition. It is a concept, that is difficult to measure and work into formal models for
people to use (OECD, 2001), since it is tied to a singular organisation, rather than based on
organisational type or size (Olesen et al., 2008). There are, however, some aspects that
repeat in the different definitions, with shared ideas of network, trust and norms (Olesen
et al., 2008). Social capital is a relational concept, rather than being dependent on one
person. With that, it is something that is shared in a group and is a product of the investment
of time and effort from the group (Olesen et al., 2008). Social capital allows individuals
and groups to solve shared and bigger problems with more ease and provides benefits
to both the individuals and the group (OECD, 2001). The singular term ”capital” means
accumulated work, that is exchanged, where social capital then becomes a resource that
can be utilised when needed, e.g. in periods of change where the working environment
would be under pressure (Olesen et al., 2008).
Over time several different approaches have been taken in the efforts to define social cap­
ital, with the four approaches below seen as the most well­known (OECD, 2001).
The Anthropological approach stresses the biological basis and the natural instincts for
association in human nature, essentially using human biology to build social capital.
The Sociological approach focuses on social norms and human motivation. It has a focus
6 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:15==
on social organisation, such as trust and norms of reciprocity.
The Economic approach assumes that people will try and maximise their personal utilities
for economic gain through group activities.
The Political science approach emphasis the effect politics and institutions have on human
behaviour.
The approach in this thesis is that of the sociological approach with the focus on social
norms in the organisation and the connections between colleagues. In the following section
three different definitions of social capital by three different authors is defined.
2.2.1
Definitions
Three of the most well­known experts in the field of social capital all have a sociological
approach to how they understand the concept.
Pierre Bourdieu defined social capital in 1986 as stated below:
Social capital is the aggregate of the actual or potential resources which are
linked to possession of a durable network of more or less institutionalized rela­
tionships of mutual acquaintance and recognition – or in other words, to mem­
bership in a group – which provides each of its members with the backing of
the collectivity­owned capital, a “credential” which entitles them to credit, in the
various senses of the word. (Biggart, 2002)
Bourdieu’s definition of social capital focuses on social capital in relation to the individual
and what resources that individual has access to through networks. He states that social
capital can be a driver that maintains social differences and his definition thereby focuses
more on some of the negative aspects around social capital. (Olesen et al., 2008)
In contrast James Coleman’s definition of the term states it as a quality that benefits mem­
bers of a group and something that happens between people. He does not define it as an
individual trait but rather a relational one (Olesen et al., 2008). Coleman’s definition from
1990 can be seen below:
Social capital is defined by its function. It is not a single entity, but a variety of
different entities having two characteristics in common: They all consist of some
aspect of a social structure, and they facilitate certain actions of individuals who
are within the structure. (Coleman, 1990)
Robert Putnam’s definition focuses, like Coleman, on relations between people. The def­
inition from 1995 states that the social capital can be found in social networks, trust and
norms of reciprocity linked to the networks and focuses on the collective element between
people (Olesen et al., 2008).
”Social capital” refers to features of social organization such as networks, norms,
and social trust that facilitate coordination and cooperation for mutual benefit.
(Putnam, 1995)
Shared norms and values can aid people to better communicate and share common expe­
riences and divergences in the networks (OECD, 2001). Robert Putnam is also the expert
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
7 of 60
==PAGE:16==
who introduced the concept of bonding and bridging in social capital (Olesen et al., 2008).
A third concept known as linking was later introduced by Simon Szreter and Michael Wool­
cock (Olesen et al., 2008).
2.2.2
Bonding, Bridging and Linking
Bonding refers to relational ties within a group that is characterised by a high similarity in
characteristics (OECD, 2001). People in a network with bonding social capital are inter­
connected and interact with each other frequently (Olesen et al., 2008).
Bridging refers to relational networks where there is more distance between peers, such
as the ties between different groups or organisations (OECD, 2001). Bridging social capi­
tal can be seen as the result of networking outside one’s regular social groupings (Olesen
et al., 2008).
Linking refers to relations where people or groups are separated by hierarchical layers
(OECD, 2001). The relations are across more formal or institutionalised powers in society
(Olesen et al., 2008).
From these three forms, bonding and bridging are the main forms, that were first introduced,
with linking introduced subsequently (Olesen et al., 2008). Even though these three types
of ties are different, it is favourable to have all forms present in a social network, as they
together are a cause for increased productivity and quality (Olesen et al., 2008). If there
is only bonding social capital and it becomes too strong it can lead to isolation from the
surroundings and narrow the groups views and information flow from outside. Having a
combination of bonding, bridging and linking social capital opens the chance of the group
also benefiting from groups with both horizontal and vertical relational positions (OECD,
2001). Figure 2.1 illustrates two different balances of the three relations.
Figure 2.1: Examples of balances between bonding, briding and linking (Olesen et al.,
2008)
The left­most example in the figure illustrates a well­integrated organisation where the the
types of relations are balanced between each other and none of them overpower the others.
The right­most example illustrates a social capital where the relations are unbalanced and
the bonds are the strongest of the three with very little bridging or linking. An example of
8 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:17==
this are gangs, which are tight knit communities but also often cut off from the rest of the
world because of their ties (OECD, 2001).
It is difficult to measure social capital, as it centres around trust, engagement, interaction
and cooperation in social and group activities (OECD, 2001). It is necessary to assess
what the key factors for the specific social capital under investigation is and ensure that
they are all measured in some way, which is a difficult task as a great deal of what is relevant
for social capital is tacit and relational to a specific case. The difficulty in measuring can
lead to e.g. questionnaires with some open­ended questions, that are not interpreted the
same way between the surveyor and the surveyed (OECD, 2001), which is also why the
situation and context is particularly important when trying to measure social capital (OECD,
2001). Networks promoting sharing of tacit knowledge are important as these interactions
are important sources of social capital, and different kinds of interaction in the networks
create stronger bonds (OECD, 2001).
2.2.3
Organisational Social Capital
Organisational social capital is, as the name indicates, the social capital in an organisation.
It is a collective effort from the organisation that is important for the working environment, as
well as the performance through productivity and quality. Conversely a good working envi­
ronment also promotes opportunities to build social capital, as well as bettering productivity
and quality (Olesen et al., 2008). Since an organisation’s social capital affects productivity,
quality and working environment, it has a strategic significance. Because it is connected
to these factors it can also contribute to increased job satisfaction and motivation in the
members of the organisation (Olesen et al., 2008).
The definition of organisational social capital as seen in ”Virksomhedens Sociale Kapital ­
Hvidbog”, is as follows:
Organisational social capital is the ability of the members of the organisation to
collaborate when solving the key tasks of the organisation (Olesen et al., 2008)
To be able to solve the key tasks, the members of the organisation must be able to co­
operate and base their cooperation on a high level of trust and justice. Investing time
into ensuring strong social capital can help promote cooperation, trust and justice through
dense social networks (OECD, 2001). Cooperation, trust and justice are also known as
the three pillars of organisational social capital (Olesen et al., 2008).
Figure 2.2 shows the three pillars of organisational socical capital with the addition of the
key task (Olesen et al., 2008).
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
9 of 60
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.2: The three key concepts of social capital in relation to the core task (Olesen
et al., 2008)
As the figure shows, the three key concepts or pillars are connected to each other as well
as the key task of the organisation. The three key concepts are explained in the following
sections.
Trust
Organisations can benefit from it being the norm to have a cooperative trust between em­
ployees, both in bonding internally in teams as well as bridging across teams, since it can
lead to more productivity and better information flow (OECD, 2001). It is also a deciding
factor surrounding job satisfaction, health and the quality of work (Olesen et al., 2008).
Trust is a very important aspect of social capital, as the absence of trust makes individuals
tend to cooperate less than when trust is present (OECD, 2001). Reciprocated trust is
necessary for good cooperation and being shown trust from peers compels people to trust
back (Olesen et al., 2008).
The trust in the organisation is both between employees in the same hierarchical layer
and between employees and leaders on different layers. The trust needs to be present in
both the horizontal and vertical relations, since all members have some amount of power
even though the power balance is not even between leaders and employees (Olesen et al.,
2008). Having trust in the management also has an effect on employee satisfaction and
commitment, and is essential when an organisation is going through or trying to implement
change and new initiatives (Olesen et al., 2008). It is difficult to to run an organisation
effectively if there is mistrust between layers and in periods of change the behaviour of the
management is under extra scrutiny from the remaining organisation (Olesen et al., 2008).
An organisation with high social capital, can be understood as having a high level of col­
lective goal orientation and mutual trust, which supports the organisation in successful
collective action, as also stated by Putnam (Olesen et al., 2008). This also signifies that
the organisation has a high level of institutional trust, meaning that most of the organisation
trusts that they are working towards a shared goal with respect to regulations and shared
norms. The institutional trust also leads back to the management, as it is based on their
behaviour (Olesen et al., 2008).
10 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:19==
Justice
As well as trust, justice can aid in increasing satisfaction and commitment towards the
organisation. Especially the satisfaction towards management is affected by the amount
of justice. If employees feel fairly treated by their managers, it will increase satisfaction as
well as the trust in their superiors (Olesen et al., 2008).
Employee performance will increase if they feel justice is present, especially process jus­
tice. Process justice, in this case, means that as long as the process has been seen as
executed fairly, the outcome is often acceptable (Olesen et al., 2008).
Process justice is also important, because of the power distance between managers and
employees. If the employees feel they are treated fairly, there is a greater chance of ac­
cepting that others hold the power over them and trusting the people in power. Justice can
aid in ensuring mutual benefits, values and good norms are developed and established
on good grounds (Olesen et al., 2008). The goal is not to distribute evenly but fairly with
everyone’s best interest in mind.
Cooperation
The ability to cooperate is dependant on having developed norms for mutual obligations
and having structures that promote cooperation (Olesen et al., 2008). Having established
trust and a belief in just processes will make it easier to facilitate cooperation and it requires
investment in both individual and group identify (OECD, 2001).
Shared norms and values make cooperation easier, as it enables people to communicate,
even though the norms and values are not targeted towards cooperation (OECD, 2001).
Social capital is not about removing the conflict all­together, but rather being aware of
conflicts and working around them (Olesen et al., 2008).
It is important to be able to socialise outside one’s everyday group, as a group can oth­
erwise become to homogeneous and dependent on itself. It would result in a group with
strong trust and cooperation with each other, but weak ties to other groups, as mentioned
in Section 2.2.2. This should be avoided as knowledge­sharing, networks and norms of
trust and cooperation are important sources of organisational social capital and can help
help realise potential in the members of the group (OECD, 2001).
Investigating a groups ability to cooperate can be used as a way of investigating all as­
pects of organisational social capital. A group who struggles to cooperate has the risk of
dysfunction in the other two areas, shown through trouble with working together (OECD,
2001).
2.3
Hybrid­remote Work
The term ”telecommuting” was first coined in the 1970s and was used to denote work­
ing away from the office with the use of telephone communication (Lamond et al., 1997).
Technology has, however, evolved over the years and newer definitions put an emphasis
on telework requiring the use of information and communications technology (ICT), rather
than just telephone communication, as the tools used for work have expanded (Lamond
et al., 1997). Telework as a way of working was introduced to give workers another option
other than physical travelling between locations.
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
11 of 60
==PAGE:20==
There is still no official definition on the term of teleworking, but a range of definitions
do exist. It should be noted that there are also different terms for the same situation, as
telecommuting is mostly used in North America while Europe use the term teleworking
more often (Lamond et al., 1997).
One definition of teleworking is ”one kind of remote working, or doing normal work activi­
ties while away from one’s normal workplace”, while another is ”for employees to work out
of their homes”, meaning that teleworking or telecommuting can also be seen as working
from home (Lamond et al., 1997). Telework can be seen as a flexible way of working, that
entails organisational tasks are done remotely and can be either a full­time or part­time
arrangement (Lamond et al., 1997). Essentially teleworking, is when a worker is work­
ing outside of their conventional workplace using telecommunications or computer­based
technology (Bailey & Kurland, 2002). With these different explanations of the concept of
telework, telework can be seen as several things; telecommuting, telework, remote work
or working from home. Remote work is a cover term for all work that takes place outside
of the office, with working from home being a more specific type of remote work (Lamond
et al., 1997).
Remote work can, as mentioned, also be done part­time, which means that it is not a bi­
nary notion where the worker either works in or outside the office (Lamond et al., 1997).
The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behaviour also defines a split be­
tween high­intensity and low­intensity teleworking. High­intensity means working remotely
more than 2,5 days a week, with low­intensity being less than 2,5 remote days a week (The
Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behavior, 2019). Both intensities of re­
mote work are however still a combination of telework and in­office presence, meaning the
work week becomes a hybrid work form. Research has shown, that a moderate amount of
remote work leads to better results regarding exhaustion, job satisfaction and workers feel­
ings isolated (The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behavior, 2019). To
increase job satisfaction and avoid exhaustion and isolation, some organisational elements
aids in ensuring a successful experience with remote work (The Cambridge Handbook of
Technology and Employee Behavior, 2019). This will be explored in Section 2.3.1
2.3.1
Ensuring successful Remote Work in an Organisation
As mentioned, some organisational elements can help further the success of a remote
working arrangement. If the organisational culture is characterised by trust and openness
in communication, working remotely has a higher chance of working out in favour of the em­
ployees and the organisation. In that same regard, having a work space that is adapted to
the employees who work remotely will also increase the chance of success, as this means
employees will have easier access to colleagues at other locations and accommodate when
employees do show up at the office location (The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and
Employee Behavior, 2019). Managers can also choose to use an objectives­based perfor­
mance management system where the criteria are focused on goals, rather than factors
such as visibility, as this focuses solely on the employee’s performance and not on where
they choose to do their work (The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Be­
havior, 2019). Using factors such as visibility in the performance management, shows that
12 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:21==
job satisfaction is highest when the employees work from home a maximum of two days
per week instead of exclusively. This means that the hybrid­remote work arrangement is
preferable relating to productivity and job satisfaction (The Cambridge Handbook of Tech­
nology and Employee Behavior, 2019).
Other reasons remote work should be an occasional practice and not a full­time arrange­
ment is that it can add to organisational stress and create problems in regards to time
management for all employees and not only for the employees working remotely (Bailey
& Kurland, 2002). Full­time remote work also increases the risk of professional and social
isolation, meaning the employee will be isolated from colleagues but also from potential
chances of advancement in their career (Bailey & Kurland, 2002)
When an agreement about working remotely is viewed as a special agreement between an
employee and manager, it can hinder progress, as the employee will be more likely to find
that they owe their manager for allowing this arrangement and special treatment (The Cam­
bridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behavior, 2019). This is a problem, since
some employees might try to reciprocate the goodwill given to them through actions such
as increasing their amount of work hours, which can affect their balance between working
and private life. Conversely, if an agreement of remote work is seen as widely accepted
and established, employees are more likely to perceive the arrangement as customary
and normative, avoiding the stress an employee would feel from owing their manager for
doing something extraordinary (The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee
Behavior, 2019).
It is favourable for working remotely to reach a normative state, since both the organisation
and employees can benefit from it in several ways, such as schedule flexibility, fewer dis­
tractions or interruptions, and lower absenteeism (Cooper & Kurland, 2002). Several stud­
ies also support that there is a positive connection between remote work and an increase
in productivity (Bailey & Kurland, 2002). The reports on productivity are however difficult
to measure, because they will depend on how productivity is measured in the organisation
(The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behavior, 2019). Self­reporting
can be biased and results can be skewed because remote workers put in more hours,
since they saved them from commuting or because they feel they have to reciprocate the
flexibility given to them (The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behavior,
2019).
Developmental activities, like interpersonal networking and informal learning, are also aids
in ensuring successful remote work (Cooper & Kurland, 2002). Interpersonal networking is
important, when employees work remotely, since they miss informal interactions that oc­
curs in an office. Interpersonal networks are important, because they benefit the employ­
ees by allowing them to establish relationships and access information that can help them
advance professionally (Cooper & Kurland, 2002). Informal learning can, like networking,
help employees advance professionally as it helps build an employee’s knowledge base.
Informal communication is, however, often face to face and employees working remotely
risk missing out on information from these interactions, that could support them profession­
ally (Cooper & Kurland, 2002).
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
13 of 60
==PAGE:22==
As seen above, some research has gone into how to make remote work successful. How­
ever, a lot of the research on remote work focuses on the individual who works remotely,
rather than then entire group of people in the organisation who are affected by an employee
working remotely (Bailey & Kurland, 2002). Section 2.3.2 and 2.3.3 explore the effect of
hybrid­remote work on the individual and the team respectively. It is important to investi­
gate all parties affected by an individual remote working, to fully understand the concept
with its positives and negatives.
2.3.2
The Individual Focus
As mentioned above, working remotely part­time is favourable and there appears to be a
threshold for positives outcomes from working away from the office. Job satisfaction in
remote workers is highest at moderate levels of remote work and more extensive amounts
increase professional isolation and reduces performance results (The Cambridge Hand­
book of Technology and Employee Behavior, 2019).
Working remotely, part­time, can increase performance as it removes the distraction of the
office and allows the employee to better focus on their tasks and solve them more effec­
tively (The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behavior, 2019). It also
gives the employee a flexibility, that can increase productivity because they have more of
a say in planning their schedule. The flexibility can help manage the work/life balance,
which brings several bonuses such as higher job satisfaction and decreased job­related
stress (The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behavior, 2019). It can
also increase organisational loyalty and the feeling of belonging (Bailey & Kurland, 2002).
The sense of belonging is stronger if the employee has a strong knowledge of how the or­
ganisation works, prior the working remotely, and perceives working remotely as a choice
and something negotiable (The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Be­
havior, 2019). Remote work, can however also affect the work/life balance negatively, as
some employees struggle to end their workday at an appropriate time (The Cambridge
Handbook of Technology and Employee Behavior, 2019).
Another negative effect of remote work is, as mentioned, the risk of professional and social
isolation from colleagues (The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behav­
ior, 2019). The isolation can impact the remote employees differently, depending on what
kind of isolation it is. Professional isolation can be linked to reduced development oppor­
tunities and the amount of perceived respect from colleagues and professional networks
(The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behavior, 2019). Social isola­
tion can leave the remote employee with feelings of exclusion and missing connection to
their work environment, because they are missing out on informal interactions in the office
(Cooper & Kurland, 2002). The two forms of isolation can be distinguished, but they are
also connected to each other (Cooper & Kurland, 2002). Social interactions involve parts of
interpersonal networking and contribute to informal learning. In general social interactions
help build trusting relationships (Cooper & Kurland, 2002). The isolation can occur because
the employee becomes more invisible in the office setting, miss out on social interactions
and become forgotten in networks and information distribution (Bailey & Kurland, 2002).
The biggest impact on isolation is the frequency of remote work with research showing that
14 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:23==
part­time remote work does not leave employees out of networks and has very little impact
on the intra­organisational communication (Bailey & Kurland, 2002).
2.3.3
The Team Focus
Employees working remotely are not the only people affected by the arrangement and the
focus can be shifted from the individual to the team; looking at a network of individuals and
the organisation as a whole. In Section 2.3.2 it was stated how working remotely could add
to job satisfaction and performance. However, looking at it from a team point of view remote
work can negatively affect collegiate relationships, colleague job satisfaction, knowledge
transfer and team performance (The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee
Behavior, 2019). Reduced face to face interaction is associated with employees working
remotely and can reduce the quality of the connection between the remote worker and their
colleagues (The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behavior, 2019).
In an office, where remote work is the norm, the employees in the office may have adapted
their working processes to accommodate their remote colleagues, which maximises the
benefits that remote work can give. Adapting the office to the remote workers can lead to
increased team performance, because all employees feel like valued members of the team
(The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behavior, 2019).
A trusting relationship and interpersonal bonds with colleagues is important to increase
knowledge sharing, but these relationships are stronger with face to face interaction, which
is missing to some degree if an employee works remotely full­time (The Cambridge Hand­
book of Technology and Employee Behavior, 2019). Social relationships are important to
drive the human motivation, meaning if the social need is ignored employees can start feel­
ing isolated and engage less in communication (The Cambridge Handbook of Technology
and Employee Behavior, 2019). However, from a team point of view, isolation becomes
less important compared to the individuals experience. New issues arise, like frustration
among the employees still at the office, who have to adapt to remote working colleagues
and shifting patterns of interruptions (Bailey & Kurland, 2002). The employees in the office
may also have a hard time seeing the contribution of the remote worker, compared to when
they are in the same room, and they may feel that the remote workers are contributing less
to the team objectives (The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behavior,
2019). Full­time remote work is not ideal in a team setting, because it leads to lower quality
relationships with colleagues and supervisors. A problem that is not present in part­time
remote work (The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behavior, 2019).
2.4
Organisational Communication
A common denominator between organisational social capital and remote work is organ­
isational communication. This section will show how communication is important in both
subjects explained above.
Communication is a core process in an organisation that can do many things. It conveys
information between parties, can control behaviour, build relations and develop culture in
the organisation. You need communication to build a shared culture between employees
in an organisation, through conveying values and norms to the employees(Jacobsen &
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
15 of 60
==PAGE:24==
Thorsvik, 2018). Communication is not just sharing knowledge, but also a way to share
ideas, opinions and feelings between individuals or in a group of people, meaning it is also
an integral part of social capital.
The chosen communication media is important for the communication process and can
shape the message and interpretation (Jacobsen & Thorsvik, 2018). Ways to communicate
have been expanded by the introduction of IKT into the work processes, meaning it is also
connected to remote work. IKT has made it possible for people to communicate with each
other without being in geographically close proximity and many people can communicate
at the same time independently of each other. It has created a middle ground between
written and oral communication (Jacobsen & Thorsvik, 2018). Making it possible for people
to communicate easily without being in the same room is what makes it possible to work
remotely, but virtual teams have some challenges. Research shows that virtual teams are
worse at handling conflicts than teams who are together, because the physical distance
suppresses potential conflicts in the team. They have a tendency to be more fragmented
and have difficulty with building a strong sense of togetherness, as well as lower satisfaction
in general due to the missing social and personal contact a person would have in an office
(Jacobsen & Thorsvik, 2018). A lot of communication is also done non­verbally through e.g.
mannerisms, that can help decide what is actually meant by the message being conveyed in
that instant. These non­verbal cues are lost when the communication media is non­visual,
such as phone calls or meetings without visuals of the meeting attendees. This impairs the
ability to understand the message and can affect the efficiency in communication, since
many find that face­to­face communication is what they find to work the best because of
instant feedback (Jacobsen & Thorsvik, 2018).
Because of these struggles, that virtual teams can have, it is relevant to investigate the
experiences employees have had with working from home during the Covid­19 pandemic
and what they have learnt from doing remote work. This also opens the possibility of
investigating the social capital in the employees from the public offices relating to their
experiences with remote work.
16 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:25==
3
Methodology
This thesis is a study on how employees in public offices have experienced hybrid­remote
work during the pandemic in the period of March 2020 ­ August 2021. It is a qualitative
study with an inductive approach with theoretical sensitivity. The combination of remote
work and social capital during a pandemic lends itself to induction since there is not much
information in the area, while there is still theory available on the two topics separately
(Mark Saunders, 2006).
Using an inductive approach, with theoretical sensitivity, to the focus area allows for the
opportunity to combine theory and qualitative data in analysis. This is also relevant, as the
findings from the initial data collection are used to investigate how well existing surveys
of psychosocial work environments fit the situation currently happening with hybrid­remote
work and social capital. A flow chart of the thesis process can be seen in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Process overview
The process started with a preliminary search about the case organisation, current rules
and legislations as well as a search for theory around the topics of social capital and hybrid­
remote work. This preliminary research was mainly done through regular search engines,
finding relevant articles from 2020 and 2021. The preliminary research was followed by
the annual HK conference, where the first data was collected through a fishbone diagram
workshop, as explained in Section 3.2. A cursory analysis of the data from the workshop
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
17 of 60
==PAGE:26==
was done to gain an overview of the findings before moving on to the literature review.
Doing the literature review, I used different methods for searching for literature, as stated
in Section 2.1 about search strings. Snowball sampling was also used as described in
Section 3.1. Following the literature review, the findings from the HK workshop and cursory
analysis was further analysed and compiled into two encompassing fishbone diagrams for
good and bad experiences from the time period of working from home; March 2020 ­ August
2021. The HK conference happened early in the process, which is the reason for a cursory
analysis of the workshop findings before the literature review and more in­depth analysis.
Using the findings from the fishbone diagrams, I investigated the known survey DPQ (Dan­
ish Psychosocial Questionnaire), which is a survey for the psychosocial working environ­
ment in an organisation. The investigation was with a focus on how well the existing di­
mensions of the survey covered the relevant themes from the fishbone diagrams and if any
additional questions were needed. Other surveys were investigated to locate questions to
further cover the themes from the fishbone diagrams, where necessary. Finally, the con­
nections between the fishbone diagrams, psychosocial surveys and literature review was
discussed.
3.1
Snowball Sampling
Inspiration was taken from the snowball sampling method to find additional literature for
the theory search. Backward snowballing is a method where the reference list of articles
is used to find other relevant literature for further research (van Aken & Berends, 2018).
Snowball sampling can be used, when it is difficult to identify the relevant prospects (Mark
Saunders, 2006). By using snowball sampling, articles that have already been found rel­
evant can aid in identifying other relevant sources. However, one has to be mindful when
doing snowball sampling, as the group of references can become homogeneous since they
are connected through reference lists. Homogeneous sampling is, however, not necessar­
ily a bad thing as it also allows for an in­depth study of a particular group or subject (Mark
Saunders, 2006).
I see snowball sampling as a beneficial method, since this thesis investigates a very rele­
vant subject of what is happening in the world right now, and using snowball sampling on
the references while reading gave an opportunity to stay on the right track while still finding
new references to uncover more information. I also found that snowball sampling gave me
a nice overview of the span in years between the references in a given article, as articles
on e.g. telework and remote work span a great range of years. I found this especially
relevant, when investigating telework, as the way people work has changed in many ways
since the original papers on the subject, with the introduction of technology in many work
tasks.
3.2
Fishbone Diagram Data Collection
A fishbone diagram is also known as a Ishikawa diagram or cause­and­effect diagram
(Ishikawa, 1976). It was developed by Professor Kaoru Ishikawa in 1943, as a method to
find the cause for a certain effect in factory production. It can however be applied to many
other scenarios than factories (Ishikawa, 1976).
18 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:27==
A fishbone diagram can be used as a guide for discussion (Ishikawa, 1976), and is therefore
also useful, when trying to identify the effects on people from working from home and what
causes them. The first step in the fishbone diagram is finding the effect, that should be
the focus of the discussion. Next, there are different approaches to finding the causes
to the chosen effect. One way is to find the main factors, e.g. in a factory example it
could be materials, equipment or work methods and then identifying more detailed factors
under each of these branches. However, another way of finding causes is to list all causes
possible in a brainstorm and then grouping together the causes to find the relationship
between cause and effect (Ishikawa, 1976). The second option is good when trying to
exhaust the list of causes and ensuring that no causes are missed, as the thoughts should
flow freely.
3.2.1
Using Fishbone Workshops as a Data Collection Method
Using the fishbone exercise in a workshop setting is a participatory method that aims at
connecting work­related experiences, positive or negative, to work activities. The workshop
has a dual­focus as it is important to explore both enthusiasm and stress. The goal is that
the positive experiences should be furthered, while the negative should be prevented if
possible going forward (Ipsen et al., 2017).
Doing a fishbone workshop makes it possible to collect primary data about perceptions from
the participants. It also allows participants to focus on the context and effects of a situation
and gives them a feeling of involvement, motivating them to take ownership of what is
being investigated. The fishbone workshop gives the opportunity to establish a collective
reflection and insight to experiences from colleagues (Ipsen et al., 2017). The co­created
fishbone diagrams provide a visual overview for creating organisational interventions that
reflect the organisation’s processes. The chances of success then increase, since the
participants have taken ownership and the interventions found through the workshop will
fit the needs of the organisation (Ipsen et al., 2017).
When conducting the workshop, with dual­focus on enthusiasm and stress, it is beneficial
to begin with the enthusiasm fishbone, because people are more likely to share and be
open about positive feelings and experiences. This can help increase the chances of them
being honest, open and elaborate, when doing the stress fishbone subsequently (Ipsen
et al., 2017).
The workshop should be overseen by a leader, that can keep time and ensure that everyone
is heard in discussions. This workshop leader can be a researcher or consultant, who is
not usually part of the organisation. This can also help with bias, as other organisational
issues may become apparent during the workshop. As an example, trust issues could limit
the openness from participants and make them hold back opinions (Ipsen et al., 2017).
The exercise should preferably be done with post­it notes and pens, that can be tagged onto
an empty fishbone diagram printed on paper. A question should be posed by the person
leading the workshop and a period of time should then be given to put down thoughts on
the post­its. The post­its should then be discussed in groups and clustered together if they
are similar and share a theme. It is recommended that the groups should be between 8­16
people (Ipsen et al., 2017).
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
19 of 60
==PAGE:28==
The dual­focus, of enthusiasm and stress, is in this case the good and bad experiences
with the causes being all the things the respondents thought had added to their work from
home experiences in either direction.
Figure 3.2: Example of the fishbone diagram
As seen in the example in Figure 3.2, there are 4 branches in this fishbone diagram, with
a category name for the different themes that can be grouped together under that named
category. With the effect or experience at the end of the arrow connecting all the branches.
There should be two separate fishbone diagrams for respectively the good and bad expe­
riences, as they are seen as two separate effects.
The side bones created, should indicate focus clearly and represent factors that cause the
outcome, not target specific people or behaviours (Ipsen et al., 2017).
In theory, increasing employee influence should reduce risk of stress, but the increased
influence could also lead to increased workload, which is know to increase stress. The
same goes for social interaction, as it increases the chance of social support, but it may
also increase role conflict and the social complexity (Ipsen et al., 2017). The complexity and
duality of this, can require extra data to expand on statements from the fishbone diagrams
created. Surveys can be used to gain knowledge on any found issues or points, that would
benefit from further data collection or research (Ipsen et al., 2017). Surveys are described
in Section 3.3.
3.2.2
Fishbone Workshop at the Annual HK Conference
I participated in the annual conference for HK members, where 93 representatives were
present. The representatives were all introduced to the theory behind the fishbone diagram
and how the exercise is done. Here it was used as an exercise in finding cause and effect
behind good and bad experiences from the pandemic.
In the case of the HK conference, the fishbone diagram was used to start conversation
among the different HK representatives in participation. The HK representatives were di­
20 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:29==
vided into groups depending on what region they were from. Depending on the amount
of people representing the offices, some offices were split into smaller groups, as not all
offices were represented by the same amount of people. Table 3.1 shows the amount of
groups from each regional office present at the conference.
Table 3.1: Number of groups from each HK office at the conference
HK department
# of groups
Hovedstaden
4
Nordjylland
2
Midtvest
4
Sjælland
3
Sydjylland
3
Østjylland
4
Midt
2
Total
22
The goal was to create two fishbone diagrams for each group at the conference; one for
the good experiences and one for the bad when working from home during the pandemic,
in the period from March 2020 to August 2021 (Andersen et al., 2009). This resulted in 44
fishbone diagrams, split evenly between good and bad experiences.
The groups were introduced to all parts of the exercise, before beginning the workshop. As
suggested in Section 3.2.1, the exercise started with the good experiences. The groups
were given time to individually write two to three good experiences from the pandemic on
post­it notes, which they then discussed and sorted into clusters, when there were several
post­its of the same nature. After discussion in groups, people were asked to share what
they found with the other groups. The process was then repeated for the bad experiences,
with the respondents being asked to write three to four post­its. After discussion and clus­
tering in groups, it was discussed across the entire conference assembly opening up for a
chance to share experiences and ask questions. The fishbone diagrams were hung up on
the wall, so people could view them and discuss further if they wished.
After returning from the conference, I reviewed the 44 fishbone diagrams and clustered
the post­its further if found relevant. I gave the clusters of post­it notes a theme matching
the contents to create headlines. This process was done in Excel to digitise the physical
fishbone diagrams into virtual lists. The Excel version of the fishbone diagrams is still
split into the different groups from the conference. This excel document is available as
a separate appendix under the name ”HK Kommunal Workshop”. After digitisation, the
themes were then compiled into a list, and doubles removed, resulting in the fishbone
diagrams as seen in Figures 4.1 and 4.2. I categorised the themes into four different overall
categories, as also seen in the example in Figure 3.2. The themes can overlap if they are
present in both diagrams.
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
21 of 60
==PAGE:30==
3.3
Using Questionnaires for Further Data Collection
The fishbone workshop, described in Section 3.2, results in some overall themes of how
respondents have found working remotely and what they have learnt from it. However,
since the workshop includes only a group of employees as respondents, it is relevant to
investigate how the remaining employees feel towards the same themes as the original
respondents through e.g. distribution of questionnaires.
Several different questionnaires already exist on the psychosocial work environment and
well­being in employees. I find it relevant to investigate these questionnaires and find how
well they cover the themes of the fishbone workshop, social capital and hybrid­remote work.
As I am seeking to investigate existing questionnaires to find their relevance for the subject
of social capital and hybrid­remote work this part of the process leans toward a descriptive
research.
Questionnaires are a useful tool to collect quantitative data from a complete group in an
organisation, instead of using qualitative interview forms on a sample (Mark Saunders,
2006). I believe that, in the case where a group of respondents have participated in the
fishbone workshop, described in Section 3.2, questionnaires can be a natural step to collect
more data on the same themes. Using the findings from the fishbone workshop in a survey
can be beneficial for uncovering if the opinions from the workshop are shared by an entire
organisation instead of a sample group.
An interview can either be structured, semi­structured or unstructured in the way they are
conducted. Structured interviews usually contain standardised questions, such as a ques­
tionnaire, and the questions are always presented in the same manner to the different re­
spondents. Semi­structured interviews have a list of themes and questions to be covered,
but the order in which they are presented can be switched around if needed to build a better
flow in the interview dynamic. Finally, unstructured interviews are used to explore a general
area more in­depth and have no prepared questions to adhere to, but gives the respondent
a chance to talk freely about a topic the interviewer has presented. (Mark Saunders, 2006)
Table 3.2 shows what types of interviews are used for the different research categories as
stated in (Mark Saunders, 2006).
Table 3.2: Different interview types for the research categories (Mark Saunders, 2006)
Exploratory
Descriptive
Explanatory
Structured
✓✓
✓
Semi­structured
✓
✓✓
Unstructured
✓✓
✓✓= more frequent, ✓= less frequent
Questionnaires are a type of survey data collection method, where each person has to
respond to the same set of questions in the same pre­determined order (Mark Saunders,
2006). Table 3.2 indicates that questionnaires fit well with the likes of descriptive research
as to identify general patterns (Mark Saunders, 2006).
22 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:31==
There are different ways questionnaires can be administered; self­administered or interviewer­
administered. Structured interviews are a type of interviewer­administered questionnaire
and internet­mediated questionnaires a type of self­administered (Mark Saunders, 2006).
Interviewer­administered questionnaires are better fit if there are several open­ended ques­
tions in the questionnaire, but there is a risk of contamination in the answers because of
the human interviewer factor. It also takes longer to complete the interviewer­administered
questionnaires in comparison to the same sample size of self­administered (Mark Saun­
ders, 2006). Self­administered questionnaires can complete a bigger sample size in the
same time and respondents are more likely to answer honestly, rather than what they think
is the correct answer according to the interviewer (Mark Saunders, 2006). The questions
do however have to be more closed and less complex than when an interviewer is present
(Mark Saunders, 2006). As the existing questionnaires are self­administered I found that
it makes sense to continue in that branch and any suggested additions be made in the
same form as the existing questionnaires. A form of closed questions are rating ques­
tions, where the respondent is given a Likert­style scale on how much or little the question
applies to them. This helps collect responses, that are both negative and positive without
asking open­ended questions to the respondent. The scale does not have to stay the same
throughout the entire questionnaire, but it should be very visible what scale is currently used
for the questions (Mark Saunders, 2006).
It is important, that the questions posed in the questionnaire are defined precisely. This
is so the respondents do not misinterpret the question, as it can be difficult to go back for
follow up if the questionnaire is without specific identifying data (Mark Saunders, 2006). As
people tend to be more honest when they are anonymous, meaning the answers will be
less skewed, using simple identifiers to categorise people can help (Mark Saunders, 2006).
Using questions to designate specific attributes about the respondents can help ensure that
the entire population is represented and can help categorise the opinions recorded from
the questionnaires based on different attributes (Mark Saunders, 2006). These attribute
questions can be done as list questions, giving the respondent a list of choices in what
attribute best describes them, e.g. gender or age bracket, with the option of an open­ended
option for if none of the listed choices fit (Mark Saunders, 2006).
3.3.1
Selecting Surveys for the Analysis
When approaching the analysis, with the goal in mind of collecting further information relat­
ing to the findings from the fishbone workshop, I started the process with investigating the
DPQ questionnaire from The National Research Center for Work Environment (NFA). This
questionnaire covers many themes within the area of psychosocial working environment.
The questions in the DPQ questionnaire have a broad range, as it is designed to be ap­
plicable in many different organisations (Det Nationale Forskningscenter for Arbejdsmiljø,
2021b). There are however some themes found in the workshop, that are not covered by
the questionnaire, making it relevant to investigate if any other surveys could be found that
would cover these bases.
The first place, I searched for additional questionnaires, was the NFA website. Considering
the DPQ questionnaire is from this source, I saw it as a natural step to investigate if they
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
23 of 60
==PAGE:32==
had any other surveys that would be useful in the analysis. Initially three questionnaires
were found, but upon further analysis and comparison it became clear that the overlap
between the DPQ questionnaire and a new survey, themed around social capital, was
too big and that it would not contribute anything further to the analysis. The two remaining
questionnaires do however cover some areas of the themes from the workshop. These two
surveys are ”Arbejdsmiljø og Helbred i Danmark” and ”Copenhagen Burnout Inventory”.
When it came to the aspect of remote work, the first questionnaire I investigated was pre­
viously known due to a course and originating from a group of DTU researchers. This was
followed by a search using search engines, which lead to the questionnaire developed by
the SIGMA initiative, a cooperation between the OECD and the EU. The two questionnaires
relating to remote work are ”Experiences of working from home in times of Covid­19” and
”Telework survey: Learning from the Covid­19 crisis”.
When analysing the different questionnaires in Chapter 5, they are related to the original
work environment questionnaire DPQ and how they cover the themes from the fishbone
workshop to ultimately make it possible to further investigate the themes from the workshop
through survey questions.
24 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:33==
4
Fishbone Workshop Findings and
Analysis
This chapter contains the findings from the workshop at the HK conference, as described in
Section 3.2.2. The chapter investigates the themes from the workshop and how prominent
they were. I utilise the fishbone diagram to group the different findings together and create
an overview of the good and bad experiences respectively. The chapter ends with an
analysis on how some of the main themes from the workshop connect to the subject of
social capital as described in Section 2.2.
All findings from the fishbone workshop are also available in the Excel file ”HK Kommunal
Workshop”, which can be found in the zip­file attached to the hand­in. The Excel file is in
Danish.
4.1
Fishbone Diagrams from Annual HK Conference
Following the HK conference, I clustered the findings from the fishbone workshop into two
separate diagrams, to illustrate a collective view of the good (Figure 4.1) and bad (Figure
4.2) experiences respectively. The process is described in Section 3.2.1.
Figure 4.1: Good experiences observed from the HK conference
In Figure 4.1 it can be seen that there are 4 categories, or sub­bones, of themes that
were uncovered while clustering. The two top sub­bones Communication and Management
each have a theme with the same name as the category. The themes of communication
and management are not a miss­write from the categories, but more themes for different
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
25 of 60
==PAGE:34==
findings in that category that did not fit any of the other themes in their respective sub­
bones. There are 12 themes in total across the 4 sub­bones.
Figure 4.2: Bad experiences observed from the HK conference
Figure 4.2 has the same 4 categories, or sub­bones, as Figure 4.1. However, the themes
differ between the two diagrams, which is especially visible in the Communication sub­
bone. The Communication sub­bones in the fishbone diagram with bad experiences con­
tains several more themes compared to its counterpart in the diagram with good experi­
ences. There are 14 themes across the 4 sub­bones. It is however important to note, as
described in Section 3.2.1, that the respondents were asked to supply different amounts
of good and bad experiences when doing the exercise. This could be a contributing factor
for why there are more themes in the diagram of bad experiences.
Since some of the themes are shared between the two diagrams, while others are exclusive
to either good or bad experiences, I created a table to give an overview of the different
themes. Table 4.1 shows this overview of the different cluster themes sorted into the four
categories and if they are exclusively good, exclusively bad or shared experiences. A
shared experience means that the theme is present in both fishbone diagrams. The table
contains three columns, splitting the themes into good, bad or shared experiences. The
themes have also been sorted by the categories and split by a row indicating which category
the themes belongs to.
The six themes present in both diagrams are: communication, sparring, management,
trust, work environment and work/life balance. As visible from the figures, some of the
themes share names with the overall categories. This is due to clusters from the exercise
being broad in nature and falling under the umbrella term of the entire sub­bone.
26 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:35==
Table 4.1: Sorted overview of the themes in the four sub­bones of the fishbone diagrams
Exclusively Good
Exclusively Bad
Shared Experience
Communication
Isolation
Communication
Loneliness
Sparring
Knowledge sharing
Management
Discrimination
Trust
Management
Equipment/Prerequisites
Development
Equipment
Work environment
Digitalisation
Outcomes
Productivity
Stagnation
Work/life balance
Efficiency
Uncertainty
Flexibility
Health
The following section describes the categories and themes in greater detail to delve further
into the fishbone diagram than just the headlines.
4.1.1
Description of Categories
This section contains a description of the different themes and categories found in the two
fishbone diagrams (Figures 4.1 and 4.2) and displayed in Table 4.1. The descriptions are
sectioned into the four categories from the fishbone diagrams.
Communication
In the Communication sub­bone there were no themes, that were exclusively good. The two
themes present in the sub­bone in Figure 4.1 are also present in the fishbone diagram with
bad experiences. This results in two shared themes, between the two fishbone diagrams,
and three themes that are exclusively bad.
The generalised theme communication is present in both diagrams, as some respondents
found that they became closer with their colleagues, because of daily meetings and had
more contact to people, while others found that some meetings were not fit to be virtual
and thereby had a bad experience with communication in their job. This is also connected
to the theme of sparring, as some respondents, as stated, found they had easier access
to colleagues when the need for sparring arose. Other respondents found that they were
missing out on sparring and discussions with colleagues and feeling more individualised
in their work rather than being part of a team because of the missing contact one would
normally have by being in­office.
In continuation of the themes of communication and sparring, some respondents felt that
they had become isolated and that the community had been negatively affected, with some
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
27 of 60
==PAGE:36==
colleagues distancing themselves while working from home. They found that it was difficult
to catch if someone needed help outside of regular work tasks. Feeling isolated from their
teams and colleagues also gave a feeling of loneliness and some respondents felt alone
and unmotivated by the missing social aspect and relations from going into the office.
Some respondents also found that knowledge sharing had become more difficult and they
felt like they were missing pieces in their work, that would have been given to them through
knowledge sharing with colleagues in their workday before working from home. This is
interesting, since there were divided opinions on how well communication worked, while
working from home. It goes in hand with the respondents who also found sparring and
general communication a problem, but knowledge sharing was not mentioned as a good
experience. This can however be because the people who found no issues with knowledge
sharing, did not think to mention it during the fishbone exercise.
Management
In the Management sub­bone, there are two shared experiences and one exclusively bad
experience. Some of the respondents had experiences a feeling of discrimination against
them, through talking to other HK members from different offices. They found that the ap­
proach to remote work was different between some offices and some felt like they were
missing out, even though they understood that not all employees have the same agree­
ment. This could be because some employees did not find the process of remote work to
be fair between offices or they felt that they had been less informed than they wanted to.
This can also be connected to the findings on trust in the fishbone exercise. There were
both good and bad experiences with trust, with some employees feeling that their man­
agement trusted them, while others did not have the same experience with their superiors.
This can be a problem, since trust should be a shared feeling between employees and
managers for the organisation to run effectively (Olesen et al., 2008). If employees feel
like the processes of remote work has not been fair to them compared to some of their HK
peers, in other offices, the trust in their managers can waver and overall satisfaction can
drop (Olesen et al., 2008).
The risk of missing trust is also visible in the shared experience theme of management
as some respondents voiced their opinion on missing competencies in their managers and
feeling like they were distanced from each other. Some of the respondents were concerned
that their management would use this period of remote work as a stepping stone to saving
funds on office space, which would affect the respondents work week more permanently.
This could point to respondents not feeling like their management is being transparent
enough in what is happening and what the plan is for the future.
Overall, the majority of the findings in this sub­bone points toward the respondents feeling
like the process has not been transparent enough, making the respondents unsure on if the
process has been fair and if they should trust that their management has the employees’
best interest in mind.
Equipment/Prerequisites
The Equipment/prerequisites sub­bone contains any physical aspects of the working en­
vironment and working from home. This sub­bone contains one shared, one bad and two
28 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:37==
good experiences.
The shared experience concerns the actual physical work environment of the respondents.
The experiences were split between respondents thinking both their physical and psycho­
logical work environment had suffered from having to work remotely. Others thought that
their work environment had improved with working from home and given them new opportu­
nities. Some of the respondents had found that new work methods had shown themselves
while working from home and they saw how digital tools could be utilised to improve their
productivity, efficiency and their overall way of working. Working remotely had for them
shown itself as a chance of development. They were impressed with how prepared they
actually were for a full digitalisation of their work day and the whole process went smoother
than they initially expected.
There were however also some respondents who had a different experience with moving
to working fully remote. Some felt that they did not receive the equipment they needed to
make it possible to work from home and make the transition as smooth as possible, as well
as having problems with the equipment they did have. This is once again a testament to the
fact that different offices went through different processes in regards to moving to remote
work with differing success. It is an extra hurdle to have to move past, if they physical
equipment in a remote work setup is not fitting to the needs of the work, and energy will go
to that instead of solving the work tasks.
Outcomes
The final sub­bone contains all the Outcomes of the period of working from home for the
respondents, meaning what they found had come out of the period of working from home
that they either experienced as an improvement or impediment of their work. This sub­bone
contains one shared, two bad and four good experiences.
The shared experience is that of work/life balance, where the good experience some re­
spondents had was that they enjoyed working from home as it saved them time on commut­
ing, which they could use elsewhere. Work/life balance is also tied to one of the recorded
good experiences. Some respondents found that remote work gave them a flexibility, they
did not have before. Both in regards to fitting work and private life together, but also how
they planned their work day to get the most out of their time. They found themselves to
be more productive and efficient in solving tasks, because they experienced more peace
and quiet while working from home. This gave them the opportunity to focus better on their
work without interruptions from colleagues, giving them a better flow.
Other respondents found it difficult to differentiate between work and their private life with
remote work blurring the lines between the two and throwing off their work/life balance. At
the same time some respondent felt stagnation in their work life. They had the feeling that
no progress was being made on projects and that less new ideas saw the light, compared
to before the remote work period. A feeling of uncertainty was also presented by some
respondents, as they were unsure about the situation of remote work moving from obliga­
tory to something that should be up for discussion and what timeline they are working on
regarding remote and hybrid work in the future.
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
29 of 60
==PAGE:38==
4.1.2
Theme Cluster Counting and Sorting
Table 4.2 shows a count of clusters in the different themes in the two fishbone diagrams.
It is important to note, that the count is the amount of clusters and not the amount of post­
its in that theme. A column of percentages is also present in the tables for good and
bad experiences, as the respondents in the exercise were asked for 2­3 post­its of good
experiences and 3­4 post­its of bad experiences. As this skews the result, the percentage
compared to the overall amount is shown. Table 4.2a are the good experiences and Table
4.2b the bad experiences.
Table 4.2: Number of times a cluster theme appeared in the fishbone diagrams (Descend­
ing)
(a)
Good experiences
Theme
# appeared
~%
Flexibility
16
17
Efficiency
15
16
Productivity
13
14
Trust
11
12
Digitalisation
10
11
Development
7
8
Work environment
6
6
Health
5
5
Communication
3
3
Management
3
3
Work/life balance
3
3
Sparring
1
1
Sum
93
100
(b)
Bad experiences
Theme
# appeared
~%
Isolation
21
18
Communication
20
18
Work/life balance
12
11
Management
12
11
Work environment
10
9
Loneliness
9
8
Equipment
6
5
Sparring
6
5
Trust
5
4
Stagnation
4
4
Knowledge sharing
3
3
Discrimination
3
3
Uncertainty
3
3
Sum
114
100
The themes that are most prominently mentioned in Table 4.2a are closer together in num­
ber of appearances, than Table 4.2b. The two most prominent themes are flexibility and
efficiency, with 17% and 16% respectively, followed closely by productivity at 14% and trust
at 12%. In Table 4.2b it is more pronounced, that two themes are prominent in mentions.
The themes isolation and communication appear the most out of the 13 themes in bad
experience, with each amounting to around 18% of the total amount of clusters. This is
followed by work/life balance and management, which each amount to approximately 11%
of the total amount of clusters.
It is an interesting observation, that even though the two fishbone diagrams share some
themes, none of them appear at the top of both tables. It is different things, that are high­
lighted in the respective good and bad experiences. This makes sense, since the fact that
a theme is present in both diagrams is not an indication that it is equally mentioned in both
30 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:39==
instances. This observation could be an indication, that the process of how remote work
has been handled has been fair and just in execution, since the grievances surrounding
offices being treated differently is very low on the list of bad experiences (discrimination).
Another specific example is the theme of trust. It is present in both tables, but where it
is one of the high scorers on the good experiences it is not presented very many times in
bad experiences. This could indicate that people have felt there has been a certain level
of trust present in their processes of working remotely.
This is of course not an all­encompassing result of how everyone has experienced the
remote work period. There are also some themes that are visibly prominent as seen in
Table 4.2, making those themes interesting for further research. The top two themes in
Table 4.2a are relevant, because they both account for more than 15% each of the full sum
of clusters. Productivity is also relevant, as it is a theme touched upon by both hybrid­
remote work and social capital, as mentioned in Chapter 2. The same goes for the theme
of trust, as it is one of the key concepts for social capital, as stated in Section 2.2. In Table
4.2b the two top themes once again account for more than 15% of the total amount of
clusters, respectively, making them interesting for further research. As work/life balance is
also a very relevant topic in the area of remote­hybrid work, I also find this to be interesting
to investigate further. Finally, management is a relevant theme to investigate further, as it
as well is tied into both social capital and remote work.
4.2
Fishbone Workshop Findings and Social Capital
For the reasons given above, the themes chosen for further research are flexibility, effi­
ciency, productivity and trust from the good experiences. From the bad experiences the
chosen themes are isolation, communication, work/life balance and management. To look
at the connection social capital has to the chosen findings in the fishbone diagrams, I have
developed a figure of how I see the different themes relating to the three key concepts of
social capital, as they are mentioned in Section 2.2.
Figure 4.3: Connection between chosen fishbone themes and social capital key concepts
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
31 of 60
==PAGE:40==
As visible in the figure, none of the themes are connected to the concept of justice in social
capital. This also fits with my earlier observation, that the process of working from home
has been seen as done in a fair way by the respondents in the fishbone workshop. At least,
when it comes to the most prominent themes, that have been chosen for further analysis.
This does not mean, that the key concept of justice in absent from the entire group of
findings from the fishbone workshop, but rather not being the main focus in the narrowed
pool of data. Table 4.3 shows another overview of the connections I found between the
fishbone themes and key concepts of social capital.
Table 4.3: Connection between experiences and social capital
Theme
Justice
Trust
Cooperation
Flexibility
X
X
Efficiency
X
Productivity
X
X
Trust
X
Isolation
X
Communication
X
X
Work/life balance
Management
X
X
Some of the more elaborate post­its from the fishbone workshop give a view of what the
different themes signified for working from home.
4.2.1
Good Experiences
Several respondents indicated that the flexibility for them was the freedom to choose when
to solve different work tasks and it helped some individuals with increased flexibility be­
tween their work life and private life, making it easier for them to fit everything. The re­
spondents indicating that they were given the flexibility to plan their time differently, from
what they would have done in the office, can both signify trust and cooperation. It is a
trust in the employee to be able to get their work done efficiently under these different
circumstances and without being in the office. It also signifies cooperation, since some
respondents found that the increased flexibility made room for the individuals needs.
In regards to efficiency, many respondents indicated that they found meetings more efficient
and that fewer meetings took place. The meetings were shorter and people had more
peace to work, with the possibility of planning their own working day. The flexibility led
them to feeling more efficient. They enjoyed the shorter virtual meetings as they saved
commute time and could easily have things clarified with their colleagues, when needed.
These things point to efficiency being tied to cooperation in social capital. Even though
the respondents said they had less disturbances from colleagues, it can still be seen as
something that strengthens cooperation as they could still get in contact with each other
easily and the flexibility was part of their self­reported improvement in efficiency.
With the reported increase in efficiency was also a reported increase in productivity. The
most reported point about productivity was the opportunity to work in peace and without
32 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:41==
interruptions, which is also the case for efficiency. Since trust between colleagues can be
connected to increased productivity, through social capital, it is also connected to that key
concept. A point that is shared between efficiency and productivity is that the employees
were still able to get their work done even though they were put into a relatively unknown
situation with working from home full­time and reported that they were still able to solve
their work tasks. This could be because the employees knew each other prior to working
remotely and already had a strong network to rely on with trust in their colleagues to get
the job done. Often, the three themes of flexibility, efficiency and productivity are con­
nected in the answers from the fishbone workshop, showing that some of the respondents
themselves saw the flexibility was helpful in their own productivity and efficiency.
The trust experiences from the workshop revolved mainly around the respondents feeling
that their respective managements had trust in them to solve their work tasks under the cir­
cumstances given. The experience of increased trust from management had given some
of the respondents an increased feeling of responsibility as well, because they wanted to
show what they were able to do with the freedom given to them because of the trust from
management. Most of the answers about trust are angled towards the trust the manage­
ment has in the employees and not in the opposite direction. This can of course be due
to several reasons, either because the respondents did not think of their own trust in the
management as an extraordinarily good experience, but just their norm or because the
trust from management was where it was felt the most.
4.2.2
Bad Experiences
The most frequently mentioned bad experience was that of isolation in both the profes­
sional and social manner. Especially the lack of collegiate community was mentioned sev­
eral times, noted next to decreased well­being and loneliness in the respondents’ work.
It led some respondents to decreased motivation and feeling like they were alone in the
whole situation, because of the missing daily contact with colleagues and easy access to
discussions and the working environment suffering due to remote work. The discussions
and conversations are not as natural when working remotely and it requires more energy
to keep up the connections with colleagues. The respondents felt fragmented and some
found that their well­being was taking a hit due to the distance and isolation making them
feel lonely. The decreased access to colleagues socially and professionally affects the co­
operation between the employees. This fits well with what was found in Section 2.3, since it
was found that high amounts of remote work led to professional and social isolation, which
could affect the motivation, productivity and well­being.
The points from communication touch on some of the same things as the isolation theme
does. Discussions have become more difficult, when done online and the results are not the
same as an in­person discussion. The teams that struggled to cooperate earlier struggle
even more and the interdisciplinary work and knowledge­sharing has become more difficult.
The relations are challenging to uphold and virtual meetings miss important aspects like
body language and mannerisms. Overall there are several aspects that challenge the
cooperation between colleagues and their relations to each other, also affecting the trust
between them.
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
33 of 60
==PAGE:42==
The main point mentioned regarding work/life balance was that it was difficult to separate
work from private life. Breaks were forgotten and the lines between work and private life
were blurred both mentally and physically. It was difficult to find a connection between the
issues with work/life balance and social capital as it can be very dependent on the situation,
but since it was still one of the most mentioned bad experiences, and relevant relating to
remote work, it is mentioned here for clarity.
The ultimate point brought forward regarding management, was that is was lacking and that
management felt distanced from the employees. The employees were concerned that they
would miss out on important information from their managers and that their managers did
not have the competencies for managing employees working remotely. Some respondents
were concerned that it would be difficult to keep an overview of the task distribution and
that the distance affected the bonds between the hierarchical layers negatively. The linking
relations suffers because of the increased distance between managers and employees,
and the employees appear to be concerned that their managers are not equipped well
enough for the challenge that is distance management.
With the findings and connections from this chapter, the following chapter will analyse dif­
ferent questionnaires pertaining to work environment and well­being as to investigate how
questionnaires can cover the themes mentioned at the workshop and here to collect addi­
tional data with the same focus.
34 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:43==
5
Investigating Questionnaires
Since the fishbone workshop with the HK members was done with respondents from sev­
eral different public offices it is relevant to investigate how to collect data, relating to the
workshop findings, from a larger group of people. This can be done by distributing question­
naires to the different public offices, where the questions are centred around the findings
of the fishbone workshop. This way the opinions of the points from the fishbone workshop
can be investigated with a larger respondent group.
A questionnaire already exists on the psychosocial working environment, known as the
DPQ questionnaire. DPQ stands for Danish Psychosocial Questionnaire, making it very
relevant for this case. The DPQ questionnaire was created by The National Research
Center for Work Environment (NFA). However, the DPQ questionnaire aims to have a very
wide coverage and some of the themes found to be frequently mentioned in the fishbone
workshop could be sought to have a better coverage by seeking out additional questions.
These additional questions can be found in other already existing questionnaires as is
common when creating questionnaires (Mark Saunders, 2006).
Other questionnaires also exist on the topics of social capital and well­being in the work
environment, making it advantageous to investigate these questionnaires for relevant ques­
tions pertaining to the workshop findings. Two questionnaires were also found relating to
remote work during the Covid­19 pandemic to cover that subject area. Several of these
questionnaires were created by the NFA. As the DPQ questionnaire was created by the
NFA it was natural to investigate what other tools the NFA already had available for use on
their official website. It also makes sense, since the cooperating organisation is based in
Denmark and they will already know of the NFA. Some of the questionnaires are published
in Danish and the questions have been translated for this thesis. The original questions,
together with the translation, can be found in the Excel sheet ”Question Overview”, which
can be found in the zip­file attached to the hand­in.
The questions from the other questionnaires may have been found relevant to cover a
theme missing in the original DPQ questionnaire or to cover an already existing theme
further. This may mean that some of the questions appear very similar, but the focus of this
analysis is to increase coverage of the questionnaire rather than replacing already existing
questions. Section 5.1 will investigate how well the existing DPQ questionnaire covers
the themes found in the fishbone workshop, while Section 5.2 will investigate additional
questions from other questionnaires that cover what the DPQ questionnaire does not.
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
35 of 60
==PAGE:44==
5.1
Coverage of Themes in Existing Psychosocial
Questionnaire
The DPQ questionnaire contains 46 main questions, with many questions containing sub­
questions. It is a very broad questionnaire, that covers many themes regarding the work
environment as to be applicable to many organisations (Det Nationale Forskningscenter
for Arbejdsmiljø, 2021a). The purpose of this section is to investigate how the existing
DPQ questionnaire covers the findings from the fishbone workshop. Table 5.1, at the end
of the section, summarised what areas have shortcomings in DPQ that require additional
questions.
There are five dimensions to the DPQ questionnaire, with different themes under each
dimension as shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Themes in the DPQ questionnaire (Det Nationale Forskningscenter for Arbe­
jdsmiljø, 2021b)
Some of the themes from the fishbone workshop are covered quite well by the DPQ ques­
tionnaire as those themes relate more to the general working environment, as opposed to
the situation of working from home. Specifically everything revolving around social capital is
covered in the dimension known as ”Interpersonal relations at work: management and co­
operation”. Here the three key concepts from social capital are covered and the questions
are about relations horizontally between colleagues and vertical relations between man­
agers and employees. That also means the most of the themes from the workshop findings
are already covered to varying degrees in the questionnaire. However, even though that
the theme is covered it may not mean that the specific concerns from the workshop are
covered by these questions.
An example is that one of the top themes from the workshop is trust. Trust is covered in
the DPQ questionnaire, but the focus is on trust between colleagues and not explicitly the
trust managers have in employees, which was the main concern regarding the trust at the
workshop. Question 14.6 in DPQ focuses on the trust between colleagues in doing their
work tasks well. However, what was found relating to trust in the workshop was mainly
36 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:45==
vertical trust between employee and manager, both ways. Especially that management
should have trust in the employees to do their job well, which means that DPQ does not
cover this specific area directly.
There are no questions in the DPQ questionnaire specifically pertaining to the theme of
isolation from the workshop. This makes sense, since that theme is mainly related to the
subject of remote work, even though it also ties to social capital due to the nature of it
affecting relations between employees. Question 14.9 in DPQ asks about an employee
and their colleagues general attention to each others well­being, but the question is not
specified further than that. Question 21.4 also questions if the manager is observant of the
state of well­being, but that question is specifically worded about the work place. Because
of this, it could be beneficial to identify an additional question in another questionnaire,
that focuses on work in isolation. It is important to note, that the DPQ questionnaire does
contain questions about the feelings, that would normally be connected to isolation, such
as motivation and job satisfaction. It is however beneficial to add a question specific to
working in isolation as it can give additional details about the other questions and if there
are any connections.
Relating to isolation, the DPQ questionnaire already contains questions about communica­
tion between colleagues and with the management, since communication is such an impor­
tant part of organisational success. However, again due to the remote angle of the findings
from the workshop, there appears to be a gap in the questions regarding remote commu­
nication. The interdisciplinary communication has, according to the workshop findings,
suffered during the period of remote work and the collegiate togetherness has also been
affected by the distance between employees. The DPQ questionnaire already contains an
entire section, under question 14, about cooperation between colleagues and their com­
munication, but additional questions referring to the communication during remote work
could cover the workshop findings more advantageously.
The themes of efficiency and productivity are very connected, since the main finding for
both themes was that remote work gave employees a peaceful and quiet working environ­
ment to focus better and by that do more efficient and productive work. In this area, the
DPQ questionnaire focuses mainly on questions regarding if the employee can complete
their tasks to a satisfactory level and if they know when they are doing their job well. These
questions can give information on the productivity and efficiency in an employee, but none
of them question if the efficiency or productivity has changed due to remote work, which
was one of the main findings from the workshop. Because of that it is relevant to investigate
additional questions that cover this.
Connected to productivity and efficiency is the theme of flexibility. DPQ has several ques­
tions relating to how much influence the employee has on their workday, both regarding
how and when they solve their tasks but also when they take breaks and which hours they
have to work. This is still relevant and applicable for employees working remotely, but
since increased flexibility was considerably mentioned at the workshop, it can be assumed
that the amount of flexibility has changed since working from home and adding additional
questions about the amount of flexibility in an employee’s workday can be relevant. This
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
37 of 60
==PAGE:46==
also ties into the theme of work/life balance, since the respondents both reported increased
flexibility but also that they struggled with the balance between their work and private life.
This makes it relevant to pose additional questions relating to work/life balance specifically
in a remote work setting, since the DPQ questionnaire already contains some questions
about the influence of an employees work on their private life.
The management theme from the workshop is tied to several aspects of other themes,
such as trust and communication. It is already present in the DPQ questionnaire under dif­
ferent scenarios pertaining to how managers and employees cooperate and communicate.
Specifically question 21 with all sub­questions. With that said, there are some questions
that could aid in better coverage of the findings from the workshop. As mentioned, these
questions relate to the trust and communication described above.
Table 5.1 summarises the different areas where questions come up short, relating to the
workshop findings, in the original DPQ questionnaire and could benefit from additional
questions.
Table 5.1: Shortcomings in existing survey
Theme
Shortcoming
Communication
There are several questions surrounding communication in DPQ,
however, because of the remote angle the survey is missing ques­
tions about communication between colleagues as well as between
employee and manager with that angle
Efficiency &
Productivity
DPQ contains questions about if employees feel rushed or if they
feel like their job should be done differently and if they have the right
means to complete their tasks. It does not contain any questions on
efficiency and productivity in remote work
Flexibility
The existing questionnaire contains questions about the flexibility in
an employee’s job, but additional questions are relevant due to the
increase in flexibility found at the workshop and the remote angle
the work day now has
Isolation
The survey was created before remote work was as prominent as it
is now, and it therefore does not contain any questions specifically
relating to the theme of isolation
Trust
The survey contains questions about trust between colleagues, but
is missing questions about trust from management in employees
ability to solve work tasks
WLB
There are several questions about work/life balance in the DPQ
questionnaire, but the workshop findings relate to the problem of
the boundary between work and private life resulting in working too
much
This is not an exhaustive list of all areas, where the DPQ questionnaire could be improved,
but relates to the themes found to be most prominent in the fishbone workshop and chosen
38 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:47==
for further investigation in this thesis. There are most likely other areas where the ques­
tionnaire could be improved relating to remote work, but the focus for the remainder of this
thesis will be on the areas mentioned in Table 5.1.
Because of the shortcomings, mainly related to remote work, in the DPQ questionnaire
mentioned above and summarised in Table 5.1, it is beneficial to seek additional questions
addressing these shortcomings. The following section will seek to find questions that cover
these shortcomings in other questionnaires within the subjects of work environment, well­
being and remote work.
5.2
Additional Questions from Other Questionnaires
When searching for additional questions to cover the areas found in Section 5.1, the main
terms used were ”remote work”, ”work from home” and ”working environment” as most
of the areas relate to the subject of remote work. Table 5.2 shows the different surveys
investigated in this analysis. The right­most column labelled ”Code” contains the shortened
code used in tables and descriptions in the remainder of this chapter to refer to the different
surveys and correspond to the codes in the Excel sheet.
Table 5.2: Questionnaire overview
Survey
Description
Code
Arbejdsmiljø og
Helbred i Danmark
(NFA, 2020)
Survey
created
by
NFA
for
use
by
the
Danish
Working
Environment
Authority.
The
survey
con­
tains
53
main
questions
spread
over
14
topics.
The survey is in Danish.
AH
Copenhagen
Burnout Inventory
(NFA, n.d.)
Survey
created
by
NFA
to
measure
burnout
in
employees
for
the
PUMA
project.
The
survey
covers
private,
work
or
client
related
burnout.
The survey is in Danish.
CBI
Ipsen, Kircher &
Hansen survey
(Ipsen et al., 2020)
Survey
created
by
researchers
at
DTU
to
investi­
gate
the
initial
reactions
of
working
from
home
dur­
ing
the
first
lockdown
of
the
Covid­19
pandemic.
The survey is in English.
IKH
SIGMA initiative
Covid­19 survey
(SIGMA, 2020)
Survey
created
by
the
SIGMA
initiative;
a
co­
operation
between
OECD
and
the
EU.
The
cur­
vey
contains
45
main
questions
about
teleworking.
The survey is in English.
SIGMA
The survey, ”Arbejdsmiljø og Helbred i Danmark”, was created by the NFA for the Danish
Working Environment Authority (AT). It contains 53 questions distributed over 14 different
topics (NFA, 2020). The second survey from the NFA is the Copenhagen Burnout Inventory,
which is a self­administered survey people can take to measure their burnout in relation to
private, work or client matters. It contains 19 questions. The survey was originally created
for the PUMA project, which is about burnout, motivation and job satisfaction (NFA, n.d.).
The third survey is a survey done by researchers from DTU investigating the initial reaction
to working from home during the first Covid­19 lockdown in 2020. The survey contains
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
39 of 60
==PAGE:48==
23 questions (Ipsen et al., 2020). The final survey contains questions about learnings
regarding teleworking during the Covid­19 crisis. It was created by the SIGMA initiative,
which is a cooperation between the OECD and the EU. The SIGMA survey contains 45
main questions relating to remote work (SIGMA, 2020).
These surveys were found through either a search engine, using the topics found through­
out the report, previous knowledge or investigating official channels. The NFA has a page
on their official website with tools, such as surveys, for use at a work place. The SIGMA
initiative questionnaire was found through searching for surveys pertaining to remote work.
The DTU survey was previously known. With a combination of surveys on well­being, work­
ing environment and remote work it is possible to cover all the top themes from the fishbone
workshop, creating a series of questions that can be used for further investigation on the
previous findings.
Figure 5.2 shows an overview of the connections of the questions, from the different sur­
veys, to the top themes from the fishbone workshop. The figure is also available in the
Excel sheet ”Question overview” in the tab ”Overview”. All questionnaires were already
numbered, and the numbers in the figure correspond to the original question numbers,
except ”Arbejdsmiljø og Helbred i Danmark (AH)” where I added numbers for easier refer­
encing. The remainder of the chapter analyses these questions and why they have been
found relevant for further research.
Figure 5.2: Compilation of questions from questionnaires
Only a selection of questions from each survey were found relevant for further research
relating to the areas found in Section 5.1. Summarised between the four questionnaires,
14 questions were found to be relevant and cover the 8 different themes in different ways.
The questionnaires have been split into two sections for further analysis, with Section 5.2.1
containing the questionnaires from the NFA on working environment and well­being and
Section 5.2.2 containing the two questionnaires on the subject of remote work. The two
40 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:49==
sections will go through the questions shown in Figure 5.2 and how they related to the
themes marked in the figure.
5.2.1
Questionnaires on Working Environment and Well­being
The DPQ questionnaire already covers the subjects of social capital, working environment
and well­being well as it is a relatively long and validated survey from the NFA. There are
however some questions that could be used to further investigate social capital in a hybrid­
remote work setting, supporting the findings from the fishbone workshop.
This section analyses the questions found in the two surveys from the NFA relating to
work environment and well­being in employees. The questionnaires have different types
of question types and may not be the same for all questions from the same questionnaire.
It will be made clear what the type of answer option is for each question. The first question­
naire, analysed in this section, is ”Arbejdsmiljø og helbred i Danmark”. The questions in
this questionnaire were not originally numbered, meaning that the numbers in the table do
not refer to any corresponding numbers in the original survey. The questions have been
numbered for referencing purposes in this thesis.
The questionnaire ”Arbejdsmiljø og helbred i Danmark” contains two questions that are
relevant to add in this circumstance. Table 5.3 shows these questions.
Table 5.3: Questions from ”Arbejdsmiljø og Helbred i Danmark”
Number
Question
AH ­ 1
How often can you trust the announcements made by management?
AH ­ 2
How often do you have influence on when you solve your work tasks?
AH ­ 1 questions how often the employees trust the announcements coming from the man­
agement, with an answering range going from ”never” to ”always”. This question relates to
trust, communication and management from the workshop. This is an important question
because the fishbone workshop found that the linking between management and employ­
ees were suffering because of the increased distance between them and the employees
were concerned that they would miss out on information from the management. Adding
this question of how often the announcements from management can be trusted, will add
an aspect that can potentially show if employees feel like they are receiving the whole truth.
If the employees do not trust the announcements from the management, it could allude to
a deeper issue of employees feeling like the management is hiding information from them.
The feeling of having information hidden can affect the trust between hierarchical layers
and potentially increase the feeling of managers not having the competencies to manage
at a distance, that respondents from the workshop voiced. Hence, this question can help
show if their is enough open communication between the management and employees.
AH ­ 2 has the same answering range as AH ­ 1, and is very similar to an already existing
question in the DPQ questionnaire. Question 9.11 in the DPQ questionnaire questions to
what degree an employee has influence on what order their work tasks are done in. The
differentiation is in asking for the influence on the order of the work tasks and asking more
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
41 of 60
==PAGE:50==
generally how often the employee has on influence on when they solve their tasks. Since
the workshop findings found flexibility to be a big bonus for many of the respondents, this
is a relevant question to add as it can show to what degree the employees can be flexible
with their time or how often they feel they can be flexible in the way they work and by that
their work/life balance. Adding this question could potentially also reveal something about
the employee’s efficiency and productivity, since an answer of ”always” could be argued
as them being allowed to work when it fits them the best, and by that when they feel most
productive and efficient. The answer could also reveal something of how much trust the
management has in the employees to get their work done in due time for deadlines without
the management monitoring the employees.
From the ”Copenhagen Burnout Inventory”, I found one question to be of relevance to add
to the existing questionnaire. The question can be seen in Table 5.4.
Table 5.4: Question from ”Copenhagen Burnout Inventory”
Number
Question
CBI ­ 2.7
Do you have energy to be with family and friends on your free time?
The question from the CBI questionnaire can be related to question 32.1 in the DPQ ques­
tionnaire. Question 32.1 questions to what degree an employees work requires so much
energy that it affects their private life, ranging from ”to a very low degree” to ”to a very high
degree”. The question from the CBI questionnaire is a relevant counterpart, since it has a
different answering range than the DPQ question. With an answering range from ”never”
to ”always” it puts another amount to the question of if time and energy is taken away from
the private life of the employee due to work. Instead of answering how often work takes
energy away from the employee’s private life, the CBI questions if the employee has the
energy to be with family and friends making the question more specific to what part of their
private life the question is talking about. The question is also more generally targeting the
available energy of the employee rather than focusing on the part their work takes in drain­
ing their energy. This alternative wording allows for the respondent to have other reasons
for missing energy other than their work, such as e.g. isolation due to remote work. CBI ­
2.7 can be related to the theme of isolation through the fact that if they have a low amount
of energy in their free time their relationships will potentially suffer. It also relates to one
of the findings from the workshop, where some respondents were concerned with being
unable to catch if colleagues were struggling emotionally. The question also relates to the
employees’ work/life balance, since missing energy for their free time will affect their private
life. Because of this, the question can be used to identify potential employees who may be
in need of support from their workplace or colleagues and can help ensure that the social
capital stays strong in a team, without some employees feeling like have been forgotten.
5.2.2
Questionnaires on Remote Work
As the DPQ questionnaire has not been designed to be used specifically by employees
who work remotely or in a hybrid way, several questions are applicable to add to the DPQ
questionnaire to cover the subject of remote work in relation to the findings of the fishbone
42 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:51==
workshop. Even though none of the questions in the DPQ questionnaire are directly about
remote work, some of them are similar to the questions found in this section, and will
be mentioned when those questions are analysed. Two questionnaires were investigated
pertaining to remote work, as mentioned in Table 5.2. The first questionnaire was created
by researchers at DTU to investigate the early experiences of working from home due to
Covid­19. The questions that were found to be relevant for this analysis can be seen in
Table 5.5. All three questions found in this survey have the same answering range from
”strongly disagree” to ”agree strongly” on a 5­point scale, as they were grouped together
in the original survey.
Table 5.5: Questions from ”Experiences of working from home in times of Covid­19”
Number
Question
IKH ­ 7A
During these times, I’m working more hours than normally
IKH ­ 7B
During these times, I’m getting less work done than normally
IKH ­ 7E
I can keep a good relationship with my colleagues or costudents when I’m
working from home
Question IKH ­ 7A specifically relates to the finding from the fishbone workshop of em­
ployees finding it difficult to separate their work life from their private life and that the lines
were blurred, affecting how much they were working. The question asks simply if the em­
ployee is working more hours than they normally would, which in this case is remote work
compared to in­office, revealing if they are struggling to separate work time from private.
The question both covers the scenario where the employee works longer hours and where
they forget to take breaks in their working day. The phrasing ”during these times”, that
is present in both 7A and 7B, also alludes to the fact that it is another situation than the
regular working situation, which naturally will make the respondent think of their remote
working days.
In that same lane, question IKH ­ 7B investigates if the employee is getting less work done
than what they would under regular conditions, which is the same comparison as IKH ­ 7A
but on a different parameter of the amount of work instead of the hours. These questions
are important separately, but also together as it can investigate if an employee works more,
but feels like they get less done or they work less hours while getting more done than
normally. Question IKH ­ 7B can reveal how efficient, as well as productive, an employee
is compared to working in­office. Relating to Section 2.3, where the research stated that the
way to measure performance should be done in deliverance’s rather than visibility, these
questions could show which employees are more productive working from home in either
the same time as regular work hours or even in less time, and which employees get less
done working remotely. The two questions can also help reveal what employees appear
more productive because they are also working more, which would affect their work/life
balance. On the other hand, some employees have a lower overall productivity, which
could be due to a lack of motivation induced by isolation, which the questions would also
help to uncover.
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
43 of 60
==PAGE:52==
With question IKH ­ 7E, the costudent part of the question is not relevant but has been
written as the original questionnaire did. The remainder of the question is, however, very
relevant relating to social capital and thereby also trust and communication. Being able
to keep up a good relationship with colleagues while working remotely is important for the
social capital to stay strong as well as ensuring employees do not feel isolated, either pro­
fessionally or socially. Ensuring good communication between colleagues, and avoiding
isolation while remote working, will keep the bonds in the social capital strong and with
that the trust between colleagues. Social relationships are also important to human moti­
vation, as mention in Section 2.3, making it important for the productivity in the employees.
Professionally it is also advantageous to keep up the good relationship with colleagues to
ensure that the team performance and knowledge­sharing are not affected negatively due
to a greater distance between employees in a team. Question IKH ­ 7E can help identify if
any employees are struggling to keep up their relationships with colleagues and the situa­
tion can then be investigated further if necessary to figure out if anything can or should be
done outside of the individual employee.
The final questionnaire, from the SIGMA initiative, contained 8 questions that are relevant
for the areas discussed in Section 5.1 and the workshop findings. The questions in Table
5.6 are grouped in the numbers 6, 35 and 37 with a letter attached, which means that
they were grouped together in the original questionnaire and have the same answering
options. The answer options for each group are explained following the table together with
the connection to the findings.
Table 5.6: Questions from ”SIGMA initiative survey on teleworking”
Number
Question
SIGMA ­ 6A
How difficult did you find balancing of work and personal life?
SIGMA ­ 6B
How difficult did you find setting fixed working hours (e.g. not working
longer than usual)?
SIGMA ­ 6D
How difficult did you find working in social isolation?
SIGMA ­ 35C
My manager trusted me and did not impose any additional supervising
procedures on me
SIGMA ­ 35D
My manager communicated clearly the work conditions for remote work­
ing (e.g. when to be available for calls, how to report working hours, etc.)
SIGMA ­ 35E
My manager required of me to be permanently available during working
hours
SIGMA ­ 37A
Coordination between management and the employees
SIGMA ­ 37B
Coordination of work tasks with your colleagues and team members
The three questions SIGMA ­ 6A, 6B and 6D have the same 5­point answering scale rang­
ing from ”very difficult” to ”very easy”, asking the respondent to indicate how easy or difficult
they found different aspects, with respect to the period of remote work.
Question SIGMA ­ 6A relates to work/life balance, which was reported to be suffering due
to blurred lines between work and private life. It touches on the same theme as CBI ­ 2.7
44 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:53==
and IKH ­ 7A, but differs in the fact that it directly asks how the respondent experienced
balancing their work and private life. The DPQ questionnaire focuses on finding out if the
respondent has felt that some of their energy, time or attention has been taken away from
their private life due to work. The CBI question does the same, with a focus on energy,
while not explicitly referencing work and IKH ­ 7A questions if the respondent works more
hours without covering the potential effect work has on their private life. SIGMA ­ 6A makes
the respondent think about if their current work hours are affecting their private life, since
more work hours doesn’t necessarily mean that their private life is affected. This is because
the respondent may be saving time on commuting, and is using that time to work instead,
ending in them having the same amount of time after work as they would on in­office days.
SIGMA ­ 6A plainly asks if balancing work and private life was difficult while working re­
motely. It also relates to the flexibility theme, since it questions the respondents ability to
balance the two sides of their life, and it can be assumed that increased flexibility makes it
easier to balance the two sides.
SIGMA ­ 6B also related to work/life balance and specifically what the workshop respon­
dents addressed as their biggest problem when it came to that theme: the ability to differ
between work time and private life. It directly questions if the respondent is able to draw a
straight line between the two parts of their time and turn off their work when they reach the
amount of time allotted to their working day.
Question SIGMA ­ 6D specifically targets the respondent’s experience with working in iso­
lation away from their colleagues, which as mentioned is not present in the existing DPQ
questionnaire. The term ”social” in this question refers to working in solitude away from
others. Since the DPQ questionnaire does not cover isolation, this question is relevant
and can help cover the workshop theme to check in with employees to investigate if they
have struggled with working away from their colleagues. It also touches the theme of com­
munication, since that is connected with the isolation theme. Negative answers to this
question could mean that further check­ins with the employees are necessary and that the
communication channels may need to be improved. Since it was stated in Section 2.3 that
remote work is preferable in a hybrid arrangement, with in­office days, to increase produc­
tivity this is also an important questions, as the Covid­19 pandemic required many people
to work remotely full­time. This also means, that on top of touching on the themes of isola­
tion and communication, this question could also lead to information about productivity in
the employees.
The three questions SIGMA ­ 35C, 35D and 35D all revolve around the connection between
the manager and employee in different ways, and they all have a 5­point answering scale
from ”completely disagree” to ”completely agree”. The three questions are grouped to­
gether, asking for the respondents level of agreement with different statements, regarding
their experience with remote work.
SIGMA ­ 35C focuses on if the employee was exposed to any additional supervision proce­
dures from management while working remotely. This is an important question, because
of the findings from the workshop, where the respondents voiced that the management
trusted them to do their work from home. This question is specifically worded such that it
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
45 of 60
==PAGE:54==
puts weight on the direction of the manager trusting the employee to do their work and not
impose any new procedures to keep an eye on them. In that way it is both tied to trust and
management, since it is the link between the manager and employee that is in focus. This
question can show if the link between manager and employee is strong or if there is room
for improvement and a need to ensure that the employee does not feel that they are being
monitored above what is necessary to get their job done.
In that same link between manager and employee is question SIGMA ­ 35D, which touches
on the theme of communication and flexibility in the remote work arrangements. The ques­
tions regards if the management has done a well enough job of communicating how the
work day should look while working at a distance. This information is important, since it is
what makes it possible for the employee to know how flexible they can be in solving their
work tasks and planning their day. It is also important because it is what tells them the
requirements from the management. The question has a remote angle in its wording and
gives the employee a chance to report back if they feel like they feel well enough informed
of how they should go about their workday while being remote, since a negative answer
to this question could allude to the fact that management have held back information or
not been clear enough in their communication compared to what the employee actually
needed.
Connected to SIGMA ­ 35D is 35E, that questions if the employee was required to be
permanently available during working hours. This question can to a degree show how
much flexibility the employee has been allowed to implement into their working day, since
an answer that completely agrees with this statement indicates that no flexibility was given
to the employee on when they can work. It is important to note, that it strictly relates to
flexibility regarding work hours and not to the flexibility in how or in what order tasks are
solved by the employee. This question also relates to trust in the way that there can be
different reasons for being needed during working hours, such as meetings and cooperation
with other employees, but being requested to be constantly available could also allude to
the fact that the manager does not trust the employee to get their work done in time if they
are not required to be present during regular working hours.
The final two questions, SIGMA ­ 37A and 37B, both have a 5­point answering scale ranging
from ”very negative effect” to ”very positive effect”. They both concern coordination in the
workplace and ask the respondent to consider their experience and the effect remote work
has had on different aspects of their work life. This means these two questions are of a
comparative format to the in­office experience the employees have.
SIGMA ­ 37A focuses on the coordination between the management and employees and
by that is also related to 35D and 35E, since coordination is communication between the
parties. It also relates to the three themes of flexibility, efficiency and productivity, since
coordination can contain information about how to do certain work tasks and in what order.
As mentioned earlier, this can affect the productivity and efficiency of the employees, if they
are required to complete the tasks in a different order than what they see as most beneficial.
It can also affect the flexibility, if the communicated coordination is so strict that it limits the
employee. This question can also give a comparison on if the linking between employee
46 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:55==
and manager has suffered due to remote work, since a negative effect from remote work
could indicate that the communication has worsened.
The final question, SIGMA ­ 37B, targets the coordination between colleagues and teams.
Where question 37A addressed the linking between hierarchical layers, 37B addresses the
bonding and bridging in an organisation. The answers to this question could give insight
into how the social capital has been affected by employees working remotely, as answers
of negative effect could point towards the relations between colleagues suffering. Positive
responses could indicate that a teams social capital and communication is strong, making
them able to coordinate and cooperate with each other independently of where they are
located. This is important since the colleagues ability to coordinate with each other about
work tasks affects their efficiency and productivity.
Adding both 37A and 37B, thereby gives an insight into all three types of relations in social
capital ­ bonding, bridging and linking. The two questions can also show if the coordination
has been negatively affected overall or if it is a specific part of the coordination that has
suffered.
Following this analysis of the workshop findings, in Chapter 4, and different surveys relating
to remote work and work environment, in Chapter 5, the following chapter will discuss
different aspects that have been found along the way in further detail.
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
47 of 60
==PAGE:56==
48 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:57==
6
Discussion
This chapter will look into the different findings and analysis done throughout this report,
while taking the theory into account and how these tie into each other. The chapter will
discuss the connections between social capital and remote work relating to how the bond­
ing, bridging and linking can be affected. The chapter also discusses the individual versus
team focus relating to the theory on remote work and how it is present in the findings. A
potential improvement for the question selection from Chapter 5 is also presented, followed
by a discussion of generalisation and the remaining themes that were not focused on to
the same degree as the top themes.
6.1
Social Capital and Remote Work
Since social capital and remote work are both connected to communication in the organisa­
tion, there are several different aspects that can be sat opposite each other for discussion.
Remote work can affect the relations between colleagues and by that then also the social
capital in a group. Since it was found in the fishbone workshop that the respondents felt like
the distance between employees affected their abilities to discuss and knowledge­share
negatively, it could point towards the social capital suffering because of this. There is how­
ever the fact, that bonding happens between people who share characteristics, meaning
it could be argued that employees could bond over the fact that everyone was pulled out
of their regular routines and forced to switch to remote work. This means, that the remote
work could potentially lead to two different scenarios for a team. Either, they bond over
the fact that they have all experienced this new situation with working fully remotely or the
physical distance results in mental distance and relations suffering due to the situation. It
could be that the teams that were more closely knit before the remote work period could
bond over the experience, while teams with weaker links ended in a situation where the
relational ties between them were more bridging than bonding. If a team did not have the
time to bond properly before being put into a new work situation, it could mean that the re­
lations were not characteristically similar enough for them to utilise the ties as a resource.
It could however also be argued that a team who have worked together for a long time,
before the remote work period, would have to get used to working together in a new way,
whereas a newer team could adopt the new work ways as their normal from the start. As
mentioned in Section 2.2, all three types of relational ties are important for a well­balanced
organisation to avoid situations such as organisations with strong sub­cultures.
Since strong social capital is a resource, that can be pulled from when needed, it means
that teams that are well­established may have had an easier time switching to remote work,
than newer or ”weaker” teams. Older teams may have so strongly established processes
between them that having to work remotely is a change, but not one big enough to throw
them off course. The ease of transition into fully remote work could also be dependent on
the work tasks the employee has and how much the colleagues need to cooperate. How
much social capital, the team has to draw from, could potentially affect how effective and
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
49 of 60
==PAGE:58==
productive they can be in solving their work tasks. Since cooperation is such a big part of
the organisational social capital, being geographically distanced from ones colleagues and
the knowledge­sharing suffering due to this will also affect the productivity (Olesen et al.,
2008).
From the fishbone workshop there also appears to be a shared experience, between the
respondents, of the managers not being equipped to manage employees at a distance
and ensure that the employees were aware that the managers were still present. This
is interesting, since the other big finding about the management was that the employees
felt like the management trusted them to do their job while working remotely. The two
viewpoints seem counteracting towards each other, as one states that the management
were not communicating well enough with their employees at a distance, while the other
viewpoint was that the management showed trust. It is difficult to say anything about the
situation, without more knowledge, but the opposing viewpoints could point towards the
trust in the employees was born from the management not knowing what else to do in
that situation or a miscommunication happened and the management is not aware that the
employees feel this way towards their managers.
The missing communication from management, or non­transparency, can lead to the em­
ployees assuming details about the situation, that could have been avoided with more open
communication. It was mentioned in Section 2.2 that a situation does not have to have a
fair outcome for people to accept it, as longs as the process was fair and it was visible that
management had done their best with the means given. The same reasoning, about trans­
parency, can be given in the situation with the management’s trust in employees and the
employees perceived feeling of inadequate management. There may be a disconnect be­
tween what the management thinks the employees need and what the employees actually
want from their managers which could have been avoided by an open line of communica­
tion between parties. This also plays into the finding from the workshop of the employees
being concerned they were not being told all the information and feeling left out of the loop.
Non­transparency leads to assumptions in multiple areas. This all comes back to the com­
parison of what is perceived and what is actual truth. The management believing that the
employees perceive it in one way, but it turns out to be another, could affect the links and
trust from the employees to the management.
6.2
The Individual vs the Team Focus
As mentioned in Section 2.3, a remote working arrangement can be viewed with an individ­
ual or team focus regarding the benefits and drawbacks of the arrangement. In the fishbone
workshop two negative main themes were communication and isolation. The respondents
found it difficult to communicate with their colleagues while working remotely and they felt
alone and isolated from their regular teams and surroundings. However, two of the most
prominent positive themes were the increase efficiency and productivity working remotely
brought them, because they were not disturbed by colleagues and had the peace and quiet
to focus. This is an interesting comparison because people enjoyed the peace and quiet
the distance brought, but they felt isolated at the same time with inadequate access to their
colleagues. At the workshop, the respondents were specifically asked for both good and
50 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:59==
bad experiences, which prompted them to think extra about their situation and share both
sides even though they may have had stronger feelings on one side.
It is also difficult to say if it is the same respondents who have shared both experiences
and both felt increased efficiency and productivity, but also isolation and decrease quality
of communication. It could also be that the experiences come from different respondents,
which is where the individual vs team focus can be applied. If you have a team of people,
where some employees enjoy working from home and others do not, it may be difficult
for them to figure out how to work together since their well­being requires different work
situations. There may be a situation where one team member’s ideal work arrangement
affects another team member negatively. The challenge lies in finding an agreement that
most benefits the team as a whole while still taking the individual team members’ needs into
account. Since some individuals found remote work improved their working environment
and helped them in their productivity and efficiency, it is important to consider this ”new”
work way in future work, while also acknowledging that other employees may not feel as
positively towards this work way and prefer working in­office.
Relating to this, there could also be situations where one employee prefers to work from
home, because of the increased flexibility it brings, while one of their colleagues would
prefer for them to be present at the office for their own reasons. Maybe the employee who
works in­office finds it easier to discuss and knowledge­share in person, which means that
their productivity and efficiency is affected by the fact that their colleagues prefer to work
from home. The need from the in­office employee could also be due to them being the
only employee present at the office, which would mean that the feeling of isolation could
also be present in the person who was still showing up at the work location. No matter
the reason, for an employee needing a colleague to be in­office, it would be necessary to
seek a compromise where both employees can experience the positives they find in their
favoured work way while limiting the potential negative implications for their colleagues.
What works now, is also not necessarily what will keep being the best solution. As men­
tioned in Section 2.3 copious amounts of remote work will result in decreased motivation
and productivity in the remote worker. It has also already been noted, that a certain amount
of remote work will increase productivity. However, the fishbone workshop was built on ex­
periences with remote work and not specifically hybrid­remote work. A question can be
posed, if the positive responses from the workshop would change in the future, if people
continued to work close to or fully remotely. Redoing the fishbone workshop at a later date,
after a longer period of remote or hybrid­remote work, could potentially yield other results if
there is a time aspect to the positive outcomes of remote work. Using surveys at different
points in a timeline of remote work could also give a comparison of effects of remote work
and if these effects change over time. Collecting data over different points in a timeline
could also help clarify, if all the positive experiences people found to have from working
from home were actually from working from home or rather because a change happened
in their workflow, giving them an opportunity to reconsider the ways their work days were
structured.
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
51 of 60
==PAGE:60==
6.3
Using Semi­structured Interviews to Make the Additional
Questions Stronger
Semi­structured interviews are more commonly used in explanatory research than struc­
tured, as stated in (Mark Saunders, 2006) and Table 3.2, implying that semi­structured
interviews would be useful in a more deep dive into a specific case on the subject.
Semi­structured interviews can also be used as a way to validate findings from more quan­
titative data collection, like the fishbone diagrams described in Section 3.2. The semi­
structured interview gives an opportunity to get further information and in­depth responses
to details from a data collection that requires elaboration or is the focus of further research
(Mark Saunders, 2006). I believe that using semi­structured interviews as an intermediary
link between the fishbone exercise and the questionnaire could aid in making the survey
results from a specific organisation strong. If semi­structured interviews were done with
a sample group of an organisation, the following survey to collect quantitative data could
take a more specified approach to what that organisation needs to focus on. The sample
group could consist of only employees without managing responsibilities or a combination
of employees and managers. I see the choice of sample group as a way to either focus on
the employees or asking the managers, what they believe should be touched on in a sur­
vey. Snowball sampling, as described in Section 3.1, could also be used to build a sample
group. This can also apply to finding prospects for semi­structured interview respondents,
as people are most likely to identify other respondents, that are similar to themselves if not
given specific pointers for what is needed (Mark Saunders, 2006).
More open­ended questions and the possibility of changing the order of the questions, as
done in semi­structured interviews, could be used to elaborate findings from the Fishbone
exercise giving more basis material for the questions in the questionnaire. Using a mixture
of open and probing questions, will help get the respondents’ perspective on the situation
(Mark Saunders, 2006). I could see this as being a useful approach, if an organisation found
the questionnaire too general or lacking in an area where the organisation are already
aware they need to investigate opinions and feelings. The focus group for these semi­
structured interviews should be on employees in a non­managerial role, since the findings
from the workshop was from that type of employee.
6.4
Generalisation and Coverage of Remaining Themes
Since the findings from Chapter 4 are from a certain organisation, it also means that the
further analysis is done on that basis and thereby will have been catered towards these find­
ings and specific company. The questions, from the questionnaires investigated in Chapter
5, are from generalised surveys, designed to be useful in several different organisations.
This means, that the questions themselves are generalised, but the foundation they have
been chosen on is biased towards the findings from a specific organisation. The findings
from HK are not necessarily the same findings one would find in a different organisation, or
at least not sorted in the same way as the findings in this report. However, since some of
the main themes found in the fishbone workshop are also mentioned in the theory, it gives
grounds for there to be focus on these specific themes.
52 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:61==
Flexibility, productivity and efficiency are all mentioned in relation to remote work making
it natural that the themes would appear when asking a respondent group about their ex­
periences on that area. Isolation and management are also two themes mentioned in the
theory of remote work, making them natural themes to appear as well. Trust is one of the
key concepts of organisational social capital and ingrained in the relations of colleagues in
the company, which went through a change with moving to remote work, meaning that it
would be apparent in the experiences of the respondents. As good communication is part
of a successful organisation, and part of how employees work with each other, it makes
sense that this theme is present, since the employees had to get used to a different way
of communicating compared to their original forms of communication. Finally, since their
work ways shifted, it makes sense that work/life balance was a theme relevant to them.
As their working day changed character because of moving to remote work, it would have
potential effects on their work/life balance. Due to the questions found in Chapter 5 being
generalised, and the themes being known themes within the two subjects of social capital
and remote work, the questions could also be useful in other organisations besides HK and
public offices.
Chapters 4 and 5 end up focusing only on the main themes found in the fishbone workshop
held with representatives from HK. The top four themes from each side was chosen for
further focus in the remainder of the report, but that does not mean that the remaining
themes are forgotten. There is some overlap on some of the themes. As an example, a
theme such as motivation was not mentioned directly very much, but it is present in other
themes such as productivity and efficiency, since they are connected. It could be beneficial,
in potential future work, to investigate the remaining themes further and analyse if they are
covered by the questions in Chapter 5 or if additional questions would be needed.
6.5
Future Research
As mentioned earlier in Chapter 6 it would be beneficial to use semi­structured interviews,
on a response group, to further investigate the findings from the fishbone workshop before
moving on to a survey. Using semi­structured interviews to investigate the findings from
the workshop, could ensure that the additional questions suggested in Chapter 5 most ef­
fectively targets the problem areas that were found at the workshop. The semi­structured
interviews could also uncover important findings, that were not as prominent in the work­
shop but still deemed to be important by an organisation.
It is also discernible that with more time actually distributing the DPQ survey, with the ad­
ditional questions from Chapter 5, for data collection could be a next step. Distributing
it at company locations, that have previously filled in the DPQ questionnaire would also
give a frame of reference with comparable statistics from the previous survey. This would
of course be statistical numbers, with no identifying features as the questionnaires con­
tains attribute questions but no questions that can tie the filled in survey directly to an
employee. However, a statistical comparison between answers from a previous survey
and the present one could give an opportunity to investigate different aspects and how
they have been affected by the period of remote work.
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
53 of 60
==PAGE:62==
54 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:63==
7
Conclusion
This chapter will summarise the previous chapters and answer the research questions,
posed at the beginning of this thesis, in short.
7.1
Summary
Before summarising the report, the purpose statement from Chapter 1 is restated for clarity.
The purpose of this thesis is to investigate employees’ experience of social capital doing
hybrid­remote work
This was done by investigating the theoretical aspect of the project with gaining knowledge
on the subjects of social capital and remote work in Chapter 2. Besides the theoretical as­
pect, data was also collected at a workshop with respondents affiliated with the collaborat­
ing organisation HK. The workshop brought the respondents through an exercise resulting
in fishbone diagrams covering their good and bad experiences with working remotely. This
process can be found in Chapter 4. In Chapter 5, the findings from the workshop were then
used in an analysis of the existing work environment and well­being survey DPQ to com­
pare the coverage of the questionnaire to the workshop themes. Different surveys were
then investigated with the goal of identifying questions to cover the themes from the work­
shop, that the original questionnaire did not. Finally, in Chapter 6, different points were
discussed, such as social capital relating to remote work and the individual versus team
focus of remote arrangements. Potential future work was also presented. This process
resulted in answering the four research questions that were also posed in Chapter 1 and
reiterated in the following section.
7.2
Conclusions to Research Questions
To conclude this thesis, the research questions from Section 1.1 are reiterated and an­
swered.
RQ1: What is social capital?
The term social capital was investigated in Section 2.2, where it was found to be a concept
of several different dimensions without a single definition to follow. This is because social
capital is difficult to measure and tied to specific organisations or teams with not one way
of describing it. It is a relational concept that, when strong, can be used as a resource to
help groups solve shared problems with more ease.
The sociological approach to social capital focuses on social norms and human motivation,
and is the approach of three of the most well­known experts in that field ­ Pierre Bourdieu,
James Coleman and Robert Putnam. They all have their own definition of the term with
different focuses on how they see social capital. Where Bourdieu’s definition focuses on
what resources an individual gains through access to networks, Coleman and Putnam’s
focus is on the benefits it can bring a group through trust and norms of reciprocity.
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
55 of 60
==PAGE:64==
Putnam is also the one who introduced the concepts of bonding and bridging, with the third
concept, linking, introduced later. Bonding is relational ties in a group with high similarity
between them, bridging is connections between people who are more distanced and linking
is connections between people on different hierarchical layers. It is favourable to have all
forms present in a network to ensure productivity and quality in the work with the possibility
to reach out to other groups through bridges.
This also applies in an organisations social capital, where it affects productivity, quality
and working environment, and can increase job satisfaction and motivation. The three key
concepts in organisational capital, that aid in solving the key task, are trust, justice and
cooperation. Having a strong trust between employees can increase job satisfaction and
productivity and is important, because missing trust can lead to issues with cooperation.
Trust between management and employees is also important, because mistrust between
layers can hinder work and cooperation between them as well. Management needs to trust
that employees can do the work and employees need to trust that managers make the right
decisions. This trust in the management and their decisions also shows that their actions
are believed to be justified and that processes have been fair, which is important because
of the power distance between layers in the hierarchy. Trust also makes cooperation easier
together with shared norms and values. Networks and norms of trust are important for the
cooperation, not limited to professional but also regular social interactions.
RQ2: What is hybrid­remote work?
As with social capital, there is not one definition for what remote work is, but rather several
different ones. They however all share the fact that it involves not working in the office, but
rather other remote locations. It is a flexible way of working either part­ or full­time, which
means there is not one set way to participate in remote work. Research has however
shown that working remotely part­time can help increase job satisfaction and productivity,
breeding a hybrid work form split between in­office and remote working.
The remote working days give the employees a chance to focus on their tasks without dis­
traction and gives them the flexibility to increase their own productivity. The job satisfaction
is highest when it is a part­time arrangement, which is also grounded in that fact that exces­
sive remote work can add to organisational stress for all employees and not only the ones
working from home, while also increasing the risk of professional and social isolation for
the remote workers. Professional isolation has been tied to decrease in developmental op­
portunities, while social isolation can affect relationships with colleagues and increase the
risk of invisibility in the remote worker. This does not happen with a hybrid arrangement.
Different organisational elements can aid in success with remote work, such as trust and
open communication. Giving the employees the tools for easy access to each other even
though they are not at the same physical location is beneficial. Interpersonal networks
are important because of the benefit they give employees, through access to each others
knowledge bases. The informal communication that builds these networks is however often
face to face, adding another reason for why a hybrid between remote and in­office presence
is preferable. The social relations between colleagues are important for the motivation,
productivity and knowledge­sharing. From a team perspective a hybrid of remote and in­
56 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:65==
office is also preferred as that does not affect relationships the same way as fully remote
work does.
RQ3: How do employees experience hybrid­remote work from a social capital per­
spective?
Through performing a fishbone workshop with a group of representatives, from public of­
fices, several experiences were found from their period of remote work. The workshop
resulted in two fishbone diagrams: one for good experiences and one for bad experiences.
From the good experiences fishbone, 12 themes were found during analysis. From the
bad experiences fishbone, 14 themes were found. Between the two fishbones, six themes
were present in both.
From the two fishbone diagrams, the four most prominent themes were chosen from each
for further analysis relating the remote work experiences to the theory on social capital. The
good experience themes, that were further analysed, was flexibility, efficiency, productivity
and trust. The bad experience themes were isolation, communication, work/life balance
and management. The most prominent findings, from each side, were that the respondents
from the workshop felt isolated while working remotely, but also enjoyed the added flexibility
it brought. These themes were investigated with focus on their relation to the three key
concepts of social capital: trust, justice and cooperation. Especially the concepts trust and
cooperation were present in the top themes from the workshop. Looking at the prominent
themes, this makes sense since they relate mainly to work processes relating to colleagues
or their own working day, more than experiences relating to decisions out of their control that
would require justice. The most prominent themes were also already known as potential
experiences from the theory.
RQ4: Which elements of existing surveys cover the subject of social capital and
which surveys should be included, if the goal is to collect experiences of remote
work?
Using the findings from the HK workshop, the well­known DPQ questionnaire, from the
The National Research Center for Work Environment (NFA), was investigated. DPQ is
a questionnaire on psychosocial work environment. The coverage of the questions from
the DPQ questionnaire were compared to the themes from the workshop and potential
areas needing additional coverage were identified. It was found that especially the theme
of isolation and trust between employees and management were underrepresented in the
questionnaire and that it would also benefit from specific questions regarding remote work.
Following this additional surveys were investigated to identify questions that would cover
the areas found previously and themes from the workshop. The other surveys were ”Arbe­
jdsmiljø og Helbred i Danmark” and ”Copenhagen Burnout Inventory” (CBI) from the NFA,
as well as a study from a group of researchers at DTU and a survey from SIGMA cooper­
ation between the EU and OECD. An analysis of these questions and their relations to the
workshop themes were done with a review of what each suggested question would add to
the existing survey. 14 questions, across the four surveys, were found to be relevant for
coverage of the themes from the workshop with HK.
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
57 of 60
==PAGE:66==
As people move back to a more regular everyday life with the ability to go into the office
once again, it is important to remember the experiences they have gotten from working
from home and what those experiences can bring to a company to improve their ways for
their employees. Hopefully this thesis has shown some useful learnings from employees
working remotely that can be taken back to the office and be utilised to ensure the well­
being, satisfaction and productivity of the employees going forward.
58 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
Andersen, V., Buch, A., & Sørensen, O. (2009). Videnarbejde og stress: Mellem begejstring
og belastning (1st ed.). Djøf Forlag.
Arbejdsmiljø København. (2021). Hjemmearbejde er både godt og skidt, viser undersøgelse
fra københavns kommune [Last accessed 16th of September 2021]. https://amk.
kk.dk/nyheder/hjemmearbejde- er- baade- godt- og- skidt- viser- undersoegelse- fra-
koebenhavns-kommune
Arbejdsmiljøweb. (2020). Fakta om social kapital: Hvad er social kapital? [Last accessed
16th of September 2021]. https://www.arbejdsmiljoweb.dk/trivsel/social_kapital/
hvad-er-social-kapital
Bailey, D. E., & Kurland, N. B. (2002). A review of telework research: Findings, new direc­
tions, and lessons for the study of modern work. Journal of Organizational Behviour,
(23), 383–400.
Biggart, N. W. (2002). Readings in economic sociology (blackwell readers in sociology).
Wiley­Blackwell.
Bøttcher, T. (2021). Tr for 4.000 akademikere: Jeg er bekymret for, at folk kommer tilbage
og opdager, at storrumskontorerne er de samme som før [Last accessed 16th of
September 2021]. https://www.akademikerbladet.dk/aktuelt/2021/maj/tr-for-4-000-
akademikere-jeg-frygter-at-folk-kommer-tilbage-og-opdager-at-storrumskontorerne-
er-de-samme-som-foer-at-de-ikke-kan-holde-larmen-og-uroen-ud
The cambridge handbook of technology and employee behavior. (2019). Cambridge Uni­
versity Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108649636
Coleman, J. S. (1990). Foundations of social theory. Belknap Press.
Cooper, C. D., & Kurland, N. B. (2002). Telecommuting, professional isolation, and em­
ployee developtment in public and private organizations. Journal of Organizational
Behviour, (23), 511–532.
Det Nationale Forskningscenter for Arbejdsmiljø. (2021a). Spørgeskemaet ’psykisk arbe­
jdsmiljø og trivsel på arbejdspladsen [Last accessed 12th of January 2021]. https:
//nfa.dk/da/Vaerktoejer/Sporgeskemaer/Dansk- psykosocialt-sporgeskema/DPQ-
Forskningsskema
Det Nationale Forskningscenter for Arbejdsmiljø. (2021b). Spørgeskemaet ’psykisk arbe­
jdsmiljø og trivsel på arbejdspladsen’ [Last accessed 10th of December 2021].
https://nfa.dk/da/Vaerktoejer/Sporgeskemaer/Dansk- psykosocialt- sporgeskema/
DPQ-Arbejdspladsskema
Ipsen, C., Edwards, K., Nardelli, G., & Vendramin, N. (2021). Managers’ first experience of
the transition to distance management during covid­19.
Ipsen, C., Kirchner, K., & Hansen, J. (2020). Experiences of working from home in times of
covid­19 international survey conducted the first months of the national lockdowns.
https://doi.org/10.11581/dtu:00000085
Ipsen, C., Sørensen, O., Poulsen, S., & Gish, L. (2017). The fishbone workshop: How to
transform initial problem identification to intervention initiatives.
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
59 of 60
==PAGE:68==
Ishikawa, K. (1976). Guide to quality control. Asian Productivity Organization.
Jacobsen, D. I., & Thorsvik, J. (2018). Hvordan organisationer fungerer ­ en indføring i
organisation og ledelse. HAnz Reitzels Forlag.
Kokholm, T. (2021). Hjemmearbejdet er kommet for at blive [Last accessed 16th of Septem­
ber 2021]. http://www.danskekommuner.dk/Nyhedsarkiv/2021/Marts/17/Hjemmearbejdet-
er-kommet-for-at-blive/
Lamond, D., Daniels, K., & Standen, P. (1997). Defining telework: What is it exactly?
Lumholt, K. (2021). Post covid fjernarbejde og hybridarbejdspladser stiller krav om ny
ledelse [Last accessed 16th of September 2021]. https://www.mm.dk/artikel/post-
covid-fjernarbejde-og-hybridarbejdspladser-stiller-krav-om-ny-ledelse
Mark Saunders, P. L., Adrian Thornhill. (2006). Research methods for business students
(4th edition) (4th ed.). Prentice Hall.
NFA. (2020). Arbejdsmiljø og helbred i danmark, ah [Last accessed 23rd of January 2021].
https://nfa.dk/da/Vaerktoejer/Sporgeskemaer/Arbejdsmiljo-og-Helbred-i-Danmark-
AH
NFA. (n.d.). Spørgeskema til måling af udbrændthed ­ cbi [Last accessed 23rd of January
2021]. https://nfa.dk/da/Vaerktoejer/Sporgeskemaer/Sporgeskema-til-maaling-af-
udbraendthed
OECD. (2001). Well­being of nations : The role of human and social capital. Organisation
for Economic Co­operation; Development.
Olesen, K. G., Thoft, E., Hasle, P., & Kristensen, T. S. (2008). Virksomheden sociale kapital
­ hvidbog. Arbejdsmiljørådet.
Persaud, C. (2021). Bloom’s taxonomy [Last accessed 16th of September 2021]. https:
//tophat.com/blog/blooms-taxonomy/
Poulsen, S., & Ipsen, C. (2017). In times of change: How distance managers can ensure
employees’ wellbeing and organizational performance. Safety Science, 100, 37–
45.
Putnam, R. D. (1995). Bowling alone: America’s declining social capital. Journal of Democ­
racy, 6(1), 65–78.
Secher, C. (2021). Fremtidens arbejdsplads er en hybrid [Last accessed 16th of September
2021]. https://www.kommunen.dk/artikel/fremtidens-arbejdsplads-er-en-hybrid
SIGMA. (2020). Teleworking survey: Learning from the covid­19 crisis [Last accessed 23rd
of January 2021]. http://www.sigmaweb.org/publications/Sample-survey-teleworking-
coronavirus-covid-19-SIGMA-July-2020.pdf
van Aken, J. E., & Berends, H. (2018). Problem solving in organizations: A methodological
handbook for business and management students (3rd ed.). Cambridge University
Press.
60 of 60
Hybrid Work in Public Offices
==PAGE:69==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
