==PAGE:1==
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and
Plan Recognition
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
Rosalie Orth, Olga Athanasopoulou, Natalia Moszczynska
Advisor
Thomas Bolander, Professor, Ph.D. Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science ∙Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
?iiTb,ffrrrX+QKTmi2X/imX/Ff
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Computation and
Mathematics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of artificial intelligence.
Rosalie Orth, Olga Athanasopoulou, Natalia Moszczynska ­ s192221, s192619, s192577
Signature
Signature
Signature
January 23, 2022
Date
ii
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Plan recognition is an area of symbolic artificial intelligence which aims to develop a
method in which a plan can be computed based on actions that may be observed. The
project was carried out on a Pepper robot. The purpose was to experiment with Pepper’s
ability to predict a goal by recognizing actions carried out by a human subject, and output
a plan to achieve the overarching goal. The results of the experiments prove that Pepper
can detect a plan by observing an actor that is aware of the Pepper’s intent to observe.
Pepper computes an optimal goal and collaborates with the actor to detect the actual goal
and explain the optimal plan.
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements by: Rosalie Orth, Co­Author
To my family, friends, and kæreste
Acknowledgements by: Natalia Moszczynska, Co­Author
To my family, friends and mi marranito
Acknowledgements by: Olga Athanasopoulou, Co­Author
To all the people who have supported me
iv
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Formal definitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Plan Recognition on Pepper (PRoP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Plan and Goal Recognition Literature Review and Analysis
5
2.1
Classification of Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Running Example Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Selected Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Assessment and Comparison of the Discussed Methods . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3
Selected Methods and Design
22
3.1
System Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2
System Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4
Implementation and Integration of Plan Recognition with Pepper
33
4.1
System Distribution Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
System Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.3
System Observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.4
System Cognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Testing and Review
47
5.1
Testing Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.2
Complications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6
Discussion
54
6.1
Different Implementation Aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
6.2
General Extendability and Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
6.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
6.4
Recommendations for Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
7
Conclusion
60
Bibliography
61
A Pepper Demonstration Videos
63
A.1 Goal 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.2 Goal 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.3 Goal 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.4 Goal 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
1
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a branch of computer science defined for the first time during
the Dartmouth conference in 1956 as:
how to make machines use language, form abstractions and concepts, solve
kinds of problems now reserved for humans, and improve themselves [1]
Since then, AI has been rapidly evolving and its applications have a very vast and wide
array of purposes. It has been used for advertisement customization, voice and speech
recognition for automatic assistance, game and problem solving, language translations,
amongst many others. While its success in these areas is substantial, there are still others
where development and improvements are necessary, such as personal robot assistants
and autonomous vehicles.
Personal robot assistants could be of tremendous support for elderly people or busy
households. However, in order for a robot to be capable of properly assisting humans,
it should not only be able to detect the current activity being executed by a person, but
also the next natural development of said activity. An example of these assistants is Lio,
a mobile robot that has been supporting patients and health staff in German and Swiss
hospitals [2]. Lio robots have proven to be useful in tasks like lab sample collection or
patient reminders for medical appointments. Nevertheless, these robots are incapable of
meaningful active collaboration with people as of yet. Improvements are being researched
and developed so that the aforementioned collaboration can take place. For example, if
a person is being handed a glass of water, the robot should follow the natural develop­
ment of the activity and ensure that the patient drinks the liquid, so that the goal of patient
hydration is accomplished.
The improvements mentioned above are deeply rooted in the Theory of Mind [3] (TOM).
It is defined as a
set of processes and functions of the human mind that allow an individual to
attribute mental states to others
In the example of personal robot assistants, these processes and functions described in
the TOM play a pivotal role in the collaboration with humans. Cognitive functions and pro­
cesses, such as defining a goal and planning actions to achieve it, are performed seam­
lessly by humans. However, implementation of cognitive processes in software systems
has proven to be a challenging task.
The first scientists to define these challenges were Schmidt, Sridharan, and Goodson
[4] in the late 1970’s.
The problem of plan recognition is to take as input a sequence of actions per­
formed by an actor and to infer the goal pursued by the actor and also to
organize the action sequence in terms of a plan structure. This plan structure
explicitly describes the goal­subgoal relations among its component actions.
The problem defined by Schmidt, Sridharan, and Goodson, caused a whole new sub­field
of AI to emerge. This sub­field intends to solve the problem of predicting a subsequent
human action as a result of goal inference and organizing an action based on a plan
2
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:8==
structure. This theoretical framework is at the center of the present thesis and will be
applied to improve meaningful active collaboration between robots and people in a real­
life case.
1.1
Formal definitions
To simplify the future analysis and discussions, we introduce necessary definitions here.
Every plan and goal recognition problem contains the environment – specifics and possi­
ble states of the settings in which recognition will take place, actor – an agent performing
some actions in the environment in order to reach some objective, observer – an agent
watching what the actor is doing to recognize the plan or goal. A set of observations
are actions performed by the actor and noticed by observer. The observer relies on these
observations to predict a plan – sequence of ordered actions needed to satisfy the main,
final objective of an actor – the goal.
Introduction to Symbolic Plan and Goal Recognition [5, p. 5­6] introduces three impor­
tant definitions for recognition problems:
Activity recognition The least abstract level of inference focusing on labeling
a sequence of possibly noisy sensor inputs with a single, usually unstructured,
label denoting a low­level activity. Sometimes also called behavior recognition.
Activity recognition would be analyzing a video from a concert and extracting actions such
as dancing, singing, jumping, etc.
Goal recognition The most abstract level of inference focusing on identifying
the highest level goal or overarching objective of the agent’s action. Note that
depending on the level of abstraction and the domain the same task can be
described as either goal or activity recognition.
For example, when observing a person boiling water and taking out a bag of tea, the
identified goal could be making tea.
Plan recognition The recognition of a specific structured plan that is being
followed by an agent, including the goal being pursued and where in the exe­
cution of the plan the agent is.
For example, if the set of observations is boiling water and taking out a bag of tea – the
plan is boiling water, taking out a bag of tea, getting a mug, putting the tea bag in a mug
and pouring hot water in the mug. The goal is making tea.
The definition of activity recognition is separate from that of plan and goal recognition.
However, plan recognition includes goal recognition.
1.2
Plan Recognition on Pepper (PRoP)
The purpose of the project is to use human­robot interaction to solve a plan and goal
recognition problem.
The Plan Recognition System on Pepper (PRoP) is an implementation in which a hu­
man actor performs a series of actions, and a robot will observe the actions in order to
predict a plan and a goal. The methodology, design, implementation, and experimental
results of this collaboration between the actor and the robot are described in detail. Vari­
ous methods in the area of plan recognition have significantly influenced the development
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
3
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1.1:
The Pepper robot –
close­up
Figure 1.2: The Pepper robot – full
figure
of PRoP. Explanations of how and why selected works were chosen are provided. Figures
1.1 and 1.2 show a preview of the Pepper robot that will serve as the observer.
4
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:10==
2
Plan and Goal Recognition Literature
Review and Analysis
Since the first definition of plan recognition in the late 1970s [4], various papers have been
written on the subject and methods proposed, leading to significant advancements in the
field.
Initially plan recognition was rule­based. That approach proved inadequate and inefficient
in larger domains. With their paper published in 1986, Kautz and Allen [6] established the
problem of plan recognition as one of graph covering. Around the same time it was ar­
gued that it was a problem of abduction, which is reasoning for the best explanation. The
general idea behind abduction can be described as ”if A causes B and we observe B,
we may consider A as the explanation”. Much of the research from then on has been
focused on this concept [7]. Charniak [8] and Hobbs [9] were some of the first to support
this idea, with Charniak adding that it can best be done as Bayesian inference. Although
the Bayesian approach was at first controversial, using probabilistic inference in general
quickly became the norm [7]. In 2009 Ramirez and Geffner were the first who defined plan
recognition as the opposite of planning and used planning algorithms to solve plan recog­
nition problems [5, p. 20]. Plan recognition as a problem of parsing (where an analogy
of plans in a plan hierarchy to sentences as parse trees in a tree grammar is made) was
also an early approach, which has gained traction in more recent years, with work building
on parsing and using Bayesian logic addressing its weaknesses on partial ordering and
interleaved plans [7].
Recently there have been many successes in sub­symbolic methods. This in turn gave
rise to different approaches in plan and goal recognition that incorporate machine learn­
ing, big data and neural networks [5, p. 7]. In recent years much weight has been put on
Hidden Markov Models (HMMs). Significant work has been done on that front, with many
researchers incorporating the hierarchical model in order to combine the strengths from
both approaches (the advantages of HMMs include the availability of likelihood informa­
tion and the support for machine learning among others) [7, p. xxi]. Later work in the field
has used the term activity recognition instead of plan recognition, in order to differenti­
ate between work on recognizing individual activities and work done on recognizing the
complex interactions and relationships between them that result to a plan [7]. This report
will focus on the areas of plan recognition and goal recognition, which is the scope of the
PRoP project.
As is clear from this short history of plan and goal recognition, many different approaches
and paradigms have been examined in order to solve this problem and new work contin­
ues to build on most of these branching directions. This chapter provides a classification
of methods, as well as an analysis of the selected methods which have influenced the
design and development of PRoP.
2.1
Classification of Methods
A method within the plan and goal recognition domain can be categorized based on how
information is represented and how the perception of the environment is translated. A
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
5
==PAGE:11==
definition and classification for information representation and domain attributes are pro­
vided.
2.1.1
Information representation
The paradigm used in a system can be either symbolic or sub­symbolic. Symbolic and
sub­symbolic refer to AI in general and the term has by extension been carried to plan
recognition too. Depending on the paradigm followed, AI methods can be split in sym­
bolic, sub­symbolic and hybrid (in­between) methods [10].
The symbolic paradigm utilizes human­understandable language, resulting in easily in­
terpretable systems. Knowledge bases are usually used in such systems, where knowl­
edge is discretely stored. Human supervision and intervention is unavoidable in such
systems. Methods incorporating the symbolic paradigm include rules, decision trees and
planning [10].
On the other hand, sub­symbolic systems incorporate statistical methodologies to es­
tablish correlations between input and output variables. Sub­symbolic systems are more
robust against noisy and missing data and in general have high computational perfor­
mance. Statistical algorithms and machine learning techniques, such as Artificial Neural
Networks (ANN), deep learning, Bayesian learning, genetic algorithms and clustering be­
long to the sub­symbolic paradigm [10].
Hybrid methods utilize the advantages from both symbolic and sub­symbolic, by having
the ability to learn from the environment, while being able to reason regarding the results.
Most of the modern systems use algorithms combining the two paradigms. Some of the
methods belonging to this category are Knowledge­based Neural Networks (KBNN or
KBANN), Hybrid Expert System (HES) Graph Neural Networks (GNN) and Tensor Prod­
uct Representation [10].
The symbolic paradigm utilizes the human propensity to represent knowledge with sym­
bols, for example language, while sub­symbolic ones, such as neural networks, mimic
the low­level part of the human brain functionality. A parse tree such as the one that
can be seen in figure 2.1 represents grammatical types as non­terminal symbols and
specific words as terminal ones, making it a symbolic representation. In contrast, in Ar­
tificial Neural Networks information that can be usable is not immediately evident. It can
schematically be represented as interconnected neurons, split in layers.
The parse tree example uses symbols that represent real­world entities or concepts, while
in the neural network one information can be implicitly inferred by complex calculations.
2.1.2
Domain representation
In ”Introduction to Symbolic Plan and Goal Recognition” a distinction between explicit and
implicit representations of the domain is made. This distinction concerns the structure with
which the defined plans are represented. The naming for this categorization is the one
that will also be used throughout this report.
In explicit representations knowledge of the exact way a plan is executed and therefore
the way a goal is reached is important and thus the sequence of actions that form a plan
is explicitly defined. Representations of this type are also called plan libraries. Trees,
graphs and formal grammars are some of the structures used to explicitly define plans [5,
p. 32].
6
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: A parse tree representing the sentence ”Jack plays football”. The symbols
S, NP, VP, N and V stand for Sentence, Noun Phrase, Verb Phrase, Noun and Verb
respectively.
Explicit domain theories are common in classical planning methods, although both repre­
sentations usually require that the domain is hand­coded [5, p. 50]. Explicit domains are
still implemented in scenarios that require physical actions conducted by human agents.
This is described in more detail in ”An Introduction to Symbolic Plan and Goal Recogni­
tion”[5, p. 50]:
”For example, in some domains such collections of plans already exist in the
form of “doctrine” or mandated operational procedures... settings where there
are well known and codified sets of acceptable plans (e.g., military doctrine,
large­scale manufacturing plant operating processes, flying airplanes, medi­
cal, or even legal procedures, etc.)...
...sometimes the reason these procedures have already been codified is ex­
actly to guarantee that one can easily identify when they are being done cor­
rectly by others... there are already well agreed­upon and codified sets of
acceptable plans that can be hand encoded into explicit domain theories for
them”
Implicit representations on the other hand don’t require specific sequencing of actions
in order to achieve a goal. Usually the algorithm involves reconstructing plans given the
information that has been provided of how a plan should be structured. Ways to represent
the knowledge of the domain in such systems include MDPs, Partially Observable Markov
Decision Processes (POMDPs) and games [5, p. 32].
Often variations of the STRIPS language – a language used for planning – are used
for implicit representations. In an implementation using this type of representation, the
domain can be encoded in a separate file in the Planning Domain Definition Language
(PDDL), where the available actions will be included, together with their preconditions and
their postconditions (or effects). Preconditions are conditions that have to be satisfied in
order for the action to be executed and postconditions are the results of executing the
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
7
==PAGE:13==
action. In an explicit representation on the other hand, plans could be encoded in a graph
structure, with a single plan being one single path from the root to a leaf.
2.1.3
Domain Uncertainty
The representation of the environment in a plan and goal recognition problem can be
classified as deterministic, non­deterministic or stochastic depending on the certainty of
an outcome for a specific operation [5, p. 26].
In a deterministic environment there is a single and known outcome to any specific op­
eration. In such an environment, the actor’s actions are typically represented by a plan
formed from a sequence of actions [5, p. 26].
In non­deterministic environments the outcome of a certain action can differ for different
executions, while for stochastic environments the outcomes of actions are associated
with probability distributions. In these types of environments the actions that an actor
may perform depending on the state are defined by policies [5, p. 26]. Policies provide
directions to an actor on how to act under certain circumstances.
For example, consider a function that returns an item from an array arr that holds the
strings ”umbrella”, ”chair”, ”box” and ”bag”. If it is programmed to always return the first
item (”umbrella”), that makes it deterministic. By adding a random function that will re­
turn an object at random, it will become non­deterministic. Storing some probabilities for
each item in another array (e.g. 0.3, 0.1, 0.5 and 0.1) and using those as the seed to the
random function will make the function stochastic.
2.2
Running Example Domain
In order to better understand each of the methods that will be described, an example do­
main will be used to display the function of each.
Imagine the following scenario:
In a modern and technically equipped elementary school classroom, the teacher gives
an exercise to the students where they are going to make some simple science experi­
ments, for which she has brought several items to be used. She lays them down on a
table and gives them a few different experiments to choose from, each of which requires
different items. After they pick a topic, they will have to pick up the necessary items and
take them to their desk. The classroom’s robot assistant watches and is ready to observe
the students and help with carrying their items to their desks.
The children are quite young and they cannot carry many things at the same time and
the teacher tells them to carry one thing at a time to avoid making a mess. The robot
assistant can be coded in various ways to recognize the observed child’s plan and help
them carry the rest of the items or do the experiments.
The experiment is for the children to learn how to make secondary colors using cups
of water and dye. The students are only given dyes for primary colors. They have to
create a secondary color in their cups. The students can of course only use the materials
provided. The domain consists of a set of actions which may be completed in order to
satisfy a goal.
Actions: {GetYellow, GetBlue, GetRed, PlaceYellowOnDesk, PlaceBlueOnDesk, Plac­
8
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:14==
eRedOnDesk, PourYellow, PourBlue, PourRed}
Goals: {MakeGreen, MakeOrange, MakePurple}
An observation is an action that has been recognized by the observer. For example,
the observer recognizes that the student is pouring red dye into the water cup. The ob­
server makes an observation: {PourRed}. A series of observations constructs a plan:
{GetRed, PlaceRedOnDesk, GetBlue, PlaceBlueOnDesk, PourRed, PourBlue}. A plan is
a sequence of observations that satisfies a goal: {MakePurple}.
Figure 2.2: Running Example Environment
2.3
Selected Literature
Exclusively sub­symbolic approaches are outside of the scope of PRoP, so none of the
described methods belong to this category. However, both the implicit and explicit ap­
proaches were considered for representing the PRoP domain. Several methods were
examined and compared the advantages and disadvantages for explicit and implicit rep­
resentations. The advantages of deterministic and non­deterministic domains were also
considered.
2.3.1
Plan recognition as planning
Information representation: Symbolic
Domain representation: Implicit
Domain uncertainty: Deterministic
Fundamental Contribution: Viewing plan recognition as planning in reverse and using
planners to solve plan recognition problems
Methodology: Planners, STRIPS language for representing the domain
Ramirez and Geffner were the first to use a domain theory to implicitly represent the
available plans in a plan recognition problem. The central idea of the theory was that
plan recognition is the reverse process of planning. Hence, the plan can be identified by
continuous applications of a planner.
The work of Ramirez and Geffner was of particular interest to the PRoP implementa­
tion because of its contribution to the field of plan and goal recognition and the branch
involving methods using symbolic representations in particular, as well as its flexibility on
how the plans are implemented.
Before continuing with the description of the method, a few definitions have to be given:
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
9
==PAGE:15==
• Planning is the branch of AI that concerns itself with deciding the next actions of an
agent depending on how the world works according to the agent’s knowledge, the
current state and the goal to be achieved [11].
• A planner is a program that outputs a solution to a planning problem.
• Fluents are logical terms that have a truth value assigned to them.
• A state is defined when all the available fluents have been given a truth value.
• Preconditions and postconditions are partial assignments of truth values to the
domain’s fluents which denote the conditions that have to be met for an action to be
executed and the result of executing the action respectively (see also section 2.1.2).
While in plan recognition the plan that is being carried out needs to be recognized and
the plan that will be executed by the actor in the end does not depend on the predicted
plan but rather the opposite, the result of a planning algorithm is a plan that will be used
by the agent.
In their paper, Ramirez and Geffner showed that a goal explains the observations if the
goal has an optimal plan which is also consistent with the observations. Continuing to
build on this result, they showed how to compute such goals using existing planning algo­
rithms and heuristics. The focus is on optimal plans because an optimal plan represents
the actions of a perfectly rational agent.
The concept of costs is used in this method, with the objective being to find the most
probable plan and goal by minimizing the expended cost. A cost is usually natural num­
ber which is used in a heuristic function in order to reward or reprimand the agent for an
action taken (depending on how useful the action is towards the agent’s goal).
The way this is approached is by creating an optimal plan p for each possible goal and a
plan p′ that satisfies that goal but also includes the observations. The difference between
the costs of these plans is called the marginal cost of the observations toward the goal
and is given by the formula δ(Gk|O) = C′(Gk) −C(Gk), where C(Gk) is the cost of p and
C′(Gk) the cost of p′ for reaching goal Gk given the observations O.
The marginal cost can be considered an indication of how much the observations de­
viate from an optimal plan and as such, plans with lower marginal costs are considered a
more likely explanation for the observations [12][5, p. 47].
Example
In ”Plan recognition as planning”, a STRIPS planning problem is a tuple P=<F, I, A, G>,
where F = fluents, I = initial state, A = actions, G = goals. The running example is defined
according to this notation below:
• F: {YellowAtTeachersDesk, BlueAtTeachersDesk, RedAtTeachersDesk, HoldingYel­
low,HoldingBlue, HoldingRed, YellowAtDesk, RedAtDesk, BlueAtDesk, YellowIn­
Cup, RedInCup, BlueInCup}
• I: positive fluents {YellowAtTeachersDesk, BlueAtTeachersDesk, RedAtTeachers­
Desk}
• A:(preconditions, postconditions, cost): {
GetYellow:(¬ HoldingYellow ∧YellowAtTeachersDesk, ¬ YellowAtTeachersDesk ∧
HoldingYellow, 1.0),
10
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:16==
GetBlue: (¬ HoldingBlue ∧BlueAtTeachersDesk, ¬ BlueAtTeachersDesk ∧Hold­
ingBlue, 1.0),
GetRed: (¬ HoldingRed ∧RedAtTeachersDesk, ¬ RedAtTeachersDesk ∧Holdin­
gRed, 1.0),
PlaceYellowOnDesk: (HoldingYellow, YellowAtDesk ∧¬ HoldingYellow, 1.0),
PlaceBlueOnDesk (HoldingBlue, BlueAtDesk ∧¬ HoldingBlue, 1.0),
PlaceRedOnDesk (HoldingRed, RedAtDesk ∧¬ HoldingRed, 1.0),
PourYellow (YellowAtDesk, ¬ YellowAtDesk ∧YellowInCup, 1.0),
PourBlue (BlueAtDesk, ¬ BlueAtDesk ∧BlueInCup, 1.0),
PourRed (RedAtDesk, ¬ RedAtDesk ∧RedInCup, 1.0)
}
• G:(conditions): {
MakeGreen: (YellowInCup ∧BlueInCup),
MakeOrange: (YellowInCup ∧RedInCup),
MakePurple: (RedInCup ∧BlueInCup)
}
• observations O: {GetYellow, PlaceYellowOnDesk, GetBlue}
For simplicity, all the costs are set to 1.0. Preconditions and postconditions described in
actions contain here only fluents that have been updated.
Applying Ramirez and Geffner’s method, for every possible goal there are computed plans
P’ ­ containing observations and P – without observations:
1. P’(MakeGreen): {GetYellow, PlaceYellowOnDesk, GetBlue, PlaceBlueOnDesk, PourYel­
low, PourBlue}
2. P(MakeGreen): {GetYellow, PlaceYellowOnDesk, GetBlue, PlaceBlueOnDesk, Pour­
Blue, PourYellow}
3. P’(MakeOrange): {GetYellow, PlaceYellowOnDesk, GetBlue, PlaceBlueOnDesk, Ge­
tRed, PlaceRedOnDesk, PourRed, PourYellow}
4. P(MakeOrange): {GetYellow, PlaceYellowOnDesk, GetRed, PlaceRedOnDesk, PourYel­
low, PourRed}
5. P’(MakePurple): {GetYellow, PlaceYellowOnDesk, GetBlue, PlaceBlueOnDesk, Ge­
tRed, PlaceRedOnDesk, PourBlue, PourRed}
6. P(MakePurple): {GetBlue, PlaceBlueOnDesk, GetRed, PlaceRedOnDesk, PourRed,
PourBlue}
We calculate marginal cost to show which goal would be chosen. In goal MakeGreen, all
the observed actions are part of plan, therefore the result is:
δ(MakeGreen|O) = C′(MakeGreen) −C(MakeGreen) = 6 −6 = 0
Meanwhile, for goal MakeOrange, actions regarding color yellow match the plan – but
the blue needs to be put down after picking it up, therefore:
δ(MakeOrange|O) = C′(MakeOrange) −C(MakeOrange) = 8 −6 = 2
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
11
==PAGE:17==
and for goal MakePurple, actions regarding yellow are unnecessary and blue fits the plan:
δ(MakePurple|O) = C′(MakePurple) −C(MakePurple) = 8 −6 = 2
The lowest marginal cost has MakeGreen goal – therefore that would be the predicted
goal.
2.3.2
Probabilistic plan recognition for intelligent information agents –
Towards proactive software assistant agents
Information representation: Hybrid
Domain representation: Implicit
Domain uncertainty: Stochastic
Fundamental Contribution: Seamless integration of information gathering with plan
recognition and adaptation of the system in order to proactively offer assistance
Methodology: Markov Decision Processes, Bayesian probabilities
This was a method proposed by J. Oh, F. Meneguzzi and K. Sycara in 2011. The system
they implemented was named ANTicipatory Information and Planning Agent (ANTIPA)
and its purpose was to use plan recognition to facilitate the proactive assistance of the
user.
The ANTIPA method is mainly of interest for PRoP because of the closeness of its subject
(a system developed to recognize goals being pursued by actors in order to assist them)
and the use of an MDP and probabilities, which are appropriate techniques to make a
plan and goal recognition system more robust.
It comprised of several modules, namely the Observation Module, the Cognition Mod­
ule, the Assistance Module and the Interaction Module but only the plan recognition sub­
module from the Cognition Module was described in the paper and is of main interest for
the PRoP integration, as it is the only one involved in the plan recognition process.
The user’s moves in ANTIPA were predicted with the help of a Markov Decision Process
(MDP). A definition for MDPs and a detailed explanation of them will first be provided
before going into more detail regarding the algorithm.
Markov Decision Processes
An MDP is a state­based decision process that moves through states in discrete steps.
MDPs are used to solve sequential decision problems in fully observable stochastic envi­
ronments.
They consist of a set of states S, a set A(s) of actions which belong to the state s, a
transition model P(s′|s, a) and a reward function R(s), where s is the current state and s′
is a reachable state from s. A discount factor γ, where 0 < γ < 1 is also defined [13][14, p.
264]. The probability for each transition from state s is only dependent on s and not in any
way on the previous history of visited states. For all the available states s a policy π(s)
has to be calculated. A policy π(s) is the action that will be chosen in state s. Normally an
optimal policy for each state will be approximated by repeated iterations and the estima­
tion of an expected utility generated for each state. The utility of a given state sequence
can be defined as the sum of discounted rewards obtained during the sequence. Solving
an MDP means finding the policy that maximizes the total reward, which is given by the
current utility. This policy is called the optimal policy [14].
The way an MDP functions can best be described by the example of a grid where the
12
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:18==
cells represent the states and the available actions from each state are the act of moving
towards any of the four directions. In each state s there is a different probability for moving
towards each possible direction[14]. This is displayed in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: A simple 4×3 environment that presents the agent with a sequential decision
problem and illustration of the transition model of the environment for the starting state.
Based on a figure from ”Artificial Intelligence A Modern Approach – Third Edition”.
We assume the environment in figure 2.3 is fully observable, so the agent always knows
where it is. The agent can perform the actions UP, DOWN, LEFT, RIGHT at any given
state. In the figure the agent starts from position (1,1) and needs to reach one of the two
goals that are marked with 1 and ­1. These numbers that mark the goals are the rewards
given for reaching each of them, which means that the goal at (4,2) should be avoided.
At the first step, the probabilities for the different actions might for example be:
P((1, 2)|(1, 1), UP) = 0.8
P((1, 2)|(1, 1), LEFT) = 0.1
P((1, 2)|(1, 1), RIGHT) = 0.1 and
P((1, 2)|(1, 1), DOWN) = 0.
These probabilities model the uncertainty and non­optimality of the environment and the
agents. It can be assumed that most probably an agent will choose the obviously opti­
mal way of going UP but there is always a small probability that the agent will try to go
RIGHT (0.1) or LEFT (0.1). In that last case, the agent will bump into a wall and not move.
The purpose of the MDP is to train the agent through repeated iterations to get to the goal
through the path with the greatest reward. Each iteration will go through all the states and
compute their utilities until some condition is met that will denote that the optimal policies
have been found [14].
The ANTIPA algorithm
Apart from the use of the MDP, the rest of the algorithm isn’t of much interest for the cur­
rent project, since the size of the system made it hard to implement within the timeframe
for PRoP. The MDP was the only part from it that was used, as will be explained in later
chapters. Thus, the rest of the algorithm is examined only briefly here.
There are a few different algorithms that can be used to solve an MDP. In ANTIPA the
value iteration algorithm was used for this purpose. Apart from that, a plan tree was used
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
13
==PAGE:19==
for ANTIPA with dynamically built nodes depending on given probabilities. The user’s
moves were predicted with the help of the MDP [13]. The algorithm is split into two parts,
the goal recognition and the plan prediction.
In the goal recognition, policies are computed with the use of the MDP but they are
computed from the perspective of each goal, by setting the rewards of the rest of the
goals each time to 0. The value iteration algorithm normally returns a deterministic policy
but in ANTIPA a stochastic version of it was used. Instead of outputting the action that will
be taken in each state, a probability was computed for taking that action while in a specific
state and pursuing a specific goal. Next, the system observes a sequence of states and
actions and, using the Bayes rule, the conditional probability of each goal given these
observations is computed. These will be used later as weights on the tree. The algorithm
also handles changing goals or the user interleaving plans for multiple goals by using a
function that ”discounts” older observations. This is done by calculating the probabilities
for an observation given a specific goal as the product of the probabilities of the rest of
the observations but assigning weights to them, which are smaller for older observations.
This way the older observations are considered less relevant and are gradually discarded.
The plan detection part takes as input one goal. The sequence of actions that the actor
is most likely to execute are predicted here. A stochastic policy is again calculated in this
step using an MDP. The MDP is solved for the specific goal to maximize the long­term
expected rewards. A plan­tree is constructed using the most probable plans from the
most recently observed state. Each node contains the predicted action together with two
properties: priority and deadline. The priority is a measure reflecting the system’s belief
that the actor will execute the particular action in the future and is proportional to its prob­
ability, while the deadline indicates the predicted time step in which the user will execute
the action and, therefore, before which the user will require assistance. The actions are
added to the tree only if the system’s belief regarding how probable the user is to execute
an action is over a certain threshold. The plan prediction is ran for all the goals separately.
The algorithm was also extended to tackle partial observability by inferring the user’s state
through indirect observations (e.g., keyboard and mouse inputs from the user’s computing
environment or sensory inputs from various devices) and by maintaining a probability
distribution over the set of user states [13].
Example
Consider the example of the students making experiments by mixing colors. In order to
build the world states the fluents from section 2.3.1 are assigned as:
Fluents: {YellowOnTeachersDesk, BlueOnTeachersDesk, RedOnTeachersDesk, Hold­
ingYellow, HoldingRed, HoldingBlue, YellowOnDesk, RedOnDesk, BlueOnDesk, Yellow­
InCup, RedInCup, BlueInCup}
The actions are:
Actions: {GetYellow, GetRed, GetBlue, PlaceYellowOnDesk, PlaceRedOnDesk, Place­
BlueOnDesk, PourYellow, PourRed, PourBlue}
The students in this scenario must first carry two dyes of different color to their desk one
by one and afterwards mix them. A specific student being observed wants to make purple.
The state graph in figure 2.4 shows the available states of the world and the probabilities
computed as stochastic policies by the MDP for the MakePurple goal, with the rewards
for the other two goals set to zero. Only the positive fluents are displayed on the nodes
of the state graph. Due to space, the fluents that denote that a color is on the teacher’s
desk are omitted and their abbreviations are given instead of their full name. For example,
14
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:20==
HY stands for HoldingYellow, RSD stands for RedOnDesk (the ”SD” part is for ”Student’s
Desk”) and BC means BlueInCup.
Figure 2.4: The available states and possible actions in the world together with the com­
puted stochastic policies for the MakePurple goal.
The red dye is the most sought­after color in this classroom, so the system has observed
that when the students want to make purple they go for the red color first most of the
times. At the mixing phase however, it is equally likely for them to pour red and to pour
blue first.
The resulting plan­tree for the MakePurple goal can be seen in figure 2.5.
The GetYellow and GetBlue actions at the beginning of the plan­tree have been ”pruned”
(in reality they haven’t been added to the plan­tree because their probability was lower
than the example system’s threshold). The Time Step axis represents the expected time
step in which the actions will be executed by the student.
2.3.3
A fast goal recognition technique based on interaction estimates
Information representation: Symbolic
Domain representation: Implicit
Domain uncertainty: Stochastic
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.5: The computed plan tree for the MakePurple goal. The GetBlue and GetYellow
actions have been pruned from the beginning of the plan tree.
Fundamental Contribution: Improvement on ”Plan Recognition as Planning” by reduc­
tion in time to compute cost of a plan
Methodology:
Interaction estimates that calculate the cost of how fluents interact and
prune the graph based on the results, STRIPS language
This method introduces an approach that represents cost and interaction information in a
plan graph, and uses that information to estimate probabilities to satisfy goals [15]. Build­
ing on selected concepts from ”Plan Recognition as Planning”, more specifically a version
of it in which probabilities were added for each goal given the observations [16], the main
idea of this method was to introduce the concept of cost interactions between fluents. The
interaction estimates method aims to improve on the Ramirez method and to combine it
with graph pruning in order to optimize the computation time. The main idea behind the
pruning technique is to define each action as being either imperative, unknown, or un­
likely, and pruning the unlikely actions from the graph.
The Interaction Cost defines how two fluents influence one another. This method is
optimal when no more than two fluents will influence each other. Therefore, in domains
where multiple fluents have a dependent relationship, this method is sub­optimal. This
method is most similar to the ”Plan Recognition as Planning” method, which is based on
cost calculations. However, this method uses an explicit domain, which is different from
the method presented in ”Plan Recognition as Planning” as well as the ANTIPA method.
The interaction cost is used to determine the value that will be assigned to an action.
There are three possible values: ­1, 0, 1. If two fluents have no relationship to each other
and a change in the value of either fluent is independent of the value of another fluent,
then the label is assigned as 0. If the two fluents conflict with one another, such that one
fluent adversely affects the other fluent, then the assignment is ­1. If the fluents are com­
plementary to each other, then the assignment is 1.
Example
Based on the running example, consider the fluents HasBlue and BlueInCup. The stu­
dent must have the blue dye in order to pour the blue dye into the cup. These fluents are
complementary to one another. The action between these two fluents is PourBlue. The
value of the action PourBlue is assigned as 1, because the fluents HasBlue and BlueIn­
Cup have a complementary relationship.
16
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:22==
Now, consider the fluents HasBlue and HasRed. The student does not require red in
order to have the color blue, nor vice versa. These fluents have nothing to do with each
other, and they are established independently of one another. So, the transition from the
fluent HasBlue to HasRed would include the action GetRed. That action will be assigned
a value of 0, because the fluents are independent.
Finally, consider the fluent MakePurple and HasYellow. These fluents are mutually ex­
clusive, meaning only one fluent can be true. The student cannot use the yellow dye to
create the color purple. The action PourYellow will not yield MakePurple, and so this ac­
tion is assigned a value of ­1.
The actions which have been assigned a value of ­1 are pruned from the graph according
to the observations. So, if an observation shows that the student HasYellow, then the ac­
tions leading to the goal MakePurple will be pruned and no longer considered a possibility
as the actor’s goal. In figure 2.6, the goal MakePurple has had its edges pruned after the
observation HasYellow. The goals which use yellow, MakeOrange and MakeGreen, are
still possible, and so the edges remain intact.
Figure 2.6: Goal MakePurple is Pruned after observing HasYellow
This explanation has been simplified to fit the running example domain. The aspect of
this method that is significant to PRoP is not the interaction calculations, but rather the
graph pruning methodology. By pruning actions which lead to unlikely goals, the graph
is made smaller and the plan recognizer is left with a set of possible goals which are
more likely to be the actor’s goal. This graph pruning method is utilized in PRoP. If an
action leads to a possible goal in PRoP, then it is assigned a value of active. If an action
is attached to a goal that is considered impossible based on an observation, then the
action is labeled inactive. Inactive actions are pruned from the graph so that the goal is
no longer considered by PRoP. This implementation is described in detail in Chapter 4:
Implementation and Integration of Plan Recognition with Pepper.
2.3.4
Fast and complete symbolic goal recognition
Information representation: Symbolic
Domain representation: Explicit
Domain uncertainty: Deterministic
Fundamental Contribution:
Improved efficiency for mapping observations and calcu­
lating a hypothesis for a plan
Methodology:
Current state query algorithm and history of states query algorithm to
track current and past states using timestamps
This method matches observations which hold multiple relevant data points to a plan
library [17]. A plan graph is one way to model a plan library in an explicit domain rep­
resentation. This sets it apart from the previous methods, which each utilize an implicit
domain. ”The Fast and Complete Symbolic Goal Recognition” method was developed by
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
17
==PAGE:23==
Dorit Avrahami­Zilberbrand and Gal A. Kaminka for two purposes:
• Improving efficiency of mapping observations to a plan library
• Improving efficiency when calculating a plan hypothesis
This method includes multi­featured observations, and it depends on those observations
to survey the current state. This method also queries the data of the history of states. In
other words, states are saved as the plan progresses, and the history of states influences
the current state. Dorit Avrahami­Zilberbrand and Gal A. Kaminka provide definitions for
their approach:
”In general, plan recognition relies on a plan library of plans potentially exe­
cuted by the observed agent. Typically, the plan library is composed of top­
level plans that are hierarchically decomposed. The recognizer matches ob­
servations to specific plan steps in the library. It may then infer answers to
plan recognition queries, such as the currently selected top­level plans (current
state query), or the ordered sequence of (completed or interrupted) selected
plans (state history query)” [17].
The plan graph is one of the representations used in plan recognition algorithms which
depend on explicit domains. The running example of a plan graph for Fast and Complete
Symbolic Goal Recognition is shown in figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Acyclic Connected Graph of Running Example [17]
The recognition algorithm takes this plan library as an input, as well as the current ob­
servation. The algorithm matches the current state to a node in which the features are
consistent to the current state. A hypothesis represents a plan that is consistent with the
observations. The history of states forces some hypotheses to be excluded because ob­
servations must happen sequentially in a plan. For example, a student cannot MakePurple
18
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:24==
without first pouring the red colored dye.
This method includes two algorithms:
• Current state query algorithm
• History of states query algorithm
The current state query algorithm handles the current state, and attaches a time stamp
to the state if the node is consistent with the current observation. The history of states
query algorithm handles the states that have been visited previously, and verifies that a
plan is consistent with the history of states, by checking the time stamps. The result is a
sequential plan. A visualization of the plan is shown in figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: Plan Ordered by Time Stamps [17]
This construction shows the sequence of states that are involved in a plan. The method
of using time stamps is suitable in this case because multiple plans can be evaluated.
This ordering allows for an analysis that locates multiple plans without misplacing states
on unsuitable plan paths. The time stamp labels correspond to the labels shown in figure
2.7.
The approach is accurate and efficient. The current state query algorithm operates in
linear time, and the history of states query algorithm is polynomial in time. The tests were
conducted in a range of 3 to 10 sequential observations [17]. As is the case with all plan
libraries, the depth of the graph factors into the overall efficiency.
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
19
==PAGE:25==
This method is significant because it influenced the design and implementation of PRoP.
This method was implemented over an explicit domain representation. More specifically,
the domain is a plan library which is represented in a plan graph. The plan Recognition
on Pepper is modeled in with a similar representation. An explicit domain representation
is used, and the plan library is implemented as a graph. Likewise to this method, PRoP
also receives the plan library and the current state as input. However, the integration with
Pepper does not include the timestamp algorithm. The timestamp algorithm is useful in
this method because states may be revisited on several occasions in order to satisfy a
goal. This is not the case in the PRoP integration, and therefore the timestamp algorithm
is not considered.
2.4
Assessment and Comparison of the Discussed Methods
Tables 2.1, 2.2 show the key characteristics and concepts of discussed methods.
Method
Information
Representation
Domain
Uncertainty
Plan recognition as planning
Symbolic
Implicit
Deterministic1
ANTIPA
Hybrid
Implicit
Stochastic
A
Fast
Goal
Recognition
Technique Based on Interac­
tion Estimates
Symbolic
Implicit
Stochastic
Fast and Complete Symbolic
Goal Recognition
Symbolic
Explicit
Deterministic
Table 2.1: Comparison of key characteristics of discussed methods
In the research phase, the main goal was to learn about the problem of plan and goal
recognition and choose techniques suitable for PRoP. The focus has mainly been on
symbolic methods – utilizing human­understandable language makes it easier to describe
system’s output and understand that complex problem. Analyzing ANTIPA, the hybrid
method, has provided what possible advantages can come from sub­symbolic represen­
tation. For example, the MDP can simulate real­life decision making.
Likewise to ”Fast and Symbolic Plan Recognition”, PRoP utilizes an explicit domain. One
of the key comparisons of the explicit and implicit representations is that an implicit rep­
resentation scales well is made to handle large domains, whereas an explicit domain
requires more human supervision to add scale. Given that PRoP runs over a small, con­
trolled environment the scaling benefit of an implicit domain was not required. Similarly,
the explicit domain is an easily readable visualization, which is more user friendly.
Non­deterministic environments were not considered. For the purpose of exploring the
field of plan recognition, it was decided to place the focus on more predictable environ­
ments. Deterministic environments provide a lot more simplicity which is useful for learn­
ing purposes, although it is less applicable in real­life. Stochastic environments allow
simulation of the real­life uncertainty in a bit more controlled way. Given that PRoP was
1It has to be noted that Ramirez and Geffner, within the two years after their original paper, expanded it
both to include Bayesian probabilities and to a stochastic and partially observable domain in two separate
papers[16][18].
20
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:26==
created as a new project, rather than a continuation of a previous project, it was deter­
mined that maintaining a simple environment would relieve some of the complexity during
the development process.
Method
Contribution
Methodology
Plan
recognition
as planning
Viewing plan recognition as
planning in reverse and using
planners to solve plan recog­
nition problems
Planners, STRIPS language
for representing the domain
ANTIPA
Seamless integration of in­
formation gathering with plan
recognition and adaptation of
the system in order to proac­
tively offer assistance
MDP, Bayesian probabilities
A
Fast
Goal
Recognition
Technique Based
on
Interaction
Estimates
Improvement
on
”Plan
Recognition as Planning” by
reduction in time to compute
cost of a plan
Interaction estimates that cal­
culate the cost of how fluents
interact and prune the graph
based on the results, STRIPS
language
Fast
and
Com­
plete
Symbolic
Goal Recognition
Improved efficiency for map­
ping observations and calcu­
lating a hypothesis for a plan
Current state query algorithm
and history of states query al­
gorithm to track current and
past states using timestamps
Table 2.2: Summary of central concepts of discussed methods
Table 2.2 sums up the contributions and methods used in the selected methods. There are
many different implementation attributes to consider in regards to the problem of plan and
goal recognition. The main concepts that have been useful while working on the PRoP
system are symbolic and explicit domain representation, MDPs, and graph pruning.
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
21
==PAGE:27==
3
Selected Methods and Design
In this chapter the PRoP system will be described as well as the choice of development
methods, assumptions and considerations, and the design process.
3.1
System Analysis
As a first step of the design and implementation planning phase, the given system had to
be analyzed. In the following sections this process will be described.
3.1.1
Description of the system
The PRoP system involves the expansion of the AI of a Pepper robot, by adding the
ability to recognize the goal of the observed agent, as well as the plan being executed
to achieve that goal. No requirements were placed regarding what the robot would do
with that information as soon as it had collected it. Another aspect of the project is the
interaction between human and robot, so this would also have to be taken into account.
3.1.2
Design Considerations and Requirements
There are several challenges a plan and goal recognition system faces that potentially
need to be addressed during its design.
Van­Horenbeke and Peer [19] offer a non­
exhaustive list:
• Uncertainty and competing hypotheses: Sometimes a series of observations
may lead to multiple possible goals with equal probability. In that case, a strategy
may need to be implemented in order to always choose one of the equally probable
intentions, such as establishing a secondary measurement apart from the probability
of each possible goal. This secondary measurement could, for example, represent
the urgency for intervention depending on which of the possible goals is the actual
one. An example of a situation where this would be relevant could be a passenger
being seen through the CCTV surveillance system at an airport leaving their luggage
but it being unclear whether they picked it up. In that case it could be a lot more
dangerous and would require immediate attention if it was assumed they didn’t pick
it up. [20].
• Plans, goals or activities that have not been encountered before: Many plan
and goal recognition systems consider the agent’s knowledge a subset of the sys­
tem’s knowledge base and fail to account for misconceptions. Encoding principles
for variations of the knowledge of the agent can help tackle noise generated from
agent misconceptions and activities that have not been explicitly encoded [21]. Not
expecting an exact match to the actor’s plan would make boiling rice still recogniz­
able even if the actor didn’t pour salt into the water or poured another spice instead
because of an inaccurate knowledge of how to boil rice. Probabilistic methods can
also help handle propositions for which there is no, limited or partial evidence. The­
oretical frameworks such as Dempster­Shafer offer the advantage of distinguishing
lack of evidence for a proposition from evidence against the proposition [21].
• Variability among different instances of the same action/plan: The way people
perform an activity varies between every two different persons. Differences in body
movements and mannerisms need to be accounted for [22]. This pertains more to
activity recognition rather that plan or goal recognition.
22
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:28==
• Early prediction: It is of high importance for the goal or plan to be determined in
as early a stage as possible, so that any necessary actions can be taken before
its completion by the system. For this reason recognition is usually performed on­
line and the recognition analysis is typically performed on the prefixes of plans and
policies (their initial stages) [5].
• Incomplete knowledge, partial observability and noise: An example of this is
keyhole intention recognition, where the agent performing the actions does not act
with any intent to assist the recognition system or, even more, actively attempting to
hide their intentions, which may lead to partial observed information by the system.
At the same time, actions that are considered noise – actions that are not related to
the plan being carried out – may be interposed by the acting agent [20].
• Interleaved plans and plans executed in parallel: The acting agent may have
multiple intentions or they may be concurrently trying to execute multiple plans for
achieving the same intention [20]. While making coffee the actor may need to an­
swer the doorbell and receive a package and after that continue with the plan of
making the coffee.
• Interruption of plans: The user may choose or have to interrupt their plan at any
time. An example could be a manager being observed by their assistant carrying
out a certain task and suddenly receiving a phone call. The assistant should be able
to deduce that the manager has not abandoned the previously performed plan and
that the new actions are part of another task [23].
• Sharing of executed actions among different plans: In many domains, one ac­
tion might be able to be used by multiple plans. For example, making enough pasta
in a day to use the following days in more than one different dishes [6].
• Collaboration of agents towards a common goal: Systems where multiple agents
collaborate towards a common goal are called multi­agent systems. This contains
its own challenges, such as the problem of identifying related clusters of agents,
identifying which agents are working towards which intentions and extracting inten­
tions and plans from interleaved actions [20]. A robotic assistant to a rescue crew
must be able to understand which members of the team are in charge of helping a
group of people out of a cavern where they fell, who is operating the machinery that
they might be using and the delegation of other relevant activities in order to be able
to assist them.
• Non­rational, non­optimal and malevolent actions: Sometimes the agents may
unwillingly act in an irrational way out of confusion. For example, the system de­
signed to help Alzheimer patients needs to take into consideration that the patients
often do things not related to their goal ­ such as wandering around the house or hid­
ing things. People are also not always optimal and sometimes may act erroneously
(such as in the case of students learning a new skill). Apart from these cases, there
may also be situations where the scenario being observed may involve agents that
are intentionally trying to mislead or deceive the recognition system [20][21].
• Temporal sequencing of actions: Depending on the context, a recognizer that
will be useful cannot make simplistic assumptions regarding the temporal ordering
of the actions. An example is story understanding, where actions might not be given
in the sequence with which they happened. Other times there might be a need to
allow actions to happen at the same time or there may be no temporal ordering [6].
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
23
==PAGE:29==
• Adaptation to the agent: Many times recognition systems ignore the preferences
humans have regarding plans. Taking preferences into account can be looking at
the ”classification” of humans (e.g. adults and children have different plans they
prefer to carry out in a shopping center) or keep personalized information [24].
• Context of the actions: The same action may have to be interpreted differently
depending on the environment or roles of the actors among others. For example,
Sanchez, Tentori and Favela tackled the case of a hospital. In this setting the han­
dling of files by a doctor and by a nurse may be interpreted as clinical case assess­
ment or patient care respectively [20].
• Expressivity and interpretability: The model used should be able to recognize
and express high­level actions instead of low­level representations that are not
meaningful for humans, so that it can easily be interpreted. In another sense, ex­
pressivity can also mean the range of information that can be represented by the
model [23].
• Scalability and extendability: Research has often focused on small sample li­
braries and domains but it is not as easy to scale those systems to domains with
thousands of goals and plans to achieve them [21]. In these cases, scaling might
prove impractical with the performance of the system dropping exponentially.
3.1.3
Assumptions
Some assumptions must be made about the domain and the agents. These assumptions
guided the design and implementation.
• Single Agent: The actor is a single agent. There are not multiple actors working
towards a goal.
• Intended Recognition: The actor is aware that Pepper is attempting to observe a
plan [5, p. 27] page 27. The actor may make deliberate movements to increase
Pepper’s efficiency.
• Closed World: The closed­world assumption means that the actions that lead to
a state are the only actions that lead to that state. For all observations, there ex­
ists a corresponding action. The recognizer can only reason the knowledge that it
currently holds [25].
• Single Goal: The actor is only pursuing one goal.
3.1.4
Design choices
The usual approach of research projects in the field is to focus on optimizing a few of the
aspects described in section 3.1.2. Similarly, it would not be possible for this project to
address all of these at the same time and the scope of the PRoP project had to be limited
to tackling only certain issues.
Since a central focus of PRoP is the interaction between human and robot, expressivity
and interpretability would be a requirement. A symbolic approach was chosen in order
to make Pepper’s goal and plan recognition functionality user­friendly and its interactions
with human users smooth. A requirement that is central to the purpose of a plan and goal
recognition system is the early prediction of the plan and the goal. The prediction of the
plan before the goal is reached is by definition a given. However, how early a plan or goal
will be predicted can be optimized. With any recognizer and domain there is a certain
point in time when a plan can be predicted with certainty. Before that, only probabilistic
estimates can be given. This was tackled by using a Markov Decision Process (MDP)
24
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:30==
to output a probabilistic estimate.
Additionally, the MDP allowed for the handling of uncertainty and competing hypothe­
ses. This was coupled with a pruning technique, to gradually minimize the uncertainty
regarding the pursued goal and the ambiguity regarding which plan is being carried out.
Further to the challenges mentioned before, another one very important and fundamental
to any interaction is speed. In order for the human­robot interaction to be smooth and to
successfully emulate an interaction between humans, the reaction times must be small.
On the other hand, partial observability, variability between a plan execution by two dif­
ferent people, information that has not been seen before, collaboration between multiple
agents and adaption to the agent were issues that were either decided to not be handled
or were irrelevant as they weren’t included in the definition of the system and the domain.
It was deemed more fitting for PRoP to not fully implement any of the methods described
in the literature review. Instead, based on the comparison matrix of different theories,
different concepts which fit the problem case were selected. As is evident from the de­
scription in the next chapters, although an implicit representation of the domain as in ”Plan
Recognition as Planning” wasn’t used, the graph used for PRoP was inspired by part of the
paper’s idea, since the parent node’s state can be considered an action’s preconditions
and the child node’s state can be considered its effects (although the same action may
appear with different states as parent nodes and different states as children nodes). For
this reason, terminology introduced in section 2.3.1 ”Plan Recognition as Planning” will be
used to describe parts of the PRoP implementation that relate to the graph. The ANTIPA
method (section 2.3.2) influenced PRoP in using the MDP but the full implementation with
the specific combination of methodologies is left for future work. A variation of the pruning
technique used in section 2.3.3 ”A Fast Goal Recognition Technique Based on Interaction
Estimates” was decided to be used in order to increase the algorithm’s accuracy. Finally,
an explicit domain is composed as a plan library and structured as a graph, as is seen
in section 2.3.4 ”Fast and Complete Symbolic Goal Recognition”. Similar to this method,
the plan graph and the current state are received as inputs for the plan recognizer.
In the following sections the implementation and how the theory was included into it are
described in detail.
3.2
System Design
While taking the results of the research phase into account, the focus of the design phase
was to set a basis for the development of the PRoP system.
3.2.1
System Concept
The method of implementation was selected based on feasibility in the given time frame,
while incorporating the design choices made in the research and analysis phases. There
were concerns about how quickly a functioning system could be implemented and thor­
oughly tested on the robot. Thus, a simplistic domain was selected to increase the effi­
ciency of the physical testing phase. It was also a material consideration that PRoP may
be extended and continuously improved by other developers. Therefore, the aim was to
make the domain extendable and scalable.
The running example so far has been students conducting a simple science experiment
in a classroom. Abstracting from this concept, the domain selected for Pepper was a sim­
ilar idea in which a student is moving items between desks in a classroom. The task of
the Pepper robot was to observe an actor moving objects between tables in a room, and
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
25
==PAGE:31==
use its observations to develop a hypothesis regarding the actor’s goal. Pepper was also
tasked with outputting a plan that would satisfy its hypothesis.
Figure 3.1: Pepper observes a student holding an object
The use case would be, for example, a student moving their own items to their desk.
Pepper should recognize that the goal is to move items from one location to another. The
items can be moved in any order, and to any of the surfaces that exist in the domain.
The PRoP system was developed with the properties as described in table 3.1. The com­
ponents of the PRoP system are described in detail throughout the design and integration
chapters. These properties were determined to be most suitable in the project setting for
a variety of reasons. For example, a symbolic approach is readable for the user. The
explicit domain is limited and rigid, which is appropriate in a small domain space. Finally,
the recognition algorithm is probablistic. The methodology used in the ANTIPA method,
which is also probablistic, is closely related to the implementation of PRoP.
Uncertainty
Information
Representation
Domain
Methodology
Symbolic
Explicit
Deterministic
Probablistic
Table 3.1: Implementation Properties
3.2.2
Environment
The PRoP environment was ultimately defined as a room which contains three surfaces,
two objects, and one actor. This was decided in order to maintain simplicity while handling
the complexity added by the Pepper robot. This is an open environment which makes it
extendable and scalable, because there can be additional surfaces, objects, actions, and
26
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:32==
goals which would fit easily into the environment without necessarily demanding additional
functionality.
Label
Component
Surfaces
Table A (initial state)
Table B
Table C
Objects
Mug
Phone
Actions
Pick Up
Place
Observations
Pick Up Mug
Place Mug
Pick Up Phone
Place Phone
Actor
Actor
Table 3.2: Environment
The actual environment is pictured in figure 3.2. The actor can see that the tables are
labeled A, B, and C. The objects in this figure are placed at the initial state. This is the
beginning of a plan recognition process, in which the actor has not made any changes to
the environment.
Figure 3.2: Environment Set­Up
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
27
==PAGE:33==
3.2.3
Knowledge Base
The knowledge base of the developed system contains fluents – which is a set that de­
scribes possible world states. The fluents describe possible positions of objects defined
in the domain and consist of the following statements: Mug on table A, Mug on table B,
Mug on table C, Holding mug, Phone on table A, Phone on table B, Phone on table C,
Holding phone. The fluent values and how they can change are shown on figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Flow of fluents when performing a plan towards goal G1
The other part of the knowledge base is a graph that describes which conditions need
to be met to change the state, what the goals are and what path can lead to a goal.
The full domain is shown in figure 3.4. The domain is modeled in a explicit domain as
a graph structure, similar to what was presented in 2.3.4 ”Fast and Complete Symbolic
Goal Recognition”. In this method, the algorithm matches the current state to a node in
the plan library that is consistent with the observation [17]. The plan library is handled the
same way in this implementation.
3.2.4
Software Architecture of Plan Recognition
An overview of the software architecture of the system can be seen in figure 3.5.
The perception part involves the low­level functionality that includes Pepper’s input and
output in the form of movement, sounds and perception of the physical space. All these
are handled with embedded code that exists on Pepper for the use of cameras, sensors
and speakers that help it communicate with the world. NAOqi API [26] is the collection of
libraries developed to facilitate the communication with Pepper’s embedded code. The
scope of PRoP was to develop the functionality to handle all the high­level recognition
tasks. Details regarding the implementation and the code are described in Chapter 4.
Integration of plan recognition with Pepper.
PRoP is split into relevant conceptual entities. The separation is based on different levels
of abstraction. The recognition system resulting from the analysis consists of the following
modules:
• Detection: The least abstract of the three, it involves the calculations needed to
decide whether a movement has occurred or whether there is an interaction between
28
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.4: Graph with all possible states
Figure 3.5: Overall architecture of the system
two objects.
• Observation: Contains the main loop that will handle the continuous observation
of the world and the decision on what to do with those observations.
• Cognition: Includes the most abstract part of the code, where discrete observations
are translated into human­understandable language.
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
29
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.6: Component Relationship
These general parts of the system had in turn to be broken down into separate modules
and the functional blocks they include. It was concluded that the following collection of
components would have to be contained in each greater module:
• Detection
– Detection of whether an object, after a change to its position, is neighbouring
another one
– Detection of whether there was a significant change to an object’s position that
can be interpreted as an action
• Observation
– Initializations
– A main loop where the robot will be constantly observing and looking for mean­
ingful events in the world
• Cognition
– A graph to encode the available plans
– A search algorithm to traverse the graph and find specific nodes
– The Markov Decision Process (MDP) implementation
– An algorithm for pruning the graph
The basic arrangement of these components is shown in figure 3.6. The detection and
cognition components support the observation component. An observation is a combina­
tion of two parts:
• An action
• A deduction based on that action
30
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:36==
So, it logically follows that these parts contribute to the observation system. The observa­
tion component is connected with the robot interface. This is necessary as the observation
module receives input which it transfers to the cognition and detection modules. Based
on the output of those modules, the observation module controls the robot via the robot
interface.
It can be deducted from the above analysis that the Observation module would hold the
main function of the application, where the central process would take place and initialize
and call the rest of the code accordingly.
As the final stage of the design phase, the workflow of the main loop of the application
was designed. This can be seen in the activity diagram of figure 3.7.
Notice that the ”Observe scene” action at the beginning is there twice consecutively.
This is because the first action is there to initialize the observed scene with what will
be afterwards compared to the future observations, and the second one is the current
observations taken at the beginning of every iteration.
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
31
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.7: Activity diagram depicting the sequence of activities in the main loop
32
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:38==
4
Implementation and Integration of Plan
Recognition with Pepper
4.1
System Distribution Overview
The Pepper robot is run over android systems. Pepper is connected to WiFi via a router
and plays the role of server. The client can SSH into Pepper from any terminal while con­
nected to the same WiFi network. Code is on­boarded onto Pepper via the MessagePack
python module. Python modules socket and MessagePack are open source libraries that
were developed for the purpose of networking communications in python. The IO and
Speech Recognition modules enable communication between Pepper and the actor.
4.1.1
Code dependencies
These open source python libraries provided functionality for networking communications
and speech recognition. A brief description of the libraries is provided.
Socket
Networking is dependent on the socket python module. According to the documentation,
”This module provides access to the BSD socket interface... The Python interface is a
straightforward transliteration of the Unix system call and library interface for sockets to
Python’s object­oriented style” [27]. A BSD socket interface refers to Berkeley sockets.
Internet sockets can use the Berkeley sockets API for inter­process communication.
MessagePack
MessagePack allows for data exchange between multiple languages. It is available as an
open source library. Formally, ”MessagePack is an efficient binary serialization format. It
lets you exchange data among multiple languages like JSON. But it’s faster and smaller.
Small integers are encoded into a single byte, and typical short strings require only one
extra byte in addition to the strings themselves” [28].
IO
Pepper is able to understand speech with integration from python library IO. Speech is
recorded as an audio file and then it is transferred as bytes. From the documentation:
”The io module provides Python’s main facilities for dealing with various types
of I/O. There are three main types of I/O: text I/O, binary I/O and raw I/O...
Binary I/O (also called buffered I/O) expects bytes­like objects and produces
bytes objects. No encoding, decoding, or newline translation is performed.
This category of streams can be used for all kinds of non­text data, and also
when manual control over the handling of text data is desired” [29].
This library assists in the interpretation of Pepper’s audio files, which enable communica­
tion between Pepper and the actor. This component assists with the Speech Recognition
library.
Speech Recognition
This is an open source library which detects speech with the support of several APIs. The
APIs are developed by several companies including Google, Microsoft, and IBM [30]. The
PRoP integration utilizes the Google speech recognition API. The code snippet shown
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
33
==PAGE:39==
below displays how the google API receives an audio input file. The interpreted file is re­
turned as a string. The Google API does not have offline functionality. An active internet
connection is required in order to use the speech recognition feature in PRoP.
R
`Q#QiX#2;BMnm/BQn`2+Q`/BM;U]7`QMi]V
k
iBK2XbH22TUjXyV
j
`Q#QiX2M/nm/BQn`2+Q`/BM;UV
9
m/BQn7BH2 4 `Q#QiX2M/nm/BQn`2+Q`/BM;UV
8
` 4 bT22+?n`2+Q;MBiBQMX_2+Q;MBx2`UV
e
rBi? bT22+?n`2+Q;MBiBQMXm/BQ6BH2Um/BQn7BH2V b bQm`+2,
d
m/BQ 4 `X`2+Q`/UbQm`+2V
3
?2`/ 4 `X`2+Q;MBx2n;QQ;H2Um/BQV
4.1.2
End­to­End Distribution
Pepper’s interface is implemented in C++ and python. The interface includes functionality
used in various projects on­boarded onto Pepper previously and not all the functionality is
utilized in this project. The robot interface is responsible for physical controls of Pepper.
For example, movement, speech, and the camera feed.
Figure 4.1: Overview of System Distribution
4.1.3
Secure Shell Protocol
The secure shell protocol enables secure network communication between a client and
a server, and is usually abbreviated to SSH. This protocol is used for transferring data
between computers or to login and control a computer remotely. Additionally, SSH pro­
tocol is secure: ”An inherent feature of ssh is that the communication between the two
34
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:40==
computers is encrypted meaning that it is suitable for use on insecure networks” [31]. The
client can SSH into Pepper from any computer that is connected to the same WiFi net­
work. This was done from the command line, but users unfamiliar with command line can
download open­source, user­friendly applications to use SSH.
Figure 4.2: Secure Shell Protocol based on a diagram provided by the official SSH website
[32]
4.1.4
Pepper Robot
The PRoP is implemented on a Pepper robot. Pepper robots are developed and dis­
tributed by SoftBank Robotics, headquartered in Tokyo, Japan [33]. Along with the Pep­
per robot, SoftBank Robotics also provides an API and an SDK to enable developers to
customize Pepper [34]. According to SoftBanks Robotics:
”Pepper was optimized for human interaction and is able to engage with people
through conversation and his touch screen. Pepper is available today for busi­
nesses and schools. Over 2,000 companies around the world have adopted
Pepper as an assistant to welcome, inform and guide visitors in an innovative
way” [35].
Pepper has an android tablet attached to it, and is supported by the QiSDK. Previously,
Pepper was supported by the NAO­QiSDK. There are SDKs available in both python and
C++ for Pepper, which are likewise developed by SoftBanks Robotics [33].
Installation of the python SDK is required. The python SDK includes the qicore file, which
enables access to the qifile and the API. In this way, Pepper’s low­level controls and
physical sensors are accessible for development purposes [26].
4.2
System Detection
The detection module is used to load and parse the data. This module compares the cur­
rent state of the world to the previous observed state of the world. The comparison may
show that nothing in the world has changed, and therefore the previous state of the world
remains unchanged. The detection module continuously conducts comparisons between
the current world and the previous world. If a significant change is detected, then this data
is considered a potential observation and is handled by the Pepper’s observation system.
This code snippet is used as an example from the PRoP detection integration. A com­
parison is made between what Pepper saw previously, and what Pepper is seeing now.
The determination of what distance should be considered a significant distance was con­
cluded during the initial testing phase on Pepper, which is further described in Chapter 5.
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
35
==PAGE:41==
The boolean value helps Pepper determine whether a significant change has occurred,
and can be registered to the system observation integration to be analyzed.
R
/27 bB;n/BbiM+2UT`2pBQmb - +m``2MiV,
k
bB;MB7B+Min/BbiM+2 4 6Hb2
j
T2`+2MinbB;MB7B+Mi 4 yXy8
9
B7 #bUUT`2pBQmb @ +m``2MiVV =4 T2`+2MinbB;MB7B+Mi,
8
bB;MB7B+Min/BbiM+2 4 h`m2
e
`2im`M bB;MB7B+Min/BbiM+2
4.2.1
AprilTags
Object recognition was possible with the use of AprilTags. ”AprilTag is a visual fiducial sys­
tem, useful for a wide variety of tasks including augmented reality, robotics, and camera
calibration. Targets can be created from an ordinary printer, and the AprilTag detection
software computes the precise position, orientation, and identity of the tags relative to
the camera” [36]. AprilTags were favored over a machine learning implementation for
object recognition to both save time and ensure robustness. By attaching AprilTags to
the objects, Pepper could recognize objects in the environment quickly and accurately.
AprilTags were developed for the purpose of optimizing a low payload and accuracy. All
AprilTags are therefore representations of between 4 and 12 bits [36].
Figure 4.3: AprilTag used for Mug Object
4.3
System Observation
The observation system holds the current state of the world. This can only be updated
if a change in the world is detected by the detection module. The system observation
conducts a search of possible next states if an observation is detected. During this anal­
ysis, the fluents and preconditions serve as delimiters regarding future possibilities. If
a possible world is found, based on the latest observation, then the current state of the
world is changed. A plan is a sequential set of actions, so observations are only possible if
they happen sequentially as they are modeled in the plan library. The system observation
serves both the system detection and cognition integration. This mediator is necessary
because Pepper should not try to align every observation it makes with a possible action
36
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:42==
or goal. That would slow down the entire system, and would not support the plan recogni­
tion theory. The observation system connects detection and cognition, without detection
and cognition interacting directly.
4.3.1
Differentiating Detection and Observation
Not dissimilar to humans, what Pepper perceives may vary from the truth. Likewise, Pep­
per may perceive noisy and useless data. Humans have a similar feature – when relaxing
and reading a book, we only observe the words on the page. We do not observe every
object in the room, nor do we observe the details of every object such as color, location,
or size. In this way, the actions that Pepper perceives are different than Pepper’s ob­
servations. An unexpected action may be perceived by Pepper, but this is handled by
Pepper’s observation integration. A key difference between detection and observation, is
that detection only sees actions. Observation connects the dots to understand the action.
The detection integration notices that a change has occurred. The observation integration
finds out what change occurred, and responds. In this way, Pepper perceives a lot more
data than it observes.
An example of possible detections and observations is shown in table 4.1. Although the
environment has remained mostly static over 1 minute, Pepper continues to receive input
from its environment. Most of this data does not indicate that something observable has
occurred, and therefor it is ignored and never loaded to the cognition system.
Time in Seconds
Current Detections
Current Observations
01.00
5
0
20.00
4
0
40.00
5
1
60.00
5
0
Table 4.1: Detections Compared to Observations at an Instance
Pepper’s ability to perceive an environment and receive input is fast. Detections on the
server occur slightly faster than 1 per second. The Detections Compared to Observations
at an Instance table 4.1 is thus a representation of approximately a 1 second period. A
table with an aggregation of the detections and observations over time is also provided in
table 4.2.
Time in Seconds
Total Detections
Total Observations
0.00­19.00
95
0
20.00­39.00
192
0
40.00­59.00
269
1
60.00­79.00
354
1
Table 4.2: Detections Compared to Observations over Time
It is clear that Pepper receives more input than is relevant to the recognition process.
Pepper is constantly perceiving, and most of the perceived data is irrelevant to recognizing
a plan. Pepper is only observing changes when the observation may lead to a change in
the state of the world. That is the demonstrated by the different friendly names between
actions and observations. An action is a simple label. ”Pick Up” is an action. It is not
descriptive, and does not account for what object was lifted and what the state of the
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
37
==PAGE:43==
world was before the action was perceived. ”Pick Up Mug” is an observation. Pepper has
conducted an analysis to reach that observation. The previous state of the world had the
mug on the table and the actor was not holding it. The observation signals that the current
state of the world has changed, and the actor is now holding the mug and therefore the
mug is not on any of the tables. This information is reflected in the fluents which represent
the state of the world.
4.4
System Cognition
This is the most complex component of PRoP because it contains the most functionality.
The cognition system includes the plan library, the MDP value iteration, and the pruning
of the plan graph.
4.4.1
Plan Library
Pepper’s cognition system includes a model of all of the worlds and states that Pepper
believes are possible. Given that this is explicitly represented as a plan library in a graph
structure, the possible worlds are finite and predetermined. In the graph, the actions are
edges of the graph and the states are nodes of the graph. In other words, actions point
to a new state, and a state is a collection of fluents and their values which describe a
possible world.
A partial representation of possible plans is shown in figure 4.4. The actions are labeled
on the edges on the graph, and a state is a node with a friendly name. Friendly names en­
able developers to easily interpret and extend the plan library. There are labels attached
to nodes which are possible goals. In this domain, it is possible that multiple goals can be
reached on the same path. Following the problem example that Pepper is observing an
actor move objects from one table to another, it’s possible that the actor would only like
to move some of the objects. An actor that has moved all of the objects may also reach
a goal that is a terminal state. The terminal state in this example is labeled with ”(T)”. A
key for reading the graph is described in table 4.3.
Appearance
Description
G1, G2, G7
Possible Goals 1, 2, 7
(T)
Terminal State
Node
State
Edge
Action
Table 4.3: Key to Figure 4.4
The full graph is much larger, as more goals are possible and the knowledge base is
more expansive. The graph in figure 4.4 excludes the full paths of the nodes, but shows a
complete path to reach the goal state G7. For a full diagram of the plan library, refer back
to figure 3.4. The graph is traversed using the breadth­first search algorithm. Given that
this knowledge base is small and discrete, it was determined to be unnecessary and likely
less efficient to utilize other algorithms such as A­star. In such a limited library, there is not
expected to be a significant difference of computation time for different search algorithms.
Node as a State
Several categories of nodes exist for different purposes.
Namely, there are terminal
nodes, the initial node, goal state nodes, and state nodes which have no special flags.
Goal state nodes are given friendly names in figure 4.4. Although nodes may appear
similar or the same as one another, the presets that lead to the node may vary, enabling
38
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.4: Partial Representation of the Plan Graph
similar nodes to appear in multiple instances. Likewise, multiple paths can lead to the
same goal state.
Initial State
The initial state is provided to Pepper. This is a measure to encode fault tolerance in the
system, and keep the full domain possible in Pepper’s first observation. Given an initial
state, Pepper can then spend the first moments observing its surroundings. This includes
detecting the locations of the surfaces and objects in the room. Given the initial state, and
after the initial perception, Pepper is ready to observe any changes that may occur in the
environment.
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
39
==PAGE:45==
Terminal States
A terminal state has no successive nodes. If Pepper deciphers that the actor is on a path
that can only lead to a terminal state without other goal states on the path, and the ter­
minal state is a goal state, then Pepper immediately determines that the terminal state is
the actor’s goal.
Goal States
Goal states are accessible from many paths, and an action can result in different states.
For example, the action Pick Up occurs repeatedly in the graph, but is differentiated by
the precedent state. Take the goal state at G7. A state is a composition of the values of
the fluents. Consider the fluent values at the state G7 and another goal state G1. Both
of these are goal states, and both satisfy the goal by reaching a node where the fluent
of mug on table B is updated from False to True. However, these nodes are different
because the fluents which compose the states are not equivalent. The tables 4.4 and 4.5
represent the fluents for these states.
Fluent
Value
Mug on Table A
False
Phone on Table A
False
Mug On Table B
True
Phone On Table B
True
Mug On Table C
False
Phone On Table C
False
Actor Holds Phone
False
Actor Holds Mug
False
Table 4.4: Fluent Values for Goal State G7
Fluent
Value
Mug on Table A
True
Phone on Table A
False
Phone On Table B
True
Mug On Table B
False
Mug On Table C
False
Phone On Table C
False
Actor Holds Phone
False
Actor Holds Mug
False
Table 4.5: Fluent Values for Goal State G1
Both nodes are goal states, and both are achieved by changing the value of just one fluent.
Although the nodes have these factors in common, the state of the world is different after
the actions, and therefore the states must be represented by different nodes.
Edge as an Action
As seen in the diagram 4.4, edges connect states. A new state can be reached if the
actor completes an action. However, actions repeat several times in the graph. The
same action can lead to different states. It is dependent on what Pepper observes. For
example, Pepper may observe that the actor has picked up the mug. There are at two
variations of this observation:
40
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:46==
• This is the actor’s initial action.
• This is a complex action, meaning it is preceded by another action or actions.
This determination is made based on the parents and children of the edge. In order for
Pepper to follow the correct path to the potential goal, the nodes connected by an edge
must be considered. The edges that are attached to a node also limit what actions are
possible. For example, Pepper cannot observe an action ”Pick Up” if an edge Pick Up is
not a child of the current state. This also limits regressive traversal of the graph. In other
words, it is impossible for Pepper to observe an action ”Pick Up”, and then observe ”Pick
Up” immediately, without observing a different precedent action. If an actor has picked
up the mug, then it is naturally impossible to pick up the mug again without first placing it
on a table.
Thus, although an edge is labeled as an action, it is actually composed of five parts:
parent/parents, child/children, the action it represents, transition probability and the ”ac­
tive” boolean. As previously discussed, states are only possible based on the conditions
of the previous state. An edge can only exist in a case that one state of the world can
possibly result from a previous state of the world. The active boolean is utilized in the
graph pruning technique, which is described in detail later on. The pruning and transi­
tion_probability are each used for calculating MDP policies. The implementation must
also reflect this concept, as shown below:
R
+Hbb 1/;2,
k
/27 nnBMBinnUb2H7- T`2MinMQ/2 - +?BH/nMQ/2 - +iBQM- i`MbBiBQMnT`Q##BHBiv
V,
j
b2H7XT`2MinMQ/2 4 T`2MinMQ/2
9
b2H7X+?BH/nMQ/2 4 +?BH/nMQ/2
8
b2H7X+iBQM 4 +iBQM
e
b2H7Xi`MbBiBQMnT`Q##BHBiv 4 i`MbBiBQMnT`Q##BHBiv
d
b2H7X+iBp2 4 h`m2
4.4.2
Markov Decision Process and Value Iteration
As is described in section 2.3.2, an MDP is a discrete step, state­based decision process.
In this case, the states are the nodes of the corresponding states in the plan graph and
the possible actions from each state are the child edges of the node of that state.
There are a few different algorithms that can be used to solve an MDP. Following the AN­
TIPA method’s example (section 2.3.2), the value iteration algorithm was implemented.
The algorithm is implemented in a separate module which takes the current state and the
plan library as an input.
For the PRoP implementation, the Bellman equation was used for computing the util­
ities. The equation is:
U(s) = R(s) + γ max
a∈A(s)
!
s′
P(s′|s, a)U(s′)
The maximum function is a non­linear function and as such, it can’t be solved using alge­
braic methods. For this reason, in order to solve the equation an iterative approach needs
to be followed. The algorithm that was implemented can be seen in figure 1 as taken from
”Artificial Intelligence A Modern Approach – Third Edition” [14, p. 653].
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
41
==PAGE:47==
Algorithm 1 The Value Iteration algorithm. Based on an image from ”Artificial Intelligence
A Modern Approach – Third Edition”
function V ALUE_ITERATION(mdp, ϵ)
inputs: mdp, an MDP with states S, actions A(s),
transition model P(s′|s, a), rewards R(s), discount
γ, the maximum error allowed in the utility of any state ϵ
local variables: U, U ′, vectors of utilities for states in S, initially zero
δ, the maximum change in the utility of any state in an iteration
repeat
U ←U ′
δ ←0
for state s in S do
U ′[s] ←R(s) + γ max
a∈A(s)
"
s′ P(s′|s, a)U[s′]
if |U ′[s] −U[s]| > δ then
δ ←|U ′[s] −U[s]|
end if
end for
until δ < ϵ(1 −γ)/γ
return U
▷returns a utility function
end function
The iterations continue until the algorithm converges. This happens when the condition
for the loop that can be seen in the algorithm in figure 1 is satisfied [14].
Policies
Every time the MDP algorithm is called in PRoP, a default initial policy is assigned to each
node. When the convergence happens, for each node the edge with the highest value
given from the equation is picked. That edge is set as the node’s policy. The algorithm
is called at the beginning of the Observation module, in order to initialize the policies and
is called again after every unsuccessful attempt to guess the actor’s goal, in order to
reassess the policies. It has to be noted that the intermediate goals (the goals that are
not leaf nodes) have not been taken into account for the policies. The node chosen to
be a potential goal is always the leaf on the path created by the policies from the current
node. This was done to be able to test and demonstrate PRoP’s prediction capabilities –
the domain is small and paths are short.
Initial values
A classification system was used in order to assign rewards to the nodes. The nodes
were split into four classes:
• Optimal goals: These are considered the preferred goals. This class includes the
goals where all the items are placed on one table. In the PRoP domain this could
be explained with a student who prefers to place all of their items on their own table.
These goals receive the highest reward, which is set to 10.
• Lowest­graded goals: The nodes where each item is placed on a different table
receive the lowest reward out of all the goals. Looking again at the scenario for the
PRoP domain, the student is rewarded for moving some of their items to their table
but receives a penalty for also moving some of their items to another student’s table.
The reward given for these goals is set to 3.
42
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:48==
• Lower­graded goals: This class includes the intermediate goals, which are re­
warded less than the optimal goals but not as low as the lowest­graded ones. The
reason for this in the scenario with the students and the tables is that students are
rewarded for moving their items to their table but they also receive a penalty for not
removing all of the items from the common table. However, putting their items on
another student’s table is considered the most reprehensible. A reward of 5 is given
for these goals.
• Regular nodes: These nodes receive a default reward of 1, which is the lowest
reward given.
On the other hand, the transition probabilities that needed to be assigned to the edges
were all assigned to 0.5, which means that they didn’t play any actual role, since all of the
edges had equal probability to be selected. Moreover, an initial utility of 0 and an empty
policy were assigned to each node.
The above numbers would be adjusted depending on the scenario.
4.4.3
Plan and Goal Detection
As described, a plan is a series of actions. In this case, the actions are linear and se­
quential. A goal can be achieved when a set of actions has been completed sequentially.
Actions performed by an actor are interpreted by Pepper as observations. Pepper must
predict a plan and a goal based on observations. Pepper’s MDP value iteration determines
a goal and develops a policy based on the current observation. The policy represents a
plan that will satisfy a the goal. Pepper’s hypothesis is the goal that results from the
policy.
The possible goal hypothesis is output by Pepper after every observation. An obser­
vation signifies a change in the world, and therefore the plan might change. Plans are
constructed as a path that is consistent with the plan library. The recognition algorithm
matches a current observation to a state that is represented as a node in the graph.
The MDP value iteration algorithm receives the current state and the plan library as input,
and it outputs the policy for a single plan. Pepper will announce a hypothesis, which is the
goal that the policy achieves, to the actor. The hypothesis selected by the value iteration
algorithm may not be the goal that the actor is attempting to complete. This is where the
actor and Pepper have a chance to collaborate. If the actor rejects Pepper’s hypothesis,
then that hypothesis will be pruned and no longer considered as a possible goal.
For example, perhaps the actor has completed the action Pick Up Mug. The cognition
system will return a policy of actions that satisfies a goal such as:
• Place mug on table B
• Pick up phone
• Place phone on table B
The result of this policy is the goal Mug and Phone on Table B. Referring back to graph
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
43
==PAGE:49==
Algorithm 2 The PRoP algorithm
function observe_actions()
tree ←create_tree()
initialize_MDP_policies()
prev_observations ←robot.observe()
while True do
observations ←robot.observe()
executed_action ←check_action(prev_observations, observations)
if executed_action in tree then
update_cur_node_and_cur_state
policy_plan ←get_policy_from_current_node()
if policy_plan is not None then
ask_if_policy_is_executed_plan
if plan_found then
return final_goal(), final_plan()
end if
else
plan_recognition_failed
end if
prev_observations ←observations
end if
end while
end function
3.4, this is goal G7. Pepper will then ask the actor:
”I think your goal is mug and phone on table B. Is that correct?”
Pepper will wait for an answer from the actor. There are three possibilities of what can
happen next. The actor may answer ”YES”, the actor may answer ”NO”, or the actor may
provide an answer that Pepper cannot understand. If the actor answers yes, then Pepper
will describe the plan to reach the goal.
”The plan to reach your goal is: place table B, pick up phone, place table B.”
This is the termination of the plan recognition process. A goal is a terminal state, such that
the actor is not expected to continue to try to achieve additional goals or parallel goals. If
the actor wishes to complete another goal, the recognition system must begin again from
the initial state.
Alternatively, the actor may have a different goal. The goal can be, for example, that
the actor would like to have both objects on table C. In this case, the actor will answer
”NO”. Pepper will respond to this rejection:
”Okay.”
Internally, the plan graph will be pruned so that the goal G7 is not longer possible. Pepper
will not consider that the end goal is to place both items on table B as a possible goal.
The third possible case is that Pepper does not understand the input from the actor. This
may be because the actor said ”YES” or ”NO” but Pepper’s speech recognition failed to
interpret it, or it could be that the actor said something else entirely. In this case, Pepper
44
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:50==
responds:
”I didn’t understand you. Please repeat.”
The actor will have another opportunity to answer either ”YES” or ”NO”. This process
will recur until the actor gives a valid answer, so that Pepper can move on with the plan
recognition process.
Figure 4.5: Flow chart of communication between Pepper and actor
4.4.4
Graph Pruning
As described in previous section, when Pepper detects a possible goal, it asks the actor
for confirmation whether it is a correct hypothesis. If the actor’s response is ”NO”, then
that goal will no longer be considered. To remove that goal from Pepper’s consideration,
the edges attached to that goal node are pruned. The methodology for pruning the graph
is influenced by ”A Fast Goal Recognition Technique Based on Interaction Estimates”.
In that method, edges that definitely will be used are labeled 1, edges that are definitely
not going to be used are labeled ­1, and edges with an unknown level of importance are
labeled 0.
Rather than use three labels, only two are used. All edges are considered active by
default. If a goal must be pruned, then all of the edges which are directly connected with
that goal are labeled inactive. The MDP value iteration only evaluates the elements of
the graph in which the edges are active. In this way, the goal will never be computed and
a policy and hypothesis cannot be considered for that goal after it has been pruned.
In figure 4.6, an example of a pruning instance is visualized. In this scenario, the ac­
tor has just picked up the phone. No other changes to the environment have occurred.
Pepper has offered the hypothesis: ”Mug on table B, phone on table B”. The actor has
rejected the hypothesis, and therefore the edges which are directly connected to the goal
state G7 are pruned. The pruning is signified by a dashed line. The current state is
highlighted. Pepper has just made the observation ”pick up phone”.
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
45
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.6: The graph is pruned after the actor rejects Pepper’s first hypothesis
46
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:52==
5
Testing and Review
5.1
Testing Cycle
The testing cycle was conducted in a series of phases, but each phase is also preceded
with testing in a virtual environment. Given that Pepper only adds complexity to the overall
functionality, it was required that each development phase passed testing in the virtual
environment before beginning testing on Pepper. Each testing phase served to prove the
validation of the implementation. If the method was validated after the testing sessions,
then the next phase of development may ensue. In the final testing phase, Enhanced
Cognition, tests were conducted as experiments to develop a small data set in order to
report results. The diagram provided in figure 5.1 shows the cycle of testing for validation
purposes.
Figure 5.1: Testing Cycle
5.1.1
Initial Phase
Testing was conducted in a bottom­up structure, such that the basic functionality would be
tested before implementing more complex components of PRoP. Therefore, Pepper was
first tested on its recognition of AprilTags. AprilTags were essential to the object recogni­
tion aspect of the project, and it quickly became clear that there were certain boundaries
and bottlenecks present. For example, Pepper had limited depth perception. Although
Pepper could read the value of the tags at various distances, other relevant data would
be lost.
For example, the distance and the angle variables, which represent the position of the
tag relative to Pepper, may be lost. Additionally, Pepper may notice only some of the
AprilTags in its vision, or lose an AprilTag when it is in motion.
Below is the output of Pepper’s AprilTags detection function. The ’id’ is the identifier
of an AprilTag, the angle is the position of the object relative to Pepper, and the distance
is the measurement from Pepper to the object. A change in angle means that an object
is moving left or right. A positive angle value indicates a movement to the right, and a
negative angle value indicates a movement to the left. A greater distance value means
the object is farther away from Pepper. In this example, one of the distance values has
returned nan. This may happen repeatedly during the goal detection process. The angle
value is more robust, and is almost always returned if the ’id’ is also located. For this
reason, the angle measurement was used to track the objects and surfaces positions.
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
47
==PAGE:53==
R
(&^B/^, R-
k
^M;H2 ^, @yXRjkkN-
j
^/BbiM+2 ^, yXdyyj'-
9
8
&^B/^, ed- ^M;H2 ^, yXjjyk-
e
^/BbiM+2 ^, MM'-
d
3
&^B/^, N3- ^M;H2 ^, @yXjkej-
N
^/BbiM+2 ^, yXky98d')
In an attempt to improve the reliability of the distance variable and include it as a rela­
tive measure, a function was tested which operated by searching for and tracking specific
AprilTags rather than outputting AprilTags indiscriminately. With this function, Pepper
would focus on the object that is being manipulated. The aim of this functionality was to
ensure that Pepper is observing relevant data and ignoring noisy data. This was imple­
mented such that, when an object had an action performed on it, Pepper would begin to
track that object. This function works by passing a target AprilTag for Pepper to locate.
Pepper does not rely only on the current camera feed when it is searching for a target
tag. Pepper will move its head to obtain different views of the room in order to locate the
target id.
R
/27 Q#b2`p2Ub2H7- +K2`4y- i`;2ini;nB/4@RV,
k
]]]
j
a+Mb 7Q` T`BHh;b mbBM; i?2 bT2+B7B2/ +K2` M/ `2TQ`ib i?2B`
9
/BbiM+2 M/ `2HiBp2 M;H2X
8
]]]
e
Q#b2`p2n+K/ 4 &
d
^ivT2^, ^Q#b2`p2 ^-
3
^+K2` ^, +K2` -
N
^i`;2i ^, i`;2ini;nB/ -
Ry
'
RR
b2H7Xnb2M/n+QKKM/UQ#b2`p2n+K/V
Rk
Q#b2`piBQM 4 b2H7XnrBin7Q`n`2bTQMb2nivT2U]Q#b2`piBQM]V
Rj
`2im`M Q#b2`piBQM(]HM/K`Fb])
This operation proved to be a bottleneck as Pepper could take more than thirty seconds to
locate the tag it was searching for. The tests were then conducted within the parameters
that Pepper’s camera was most reliable, and rather than depend on depth, the tests would
be exclusively lateral. The function default is that the AprilTag target id is ­1. This returns
all the AprilTags that Pepper perceives, and proved to be faster and more robust than
searching for a specific tag.
5.1.2
Progress Analysis
After surveying the consistency of recognition for AprilTags, Pepper was tested on its abil­
ity to recognize a goal given all of the information clearly. In this phase, most of the virtual
implementation was done. That is to say, most of the preconditions and fluents were de­
termined, the size of the world was finite, and the basic graph structure was implemented.
At this phase, all observations were modeled as AprilTags to enhance Pepper’s ability to
register events. Objects were represented by AprilTags, as were the actions that were
performed. The actor would show the object, then the action, then the object. This phase
was used to determine if there were bugs or other issues in the initial implementation of
48
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:54==
the code. This testing phase enabled the group to find potential issues in the code without
having the added complexity of Pepper failing to recognize an action or object.
5.1.3
Beta Test Phase
This is considered the Beta testing phase because at this point, Pepper should recog­
nize and deduce a plan as a baseline. In the first functioning implementation of plan­
recognition on Pepper, AprilTags were only used on objects, and actions were perceived
when an actor moved an object. This test focused on how naturally an actor could conduct
a movement while Pepper could still recognize and react to it. Pepper should alert the
actor that a potential goal has been detected, and ideally this should happen in real­time.
Pepper had a more limited domain during this testing phase, so fewer goal states were
possible. This was done in order to make the debugging process more efficient. With
fewer goals available, there was less testing required to validate the path to each goal.
One of the tests is shown in figure 5.2. As is seen in the figure, this test is conducted
in a limited domain in which there are only two tables rather than three, and the complex
goals at this phase could only be to have the objects on the same table. The focus of
this testing phase was to determine how Pepper would handle movements and translate
perceptions into observations. In figure 5.2, the actor is holding the object and is not
near either surface. Pepper should perceive this action to be pick up and interpret the
observation as Pick up phone.
Figure 5.2: Beta Testing PRoP
5.1.4
Enhanced Cognition Testing
The final phase tested the implementation of PRoP in its entirety. Pepper should deci­
pher plan probabilities as quickly as possible. In the beta test phase, Pepper assumed
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
49
==PAGE:55==
that every action is equally possible. However, this should not be assumed among hu­
man actors. Therefore, Pepper was extended to assess that some actions, and therefore
some goals, are more likely than others. To enhance this aspect of Pepper’s recognition
ability, Markov decision processes (MDPs) were used to evaluate optimal policies. Pep­
per would compute a policy after each action and the policy is a plan to reach a specific
goal. The goal that the policy satisfies is called the hypothesis. Pepper releases a hy­
pothesis after the first action, and if the actor rejects Pepper’s hypothesis, then Pepper
must adjust and find a new optimal policy. This is done by pruning the plan graph so
that the current hypothesis is no longer available. Over several iterations, it was proved
that Pepper reliably provides an optimal policy with every new observation. The process­
ing time is close to real time, as can be seen in the videos which are linked in the appendix.
The bottleneck at this stage of testing arises from the collaboration between Pepper and
the actor. The actor and Pepper must have a small conversation before the next action.
There must be time allotted for Pepper to express the hypothesis, and for the actor to
reply. This interaction is necessary, because it limits how many actions the actor must
complete. In some cases, Pepper will detect the goal after the first action.
The preceding phases present a functional plan recognizer over an explicit domain model
which seeks to deduce a human actor’s goal based on the preceding actions. The do­
main model up to this point contains limited actions and goals. One benefit of this domain
model is that testing results are more quickly revealed if the goal can be achieved with 3­4
actions. Even with this limited model, an iteration of one experiment would take some­
where from 0.5­1.0 minutes. The variation in time comes from the way the actor moves
the object, and if Pepper fails to observe an action in good time.
Pepper’s domain was expanded to include more possible states. This broadened the
range of actions that a human actor can choose, and tested the plan recognition sys­
tem’s ability to be extended and scaled. For example, an increase in scale requires the
domain representation to be larger and include more possible goals. Likewise, Pepper’s
cognition system has more possible states to evaluate. Finally, there are more possi­
ble observations. The system is dependent on Pepper never missing an observation. If
more observations are possible, then the possibility of failing to observe one action also
increases. This test phase was necessary to evaluate the robustness of Pepper’s obser­
vation functionality.
A goal state is shown in figure 5.3 in which the mug is on table C and the phone is on table
B. This is an extension of the previous domain. A goal state can be to have both objects
on different tables. Additionally, there is a table A, which serves as the initial state. This is
a picture from one of the experiments conducted to evaluate the performance of PRoP. A
link to watch the full video of the experiment is available in the appendix. With reference
to figure 3.4 this is goal G5.
5.2
Complications
The major complication involved with testing was Pepper’s ability to recognize all of the
objects and surfaces consistently. Even in a very controlled environment, it may occur
that Pepper fails to recognize an object or surface. This was handled in the implementa­
tion by adding newly observed objects to the previous observations, making it as though
Pepper had observed it from the start. However, a problem occurs if Pepper never suc­
ceeds in recognizing all of the AprilTags. This also slows down the entire system, and
50
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.3: Experiment on G5: Mug on C and Phone on B
can cause the entire experiment to fail as a result.
Another complication is that Pepper’s perception of actions is dependent on a lateral axis.
If a subject moves an object from one table to another laterally, then Pepper can reliably
notice the action. If a subject lifts an object and holds it just higher than its original location,
then Pepper will not recognize that as a significant change in the object. The reason for
this discrepancy is that the API for the AprilTags recognition can only measure distance
and angles. The distance value represents how far away an object is from Pepper, and
the angle value represents if the object is right or left of Pepper. Thus, the actor’s actions
are strictly confined in order for Pepper to consistently recognize them. Figure 5.4 is a
representation of a 3­dimensional scope. Based on this figure, Pepper’s functionality for
analyzing AprilTags could gather data for the angle and distance axes. The API does not
have support for the height axis at this time.
5.3
Results
The final tests, which can be seen on video by following the link in Appendix A, proved
that Pepper can consistently recognize several possible goals. Although the actor must
move deliberately and at a moderate speed, Pepper reacts in close to real­time. In this
experiment, the actor was prepared to move deliberately such that Pepper could recog­
nize actions. Referring back to Chapter 3, the assumption is made during the design
phase that PRoP will function under intended recognition, in which the actor is aware that
Pepper is observing a plan.
Pepper’s ability to detect the optimal plan becomes more accurate with each action. The
MDP integration detects the policy within two actions in every successful experiment. That
means that at most, the actor has completed 50% of the plan before Pepper has detected
the goal. One reason for this quick detection is that the domain is quite limited. As long as
Pepper is observing every action that occurs, it will predict the plan before the completion
of the plan. A given drawback is that Pepper cannot detect a plan if it has missed an
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
51
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.4: Three­dimensional Room Representation
observation.
Testing for validation purposes occurred at every testing phase of the project. However,
quantitative experiments were only conducted for the final implementation of the plan
recognition system. The experiments were conducted such that every goal would be suc­
cessfully completed more than one time, in order to have a valid data sample.
Table 5.1 displays the overall results of the experiments. This is the aggregated data
from all of the experiments, independent of the actor’s choice for the final goal. The table
can be interpreted as follows:
• Avg. Rejections is the average amount of times that the actor rejected Pepper’s
hypothesis. The rejections were never greater than 2 and at minimum 0. The aver­
age number of rejections was 1, which is also the median of the rejections. Based
on this finding, one can determine that the actor will normally reject Pepper’s hy­
pothesis 1 time when completing a plan. This measurement includes successful
and unsuccessful experiments.
• Avg. Time is the average amount of time it took for Pepper to find the correct
hypothesis and communicate it to the actor. In this case, it became clear that Pep­
per’s speech is the slowest aspect of the plan recognition process. However, the
communication aspect is essential to the purpose of developing a human­robot col­
laborative effort towards goal recognition. The average time was 27.68 seconds.
This only measures successful experiments, because it is unclear when to detect
the precise time that the experiment has failed.
• Repeat Requests is the average amount of times that the actor was requested to
repeat ”YES” or ”NO” to Pepper. In all of the cases for these experiments, the actor
knew that only ”YES” and ”NO” were acceptable answers. All of Pepper’s requests
for the actor to repeat the answer were because Pepper failed to understand the
actor. In other words, it was Pepper’s error on every action, and not the actor’s
error. This occurred in 16.67% of experiments. Pepper only asked the actor to
repeat the answer once for each experiment that it occurred. On the second try,
Pepper was always successful. This data point is inclusive of failed and successful
52
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:58==
experiments.
• Success Rate is the percent of experiments in which the plan and goal were accu­
rately detected and the system functioned to completion. In the failed experiments,
Pepper failed to notice an action when it took place. This disabled Pepper from
creating a hypothesis based on its observations. One reason this failure may have
occurred is that the actor has moved an object in a way that is difficult for Pepper
to recognize. For example, the actor may have failed to move the item significantly
enough that Pepper has detected that the item has been picked up. This was a
recurring issue in all testing phases. Although Pepper has a high success rate in
the final implementation, determining how to define a movement is complex. If a
movement is too minor, Pepper may not detect it. If Pepper fails to detect such a
critical observation, then PRoP will fail to identify the goal. Pepper usually detects all
of the observations, which is proved by the experiments. The success rate overall
was 88.9%.
Rejections
Avg. Time
Overall Repeat Requests
Success Rate
1 per experiment
27.68 seconds
16.67%
88.9%
Table 5.1: Overall Experiment Results
There was some variation in the results for the complex goals. For example, the goal G7
is apparently the most efficient in time. This can be seen in figure 5.5. The goals are
labeled in accordance with the full domain graph, referring back to figure 3.4.
Figure 5.5: Timing results for recognizing goals
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
53
==PAGE:59==
6
Discussion
We have described so far a foundation for a probabilistic plan recognition integration for
Pepper which is implemented and tested. However, this stage of development opens
the door to opportunities. Here we discuss our reasoning behind certain design choices,
and features we considered adding as an extension of the project. Some of the possible
variations of the project that we considered were ultimately rejected, whereas others are
recommended as valuable additions to PRoP overall. We provide some background rea­
soning in regards to these decisions. Some of the variations may be carried out in future
work.
6.1
Different Implementation Aspects
6.1.1
Collaboration via Assistance from Pepper
Pepper has the functionality to be interactive with humans, as SoftBank Robotics intended
[33]. Pepper’s current functionality allows it to recognize several possible goals, and com­
municate with the actor. In the future Pepper, should actively contribute to fulfilling the
goal. For example, if the goal is to have all of the objects on the table, then Pepper
should begin to also move the objects. Possibilities for different scenarios are endless
and depend on how extended the domain would be. The limitation of this extension is
that Pepper can only grip certain objects reliably. Pepper may push the objects more
easily, but if there is a gap between the tables, this feature would become useless.
Pepper was designed for human interaction, and as a result, Pepper is not very strong or
precise compared to robots which are designed with the purpose of completing a physical
task. So, most physical assistance from Pepper is not necessary. Pepper’s design makes
it intentionally adept in communication, which is why PRoP has focused on Pepper’s func­
tionality to observe and communicate. Pepper can communicate in a variety of languages,
recognize faces, and display interactive screens on its android tablet [33]. Given that this
is the intention of Pepper’s design, physical contribution from Pepper was not prioritized.
However, a later development stage of the PRoP could find a use case in which Pepper’s
physical contribution to the goal is efficient and adds value to the completion of the goal.
6.1.2
Hardware Upgrades
Pepper’s on­board hardware was satisfactory for the testing thus far. In future work, Pep­
per should identify objects at a greater distance, breadth, and height. This may be done
by using a more advanced camera for Pepper’s perception system. In PRoP’s current
stage, Pepper’s frontal camera was sufficient because the complexity of possible actions
was intentionally limited. As the domain expands, more actions should become available
for Pepper to observe. Therefore, Pepper will require the hardware that allows for more
advanced perception.
6.1.3
Multi­Agent Plan Recognition
Pepper’s ability for goal­recognition is limited to a single actor. The complications of an ad­
ditional actor may interfere with Pepper’s perception, and the potential for multiple goals.
In other words, two actors may have two different goals. In this case, the actors must
always be differentiated through Pepper’s perception model. Although Pepper has robust
facial recognition and skeletal tracking, multiple agents may still cause errors in percep­
tion. For example, two agents may walk past each other, making one agent invisible.
That type of case can inhibit Pepper’s goal recognition abilities.
54
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:60==
6.1.4
Multi­Robot Collaboration
The Technical University of Denmark is in possession of two Pepper robots. If the robots
were to collaborate on plan recognition, then there is potential for a sea of new actions
and observations. For example, the robots may observe opposite sides of the room, and
communicate a change in events to one another. It would be interesting to see that actions
that occur outside of one robot’s perspective may have an influence over its cognition for
goal recognition.
For example, perhaps two actors exist on opposite sides of the room. One actor, called
actor1, picks up a ball, which is observed by Pepper1. The information is transferred to
Pepper2, and Pepper2 predicts that the goal is for actor2 to hold the ball. This extension
has great potential for future work given the current domain and resources. The current
integration can be implemented on any Pepper robot, meaning that both robots can hold
the same plan library. One integration of multi­robot collaboration might be that the robots
inform each other of new observations using speech recognition. This extension is quite
viable, but is ultimately not recommended for future work. Future work is reserved for
more technical advances in the recognition technique that may use variations of plan­
ners. Extending the domain to another robot would not optimize the overall recognition
technique.
6.1.5
Transition to Implicit Domain Model
The explicit domain model was selected based on simplicity and domain size. The domain
was not complicated and consisted of only a few possible goals and plans, meaning it was
not an overwhelming task to develop an explicit model for PRoP. However, an implicit
domain is more easily extended. This could be a great benefit for future work of Pepper’s
goal recognition functionality.
6.1.6
Objects and actions recognition
At this stage in development, Pepper is recognizing objects using AprilTags which have
been attached to the available objects. The only actions that Pepper can perceive is
picking up and putting down objects. In the future, more actions and objects should be
recognizable. This would improve the system overall by adding variance to the possible
goals. Object recognition can be done by using libraries offering object recognition from
video, however this is a less robust method than AprilTags. AprilTags are easily recogniz­
able, and part of the reason for this is that there is a white outline surrounding the tag [36].
The robot can decipher this image quickly. Objects can look quite different at different
angles, especially for the robot. For example, picture a laptop and a book laying flat on
the table. These would both look like a dark rectangular surface to the robot, and even
advanced libraries may fail to differentiate the two.
Furthermore, object recognition using a machine learning library would require extensive
training to evaluate the objects, or objects would need to be selected based on what the
library has already trained on. Given these drawbacks, object recognition using machine
learning was not possible in this version of PRoP, but could be a focus of a future version.
6.2
General Extendability and Scalability
Scalability is an important measure of the performance of any research project, since it
will signify the usefulness in real­life scenarios. Given that the functionality of the algo­
rithm is the core aspect to display, the amount of used data during the testing phase often
remains limited.
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
55
==PAGE:61==
There are a few aspects which could potentially be extended in our implementation:
• Tags: The extendability of the domain depends heavily on the number of available
AprilTags. In the family of tags that is recognizable for Pepper there is a total of 2114
tags so that would be the maximum total number of objects and surfaces that could
theoretically be used (the word ”theoretically” is used here because there are other
factors at play apart from this).
• Domain: This would require extending a few different objects in the code:
– Graph
– World state fluents
– Surfaces
– Tags
PRoP stores world fluents, surfaces and Tags, in object types that are easily ex­
tendable (dictionaries, arrays and enums). Furthermore, they are all collected in a
separate module so they can easily be changed. On the other hand, by experiment­
ing with adding different states to the graph, it has become apparent that extending
it would not be as easy. With the current implementation, each node is created with
a unique name and the nodes are hard to visualize in their positions in the graph,
which quickly becomes cumbersome and inefficient.
• Available actions: The way the actions are recognized and treated is handled in the
Detection module. The code is tailor­made to fit the currently used actions (pickup
and place). Therefore, adding new actions would require adding customized code
for them. However, the used actions are simple enough that all other actions could
be decomposed into them. The majority of composite actions that involve the use
of objects involve picking them up or placing them. With the addition of only a small
number of basic actions (e.g. press) it would be possible to describe any complex
ones, so there is limited need to add more actions. It would of course be harder
to describe actions that apart from interactions with an object require complex hu­
man gesture and facial recognition (e.g. recognizing the act of sleeping does not
only require recognizing lying down on a bed) but this comes down to the robot’s
perception limitations, which are not covered here.
In conclusion, the extendability and scalability of the PRoP implementation is moderate.
A few aspects have been handled efficiently but the graph would need to be partially re­
designed in order for it to be more scalable. For the small domain of PRoP, the explicit
approach was convenient. Giving unique, friendly names to the nodes helps developers
differentiate between states, but it is obvious that this design cannot be maintained for
domains of greater scale.
The scaling issues of the PRoP arise from the general lack of scalability of symbolic
approaches, with sub­symbolic ones being easier to scale and more suitable for large
datasets and knowledge graphs [10].
6.3
Limitations
There are a few limitations to the PRoP implementation that are either imposed by the
limitations of the equipment or from the limited scope and time of the project.
56
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:62==
Although the Pepper robot is adept at perceiving space and activity, its perception still
do not match that of a human. As a result, it has to be accepted that Pepper cannot rec­
ognize regular everyday actions and plans being carried out. Instead, movements may
be slower than they would normally be and the placement of the actor and the objects in
Pepper’s field of view may seem forced and not realistic, sometimes actions may need to
be repeated and there has to be no other object in the way blocking Pepper’s view (even
a small part of it). Furthermore, Pepper’s perception is quite primitive at its present state
and instead of it recognizing objects by their shape, color and other features, an AprilTag
is attached to every object. Furthermore, the AprilTags that are used must be encoded
into PRoP to have meaning. For example, the AprilTag of value 1 is representative of the
mug object, and this must be given in the underlying PRoP code.
In general, due to the limited time of the project, many features are not available, for
example an actor carrying out two plans in parallel with interleaved actions or the robot
utilizing its acquired knowledge and assisting the actor with reaching their goal.
6.3.1
Domain Representation
Due to the limited perception system offered by Pepper, the designed domain is very sim­
ple and has been adjusted to what the robot can observe – AprilTags and basic move­
ments of objects. There is an increased need for human supervision and maintenance in
an explicit domain. In this use­case, an explicit domain was suitable because PRoP cov­
ered a limited and strict scope. However, there are benefits to an implicit representation
that may suit PRoP as well. Namely, the implicit domain is more extendable. Given that
this project should be continued in further work by other developers, an implicit domain
can make the transition of project ownership more straightforward.
6.3.2
Single Agent
For simplicity, this version of the recognition implementation on Pepper only considers
one agent. Adding another agent would create additional complexity, namely that the
agents must be represented independently. That scenario may become an issue when
the two actors are standing in front of each other, such that only one is seen by Pepper.
This may be considered an edge case, and one could make the assumption that agents
do not walk past each other to complete the plan. In such an environment, Pepper can be
extended to include multi agents in its plan recognition function without significant changes
to the current integration. Pepper has functional support for facial recognition and skeletal
tracking. Both of these features enable differentiation between actors. For this reason, a
multi agent extension is included in the Further Work chapter. For environment simplicity,
this implementation only considers a single agent.
Figure 6.1: Edge Case: Pepper’s camera can only see one actor if the actor right in front
of it obscures the second actor
6.3.3
Single Final Plan
This implementation assumes that there is only one goal which the actor would like to
achieve. This limits the actor to only completing one goal without parallel goals or goals
that may follow the first goal. Pepper will compute optimal policies and a hypothesis until
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
57
==PAGE:63==
the actor communicates that the goal has been detected. After this point, Pepper will
describe the plan and terminate the plan recognition process. This is a limiting feature,
as an actor may want to accomplish several goals with the assistance of Pepper.
6.4
Recommendations for Further Work
Based on the different implementation aspects and limitations, we have evaluated recom­
mendations for further work which are the most practical and add the most overall value
to the progression of the plan recognition integration with Pepper.
6.4.1
Domain Independence
PRoP is implemented with a high level of domain dependence. In other words, changing
the environment and components of the domain would be nontrivial. Ideally, the PRoP
system should run over a variety of domains and use the domain as an input. PRoP is
tailored to the environment it was developed under. Shifting PRoP to be domain indepen­
dent would allow it to be more easily extended to new environments.
An example of the domain dependence of PRoP is that the AprilTags are encoded with
the objects and surfaces that were present in the environment. For Pepper to recognize
tags as objects, the object that the tag represents must be encoded and handled manu­
ally. One way to transition towards domain independence would be for PRoP to receive
the map of the representations of each tag as input.
Another example is that Pepper only recognizes actions based on a few events, such as
a change in an object’s position. Other problem cases would likely require more events
to signify a greater variety of actions.
6.4.2
Efficiency Optimization
Pepper’s response time is quite efficient, but as the domain is extended, there is a normal
increase in the processing time. PRoP receives a plan library as input, and PRoP matches
the current state to a node in the library. If the library is made of hundreds or thousands
of nodes, the process to search and match the nodes becomes computationally heavier.
One way to handle this would be to utilize an algorithm such as A­star, rather than BFS.
For the current domain size, BFS was sufficient. However, a heavier domain can be more
efficiently traversed.
6.4.3
Further integration of tested systems
The issues mentioned earlier with various aspects of the implementation could be ad­
dressed by utilizing previous work that has already been tested and evaluated. The PRoP
system could be either expanded to more precisely fit the implementation of one of the
proposed methods in section 2.3 or utilize some of its proposed ideas. One example of
ideas that could be used would be to modify the MDP according to the ANTIPA implemen­
tation to output stochastic policies. Those could be used either in a similar way that they
are used in ANTIPA by expanding the PRoP implementation to fit the ANTIPA proposed
system or they could be used in the current implementation by using a non­deterministic
function to pick an action according to their stochastic policies. That would make PRoP
more flexible and able to explore different possibilities. Futhermore, implementing the
ANTIPA algorithm on the Pepper robot would work towards Pepper becoming a useful
robot that can understand users’ intentions and proactively assist them.
Another option that has been mentioned earlier would be to convert the domain repre­
sentation to an implicit one. Either by implementing the domain proposed in the ”Plan
58
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:64==
Recognition as Planning” and enlisting the help of a planner or using the ANTIPA imple­
mentation of a dynamically built tree would work towards that goal.
6.4.4
Implementing a More Robust Probabilistic Approach
As mentioned in section 4.4.2, the transition probabilities that are used by the MDP are
assigned to 0.5. In order to increase the algorithm’s efficiency, different probabilities would
have to be assigned for different actions. A strategy that would be fitting would be for them
to be computed so that
!
e∈E(s)
P(e) = 1
where E(s) is the set of children edges of node s. In that case, if for example a node has
two children edges, one of them could have a transition probability of 0.8 and the other
one 0.2 assigned to them, while for nodes with just one child edge the edge would always
have a probability of 1 assigned to it.
Furthermore, as mentioned in section 6.4.3, a stochastic MDP policy would increase Pep­
per’s ability to reason and would make it more suitable for real­life scenarios.
6.5
Summary
After the evaluation of several possibilities for extensions of PRoP and potential further
work, it is our recommendation to develop an independent domain and optimize PRoP
such that it can handle complex domains. This was chosen because creating domain
independence would increase the scope of possibilities for future work. Domain indepen­
dence would give future developers more freedom to extend PRoP with valuable features
and design improvements. In other words, an independent domain would allow the other
implementation aspects mentioned previously to be more easily integrated into the PRoP
system.
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
59
==PAGE:65==
7
Conclusion
The Plan Recognition on Pepper implementation presents a Pepper robot as an observer
of a human actor. Plan and goal recognition is defined as a focus area in artificial intelli­
gence, and a summary of the theories and previous works that influenced the design and
development of PRoP is provided. PRoP receives an explicit domain as a plan library,
and observes the actor and the current state of the environment. In the problem case, a
student is moving items between desks. The installation of PRoP provided Pepper with
the functionality to recognize actions and develop a hypothesis using an MDP value iter­
ation and graph pruning. Pepper communicates with the actor to deduce the actor’s goal.
If Pepper’s hypothesis is confirmed by the actor, then Pepper will announce the policy
for the plan to satisfy the goal. The assumptions are that there is only one actor and the
actor has only one goal. This was assumed for the PRoP implementation to reduce over­
all complexity. Discussions regarding further work have yielded recommendations that
would add the most value to the future development of PRoP.
The most logical and valuable further work of PRoP would be to create domain inde­
pendence. Domain independence would allow future developers to have more freedom
in future work with PRoP. However, new domains may be larger and more complex. If
domain independence is achieved, then it coincides that the efficiency of PRoP must also
be improved in order to handle larger and complex domains.
The PRoP system successfully fulfills the project purpose: Pepper correctly uses ob­
servations to accurately predict a plan and goal, and cooperates with the human actor
in a user­friendly way. The PRoP approach compiles different techniques from the field
of plan and goal recognition. The chosen strategy for PRoP delivers satisfying results
and leaves opportunities for future work, both in areas of plan and goal detection and
human­robot collaboration.
60
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[1]
John McCarthy et al. A Proposal for the Dartmouth Summer Research Project on
Artificial Intelligence. 1995.
[2]
Justinas Miseikis et al. Lio ­ A Personal Robot Assistant for Human­Robot Interac­
tion and Care Applications. 2020.
[3]
F. Cuzzolin et al. Knowing me, knowing you: theory of mind in AI. 2020.
[4]
C.F.Schmidt, N.S.Sridharan, and J.L.Goodson. The plan recognition problem: An in­
tersection of psychology and artificial intelligence. 1978. url: ?iiTb,ffrrrXb+B2M+2/B`2+iX
+QKfb+B2M+2f`iB+H2fTBBfyyy9jdykd3NyyRkd.
[5]
Reuth Mirsky, Sarah Keren, and Christopher Geib. Introduction to Symbolic Plan
and Goal Recognition. 2021.
[6]
Henry A. Kautz and James F. Allen. Generalized Plan Recognition. 1986. url: ?iiTb,
f f rrr X b2KMiB+b+?QH` X Q`; f TT2` f :2M2`HBx2/ @ SHM @ _2+Q;MBiBQM @ Emix @ HH2M f
/+dRj7yd3d7N7/27dyR/ejeR8+/9/eRRe8e.
[7]
Gita Sukthankar et al. Plan, Activity, and Intent Recognition ­ Theory and Practice.
2014.
[8]
Eugene Charniak and Robert P. Goldman. A Bayesian model of plan recognition.
1993. url: ?iiTb,ffrrrXb+B2M+2/B`2+iX+QKfb+B2M+2f`iB+H2f#bfTBBfyyy9jdykNjNyyeyP\
7#+HB/4Ar_jBp_t1ewoyiN#D?LNsK+kAoBZh@N?DKSkeyFBSFv9ZZD_hJG29u[+*oJ9.
[9]
Jerry R.Hobbs et al. Interpretation as abduction. 1993. url: ?iiTb,ffrrrXb+B2M+2/B`2+iX
+QK f b+B2M+2 f `iB+H2 f #b f TBB f yyy9jdykNjNyyR89 \ 7#+HB/ 4 Ar_RrP_hN.+y3wvx n
JDTeTE3a+qsdKn3jthru?d3Cn8x2Q:q_RuRMs*r88r.
[10]
Eleni Ilkou and Maria Koutraki. Symbolic Vs Sub­symbolic AI Methods ­ Friends or
Enemies. 2020. url: ?iiTb,ffrrrX`2b2`+?;i2XM2ifTm#HB+iBQMfj98k9jdk8navK#QHB+n
obnam#@bvK#QHB+nAnJ2i?Q/bn6`B2M/bnQ`n1M2KB2b.
[11]
Hector Geffner and Blai Bonet. A Concise Introduction to Models and Methods for
Automated Planning. 2013.
[12]
Miquel Ramirez and Hector Geffner. Plan recognition as planning. 2009.
[13]
Jean Oh, Felipe Meneguzzi, and Katia Sycara. Probabilistic Plan Recognition for In­
telligent Information Agents ­ Towards Proactive Software Assistant Agents. 2011.
url: ?iiTb , f f rrr X `2b2`+?;i2 X M2i f Tm#HB+iBQM f kkR8jNde9 n S`Q##BHBbiB+ n SHM n
_2+Q;MBiBQMn7Q`nAMi2HHB;2MinAM7Q`KiBQMn;2Mibn@nhQr`/bnS`Q+iBp2naQ7ir`2n
bbBbiMin;2Mib.
[14]
Stuart J. Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence A Modern Approach ­ Third
Edition. 2021.
[15]
Yolanda E­Martin, Maria D. R­Moreno, and David E. Smith. A Fast Goal Recognition
Technique Based on Interaction Estimates. 2015. url: ?iiTb,ffMi`bXMbX;QpfTBf
+BiiBQMbfkyReyyy8yjef/QrMHQ/bfkyReyyy8yjeXT/7.
[16]
Miquel Ramirez and Hector Geffner. Probabilistic Plan Recognition Using Off­the­
Shelf Classical Planners. 2010. url: ?iiTb , f f rrr X `2b2`+?;i2 X M2i f Tm#HB+iBQM f
kkReyjNR9nS`Q##BHBbiB+nSHMn_2+Q;MBiBQMnlbBM;nP77@i?2@a?2H7n*HbbB+HnSHMM2`b.
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
61
==PAGE:67==
[17]
Dorit Avrahami­Zilberbrand and Gal A. Kaminka. Fast and Complete Symbolic Plan
Recognition. 2005. url: ?iiTb,ffrrrXBD+BXQ`;fS`Q+22/BM;bfy8fST2`bfRke3XT/7.
[18]
Miquel Ramirez and Hector Geffner. Goal Recognition over POMDPs: Inferring the
Intention of a POMDP Agent. 2011. url: ?iiTb,ffrrrX`2b2`+?;i2XM2ifTm#HB+iBQMf
kky3Rj9dd n :QH n `2+Q;MBiBQM n Qp2` n SPJ.Sb n AM72``BM; n i?2 n BMi2MiBQM n Q7 n  n
SPJ.Sn;2Mi.
[19]
Franz A. Van­Horenbeke and Angelika Peer. Activity, Plan, and Goal Recognition:
A Review. 2021. url: ?iiTb,ffrrrXM+#BXMHKXMB?X;QpfTK+f`iB+H2bfSJ*3R9Rdjyf.
[20]
Fariba Sadri. Logic­Based Approaches to Intention Recognition. 2011. url: ?iiTb,
ffrrrX`2b2`+?;i2XM2ifTm#HB+iBQMfkk3NR8yR9nGQ;B+@ "b2/nTT`Q+?2bniQn
AMi2MiBQMn_2+Q;MBiBQM.
[21]
Sandra Carberry. Techniques for Plan Recognition. 2001. url: ?iiTb,ffHBMFXbT`BM;2`X
+QKf`iB+H2fRyXRykjf,RyRRRR3Nk8Nj3.
[22]
Michalis Vrigkas, Christophoros Nikou, and Ioannis A. Kakadiaris. A Review of Hu­
man Activity Recognition Methods. 2015. url: ?iiTb,ffrrrX7`QMiB2`bBMXQ`;f`iB+H2bf
RyXjj3Nf7`Q#iXkyR8Xyyyk3f7mHH.
[23]
Marcelo G. Armentano and Analía Amandi. Plan recognition for interface agents :
State of the art. 2007. url: ?iiTb,ffrrrX`2b2`+?;i2XM2ifTm#HB+iBQMfkkyejd3kRn
SHMn`2+Q;MBiBQMn7Q`nBMi2`7+2n;2Mibnaaii2nQ7ni?2n`i.
[24]
Hankz Hankui Zhuo. Human­Aware Plan Recognition. 2017. url: ?iiTb,ffQDbXBX
Q`;fBM/2tXT?TfAf`iB+H2fpB2rfRRykN.
[25]
Guy Camilleri. A Generic Formal Plan Recognition Theory. url: ?iiTb,ffrrrXB`BiX7`f
Tm#HBbf*a*fAaLGaSS1_NNXT/7.
[26]
SoftBank Robotics Documentation. NAOqi API & SDKs 2.5. 2021. url: ?iiT,ff/Q+X
H/2#`MX+QKfk@8fM2rbfkX8fMQ[BnTBn`MkX8X?iKH.
[27]
Python Software Foundation. socket ­ Low Level Networking Interface. 2022. url:
?iiTb,ff/Q+bXTvi?QMXQ`;fjfHB#``vfbQ+F2iX?iKH.
[28]
Sadayuki Furuhashi. MessagePack. 2021. url: ?iiTb,ffKb;T+FXQ`;f.
[29]
Python Software Foundation. io ­ Core Tools for Working with Streams. 2022. url:
?iiTb,ff/Q+bXTvi?QMXQ`;fjfHB#``vfBQX?iKH.
[30]
Python Software Foundation. Speech Recognition PyPI. 2021. url: ?iiTb,ffTvTBXQ`;f
T`QD2+ifaT22+?_2+Q;MBiBQMf.
[31]
University College London. Information Services Division. 2022. url: ?iiTb,ffrrrX
m+HX+XmFfBb/fr?i@bb?@M/@?Qr@/Q@B@mb2@Bi.
[32]
SSH.com. SSH Protocol – Secure Remote Login and File Transfer. 2021. url: ?iiTb,
ffrrrXbb?X+QKf+/2Kvfbb?fT`QiQ+QH.
[33]
SoftBank Robotics. The Power of Robootics to Benefit Humanity. 2021. url: ?iiTb,
ffrrrXbQ7i#MF`Q#QiB+bX+QKf.
[34]
SoftBank Robotics. Pepper Android (QiSDK). 2021. url: ?iiTb,ff/2p2HQT2`XbQ7i#MF`Q#QiB+bX
+QKfT2TT2`@[Bb/F.
[35]
SoftBank Robotics. Pepper. 2021. url: ?iiTb,ffrrrXbQ7i#MF`Q#QiB+bX+QKf2K2f2Mf
T2TT2`.
[36]
AprilTag Robotics Laboratory. AprilTag. 2010. url: ?iiTb,ffT`BHX22+bXmKB+?X2/mf
bQ7ir`2fT`BHi;.
62
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
==PAGE:68==
A
Pepper Demonstration Videos
A.1
Goal 5
https://youtu.be/5xA215U1SQQ
A.2
Goal 6
https://youtu.be/5Vt8JlMV7OA
A.3
Goal 7
https://youtu.be/8trCalKD464
A.4
Goal 8
https://youtu.be/n2LzSXFmh6k
Human­Robot Collaboration via Planning and Plan Recognition
63
==PAGE:69==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
?iiTb,ffrrrX+QKTmi2X/imX/Ff
