==PAGE:1==
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of
Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
Anna Katharina Granberg Mortensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Visual Computing, De­
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
Anna Katharina Granberg Mortensen ­ s202737
Signature
Date
ii
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
21/1 - 2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The goal of this thesis is to produce a piece of software for semi­automatic segmentation
of tubular objects in volumetric data, doing the segmentation in orthogonal cross­sections
of the tube rather than the original data. Besides the usual surface representation of the
segmented object, it is also the goal to obtain a volumetric representation of the object
where each slice is an orthogonal cross­section of the object.
The idea is that doing semi­automatic segmentation in slices of the data aligned with the
object, is a simple improvement over doing manual segmentation in slices aligned with
the axes of the data.
The first part of the thesis includes, the relevant theory on visualization of 3D data, extrac­
tion of close to orthogonal cross­sections, segmentation using deformable models, and
options for measuring the quality of such segmentations.
Then the software is presented, first using screenshots to describe the user experience,
then using pseudocode, to describe the technical implementation.
Finally, the final product is discussed, along with suggestions on how the software could
be further developed.
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
5
2.1
Visualizing 3D Image Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Cross­section of Volumetric Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Getting Plane Coordinates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Interpolation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Image Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Deformable Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
Evaluation of Segmentations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Product
15
3.1
User Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.1.1
Initial Window . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.1.2
Cross­section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.1.3
Automatic Segmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.1.4
Surface Plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Technical Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2.1
General Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2.2
Design Choices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2.3
Computing Cross­sections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.2.4
Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.2.5
Automatic Evaluation of Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.2.6
Marking Branches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.2.7
Saving Output
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4
Discussion and Conclusion
37
4.1
Discussion of Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5
Bibliography
41
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Still today segmentation of 3D image data is often done manually, in particular the annota­
tion of ground­truth labels for deep learning segmentation is done manually. [1, p.434­435]
Thus a person, often an expert with domain knowledge, goes through the data one slice
at a time drawing a segmentation mask or segmentation boundary. Several tools can be
used to support this task such as napari and ITK­SNAP. One of the advantages of man­
ual segmentation is the potential for very precise segmentation. However, there are also
several disadvantages associated with this. The first is the time consumption, which in it
self can pose a problem, but it might also cause the person annotating the data to fatigue,
and thus not produce optimal segmentations anyway. Another, is the risk of inter­ and
intraobserver variability, meaning that two users might produce different segmentation, or
that if one person is asked to segment the same object twice, they might not produce the
same result. The last drawback which will be mentioned here is the risk of stairs in the
resulting segmentation. This happens when the user places the segmentation boundary
significantly different in two consecutive slices, causing the resulting 3D segmentation to
have a clear step in the surface rather than a smooth change.
On the other end of the spectrum, automatic segmentation is found. Here no user input is
necessary to produce the segmentation. Automatic segmentation can over all be divided
in to two categories, supervised and unsupervised methods. The supervised methods
often use deep learning, for example with the U­net architecture, though other classifi­
cation methods can also be used. The clear drawback with these methods is the need
for annotated data to train the model. Thus the quality of the segmentation is not only
dependent on the model but also the quality of the segmentations in the provided training
data. Further more, such models will often only work on data very similar to the data it
was trained on, making it less flexible. The clear advantage is the speed of segmenta­
tion once the model is trained, which is greatly improved compared to when a user is
involved. As for unsupervised methods, often based on clustering, speed is again one
of the main advantages when compared to manual segmentation. [2, p. 10­11] Another
advantage is the consistency and reproducibility of these results, since they only rely on
the dataset. One disadvantage, however, is that there are no golden standard for which
method to use, thus, it might require more trial and error to find a method that produces
good results. The catch for automatic segmentation methods is, that it might still be time
consuming to validate the segmentations afterwards.
Semi­automatic segmentation is a term that applies to any segmentation method which is
somewhere between manual and automatic segmentation. In some cases, manual user
interaction is still a substantial part of the segmentation, for example if an algorithm is used
to provide an initial segmentation which the user then needs to manually correct. The
user could also play a smaller part in the process, for example if they only need to provide
an initial input, from which an algorithm then produces a segmentation. Generally, such
segmentations should be less prone to variability than manual segmentations, since some
of the process is controlled by an algorithm. However, variability will not be eliminated,
since the results will still depend on the user interaction.
Problem Statement
The fastest and most used method for segmenting large quantities of volumetric data, is
via deep learning. But getting the necessary annotated ground truth labels of, can be time
consuming and difficult, when done manually slice by slice. Based on this observation, it
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
1
==PAGE:10==
is proposed that doing the segmentation in slices which are better aligned with the object,
might improve the results. Furthermore, it is proposed to use theory on image analysis to
automate parts of the segmentation, to speed up the process.
Thus, the aim of this thesis is to produce a piece of software for semi­automatic segmen­
tation of tubular objects in volumetric data, using orthogonal cross­sections of the tubes
to assist the segmentation. These segmentations should be of a quality such that the
software could be used to annotate training data for deep learning pipelines.
A secondary goal for the software is to extract the cross­sections used in the segmentation
to produce a new representation of the segmented object. For this thesis the purpose
of this new representation is primarily visualization of the segmentation, from the view
‘inside’ the object. However, a collection of orthogonal cross­sections could also be used
in quantification tasks, such as measuring the diameter of blood vessels.
Before the software itself is presented, the relevant theory which the software is based
on, is introduced. This includes theory on visualization of 3D data, extraction of the or­
thogonal cross­sections, the chosen segmentation method, and ways to verify individual
segmentations automatically.
Then the software is presented. First from the viewpoint of a user, describing the flow of
the software building on screenshots. And then presented from the technical side. This
includes the practical decisions made while developing the code, and some considera­
tions that did not end up in the final product. This presentation is supported by listings
with simplified code extracts.
Finally, in the discussion and conclusion, the final product is discussed, along with sug­
gestions on how the software could be further developed.
Related Work
There are several tools available to do semi­automatic segmentation of general objects
in volumetric data.
One example is Biomedisa which is short for biomedical image segmentation app. In this
app the user is asked to manually segment some slices of the image, all perpendicular
to the same axis, for the algorithm to use as reference. The app then produces a 3D
segmentation based on weighted random walks started in the pre­segmented slices.
Another example is the active contour tool in ITK­SNAP. Here the user is asked to mark a
region of interest and place one or more initial spheres in the data based on three slices
of the data, one perpendicular to each axis. The user also has the option to adjust the
speed image used to produce the segmentation, as well as evolution parameters. Then
the spheres are deformed to fit the object, and it is up to the user to stop the process when
they are satisfied.
A method specifically for segmentation of tubular objects in volumetric data, was proposed
by Fahmi et al. in 2008 in the conference paper ’Robust segmentation of tubular structures
in medical images’. [3] Here the user is meant to select a start point and one (or more)
end point on a tubular structure, where the segmentation should happen between. Then
a minimal path technique is used to extract a path between the end points, followed by a
new image being generated only containing voxels a certain radius away from the path.
Then in this reduced image, a level set is initialized as several spheres centered along
the path, and finally the level set is deformed to fit the tube.
What sets the method proposed in this thesis apart, is the idea of doing the segmentation
in two dimensional cross­sections of the 3 dimensional data, and the idea of producing
2
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:11==
these cross­sections, not just to facilitate the segmentation, but also to be part of the
result.
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
3
==PAGE:12==
4
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:13==
2
Theory
The theory presented here is the theory that has been the foundation for the software
produced for this thesis. First the focus is on visualization of 3D data, more specifically
on visualization of 3D images in a 2D image plane.Then, theory related to getting a cross­
section of the data that is not aligned with any of the three standard axes of the data is
presented, this is divided in to two parts, first getting the coordinates of the desired cross­
section through the data, and then using interpolation to get a meaningful 2D image to
display. Lastly theory related to segmenting an object in the cross­section is presented.
Here the focus is on one specific deformable model, which is the method chosen for
the segmentation in the software, however, some variations to this are also discussed.
Then different strategies for evaluating a given segmentation is presented. These are
used in the software to let the segmentation happen automatic, as long as the calculated
segmentations are of a of a certain quality, in regards to the presented measures.
2.1
Visualizing 3D Image Data
In the software, the 3D image provided by the user, in which the segmentation is to take
place, needs to be displayed to the user in a meaningful manner.
Visualizing a three dimensional dataset in a two dimensional image plane such as a com­
puter screen poses a challenge. There are several methods for reducing the dimen­
sionality of such an image for visualization, but the aim of the visualization and the prior
knowledge of the data might make some methods more useful than others.
A simple way to reduce the dimensionality of a 3D image is to use cutting to extract a slice
of the volume. [4, p. 406­408] Such a slice is defined as the voxels having one of the three
coordinates x, y or z all equal. Except in very specific use cases visualizing only one such
slice is not a useful representation of the 3D image. There are different ways to improve
on such a visualization, still only using slices of the volume. One option is to visualize
one slice perpendicular to each axis, either side by side, or together in one plot such that
the slices intersect. Another option is to make multiple slices in the same direction, but at
different depths. These can then be visualized on top of each other, using opacity, to give
depth to the visualization. Alternatively they can be visualized one at a time, using time
as the third dimension.
Another method for reducing the dimensionality, is to do a projection of the data from
one view direction onto a 2D image plane. [4, p. 409­414] This is generally known as
volume rendering. The idea is to send view rays through the data, parallel to the view
direction. Then a ray function is used to map each ray of intensities to one pixel value in
the 2D image plane. Depending on the choice of the ray function, different insights from
the volume can be visualized.
The view direction can be chosen by the user to be any direction which might fit the
desired visualization. Here, q0 and q1 denotes the two points where the ray first intersects
the volume, and where it exits the volume, respectively. The position of the ray points can
thus be parameterized by:
q(t) =

1 −t
T

q0 + t
T q1,
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
5
==PAGE:14==
with t ∈[0, T] and T = ∥q1 −q0∥. Any voxel intensity in the ray can then be described as
s(q(t)), or simply s(t).
The other thing the user should decide is the size an resolution of the image area I,
showing the resulting projection. For each pixel in I, a ray is sent through the data, and
the intensity or color of each pixel is then calculated as:
I(p) = F(s, T),
s : [0, T] →R.
One of the simplest ray functions is the maximum intensity projection. Here each pixel
in the 2D projection image just takes the maximum intensity value recorded along the
corresponding ray:
I(p) = F(s, T) = max
t∈[0,T] s(t).
Really any summary statistics can be used on the intensity values recorded along the the
rays. This could for example be the mean, the n’th quantile, or the range of the values.
If a certain voxel intensity σ is known to be of interest this can be used in more advanced
ray functions. Alternatively an intensity range Σ = [σ0, σ1] can also be used.
One such ray function is the isosurface function, which creates a binary image with two
colors σ and I0, where I0 is a background color:
I(p) =
(
σ,
∃t ∈[0, T], s(t) = σ
I0,
otherwise
.
The resulting image will be quite flat, and might be difficult to interpret if it is not rendered
with some kind of shading. Thus, in some cases the distance to value function might give
a better result:
I(p) =
min
t∈[0,T], s(t)=σ t.
Here the resulting image will not reflect the actual voxel intensities of the data, but rather
the minimal depth to the chosen voxel intensity in the view direction.
Within this framework of volume rendering, one could go even further by using different
transfer functions. Transfer functions are used to map the voxel intensities to desired
colors and opacities, working together with the ray function. One example on how using
a transfer function together with a ray function to produce a more complex visualization
could be this extension of the distance to value ray function where two voxel intensities
are the focus at the same time:
I(p) = f1

min
t∈[0,T], s(t)=σ1
t

+ f2

min
t∈[0,T], s(t)=σ2
t

,
where f1 and f2 are two transfer functions mapping t ∈[0, T] to two different color maps
with some opacities.
Another option could be to use a transfer function on the voxel intensities before applying
the ray function, for example to enhance the contrast of the image, or add an opacity value
to each voxel which can be used by the ray function.
6
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:15==
Though more information about the original image can be represented in this kind of pro­
jection, compared to a single slice, one image might still not be enough. Thus, a multi
view visualization with the same ray function but different view directions might be used
to enhance the visualization. Another option can be to use the same view direction but
change ray function, to produce images with different insights.
2.2
Cross­section of Volumetric Data
In the software the user is asked to provide one point in the volume, where they want
to extract a cross­section.Then they are asked to provide a second point, such that the
vector between the two points, is orthogonal to the desired cross­section. Thus, the goal
of this section is to present the theory on how to get a cross­section of a volume based
on a point p which is in the plane of the desired cross­section, and a vector ⃗n which is
normal to the desired cross­section.
2.2.1
Getting Plane Coordinates
Given p and ⃗n as described above, the calculations related to getting the plane coordinates
of such a cross­section is now presented.
Let C be a 3 × n × m matrix with the coordinates of a rectangle of size n × m parallel with
the x and y axes and with center in (0, 0, 0):
C1ij = i −n/2 −0.5
for i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , m
C2ij = j −m/2 −0.5
for i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , m
C3ij = 0
for i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , m.
Then the goal is to find a rotation matrix which can be used to rotate C such that the
normal direction of C is ⃗n. [5, p 124­125] Here the first step is to find an orthonormal
basis where ⃗µ =
⃗n
|⃗n| is one of the basis vectors. To find a vector ⃗v which in orthogonal
to ⃗µ the Gram­Schmidt process is used. [6] Given a vector ⃗w where ⃗µ and ⃗w are linearly
independent ⃗v can be found as
⃗v = ⃗w −Proj⃗µ ⃗w
= ⃗w −⃗w • ⃗µ
|⃗µ|2 ⃗µ,
where • is the dot product.
Then ⃗v also needs to be normalized to get the second bases vector ⃗ν = ⃗v
|⃗v|.
Finding the last basis vector can be done just by taking the cross product of the two first
basis vectors:
⃗u = ⃗µ × ⃗ν.
Then this basis can be used to make a rotation matrix:
R =


νx
ux
µx
νy
uy
µy
νz
uz
µz

,
which can be used to rotate C:
C′
kij =
3
X
l=1
RklClij.
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
7
==PAGE:16==
The resulting matrix C′ is an 3×n×m matrix, where the vector C′
:ij contains the coordinate
in the volume that corresponds to the point (i, j) in the rectangle C. The last thing to do is
to translate the coordinates of C′ such that p lies on the cross­section, more specifically
at the center of C. This is done by adding the p to to each vector C′
:ij, since the center of
the rectangle both before and after rotation is located at (0, 0, 0), thus:
C′′
kij =
3
X
l=1
RklClij + pk.
The challenge now is that the coordinates of the cross­section might not be integer, thus
if the volume is discrete, interpolation is needed to populate the cross­section with mean­
ingful values.
2.2.2
Interpolation
One interpolation method which is often used in image analysis, is linear interpolation.
[5, p. 44] In one dimension linear interpolation is working on a sequence of x­values
x1, x2, . . . , xn which each have an associated y­value yi for i = 1, . . . , n. With linear
interpolation the goal is to create a continuous function f(x) = y, which goes through
the n points (xi, yi) connecting them by straight lines. This is achieved by the following
function, letting xi ≤x ≤xi+1:
f(x) = yi +
x −xi
xi+1 −xi
(yi+1 −yi).
In three dimensions the method is known as trilinear interpolation. [7] Here the goal is
the same, the only change is that the function f(x, y, z) = ι goes through points in 3D
assigning.To help ease the understanding of the method it is broken up in to three parts,
one for each dimension. This means that it is just multiple steps of linear interpolation.
However, there also exist other formulations limiting the process to one just one or two
steps.
Thus, first four points are interpolated based on the x­value, again with xi ≤x ≤xi+1,
and now also yi ≤y ≤yi+1 and zi ≤z ≤zi+1:
f(x, yi, zi) = f(xi, yi, zi) +
x −xi
xi+1 −xi
 f(xi+1, yi, zi) −f(xi, yi, zi)

f(x, yi+1, zi) = f(xi, yi+1, zi) +
x −xi
xi+1 −xi
 f(xi+1, yi+1, zi) −f(xi, yi+1, zi)

f(x, yi, zi+1) = f(xi, yi, zi+1) +
x −xi
xi+1 −xi
 f(xi+1, yi, zi+1) −f(xi, yi, zi+1)

f(x, yi+1, zi+1) = f(xi, yi+1, zi+1) +
x −xi
xi+1 −xi
 f(xi+1, yi+1, zi+1) −f(xi, yi+1, zi+1)

.
Then using these four points and the y­value, two new points are found:
f(x, y, zi) = f(x, yi, zi) +
y −yi
yi+1 −yi
 f(x, yi+1, zi) −f(x, yi, zi)

f(x, y, zi+1) = f(x, yi, zi+1) +
y −yi
yi+1 −yi
 f(x, yi+1, zi+1) −f(x, yi, zi+1)

.
And finally these two points and the z­value are used to find the final value of f(x, y, z) = ι:
f(x, y, z) = f(x, y, zi) +
z −zi
zi+1 −zi
 f(x, y, zi+1) −f(x, y, zi)

.
8
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:17==
Thus, following up on the coordinates found in the previous section, the calculations
needed to get the intensities of the 2D cross­section would be to calculate f(C′′
kij) for
all k = 1, 2, 3, i = 1, . . . , n and j = 1, . . . , m, given the discrete 3D points of the volume
and the corresponding intensity values.
2.3
Image Segmentation
One of the main features of the software is the capability to segment objects in the ex­
tracted cross­sections. Thus this section first focuses on one selected method for image
segmentation known as deformable modes. Since there exist several different variations,
one in particular is described. Making the segmentation in the software semi­automatic is
achieved in part by evaluating each segmentation automatically. Therefore, the second
focus of this section is different measures which can be used to evaluate an obtained
segmentation, both looking at the intensities of the image and at prior knowledge of the
geometry of the object.
2.3.1
Deformable Models
Deformable models is a framework which among other things can be used for image
segmentation. Here the focus is on segmentation in 2D which is sometimes referred to
as deformable contours. As in several other segmentation methods deformable models
are based on two contributions, one term from the image and one term based on a priori
knowledge about the segmentation. [8]
The way deformable models work, is that a curve in the image is moved based on the
two terms, the internal forces that are defined within the curve, and the external forced
which are calculated from the image. These forces are based on segmentation energies.
The idea is that the desired segmentation should be found as the curve that, minimizes
the weighted sum of these two energies. The specific choice of energies is therefore
depend on the image, the representation of the curve, and on prior knowledge about
segmentation.
Curve Representation
Deformable models used for image segmentation are often classified as either parametric
or geometric depending on how the curve is represented. [8] In parametric deformable
models, also referred to as snakes, the curve is represented either continuously as C(s) =
(x(s), y(s)) where s ∈[0; 1] is an arch length parameter or discretely as C(l) = (xl, yl)
where l = 1, . . . , n is ordered and n is the number of points used in the representation.
Geometric represented deformable models are calculated from level sets of higher order
scalar functions. [9, p. 146] Though these two methods of representation are different,
they represent the same underlying mathematical model.
Using the parametric representation has the advantage of a compact representation, mak­
ing it easy to implement. Another difference to consider is the handling of topological
changes. In the geometrical representation the parameterization of the curve only hap­
pens after the deformation, and thus, topological changes are handled automatically,
while parametric represented models does not allow for topological changes. In some
cases this restriction can be an advantage while at other times it can be a problem.
Internal Energy and Force
Focusing on parametric represented curves, one internal energy often used (in continuous
case), is the following which is used to impose smoothness:
Eint = 1
2
Z
α

∂C
∂s

2
+ β

∂2C
∂s2

2
ds,
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
9
==PAGE:18==
where α and β are weights, controlling the influence of the first and second order deriva­
tives respectively. [8] Conceptually this energy is based on controlling the elasticity and
rigidity of the curve. Having an appropriate energy to use, the next step is to formulate a
force which will push the curve towards a minimal energy level. Continuing in the contin­
uous case the corresponding force is:
Fint = ∂
∂s

α∂C
∂s

+ ∂2
∂s2

β ∂2C
∂s2

.
As for the discrete case, the derivatives can be approximated using finite differences. In
that case the result corresponds to filtering the curve with filters for the first and second
order derivatives: [1, −2, 1], [−1, 4, −6, 4, −1], still weighted by α and β.
External Energy and Force
Continuing on to the choice of external energy, the decision should be based on knowl­
edge about the image. One thing to consider is the kind of feature in the image that
defines the object. Typically changes in the image intensities is the most significant fea­
ture, however, other features such as orientation or curvature can be relevant in some
cases. Another thing to consider is the composition of the image. Some examples of this
are: Is the object solid or hollow, is the background smooth, and are there other objects
in the image.
A commonly used class of energies used are based around edge detection, such that the
energy is minimized when the curve is located at areas of the image with high magnitude
gradients. [9, p. 135] One example of such an energy is the following:
Eext_edge = −
Z 1
0
|∇[Gσ ∗I]|2 ds,
where Gσ is a 2D gaussian kernel with standard deviation σ, used to smooth the image,
and I is the image, considered as a function of continuous pixel positions: I(x(s), y(s)).
Another even simpler class of energies is based around line detection. Here the curve
intensities in a smoothed image are evaluated directly:
Eext_line = ±
Z 1
0
Gσ ∗I ds.
If the goal is to detect dark lines on a bright background the sign in front of the integral
should be positive, while a negative sign is used for detecting bright lines on a dark back­
ground.
The two classes of energies presented above, are focused on gradients of the image
intensities, and can be used with most image compositions, however, they are sensitive to
noise. Other more advanced energies are more robust in this regards. One such class of
external energies are based on the two­phase piece­wise constant Mumford­Shah model
developed by Chan and Vese. [10] This class is not limited to work with image intensities,
other image characteristics can be used. However the version presented here is the
intensity based version, adapted to work with parametric curve representation. [8]
Eext_ChanVese =
Z
Ωin
(I −min)2 dω +
Z
Ωout
(I −mout)2 dω.
Again I is seen as a function of continuous pixel positions I(x(ω), y(ω)), but now Ωin and
Ωout are the parts of the image inside and outside the curve respectively, and min and
mout are the mean image intensities inside and outside of the curve.
10
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:19==
The biggest limitation of this external energy is that it is only suitable for segmentation
objects which are solid, preferably on a background that does not contain too many other
objects that may offset the mean intensity.
Focusing on the Chan­Vese external energy, the corresponding force to be used is:
Fext = (min −mout)(2IC −min −mout)N,
where IC is a vector of length n with the interpolated image intensities of the n curve
points, and N is the outwards unit normal of the curve.
Final Formulation
Now that an internal and an external force has been presented, the next step is to describe
how they are actually used to find a desirable segmentation. Here a dynamic formulation
is discussed. [8] Thus the goal is to make the curve dynamic, and use the forces described
to deform the curve, towards the desirable segmentation.
First a dynamic formulation of the internal force is presented. To get the best result, the
backward Euler scheme is used for the smoothing of the curve. [11] First the regularization
matrix is defined:
Rint = (In−αA−βB)−1,
where In is the identity matrix of size n where n is the number of points in the curve
representation, and A and B are circulant matrices of size n, based on the first and second
order derivative filters respectively. That is:
A =


−2
1
0
· · ·
1
1
−2
1
· · ·
0
0
1
−2
· · ·
0
...
...
...
...
...
1
0
0
· · ·
−2


,
and B is similar just with −6 in the diagonal and 4 and −1 on each side. Then the smoothed
curve is found as Cnew = RintC.
Looking at external force, the first step is to divide it in two parts, letting fext be the first
part:
fext = (min −mout)(2IC −min −mout),
and keeping N separate. Then the new curve under the influence of the external forces
is found as:
Cnew = C + τ diag(fext)N,
where τ is the step size of the deformation.
The deformation of the curve can then be described dynamically, such that the curve at
time t is:
Ct = Rint(Ct−1 + τ diag(fext)Nt−1).
(2.1)
One such time step deforming the curve is also known as an evolution of the curve.
This processes of evolving the curve can either be done a set number of times, or after
each evolution the change of the curve can be calculated and the process stopped when
the change is below some threshold. But even if the evolution is stopped because of
convergence, there are no guarantees that the segmentation will be satisfactory, thus
some evaluation might be necessary afterwards.
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
11
==PAGE:20==
2.3.2
Evaluation of Segmentations
There are several approaches which can be used to evaluate the quality of a segmenta­
tion. The most apparent option is to do a manual visual inspection to see if the segmen­
tation matches the expectation. This should preferably be done by someone with domain
knowledge. Alternatively different measures can automatically be computed to evaluate
the segmentation. This could be focused either on how the segmentation matches the
image, or how the geometry of the segmentation matches prior knowledge about the ob­
ject.
Gradients
Given a segmentation calculated with the method from eq. (2.1), the gradients of the
image were not used in the deformation. Thus the gradients could be used to evaluate
the segmentation, assuming the desired segmentation boundary is located near changes
in the image intensities. One procedure could be to find the gradient magnitudes of the
image and then based on these quantify to which degree the curve points are located on
or near edges.
Two examples of filters which are used for edge detection in images are the Roberts filter
and the Sobel filter:
Robertsx =
1
0
0
−1

Sobelx =


1
0
−1
2
0
−2
1
0
−1

.
The Roberts filter is a simple kernel made to approximate the magnitude of the image
gradients as the sum of squares of the differences between diagonally adjacent pixels.
The Sobel filter is a little more advanced, and can be seen as combining smoothing and
computing the gradient in one calculation, or can be seen as giving more importance to
pixels closer to the center of the mask. In either case the approximation of the gradient
image is found by convolving the image with both the horizontal and vertical version of
the kernel. There also exist other more advanced algorithms such as the Canny edge
detector, which are able to produce better results, but at cost of more computation needed.
Geometry
The focus is then shifted to how prior knowledge of the geometry of the object might help
evaluate the segmentation. It is first noted that the expectation that the segmentation
boundary is somewhat smooth, has already been used in the deformation, thus this will
not be considered here.
One general characteristic of the object which might be known is the approximate size
of the object, either in regards to the area or the width of the object in the image. Thus
segmentations where the size of the object is too small or large might be discarded, or
send to a visual inspection of the user.
Another option could be knowledge about the general shape of the object. One example
of this could be the expectation that the object should be convex. Then the convexity of
the object could be calculated as: convex perimeter
perimeter
. [12, p. 33]
The knowledge of the shape could also be more specific, for example that the object is
quite round. Then the are a whole list of measurements which could be used to test the
roundness of the segmented object. Here five such measurements are presented. These
measures are all adopted form this source [12], and the names are all kept the same.
The fist two measures are circularity:
4∗π∗area
(convex perimeter)2 , and compactness
4∗π∗area
(perimeter)2 . They
both use the circumference of a circle of the same area as the object as the numerator.
12
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:21==
The difference is in the denominator where circularity uses the perimeter of the convex
hull of the object, and compactness just uses the perimeter of the object itself. Thus the
circularity is a measure of the roundness which is more insensitive to local irregularities
at the boundary than compactness. Both measures are equal to 1 for a perfect circle.
The third measure is the ratio between the length of the major axis and the length of the
minor axis, which gives an idea of the elongation of the shape. This is called eccentricity:
len(minor­axis)
len(major­axis). If the ratio is 1, there is no elongation, as would be the case for a perfect
circle.
For the fourth measure more calculations are needed. First the center of mass of the
object is calculated, then the shortest distance from the center of mass to a point on the
perimeter is found as well as the longest distance from the center of mass to a point on the
perimeter. This can also be thought of as the radius of an inscribed and a circumscribed
circle with center at the objects the center of mass. Then the ration between these two
distances is here called sphericity:
Rinscribing
Rcircumscribing . Again, a value of 1 is achieved if the object
is a perfect circle.
The last measure described here is a variation on the circular variance described in [12].
This is calculated as the intersection over union between the object and a circle with the
same area and center of mass as the object circle ∩object
circle ∪object. Once again, a perfect circle will
result in the value 1.
These measures can be used either on their own to accept or reject segmentations or as
a check to decide which segmentations should be verified by a expert. Another option is
to use the measures to instill trust in a given segmentation.
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
13
==PAGE:22==
14
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:23==
3
Product
The focus of this thesis is building a piece of software for semi­automatic segmentation
of tubular objects in volumetric data, using orthogonal cross­sections of the objects. A
secondary objective of the software is to produce a new representation of the segmented
object, using the orthogonal cross­sections.
To achieve this goal, the software should produce a graphical user interface, enabling the
user to easily interact with the data and the segmentation. Thus the work for this thesis has
included designing the appearance of a graphical user interface as well as the possible
user interactions. After designing the interface, it was turned in to code using python,
and the Qt framework. The work also included designing the mathematical algorithms
enabling the semi­automatic segmentation, and implementing these in the software.
In the following sections, the resulting product is first presented from a user perspective,
focusing on the appearance and interactions designed for the interface. Then the product
is presented from a more technical perspective, here the final implementation is described
along with different considerations made during the implementation. However, first the
overall flow of the tool is be described:
The user interacts with the volumetric data, deciding where to make an initial cross­section
of the data, approximately orthogonal to the tubular object. In this cross­section the user
initializes a curve, which is used as the initial curve in the deformable model segmentation
method. Then based on parameters given by the user, the tubular object is segmented
in the cross­section. When the user is satisfied with the first segmentation, the interface
changes to automatic segmentation, where the software automatically finds consecutive
cross­sections orthogonal to the tubular object, and segment the object in them. If a given
segmentation does not satisfy certain threshold values provided by the user, it causes the
automatic segmentation to pause and let the user inspect the segmentation. When a
section of the tubular object has been segmented, the segmentation curves are used to
produced a visualization of the surface of the section. Here the user has the option to
accept the whole segmentation or discard it. Then the surface of all saved segmented
sections are visualized together.
3.1
User Perspective
The user experience of the final product is now be presented, by going through the pro­
gram one view at a time.
The figures in this section are all screenshots made of the interface run on a volume of a
chest CT scan, where the settings were already tuned to the data. The volumes is part
of the OSIC Pulmonary Fibrosis Progression dataset. [13] The data was converted to the
appropriate format before using it with the software. This was done by first clipping the
data based on quantiles to disregard extreme intensity values, then scaling the intensities
to be in the interval [0, 255] and finally changing the datatype to uint8.
3.1.1
Initial Window
To open the program, the user should run the main.py file from the command line passing
the path of the file they want to work on as a command line argument. The file should
be a .npy file with data type np.uint8, and should contain a 3D volumetric image. Then
the user is met with a window with four boxes. The first three boxes labeled “Top view”,
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
15
==PAGE:24==
“Side view” and “Front view”, contain 2D projections of the volume from the three different
perspectives that matches the three axes of the dataset. At this time the fourth box labeled
“Cross­section” is empty. This screen can be seen in fig. 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Initial window.
From fig. 3.1, it can also be seen, how in the status bar in the bottom of the window, there
is a message for the user when the window is first opened: “The GUI is ready | Use H to
toggle the help screen”. Thus the user is invited to press ‘H’ to get help on how to use the
interface. Pressing ‘H’ results in the help overlay shown in fig. 3.2 to be displayed on top
of the window. This overlay explains how the user can interact with the different scenes
in the interface both using mouse and keyboard.
16
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.2: Help screen.
The overlay also mentions the option to open the settings menu by pressing ‘S’. In the
settings menu the user is able to change several options related to the computations
done by the program. These settings are divided in to three tabs: “Projections”, “Snakes”
and “Auto­Segmentation”. In the projections tab, the user has the the option to tune the
projection used for visualizing the three 2D views of the volume. The default projections
are 5­quantile projections to focus the visualization on the darker parts of the volume, but
the user is here able to change the quantile to make the projections easier to read, or
change the focus to the bright parts of the volume. In fig. 3.3 and fig. 3.4 an example can
be seen of how changing the quantile changes the visualization.
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.3: Projection tab in settings,
5­quantile.
Figure 3.4: Projection tab in settings,
95­quantile.
In the snakes tab, the user finds parameters related to the deformable models method
used for segmentation in the cross­sections. These should be tuned to the data by the
user to get the most accurate segmentation. In the projections tab the user can adjust the
measures and thresholds used to assess if a segmentation in a cross­section needs to
be presented to the user for visual inspection, as well as determine the distance between
cross­sections. Screenshots of the snakes tab and the automatic segmentation tab can
be seen in fig. 3.5 and fig. 3.6 respectively.
18
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.5: Snakes tab in settings.
Figure 3.6: Automatic segmentation tab
in settings.
When the user is satisfied with the settings, and has familiarized themselves with the
interface through the help screen, the user can begin the initialization of the first cross­
section. The first thing the user must do is to choose a point in the three projections
representing the approximate center of the cross­section where the first segmentation
will be performed. Depending on how familiar the user is with the data it might take some
exploration to choose a point that matches the expectation. After placement of this center
point the user needs to place another point marking the normal direction that should be
used when finding the cross­section.
After placing the two points, the user can move them by dragging them with the mouse.
Pressing ‘shift’ while dragging one of the points will enable one­direction movement, that
means that it will only be possible to move the point along one axis at a time.To further
ease precise placement of the points, the user can press ‘Z + alt’ to zoom in on the three
projection views. When the user is satisfied with the two points they should press ‘enter’
to generate the cross­section which is then be displayed in the fourth box labeled “Cross­
section”. If the user is not satisfied with the cross­section, they can move the points in the
three first boxes and press ‘enter’ again to generate a new cross­section.
3.1.2
Cross­section
An example of the interface, when the first cross­section has been found, can be seen in
fig. 3.7. In the first three boxes, the user­placed center point and normal direction point
can be seen on the projections, and in the fourth box the corresponding cross­section
can be seen. The position of the center point from the three 2D projections will be at the
center of the cross­section. This is marked by a small yellow cross, to help guide the user.
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.7: Window after generation of the first cross­section.
The next step is for the user to interact with the cross­section to initialize the segmentation.
The user should click once at the approximate center of the tube in the cross­section, to
place a new center point, and then click a second time close to the edge of the tube to
place a circle approximating the edge. Both can then be moved and adjusted afterwards
using the mouse. Again the user has the option to zoom if more precision is needed. To
zoom on the cross­section the user should to press ‘Z’.
When the user is satisfied with the placement they can press ‘X’, which will start the
segmentation process. First the center and the radius of the circle placed by the user,
are used to initialize a curve, then this curve is deformed to match the edge of the cross­
section of the tubular. The resulting deformed curve is then displayed on the cross­section.
An example of this process can be seen in fig. 3.8 and fig. 3.9, where the red point and
circle are placed by the user in the left figure, and the green outline in the right figure is
the deformed curve.
20
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.8: User input used to initialize
segmentation.
Figure 3.9: Computed segmentation
boundary.
If the user is satisfied that the deformed curve matches the edge of the object of interest
in the cross­section, they can press ‘N’ to proceed to the automatic segmentation of the
object. If the user is not satisfied, they can either press ‘X’ again to further deform the
curve, or they can initialize a new curve, using the mouse.
3.1.3
Automatic Segmentation
The next step is the automated computation of cross­sections and segmentation of the
tubular object in the cross­sections. From the users perspective, the only thing that hap­
pens here, is that the two points in the 2D projections, which the user provided, are deleted
and instead a trail of new points are drawn on the three projection views. These points
mark the centers of the segmented objects, and are drawn to allow the user to follow the
process of the automated segmentation. An example of how this looks can be seen in­
fig. 3.10, where the two black and white points from before have been replaced by several
blue points at the top of the image of the front view projection.
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.10: Front view projection with blue dots marking
the centers of the already segmented sections.
For each segmentation curve the following three characteristics are computed to evaluate
if the segmentation is good enough: The area of the interior of the curve, the roundness
of the curve and the magnitudes of the gradients in the cross­section in the curve points.
The three characteristics are then compared to threshold values provided by the user. If
one of these thresholds are violated the automatic segmentation stops, and the cross­
section shown in the fourth box will be replaced by the latest cross­section, with the curve
drawn on it for visual inspection by the user. At this point the status bar will give information
on which condition was violated, for example “Automatic segmentation stopped due to
roundness threshold being violated”.
The user also have the power to pause the automatic segmentation by pressing ‘P’. This
again results in the cross­section being updated to show the latest cross­section, with
the latest curve drawn on it. The status bar also here gives information about why the
segmentation was stopped: “Automatic segmentation paused by user”.
It is then up to the user to inspect the segmentation curve and decide on the best course
of action. Then, depending of the inspection, the user can press ‘N’ to continue the
automatic segmentation of the tubular object without interfering, press ‘X’ to evolve the
22
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:31==
curve again, or use the mouse to initialize a new curve in the cross­section. If the user
finds that the segmentation stopped because the object is branching, the user has the
option to mark this cross­section as containing a branching point by pressing ‘M’. This
will allow the user to segment one branch first, and then return afterwards to segment the
other. The user also has the option to press ‘Q’ to terminate automatic segmentation of
the current object.
3.1.4
Surface Plots
When the automatic segmentation is terminated, a surface plot of the segmented tube
section based on the curves is displayed instead of the cross­section. An example of this
can be seen in fig. 3.11.
Figure 3.11: Window showing the surface plot of the current
segmentation in the fourth box.
The user should then inspect the surface plot and decide if it is satisfactory. To aid this
inspection, the user is able to rotate the surface plot using the mouse. The user can then
press ‘A’ to accept the segmentation or ‘R’ to reject it. Accepting the segmentation will
save it together with any previous segmented tube sections. Rejecting the segmentation,
will just delete it. Finally all the accepted segmentation sections are shown together in
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
23
==PAGE:32==
one surface plot. An example of this, after two rounds of segmentation, can be seen in
fig. 3.12.
Figure 3.12: Window showing the surface plot of two
segmentation sections together in the fourth box.
It can be seen from the two previous figures, how the color of the surfaces in the surface
plots match the colors of the centers in the 2D view to help the user better understand the
results.
Now the user has the option to press ‘M’ to return to a marked branching point cross­
section, if there are any, or use the mouse to again place two points in the three 2D
projections to initialize the segmentation of a new tube section.
When the user is satisfied with the full segmentation made in the volume, they can press
‘O’ to save the work. The cross­sections, the 2D curves and the 3D curves are then all
saved to the computer.
24
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:33==
3.2
Technical Perspective
Now the implementation of the graphical user interface is discussed. First some general
considerations about the code are presented. This is then followed by some of the design
considerations made during the development. Then the technical implementation of the
main features, based on the theory introduced in chapter 2, is presented, followed lastly
by some minor features.
3.2.1
General Considerations
The programming language used to create the product is python. It was chosen since it is
one of the most widely used languages within image analysis, and there exist numerous
packages for python to assist development of image analysis code. In this project Numpy
is used to handle most of the data since it is optimized to handle multidimensional arrays.
Other noteworthy packages used in the code are Scikit­image, SciPy and Matplotlib.
To build the graphical interface the QT framework is used, with the pyQT5 bindings to
connect it to python. QT is a framework for development of cross­platform applications.
The framework is based on an event­driven architecture. Here the user produces events
by interacting with the interface, these events then cause signals to be transmitted to slots
in the code prompting different actions.
3.2.2
Design Choices
The most important design choices and some of the considerations behind them are now
presented. This includes choices on how to visualize the data at each step and the design
of the user interaction at each step. It also includes the general layout of the interface,
and the presentation of any additional information the user might need.
Visualizing the 3D Volume
The first challenge was how to display the 3D volume provided by the user, in such a
way that the user would be able to recognize and understand the data. Furthermore,
this visualization should enable the user to interact with the data and thus decide on the
location and direction of the first cross­section.
Based on the theory in section 2.1 several visualization options were considered. The
first decision made was to use a multi­view approach, visualizing the data three times,
one corresponding to each of the data’s three axes. The option to use slices of the data
for each view, allowing the user to change the depth of the slices, was shortly consid­
ered. However, it was decided against, in favor of using volume rendering, to embed
more information in to each view. The first version of the software the maximum intensity
projection ray function. This worked well for very simple data, but it was decided that it
did not perform adequately on more complex data. Thus other summary statistics were
tested for the ray function. Here the n­quantile function, with a user chosen n, was found
to be satisfactory.
Having decided on the visualization of the volume, the before mentioned user interaction
also needed to be designed. The general goal of this interaction was to enable the user
to choose two three dimensional points in the volume, to use when computing the first
cross­section.
In the first design which was considered, the user would first place one dot in one of the
three 2D projections determining two of the three coordinates of the 3D point. Then a
line would appear in each of the two other views corresponding to the plane through the
projection in which the first dot was placed. Then it was up to the user to place a second
dot in one of the other projections on the line, to determine the last coordinate of the 3D
point. This would then result in the corresponding dot showing up in the third projection.
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
25
==PAGE:34==
However, it was decided to simplify this process, such that the user only needed to click
once in one of the projections to initialize the 3D point. The last coordinate of the 3D point
not determined by where the user clicked, would then be given dummy a value equal to
one of the other coordinates. Then using these three coordinates, a dot would be created
in each of the three projections, and the user would have the option to move the dot in
one of the other projections, to give a meaningful value to the last coordinate of the 3D
point. Thus, in the final implementation the user needs to place two of such collections of
dots, to get the two 3D points needed to generate the first cross­section.
Visualizing Cross­sections
Then next step was visualizing the cross­sections. Considering the cross­sections sepa­
rately, the only noteworthy design choice was the choice to add a small yellow cross at
the center of the first cross­section, matching the location of the first 3D points placed by
the user in the three 2D projections. This was done to help the user identify the correct
tubular object in case there are several tubes in the cross­section.
Then there was the consideration of how many of the cross­sections should be presented
to the user during the segmentation process. In one of first versions of the software
the user had the option to break the automatic segmentation up in to parts of x frames,
such that every x’th cross­section was presented to the user for inspection. This was
changed in later versions, and instead, automatic evaluation of the segmentations was
implemented, meaning that only problematic cross­sections were presented to the user.
In the final version the automatic evaluation is still present, but the user also has the option
to pause the automatic process, to inspect the current cross­section being processed.
Deciding on the user interaction with the cross­sections was straightforward since the
segmentation method needed information on the size and placement of an initial curve.
Thus the interaction was designed such that the users first click on the cross­section
places a point marking the center of the curve, and then with a second click, places a
circle around the center.
Visualizing Connection between Cross­sections and Volume
Having decided on the base visualization of the volume and the cross­section, it was
considered how visual cues could be used to help the user understand the relationship
between these. One idea was to also have a 3D rendering of the volume in which the plane
of the cross­section was highlighted. However, limitations on the speed of rendering a 3D
volume with the tools available, made any such solution infeasible. Instead the focus was
turned to how the three 2D projections could be used. Several options were considered,
but in the end as a compromise between information and simplicity, it was decided to just
show the centers of the segmentation curves on the 2D projections.
Visualizing Segmentation Surfaces
Then it was decided that it would be useful to display the segmented tube segments for a
visual inspection, when the segmentation was completed, as well as a visualization of all
the segmented sections together. The obvious choice of how to visualize this was to use
the segmentation curve points to make a surface plot.
In order to make this visualization, the first consideration was whether the points were
sampled in a grid which could be used for visualizing the surface. It was clear that, in the
direction across the tube, the points were sampled regularly along a grid. Thus, it was
investigated how the gird behaved along the tube. Here it was found, that the rotation
between cross­sections was reasonably small. Based on this it was decided that that the
grid structure already in the data would suffice to base the visualization on. This meant
that the plot_surface function from Matplotlib, could be used to visualize the surfaces.
26
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:35==
Using Matplotlib also had the advantage of enabling the user to rotate the plots in order
to better understand and inspect the segmentations.
Then it was considered how visual cues could help connect these surface plots, to the
visualization of 3D volume. Here it was decided to give each section of the segmentation
its own color, such that the color of centers of one branch, would be the same color used
to color the surface of the branch in the surface plots.
Layout of the Interface
Having decided on all the major parts in the interface, the next step was to put them
together. Here it was decided to keep the three 2D projections at all time and use them
as the reference as mentioned earlier. Then it was decided that the cross­sections and
the surface plots could alternate, such that there are at most four views that needs to be
visualized at all times. Thus dividing the interface in four boxes and keeping a consistent
setup.
Then all the minor features needed to be incorporated into the layout. Here the general
consideration was not to clutter the interface with too many options and too much infor­
mation. Therefor the settings where placed in a separate screen which the user can open
as needed. Furthermore, the settings window itself is divided in to three tabs to give a
better overview of the settings thus continuing the design philosophy. The help overlay
was added to let the user easily look up the shortcuts, as keyboard shortcuts were chosen
over buttons, in order to not clutter the interface. Lastly the status bar in the bottom of
the screen was added to convey important information to the user without being intrusive.
Examples of such information include an initial message, telling the user that the interface
is ready and how to open the help overlay, error messages, and messages on why the
automatic segmentation has stopped.
3.2.3
Computing Cross­sections
The first of the main features of the software is the computation of cross­sections. In
section 2.2 the theory of getting a 2D cross­section of a 3D volume based on a point on
the cross­section and a normal vector to the cross­section was presented. In this section
it is explained how this knowledge was turned in to code.
A simplified version of the implementation can be seen in listing 3.1. This is written as
a function taking three inputs: The volume in which the cross­section should be taken,
the 3D coordinates of the center of the desired cross­section in the volume, and a normal
vector to the cross­section. When finding the first cross­section, the center point and the
normal vector are both based on the input the user has provided by placing the two points
in the 2D projections. For the rest of the cross­sections, the center point and the normal
vector are calculated by a process which is explained later in this section.
The parts of the code match the parts introduced in the theory: Finding rotation matrix
R based on orthonormal basis where the third basis vectors is the normalized normal
vector. Finding the coordinate matrix C′′ by rotating a coordinate matrix C, of a rectangle
orthogonal to the the z­axis, using R. And then populating the cross­section using trilinear
interpolation. Most of the code is really close to the theory, however there are some
choices made in the code which were not dictated by the theory.
Firstly, in the theory, when finding the second orthonormal basis vector ⃗ν, a vector ⃗w
which was linearly independent to ⃗µ, was used as the starting point. However, in the code
a vector w = [1, 0, 0] is used to calculate ⃗ν and then afterwards, it is checked whether
the resulting basis vectors are in fact orthogonal. In this implementation, if the resulting
basis vectors are not orthogonal, the user is prompted to move one of the points and
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
27
==PAGE:36==
try again. An alternative could have been to repeat the code with ⃗w = [0.99, 0, 0]. The
reason for not wanting to change ⃗w, is that this vector influences the angle of rotation of
the resulting cross­section. Here it is desirable with as little rotation as possible between
cross­sections. This is primarily to not disturb the automatic segmentation, but also since
it gives the best visual results.
The second thing to note is the size chosen for the initial rectangle. Here size of the largest
dimension of the volume is used as both the height and width. This is done to ensure that
most of the time the whole cross­section of the volume will be visible on the rectangle.
1
def get_cross_section(volume, center, normal):
2
#Finding rotation matrix
3
eZ = normal/np.linalg.norm(normal)
4
eX = np.array([1, 0, 0])
5
eX -= eX.dot(normal) * normal / np.linalg.norm(normal)**2
6
eX = eX/np.linalg.norm(eX)
7
eY = np.cross(normal, eX)
8
if not np.isclose(eX.dot(eY), 0, atol=1e-6):
9
statusBar().showMessage('Cross-section is not generated , move one
of the points and try again')
10
return None
11
R = array([eX, eY, eZ]).T
12
13
# Finding coordinate matrix
14
n, m = np.max(volume.shape), np.max(volume.shape)
15
Xs = np.arange(0.5-n/2, 0.5+n/2)
16
Ys = np,arange(0.5-m/2, 0.5+m/2)
17
18
C = np.zeros((3, n, m))
19
C[0, :, :] = Xs.reshape(n, 1)
20
C[1, :, :] = Ys.reshape(1, m)
21
22
C_pp = np.einsum('kl,lij->kij', R, C) + center.reshape(3, 1, 1)
23
24
# Interpolation
25
cross_section = scipy.ndimage.map_coordinates(volume , C_pp, order=1, mode=
'constant', cval=1)
26
27
return cross_section
Listing 3.1: Simplified python code for the calculation of cross­sections.
Now that the process of getting one cross­section has been described, the focus is turned
to the process of finding the center points and the normal vectors used in computing the
cross­sections. This description is accompanied by a set of diagrams made to explain the
process in 2D. These can be seen in figures 3.13 to 3.16.
In the code, the first time a cross­section is found, it is done based on the two points given
by the user, let these be i1 and i2 respectively. The first point i1 is used as the center point
of the cross­section, and the normal vector is found as n0 = i2 −i1. (fig. 3.13)
This first cross­section is only used as a base step for finding the second cross­section,
and the curve found in the first cross­section is not saved. The normal vector used to find
the second cross­section is again n0, this time the center point of the new cross­section
is calculated as: p0 = i1 +
n0
∥n0∥∗δ, where δ is the step size parameter determining the
distance between cross­sections. The user can change δ in the settings. (fig. 3.14)
At this point real structure of the process begins to show. To find the new normal vector n1,
the centers of the segmentation curves in the first two cross­sections are used. Thus it is
28
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:37==
assumed, that given a cross­section the segmentation method is able to find the contour
of the tubular object, such that then the center of the object can be approximated as the
mean of the curve points from the segmentation. Letting the centers of the objects in the
first and second cross­sections be c0 and c1 respectively, n1 = c1 −c0. (fig. 3.15)
Then n1 and c1 are used to find the center point of the third cross­section: p1 = c1+ n1
∥n1∥∗δ,
and then the third cross­section can then be found using n1 and p1. (fig. 3.16)
Figure 3.13: Finding the first
cross­section.
Figure 3.14: Finding the second
cross­section.
Figure 3.15: Finding n1.
Figure 3.16: Finding the third
cross­section.
Thus, finding the cross­sections are done in the following way, after the initial irregularity:
• Given a cross­section, segment the tubular object and approximate the center of
the segmented object as ci ≈mean(curve points).
• A new normal vector is found as ni = ci −ci−1 .
• Using ci, ni and the step size δ, the center point of the next cross­section is found
as pi = ci +
ni
∥ni∥∗δ.
• Using pi as the center of the cross­section and ni as the normal vector, find the next
cross­section.
There are some imperfections with this method. The first is the irregularity in the begin­
ning. One alternative which was considered was to change the first iteration such that the
the cross­section created is this step was created behind the first cross­section. Then the
center of the segmented object in this cross­section together with the center of the object
in the first cross­section could be used to find n1, making the new second cross­section
better fit the structure of the method.The problem with this solution, is that it carries the
assumption that the object continues behind the center point provided by the user. If this
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
29
==PAGE:38==
is not the case, the segmentation would fail to produce a meaningful result, causing the
direction of n1 to be arbitrary. In the end it was decided that this imprecision was accepted.
Another thing that was considered was the general difference between the actual orthog­
onal plane through the object and the cross­sections found. Here it was decided that
since the main focus is visualization of the object rather than using the cross­sections for
quantitative analysis of the object, this disparity was acceptable. It was also noted that
decreasing δ can be used to improve the precision. However, should the software be used
for tasks where a even higher level of precision is needed, expanding the process with
these steps would increase the precision, but also be more computationally demanding:
• The cross­section found as described above is viewed as an intermediate cross­
section, and in this an intermediate segmentation is found, with center c′
i+1.
• Then using c′
i+1, a new normal vector is found as: n′
i = c′
i+1 −ci.
• Now the new cross­section is found using c′
i+1 and n′
i.
3.2.4
Segmentation
The second main feature of the software is the segmentation of the the tubular objects
in the cross­sections. The segmentation method implemented in the code is based on
the theory described in section 2.3.1. It is a deformable model with parametric curve
representation and an internal force regulating the elasticity and rigidity of the curve and
an external force based on the energy described by Chan and Vese.
A simplified implementation of the whole segmentation process starting with no initial
curve to be deformed can be seen in listing 3.2. The first input of the function described
in the simplified code, is the cross­section in which the segmentation should be made.
The second and third input are the center and radius which should be for the initial curve,
these are based on input given by the user when they place the point and circle on the
cross­section. The remaining five inputs are all parameters related to segmentation which
the user can provide in the settings menu.
The biggest difference between this code and the presented theory, is the preprocessing
of the cross­section and the coordinates that happen in line 15 to line 36. Here a section of
the the cross­section containing the initial curve is extracted, such that the area, which the
segmentation algorithm should consider is reduced. This is done such that the calculation
of the mean intensity outside the curve is less influenced by other objects being present
in the background.
The other thing not presented in the theory is the method for finding the normal vectors.
However, this is quite straight forward. First the tangents are found by adding the direc­
tions of the in­going curve segment with the direction of the out­going curve segment for
each curve point. Then the tangents are normalized, and then the normal vectors are
found by rotating the tangent vectors 90◦.
1
def get_segmentation(cross_section , curve_center , curve_radius , nr_points ,
alpha, beta, nr_evolutions , step_size)
2
# Initialize curve
3
center_init = curve_center.reshape(2, 1)
4
angles = np.arange(nr_points)*2*np.pi/nr_points
5
angles_array = np.array([np.cos(angles), np.sin(angles)])
6
curve_init = center_init+curve_radius*angles_array
7
8
# Find regularization matrix
30
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:39==
9
d = alpha*np.array([-2, 1, 0, 0]) + beta*np.array([-6, 4, -1, 0])
10
D = np.fromfunction(lambda i, j: np.minimum(
11
(i-j) % N, (j-i) % N), (N, N))
12
AB = d[np.minimum(D, len(d)-1)]
13
R_int = scipy.linalg.inv(np.eye(N)-AB)
14
15
# Reduce the size of the frame that the curve functions work on
16
padding = curve_radius * 2
17
18
idx_00 = max(round(curve_center[0] - curve_radius - padding), 0)
19
idx_01 = min(
20
round(curve_center[0] + curve_radius + padding), cross_section.shape
[0]
21
)
22
idx_10 = max(round(curve_center[1] - curve_radius - padding), 0)
23
idx_11 = min(round(curve_center[1] + curve_radius +
24
padding), cross_section.shape[1])
25
frame = cross_section[idx_00:idx_01, idx_10:idx_11]
26
27
center_in_frame = np.array(
28
[
29
curve_center[0] if idx_00 == 0 else curve_radius + padding ,
30
curve_center[1] if idx_10 == 0 else curve_radius + padding ,
31
]
32
)
33
34
# Getting the curve in the coordinates of the smaller frame
35
curve_init_center = np.mean(curve_init , axis=0)
36
curve_tmp = (np.array(curve_init) - curve_init_center)
37
curve = ((curve_tmp + center_in_frame).T).copy()
38
39
# Deforming the curve
40
for i in range(nr_evolutions):
41
# Find f_ext
42
mask = skimage.draw.polygon2mask(frame.shape, curve.T)
43
m_in = mean(frame[mask])
44
m_out = mean(frame[~mask])
45
46
f = scipy.interpolate.RectBivariateSpline(np.arange(frame.shape[0]),
np.arange(frame.shape[1]), frame)
47
I_C = f(curve[0], curve[1], grid=False)
48
49
f_ext = 0.5*(m_in-m_out)*(2*I_C - (m_in+m_out))
50
51
# Find N
52
ds = np.roll(curve, 1, axis=1) - curve
53
ds_norm = ds/np.linalg.norm(ds)
54
tangent = roll(ds_norm , -1, axis=1) + ds_norm
55
tangent_norm = tangent/np.linalg.norm(tangent)
56
N = tangent_norm[[1, 0], :]*np.array([-1, 1]).reshape(2, 1)
57
58
# Here the deformation happens
59
curve += step_size*f_ext*N
60
curve = np.dot(curve, R_int)
61
return curve
Listing 3.2: Simplified python code for calculating segmentation.
It is only in the first cross­section that user input will be used to initialize a new curve. In
the later cross­sections, the final curve from the previous cross­section will be used as
the initial curve to be deformed.
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
31
==PAGE:40==
In the software developed for this thesis, it is only the above described kind of deformable
model which has been implemented to be used for the segmentation. However, other
options could be implemented in the future, expanding the use cases of the software.
3.2.5
Automatic Evaluation of Segmentation
The third and last main feature of the software, is the automatic evaluation of every seg­
mentation, allowing the software to do semi­automatic segmentation, which is only inter­
rupted when a segmentation is not deemed satisfactory. Thus, in the automatic segmen­
tation, every time a new segmentation is produced, three measures are calculated and
compared to threshold values. These measures are based on the theory described in
section 2.3.2.
The first check it quite straightforward, here the area of the interior of the curve is just
compared to a lower bound and upper bound of the area set by the user in the settings
menu. Simplified python code of this check can be seen in listing 3.3.
1
def check_area(curve_area , Min_curve_area , Max_curve_area):
2
if curve_area < Min_curve_area:
3
area_flag = 1
4
statusBar().showMessage('Automatic segmentation stopped due to area
threshold being violated - snake is too small')
5
elif curve_area > Max_curve_area:
6
area_flag = 1
7
statusBar().showMessage('Automatic segmentation stopped due to area
threshold being violated - snake is too large')
8
else:
9
area_flag = 0
10
return area_flag
Listing 3.3: Simplified python code for size check.
The second check is related to the roundness of the segmentation. Here, the user is able
to choose which roundness measure to use between the five measures presented in the
theory: Circularity, Compactness, Eccentricity, Sphericity and Circular variance. If no one
measure is obvious to use, the user can choose to use the mean of the five measures.
All five measures have a range from 0 to 1, where 1 indicates a perfect circle, thus this
mean can be used as a meaningful alternative. The chosen measure is then computed
and compared to a threshold value also chosen by the user. Simplified python code of
this can be seen in listing 3.3.
1
def check_roundness(curve, Roundness_type , Roundness_threshold):
2
curve = np.append(curve, array([curve[0]]), axis=0)
3
4
min_, max_ = round(curve.min())-5, round(curve.max())+5
5
x, y = np.mgrid[min_:max_, min_:max_]
6
coors = np.hstack((x.reshape(-1, 1), y.reshape(-1, 1)))
7
8
poly_path = matplotlib.path.Path(curve)
9
mask = poly_path.contains_points(coors).reshape(max_-min_, max_-min_)
10
11
# Get measures
12
label_img = skimage.measure.label(mask, connectivity=mask.ndim)
13
props = skimage.measure.regionprops(label_img)
14
15
convex_mask = props[0].convex_image
16
convex_label_img = skimage.measure.label(convex_mask , connectivity=
convex_mask.ndim)
17
convex_props = skimage.measure.regionprops(convex_label_img)
18
32
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:41==
19
norms = np.linalg.norm(curve-min_-props[0].centroid , axis=1)
20
21
temp_mask = mask.copy()*1
22
radius = np.sqrt(props[0].area/np.pi)
23
center = (props[0].centroid)
24
temp_mask[skimage.draw.disk(center, radius)] += 3
25
intersection = (temp_mask == 4).sum()
26
union = (temp_mask > 0).sum()
27
28
Circularity = (4*np.pi*props[0].area)/(convex_props[0].perimeter)**2
29
Compactness = (4*np.pi*props[0].area)/(props[0].perimeter)**2
30
Eccentricity = props[0].minor_axis_length/props[0].major_axis_length
31
Sphericity = norms.min()/norms.max()
32
Circular_variance = intersection/union
33
Mean = np.mean([Circularity , Compactness , Eccentricity ,
34
Sphericity , Sphere_variance])
35
36
if Roundness_type == 'Circularity':
37
roundness = Circularity
38
elif Roundness_type == 'Compactness':
39
roundness = Compactness
40
elif Roundness_type == 'Eccentricity':
41
roundness = Eccentricity
42
elif Roundness_type == 'Sphericity':
43
roundness = Sphericity
44
elif Roundness_type == 'Circular_variance':
45
roundness = Circular_variance
46
elif Roundness_type == 'Mean':
47
roundness = Mean
48
49
if roundness <= Roundness_threshold:
50
roundness_flag = 1
51
statusBar().showMessage('Automatic segmentation stopped due to
roundness threshold being violated')
52
else:
53
roundness_flag = 0
54
return roundness_flag
Listing 3.4: Simplified python code for roundness check.
The third check focuses on the gradients of the cross­section at the curve points. Here the
user has the choice between using a Sobel or Roberts filter for edge detection. However,
other filters could easily be implemented if there were any special demands. Simplified
python code of the gradient check can be seen in listing 3.3.
To lower the computational demand of this part of the software, the first thing that happens
in the code is that the relevant part of the cross­section which contains the segmentation
curve, is cut out with a padding of five pixels. And then it is only this piece of the cross­
section which is filtered with the chosen filter.
For each curve point, the pixel closest to the point and its immediate neighbors (3x3
window) are inspected. For each point the maximal gradient magnitude in the window is
recorded. Then this sequence of maximal gradient magnitudes are treated as a 1D signal,
and are smoothed using a gaussian kernel. Then looking at the smoothed sequence the
lowest value is compared to a gradient threshold provided by the user, to determine if any
significant part of the curve is removed from the edge of the object.
1
def check_gradients(curve, cross_section , Gradient_type , Gradient_threshold):
2
idx = np.round(curve).astype(int)
3
mi = np.min(idx, axis=0)+[-5, -5]
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
33
==PAGE:42==
4
ma = np.max(idx, axis=0)+[5, 5]
5
idx_2 = idx-mi
6
cross_section_slice = cross_section[mi[0]:ma[0], mi[1]:ma[1]]
7
8
if Gradient_type == 'Roberts':
9
filter_ = skimage.filters.roberts(cross_section_slice)
10
elif Gradient_type == 'Sobel':
11
filter_ = skimage.filters.sobel(cross_section_slice)
12
13
filter_normalized = (filter_ -np.min(filter_))/np.max(filter_ -np.min(
filter_))
14
15
gradients = []
16
for i, j in idx_2:
17
# Window of size 3x3
18
neighborhood = filter_normalized[i-1:i+2, j-1:j+2]
19
gradients.append(np.max(neighborhood))
20
21
gradients_smooth = filters.gaussian(np.array(gradients), mode='wrap')
22
if min(gradients_smooth) <= Gradient_threshold:
23
gradient_flag = 1
24
statusBar().showMessage('Automatic segmentation stopped due to
gradient threshold being violated')
25
else:
26
gradient_flag = 0
27
return gradient_flag
Listing 3.5: Simplified python code for gradient check.
If any of these checks are failed, the automatic segmentation is paused, and the cross­
section with the segmentation is showed to the user for visual inspection.
3.2.6
Marking Branches
When working with tubular objects with a branching structure, it is necessary to return to
the some parts of the object, if multiple branches are to be segmented. To ease this, the
feature of marking cross­sections as containing a branching point was implemented.
The way this is implemented is using a list of dictionaries containing information about
the cross­sections, and the curves as can be seen in listing 3.6. New branching points
are added to the end of the list, and when returning to a branching point, it is the last
dictionary which is used. This results in a kind of depth first segmentation of the structure.
This could also have been implemented in other ways among others resulting in more of
a breath first approach.
1
def mark_branch():
2
if len(curves) >= 2:
3
marked_branches.append({})
4
# for 2d plot
5
marked_branches[-1]['cross_section'] = cross_section
6
marked_branches[-1]['other_curve'] = new_curve
7
# for 3d
8
marked_branches[-1]['old_curve'] = curves[-2]
9
marked_branches[-1]['point_tmp'] = point_tmp_old
10
marked_branches[-1]['normal_dir'] = normal_direction_old
11
else:
12
statusBar().showMessage('Please begin automatic segmentation before
marking branching point')
Listing 3.6: Simplified python code for marking a new branch.
34
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:43==
Another way this feature can be used, is to divide the structure, segmenting one non­
branching section at a time. An example of what impact this has on the surface plot of the
whole segmentation, can be seen in fig. 3.17.
Figure 3.17: Surface plot of segmentation where
each section is one branch.
3.2.7
Saving Output
The last feature which will be discussed, is the option for the user to save some of the
results to their computer. The first result is the segmentation made in 3D, that is all the
segmentation boundaries in the three dimensional coordinates. The second result is the
cross­sections calculated during the segmentation together with the corresponding seg­
mentation boundaries in the two dimensional coordinates. The output is just the raw data
saved in lists of lists which are exported to .npy files. Simplified python code of this can
be seen in listing 3.7. If the software was to be used it specific use cases, the option to
save the data in different formats could be a useful expansion of the code.
1
def save_output():
2
if len(all_curves) > 0:
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
35
==PAGE:44==
3
save('curves.npy', asanyarray(all_curves))
4
save('cross_sections.npy', asanyarray(all_cross_sections))
5
save('curves_2d.npy', asanyarray(all_curves_2d))
Listing 3.7: Simplified python code for saving the output.
36
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:45==
4
Discussion and Conclusion
4.1
Discussion of Results
The software produced for this thesis is able to segment tubular objects, as is clear from
fig. 3.17, however the quality of the segmentation is dependent on a few factors. The first
factor is whether the data is suitable. In this prototype of the software, the object of interest
should be solid and should either be recognizable by having particularly high or low voxel
intensities compared to the background. Furthermore, the data should be interpretable
by the user, such that the user is able to provide useful input in the process. The first
two points are both limitations which could be addressed in further development of the
software. Another factor the quality depends on, is the tuning of the parameters. If the
parameters are not properly tuned, the quality of the segmentation can not be expected to
be particularly good. The process of tuning the parameters could also be better supported,
in further developed versions of the software. The last factor influencing the quality of the
segmentation, which will be mentioned here, is the user input. Both the initial input, and
the decisions made by the user when presented with the intermediate cross­sections, can
greatly affect the segmentation.
The software also produces cross­sections of the tubular object. As mentioned in sec­
tion 3.2.3, the method implemented does not provide perfectly orthogonal cross­sections,
but using a small step size should make the cross­sections close to orthogonal. Also an
expansion of the code is suggested in section 3.2.3 for even higher precision. Another
drawback with the method implemented for producing the cross­sections, is that it is de­
signed for tubes without branches, and though it generally produces acceptable results,
even in the presence of branches, a more robust technique tailored to handle branches
would be an improvement.
A final thing worth noting is, that one error can mean the user needs to start over, for
example, a bad decision on whether to start the branch in one cross­section or the next.
Here an undo feature or a ‘go back one cross­section’ feature, could be useful, or generally
the implementation of more interactivity.
4.2
Future Work
First the points mentioned above are addressed, followed by some other future ideas.
The restriction, that the tube should be solid is due to the limitations of the currently im­
plemented external force, as already presented in the theory. Thus implementing other
options for the external force, such as a force based on either line or edge detection would
extend the segmentation capabilities of the software.
Regarding the other restriction on what data is suitable for use, the following can be said.
As mentioned in the design choices, when the ray function used for the 2D projections was
chosen, only some simple ray functions based on summary statistics were tested, until one
was found that worked for the different datasets that were used during the development
of the software. Alternative implementations could have relied on the user providing a
specific intensity or a range of intensities of interest. These could then either be used by
the ray function for example to extract an isosurface. Or it could be used by a transfer
function, to transform the image intensities before a ray function was applied.
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
37
==PAGE:46==
The process of tuning the parameters, can be tiring and difficult, it was thus considered
if implementing a test environment specifically for this would add value to the software.
It was however, decided that it was not a key feature, and other features were prioritized
instead. Another thing that could ease the parameter tuning would be the option to export
settings, so the user could save parameters tuned to particular datasets. Or alternatively,
make it so settings are remembered across sessions.
No functionality specifically to assist the extraction of the cross­sections in parts of the
tubes with branches were implemented. However, some concepts regarding how this
might be accomplished have been considered. Thus, when the software detects a branch,
the following could happen: First the software should backtrack a number of cross­sections,
to a point before the branching begins to affect the tube. Then the user could be asked
to specify which branch to follow, using the 2D projections, placing two dots on the tube,
one approximately on the center, and the other specifying the direction of the tube. Then
this information could either be used to somehow extract a skeleton of the tube between
the current cross­section and the marked branch, and then use the skeleton to guide the
centers through the branching. Another idea could be to somehow interpolate how the
section would be shaped, if there were no other branch, and then use this new border,
when calculating the centers.
Several improvements to the interactivity of the design were considered. As already men­
tioned, an undo or a ‘go back one cross­section’ feature could be helpful. Another idea
was adding interactivity to the way the user can mark branches and return to them. This
could be done by having an interactive overview of where branching points are marked,
letting the user freely choose which point to return to and how many times. Going even
further, the option to return to any giving cross­section, marking branching points after the
first pass through, could also be implemented. Another useful option could be to let the
user select previously accepted segmentations, and discard them, if they change their
mind. Finally, a shortcut to clear the whole work area, starting over with out having to
close and open the interface, would also be useful.
Another thing which was important to consider was the speed of the software. To help
reduce the computational cost, profiling was used. Profiling has for example let to the
discovery of unnecessary repeat calculations of the cross­sections, which were then re­
moved. It also helped decide the implementation of the gradient check, to lower the com­
putational cost of the filter operation. However, profiling could also be used to further
guide the development of the software. As it is now, both the gradient check and round­
ness check are still relatively expensive, when taking in to consideration how many times
they are repeated. Thus, for example, for higher resolution images, it might be worth to
find a way to exclude the interior of the curve from the filtering operation in the gradi­
ent check. It is also noted that the current roundness check does a lot of unnecessary
calculations if just one of the measures is chosen instead of the mean.
Some other ideas for further development are now presented.
One thing which was highly considered was implementing a more complex zoom function
for the three 2D projection views. The general idea was to not only restrict the height and
width of the data displayed when zooming, but also the depth of the projection. Say the
user decides to zoom in on the first view. Then this restricts which x and y coordinates
are visualized in that view. This restriction could then be used to change which values the
ray function should reflect in the two other views, reducing the depth of these projections.
Of course this would not need to be a process, of zooming in on one view at a time, but
could happen simultaneously in all three views, as it does now.
38
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:47==
Another thing was the update of the parameters used in the segmentation. As it is now,
when the segmentation begins, the parameters currently in the settings menu are stored,
and will be used for the whole segmentation of that section, even if the user changes
any of the settings. New parameters will only take effect when a new section is initiated.
However, the only parameter that needs to be locked is the number of points in the curves.
This parameter is both locked during segmentation and when continuing segmentation
from a branching point. This is due to the visualization of the segmentation surface. Thus,
one improvement could be to change it such that any changes to the other parameters
are updated in the code, as soon as the next round of evolutions happen. Furthermore,
in the settings the “Number of points”­option could be grayed out, while a segmentation
is in progress, to let the user know that it cannot be changed at this point.
Then in the current version of the software the user needs to provide the path to the
data file as they run the program. A small quality of life change would be to implement a
graphical interface for selecting a file.
Then there are some minor visual improvements that could have implemented. The first
is related to the the points, lines and curves drawn on top of the data. The size of these
elements could be tested on several users to find an appropriate size. Then it was also
considered if drawing an arrow from the first point to the second point in the 2D projections,
would help users.
Finally, it was considered if some, visualization of the finished cross­sections should be
part of the software. However, it was decided that it was better to keep the visualization
separate from the software, such that the user would be able to design the visualization
as they wanted.
4.3
Conclusion
Overall, the software and the proposed method seem to be able to produce segmentations
of an acceptable quality.
One of the ways the proposed method sets itself apart, is the option for the user to give
threshold values indirectly controlling the level of manual oversight. Thus, providing strict
thresholds enables the user to closely monitor the segmentation, and continually correct
small errors. This also helps prevent the segmentation area from bleeding into the back­
ground. Conversely, providing less strict thresholds, leads to a more more automatic
segmentation, where the focus of the manual interaction is on initializing segmentations
and handling branches.
The other thing that sets the method apart, is the cross­section representation which is
produced as part of the segmentation. This can be useful in cases where the goal of
the segmentation is primarily visualization, since this representation can give rise to an
different way to visualize of the segmented object.
Thus, in cases where the one of the two above mentioned distinctions, is a significant
advantage, it might be worth investigating this proposed method, and further develop it.
Otherwise, other alternatives should be able to produce comparable results.
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
39
==PAGE:48==
40
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:49==
5
Bibliography
[1] Starmans MPA, van der Voort SR, Castillo Tovar JM, Veenland JF, Klein S, Niessen
WJ. Chapter 18 ­ Radiomics: Data mining using quantitative medical image features.
In: Handbook of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention.
Academic Press; 2020. p. 429–456. Available from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/B9780128161760000235 [Accessed 20/1 2022].
[2] Sharma N, Aggarwal LM. Automated medical image segmentation techniques. Jour­
nal of Medical Physics. 2010;35(1):3–14. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC2825001/pdf/JMP-35-3.pdf [Accessed 20/1 2022].
[3] Fahmi R, Jerebko A, Wolf M, Farag AA. Robust segmentation of tubular structures in
medical images. Progress in Biomedical Optics and Imaging ­ Proceedings of Spie.
2008;6914.
[4] Telea A. Data visualization: Principles and practice. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis
Group; 2015.
[5] Marschner S, Shirley P. Fundamentals of Computer Graphics. CRC Press, Taylor &
Francis Group; 2016.
[6] University College London. Orthogonal and orthonormal vectors [Lecture notes].
University College London;.
Available from:
https://www.ucl.ac.uk/~ucahmdl/
LessonPlans/Lesson10.pdf [Accessed 19/1 2022].
[7] Wikipedia. Trilinear interpolation.
Wikipedia; 2021.
Available from: https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Trilinear_interpolation [Accessed 19/1 2022].
[8] Dahl AB, Dahl VA.
Chapter 6:
Deformable models.
In:
Advanced Im­
age Analysis:
Selected topics. Technical University of Denmark; 2021. Avail­
able from: https://learn.inside.dtu.dk/content/enforced/60248-offering-633835/Note_
chapters/6_deformable_models.pdf [Accessed 19/1 2022].
[9] Xu C, Pham DL, Prince JL. Chapter 3: Image segmentation using deformable mod­
els. In: Handbook of Medical Imaging. Vol.2 Medical Image Processing and Anal­
ysis;. p. 175–272. Available from: http://iacl.ece.jhu.edu/pubs/p119b.pdf [Accessed
19/1 2022].
[10] Chan TF, Vese LA. Active contours without edges. Ieee Transactions on Image Pro­
cessing. 2001;10(2):266–277.
Available from: https://www.math.ucla.edu/~lvese/
PAPERS/IEEEIP2001.pdf [Accessed 19/1 2022].
[11] Dahl
AB,
Dahl
VA.
Chapter
1:
Introduction.
In:
Advanced
Image
Analysis:
Selected
topics.
Technical
University
of
Denmark;
2021.
Avail­
able from: https://learn.inside.dtu.dk/content/enforced/60248-offering-633835/Note_
chapters/1_introduction.pdf [Accessed 19/1 2022].
[12] Wirth MA. Shape Analysis & Measurement [Lecture notes].
University of
Guelph; 2004. Available from: http://www.cyto.purdue.edu/cdroms/micro2/content/
education/wirth10.pdf [Accessed 19/1 2022].
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
41
==PAGE:50==
[13] Open Source Imaging Consortium (OSIC). OSIC Pulmonary Fibrosis Progression
[Website with dataset]. Kaggle; 2020. Available from: https://www.kaggle.com/c/
osic-pulmonary-fibrosis-progression/data [Accessed 19/1 2022].
42
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
==PAGE:51==
QT­based GUI for Interactive Segmentation of Tubular Objects in Volumetric Data
43
==PAGE:52==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
