==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Acceleration of data-driven application de-
ployment to a predefined environment
Design and implementation of a data-driven ap-
plication deployment platform
Dániel Szajcz (s192623)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Due to the growing emergence of climate change related issues, the amount of devel-
oped software tools to accelerate the process of becoming a climate neutral society
has grown rapidly. The energy sector has a highly important role in this operation in
multiple ways, including the collection of energy related data and its utilization, as
it allows to develop applications to help continuous energy eﬀiciency improvements
and consumer empowerment.
To support the utilization of energy related data, Center Denmark1 provides a central-
ized data platform to collect data from multiple energy providers around Denmark,
as well as to allow developers to deploy applications that require heavy computing
power due to the amount of utilized energy related data.
The goal of this thesis is to design and implement a solution that allows developers to
deploy energy data-driven applications to a predefined environment. As applications
are deployed from multiple sources at different rates, the need for human interactions
would slow down the deployment process immensely, therefore the designed solution
must be fully automated, to ensure a simple and seamless deployment process at any
time.
1https://www.centerdenmark.com/
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This M.Sc. thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree in Computer Science
and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, January 2, 2022
Dániel Szajcz (s192623)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincerest gratitude to my supervisor, Razgar Ebrahimy
for the great guidance, competent feedbacks and motivation over the course of the
project.
Furthermore, I would like to thank the whole team of Center Denmark for the oppor-
tunity and the provided platform to discuss and develop the results of this thesis.
Besides them, I would also like to thank my amazing family and friends for the endless
support throughout my entire studies, especially Zsófia Dénes, for her never-ending
positivity and encouragement.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Energy data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Prior work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Goals and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Thesis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Related work
5
2.1
Deployment automation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Infrastructure as code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Analysis
11
3.1
Developer preferences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Containerization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Image registries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Deployment management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Further segments of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6
Analysis summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Design
21
4.1
Platform design decisions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Deployment platform architecture overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Docker Registry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Kubernetes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5
Event receiver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.6
Sandbox environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.7
Related APIs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Implementation
35
5.1
Prerequisites
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Docker Registry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Sandbox environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4
Event Receiver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.5
Data platform API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.6
Client platform API
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.7
Implementation overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Evaluation
53
6.1
Complete deployment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
Speed comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.3
Test cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7
Discussion
59
7.1
Goals and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8
Conclusion
63
A
An Appendix
65
A.1 TLS/SSL handshake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2 Pushing an image to the private Docker Registry . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
Bibliography
67
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Enforcing the green transition to become a climate neutral society has become an
indispensable task worldwide, since environmental degradation poses an existential
threat to the entire planet. While every single person can and should be part of
the green transition, country leaders and major companies have the most power and
influence to implement impactful changes.
To support the transition and boost the economy through green technology, the Eu-
ropean Union presented European Green Deal, Europe’s new growth strategy that
aims to achieve climate neutrality by 2050 while transforming the European Union
into a modern and resource-eﬀicient economy. [1] Among other important aspects
of the strategy, the European Green Deal emphasizes the importance of everybody
from businesses to citizens across the EU being able to access climate-related data
and to develop instruments to integrate climate change into their risk management
practices.
Specific countries, like Denmark, are also participating in this transition. In 2019, the
Danish government joined forces with multiple corporations in the energy sector to
achieve Denmark’s 70% reduction target in carbon emissions compared to the 1990
level by 2030. In this collaboration real time energy usage data collection also plays
a major role, since it allows continuous energy eﬀiciency improvements and consumer
empowerment for the energy providers. [2]
1.1
Energy data
As emphasized earlier, one very important contributor to the acceleration of the green
transition in terms of digitization is energy data.
The collection and usage of energy data can be used in many ways. It allows sup-
pliers, industrial partners and researchers to design and develop services that control
the energy consumption based on demand and prevent the waste of sustainable en-
ergy. It also allows energy consumers to be aware of when they are using energy from
renewable energy sources and the current nation-wide energy consumption.
Some of the district heating supplier companies already provide historical and real-
time data to their partners to develop optimization procedures that allow them to
use self-calibrating models and data intelligent control mechanisms. [3] One example
is, when the wind power provision is high, but the electricity demand is low, energy
data based control mechanisms make it possible to start waste management facilities
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
automatically where waste has accumulated, to fully utilise peak periods in energy
production. As Figure 1.1 shows, supply temperature can also be optimized by intel-
ligent control mechanisms based on inputs like weather and consumption data.
Figure 1.1: District heating supply temperature with and without data intelligent
control mechanisms [3].
1.2
Prior work
To achieve the goal of widely accessible energy data, Center Denmark was estab-
lished as a partnership between Danish technical universities, energy suppliers and
the Danish transmission company, Energinet with a goal to create a data platform for
research and development of commercially viable digital solutions for the heat, gas,
electricity and water sectors of the Danish energy system. The data platform operates
with a 100% open source technological stack and on completely local servers to have
complete control over the management of the system. One of the main strengths of
Center Denmark is sector coupling, in other words, the collaborative work and con-
tribution of competing energy suppliers, transmission, heating and water companies
and universities.
The data platform receives data in different rates, some continuously and some daily,
from multiple companies in the energy sector, and also provides interfaces to access
the data. Depending on the age of the received data, it is stored in either a quickly
accessible time-series database or in a distributed file system. Apart from providing
a platform capable of storing large amount of energy related data, the platform’s
goal is also to provide an environment where energy data-driven application can be
deployed. This environment greatly contributes to the development of energy data-
driven applications, since such data-driven application development requires heavy
computing power due to the large amount of data. Applications deployed on an ex-
ternal environment like this can utilize the supportive features and computing power
provided by Center Denmark. [4]
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Problem statement
3
1.3
Problem statement
As mentioned in Section 1.2, Center Denmark provides an environment, a cluster
of well equipped and powerful servers, to deploy applications and tools that require
heavy computing power due to the large amount of data they use. While the de-
ployment environment is available, the current deployment process is manual and
requires heavy collaboration between developers and administrators, that slows down
the deployment immensely. Not only the deployment of the tools slows down the
process, but returning back the results of calculations made by the tools require a
further round of human interactions. This is especially accurate when companies like
Center Denmark collaborate with multiple companies and universities nationwide to
provide access to their platform, and the collaboration results in multiple separated
projects from different developers and researchers.
A handful amount of tools exist that fasten deployments to remote servers, but they
require configurations and collaboration on both the developer side and the server
administrator side, that slows down the deployment process again. To address the
previously mentioned issues, the following problem statement can be constructed:
The current deployment solutions are time-consuming due to the required
human interactions. The deployment process should be simple and auto-
mated, therefore there is need for a fully automated deployment solution
to eliminate waiting time resulted from human collaboration, while still
ensuring data accessibility and control over the deployed applications.
As the problem statement is formed, it comes with further sub-problems. To make
the solution viable against humanly administrated deployment, the deployment en-
vironment needs to be highly available and needs to offer ways to interact with the
deployed applications, to prevent the need of further human interaction. The solu-
tion also needs to ensure confidentiality, to protect against the leakage of possibly
sensitive data.
1.4
Goals and methods
The overall goal and objective of this thesis is to propose a solution that accelerates
the deployment process by providing a platform that does not require further human
interaction after the initial configurations of the system, using state-of-art solutions
and methodologies. To completely overcome the flaws of the currently existing solu-
tions, the following sub-objectives were identified:
• Accelerated application deployment: The solution’s main goal is to fasten the
deployment process by providing a solution that does not require human inter-
actions to deploy applications, is simple and based on methodologies already
widely used both in research and in the industry.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
• Confidentiality of data: The solution should provide features for the rightful
owners of the applications to access the results of the their calculations.
• User control over deployments: The solution needs to provide a system where
initiators of the deployments have complete control of their deployed tools and
their results.
• Highly available and scalable environment: The solution should aim to provide
a highly available environment with high scalability to ensure a seamless de-
ployment experience at any amount of running applications.
1.4.1
Innovation
The project aims to solve the issue of application deployment that includes time-
consuming deployment pipeline set ups or manual deployments for each project, and
provide a way to simply deploy an application to remote environments with ease and
methods that are already widely used all over the industry.
1.5
Thesis overview
The thesis consists of eight chapters, including this introductory one. The following
briefly describes the content of each coming chapters.
Chapter two evaluates the currently existing solutions that has a similar purpose
and analyzes how they operate considering the proposed requirements.
Chapter three analyzes the different technologies that can be adopted in the implemen-
tation of the deployment platform, considering their advantages and disadvantages.
Chapter four describes in detail the decisions made in the design process of the system
and acknowledges the followed design principles and best practises.
Chapter five details the implementation and configuration process of the platform
based on the design decisions made in Chapter four.
Chapter six evaluates how the developed solution works, its comparison to manual
deployments and the results of the executed test cases.
Chapter seven discusses how the initial goals are met by the designed solution, the
limitations of the solution and the needed future work to be a fully production-ready
solution.
Chapter eight concludes the thesis, acknowledges the achieved state of the system
and summarize the thesis project as a whole.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Related work
With the rapid spread of cloud computing in the past decade [5], deployment automa-
tion became an important topic with terms like DevOps, CI/CD and IaC becoming
heavily used buzzwords. This chapter discusses the previously mentioned terms and
the related deployment automation tools, describing how they try to solve the prob-
lem stated in Section 1.3 and their shortcomings.
2.1
Deployment automation
Cloud computing is providing access to remote resources managed by external cloud
services providers, taking burden off the shoulders of developers who are not familiar
with setting up scalable and cost-effective IT infrastructures. While cloud computing
unburdens the developers’ job in terms of infrastructure operations, the application
deployment and its automation still requires infrastructure management operations,
resulting the DevOps portmanteau from development and operations.
DevOps is a set of practices to shorten the application development and deployment
life cycle. This set of practices includes continuous integration (CI) and continuous
delivery or deployment (CD), together resulting a reliable and automized application
deployment process.
The practice of Continuous integration means building the application automatically
and running automated tests on the build each time the code of the application is
pushed to a specific branch of a version control system (VCS) such as Git1.
Continuous delivery extends continuous integration by deploying the image built in
the CI process to a non-production testing or staging environment if tests in the CI
process were successful. This allows further testing and results in a deployment-ready
build artifact that can be deployed to production after a manual approval.
Continuous deployment is similar to continuous delivery, with the exception that it
does not require explicit manual approval, therefore the deployment process to produc-
tion if fully automated, only failed test cases can prevent the production deployment.
These practices together result in an automated deployment process that can be seen
on Figure 2.1.
1https://git-scm.com/
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Related work
Figure 2.1: Pipeline of continuous integration, delivery and deployment.
As it can be seen on Figure 2.1, both continuous delivery and continuous deploy-
ment extend continuous integration by deploying the output of the integration first to
a non-production environment, and then to a production environment, where in case
of continuous delivery, the production deployment requires manual approval, while
in case of continuous deployment, the production deployment relies purely on the
results of the tests executed beforehand.
2.1.1
Deployment automation tools
To simplify the usage of DevOps pipelines with continuous integration and continuous
delivery or deployment, a handful of tools exists, that are heavily used in the industry.
[6] The following list details the most commonly used tools and their level of diﬀiculty
in terms of initial configuration to deploy applications to remote environments.
• Jenkins2 is an open-source automation tool that automates the build, test and
deployment processes. Jenkins provides hundreds of plugins making the tool
highly extensible. To allows automated deployments using Jenkins, it needs to
be integrated with a VCS (such as GitHub) by adding the Jenkins webhook
endpoint to the VCS’s settings.
• CircleCI3 is a continuous integration platform that integrates with GitHub,
GitHub Enterprise and Bitbucket. Every time code is commited to one of the
previously mentioned VCS, CircleCI creates a pipeline, that automatically runs
the test cases of the application, and either notifies the developers in case of
2https://www.jenkins.io/
3https://circleci.com/
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Deployment automation
7
failing test cases or deploys the application to various environments in case of
passing test cases.
• Travis CI4 is a continuous integration service used to build, test and deploy
software projects hosted on GitHub and Bitbucket. To open-source projects,
Travis CI provides its services for free. To enable automated deployment with
Travis CI, a .travis.yml named configuration file with the correspondent config-
urations needs to be added to the project and Travis CI has to be activated for
the given GitHub or Bitbucket repository.
• Azure Pipelines5 allows developers to automatically build, test and deploy code
projects. To utilize the CI/CD features provided by Azure Pipelines, the source
code of the application needs to be version controlled by GitHub or Azure
Repos6 and the required configurations need to be added to the VCS. Any
changes made to the version control repository will be automatically built and
validated.
As it can be seen from the description of the deployment automation tools, they
greatly accelerate application deployment.
Although the listed technologies work
somewhat differently, all of them require a VCS to be able to detect changes in the
source code of the application by webhook based notifications. While most modern
version control systems are capable of using webhooks, and most developers know and
use version control systems on a daily basis, not many people are familiar with con-
figuring webhooks in their VCS, even though it only requires very minimal changes.
While webhook endpoint configuration is a simple task, it is important to consider
that branching needs to be introduced to the version controlling of the project, if the
developer does not want to deploy the application on every push to the VCS.
These two mentioned issues might bring unwanted overhead to the deployment, since
some developers might not be confident with proper branching and VCS configura-
tion.
Considering the mentioned issues, using deployment automation tools seems like a
great solution for the deployment of one consistently developed application, but could
bring unwanted complexity to the deployment of many small applications from mul-
tiple sources with different levels of version control system related knowledge.
4https://www.travis-ci.com/
5https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/devops/pipelines/
6https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/devops/repos/
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Related work
2.2
Infrastructure as code
Infrastructure as code (IaC) is the practice of managing and provisioning infrastruc-
ture, and deployments on that infrastructure through both machine- and human-
readable configuration files instead of manual processes.
Using configuration files
to provision infrastructure comes with many benefits. One benefit is repeatability,
thus being able to use the same configuration file to set up test, development and
production environments, therefore ensuring that all environments are consistent and
configured the same way. Treating infrastructure as code also allows to version control
the configuration files, thereby the modifications in the environments are traceable
and braking changes in the configurations can easily be rolled back to previous ver-
sions. [7]
While IaC practices focus on automating infrastructure provisioning, it is also able to
accelerate and simplify application deployment, since it provides great control over
the environment that the applications are deployed on. In the following, the most
widely-used infrastructure as code tools in the industry will be detailed, putting spe-
cial emphasis on their ability to automatically deploy applications on the configured
environments. [8] [9]
• Terraform7 is an open-source infrastructure as code software tool that allows
to build and change environments in a repeatable and version controllable way.
Terraform uses its own high-level configuration language, called HashiCorp Con-
figuration Language (HCL), to describe the desired state of the infrastructure
that applications are deployed on. This description of the desired state includes
both low-level components such as compute instances, storage and networking,
as well as high-level components such as DNS entries, SaaS features or deployed
applications on the environments.
In Terraform Resources describe one or more infrastructure objects. A deploy-
able application can also be described as a Resource, including all the required
details for the deployment, such as the location of the executable file and con-
figurational information such as the port to be exposed on.
Also, to interact with APIs, different Providers can be installed and used with
Terraform. Depending on the infrastructure, this can heavily simplify deploy-
ment, as widely-used deployment tools, such as Docker8 and Kubernetes9 also
have related Providers. With the Docker Provider, Terraform can execute de-
ployments based on Docker images and interact with the deployed Docker con-
tainers. As for the Kubernetes Provider, it allows to provision and manage a
Kubernetes cluster, as well as deploy containerized applications on the cluster.
• Ansible10 is an open-source provisioning, configuration and deployment man-
agement tool for infrastructure and applications enabling infrastructure as code.
7https://www.terraform.io/
8https://www.docker.com/
9https://kubernetes.io/
10https://www.ansible.com/
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Infrastructure as code
9
Ansible is agentless and typically used in a master/slave architecture, meaning
that there is one master server that executes the Ansible workflow tasks against
multiple managed hosts in the defined infrastructure, using a list of nodes called
inventory. Ansible uses YAML based description files, called playbooks, to de-
fine infrastructure automation workflows as a sets of ordered tasks. An Ansible
playbook consists of of modules, each module in a playbook serving a specific
purpose, like changing configurations or deploying an application on the target
environments.
Ansible modules contain commands that can be executed on
Unix-like operating system. Using Unix commands, Ansible allows developers
to simply create Ansible playbooks with modules containing commands to copy
the sources of the application to the target environment, and then to run the
application same way as on their local environment. [10]
Besides the basic set of commands, Ansible offers a great variety of external
collections of modules to assist application deployment, such as Docker and Ku-
bernetes collections, similarly to Terraform. With the Docker modules, Ansible
can deploy containers and interact with running containers in the nodes de-
fined in the inventory. The Kubernetes Ansible modules allow the management
of the applications running on the defined Kubernetes cluster using Ansible
playbooks.
• Chef11 is an open-source and code-based infrastructure configuration manage-
ment tool. Chef’s description files are called cookbooks and written in Ruby
to define the desired state of the infrastructure. A cookbook represents an IT
automation workflow and it consists of a set of recipes, while each recipe is a
collection of resources to be created and managed on a node. While Chef works
similarly to Ansible, its major difference is in its agent-based architecture, mean-
ing that the computer nodes that cookbooks are executed on need to have a
Chef agent installed, thereby the nodes can be responsible for themselves and
execute self-updates.
Having resources defined in recipes, application’s executable files can be also
defined as resources to be deployed on the nodes. To stay consistent with the
previously mentioned technologies, Chef provides pre-defined Docker and Ku-
bernetes cookbooks. With the Docker cookbook, Chef provides resources for
installing Docker, as well as building, managing, and running Docker contain-
ers, while the Kubernetes cookbook (called Kube cookbook) provides custom
resources to manage the components of a Kubernetes cluster, including appli-
cation deployment on the cluster.
• Puppet12 is an open-source tool to manage and automate the configuration of
servers. Puppet enables infrastructure as code by defining the desired state
of the infrastructure in Puppet’s Domain-Specific Language (DSL). Puppet’s
code is declarative, meaning that the desired state of your systems is described,
11https://www.chef.io/
12https://puppet.com/
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Related work
rather than the steps needed to achieve it. Puppet then automates the process
of getting the required nodes to this desired state through Puppet primary
server and a Puppet agent. The primary server stores the code that defines
the desired state, and the Puppet agent translates the code to commands and
executes it on the specified computer nodes.
In Puppet code, there are four types of building block: resources that defined
the system components, classes as collections of resources, manifests to store
definitions of classes and modules to specify reusable units of infrastructure
automation tasks.
Similarly to the earlier solutions, Puppet also allows application deployment on
the managed infrastructure by defining modules containing commands to run
the executable file of an applications, as well as provides modules for Docker
container deployment and Kubernetes cluster management.
As the descriptions of the technologies detail, all of the widely-used infrastructure as
code solutions are able to deploy applications to the managed environments. After
studying the technologies, it can be explicitly seen that Terraform’s main focus is the
initial infrastructure setup and the management of that environment, while Ansible,
Chef and Puppet focus more on managing and configuring the already set up infras-
tructure and the applications on that infrastructure.
While all four technologies are capable of application deployment, it is hard to see
them providing a general solution to the problem stated in Section 1.3.
Using IaC tools for application deployment is beneficial for the people who used a
specific IaC tool to set up the infrastructure and possess comprehensive knowledge of
it, but for external people without knowledge about the infrastructure it may brings
extra diﬀiculty, since they are required to know the details of the environment, such
as which servers to deploy on (for example how to build up the inventory in case of
Ansible).
Also, all four of the IaC tools use different languages and mostly different methodolo-
gies for their infrastructure description files, and since all four tools are more or less
equally spread in the industry, it is diﬀicult to come up with a general deployment
policy, when some developers prefer one tool with a specific description language,
such as Ansible with YAML, while some prefer a different one, such as Chef with
Ruby.
Overall, using IaC tools as part of a deployment pipeline can bring great benefits and
ease the management of the system, but simply relying on developers deploying their
applications using IaC tools on remote environments, although it is possible, would
require knowledge of the infrastructure from them and possibly learning the usage of
a new tool, which cannot be expected.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis
As discussed in the previous chapter, deployment automation tools and infrastructure
as code solutions, although provide ways to automate application deployment, they
require sometimes unwanted configurations and additional training on the developers’
side, that cannot always be expected.
To eliminate these problems, this chapter
analyses the technologies that can be adopted to design a platform that meets the
requirements and minimizes the action needed from the external developers.
3.1
Developer preferences
Due to the spread of cloud computing, the adoption of containerization to accelerate
deployment, further explained in Section 3.2, has been steadily gaining momentum
as evolving container technologies intersect the growing imperative for organizations
to modernize their operations and infrastructure. Based a survey on hundreds of de-
velopers and released by IBM, 61% of the developers already use a container orches-
tration solution, while another 30% plan to. [11] A survey from 2017 about container
adoption also shows that companies across a variety of industries and sizes invest
significantly in container based solutions with 32% of companies spending 500,000
dollars or more a year on license and usage fees for container technologies. [12]
Considering the results of the surveys, it becomes undoubtedly relevant to analyze
the opportunities provided by containerization, especially knowing that a significant
amount of developers are already rely on the methodology, while most of the remain-
ing developers also plan to adapt it.
Multiple container management tools exist to aid container based deployment. While
a handful of alternatives, such as Podman1 and OpenVZ2, provide similar features
for containerization, based on a 2020 survey answered by nearly 65000 developers
confirms that Docker is the most preferred containerization tool, since 73.6% of the
developers consider it the most beloved platform and expressed interest in continuing
to develop with Docker. [13].
Considering these numbers, it is safe to say that, when using containerization, Docker
is the tool to choose to utilize the knowledge of the most amount of developers.
1https://podman.io/
2https://openvz.org/
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Analysis
3.2
Containerization
Containerization makes it possible to package together a software’s source code and
all its necessary dependencies, such as libraries and frameworks into one isolated unit,
called a container, that is truly portable and runs in any environment that has the
correspondent container runtime installed, therefore the overhead of recreating the
the required environment for a deployment gets eliminated.
The isolation and knowing the fact the most developers are familiar with related tools,
such as Docker, come with numerous advantages that can be beneficial at designing
a tool to simplify and automate application deployment. The following list details
some of the advantages and their relation to deployment acceleration: [14]
• Portability: Containers have the portability characteristic by sharing the host
machine’s operating system kernel, therefore eliminating the need for a complete
separate operating system for each deployed application, unlike virtual machines
(detailed in Section 3.2.1).
This allows developers to test their applications
on their local environment, and then be certain that the application will run
precisely the same way after being deployed on a different environment.
• Speed: Since containers share the machine’s operating system kernel, it reduces
start-up time and allows applications to be deployed in seconds, as there is no
need to boot a new operating system.
• Reproducibility: As the main target group of the solution to be deployed are
researchers and scientific workers, it is indispensable to mention reproducibility.
Published code bases and code snippets alongside scientific papers often come
with undocumented assumptions that make reproducibility hard to achieve.
Container image publication addresses these issues and provides immediately
usable artifacts that ensure the reproducibility of scientific results. [15]
• Security: The isolation introduces by containerization provides security in nu-
merous ways. Deployed applications are running in their own self-contained
environment, therefore if a container’s security is compromised, other contain-
ers or the host environment remain unaffected. Containerization also allows to
define security permissions to automatically block unwanted communications
with specific components or resources.
Considering the mentioned factors, an environment running multiple containers
can safely operate without the need of further separation of resources to prevent
the interference of containers.
• Testing: One of the main benefits of containerization is the ability to test the
application is a local environment and be certain that the application will run
the same way in a different environment. Executing further test cases, such
as code analysis and security scanning can also be part of the container image
build process, which shortens the testing cycle and improves security as more
issues are found before deployment. [16]
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Containerization
13
3.2.1
Comparison to virtual machines
As containers with their numerous benefits were detailed earlier, it is important to de-
scribe it in comparison to virtual machines. Similarly to containers, virtual machines
also offer a way to deploy an application in an environment that is isolated from the
underlying hardware.
The key difference between the two methodologies is that while containers share the
same kernel as other containers on the same host, when a new virtual machine is
started, it boots a new, dedicated kernel with pre-defined amount of resources for
the virtual environment. The starting process of that separate kernel includes all the
required operating system processes. This heavily slows down the deployment process
and results in a much larger isolated environment size compared to a single container
containing an application. [17] On Figure 3.13 the different types of isolation of the
two methodologies is depicted. As it can be seen, each deployed application requires
a separate operating system with dedicated resources to ensure isolation, while con-
tainerized applications achieve the same level of isolation and share the kernel of the
host operating system. [18]
Figure 3.1: Machine virtualization compared to containerization.
Considering the differences between the two virtualization technologies in terms
of both time- and resource-consumption, the benefits of containerization over virtual
machines clearly show.
Since containerization offers low resource consumption and high reproducibility, and
is highly used in the software developer community, its utilization can greatly accel-
erate application deployment. Applications can be tested in the local environment
of developers, ensuring that their applications will run in exactly the same way in
the remote environment. Sharing these containers, specifically their images, further
detailed in Section 3.2.2, can greatly accelerate application deployment, while devel-
opers do not need to learn other technologies besides the one that is already heavily
adopted by the industry, as detailed earlier.
3Source: https://www.netapp.com/blog/containers-vs-vms/
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Analysis
3.2.2
Container images
To understand the shareability of containers, container images are needed to be ex-
plained. A container image is an immutable static file that is comprised of the ex-
ecutable code of an application and other required dependencies such as libraries,
tools and other platform settings that are needed for the deployment and correct
functioning of the application, therefore everything that is needed for a containerized
application deployment. In case of Docker, described earlier as the most relevant
containerization tool, images can be built by defining the needed steps for the ap-
plication deployment in a file called Dockerfile4. A Dockerfile starts by defining a
pre-published base image that is modified and rebuilt by each subsequent instruction
in the Dockerfile, resulting in an image that includes a deployed application with
all its required dependencies. On updating the application, only the changed layers
of the image are rebuilt, making application updates lighter and faster compared to
other virtualization technologies. [19]
Utilizing methodologies like the usage of Dockerfile allows developers to create con-
tainer images in a simple way, that images later can be published to container images
registries, allowing others to access them for deployment or further modifications.
[20] [21] [22] In Section 3.3, the most widely-used container image registries are ana-
lyzed to gain a comprehensive overview of the preferred registry solutions and their
capabilities.
3.3
Image registries
Container image registries provide a platform to help the distribution of container
images. Inside a registry, images are stored in repositories, and each repository can
contain multiple versions of an image. [23] [24]
Figure 3.2 depicts the architecture of a container image registry. Although the figure
says Docker Registry as the selected platform, but other registry implementations
also have similar architecture. As it can be seen, each image in the registry has its
own repository, where the different versions of the images, named artifacts, are stored.
An artifact’s particular version is identified by its tag, as it can be seen on Figure 3.2,
for example :v1 or :version8.
Container image registries have the characteristics of being public or private, meaning
that everybody can access the stored images in the registry or the stored images are
only accessible for authenticated users. Registries can also be self-hosted or hosted
by a third party registry provider. Both categories have their advantages and dis-
advantages, such as already hosted registries require less configurational operations
and no additional resources. On the other hand, private registries allow complete
control over the registry, providing complete free will over the authentication and
access control management, monitoring, automation and other features. [25] [26]
4https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Image registries
15
Figure 3.2: Docker Registry - architecture diagram [27].
Although some of the most popular hosted public registries, such as Docker Hub,
or hosted private registries, such as Amazon Elastic Container Registry and Google
Container Registry are well known and widely-used [23], as mentioned in Section 1.2,
the aim is to find technologies that run on completely local servers to have complete
control over the management of the systems, therefore their usage is not considered
and analyzed.
Also, as some of the advanced self-hosted container registry solutions, such as Azure
Container Registry, JFrog Artifactory and Sonatype Nexus Repository offer great
features like repository health checks and universal component support, as also men-
tioned in Section 1.2, the goal is to operate with a a 100% open source technological
stack, therefore these solutions without an open source license are not considered as
possible components of the system.
As the previously mentioned requirements filtered the possible solutions used in the
industry [23], the following projects were identified to satisfy the above mentioned
requirements:
• Docker Registry5: Docker Registry is Docker’s own self-hostable container image
registry solution. Docker Registry is highly scalable and open source solution
under the permissive Apache license. To allow high scalability and automatic
load balancing, the registry can be run as a service, known as swarm in the
Docker ecosystem, to share resources in a load balanced cluster of registries.
[28] To support automatising, the registry provides a feature to send webhook
notifications6 in response to events happening within the registry. Docker Reg-
5https://docs.docker.com/registry/
6https://docs.docker.com/registry/notifications/
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Analysis
istry also natively supports basic authentication, but also can be extended with
more advanced authentication mechanisms, since the registry is designed in a
way to be highly extendable. [29] This feature is beneficial to support confiden-
tiality in a system that includes Docker Registry.
• Project Quay7: Project Quay is the open source distribution of Red Hat Quay,
a private container registry solution that stores, builds, and deploys container
images. Project Quay is designed to easily scale as image volumes grow and
includes Clair, a leading container vulnerability scanner that examines every
image pushed to Quay and continuously scans images to provide a real-time
view of any known vulnerabilities in the containers.
It also supports using
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) as an identity provider and dif-
ferent kind of authentication mechanisms, both internally and externally (such
as external JWT endpoint or third party authentication). [30]
• GitLab Container Registry8: GitLab container Registry is a private registry for
Docker images built on top of the OCI Distribution Specification based Open
Source Registry implementation. GitLab’s registry is tightly integrated with
GitLab to provide a single, well-integrated platform for version control, con-
tinuous integration, deployment and delivery, and more. Thanks to the tight
integration, authentication happens through GitLab’s authentication mecha-
nism, therefore no additional configuration needed. GitLab Container Registry
can be beneficial for teams and projects already relying on GitLab. [31]
• Harbor9: Harbor is an open source container image registry project that extends
the open source Docker Distribution to support image replication, advanced
security features such as user management, access control and activity auditing.
Harbor supports role based access control integrates with existing enterprise
LDAP for user authentication and management. Harbor also comes with an easy
to use graphical user interface. To support the development of a deployment
pipeline, it is important to note that Harbor provides notification features to a
given webhook endpoint on certain events that occur within the registry. [32]
[33]
3.3.1
Comparison of solutions
Although all of the above solutions meet the requirements of the project, it is worth
comparing them in terms of size and additional required dependencies to have a more
comprehensive overview of the services and their operational complexities.
Since
the projects’ size and dependencies are connected due to the additional size from
the dependencies, it worth staring with the dependency comparison, to be able to
7https://www.projectquay.io/
8https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/packages/container_registry/
9https://goharbor.io/
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Image registries
17
reference it in the latter comparison. In terms of dependencies of the project, the
result of the comparison is the following:
Registry
Additional requirements
Docker Registry
None [34]
Project Quay
PostgreSQL, Redis, Cloud storage [30]
GitLab Container Registry
Complete GitLab project [31]
Harbor
PostgreSQL, Redis, Beego, Chartmuseum, ... [32]
As it can be seen from the documentation, Docker Registry does not require any
additional installations, since by default, the registry stores all its data on the local
file system, whether it is used with a bind mount or a volume, although it can be
configured to use other external storages such as an Amazon S3 bucket, Google Cloud
Platform, or any other storage back-end. [34]
Project Quay and Harbor require numerous additional dependencies to be installed to
be able to provide their advanced features, such as PostgreSQL database for metadata
storage (in case of Quay) and Redis for live builder logs.
Since GitLab Container Registry is part of the GitLab system and tightly coupled
to the project, it cannot be used without installing the project as a whole.
This
can mean easy integration for projects that already rely on GitLab, but otherwise
the usage of GitLab only for the registry functionality is quite resource heavy and
unnecessary.
In terms of the size of the projects, the result of the comparison is the following,
including the compared deployable unit mentioned as ”Source”:
Registry
Size
Source
Docker Registry
26.2 MB
Oﬀicial image from Docker Hub
Project Quay
421.8 MB
Oﬀicial image from quay.io
GitLab Container Registry
2.33 GB
Oﬀicial image from Docker Hub
Harbor
103 MB
Optimized Docker image by Bitnami
It is noticeable from the comparison how much the required dependencies influence
the size of a registry project. Although Docker Registry, Project Quay and Harbor
require acceptable amount of free space, the GitLab Container Registry clearly uses
great amount of space due to the tight integration into the whole GitLab project and
therefore the fact that it cannot be installed without installing the whole project.
Based on the comparison of the technologies, it is worth considering that Docker Reg-
istry satisfies the requirements of a container image registry to distribute container
images, while also provides the additional feature of notifications, to allow the devel-
opment of further deployment processes based on the actions happening within the
registry.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Analysis
3.4
Deployment management
As containerization and its benefits were discussed in the previous chapters, deploy-
ment management tools need to be analyzed, since they greatly accelerate container
based application deployment and management, while also ensure high scalability
and availability.
Modern deployment management heavily rely on the benefits of
containerization, and the this sections details the technologies and mechanisms that
can be relevant in the design of an automated deployment platform.
3.4.1
Container orchestration
In order to provide a scalable container deployment solution when multiple applica-
tions are running on a servers, container orchestration is required to automate de-
ployment management and scaling on multiple server nodes. Container orchestration
tools help scalability by consolidating separate resources into a cluster of resources,
on which large number of applications can be subsequently deployed. Then, when a
new container is about to be deployed, a deployment is automatically scheduled by
the container orchestration tool, considering the predefined requirements.
The most widely-used open source container orchestration tools are Docker Swarm
and Kubernetes. While Docker Swarm and Kubernetes are deployable on self-hosted
environment, the leading cloud provider platforms also offer managed services by
these tools, further increasing their popularity. [35] [36] [37] The following list details
how the two container orchestration tools operate in terms of application deployment
and management:
• Docker Swarm: Docker Swarm is a container orchestrator developed by Docker,
therefore the deployment of this orchestration engine is simplified and well inte-
grated with other components of the Docker environment. Docker Swarm pro-
vides a way to configure and manage large number of Docker container grouped
in clusters. When a deployment is executed, the orchestrator uses its planning
features to select the best suitable nodes in the cluster for the deployment.
Briefly, a Docker Swarm managed cluster consists of - among many other com-
ponents - manager nodes, to receive commands and to deploy and orchestrate
deployments based on the incoming commands, and worker nodes, to receive
tasks from the manager nodes and perform them. [35]
• Kubernetes: Kubernetes, developed by Google, is a mature and complex system
to automate the deployment, planning and scaling of applications packaged in
Docker containers. Similarly to Docker Swarm, a Kubernetes container cluster
also consists of two main components, one is the master component, that is the
control plane of the orchestrator and the executor of the orchestration, and the
other component is one or multiple nodes, called slaves, to receive and execute
requests sent by the master component. One of the main benefits of Kubernetes
is its self-healing ability, which instantly redeploys a containerized application
when it breaks down or stops for any reason. [35]
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Further segments of the system
19
Based on research and comparisons of the tools, Kubernetes is considered to be the
better choice for container orchestration tool. Although Docker Swarm emphasizes
ease of use and simplicity, for more complex application configuration Kubernetes
provides better functionalities, such as automatic load balancing, disk management
and built-in libraries and processes for monitoring and logging.
The self-healing
feature is also unique in Kubernetes, which helps to provide a much better fault
tolerance for the entire system. [35] [36] [37] As of personal preference, Kubernetes
seems also to have a bigger community and therefore more resources to work with,
which is always beneficial at the development of a complex system.
3.5
Further segments of the system
As special emphasis is put on containerization and related technologies in the previ-
ous sections, the benefits and possibilities of containerization, image registries and
container orchestration tools were detailed. In the followings, further technologies
and solutions are highlighted that can further utilize the provided features to fully
satisfy the requirements of a system the solves the stated problems.
3.5.1
Notification receiver
As mentioned in Section 3.3, most modern container image registries, including
Docker Registry, are capable of sending notifications on events happening within
the registry, such as manifest pushes and pulls and layer pushes and pulls. These ac-
tions are then serialized into events, and sent to specified endpoints via HTTP POST
requests. [34] This feature can be well utilized to automate application deployment,
since a notification receiver can be implemented that is notified every time a new
image is pushed to the registry.
A notification receiver can be implemented using any programming language with
a web framework that allows to implement an API with an endpoint that receives
notifications. Programming languages and web frameworks, such as Java and Spring,
Python and Flask or JavaScript and Node.js/Express all make it possible to develop
APIs to receive notifications.
While a wide range of programming languages are
available to implement the mentioned feature, it is important to consider that the
benefits of Kubernetes were emphasized in Section 3.4.1, therefore it is best to work
with languages supported by the Kubernetes. Kubernetes oﬀicially provides client
libraries to a wide range of programming languages, namely .NET, Go, Haskell, Java,
JavaScript and Python. [38] Although all the programming languages supported by
Kubernetes would satisfy the needs of a notification receiver application, for the cur-
rent environment, considering that Center Denmark faces the problems stated Section
1.3, Python and the Flask microframework seems to be the most reasonable choice,
since the company’s technological stack already heavily includes the framework.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Analysis
3.5.2
Server configurations
To ensure confidentiality and secure communication between the components and the
users of the system to be designed, a secure and high-performance HTTP server and
reverse proxy solution is required.
Based on RootUsers’ Linux Web Server Performance Benchmark [39] against the most
popular web server solutions, Nginx prove to handle the most requests in a given time,
while also prove to be the fastest to execute a certain amount of requests between the
other popular web server solutions. While Nginx dominates among other popular web
server solutions, Center Denmark also already heavily relies on the usage of Nginx
for their different services.
Considering the results of the mentioned benchmark and the already heavy utilization
of Nginx at the company, it is reasonable to stay with the technology for easier
integration in the future.
3.6
Analysis summary
This chapter analyzed the possible technologies and methodologies that can be adopted
at the design and implementation of a solution that solves the problems stated in 1.3.
The chapter identified the benefits of containerization, such as portability and re-
producibility (among many others), and compared container based isolation to vir-
tualization to see the clear advantages of containers in terms of time- and resource-
consumption.
Then container images and known container image registry solutions were analyzed
to emphasize the shareability provided by containerization and registries, including
their additional features, such as notifications to aid image based application deploy-
ment. Docker Registry prove to be the most reasonable choice between the known
registries due to its very minimal resource requirement but still feature-packed imple-
mentation.
Widely-used container orchestration tools were also analyzed to prove the benefits of
automated deployment management and scaling on multiple server nodes. Due to its
wide range of functionalities and great community and documentation, Kubernetes
was selected as the most preferred container orchestration tool.
For the development of other different segments of the system, Python and Flask was
selected as the preferred solution due to company preferences and the support from
Kubernetes.
For the configuration of the components of the designed system, a web server per-
formance benchmark was analyzed to see which popular server solution performs the
best. Nginx prove to be superior in multiple ways among other popular web server
solutions.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Design
In consideration of the analyzed and selected technologies in Chapter 3, this chapter
details the decisions made during the design process of the deployment automation
platform. Each component of the system, as well as its high level architecture, is
illustrated by UML diagrams.
First, a use case diagrams displays the identified
requirements of the platform from the end users’ perspective. Then, the designed so-
lution and its the high level architecture is demonstrated, later followed by a detailed
description of each component of the system.
The use case diagram on Figure 4.1 depicts the expected behaviour of the system
from the perspective of the users of the system, such as developers or researchers
from the energy sector, and also the administrator of the system.
Figure 4.1: Deployment platform - UML use case diagram.
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Design
The Deploy application use case models that a user should be able to start an ap-
plication deployment with minimal required knowledge of the system, possibly with
few simple commands, without the interaction of external actors (such as the Admin-
istrator). The design of this solution is detailed in Section 4.2. Deploying applications
requires logging in to the system, since only authenticated users can use the deploy-
ment platform to ensure confidentiality, detailed Section 4.3.
The Check deployed containers use case shows that a user can inspect related con-
tainer details and execute actions as checking container logs or restarting the running
container, modelled by the Check container logs and the Restart container use cases
respectively. When checking container details and executing actions on them, logging
in is required, since for privacy reasons, users should only be able to inspect or restart
deployed containers based on their own images.
It is important to mention that at the time of the writing of the thesis, only admin-
istrators of the system can create new user, as it is modelled by the Create new user
use case. The system is designed this way, since this is the current form of registra-
tion to the provided services by Center Denmark, although a robust and advanced
authentication service with registration feature is under development, that can be
later integrated to the deployment platform. The system is designed with the con-
sideration of this is future integration. To protect resources from unauthorized users
and to monitor which application is deployed by which user, all of the previously
mentioned use cases require authentication, this is modelled by the Log in use case.
4.1
Platform design decisions
As discovered in Section 3.1, most developers are familiar with the usage of the Docker
Engine and the methodology to create Docker images. Utilizing this knowledge, and
the notification feature provided by Docker Registry and detailed in Section 3.3, the
deployment platform was designed to include a Docker Registry based container im-
age registry, where the users are able to push their applications’ Docker images to,
thereby sending a notification to an API that then starts the deployment process to
the specific environment. This allows developers to instantly deploy an application
with only a few, Docker related commands. The detailed description of the platform’s
architecture can be seen in Section 4.2
As stated in Section 1.2, the main purpose of the external deployment platform is to
allow developers to utilize the provided heavy computing power, storage and other
powerful resources that a local development environment, such as a laptop or a desk-
top PC cannot guarantee. Considering the amount of energy data and the resources
provided by both local development environments and the external deployment en-
vironment, it was decided to design the future API of the data platform in a way
that it responds with a limited data set for applications requesting it from outside
of the deployment environment, while provide the complete data set to applications
that send requests to the API from inside of the deployment environment.
This
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Deployment platform architecture overview
23
way applications can be tested on local environment with amounts of data that can
be handled by everyday computers, then after deployment, applications can execute
their calculations with the complete provided data set. The designed behaviour of
APIs operating the described way is detailed in Section 4.7.1.
4.2
Deployment platform architecture overview
The high level design of the deployment platform can be seen on the component dia-
gram on Figure 4.2, including the Docker Registry, the notification or event receiver
API and Kubernetes. The figure excludes the environment where the applications
are deployed and the different APIs that are used by the applications. In the fol-
lowing sections and chapters, the environment where the applications are deployed
is referenced as the sandbox environment, as it is an isolated environment for
applications to provide further services and resources.
Figure 4.2: Deployment platform architecture - UML component diagram.
As the component diagram depicts, the Docker Registry component requires
two interfaces. Firstly, it requires an Authentication API, to implement an authen-
tication mechanism that only allows authenticated users to push images and access
related details. Secondly, it requires an API endpoint to receive the HTTP POST
request1 based notifications sent in response to events happening within the registry.
The registry also provides an interface to facilitate the distribution of the images to
the registry. The design of the registry is further detailed in Section 4.3.
To receive the notifications from the Docker Registry, the event receiver compo-
nent provides an interface. As it provides an interface to the Docker Registry, it also
uses its provided interface, since the pushed image needs to be pulled by the event
receiver to be able to deploy it on the sandbox environment. It also requires the
1https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Methods
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Design
API of Kubernetes to be able to execute a deployment with the pulled image to the
Kubernetes cluster. The designed behaviour of the Event receiver is further detailed
in Section 4.5.
Finally, Kubernetes provides an interface for services to deploy application instances
on the Kubernetes cluster, and this interface is used by the Event receiver after a
new image is pushed to the registry. The Kubernetes component is further detailed
in Section 4.4.
With the designed architecture, when an application is pushed to the container im-
age registry, it gets deployed to the Kubernetes cluster based sandbox environment
to take advantage of the provided resources of the servers. It is assumed that the
deployed application is working properly and the published image is tested on the
developer’s local development environment.
A case of a deployed application can be seen on Figure 4.3.
Although the figure
excludes the complex architecture of a Kubernetes cluster, it is detailed and depicted
in Section 4.4. As Figure 4.3 shows, the deployed application in the sandbox envi-
ronment, possibly among others, uses the API provided by Center Denmark’s data
platform. The sandbox environment is also planned to be connected to Center Den-
mark’s middleware platform that is currently in the development to provide additional
services such as logging, caching, monitoring and other features.
Figure 4.3: Sandbox environment - UML component diagram.
As mentioned earlier, the applications deployed on the sandbox environment are
capable of using the complete data set provided by the APIs of the data platform by
utilizing the computing power of the environment. The source of an incoming API
request can be identified at the API, and by utilizing this, the API is able to detect if
a request came from the sandbox environment. The design the sandbox environment
and the mechanism deciding the source of a request is further detailed in Section 4.6
and 4.7.1.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Docker Registry
25
4.3
Docker Registry
One of the main components of the deployment platform is the container image
registry. The architecture of a container image registry can be seen on Figure 3.2,
with example repository names and tags of the artifacts.
To design a secure and highly available registry environment, the following features
and practices are needed to be considered in the design process:
• Access controls: To ensure that unauthorized users cannot execute actions re-
lated to images in the registry, it is important to implement access control
mechanisms. As Nginx was selected as the preferred web server and reverse
proxy solution in Section 3.5.2, Docker Registry related communication can be
tunneled through Nginx as well, therefore access control mechanism can also be
implemented in the reverse proxy. This solutions allows important genericity,
since the designed and implemented proof-of-concept authentication mechanism
can be easily changes to the previously mentioned future authentication service,
once it is implemented.
• High availability: To help high availability Docker provides restart policies for
containers. By setting the always restart policy to the Docker Registry’s con-
tainer at deployment, the container always restarts to help high availability,
regardless of the previous exit status. [34]
Additionally, it is beneficial to consider deploying the relevant components of the
system on the same network, as having the private registry close to the deployment
environment can minimize the network latency. [27]
Considering the Nginx in front of the Docker Registry, Figure 4.4 displays the designed
deployment of the container image registry behind the reverse proxy (excluding other
segments of the system).
Figure 4.4: Docker Registry behind Nginx - UML deployment diagram.
As Figure 4.4 shows, the client device’s communication to the container registry
is channeled through Nginx. This way the client can communicate via a secure con-
nection using HTTPS to the reverse proxy. Since the container registry is in a secure
environment behind Nginx, the communication happens via simple HTTP to prevent
unnecessary overhead. It is important to mention that the reverse proxy and the
server has to be on the same secure network to ensure internal communication.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Design
4.4
Kubernetes
To understand the behaviour and design decisions made in the Event receiver compo-
nent, the Kubernetes cluster needs to be explained and designed first. Kubernetes is
used in the deployment platform to ensure high availability of the deployed solutions
and scalability in the system.
A Kubernetes cluster is a set of computer nodes. These nodes include at least one
master node, consisting of the control plane that coordinates the cluster and the de-
ployments on it and at least one worker node that runs containerized applications.
Figure 4.52 depicts a Kubernetes cluster architecture, and it will be further detailed
in the followings.
Figure 4.5: Kubernetes architecture [40].
As Figure 4.5 shows, a Kubernetes control plane consists of multiple components.
It consists of the kube-apiserver, that is responsible for exposing the Kubernetes API,
therefore allowing access to the cluster, the etcd highly-available key-value store to
store all the global cluster information, the kube-scheduler to assign deployed appli-
cations to worker nodes, the controller manager to run controller processes and also
a cloud controller manager to embed cloud specific logic.
As it can be seen, a Kubernetes worker node also consists of multiple components. It
2Source: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/components/
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Kubernetes
27
includes kubelet to make sure that containers are running in a Pod, a representation
of an application-specific ”logical host” that can contain different application contain-
ers which are relatively tightly coupled. A worker node also includes kube-proxy to
provide a way to expose an application running on a set of Pods as a network service
and a container runtime such as Docker that is responsible for running containers.
[40]
To clearly understand to behaviour of the Event receiver components detailed in Sec-
tion 4.5, some of the different Kubernetes resources are needed to be explained. Most
importantly, the purpose of a Kubernetes Pod was already explained, but it is im-
portant to mention that Kubernetes Pods are created from Kubernetes Pod Template
objects. A Kubernetes ReplicaSet’s purpose is to maintain a stable set of replica Pods
running at any given time. As the application deployed in the Kubernetes cluster
will not be accessed by multiple users at the same time like a web service, one single
replica will be deployed of each pod, to spare resources.
The Kubernetes Deployment resource is highly used in the Event receiver component.
It describes the desired state of the Pods and their ReplicaSets in the cluster and
make the cluster’s Deployment Controller change the actual state of the cluster to
the desired state at a controlled rate.
4.4.1
Cluster topology
As the provided resources for the thesis are limited and the exact resource distribu-
tion is not yet decided for the project, as a proof-of-concept solution, the deployment
platform operates with one control plane and one worker node.
Minikube is a lightweight Kubernetes implementation that creates a virtual machine
on a local machine and deploys a simple cluster containing only one node for devel-
opment purposes. [41] [42] To showcase the concept of the platform, Minikube will
be used, and later the Minikube-based cluster is easily replaceable with a production-
ready Kubernetes cluster. Although Minikube will be used for the deployment of this
proof-of-concept solution, for future commercial usage, it is important to consider
the design of a highly available topology. To provide high availability, Kubernetes
suggests two designs, both with minimum three control plane nodes.
The first solution is the Stacked etcd topology, where each control plane node cre-
ates a local etcd. This topology couples the control planes and etcd members on
the same nodes, which allows easier management for set up and replication, but also
introduces the problem of losing both an etcd and a control plane instance when a
control plane node goes down.
The second solution is External etcd topology, where etcd members run on separate
hosts, therefore losing a control plane or an etcd member has less impact on the clus-
ter’s performance, however the topology requires twice as many hosts as the Stacked
etcd topology and the setup and management complexity is increased. [43]
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Design
For future development, the External etcd topology seems to provide a better so-
lution, since, although it brings extra complexity to deployment and maintenance, it
ensure better availability, since losing a control plane or an etcd member does not
affect the cluster redundancy as much as the stacked HA topology.
On Figure 4.6 the Stacked etcd topology can be seen on top, where the etcd is part
of each control plane, and the External etcd topology can be seen on bottom, where
the etcd members run on separate hosts.
Figure 4.6: Stacked etcd topology and external etcd topology [43].
As previously mentioned, due to limited resources, Minikube will be used for de-
velopment to showcase the viability of the platform instead of the above mentioned
highly available Kubernetes cluster topologies, although the cluster provides replace-
ability without the need to modify other components of the platform.
==PAGE:39==
4.5 Event receiver
29
4.5
Event receiver
The second component of the platform to mention is the event receiver REST API
to receive and handle notifications on events happening within the Docker Registry.
The notifications are HTTP POST requests made to a specified endpoint with a pre-
defined JSON structure, as an example shown in Listing 4.1.
1 {
2
"events": [
3
{
4
"id": "320678d8-ca14-430f-8bb6-4ca139cd83f7",
5
"timestamp": "2016-03-09T14:44:26.402973972-08:00",
6
"action": "pull",
7
"target": {
8
"mediaType": "application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json",
9
"size": 708,
10
"digest": "sha256:
fea8895f450959fa676bcc1df0611ea93823a735a01205fd8622846041d0c7cf
",
11
"length": 708,
12
"repository": "heating-opt",
13
"url": "http://192.168.100.227:5000/v2/heating-opt/manifests/sha256:
fea8895f450959fa676bcc1df0611ea93823a735a01205fd8622846041d0c7cf
",
14
"tag": "latest"
15
},
16
"request": {
17
"id": "6df24a34 -0959-4923-81ca-14f09767db19",
18
"addr": "192.168.64.11:42961",
19
"host": "192.168.100.227:5000",
20
"method": "GET",
21
"useragent": "curl/7.38.0"
22
},
23
"actor": {
24
"name": "tester"
25
},
26
"source": {
27
"addr": "xtal.local:5000",
28
"instanceID": "a53db899 -3b4b-4a62-a067-8dd013beaca4"
29
}
30
}
31
]
32 }
Listing 4.1: Notification object from Docker Registry.
At a push to the Docker Registry, multiple events happen, as multiple layers and bi-
nary files are pushed to the registry. The ”mediaType” value of the event’s target de-
fines what exactly is pushed to the registry. As the ”application/octet-stream” value
for the ”mediaType” suggests that binary files has been pushed to the registry, the
”application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json” for the ”mediaType” value
means that the complete Docker image has been pushed to the registry. [44]
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Design
To receive and handle the shown events from the Docker Registry, the event receiver
is designed to have the following methods with the described intended purpose:
• create_deployment_object(host, repository, tag, actor, deployment_name): The
create_deployment_object method is responsible for the creation of the Python
representation of a Kubernetes Deployment object. This includes the initializa-
tion of the Python representation of multiple Kubernetes objects, such as a
Container, defining the image that the container is going to be based on, in-
cluding its details such as the host, repository and tag parameters received as
input parameters. It also creates a Kubernetes Template object, including the
received actor’s name as a label, to be able to identify the user who initiated
the deployment. Then all the previously initialized objects are used to instanti-
ate and return a Kubernetes Deployment object with the name provided in the
deployment_name input parameter.
• create_deployment(api, deployment, deployment_name): The create_deployment
method uses the Kubernetes Deployment object and the Kubernetes Client API
object received as input parameters to execute an application deployment on
the Kubernetes cluster with the name provided in the deployment_name input
parameter.
• update_deployment(api, deployment, deployment_name): The create_deployment
method uses the Kubernetes Deployment object and the Kubernetes Client API
object received as input parameters to update the application with the name
provided as the deployment_name parameter on the Kubernetes cluster. The
application gets update with the deployment object provided as the deployment
input parameter.
• check_deployments(repository, tag, actor): The check_deployments method it-
erates through the deployed applications in the Kubernetes cluster, and returns
true if an application is found that has the same application name, tag and
username as the received repository, tag, actor input parameters, otherwise it
returns false.
• receive_notification(): The receive_notification method is the method called
on a POST request to the ”/listener” endpoint of the REST API. It handles
the received events and checks if the event’s mediaType is the previously men-
tioned ”application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json” type. If so, first
it creates a deployment object by using the create_deployment_object method.
Then, it checks if the application is already deployed by the user. If not, it calls
the create_deployment method to deploy the application on the cluster, other-
wise the update_deployment is called to update to already deployed application
to a newer version.
A REST API including the mentioned methods can satisfy the requirements to be
able to receive notifications on container image push and based on the received image,
deploy or update already deployed applications on a Kubernetes cluster.
==PAGE:41==
4.6 Sandbox environment
31
4.6
Sandbox environment
As detailed earlier, applications are deployed on the Sandbox environment to utilize
the provided resources and additional features by the platform. One of the provided
features is Center Denmark’s middleware solution under development, as it is de-
signed to be connected to the sandbox environment and provide additional services
for maintenance, such as a service to monitor the status, health and behaviour of the
applications, a logging service to store the logs of the deployed applications, catching
service and other supplementary services.
The benefits of applications running from a common environment is that general rules
can be applied to requests coming from this specific source. As mentioned in Section
4.1, applications deployed in the sandbox environment are able to execute calcula-
tions on the complete data set provided by the APIs of Center Denmark. To ensure
this behaviour, the platform was designed in a way that requests from applications in
the sandbox environment receive a flag, sort of an API key, that is added as a header
to requests, which is later checked by the API accessing the database the decide that
amount of data that will be returned. The environment uses the flag in the headers
solution over authentication tokens [45], since they are suitable for source identifica-
tion, and individual user identification is not required.
Figure 4.7 displays the component diagram of the sandbox environment with an
application deployed on it.
Figure 4.7: Sandbox environment and connected components - UML deployment
diagram.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Design
It can be seen on Figure 4.7 that the applications deployed on the Sandbox envi-
ronment communicate with Center Denmark’s API through Nginx. This has multiple
purposes.
First of all, it allows to implement HTTPS based communication, therefore com-
munication is encrypted using Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol3 to prevent
communication related attacks on the platform. The other benefit of using Nginx is
being able to check incoming requests to the API and append the previously men-
tioned flag to requests they are originated from the Sandbox environment.
This
design takes away the responsibility of IP address checking of each request from the
API and allows a general source checking solution to be developed in the Nginx con-
figurations. The examination of the mentioned flag and data fetching based on it is
further explained in Section 4.7.1. It is important to mention that this solutions does
not enhance the security of a system, as the flag simply an indicator of the source
of a request. The flag can be eavesdropped and copied, owning it only lets users to
fetch an amount of data that an average computer is not certainly able to handle.
4.7
Related APIs
The platform has two related APIs whose design needs to be considered in for the
system to meet the requirements.
The first is the REST API that provides access to the data stores in Center Denmark’s
data platform, referenced in the followings as data platform API, and provides com-
plete or limited data set based on the source based flag mentioned in the previous
section, while the second is the REST API providing the additional feature of access-
ing the details of the running applications on the sandbox environment.
4.7.1
Data platform API
The data platform API provides access to Center Denmark’s data platforms, pre-
cisely to the quickly accessible time-series database and to a distributed file system
mentioned in Section 1.2. To utilize the previously mentioned header and fetch data
based on its presence, the following methods were designed and needed to be added
to the data platform API:
• check_header(headers): The check_header method simply examines the head-
ers received as input parameter to decide in the flag that represents that the
request’s source is the Sandbox environment.
If it is found, it returns true,
otherwise it returns false.
• fetch_data(from_sandbox): The fetch_data method connects to the correspon-
dent database and executes a query based on the from_sandbox flag received as
input parameter. If the from_sandbox flag is false, the method should construct
3https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5246
==PAGE:43==
4.7 Related APIs
33
a query that contains a limitation to the number of fetched values, otherwise the
method should construct the same query, but without the limit on the returned
values.
• get_data(provider_name): The get_data method is called on GET request to
the ”/api/all” endpoint of the data platform API. It calls the check_header
method with the request headers to decide the source of the request, then calls
the fetch_data method with the result of the check_header method, and return
the fetched values.
Figure 4.8 depicts in an activity diagram to show how the activities carry out in the
data platform API based on the presence of the flag possibly added to the request
headers by Nginx. It shows that the API fetches the complete data set when the
request header contains the flag, and fetches a limited data set, when when the
request header does not contain flag, and the responds with the fetched data set
either way.
Figure 4.8: API data fetching - UML activity diagram.
This design allows developers to use the same REST API endpoint on a local
development environment to test a developed application with a limited data set, as
on the sandbox environment by the deployed application to run calculations with a
full and resource heavy data set.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Design
4.7.2
Client platform API
To satisfy the requirement of the project, the platform needs to provide access to
initiators of the deployments have complete control of their deployed tools and their
results. This feature is provided by designing an API, called client platform API,
that allows registered users to access details about their deployed applications in the
Sandbox environment, and also to perform different action on them, such as restart-
ing the application or reading the logs of a specific application. The designed API
uses JSON Web Token (JWT) to identify the users of the system. JWT was selected
for the development of the API to help scalability, since tokens are stored by the
client application, while the session based solutions use the server memory to store
user data.
The explained API is designed to use the same authentication service as other compo-
nents of the platform, therefore providing a unified authentication service, although
as mentioned earlier, a generic authentication service is still in the development stage.
The following four endpoints were designed to be implemented in the API to satisfy
the above mentioned requirements:
• POST /dashboard/login: The endpoints allows the user to log in with a regis-
tered username and password combination in the body of the POST request. If
the credentials are right, the method generates and returns a JWT that can be
added as Authentication header to requests to the API.
• GET /dashboard/pods/all: The endpoints return a list with the identifier, the
image that is is based on and the status of each application that is deployed by
the user. The endpoint should require the JWT in the Authorization header of
the request to be able to identify the user who initiated the request.
• GET /dashboard/pods/<id>/logs: The endpoint return the data written to the
application’s standard output, identified by the id path variable. The endpoint
also should require the JWT in the Authorization header of the request to
ensure that users can only view data from their own applications.
• POST /dashboard/pods/<id>/restart: The endpoint allows users to rerun the
applications in the Sandbox environment. This can be beneficial if the appli-
cation has terminated, but the results of a calculation using the measurements
from a different day are needed. The endpoint also should require the JWT
in the Authorization header of the request to ensure that users can only view
rerun their own applications.
A REST API including the mentioned methods can satisfy the requirements for users
to be able to have complete control of their deployed tools and their results.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
This chapter describes the implementation details of the deployment platform, follow-
ing the design decisions made in Chapter 4.
For the implementation of the deployment platform, a cloud server that runs an
Ubuntu 20.04.2 LTS operating system, with the DNS name daniel.centerdenmark.com
was provided to work on. Although the solution is considered as a proof-of-concept,
it is designed and implemented in a way that the requirements of a production-ready
platform is considered as well.
To simulate a multi-server platform, as the production environment would be, it
was planned to deploy multiple virtual machines on the server for the development,
thereby each virtual machine represents a server instance, where the different com-
ponents of the platform can be deployed. As the provided server has very limited
resource, after attempting to deploy multiple virtual machines on the server, heavy
performance decline and stability issues were experienced.
With the provided re-
sources, it was decided not to use virtual machines, instead install the required com-
ponent directly on the Ubuntu server. Throughout the chapter, it will be mentioned,
when the solution would require different implementation in a multi-server setup.
To have a better insight into the platform’s implementation, the source code of each
component of the platform is available at the https://github.com/szajcz/thesis-
components repository.
5.1
Prerequisites
Before staring the development, prerequisites like Nginx server and the Docker Engine
container runtime need to be installed and configured on the server.
5.1.1
Nginx and HTTPS-based communication
To install Nginx to the server, the Digital Ocean installation guide1 was followed.
After following the described steps from the guide, Nginx’s status can be check by
running the command in Listing 5.1.
1https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-install-nginx-on-ubuntu-
20-04
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Implementation
1 systemctl status nginx
Listing 5.1: Checking the status of Nginx.
After executing the command, the output indicates that the server is actively run-
ning. Nginx’s configuration file can be found at the system’s etc/nginx/nginx.conf
location, which contains the description of the server, including the open ports, the
server name, the location of the index.html file used to describe the welcome page,
and the files to display on different URL paths.
Encrypted communication between the server and the client is required to prevent
security-related attacks, such as man-in-the-middle attack, where attackers listen to
and possibly alters the communication between the client and the server. To ensure
secure communication from the beginning, Certbot2 was used to make the server ac-
cessible via HTTPS using a TLS/SSL certificate provided by Let’s Encrypt3, a widely
used Certificate Authority. [46] Certbot is an open source software tool to enable au-
tomatic HTTPS qualification. This way a TLS/SSL handshake, displayed in Figure
A.1 in the Appendix, creates a protected connection between the server and client’s
device.
To execute the Certbot installation and configuration in Listing 5.2, it is required to
have the snapd package installed, and it is ensured by the first command in the List-
ing. The second and third commands install Certbot and ensure that it the Certbot
command can be executed. The fourth command makes the system receive the Let’s
Encrypt certificate and edits the system’s Nginx configuration to turn on HTTPS-
based access.
1 sudo snap install core; sudo snap refresh core
2 sudo snap install --classic certbot
3 sudo ln -s /snap/bin/certbot /usr/bin/certbot
4 sudo certbot --nginx
Listing 5.2: Enabling HTTPS-based communication.
After executing the commands listed in Listing 5.2, the lines listed in Listing 5.3
were added to the previously mentioned Nginx configuration file, to add the required
configurations such as the location of the certificate and certificate key. From Line 9 in
in Listing 5.2, Nginx redirects non-HTTP-based communication to use HTTPS-based
encrypted communication only.
2https://certbot.eff.org/
3https://letsencrypt.org/
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Prerequisites
37
1 listen 443 ssl; # managed by Certbot
2 server_name daniel.centerdenmark.com;
3 ssl_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/daniel.centerdenmark.com/fullchain.pem
; # managed by Certbot
4 ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/daniel.centerdenmark.com/privkey.
pem; # managed by Certbot
5 include /etc/letsencrypt/options-ssl-nginx.conf; # managed by Certbot
6 ssl_dhparam /etc/letsencrypt/ssl-dhparams.pem; # managed by Certbot
7
8 # Redirect non-https traffic to https
9 if ($scheme != "https") {
10
return 301 https://$host$request_uri;
11 } # managed by Certbot
Listing 5.3: SSL details added to Nginx configuration.
After enabling the HTTPS-based communication with the SSL certificates, it can be
seen when accessing the server at the daniel.centerdenmark.com domain via a web
browser that the server is secured with a valid certificate, as it can be seen on Figure
5.1.
Figure 5.1: Proof of valid certificate in Google Chrome.
5.1.2
Docker Engine
The Docker Engine was install on the server by simply following the oﬀicial Ubuntu
installation guide 4.
Docker Compose is a tool to run single- or multi-container Docker applications based
on a YAML configuration file that contains the required services and other attributes
of the application to be run. For the deployment of the components of the system,
Docker Compose was used. The usage of Docker Compose was chosen to enjoy the
benefits of version-controllable deployment files providing repeatability over using
complex docker run commands with multiple arguments.
4https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/ubuntu/
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Implementation
Using Docker Compose, the services and attributes of an application can be defined
in YAML configuration files, called docker-compose.yaml and run in the containing
folder by the command in Listing 5.4.
1 docker-compose up
Listing 5.4: Running a Docker Compose file.
5.2
Docker Registry
The Docker Registry is one of the main components of the system. It allows developers
to publish their Docker images to the platform and therefore start the automated
deployment process. The Docker Compose file to deploy a Docker Registry on the
server can be seen in Listing 5.5.
1 version: '3'
2
3 services:
4
registry:
5
image: registry:2
6
restart: always
7
ports:
8
- "5000:5000"
9
environment:
10
REGISTRY_STORAGE_FILESYSTEM_ROOTDIRECTORY: /data
11
volumes:
12
- ./data:/data
Listing 5.5: Docker Registry - Docker Compose file.
The Docker Compose file in Listing 5.5 starts with the used version of Docker Com-
pose, then it lists the services, that is, the containers to be deployed with their
required arguments.
This Docker Compose file only deploys one container with the name registry. The
restart section sets the container’s restart policy to always restart regardless of the exit
status when it is previously stopped, thereby ensuring higher accessibility of the reg-
istry. The port section describes that the Docker Registry runs on port 5000 inside the
container, and it is mapped to the host’s port 5000. The environment section sets the
environmental variable REGISTRY_STORAGE_FILESYSTEM_ROOTDIRECTORY
to make the registry save its data to the /data folder, while the volumes section maps
the /data directory of the container to the /data on the server. It is beneficial to
store a container’s data on the server and prevent data loss in case of any unexpected
stoppage or complication.
After executing the deployment by running the Docker Compose file with the com-
mand listed in Listing 5.4, the Docker Registry is running and listening on port 5000
of the server.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Docker Registry
39
5.2.1
Security configurations
Although the Docker Registry is deployed, to provide a secure and production-ready
registry, it requires further configurations. To help confidentiality, access control re-
strictions need to be enabled to ensure that only authenticated users of the system
can access and push images to the registry. Encrypted communication between the
developers’ computers and the registry is also needed to be implemented to prevent
sniﬀing attacks like the previously mentioned man-in-the-middle attack.
To facilitate communication to the registry and therefore the distribution of the im-
ages, Docker Registry provides an API, namely the Docker Registry HTTP API5.
The API is accessible on the same port as the registry, at the endpoints starting with
the ”/v2” path. To ensure encrypted communication with the registry, the registry’s
API’s location, can be seen in Listing 5.6, is added to the Nginx configuration of the
already HTTPS-based server to define how requests to the registry should be handled.
1
location /v2 {
2
if ($http_user_agent ~ "^(docker\/1\.(3|4|5(?!\.[0-9]-dev))|Go ).*$" )
{
3
return 404;
4
}
5
6
add_header 'Docker-Distribution -Api-Version'
$docker_distribution_api_version always;
7
8
proxy_pass
http://localhost:5000/v2;
9
proxy_set_header
Host
$http_host;
10
proxy_set_header
X-Real-IP
$remote_addr;
11
proxy_set_header
X-Forwarded-For
$proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
12
proxy_set_header
X-Forwarded-Proto https;
13
proxy_read_timeout
900;
14
15
client_max_body_size 0;
16
chunked_transfer_encoding on;
17
}
Listing 5.6: Nginx configuration of Docker Registry.
The configuration in Listing 5.6 defines how requests to the Docker Registry API’s
”/v2” endpoints are handled. First, connections to the registry from Docker version
earlier than 1.6 are permitted and get error code 404 returned, since these versions
did not set the required User-Agent header6. Then the request is forwarded to the
registry service with additional headers to forward the actual client’s IP address in-
stead of the server’s and the X-Forwarded-Proto header7 to identify the protocol used
by the client to connect to the server. The client_max_body_size set to 0 is required
to be able to upload large images to the registry without receiving the Payload Too
Large error (error code 413), and the chunked_transfer_encoding setting is to avoid
5https://docs.docker.com/registry/spec/api/
6https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/User-Agent
7https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Forwarded-Proto
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Implementation
the Length Required error (error code 411) without a defined Content-Length header8
by Docker. The IP forwarding is important in a multi-server setting, where the Nginx
reverse proxy server redirects the request to a separate registry server.
To enhance the security of the system and ensure the confidentiality of the Docker
Registry, an access-control mechanism needs to be implemented. As mentioned ear-
lier, a robust authentication service is under development and will be used by the
deployment platform, including the Docker Registry. As a proof-of-concept solution,
a htpasswd file based basic authentication is implemented using Nginx. Implement-
ing the registry’s authentication using Nginx is beneficial to decouple the registry’s
configuration and the authentication mechanisms, therefore allowing to only modify
the Nginx configuration once the company’s authentication service is developed.
To set up the username and password based basic authentication, the configuration
in Listing 5.7 needs to be added to the ”/v2” location configuration listed in Listing
5.6.
1 auth_basic "Registry realm";
2 auth_basic_user_file /auth/htpasswd;
Listing 5.7: Docker Registry authentication configuration.
The auth_basic directive sets a name to the password-protected area that is shown
in the username/password dialog window when the credentials are asked for, and the
auth_basic_user_file defines the location of the file that stores the credentials of the
users.
After adding the configurations, the users’ credentials need to be added to the ht-
passwd file in the /auth folder of the system. After installing the required apache2-
utils package to use htpasswd, the command listed in Listing 5.8 can be executed to
create a user with the name test_username.
1 htpasswd -Bn test_username > /auth/htpasswd
Listing 5.8: Registering credentials for Docker Registry.
The command in Listing 5.8 generates the htpasswd file and adds the username and
password combination after encrypting the password with bcrypt encryption. The
password can be added as a second argument after the username, but it is a better
practise to exclude it and make the terminal prompt it, therefore the password, which
is confidential data, will not be shown in the command history. After the executed
commands, the file contains a single line, starting with ”test_username:” followed by
the bcrypt encrypted password.
After the configurations, the registry is only available for authenticated users, and
the communication to the registry happens through encrypted channels.
8https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Length
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Docker Registry
41
To test the deployment, the example commands in Listing 5.9 can be executed from
any computer environment with Docker installed for any user registered in the system
to push a copy of the Ubuntu Docker image to the registry.
1 docker pull ubuntu
2 docker image tag ubuntu daniel.centerdenmark.com/my-ubuntu:v1
3 docker login daniel.centerdenmark.com
4 docker push daniel.centerdenmark.com/my-ubuntu:v1
Listing 5.9: Commands to test the deployed registry.
The commands in Listing 5.9 first pulls the oﬀicial Ubuntu Docker container from
Docker’s own public registry, then it is tagged to include the location of the private
registry in the name of the image, since this instructs Docker to access the registry
located at daniel.centerdenmark.com.
After trying to push an image without logging in first to the registry, the server
will send back the ”unauthorized: authentication required” error message, but after
logging in to the registry, the server allows the user to publish the image. The whole
process of pushing a copy of the Ubuntu Docker image to the private registry can be
seen in Figure A.2 in the Appendix.
As mentioned earlier, the Docker Registry stores the images in repositories, that
are collections of multiple versions of the same image, and the Docker Registry API
provides the GET /v2/_catalog endpoint to fetch the repositories in the registry.
After sending GET a request to the endpoint, the repositories list in the response,
shown in Figure 5.2, proves that the image is pushed to the registry.
Figure 5.2: Repository of the pushed image.
5.2.2
Notifications
As mentioned is Section 3.3, the registry supports sending webhook based notifica-
tions to a specific endpoint on events happening within the registry. Webhooks are
HTTP POST requests, allowing to implement an API that receives the notifications
and executes further actions in order to deploy the published image on a server.
To enable sending notifications, the notification settings listed in Listing 5.10 need to
be added to the registry’s configuration file, called config.yml in the /etc/docker/reg-
istry folder of the registry’s container.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Implementation
1 notifications:
2
endpoints:
3
- name: notificationlistener
4
url: https://daniel.centerdenmark.com/listener
5
timeout: 500ms
6
threshold: 5
7
backoff: 1s
Listing 5.10: Docker Registry notification configurations.
The settings in Listing 5.10 configures the registry with an endpoint to send events
to the URL https://daniel.centerdenmark.com/listener. It is also set that the request
times out after 500 milliseconds, and if the request fails 5 times in a row, the registry
stops for 1 second before trying to send the events again.
This repeats until the
request succeeds, which is beneficial, since it ensures the arrival of the notification by
having multiple tries of sending the data, while still not overloading the in-memory
queue. The configuration will be tested in Section 5.4, where the implementation of
the event receiver is explained.
5.3
Sandbox environment
Before detailing the Event receiver application, it is beneficial to describe the setup
of the environment where the application are going to be deployed, referenced as the
Sandbox environment. As mentioned earlier, the environment will run on a Kuber-
netes cluster to enjoy the many benefits of Kubernetes, such as simple horizontal
scaling and advanced secret and configuration management. By having the deployed
applications in a unified, self-controlled environment, the Nginx reverse proxy can add
additional headers to the requests coming from the environment, therefore granting
special privileges to the deployed applications.
5.3.1
Kubernetes
While, as discussed in Section 4.4, a production-ready Kubernetes cluster should
implement an external etcd HA topology, due to the lack of resources, as a proof-of-
concept solution, Minikube will be deployed as the Kubernetes cluster of the Sandbox
environment with one single node.
This solution still provides a working Kuber-
netes cluster that later can be substituted by a Kubernetes cluster with an improved
and highly accessible topology.
After providing and installing the requirements9,
Minikube is started by the first command listed in Listing 5.11. The second command
displays the currently running Pods in the cluster, which initially shows nothing, as
the cluster is freshly created, but it proves the functioning of the cluster.
9https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Sandbox environment
43
1 minikube start
2 kubectl get pods
Listing 5.11: Starting the Kubernetes cluster.
5.3.2
Communication from the environment
As discussed in Section 4.6, one of the benefits of the applications running from a
common environment is that general rules can be applied to requests coming from
this specific source. To utilize this shared location, a flag is added to the requests
coming from the Sandbox environment to indicate that the host environment of the
application is capable of handling greater amount of data.
It is very important to emphasize that this is not a configuration to enhance the
security of the system, but only to indicate that a greater amount of data can be
provided to make use of the computing power of the environment. On one hand, an
attacker can easily fake the IP address to match with the address of the Sandbox
environment, on the other hand, the static flag can be easily sniffed, copied and
appended to the headers by the attacker itself.
To append the indicator header to the requests from the Sandbox environment, the
configuration listed in Listing 5.12 is added to the Nginx configuration of the endpoint
where the data platform API is accessible, precisely endpoints starting the ”/api”
path, further discussed in Section 5.5.
1 location /api/ {
2
set $sandbox_flag "";
3
if ($remote_addr = 138.197.185.250) {
4
set $sandbox_flag "true";
5
}
6
7
proxy_set_header Sandbox $sandbox_flag;
8
proxy_pass http://localhost:8000/api/;
9 }
Listing 5.12: Adding the flag to specific requests.
The configuration examines the IP address of the incoming request to the data plat-
form API, and if it is the specific IP address, in this case the IP address of the
Sandbox environment, then a custom ”Sandbox” header is set to ”true”, indicating
that the request is capable of using the full data set provided by the API. After the
source check and conditional header setting, the call is forwarded to the data plat-
form’s REST API. This solution allows to call the same API endpoint from both a
local development environment and the deployment platform, and receive different
amount of data based on the location of the deployed application.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Implementation
5.4
Event Receiver
The component responsible for the deployment of the application is the REST API,
referenced as Event receiver, that receives the notifications from the Docker Registry.
As shown in Listing 4.1 in the Design chapter, the registry uses HTTP POST requests
to a specific endpoint to send JSON objects with a pre-defined structure including
the detailed of each event happening within the registry.
5.4.1
Communication with the registry
As explained in Section 3.5.1, Flask was selected for the development of the Event
receiver API, as Kubernetes provides a Python client library, and Flask is already
heavily used for multiple services at Center Denmark. Flask’s default port is port
5000, therefore the application will be exposed on port 5000. Also, as mentioned
earlier, the REST API will expose the ”/listener” endpoint to POST requests to
receive and handle the events happening within the registry.
To have the event
receiver endpoint accessible only via secure HTTPS communication, the endpoint,
that is called when a notification is sent, needs to be added to the server configuration
that already ensures HTTPS-based communication. Listing 5.13 shows the additional
configuration to the server’s configuration.
1 location /listener/ {
2
proxy_pass http://localhost:5000/listener/;
3 }
Listing 5.13: Event receiver endpoint configuration.
Since the setting is added to the already secure server’s configurations, all the requests
to https://daniel.centerdenmark.com/listener will be redirected to the API running
on port 5000, while all the HTTP requests are still redirected to be HTTPS requests.
In a multi-server setup this could mean redirection to a different server where the
REST API is running.
After setting up secure communication and a simple Flask-based REST API10, the
endpoint implementation shown in Listing 5.14 can be added to the API to receive
notifications from the registry configured in Section 5.2.2.
1 @app.route('/listener', methods=['POST'])
2 def receive_notification():
3
request_json = request.json
4
if 'events' in request_json:
5
event = request_json['events'][0]
6
print(event) # handle event content
7
return 'Registry notification received', 202
8
else:
9
return 'Unexpected JSON format', 415
Listing 5.14: Event receiver endpoint initial implementation.
10https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/2.0.x/quickstart/
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Event Receiver
45
The code shown in Listing 5.14 adds the POST /listener endpoint to the REST API,
that executes the receive_notification method. The method prints the content of
the request if it contains the ”events” key and return a success message, otherwise
return an error message. After running the application and testing it by running the
commands in Listing 5.9, the application prints the data posted by the registry and
parts of it can be seen in Listing 5.15.
1 {'id': 'b3b5791b-fb2b-4f3d-8f41-5fd4ca000486', ..., 'target': {'mediaType':
'application/octet-stream', ...}, ..., 'actor': {'name': 'test_username'
}, ...}
2 172.17.0.2 - - [13/Dec/2021 12:50:30] "POST /hook HTTP/1.1" 202 -
3 ...
4 {'id': '320678d8-ca14 -430f-8bb6-4ca139cd83f7', ..., 'target': {'mediaType':
'application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json', 'repository': '
my-ubuntu', ...}, ..., 'actor': {'name': 'test_username'}, ...}
5 172.17.0.2 - - [13/Dec/2021 12:50:30] "POST /hook HTTP/1.1" 202
Listing 5.15: Received events from Docker Registry.
As it can be seen in Listing 5.15, after pushing an image to the registry, the Event re-
ceiver successfully received the notification either with ”application/octet-stream” or
”application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json” media types, as mentioned in
Section 4.5. Also, since only authenticated users are allowed to push to the registry,
the notifications contain an actor object with the name attribute containing the user-
name of the user who pushed to image to the registry. After ascertaining that the
event receiver is working properly, the following sections describe the methods im-
plemented to execute container deployments based on images freshly pushed to the
private registry.
5.4.2
Container deployment
The notification event contains every information required to deploy a container based
on the image pushed to the registry. It contains the required image name, the tag of
the image and the actor who pushed the image to the registry. As mentioned as the
reasoning for Flask, Kubernetes provides a Python client API to execute operations
on the cluster programmatically.
As designed in Section 4.5, the Event receiver first checks if an application is already
running based on a different version of the published image from the same user. This
happens in the check_deployments(repository, tag, actor) method, that uses the Ku-
bernetes API’s list_namespaced_deployment function, to get the list of the deployed
applications and their labels in the Kubernetes cluster. As it will be discussed in the
current section later, all deployments made by the event receiver have app, tag and
actor labels attached to them, storing the name of the image, the version of the im-
age and the username of the user who pushed the image. The application compares
these values with the respective values of the freshly pushed image.
If a deploy-
ment exists with the mentioned labels, the an update_deployment(api, deployment,
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Implementation
deployment_name) is called, otherwise the create_deployment(api, deployment, de-
ployment_name) method is executed.
Before detailing either the create or update methods, since both requires a deploy-
ment object, the implementation of a deployment object creator method, namely the
create_deployment_object(host, repository, tag, actor, deployment_name) method,
needs to be explained. The object is created by the create_deployment_object func-
tion represents a Kubernetes Deployment, that is, a description of the desired state.
By default, Kubernetes describes its resources, including Deployments, in YAML files.
Listing 5.16 contains a description of a Deployment, which deploys an application to
the Kubernetes cluster, using an image from the deployment platform’s private reg-
istry.
1 apiVersion: apps/v1
2 kind: Deployment
3 metadata:
4
name: heatopt-deployment
5
labels:
6
app: heatopt
7 spec:
8
replicas: 1
9
selector:
10
matchLabels:
11
app: heatopt
12
template:
13
metadata:
14
labels:
15
app: heatopt
16
spec:
17
containers:
18
- name: heatopt
19
image: daniel.centerdenmark.com/heatopt:v1
20
imagePullSecrets:
21
- name: regcred
Listing 5.16: YAML representation of a deployment.
Kubernetes’ Python client API provides Python functions and objects to construct
the dictionary-based Python representation of all the components described in Listing
5.16 programmatically, therefore allowing setting the deployable images and other
details dynamically, as it is shown in Listing 5.17.
1 def create_deployment_object(host, repository , tag, actor, deployment_name):
2
container = client.V1Container(
3
name=repository , # a container object with the name of the
repository's name
4
image=f"{host}/{repository}:{tag}" # a container object based on the
received image
5
)
6
7
template = client.V1PodTemplateSpec(
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Event Receiver
47
8
metadata=client.V1ObjectMeta(labels={"app": repository , "tag": tag,
"actor": actor}), # a template object with the required labels
9
spec=client.V1PodSpec(
10
containers=[container],
11
image_pull_secrets=[client.V1LocalObjectReference(name="regcred"
)] # a template object using secret that stores credentials
to the registry
12
),
13
)
14
15
... # further initializations to match the YAML description
16
17
DEPLOYMENT_NAME = deployment_name
18
# instantiating the deployment object
19
deployment = client.V1Deployment(
20
api_version="apps/v1",
21
kind="Deployment",
22
metadata=client.V1ObjectMeta(name=DEPLOYMENT_NAME),
23
spec=spec,
24
)
25
26
return deployment
Listing 5.17: Python representation of a deployment.
As it can be seen in Listing 5.17, the Kubernetes API’s client provides functions
that return objects that represent the required element of a Kubernetes deployment.
As an example, V1PodTemplateSpec represent a template element the the deploy-
ment description, containing metadata (V1ObjectMeta) and spec (V1PodSpec) ele-
ments from Listing 5.16. As Listing 5.17 shows, the V1PodSpec function uses the
image_pull_secrets key, that uses the regcred secret. Kubernetes secrets are objects
that store encrypted sensitive data, such as credentials to a service, in this case, to
the project’s private Docker Registry. This enhances security, since even if the secret
is found, the exact credentials are still not exposed.
After constructing the deployment object with the details gained from the pushed im-
age, the function returns the deployment object for the create and update functions
to use.
Now, that the deployment object is created by the previously detailed function, the
create_deployment(api, deployment, deployment_name) and update_deployment(api,
deployment, deployment_name) methods can use the provided deployment object.
As it can be seen in Listing 5.18, to create new deployment, the Kubernetes API’s cre-
ate_namespaced_deployment is used, while to update an already existing deployment
with a different version of the used image, the API’s patch_namespaced_deployment
function is used, as shown in Listing 5.19.
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Implementation
1 def create_deployment(api, deployment, deployment_name):
2
# Create new deployment
3
resp = api.create_namespaced_deployment(
4
body=deployment , namespace="default"
5
)
6
7
... # logging and other maintenance related actions
Listing 5.18: Method to create Kubernetes Deployment.
1 def update_deployment(api, deployment, deployment_name):
2
# Patch existing deployment
3
resp = api.patch_namespaced_deployment(
4
name=deployment_name , namespace="default", body=deployment
5
)
6
7
... # logging and other maintenance related actions
Listing 5.19: Method to update Kubernetes Deployment.
After implementing the all three method to create a Kubernetes Deployment object,
to execute a deployment and to update a deployed application, the print method in
Listing 5.14 can be replaced by code snippet shown in Listing 5.20.
1 # host, repository , tag and actor variables received from event object
2 deployment = create_deployment_object(host, repository , tag, actor,
DEPLOYMENT_NAME)
3 if check_deployments(repository, actor):
4
update_deployment(apps_v1, deployment, DEPLOYMENT_NAME)
5 else:
6
create_deployment(apps_v1, deployment, DEPLOYMENT_NAME)
Listing 5.20: Logic in ”/listener” endpoint.
As designed and mentioned earlier, after a POST request is sent to the ”/listener”
endpoint by the private registry, the check_deployments method examines if an appli-
cation is already deployed based on an image with the name received from the event
and by the user with the same name also received from the event. If not, the cre-
ate_deployment is executed to deploy the application based on the image, otherwise
the already running application gets updated by the update_deployment function
based on the pushed image.
5.4.3
Event receiver overview
After putting together the previously mentioned pieces of the software, the Event
receiver can deploy application on image pushes to the private registry. To test the
functioning of the platform, an image push to the registry, like the commands in
Listing 5.9 can be executed to deploy a test application to the cluster, but instead of
the oﬀicial Ubuntu image, the application is tested with the lighter Apache HTTP
==PAGE:59==
5.5 Data platform API
49
Server Project’s Docker image.11
After pushing the image to the private registry, the event receiver application has
the output can be seen in Listing 5.21, displaying that the notification was sent to
the application after the push to the registry, and a Deployment was created and
executed based on the image.
1 [INFO] container image received.
2 [INFO] deployment created.
3 [INFO] deployment `my-httpd-deployment` created.
4 NAMESPACE
NAME
REVISION
IMAGE
5 default
my-httpd-deployment
1
daniel.centerdenmark
.com/my-httpd:1.0
Listing 5.21: Deployment created on push event.
After the deployment is executed by the Event receiver, running the command shown
in the first line of Listing 5.22, results the rest of Listing 5.22, where it can be seen
that the deployment was successful and the application automatically deployed an
application instance on the Kubernetes cluster, as defined in the deployment of the
pushed image.
1 $ kubectl get pods
2 NAME
READY
STATUS
RESTARTS
AGE
3 my-httpd-deployment -754fdc47dc-q6rql
1/1
Running
0
21m
Listing 5.22: List of deployed applications on the Kubernetes cluster.
5.5
Data platform API
While the Docker Registry push based deployment solution works as intended, other
segments require further configuration to satisfy the requirements. One of them is
the data platform API, that accesses the required databases to provide the energy
related data sets, and provides different amount of data based on the additional
header detailed in Section 5.3.2. As the REST API for the data platform is still under
development, a proof-of-concept Flask-based REST API is implemented to showcase
the viability of the design. The API connects to one of Center Denmark’s platforms,
called Science cloud, and, based on the presence of the previously mentioned header,
provides a limited or the complete data set of the daily district heating consumption
data provided by a district heating company in Hillerød.
As mentioned in Section 4.7.1, the API has three relevant functions to provide the
required feature. The first method is the check_headers(headers) method shown in
Listing 5.23, that simply checks if the headers of a request to the REST API endpoint
and examines if the ’Source’ header is present and contains the value set by Nginx.
11https://hub.docker.com/_/httpd
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Implementation
1 def check_headers(headers):
2
return True if 'Source' in headers and headers['Source'] == 'true' else
False
Listing 5.23: Method to check request headers.
Using the Boolean value provided by the check_headers method, the fetch_data
method, listed in Listing 5.24, connects to the database and constructs a query based
on the provided value. As it can be seen, it provides a limited data set, if the required
header is not present.
1 def fetch_data(from_sandbox):
2
# connection to the database
3
cur = connection.cursor()
4
query = 'select v from hillerod.readings' + (' limit 100' if not
from_sandbox else '')
5
cur.execute(query)
6
res = cur.fetchall()
7
return res
Listing 5.24: Data fetcher method with conditional limitation.
Putting together the previous methods, on a GET request to the ”/api/hillerod” end-
point, the get_hillerod method is called.
Although in section 4.7.1 the ”api/all”
endpoint and the function get_data function are designed, here a more specific,
Hillerød related naming is used. First, the method calls the check_headers method,
to check if the request headers contain the required header, and with the result, it
calls the fetch_data method to fetch the data from the database based on the result
of check_headers.
1 @app.route('/api/hillerod')
2 def get_hillerod():
3
from_sandbox = check_headers(request.headers)
4
try:
5
res = fetch_data(from_sandbox)
6
return res, 200
7
except:
8
return 'Error during fetching the data!', 500
Listing 5.25: Event receiver endpoint final implementation.
5.6
Client platform API
To satisfy the requirements of the project, users of the system need to have access
to their deployed applications to ascertain the deployment of their application and
execute different operations on them, such as restarting the application or reading its
logs. To satisfy these needs a REST API is developed, using the Python Kubernetes
client API, to provide details about the users’ deployments and allow further actions
on them.
==PAGE:61==
5.6 Client platform API
51
5.6.1
Authentication
Before allowing access to the endpoints that fetch details about the running applica-
tions, the users need to authenticate themselves. This serves multiple purposes. On
one hand, it ensures confidentiality, therefore only authenticated users of the system
can access information about the cluster. On the other hand, it is utilized to ensure
that users only access information that is related to their own applications, and not
to others’.
To implement JSON Web Token (JWT) based authentication, Flask provides the
flask_jwt Python package that allows to configure specific endpoints by adding the
@jwt_required annotation to require a JWT in the Authorization header. The pack-
age also provides a built-in log in endpoint, that can be configured, as it can be seen
in the first line of Listing 5.26. After the configuration, to log in to the system, a
POST request can be made to the ’/dashboard/login’ endpoint, with the username
and the password of the user in the request body.
The authentication is implemented by creating a User class that represents a user
with username and password, assuming that a username uniquely identifies a user.
Then a list of User objects is created based on each row in the htpasswd file used for
authentication in the Docker Registry. The authenticate and identify methods seen
in Listing 5.26 use this list of users to check the provided password’s validity and
provide the User object based on the unique username. These two methods and the
application object is provided to the JWT object provided by the flask_jwt package
to then allow JWT-based authentication in the application.
1 app.config['JWT_AUTH_URL_RULE'] = '/dashboard/login'
2
3 def authenticate(username, password):
4
user = username_table.get(username, None)
5
pw_hash = bcrypt.generate_password_hash(password)
6
if bcrypt.check_password_hash(user.password, pw_hash):
7
return user
8
9 def identity(payload):
10
username = payload['identity']
11
return username_table.get(username, None)
12
13 jwt = JWT(app, authenticate , identity)
Listing 5.26: Client Platform API - authentication configurations.
After the implementation of the JWT based authentication, a JSON Web Token in the
Authorization header is required for methods having the @jwt_required annotation.
The JWT can be obtained for registered users by sending a POST request to the
”/dashboard/login” endpoint with the correspondent credentials in the request body.
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Implementation
5.6.2
Deployment related methods
To allow users to access their deployed application in the Kubernetes cluster and
execute actions on the such as reading the logs of the application and restarting it,
the following REST API endpoints were implemented:
• GET /dashboard/pods/all: A GET request to the ”/dashboard/deployments/all”
endpoint calls the get_all_pods method.
The method uses the Kubernetes
Python API’s list_namespaced_pod function to fetch the deployed applications
in the cluster and their details, such as the identifier, status and the labels.
Since the application requires a JWT, the current_identity object can be used
to receive the current user, therefore the deployments are filtered to only provide
the applications belonging to the user. The function returns an array containing
the mentioned details for each of the user’s deployed applications.
• GET /dashboard/pods/<id>/logs: A GET request to the ”/dashboard/deploy-
ments/<id>/logs” endpoint calls the get_pod_logs method. The method uses
the read_namespaced_pod_log function from the Kubernetes Python API to
return the logs to a specific Pod, identified by the id path variable.
• POST /dashboard/pods/<id>/restart: A POST request to the ”/dashboard-
/deployments/<id>/restart” endpoint calls the get_pod_logs method.
The
method uses the delete_namespaced_pod function from the Kubernetes Python
API to delete the pod, identified by the id path variable. As Kubernetes is runs
at least one replica of each deployment, the deleted Pod will be automatically
restarted, therefore the calculations of the restared application will be rerun.
Besides the listed endpoints, the GET /dashboard/login endpoints allows users to
authenticate themselves, as detailed earlier.
5.7
Implementation overview
After following the implementation and configuration steps detailed throughout this
chapter, a platform is implemented that allows application deployment to a Kuber-
netes cluster by pushing Docker images to the deployed Docker Registry.
The designed and implemented solution allows developers to test their application
with a limited data set provided by Center Denmark’s APIs, but use a complete,
more resource-heavy data set when the application is deployed to the platform, there-
fore utilizing its resources and additional features.
The deployed applications are trackable by a client API, that allows users to list ac-
cess details about their deployed applications or restart them at any given time.
A complete example deployment is described in Section 6.1 to showcase and evaluate
the operation of the system.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation
This chapter evaluates the results of an application deployment, measurements per-
formed on the solution and test cases executed on different components of the solution
to examine the provided value, including the amount of time it saves in the applica-
tion deployment process compared to manual application deployment.
First, the deployment of an application that uses the data platform API is described
to showcase the desired behaviour of the system and to examine the results of a real-
life scenario.
Then, a deployment time comparison is carried out to prove the acceleration of the
deployment compared to manual processes.
Finally, the unit tests of the different elements of the platform are detailed and exam-
ined to demonstrate that each part of the system results the desired outputs to the
pre-defined inputs.
6.1
Complete deployment
To demonstrate how the platform operates and the results of a complete deployment
process, a sample application is deployed to the platform.
The mentioned application is a simple sample application that counts the average of
the values provided by the REST API endpoint detailed in Section 5.5. After the
average is calculated, the application prints the result to the standard output.
The expected behaviour is that the application is tested on the local environment and
returns a number based on the limited data set provided by the data platform REST
API. This value is then compared with the result of an PostgreSQL query that uses
a limitation1 and returns the expected value. Then, the application is deployed to
utilize the resources of the system, therefore using the complete data set and providing
a more precise average value. Then, this this value is compared again with the same
PostgreSQL query as earlier, but without the limitation.
The Dockerfile in Listing 6.1 is used to execute a docker build and thereby create
a docker image that can be tested locally, then pushed to the private registry to
initialize an application deployment in the sandbox environment based on the built
image.
1https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/limit-optimization.html
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Evaluation
1 FROM python:3.8-slim-buster
2
3 WORKDIR /sample-energy-app
4
5 COPY requirements.txt requirements.txt
6
7 RUN pip3 install -r requirements.txt
8
9 COPY . .
10
11 CMD [ "python3", "app.py"]
Listing 6.1: Dockerfile of the sample energy application.
The image is based on the lightweight python:3.8-slim-buster Python Docker image.
It sets the sample-energy-app directory for work directory to execute further instruc-
tions in that folder. Then, it installs the required packages listed in requirements.txt.
The application only requires the requests package to be able to send HTTP GET
requests to the data platform API described in 5.5.
After locally deploying a container with the docker run command or with a Docker
Compose file based on the image created from the Dockerfile, the application returns
with the calculated value and writes it to the standard output, then the container
stops, since it is not a continuously running application. The logged result can be
seen in the table below in the ”Calculated value (limited)” column.
After the local deployment of the application, to ascertain the correctness of the calcu-
lated value, the PostgreSQL script listed in Listing 6.2 can be executed in the internal
platform of the system to calculate the average value of the day of the testing with
the last 100 measurements.
1 select avg(rs.v) from (select * from hillerod.readings where date(t) = date(
now()) limit 100) rs
Listing 6.2: PostgreSQL query to fetch limited amount of data.
After running the query, it returns the value shown in the table below in the ”Expected
value (limited)” column.
Calculated value (limited)
Expected value (limited)
879.6342144301306
879.6342144301306
As it can be seen in the table, the value calculated by the application, and the
expected value provided by the PostgreSQL query are identical, showing that the
locally deployed application correctly uses the API and the receives the limited (to
100) data set.
==PAGE:65==
6.1 Complete deployment
55
After the application is deployed and tested in the local development environment,
it is ready to be deployed to the sandbox environment by pushing the built image
to the private Docker Registry. To be able to push it to the registry, it needs to
be tagged with the daniel.centerdenmark.com/ prefix, to inform Docker about the
address of the registry. Listing 6.3 shows the commands required, including logging
into the registry and pushing the image.
1 docker tag hillerod-todays-avg daniel.centerdenmark.com/hillerod-todays-avg:
v1.0
2 docker login daniel.centerdenmark.com
3 docker push daniel.centerdenmark.com/hillerod-todays-avg:v1.0
Listing 6.3: Commands to push sample image to the registry.
The first command tags the image to include the previously mentioned prefix. Then
pushing to the registry requires authentication, therefore it is required to run the
command in the second line and then provide the prompted username and password
to the registry. Finally, the third command pushes the image and therefore starts
the deployment process.
To ensure the application’s deployment to the sandbox environment, the client plat-
form API detailed in Section 5.6 can be used. After sending a POST request to the
daniel.centerdenmark.com/dashboard/login with the registered credentials (same as
provided to push the image to the registry) in the body of the request, a JSON Web
Token is received.
After sending a GET request to the daniel.centerdenmark.com/dashboard/all end-
point with the received token in the Authorization request header, it returns the list
of the deployed applications and their details, including previously deployed appli-
cation with the identifier hillerod-todays-avg-deployment-5fdbfb975b-nljct. To receive
the information written to the standard output of the application, a GET request
needs to be sent to the daniel.centerdenmark.com/dashboard/pods/hillerod-todays-avg-
deployment-5fdbfb975b-nljct/logs endpoint. The calculated and logged value of the
application can be seen in the ”Calculated value (unlimited)” column of the table
below.
After the deployment of the application on the sandbox environment, to ascertain the
correctness of the calculated value, the PostgreSQL script listed in Listing 6.4 can be
executed in the previously mentioned internal platform of the system to calculate the
average value of the day of the testing with all the previous measurements from the
day.
1 select avg(rs.v) from (select * from hillerod.readings where date(t) = date(
now())) rs
Listing 6.4: PostgreSQL query to fetch complete data set.
Similarly to the local deployment value, after running the query, it returns the value
shown in the table below in the ”Expected value (unlimited)” column.
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Evaluation
Calculated value (unlimited)
Expected value (unlimited)
688.6062722731272
688.6062722731272
Evaluation the values from the deployed application’s calculation and the result of
the PostgreSQL query, it can be seen that the values differ from the values returned
by the locally deployed application and the results of the PostgreSQL query with the
limitation of the number of values.
Also, it can be observed that the calculated and expected values are identical in
the case of the deployed application as well, verifying the correct behaviour of the
system, meaning that the locally tested application only uses a limited data set for
its calculations, while the application deployed in the sandbox environment uses the
complete data set for its calculation to utilize the additional computing power of the
system.
6.2
Speed comparison
As stated in Section 1.3, the main problem to be be solved by the platform is the
time-consuming deployment process that requires sometimes multiple layers of human
interactions. To prove the viability of the solution and that it solves the mentioned
issues, this chapter details the estimated time and resource consumption of manual
deployments compared to automated deployments using the developed solution.
First, to be able to draw a comparison between the two types of the deployments, the
required steps of the current, manual deployment is listed and detailed with their es-
timated time consumption. The current deployment process, without the deployment
platform, consists of the following steps:
1. The developed application’s Git repository is shared with the company via e-
mail. Depending on the level of occupation and reaction time of the person who
is responsible for accessing the repository, it can take minutes or days.
2. If the application is not ready for containerization and a Dockerfile if not pro-
vided with the source code, the dependencies and requirements of the applica-
tion need to be discussed and considered, that can take up to a few hours.
3. After discussing the possible requirements of the application, the deployment
can be performed. Depending on the usage of containerization, this part of the
process can take from minutes up to hours, if complex configurations are needed,
while unexpected complications also might come up during the deployment,
as a different actor, and not its developer, is responsible for setting up the
application.
In comparison to the previously listed steps, the deployment process using the imple-
mented solution includes the following actions:
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Speed comparison
57
1. The Docker image of the application needs to be built using the docker build
command and the Dockerfile containing the required commands to assemble the
Docker image. In the build process, the image need to be tagged to include the
daniel.centerdenmark.com/ prefix to inform Docker about the location of the
registry where the image will be pushed.
2. To publish the image built in the previous step, authentication is required to
the registry, using the docker login command and providing the registered cre-
dentials.
3. To publish the image and start the automated deployment process, the docker
push needs to be executed, using the image build earlier.
As the enumeration describes, the automated deployment process can be started by
executing the docker build, docker login and docker push actions. Although the three
commands are simple and quickly executable, they require additional actions, as they
do not include the creation of the Dockerfile and the possible learning time required
to acquire the knowledge of Docker, but as mention in Section 3.1, the technology
is already heavily used in the industry, therefore it can be assumed that developers
already own the basic knowledge of Docker.
It is important to mention, that updating a deployed application requires the same
steps in both cases, with approximately the same amount of time consumption.
To evaluate developed platform and its contribution to the acceleration of the deploy-
ment process, the execution time of both deployment processes needs to be compared.
To be able to draw the inference in terms of time consumption, both processes’ time
consumption is needed to be estimated. Assuming that each step of the manual pro-
cess takes one hour due to communication between the partners, learning about the
application to be deployed and the possible complications during configuration, and
each command in the automated deployment process takes up to ten minutes, the
chart on Figure 6.1 can be drawn to display the required time in hours for up to 100
deployments.
Figure 6.1: Estimated time comparison of manual and automated deployments.
==PAGE:68==
58
6 Evaluation
As the chart suggests, with the growing number of deployments, the amount of
time saved grows rapidly. The time saved for application deployment greatly decreases
deployment costs as well, since the manual deployment time requires contribution
from both the developer of the application and the administrator of the deployment
environment.
6.3
Test cases
To test and see the correct behaviour of the APIs composing the deployment platform,
unit tests were developed. Unit testing is the type of testing when individual units
or functions of an application are tested.
To test the methods of the APIs, Python’s unittest package was used, which provides
a unit testing framework for Python applications. In the Git repository of the project,
each application’s app_test.py file contains the adequate test cases.
The following list details which segments of which applications have been tested:
• For the Event receiver API, the creation of a Kubernetes Deployment object is
tested first, then the execution, update and restart of a deployment is tested.
• For the Client platform API, the authentication is tested first by testing if
providing the correct or incorrect credentials to the authentication endpoint
returns an access token. Then the different methods requiring a JWT are tested
to see if an authenticated user can access the deployed applications.
• For the sample Data platform API, the checking of the request headers is tested
first, then data amount returned by the data fetcher application is tested, fol-
lowed by testing the method called by the sample endpoint.
Executing the test cases for the three applications with the commands in line 1, 6
and 11 in Listing 6.5, it can be seen that all the cases run successfully as the
output of each method matches its expected output.
1 python -m unittest discover -s .\event-receiver-api\ -p '*_test.py'
2 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
3 Ran 4 test in 0.132s
4 OK
5
6 python -m unittest discover -s .\client-platform-api\ -p '*_test.py'
7 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
8 Ran 6 tests in 0.194s
9 OK
10
11 python -m unittest discover -s .\sample-data-platform-api\ -p '*_test.py'
12 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
13 Ran 4 test in 0.112s
14 OK
Listing 6.5: Command to execute Python unit tests.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
This chapter discusses how the initials goals listed in Section 1.4 were met to solve
the problems stated in Section 1.3, the unique value that the implemented solution
brings compared to the existing deployment solutions, the limitations of the system
and the required future work that needs to be implemented to be able to provide a
fully production ready platform.
7.1
Goals and results
Section 1.4 listed four goal to achieve to meet the requirements of a project that solves
the stated problems. The following sub-sections detail how each goal was achieved
by the designed platform.
7.1.1
Accelerated application deployment
As Section 3.1 detailed, Docker is a highly preferred tool to utilize the benefits of con-
tainerization. Taking advantage of this developer preference, the deployment platform
was implemented in a way that the users only need to use commands provided by
Docker to push an image to a private registry. These steps are detailed and explained
in Section 6.1 with an example of a complete deployment. As compared in Section
6.2, this heavily accelerates application deployment compared to the currently used
manual and very communication-based methodology, since simply pushing the image
of the developed application to the private registry starts the deployment process.
7.1.2
Confidentiality of data
Data confidentiality is ensured in multiple ways in the system.
First of all, the deployment process starts with a push of an image to the registry.
As detailed in Section 5.2.1, the communication between the user and the registry
happens through a HTTPS-based secure channel. This prevents the possibility of
attackers relaying and altering the communication between the two parties.
This
includes the prevention of gaining access of the pushed image and its content.
On the other hand, the push of the image is preceded by authentication to the registry
with a registered username-password combination. This is required to ensure that
==PAGE:70==
60
7 Discussion
only registered users of the system can push images to the platform, but also to
label the pushed image, therefore also labeling the Kubernetes Deployment, with the
username of the user who pushed it. This label is used when users access information
about their deployed application using the Client platform API detailed in Section 5.6.
Since the deployed applications are labelled and the Client platform API also requires
authentication, when the API provides details about the deployed applications, it
filters and only returns details about the user’s own deployments.
This prevents
users from accessing other users’ applications and their details. Harmful users also
cannot send requests claiming that they are different users, since the Client platform
API uses the generated JSON Web Tokens to gain information about the user who
initiated the requests.
7.1.3
User control over deployments
User control over the deployments is guaranteed by the implemented Client platform
API. The API allows users to fetch information about their deployments and execute
actions such as reading the logs of the application or restart the application to re-
execute the calculations done by the application at a different time.
First, the API requires authentication by sending a POST request to the /dashboard-
/login endpoint, that provides a JSON Web Token in case of registered and correctly
provided credentials.
Appending the provided JWT as a header of the requests, the users can access their
applications on the /dashboard/pods/all endpoint, returning details about all the pre-
viously executed deployments.
Again, using the JWT as a header of the requests, the users can access the in-
formation written to the standard output of their applications on the /dashboard-
/pods/<id>/logs endpoint with a GET request, where the <id> is the name of a
deployment that uniquely identifies it and can be received from the list return by the
/dashboard/pods/all endpoint.
Similarly, using the JWT as a header of the requests, the users can rerun their appli-
cations by sending a POST request to the /dashboard/pods/<id>/restart endpoint.
The API, including the listed endpoints, provides users to have the required control
over their deployed applications.
7.1.4
Highly available and scalable environment
The features provided by Kubernetes heavily enhances the system’s scalability and
availability. Kubernetes’ autoscaling feature1 allows to automatically scale up a clus-
ter when it is needed, and scale it back down once it is not. Also, to support high avail-
ability, different Kubernetes topologies were discussed and noted as possible future
improvements, as they could not be implemented due to lack of available resources.
1https://kubernetes.io/blog/2016/07/autoscaling-in-kubernetes/
==PAGE:71==
7.2 Limitations
61
7.2
Limitations
Although the developed solution satisfies the requirements and provides a solution to
the problems stated in Section 1.3, some limitation were identified in the designed
solution. The following list details the identified limitations and their possible solu-
tions:
• Pushing multiple images: As most applications, that execute calculations and
optimization algorithms, can be deployed as single images, it can happen that
some application require multiple images to be deployed together, such as requir-
ing an additional PostgreSQL relational database for metadata storage. With
the current solution, deploying multiple images together is not possible, since
the deployment process starts after the push of a single image. This is a known
limitation, and throughout the design of the platform it was assumed that the
deployed applications does not require additional containers.
To solve this issue, Docker Compose provides its push feature2. By utilizing
this feature, it is possible to push multiple images that are described in the
docker-compose.yaml file to the specified registry, therefore allowing to send no-
tifications about multiple registry pushes and utilizing this, deploying multiple
images one after another. Although this is a possible solution, it requires a
more complex knowledge of Docker and Docker Compose from developer side,
and also a different implementation in the Event receiver API.
• Event receiver security: When it comes to the implemented solution’s security,
the Event receiver endpoint, that is being called by the Docker Registry, is not
protected in any way. Lack of authentication requires in anybody being able
to call the endpoint and start unwanted deployments and potentially overload
the system, this resulting in blocking actual deployments. In production, this
problem can be avoided by modifying firewall settings of the server which the
Event receiver is running on, to only accepts requests from the location of the
Docker Registry.
• Flask web framework: As a personal opinion, the choice of using Python, espe-
cially the Flask framework is not perfectly suitable for high-scale web develop-
ment. Python gained popularity in the fields of data science and machine learn-
ing thanks to it being a syntactically simple yet fully-fledged general-purpose
programming language, and using a Python based web framework to stay with
a known technological stack is considered beneficial by many. Although Flask’s
offering is enough to develop prototypes and proof-of-concept solutions, for
production-grade applications I would rather chose more robust and mature
frameworks such as the Java based Spring3 framework. As an example, the
Spring Framework offers various components that accelerate and simplify the
development, such as the Spring Security and Sprint Data components.
2https://docs.docker.com/compose/reference/push/
3https://spring.io/
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Discussion
7.3
Future work
As mentioned earlier, the implemented platform is a proof-of-concept solution, demon-
strating the viability of the design and proving the acceleration of application deploy-
ment. This section details the identified future tasks on the project to provide a more
robust, production-ready solution.
7.3.1
Removing unused images
As for the current implementation of the system, the images pushed to the registry
are not removed and cannot be removed externally. This can lead to heavy resource
utilization due to the amount of unused images in the registry. Also, some users might
want to remove their images from the registry due to confidential or other reasons.
Solutions for both of the use-cases could be implemented by utilizing the API provided
by Docker Registry. Endpoints could be added to the Client platform API, that lets
users to fetch the pushed images and allows them to delete ones manually. To provide
an automated solution, CRON jobs4 could be implemented to periodically compare
images in the Docker Registry and the applications deployed in the Kubernetes cluster,
looking for unused and effaceable images.
7.3.2
Kubernetes cluster topology
The current implementation uses a Minikube based Kubernetes cluster as a proof-
of-concept solution.
As discussed in Section 4.4, Minikube only can be used for
development purposes, while for a production-ready cluster, it requires additional
nodes, further configurations and a Highly Available cluster topology.
7.3.3
Additional services
As Center Denmark provided an environment to test the designed platform, the follow-
ing additional, but relevant services were identified, that are still under development:
• Authentication service: a general authentication service is required to provide
a general sign in and sign up method for all the Center Denmark platforms.
• Middleware platform: Center Denmark’s middleware platform is under develop-
ment and will be integrated to provide logging, monitoring, caching and other
services to the deployed applications.
• Client portal: As the Client platform API is implemented, a dashboard applica-
tion is needed for users to be able to utilize the API in a simple and user-friendly
way, possibly integrated into Center Denmark’s already existing web portals.
4https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This thesis has introduced an approach to implement a solution that accelerates the
deployment of energy data-driven applications to a predefined environment.
The
designed approach eliminates the commonly required human interactions when appli-
cations are deployed to the environment, by utilizing tools that are highly used and
preferred all over the the industry.
The thesis begins with identifying the exact problem and setting specific goals to
solve the identified problem. The identified goals included the deployment of a solu-
tion that fastens application deployment, while provides confidentiality of data, high
availability and scalability, and allows users to be able to control their deployed ap-
plications.
After the describing the problem to be solved, the thesis examines related solutions
that solve similar issues. Specifically, deployment automation tools and infrastructure
as code tools were discussed. As it was found out, all of the widely-used deployment
automation tools require additional configurations in the developed applications’ ver-
sion control system and the possible implementation of a branching strategy, that can
result in unwanted overhead for the developers of the applications. Infrastructure as
code solutions, although are able to deploy applications, were found out to require
developers to know details about the environment that the application is planned to
be deployed on, which cannot be expected from developers who are unfamiliar with
the infrastructure of the environment.
After examining the tools related to the acceleration of application deployment and
realizing their shortcomings, technologies and mechanisms were analyzed that can be
adopted as part of the designed solution. The industry-wide usage and the benefits of
containerization were identified, including reproducibility and portability. Utilizing
this knowledge, further technologies were analyzed that are related to containeriza-
tion based application deployment.
Based on the knowledge gained during the analysis of containerization and the related
tools, a solution was designed that utilizes the analyzed technologies and mechanisms.
Taking the wide-spread usage of containerization and Docker into account, a solution
was designed that starts an application deployment process after an application’s
==PAGE:74==
64
8 Conclusion
Docker images is pushed to a private registry. Following the designed architecture,
the implementation of the solution was detailed. The design and the implementation
of the solution includes additional solutions and methodologies to aid local applica-
tion testing and to allow user control over the deployed applications.
After the implementation of the solution, it was evaluated and tested to see if it
successfully achieves the acceleration of application deployment. A complete exam-
ple application deployment and multiple unit test cases were executed, testing all the
provided features of the solution to examine the implemented behaviour. After the
sample deployment, the required steps of both manual and automated deployments
(using the implemented solution) were detailed to be able to draw the inference in
terms of deployment time consumption. After estimating the require time for both
deployment processes, it was evaluated that the implemented solution heavily accel-
erates the deployment process, especially as the number of deployments grow.
Lastly, a discussion was given about the current state of the project and how it
achieved its goals to solve the stated problem. Although the implemented solution
improved the time-consumption and simplicity of the deployment process, as it is a
proof-of-concept solution, it resulted in a few known limitations and recommendations
for future work. Fixing these limitations and implementing the recommended work
would allow the solution to be a fully production grade deployment platform.
To conclude, the thesis is determined to be successful, as it provided a solution to
accelerate application deployment to the predefined environment.
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
TLS/SSL handshake
Figure A.11 depicts the events happening throughout a TLS/SSL handshake.
Figure A.1: TLS/SSL handshake.
The TLS handshake consists of the following steps:
1. The ’client hello’ message: The client initiates the handshake by sending a
”hello” message to the server.
The message will include which TLS version
the client supports, the cipher suites supported, and a string of random bytes
known as the ”client random.”
1Source of Figure A.1 and the listed steps: https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/ssl/what-
happens-in-a-tls-handshake/
==PAGE:76==
66
A An Appendix
2. The ’server hello’ message: In reply to the client hello message, the server sends
a message containing the server’s SSL certificate, the server’s chosen cipher suite,
and the ”server random,” another random string of bytes that’s generated by
the server.
3. Authentication: The client verifies the server’s SSL certificate with the certifi-
cate authority that issued it. This confirms that the server is who it says it is,
and that the client is interacting with the actual owner of the domain.
4. The premaster secret: The client sends one more random string of bytes, the
”premaster secret.” The premaster secret is encrypted with the public key and
can only be decrypted with the private key by the server. (The client gets the
public key from the server’s SSL certificate.)
5. Private key used: The server decrypts the premaster secret.
6. Session keys created: Both client and server generate session keys from the client
random, the server random, and the premaster secret. They should arrive at
the same results.
7. Client is ready: The client sends a ”finished” message that is encrypted with a
session key.
8. Server is ready: The server sends a ”finished” message encrypted with a session
key.
9. Secure symmetric encryption achieved: The handshake is completed, and com-
munication continues using the session keys.
A.2
Pushing an image to the private Docker Registry
Figure A.2: Pushing an image to the private Docker Registry after authentication.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
European Commission. The European Green Deal. url: https://eur- lex.
europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1576150542719&uri=COM%3A2019%
3A640%3AFIN.
[2]
Dansk Energi. Powering Denmark’s Green Transition. url: https : / / www .
danskenergi.dk/sites/danskenergi.dk/files/media/dokumenter/2020-
07/Powering_Denmarks_Green_Transition_Climatepartnership.pdf.
[3]
Henrik Madsen. Data-Intelligent Operation and Optimization of District Heat-
ing Systems. url: https://www.lowtemp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/
11.00_Henrik-Madsen_lowTEMP_DTU_presentation.pdf.
[4]
Nordisk Ministerråd. Enabling the Digital Green Transition: A Study of Po-
tentials, Challenges and Strengths in the Nordic-Baltic Region. url: https:
//norden.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A1596448&
dswid=5327.
[5]
Marek Moravcik et al. “Teaching cloud computing in cloud computing.” eng.
In: Iceta 2017 - 15th Ieee International Conference on Emerging Elearning
Technologies and Applications, Proceedings (2017), page 8102512. doi: 10.1109/
ICETA.2017.8102512.
[6]
Patricia Ortegon Cano et al. “A Taxonomy on Continuous Integration and
Deployment Tools and Frameworks.” eng. In: Advances in Intelligent Systems
and Computing 1297 (2021), pages 323–336. issn: 21945365, 21945357. doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-63329-5_22.
[7]
Waldemar Hummer et al. “Testing idempotence for infrastructure as code.” eng.
In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Ar-
tificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 8275 (2013), pages 368–
388. issn: 16113349, 03029743. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-45065-5_19.
[8]
Roman Kostromin. “Survey of software configuration management tools of
nodes in heterogeneous distributed computing environment.” In: July 2020. doi:
10.47350/ICCS-DE.2020.15.
[9]
Indika Kumara et al. “The do’s and don’ts of infrastructure code: A systematic
grey literature review.” In: Information and Software Technology 137 (April
2021), page 106593. doi: 10.1016/j.infsof.2021.106593.
==PAGE:78==
68
Bibliography
[10]
Moshe Zadka. “Ansible.” eng. In: Devops in Python (2019), pages 139–145. doi:
10.1007/978-1-4842-4433-3_11.
[11]
IBM Market Development and Insights team. Containers in the enterprise. url:
https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/VG8KRPRM.
[12]
Portworx. 2017 Annual Container Adoption Survey. url: https://portworx.
com/blog/2017-container-adoption-survey/.
[13]
Stack Overflow. 2020 Developer Survey. url: https://insights.stackoverflow.
com/survey/2020#overview.
[14]
IBM Cloud Education. Containerization explained. url: https://www.ibm.
com/cloud/learn/containerization.
[15]
Jürgen Cito, Vincenzo Ferme, and Harald Gall. “Using Docker Containers to
Improve Reproducibility in Software and Web Engineering Research.” In: June
2016, pages 609–612. isbn: 978-3-319-38790-1. doi: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 -
38791-8_58.
[16]
Adam S. Biener and Andrea C. Crawford. “DevOps for containerized appli-
cations.” eng. In: Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 787 (2019).
Edited by Tareq Z. Ahram, pages 35–44. issn: 21945365, 21945357. doi: 10.
1007/978-3-319-94229-2_4.
[17]
Anuj Yadav, M. Garg, and Ritika Mehra. “Docker Containers Versus Virtual
Machine-Based Virtualization: Proceedings of IEMIS 2018, Volume 3.” In: Jan-
uary 2019, pages 141–150. isbn: 978-981-13-1500-8. doi: 10.1007/978-981-
13-1501-5_12.
[18]
Aniruddh M et al. “Comparison of Containerization and Virtualization in Cloud
Architectures.” eng. In: 2021 Ieee International Conference on Electronics, Com-
puting and Communication Technologies (conecct) (2021), pages 1–5. issn: 27662101.
doi: 10.1109/CONECCT52877.2021.9622668.
[19]
Nicholas Ayres, Lipika Deka, and Daniel Paluszczyszyn. “Continuous auto-
motive software updates through container image layers.” eng. In: Electronics
(switzerland) 10.6 (2021), pages 1–17. issn: 20799292. doi: 10.3390/electronics10060739.
[20]
Kinnary Jangla. “Docker Images.” eng. In: Accelerating Development Velocity
Using Docker (2018), pages 55–76. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-3936-0_5.
[21]
Joshua Cook. “The Dockerfile.” eng. In: Docker for Data Science (2017), pages 81–
101. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-3012-1_5.
[22]
Docker Docs. Docker images oﬀicial documentation. url: https : / / docs .
docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/images/.
[23]
Steve Buchanan, Janaka Rangama, and Ned Bellavance. “Container Registries.”
eng. In: Introducing Azure Kubernetes Service (2019), pages 17–34. doi: 10.
1007/978-1-4842-5519-3_2.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
69
[24]
Riccardo Guidotti et al. “Helping your docker images to spread based on explain-
able models.” eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)
11053 (2019), pages 205–221. issn: 16113349, 03029743. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
030-10997-4_13.
[25]
Docker. Docker Trusted Registry - Technical Brief. url: https://www.docker.
com/sites/default/files/Docker%20Trusted%20Registry.pdf.
[26]
Red Hat Software. Red Hat Quay - datasheet. url: https://www.redhat.com/
rhdc/managed-files/cl-quay-datasheet-f17283-201904-en.pdf.
[27]
Azure. About registries, repositories, and artifacts. url: https://docs.microsoft.
com/en-us/azure/container-registry/container-registry-concepts/.
[28]
G2. Best Container Registry Software Comparison. url: https://www.g2.com/
categories/container-registry/.
[29]
Mohd Nizam Mohd Mydin et al. “An Operational View into Docker Registry
with Scalability, Access Control and Image Assessment.” In: April 2021.
[30]
Red Hat Software. Quay Project documentation. url: https://docs.projectquay.
io/manage_quay.html.
[31]
GitLab. GitLab Container Registry documentation. url: https://docs.gitlab.
com/ee/user/packages/container_registry/.
[32]
Harbor. Harbor 2.4 Documentation. url: https://goharbor.io/docs/2.4.0/.
[33]
Jarle Bjørgeengen. “A Multitenant Container Platform with OKD, Harbor Reg-
istry and ELK.” eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)
11887 (2019), pages 69–79. issn: 16113349, 03029743. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
030-34356-9_7.
[34]
Docker. Docker Registry oﬀicial documentation. url: https://docs.docker.
com/registry/deploying/.
[35]
Marek Moravcik and Martin Kontsek. “Overview of Docker container orchestra-
tion tools.” eng. In: Iceta 2020 - 18th Ieee International Conference on Emerg-
ing Elearning Technologies and Applications, Proceedings (2020), pages 475–480.
doi: 10.1109/ICETA51985.2020.9379236.
[36]
Nikhil Marathe, Ankita Gandhi, and Jaimeel M. Shah. “Docker swarm and
kubernetes in cloud computing environment.” eng. In: Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics, Icoei 2019 2019-
(2019), pages 179–184. doi: 10.1109/icoei.2019.8862654.
[37]
Arsh Modak et al. “Techniques to Secure Data on Cloud: Docker Swarm or
Kubernetes?” eng. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Inventive
Communication and Computational Technologies, Icicct 2018 (2018), pages 7–
12. doi: 10.1109/ICICCT.2018.8473104.
==PAGE:80==
70
Bibliography
[38]
Kubernetes. Kubernetes Client Libraries. url: https://kubernetes.io/docs/
reference/using-api/client-libraries/.
[39]
RootUsers. Linux Web Server Performance Benchmark – 2016 Results. url:
https://www.rootusers.com/linux-web-server-performance-benchmark-
2016-results/.
[40]
Kubernetes. Kubernetes Components. url: https://kubernetes.io/docs/
concepts/overview/components/.
[41]
Minikube. The Minikube handbook. url: https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/
docs/handbook/.
[42]
Ruchika Muddinagiri, Shubham Ambavane, and Simran Bayas. “Self-Hosted
Kubernetes: Deploying Docker Containers Locally with Minikube.” eng. In: Pro-
ceeding - 1st International Conference on Innovative Trends and Advances in
Engineering and Technology, Icitaet 2019 (2019), pages 239–243. doi: 10.1109/
ICITAET47105.2019.9170208.
[43]
Kubernetes. Options for Highly Available topology. url: https://kubernetes.
io/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/ha-topology/.
[44]
Docker. Image Manifest V 2, Schema 2. url: https://docs.docker.com/
registry/spec/manifest-v2-2/.
[45]
Google. Why and when to use API keys. url: https://cloud.google.com/
endpoints/docs/openapi/when-why-api-key/.
[46]
Josh Aas et al. “Let’s encrypt: An automated certificate authority to encrypt
the entire web.” eng. In: Proceedings of the Acm Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (2019), pages 2473–2487. issn: 15437221. doi: 10.
1145/3319535.3363192.
