==PAGE:1==
Linxuan Yao, s192216
Testing and modelling of a
reconfigurable battery system for the
provision of grid services
Master Thesis, January 2022
==PAGE:2==
Linxuan Yao, s192216
Testing and modelling of a
reconfigurable battery system for the
provision of grid services
Master’s Thesis, January 2022
==PAGE:3==
Testing and modelling of a reconfigurable battery system for the provision of
grid services
Author:
Linxuan Yao, s192216
Supervisors:
Mattia Marinelli, Associate professor (DTU)
Zoltan Mark Pinter, PhD student (DTU)
Tatiana Gabderakhmanova, Postdoctoral researcher (DTU)
Mirko Ledro, research assistant (DTU)
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
23th of January 2022
Class:
1 (Public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve Master of Science
degree at Technical University of Denmark. The report represents
30 ECTS points.
Rights:
Linxuan Yao, 2022
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
First of all I wish to give thanks to my supervisors Mattia, Zoltan, Tatiana and Mirko.
Thanks to Mattia for creating the project and the academic support. Many thanks to
Zoltan for all the guidance and explanations with a lot of patience. Thanks to Tatiana for
giving advice and feedback which helps a lot. Thanks to Mirko for giving very good ideas
about the project and effort in the lab test.
The hardest part for me doing this thesis has been to maintain concentration along the
five months. Thanks to the guidance from my supervisors so that I didn’t get lost doing
this big project. I would also like to express my gratitude to my parents and my boyfriend
Jacob for supporting me during the difficult moments.
i
==PAGE:6==
ABSTRACT
Meeting the ambitious goals of transition to environmental-friendly renewable energy
sources (RES) poses new challenges to frequency stability in the electric power system due
to variable and less-controllable power output. To mitigate this effect, electricity market
participants within certain categories are encouraged to provide frequency control services.
Traditionally, frequency regulation is performed by quickly adjusting the active power
production to counteract any frequency deviations in power system. However, with the
increasing maturity level and decreasing costs, battery energy storage systems (BESSs)
are now becoming a promising solution with faster and more flexible features for providing
frequency control services.
This work focuses on a specific Li-ion BESS providing primary frequency regulation services,
which are performed in the fastest level in terms of the time frame of frequency control.
The components including an inverter, BESS and an (Energy Management System) EMS
controlling algorithm are modelled in Matlab Simulink. Three case studies are investigated
to assess compliance with the Danish grid code (in DK2):
• Test the BESS performance providing either FCR-N or FCR-D or LFSM-O at one time
• Test the BESS performance providing both FCR-N and FCR-D at the same time
• Test the BESS performance providing FCR-N, FCR-D and LFSM-O altogether
In order to confirm whether the designed Simulink model is accurately representing the
actual system, a validation test against a physical BESS system is carried out in the lab.
The BESS in the lab is complying with grid code having LFSM-O control functionality
with a droop of 4%. This functionality is mandatory for storage in category A (devices
smaller than 125 kW). The experiment results shows the same regulation behaviour as the
Simulink model.
The findings of the case studies are that the initial State of Charge (SOC) may put a
limitation on the frequency regulation performance if the droop-% is small (strong response).
The scope of the study cases is limited since only one day of historic frequency data is
tested to evaluate the battery regulation behaviour. Not to mention the grid frequency in
real time has an extremely random behaviour, which adds more difficulties to assess the
battery behaviour in practice.
ii
==PAGE:7==
SYMBOLS
Symbols
Definition
RES
Renewable Energy Source
BESS
Battery Energy Storage System
PFR
Primary Frequency Response
BES
Battery Energy storage
LFP
Lithium Iron Phosphate
ESS
Energy Storage Systems
EMS
Energy Management System
BMS
Battery Management System
RBS
Reconfigurable Battery Systems
SOC
State of Charge
SOA
Safe Operating Area
EV
Electric Vehicle
SSC
Supervisory System Control
SCM
String Control Module
MC
Module Controller
CC
Cell Controller
NSS
Nerve Smart Systems
MOSFET
Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Field-Effect Transistor
Li-ion
Lithium ion
AGC
Automatic Generation Control
TSO
Transmission System Operator
ENTSO-E
European Network for Transmission System Operators for Electricity
DK1
East Denmark grid region
DK2
West Denmark grid region
FCR-D
Frequency-Controlled Disturbance Reserve
FCR-N
Frequency-Controlled Normal Operation Reserve
LFSM-O
Limited Frequency Sensitive Mode - Overfrequency
LFSM-U
Limited Frequency Sensitive Mode - Underfrequency
iii
==PAGE:8==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgement
i
Abstract
ii
Symbols
iii
Table of Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
State of the art of storage technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Problem definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Technological background
11
2.1
Battery energy storage system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
NerveSwitch BMS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
System overview and reconfigurable cell topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Frequency regulation and grid code for storage facilities
. . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Historic frequency data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Simulation model
23
3.1
General overview of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
System components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Design of the EMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4
Validation test of the EMS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Case studies
35
4.1
Definition of study cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Case 1 - Test the battery for providing one service FCR-N or FCR-D or
LFSM-O at one time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Case 2 - Test the battery for providing both FCR-N and FCR-D
. . . . . .
44
4.4
Case 3 - Test the battery providing FCR-N, FCR-D and LFSM-O with 4%
of droop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Test in the lab
50
5.1
Lab setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2
Frequency profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3
Lab results vs. Simulink results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Conclusion & future work
55
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
iv
==PAGE:9==
Table of Contents
References
58
v
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
This chapter introduces the global shift to a sustainable energy system in order to mitigate
the risk of catastrophic climate change. The massive deployment of renewable energy
sources is putting new stress to the power system. All this has brought the significant
potential of the energy storage for grid services provision into sharp relief. Furthermore,
the technology maturity of energy storage is described. Finally, previous investigations
related to storage are introduced.
1.1
Motivation
1.1.1
Background of study
In recent years, we have been facing a rising concern about the global energy shortage
and climatic deterioration. Thus, energy-savings, emission-reduction, green energy and
sustainability have become key focus areas in today’s world. With the rapid dry-up of
fossil resources and environmental pollution, large scale development and utilization of
wind and solar energy etc. has become an effective approach of achieving sustainability,
meeting the energy demand and improving the quality of environment.
State leaders around the world have acknowledged and accepted that we are facing an
impending climatic crisis, and a number of practices have been implemented. The most
influential initiative is the Paris Agreement which was adopted by 196 Parties in 2015. Its
goal is to limit global warming to well below 2, preferably to 1.5 degrees Celsius, compared
to pre-industrial levels. To achieve a climate neutral world by mid-century, countries
have released a series of climate policies. The Danish Climate Act sets a target to reduce
Denmark’s emissions by 70 percent in 2030 compared to 1990 and climate neutrality by
2050 [1]. The statistic shows that Denmark generated half of the electricity from wind and
solar power in 2020, that’s the highest proportion recorded for Denmark [2]. As a wind
energy-dominated country, it’s a promising start but Denmark still needs to do more to
meet its ambitious goals.
Figure 1.1 shows the installed wind capacity until 2020. Growth can be seen from both
onshore and offshore wind turbines over the past years. However, variable consumption
plus variable production would lead to constant power imbalance, which calls for a flexible
solution to ensure that the Renewable Energy Sources (RESs) are integrated in an efficient
and reliable manner. Battery storage systems are emerging due to their unique capability
to quickly absorb, hold and then re-inject electricity, the details are further described later
in this section.
1
==PAGE:12==
1. Introduction
Figure 1.1. Installed wind turbines capacity in Denmark on land, at sea and overall [MW] [3].
1.1.2
Renewable energy in power system
As renewable energy is getting an increasing share in the electricity market because of
their cheaper costs, it results in having a large scale integration of renewable resources in
power system. However, due to their intermittent and fluctuating nature [4], connecting to
the grid may cause power fluctuation, therefore the unbalance of active power generation
and load emerges, which as a result leads to frequency variation of the system. It brings
great challenges to the stability and safety to the electric power system.
In 2010, an investigation was performed by the California Energy Commission, studying
how 20% and 33% of renewable energy penetration in power system would affect the
California grid. It was concluded that 20% of RES penetration causes severe grid frequency
degradation, and 33% exacerbates the frequency degradation much further [5].
When the RES penetration in the power system starts to increase, the shape of the load
curve changes significantly into a so-called Duck Curve. The Figure 1.2 depicts the duck
curves from 2012 to 2018 in the Californian power system, it refers to the timing imbalance
between peak demand and renewable energy production. It is important to note that
solar is a dominant RES in California. The system is required to ramp downwards in
the morning when solar generation grows, and ramp upwards in the evening when solar
generation reduces and demand increases. To be capable of meeting these high ramping
requirements and flatten the duck curves, a flexible technology battery storage system
would be suitable. In Figure 1.2, the red and blue curved show that build-out of solar will
aggravate the Duck Curve, and storage will mitigate it.
2
==PAGE:13==
1. Introduction
Figure 1.2. Impact on the duck curve of energy storage providing flexible ramping, using a 3 MW
feeder as an example (not the entire Californian power system) [6].
1.1.3
The feasibility of storage for the provision of frequency regulation
A battery energy storage system (BESS) is an electro-chemical device that collects energy
from the grid or a power plant and then discharges that energy at a later time to provide
electricity or other grid services when needed. A list of BESS’s applications that has been
deployed is displayed in Figure 1.3.
Figure 1.3. Applications of BESS [7].
3
==PAGE:14==
1. Introduction
The main focus of this thesis is the function of operating reserves. There are various
categories of operating reserves that function on different timescales, from sub-seconds to
several hours, all of which are needed to ensure grid reliability. BESS can quickly engage
in charging or discharging in a fraction of a second, faster than conventional thermal
plants, making them a suitable resource for short-term reliability services, such as Primary
Frequency Response (PFR)[7]. The fast response and flexible characteristics has attracted
the attention of the power system operators [8]. Here is a list of important Battery Energy
Storage System expectations for grid frequency regulation service:
• High power capacity
High power capacity of battery ensures enough instantaneous active power can be
discharged for grid frequency support.
• Long cycle life at a partial cycle
Cycle life at a partial cycle refers to the battery lifetime under a specific discharge
pattern, this specific pattern depends on the utility’s application.
• Low battery cycle cost
The battery cycle cost is determined after the cycle loss-of-life at a partial cycle is
obtained. The battery cycle cost is generally defined by the battery investment cost
divided by the battery cycle life [9].
• Fast response
Fast response time ensures that the time to start providing active power output for
grid frequency support is short enough to arrest the frequency excursion.
Long cycle lifetime at partial charge/discharge is required from the BESS when it is used
for different grid service provisions. Thus, the low cost per partial cycle is a mandatory
requirement, and the investment in the BESS could be economically viable if it is achieved
[10].
The BESS operators can get incomes from several different opportunities, including
arbitrage (energy shifting) or ancillary services payments, such as in the wholesale energy
market, through bilateral contracts, or directly by the utility through a cost-of-service
mechanism. However, the revenue regarding the ancillary services is outside the scope of
this thesis.
1.2
State of the art of storage technology
1.2.1
General description of storage technology
There are many benefits of implementing energy storage in power system, however the
costs itself have to be taken consideration first. The inclusion of a BESS will incur the
additional cost associated with storage. The price of each kilowatt-hour of energy that
passes through storage before being sent to the grid will increase. Thus, to be able to
have a true economic impact, the assessment of the effective costs without storing any
energy is necessary. Around one decade ago, battery energy storage came with a high
cost, so building additional generation was more economical rather than choosing energy
storage. However, the energy storage prices have been continuing to fall while cycle life
has increased and environmental concerns becoming more prevalent, energy storage has
become more viable.
4
==PAGE:15==
1. Introduction
Electricity storage is currently an economically interesting solution since it can provide a
variety of energy services in an affordable manner. As the cost of emerging technologies
falls further, storage will become even more competitive, the range of the economical
services it can supply will only increase. A number of technologies have been developed
for the purpose of energy storage, Figure 1.4 categorizes different forms of energy stored
and different possible applications of certain technologies. The possible formats of energy
stored are pumped hydro , electro-chemical, electro-mechanical and thermal storage. The
applications are grouped corresponding to the storage types. It can be seen that frequency
regulation applications are dominantly deployed by electro-chemical storage.
Figure 1.4. Global energy storage power capacity shares by main-use case and technology group,
mid-2017 [11].
Regarding the ancillary grid services provided by electricity energy storage, some
applications require high power for short durations (e.g. fast frequency regulation response),
while others need power over longer periods (e.g. firm capacity supply). These different
services imply various charge/discharge cycles. In the former cases, charge and discharge
cycles are likely to be uniform, while in the latter cases, charge/discharge patterns could
be highly variable. All this has brought into a further categorization of electricity storage
technologies.
Based on which services are provided, electricity storage technologies is divided into two
main categories: power-intensive and energy-intensive. Power-intensive applications are
required to provide ancillary services to the electricity system in maintaining the balance
of frequency and voltage or improving power quality. Thus, they are characterized by short
discharge time and fast response. While energy-intensive applications call for storing large
5
==PAGE:16==
1. Introduction
amounts of energy (match demand and supply or reducing congestion in the network),
they are specified by long discharge time and used on an hourly to seasonal scale. Table 1.1
categorizes the electricity storage technologies. The distinction between power or energy
intensive services is not always clear and neat. Some technologies, such as pumped-hydro
or Li-ion batteries, can provide both services but predominantly energy-intensive [12].
Table 1.1. Categorization of electricity storage technologies [12]
Service provided
Technology
Power-intensive
Energy-intensive
Flywheel (FES)
✓
✓
Large Batteries (NaS, VRB, SoNick)
✓
✓
Lead-acid batteries
✓
Stationary lithium-ion batteries
✓
✓
Electric car batteries
✓
Pumped-hydro
✓
✓
The focus of this work is on frequency stability, and therefore only power-intensive storage
systems are relevant.
1.2.2
The technological maturity electro-chemical energy storage
As it is mentioned in the previous sub-section, the frequency regulation service is usually
delivered by electro-chemical energy storage. In this part, the battery electricity storage
(BES), to be more specific, the electro-chemical storage is elaborated and the key
performance characteristics of the electro-chemical family is compared. The cost reduction
of electro-chemical BES systems has been impressive in recent years, Figure 1.5 shows all
installation cost reductions potential of different type of storage. These technologies have
taken advantages from huge investment in recent years because of their versatility. The
main sources of cost reduction for the installation costs include: the improved cathode
technology, increase of efficiency of material use, usage of less expensive materials etc. The
competitiveness of low costs and good performance would improve even more. In Figure
1.6, lead-acid batteries has the lowest energy installation costs in 2016, and the central
energy installation cost estimates for Lithium Iron Phosphate (LFP) batteries are a bit
higher.
Li-ion (Lithium Ion) type is appeared to be an outstanding technology providing high
power or energy in limited space or weight setting. Figure 1.7 shows that the current
energy densities for Li-ion cells are the highest among the others in IRENA’s studies. It
is one of the main reasons behind the wide implementation in portable applications and
usage in electro-mobility market.
Lead-acid battery is a mature technology which has been used in grid application for many
years, but the demand for lead-acid battery energy storage has only increased in recent
years [13]. However, Li-ion battery energy storage have a dominant market share and are
found to be profitable application for frequency regulation service in [14], and NaS battery
energy storages have been used in Japan and the US [15].
6
==PAGE:17==
1. Introduction
Figure 1.5. Energy installation costs estimations for battery technologies, in 2016 and 2030.
Note: LA = lead-acid; VRLA = valve-regulated lead-acid; NaS = sodium sulphur;
NaNiCl = sodium nickel chloride; VRFB = vanadium redox flow battery; ZBFB =
zinc bromine flow battery; NCA = nickel cobalt aluminium; NMC/LMO = nickel
manganese cobalt oxide/lithium manganese oxide; LFP = lithium iron phosphate;
LTO = lithium titanate. [11]
Figure 1.6. Cycle life reference and energy installation cost of selected battery storage technologies
in 2016 [11].
Figure 1.7. Energy and power density ranges of selected battery storage technologies in 2016 [11].
7
==PAGE:18==
1. Introduction
In the Danish electricity market, it is found that the most profitable service is Primary
Frequency Regulation (PFR) [16]. The service is delivered by the Energy Storage Systems
(ESS), either by discharging the energy into the grid in case of under-frequencies or charging
when there are over-frequencies. For the PFR service, Li–ion batteries were found to have
the lowest annual accumulated cycle cost [16]. Additionally, Li–ion batteries represent
attractive candidates also due to their characteristics such as long calendar lifetime, fast
response, low self-discharge rate, and decreasing cost due to the continuous expansion of
e-mobility industry [17].
Many Li–ion battery chemistry are currently available in the market and each of them has
unique characteristics. Table 1.2 compares various technical and economic characteristics of
different cathode and anode materials used in Li–ion batteries. Among these characteristics,
low cost per cycle, safety, and fast response are the most important characteristics required
for Li–ion batteries using in grid integration. Consequently, by analyzing Table 1.2, LFP-
based (LiMo2/Li4Ti5O12) cathode batteries and LTO-based (LiFePo4/C) anode batteries
have an excellent performance in all the previous mentioned requirements, therefore
these material can be regarded as the most suitable Li–ion battery technologies for grid
applications.
Table 1.2. Technical and economic comparison of Li-ion battery chemistries [16], ++ very good
performance, + good performance, - low performance.
Li-ion battery chemistry
Parameter
Cathode material
Anode material
LCO2
NMC
NCA
LMO
LFP
LTO
Lifetime
-
+
++
-
++
++
Cost per cycle
+
+
-
+
++
++
Fast response
++
++
++
++
++
++
Performance
+
+
+
-
+
++
Safety
-
+
-
+
++
++
Self-discharge
++
++
++
++
+
++
Lithium iron phosphate (LFP) cells are marked as “inherently safe” which is an extremely
attractive cathode material, their olivine crystalline structure ensuring that it has better
thermal stability than other Li-ion cells. At present, because of their characteristics, Li–ion
batteries using LFP cathodes are evaluated in several stationary energy storage projects
[18]. However, the supply risks of raw materials - particularly for use in lithium-ion
(Li-ion) has gained much attention recently. Although overall Li-ion material resources
and reserves are sufficiently abundant to support the expected increased uptake of the
technology, aggressive demand scenarios could pose challenges for the mining industry
to react sufficiently rapidly given that the uncertainty in demand growth makes supply
planning difficult. As a consequence, the main threat arising from the rapid demand
growth is likely to be the rising price of lithium. To a sustainability perspective, developing
end-of-life programs that increase recycling reuse, or re-manufacturing methods is of
great importance [11]. For the remainder of the report, Li-ion batteries are the dominant
and most suitable chemistry currently available, therefore only Li-ion batteries will be
considered.
8
==PAGE:19==
1. Introduction
1.2.3
Previous studies
The investigation of battery serving as a buffer
A number of previous studies have been conducted to develop energy management strategies
for battery systems due to the increased penetration of RES and integration of electric
vehicles (EVs) in the electricity network [19]. A promising solution would be to equip EV
charging stations with buffered batteries in order to mitigate the concerns of large adoption
of EVs posing new challenges to the electric grid because of the high peak-load demand.
In thesis [20], three management strategies for a reconfigurable battery system coupled
with EV fast chargers and PV are designed and compared. The optimal solution found
is to set a dead band for battery State of Charge (SOC) from 0.5 to 0.7 pu, since this
reduced the grid exchange to a large extent and less losses and auxiliary consumption are
generated, and as a consequence the battery aging is slower since the temperature is lower.
Article [21] evaluated an intelligent energy management approach for a solar powered EV
charging station with energy storage. This approach uses PV forecasting and EV charging
demand projection to optimize the energy management of the charging station, by doing it
the station’s peak power demand is greatly reduced and the battery recharging demand is
shifted away from the on-peak time periods to the off-peak time periods, which is beneficial
to the charging station owners and end users during peak periods due to lower prices.
1.3
Problem definition
The objective of this thesis is to extend a Matlab Simulink model [20] of DC microgrid
equipped with an Energy Management System (EMS) with particular focus on implementing
frequency control functionality. The scope of this work is to test the potentials of the 95.04
kWh battery located in Lyngby campus for the provision of grid frequency control services.
The simulation input is using one day of historic frequency data, therefore the test results
may not be sufficient enough to deduce conclusions which fit some other days.
Objectives
The main project objectives are:
• Obtain models of system components including inverter and Battery Energy Storage
System (BESS), and implement Energy Manage System (EMS) on the BESS.
Simulation models of system components and frequency regulation algorithm in Matlab
Simulink need to be created.
• Test the model with the focus of providing different types of reserves complying with
the Danish grid code.
What are the system performance during different types of frequency regulation ser-
vices to be provided by the BESS?
• Test the the BESS performance regarding frequency response in the lab.
A test frequency signal need to be created for the lab experiment and a comparison
between lab result and Simulink result need to be obtained.
9
==PAGE:20==
1. Introduction
Thesis outline
This report is divided into 6 chapters.
Chapter 1: Introduction
Introduce the contextual background and the energy storage technology.
Chapter 2: Technological Background
This chapter describes the technological background knowledge related to the modelling of
the system.
Chapter 3: Simulation Model
This chapter presents a holistic overview of the system and subsequently the design of each
system component and the EMS control algorithm. A simple validation test of the system
is elaborated briefly.
Chapter 4: Case studies
A number of case studies are carried out and simulation results are present with basic
analysis.
Chapter 5: Test in the lab
The laboratory setup is described first, the lab results of testing frequency response for the
BESS during different charging and discharging scenarios are present.
Chapter 6: Conclusion & future work
The main findings of the report are summarized and future work directions are outlined.
10
==PAGE:21==
2
TECHNOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
This chapter contains the introduction of Battery Energy Storage System (BESS), the
overview of the system investigated in this thesis, and the Danish grid code the system
should comply with. Finally, the historic frequency data used in the simulation model is
presented and analysed.
2.1
Battery energy storage system
Battery energy storage systems (BESSs) consists of a number of battery packs, a battery
management system (BMS) is required on each pack which is responsible for monitoring
and maintaining safe and optimal operation. The battery states are difficult to monitor
and safe operation maintenance adds more difficulties due to the dynamic nature. This
dynamic nature refers to operating outside the equilibrium state during cycling at all times.
Especially for the case of Li chemistry, it operates as a closed system with only a few
measurable state variables. Additionally, the battery packs degrade during cycling even
under normal operation, and the degradation gets worse under certain circumstances such
as over and under-charging, extreme charging patterns, increased temperature and so on
[22]. Battery cells inside battery packs do not have homogeneous attributes, and the lowest
capacity ones limit the performance and lifetime of the whole pack. There are many reasons
causes the cell imbalance such as manufacturing variations, the electrochemical properties
of the cells are different. A promising technology called Reconfigurable Battery Systems
(RBS) has been proposed to solve the problems of balancing while providing required
services. RBSs are BESSs which involve a BMS with reconfiguration. Reconfiguration uses
the estimation of the State of Charge (SOC) to determine the circuit switching logic [23].
The general objectives of a BMS include: fulfilling the service requirements from the user,
protection of the cells: by limiting the usage to safe operating area (SOA), balancing
the SOC of the cells to increase their performance and lifetime, thermal management,
potentially fault tolerance [23]. While the basic BMS only aims at meeting the power
demand. However, for applications such as electric vehicles (EVs) and grid integration,
a more specialized BMS with more predictive and adaptive characteristics has been
investigated in many studies.
In grid scale applications, a number of battery packs
with individual BMS are implemented altogether to form a large capacity BESS. The
information of each pack is passed through an interface called Supervisory System Control
(SSC) between the grid and BMS. When a request from the grid is received, the SSC
chooses the optimal strategy for meeting the grid demand as well as accounting for the
current conditions of the battery.
11
==PAGE:22==
2. Technological background
2.2
NerveSwitch BMS
NerveSwitch is a BMS with a dynamic reconfiguration feature. It keeps the balance of
the battery cells and provides reliable service without the need of DC-DC converters. The
researches investigating the efficiencies of the proposed BMS have been carried out. A
pilot BESS with a capacity of 312 kWh is installed to power up a DC microgrid located
on the Danish island Bornholm. It is found that the efficiency for EV fast charging at 50
kW charging level is 93.3% and the reconfiguration electronics cause only 1.2% power loss.
The RBS control algorithm includes four hierarchical levels, the conceptual illustrations
are shown in Figure 2.1 and Figure 2.2:
• Energy Management System (EMS)
EMS performs on service level required by users, managing power, voltage, current
and impedance requirements by each battery pack.
• String Control Module (SCM)
SCM completes the service command sending by EMS and manage the protection
and maintenance of the battery cells.
• Module Controller (MC)
MC has a role of checking safety and thermal management of a module with a fan.
• Cell Controller (CC)
CC uses MOSFETs for either engaging or bypassing cells [23].
It should be mentioned that this thesis works on implementing frequency regulation
functions on EMS level of the BESS, manipulating the active power and energy from the
whole battery.
Figure 2.1. Conceptual illustration of EMS and SCM [23].
12
==PAGE:23==
2. Technological background
Figure 2.2. Conceptual illustration of SCM, MC and CC [23].
2.3
System overview and reconfigurable cell topology
The designed system is presented in Figure 2.3. The system includes an inverter and a
storage. The storage is connected to a bidirectional inverter which can deliver DC power
to the AC grid or deliver AC power to the storage. The investigated storage consists of
one battery string of 95.04 kWh, manufactured by Nerve Smart Systems Aps (NSS). The
inverter is manufactured by Converdan A/S, it supports bidirectional power flow with a
33.5 kW nominal DC power.
Figure 2.3. Single line diagram of the system.
The BESS located in Lyngby campus is using LiFePO4 (LFP) battery cells. One battery
string consists of 11 modules connected in series. One module contains 27 cells which is
connected in series. The Table 2.1 presents the important parameters for each cell and
thereby the string parameters can be obtained. It should be noted that in the DC side
even the rated power of the battery reaches 190.08 kW/285.12 kW, the connected inverter
is limited to ±33.5 kW due to its power limit.
13
==PAGE:24==
2. Technological background
Table 2.1. Parameters of the proposed battery string.
Cell
String
Nominal capacity
Ccell = 100.0Ah
Cstring = 100.0Ah
Nominal voltage
Vcell = 3.20V
Vstring = Vcell · Ncell · Nmodule
= 3.20V ·27 · 11 = 950.4V
Max. continues
current (charging)
Imax_charging = 2C(200A)
Imax_charging = 2C(200A)
Max. continues
current (discharging)
Imax_discharging = 3C(300A)
Imax_discharging = 3C(300A)
Energy capacity
Ecell = 320Wh
Ecell = Vstring · Cstring
= 950.4V ·100Ah = 95.04kWh
Rated power
(charging)
Pcell_charging = 640W
Pcell_charging = Vstring · Istring
= 950.4V ·200A = 190.08kW
Rated power
(discharging)
Pcell_discharging = 960W
Pcell_discharging = Vstring · Istring
= 950.4V ·300A = 285.120kW
The proposed storage is equipped with a reconfigurable cell topology. This reconfigurable
design is achieved by implementing semiconductor switches (MOSFETs) on the battery
cells. As a consequence each individual cell can either be engaged or bypassed according
to the commands from BESS. By doing this, the battery module can be controlled to set a
dynamic open circuit voltage between 0 V if all cells are bypassed and 86.4 V if all cells
are engaged in a step of 3.2 V. This variable cell topology is shown in Figure 2.4. One
advantage of this design is that it solves cell unbalance issues so that safety, reliability, and
lifetime of the battery is increased [19]. Additionally, the charging current (EV charger)
can be adapted by controlling the number of engaged cells, without the need of power
converter. However, the controlling algorithm used for cell engagement is outside the scope
of this work.
Figure 2.4. Schematic of the reconfigurable cell topology, red lines are power links, blue dash
lines represent signal links [19].
2.4
Frequency regulation and grid code for storage facilities
2.4.1
Frequency regulation
Maintaining constant 50 Hz frequency is a crucial parameter in the electrical power system.
Frequency variations are caused by a mismatch between generation and load. In order
to keep the expected operating conditions and supply electricity to all connected loads,
14
==PAGE:25==
2. Technological background
it is important to keep the frequency within predefined limits. However when the power
system frequency reaches the emergency condition, certain controls have to be initiated.
The frequency control includes: primary, secondary and tertiary controls. Each of these
have a specific condition and function. Figure 2.5 depicts the three levels of control after a
frequency drop event.
Figure 2.5. Three tiered frequency control after a frequency event in the system. [24]
• Primary Control
The primary frequency control is an automatic function and it is the fastest among
the three, it only takes a few seconds to respond. With a load increase or loss of
generation, the frequency doesn’t drop immediately due to the kinetic energy of the
rotating generators that start decreasing the velocity, which is called the inertial
response. Then the automatic governor of each generator reacts to increase the
generation to arrest the frequency change. The primary control cannot restore the
frequency back to nominal, to take the system back to nominal, secondary control is
needed.
• Secondary Control
Once the primary control stops the frequency from getting further down, the next
step is to restore the frequency back to nominal. The secondary control is usually
performed in an automatic way, by all the generators that participate in this regulation,
through a specific “set-point” sent by a central controller. It is also called Automatic
generation control (AGC), it focuses mainly on those large load fluctuations, it has a
longer responding time around 1-2 minutes, and it aims at bring the system back to
normal.
• Tertiary Control
The third level of control is for utilizing a more economic dispatch and restore the
primary and secondary reserves. At this stage, the Transmission System Operator
(TSO) sends operating prescriptions to the generators already in operation, and ask
adjust production as needed.
15
==PAGE:26==
2. Technological background
2.4.2
Ancillary services
In power system, a balance between production and consumption of electricity must be
kept at all times. Thus, it’s the Transmission System Operators’ (TSOs) role to purchase
ancillary services to ensure access at all times to such resources, which can ensure the stable
and reliable electricity in real-time operation. The ancillary services which are procured
in Denmark has different requirements that are regulated by the ENTSO-E Continental
Europe Operation Handbook, the Joint Nordic System Operation Agreement and by
Energinet’s regulations for grid connection. These requirements vary slightly depending on
whether the services are to be supplied in Eastern Denmark (DK2) or in Western Denmark
(DK1). In this thesis, regulations for DK2 is applied. The ancillary services to be delivered
in DK2 have these perspectives [25]:
• Frequency-controlled disturbance reserve, FCR-D
• Frequency-controlled normal operation reserve, FCR-N
• automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve (aFRR) supply ability
• Manual reserves, mFRR
• Properties required to maintain power system stability.
This thesis concentrates on investigating primary frequency control. The primary control
mainly focuses on those short periods of small load fluctuations and the responding time is
very fast, generally in about 30 seconds, each generation unit shall be able to generate
the required additional power and then keep it for at least 15 minutes, the response time
is further specified in technical conditions later in this chapter. This service is supplied
normally by conventional plants, their reserves were scheduled and booked in auxiliary
service market, the TSO will activate the reserves if needed in the real time operation.
The massive deployment of RES in power system implies that less thermo-electric plants
are in operation, consequently performing frequency regulation is becoming more difficult.
To solve the problem, battery energy storage systems are among one of the most promising
solutions.
2.4.3
Electrical energy storage facilities
An electrical energy storage facility is a facility that can store and deliver energy. One
example is that it absorbs energy from the public electricity supply grid, and at a given
time delivers electrical energy back internally in the installation or delivers it back in the
point of connection (POC).
2.4.4
Technical regulation
The technical regulations are adopted from document - Technical Regulation 3.3.1 for
Electrical Energy Storage Facilities [26], effective from 18 December 2019. This technical
regulation applies to energy storage facilities connected to the public electricity supply
grid in Denmark. The requirements for the regulation are divided based on the total rated
power in the point of connection (POC). The category specifications are listed in Table
2.2. The storage investigated in this thesis belongs to category A due to the power limit of
the inverter is 33.5 kW.
16
==PAGE:27==
2. Technological background
Table 2.2. The category specifications of energy storage facilities [26].
A
Energy storage facilities up to 125 kW.
B
Energy storage facilities from and including 125 kW up to 3 MW.
C
Energy storage facilities from and including 3 MW up to 25 MW.
D
Energy storage facilities from and including 25 MW
or connected at voltages above 100 kV.
SX
Category A or B energy storage facilities.
T
Temporarily connected energy storage facilities.
Note, only LFSM-O is required for the storage facilities in category A, but FCR-N, FCR-D
and LFSM-O are all investigated in this work.
Frequency response, LFSM-U and LFSM-O
Frequency response is an automatic function offering upward and downward regulation
of active power for the purpose of stabilizing grid frequency. LFSM-O (limited frequency
sensitive mode - overfrequency) is the frequency response to the events including
overfrequency and defined frequency range where the storage shall reduce active power.
Similarily, LFSM-U (limited frequency sensitive mode - underfrequency) is the frequency
response to the events including underfrequency and defined frequency range where the
storage shall increase active power. It is important to note that according to the grid code
[26], facility category A does not perform LFSM-U while LFSM-O is required. It must
be possible to set the frequency response function’s frequency points (corner frequencies),
indicated in Table 2.3 for DK2, respectively, to any value in the 47.50-51.50 Hz range. The
setting for the frequency response function’s corner frequencies and droop (Table 2.4) is
determined by Energinet Elsystemansvar A/S. Some important technical regulations for
frequency response are listed as followed:
• Regulation must be commenced no later than 2 seconds after a frequency change is
detected and must be completed within 15 seconds.
• It must be possible to set the droop for both downward and upward regulation to
any value from the 2% to 12%.
Figure 2.6 illustrates the droop control for frequency response from the Danish grid code.
Table 2.3. Frequency settings for DK2.[26]
fmin
fmax
f0
f1
f2
Hz
47.50
51.50
50.00
49.50
50.50
Table 2.4. Droop settings in DK2.[26]
Synchronous area
Droop [%]
DK1
5
DK2
4
17
==PAGE:28==
2. Technological background
Figure 2.6. Frequency response from an energy storage facility which can deliver to and absorb
power from the public electricity supply grid. The figure illustrates functions and
responses in DK2, but values other than frequency-related values are fictitious [26].
Frequency-controlled normal operation reserve, DK2 (FCR-N)
Frequency-controlled normal operation reserve is automatic regulation provided by
production or consumption units which consists of symmetrical upward and downward
reserves, ensuring the equilibrium between production and consumption is restored, keeping
the frequency close to 50 Hz. Some technical conditions regarding the response and response
time are listed below:
• The reserve must be supplied in the range of 49.9 Hz - 50.1 Hz.
• Deliveries must be made without deadband.
• The reserve must as a minimum be supplied linearly between 0 and 100 mHz.
• The reserve must be supplied within 150 seconds, regardless of the size of the
deviation.
Note, FCR-N control function is not required by storage facilities in category A.
Figure 2.8 illustrates the droop control for FCR-N in DK2, the frequency setting are shown
in Table 2.5 (47.50-51.50 Hz range). At a frequency of 50.0 Hz, 0% of the FCR-N capacity
shall be activated and at frequencies equal or below 49.9 Hz, 100% of the FCR-N upward
capacity shall be activated. Respectively, at frequencies equal or above 50.1 Hz, 100% of
the FCR-N downward capacity shall be activated. The activation within the interval 49.9
to 50.1 Hz must be proportional to the frequency deviation. FCR-N shall remain activated
as long as the frequency deviation persists [27].
Table 2.5. FCR-N frequency settings in DK2.[26]
Standard frequency control settings
- DK2 (FCR-N)
fmin
fmax
f0
f4
f5
Hz
47.50
51.50
50.00
49.90
50.10
18
==PAGE:29==
2. Technological background
Figure 2.7. The figure illustrates FCR-N function in DK2, but values other than frequency-related
values are fictitious [26].
Frequency-controlled disturbance reserve, DK2 (FCR-D)
Frequency-controlled disturbance reserve is an automatic upward regulation reserve
provided by production or consumption facilities, which is activated during sudden frequency
drops to under 49.9 Hz or increase to above 50.1 Hz, it remains active until balance has
been restored or until the manual reserve takes over the supply of power. Some technical
conditions regarding the response and response time are listed below:
• Supply non-inverse power at frequencies between [49.5,49.9] Hz and [50.1,50.5] Hz.
• Supply 50% of the response within 5 seconds.
• Supply the remaining 50% of the response within an additional 25 seconds.
Figure 2.8 illustrates the droop control for FCR-D in DK2, it can be noticed that FCR-N is
supplemented by FCR-D, the frequency settings (47.5 Hz - 51.5 Hz) are listed in Table 2.6.
At a frequency of 49.9 Hz, 0% of the FCR-D capacity shall be activated and at frequencies
below or equal to 49.5 Hz, 100% of the upward capacity shall be activated. Respectively,
at a frequency of 50.1 Hz, 0% of the FCR-D capacity shall be activated and at frequencies
above or equal to 50.5 Hz, 100% of the downward capacity shall be activated. FCR-D shall
remain activated as long as the frequency deviation persist.
It is important to note that FCR-D providing entities shall continue to use the FCR-D
parameters also when frequency goes below 49.5 Hz or above 50.5 Hz. Entities that are
required to have Limited Frequency Sensitivity Mode (LFSM) through grid connection
requirements shall not activate different parameters for LFSM provision [27].
Table 2.6. FCR-D frequency settings in DK2.[26]
Standard frequency control settings-DK2 (FCR-D)
fmin
fmax
f0
f1
f2
f4
f5
Hz
47.50
51.50
50.00
49.50
50.50
49.90
50.10
19
==PAGE:30==
2. Technological background
Figure 2.8. The figure illustrates FCR-D function in DK2, but values other than frequency-related
values are fictitious [26].
Figure 2.9 depicts each frequency region in previously mentioned controls.
Figure 2.9. Frequency control region.
Providing both FCR-N and FCR-D
An entity providing both FCR-N and FCR-D shall comply with the following requirements:
The power set point must allow activation of both contracted FCR-N and FCR-D according
to their individual prequalification. In steady state, an entity providing both FCR-N and
FCR-D shall activate the sum of FCR-N and FCR-D at any frequency deviation, the droop
profile is shown in Figure 2.10. In this figure, if entity decides to provide both FCR-N
and FCR-D, ±25% of the power capacity is booked for FCR-N and ±75% of the capacity
is booked for FCR-D, the droop settings for FCR-N and FCR-D is derived as 0.8% and
1.07% respectively.
Protection
The energy facilities are equipped with protective functions, which aims to protect the
energy storage facility and to ensure a stable public electricity supply grid. The functions
and associated settings must match the requirements regarding both voltage and frequency.
The Table 2.7 specifies the protective functions with associated operating settings and trip
time regarding the frequency protective functions.
20
==PAGE:31==
2. Technological background
Figure 2.10. Droop profile of FCR-N (blue), FCR-D (green) and both combined (red)[27].
Table 2.7. Protective function requirements for category A energy storage facilities [26].
Protective function
Setting
Trip time
Recommended value
Overfrequency
f>51.5 Hz
200 ms
200 ms
Underfrequency
f<47.5 Hz
200 ms
200 ms
Frequency change
df/dtϵ[-2.5,2.5] Hz/s
50 ms
50 ms
2.5
Historic frequency data
The proposed model will be tested with a real time frequency profile to assess the viability
of the designed controller. The historic frequency data in DK2 is provided by the supervisor,
coming from the frequency meter on Bornholm handled by PowerLabDK, DTU [28]. In
2020, December has the most number of frequency fluctuations than the rest on the
year. Thus, the simulation test in section 4 will be conducted using frequency data from
December 2020. The frequency was within ±0.05 Hz of the nominal value 81.29% of the
time, but within ±0.015 Hz just 31.82% of the time. It is important to analyse the number
of over and under-frequency events, since it will determine how often the storage has to
exchange power with the grid.
Table 2.8. Basic statistic of frequency data in December 2020.
Mean
50.001
Minimum
48.55
Frequency [Hz]
Maximum
53.31
Standard deviation
0.0391
Number of measurements
> 50.0 Hz
50.7%
Table 2.8 shows the number of frequency measurements in the grid services interval. Over-
frequency events occur slightly more than under-frequency events. Table 2.9 shows that
the grid frequency is between 49.9 Hz and 50.1 Hz the majority (98%) of the time.
21
==PAGE:32==
2. Technological background
Table 2.9. Percentage of DK2 frequency measurements in each grid service interval on December
2020.
LFSM-U
FCR-D
FCR-N
FCR-D
LFSM-O
[47.5,49.5]
[49.5,49.9]
[49.9,50.1]
[50.1,50.5]
[50.5,51.5]
Time share
0%
1%
98%
1%
0%
Max
occurrence
day
-
08-DEC
06-DEC
08-DEC
-
To be able to test the performance of the controllers during worse cases, the two days
06-Dec and 08-Dec are chosen for the input frequency data since the most number of events
occurred in FCR-N and FCR-D interval
22
==PAGE:33==
3
SIMULATION MODEL
This chapter gives an holistic overview of the proposed system and a detailed description of
the design process of each component and control algorithm. The design of power system
components sub-models are based on the work of a previous study. Finally, a validation
test is conducted by sending a test signal to evaluate if the system is behaved as expected.
3.1
General overview of the system
In this section, a general overview of the system is introduced. Figure 3.1 illustrates the
conceptual design of the simulated model. The green arrows represent the electric power
flowing in the system components. The blue arrows represent the communication signals
sending from the EMS. The power Pinv,AC [kW] and Pinv,DC [kW] flowing through the
inverter are bi-directional. The EMS receives grid frequency and SOC information and
sends protection signals (logical numbers) to both inverter and the BESS. Additionally, an
AC active power set point Pset,pu,AC [pu] is sent to the inverter from EMS. The model is
built in MATLAB Simulink, the proposed functions of EMS is extended for provision of
grid services on an existing model from a previous student’s thesis [20]. The difference is
that the current system has one battery string only, instead of three strings in the existing
system, and the photovoltaics and EV chargers model are not considered here.
Figure 3.1. Conceptual block diagram of the system. The green parts belong to the electric power
domain and the blue parts to the energy management and control domain.
The NSS BESS contains one battery dual string with 5 and 6 modules sub-string connected
in series. The inverter can either receive or deliver power from or to the grid. The direction
is determined by the EMS. The EMS is the brain of the system. It is a control logic which
is responsible making proper decision on when and how to dispatch power, generally driven
23
==PAGE:34==
3. Simulation model
by an economic value stream. The Table 3.1 shows details of the EMS objectives developed
in this thesis.
Table 3.1. Summary of the proposed EMS objectives.
EMS objectives
EMS algorithm requirements
Fulfil power and energy needs
Adapt inverter power setpoint to the
dispatched power
Keep SOC within acceptable limits
Manage battery dual string connections and
ensure efficient and reliable battery operation
Provide grid services
Adjust inverter power setpoint according to
the grid frequency
Over and under frequency protection
Disconnect the battery during over and under
frequency events
3.2
System components
The two main components in the system is the BESS and inverter models. The details of
the sub-models are elaborated below:
3.2.1
BESS model
The NSS BESS model has one battery dual string. The model is formed by two sub-models:
an internal loss model and a SOC model as shown in Figure 3.2. Pbatt [kW] refers to the
power going in or out of the battery, Pbat,int [kW] represents the battery intenal power.
During discharging, Pbatt<Pbat,int while during charging Pbatt>Pbat,int. The charging and
discharging of the battery create Joule losses Pbatt,loss [kW] as a consequence of internal
cell and MOSFET resistances. Thus, an internal loss model of the battery string has to be
considered first. The resulting battery internal power is then calculated in the SOC model.
Figure 3.2. Conceptual block diagram of a battery dual string model [20].
Internal loss model
To obtain the battery internal power while charging and discharging, equation 3.1 and
3.2 are applied. Note that the efficiency of the battery string is in percentage value. An
efficiency lookup table is adopted from the existing model. The battery losses can be
described as equation 3.3 both during charging and discharging.
24
==PAGE:35==
3. Simulation model
Pbat,int,discharging = Pbat
η
[kW]
(3.1)
Pbat,int,charging = Pbat · η
[kW]
(3.2)
|Pbat,loss| = Pbat,bat,int −Pbat
[kW]
(3.3)
Where Pbat,int,discharging represents the battery internal power during discharging;
Pbat,int,charging represents the battery internal power during charging; η represents the
efficiency of the battery during charging and discharging. The efficiency of the battery
string is a function of active power. Figure 3.3 illustrates that the efficiency of the battery
getting lower when more power flowing. The inverter has a power limit of ±33.5 kW. Thus,
the battery has an efficiency larger than 97% when it is connected.
Figure 3.3. Efficiency characteristics of the battery dual strings. The efficiency [%] is a function of
the active power [kW]. The blue and green graph represents charging and discharging
respectively [20].
The existing battery internal loss model in Simulink is shown in Figure 3.4. The positive
sign of battery power means battery discharging while the negative sign means battery
charging. The battery internal power is the output of this sub-model.
Sate of Charge (SOC) model
To obtain the current state of the battery, an important parameter called SOC has to
be introduced. SOC of a battery is defined as a ratio between the stored energy in the
battery and total energy that can be saved within the battery. An aspect which should be
noted is that the SOC of a battery is not measurable. Its value is strictly related to the
Open Circuit Voltage (OCV), which means the steady state voltage at zero current flow,
therefore it cannot be measured when in charge or in discharge. Especially in the case of
Li-ion batteries, the OCV characteristic shows a plateau as the SOC increase, which adds
25
==PAGE:36==
3. Simulation model
Figure 3.4. The battery internal loss model in Simulink.
more difficulties in the SOC estimation. It is common to estimate the SOC percentage
using typical coulomb-counting methods that the SOC can be expressed as integrating
the discharge current (in Ah) [29]. However, in this work the energy transferred to and
from the battery is considered in kWh where the true energy transferred between system
elements are important. Hence, the SOC is estimated based on the integration of terminal
voltage multiplied by the battery current, the equation is shown as below:
SOC(t) = SOC(t0) −
1h
EC · 3600s ·
Z t
0
Pbatt,int(t)dt
(3.4)
Where SOC(t0) represents initial SOC of the battery. EC [kWh] means initial energy
capacity which is 95.04 kWh in this model. Pbatt,int(t) [kW] is the instantaneous power of
the battery. When the sign is negative, battery is charging from external energy source.
While positive sign means discharging. The Figure 3.5 presents the SOC calculation block
in Simulink.
Figure 3.5. The SOC calculation model in Simulink.
3.2.2
Inverter model
Another important component in the system is the bi-directional inverter. It can transfer
energy either from DC to AC or from AC to DC. However, the losses always occur when
the power is flowing in the inverter. The efficiency [%] as a function of power [kW] for
Converdan inverter model AFE333KAC is present in Figure 3.6, this efficiency curve
is taken from the existing model from a thesis [20]. As it is shown in the figure, the
performance is symmetric during charging and discharging. Furthermore, the efficiency
highly depends on the quantity of power flowing inside. When the power flowing through
the inverter is at 1 kW, the efficiency drops significantly to 90%, and at 0.01 kW it drops
down to 1%. The inverter has a power limit of 33.5 kW, so the efficiency is around 98% at
the highest power level.
26
==PAGE:37==
3. Simulation model
Figure 3.6. The efficiency characteristic of the Converdan inverter [20].
The following equations show the outputting DC power when deliver power to the grid
(PDC,discharging) and import power from the grid (PDC,charging), PACset is the AC power
set point of the inverter, Pnominal is the nominal power of the inverter which is equals
to ±33.5 kW. η is the efficiency of the Converdan inverter which is a decimal value from
Figure 3.6:
PAC = PACset
[pu] · Pnominal
[kW]
(3.5)
PDC,discharging = PAC
η
[kW]
(3.6)
PDC,charging = PAC · η
[kW]
(3.7)
The inverter model built in Simulink is present in Figure 3.7. The input of the inverter is
the AC active power setpoint [pu] from the EMS. It then calculates the DC power and AC
power in [kW] after accounting for the losses of the inverter.
Figure 3.7. Inverter model in Simulink.
3.3
Design of the EMS
The design of the EMS includes the following aspects: protection signal generation,
frequency regulation controllers and connection signal generation.
27
==PAGE:38==
3. Simulation model
3.3.1
Over and under frequency protection & SOC protection
The generation of protection signal is on top of the EMS objectives. According to the
grid code, the storage facility must equip with protective functions, the definitions of
overfrequency and underfrequency have been declared in Table 2.7. The flow chart of the
proposed function is shown in Figure 3.8. The protection is tripped when the frequency is
not in the range of [47.5,51.5] Hz.
Figure 3.8. Flowchart of overfrequency and underfrequency protection function.
The SOC of the storage is normally required to be kept within an acceptable range in terms
of battery life, deep charge and discharge will accelerate the exhaustion and even reduction
of battery performance. The SOC protection function aims to prevent the storage run in
the forbidden partitions. These forbidden partitions are defined as when the SOC goes
over 0.9 pu and goes under 0.1 pu. The Figure 3.9 shows the flow chart of the SOC
protection function. The SOC protection is tripped either when the SOC goes over 0.9 and
the battery continues charging energy, or when the SOC goes below 0.1 and the battery
continues discharging energy.
Figure 3.9. Flowchart of SOC protection function.
28
==PAGE:39==
3. Simulation model
3.3.2
General design of the droop controller
The purpose of the controller is to adjust the power setpoint based on the grid frequency.
Figure 3.10 shows the block diagram of the frequency controller in EMS. It takes the
grid frequency as input, compares with reference frequency 50 Hz and then calculate a
power change ∆P based on a given proportion. This power setpoint of the inverter is the
sum of the change of power ∆P and dispatched power Pdisp. The equations are listed
below. It should be noted here that the purpose of having a saturation block is to ensure
the controller only reacts in a certain frequency threshold. This threshold differs from
which service the controller is going to supply. Thus, when the frequency goes outside this
threshold, the controller outputs the maximum amount of power from its reserve.
∆f = fgrid −fnominal
(3.8)
∆P = −
1
Kdroop
· ∆f
(3.9)
Pset = ∆P + Pdisp
(3.10)
Where fgrid is the grid frequency; fnominal is the nominal frequency which is equal to 50
Hz; ∆f is the frequency deviation; ∆P is power change; Pdisp means the power output at
nominal frequency; Pset is the power setpoint of the inverter.
Figure 3.10. General design of the frequency droop controller.
The core of the controller is the parameter Kdroop, it can be expressed in percentage as:
Kdroop =
percent frequency change
percent power output change
[%]
(3.11)
The droop characteristics can be expressed for example, a 5% droop means that a 5% of
frequency deviation causes 100% change in power output.
3.3.3
Droop settings for the grid services
According to the grid code, the frequency ranges for FCR-N, FCR-D and LFSM-O are
different, the droop are different correspondingly. However, the frequency operating ranges
are continuous, thus it is possible to have the droop control altogether. The droop calcula-
tions for providing one or more services at one time are shown in the following:
29
==PAGE:40==
3. Simulation model
Providing FCR-N only. Assuming the whole capacity [-1 pu, 1 pu] is booked for
FCR-N reserve:
Kdroop = −∆f
∆P = (50.1 −49.9)/50
2
= 0.2%
(3.12)
Providing FCR-D only. Assuming the whole capacity [-1 pu, 1 pu] is booked for FCR-D
reserve:
Kdroop = −∆f
∆P = (49.9 −49.5)/50
1
= (50.5 −50.1)/50
1
= 0.8%
(3.13)
Providing LFSM-O only. Assuming the whole capacity [0, 1 pu] is booked for LFSM-O
reserve:
Kdroop = −∆f
∆P = (51.5 −50.5)/50
1
= (50.5 −50.1)/50
1
= 2%
(3.14)
The Figure 3.11 shows the droop curves of the above three scenarios.
Figure 3.11. Droop curves for providing one service only.
Providing FCR-N & FCR-D. FCR-N and FCR-D are reserves that the entity sells to
the TSO. The storage can choose to bid the two types of the reserves and how much they
want to bid in the electricity market. Assuming here the full power capacity is sold to
TSO and the storage provides both FCR-N and FCR-D. Three possible distributions of
30
==PAGE:41==
3. Simulation model
the two reserves is investigated, the amount of FCR-N and FCR-D settings are: 1 pu:1 pu,
0.4 pu:1.6 pu, 1.6 pu:0.4 pu (the sum of the two reserves is always equal to 2 pu). When
the maximum power that each service can allocate is determined, the droop settings for
both FCR-N and FCR-D can be derived accordingly. The following equations derives the
droop settings KN for FCR-N and KD for FCR-D in each aforementioned distributions
scenarios respectively:
PFCRN : PFCRD = 1 : 1
[pu]
(3.15)
KN = −∆f
∆P = (49.9 −50.1)/50
1
= 0.4%
(3.16)
KD = −∆f
∆P = (49.9 −49.5)/50
0.5
= (50.5 −50.1)/50
0.5
= 1.6%
(3.17)
PFCRN : PFCRD = 0.4 : 1.6
[pu]
(3.18)
KN = −∆f
∆P = (49.9 −50.1)/50
0.4
= 1%
(3.19)
KD = −∆f
∆P = (49.9 −49.5)/50
0.8
= (50.5 −50.1)/50
0.8
= 1%
(3.20)
PFCRN : PFCRD = 1.6 : 0.4
[pu]
(3.21)
KN = −∆f
∆P = (49.9 −50.1)/50
1.6
= 0.25%
(3.22)
KD = −∆f
∆P = (49.9 −49.5)/50
0.2
= (50.5 −50.1)/50
0.2
= 4%
(3.23)
The Figure 3.12 shows the resulting droop curves of the different amount of FCR-N and
FCR-D. For better understanding, the reserves for FCR-N is marked by double arrows for
the three cases.
Providing FCR-N & FCR-D & LFSM-O. The frequency interval for providing three
services is not symmetric, this is because LFSM-O only includes over-frequency. It is stated
in the grid code that the droop setting in DK2 for LFSM-O is 4%. The equations below
is the maximum power each service can adjust. The power output contributed by each
reserve is also marked by different colors in Figure 3.13.
PFCRN = −1
KN
· ∆f = −1
4% · 49.9 −50.1
50
= 0.1
[pu]
(3.24)
PFCRD = −1
KD
· ∆f = −1
4% · (49.5 −49.9) + (50.1 −50.5)
50
= 0.4
[pu]
(3.25)
PLFSM−O = −1
KN
· ∆f = −1
4% · 50.5 −51.5
50
= 0.5
[pu]
(3.26)
31
==PAGE:42==
3. Simulation model
Figure 3.12. Different droop curves of different power ratios between FCR-N and FCR-D.
Figure 3.13. Droop curve for FCR-N & FCR-D &LFSM-O controller.
3.3.4
Connection function
The purpose of connection function is to control the connections between the three
components: grid and inverter, inverter and the BESS. The flow chart of the proposed
function is shown in Figure 3.14. It collects the information of frequency protection and
32
==PAGE:43==
3. Simulation model
SOC protection first, if any of these protection is on, a disconnection signal is sent to both
the inverter and the BESS. If the two protections are off, the saturated power setpoint is
passed to the inverter and a connection signal is sent to the inverter and the BESS.
Figure 3.14. Flowchart of connection signal.
3.4
Validation test of the EMS
In order to ensure that the proposed EMS objectives are met, a frequency ramp up signal is
generated. The system performance can be seen step by step. Figure 3.15 only presents the
results of the validation test for providing FCR-N service, other frequency controllers can
be found similarly since the main difference between the controllers is the droop settings.
In this test, the frequency increases by a step of 0.05 Hz starting from 49 Hz to 52 Hz.
The following aspects are validated:
• Power saturation
The controller output is saturated when the frequency is below 49.9 Hz (time = 0 s -
17 s) and above 50.1 Hz (time = 21 s - 60 s).
• Controller output
The amount of the power output is as expected: 1 pu at 49.9 Hz (time = 17 s) and
-1 pu at 50.1 Hz (time = 21 s).
• SOC protection
At time = 11 s, the SOC drops below 0.1 pu, the SOC protection is on and it remains
until it stops discharging at time = 19 s.
• Over-frequency protection
The frequency goes over 51.5 Hz at time = 50 s, over-frequency protection is on.
• Connection function
Disconnection occurs either SOC protection or over-frequency or under-frequency
protection is tripped. Re-connection conditions are: when the SOC is at 0.1 pu and
it is following a charging power; when the SOC is at 0.9 pu and it is following a
discharging power; and when over-frequency or under-frequency is eliminated.
33
==PAGE:44==
3. Simulation model
Figure 3.15. Test the EMS with a ramp up frequency.
34
==PAGE:45==
4
CASE STUDIES
In this chapter, the results of the three study cases are presented. Firstly, the intention of
creating these cases is explained. Subsequently, the simulation results for each study case
are presented including a basic analysis.
4.1
Definition of study cases
In this section, the case studies are defined. The frequency input of the simulation will
be using real time data which has been analysed in section 2.4. Two days of the historic
frequency data have been chosen which are the most representative for testing FCR-N and
FCR-D controllers. However, according to Table 2.9 the frequency never goes high enough
into the LFSM-O interval [50.5,51.5], thus frequency events have been created in order
to test the LFSM-O controller. This is done by choosing one day (06-Dec-2020) with the
most events and magnify the frequency deviations by ten times.
The main purpose of the case studies is to test the viability of the BESS with a capacity of
95.04 kWh providing one or more types of grid services for one day, from the perspectives
of protection triggering, saturation of the controller output, lasting time etc. Three study
cases are created, the base case is to test the ability of providing one service at one time
with the full power capacity. The second case is to test the performance of providing both
FCR-N and FCR-D with full power capacity. The third case is to test the battery providing
three services altogether, the droop settings are all equal to 4%, which is suggested by the
grid code in DK2. The three cases are summarized in Table 4.1.
During the cases, two main factors should be taken into consideration.
One is the
initial SOC level of a day, it represents the maximum capability of taking upward and
downward frequency regulation in the beginning of the day. This is relevant because it
creates constraints on the potential of providing sufficient amount of upward or downward
frequency regulation. Hence, the initial SOC level is taken as a variable in each case to see
how it affects the controller’s performance on the battery. The other factor is the value of
Kdroop, it is important especially in the second case where both FCR-N and FCR-D are
supported. However, the allocation of the power capacity providing FCR-N reserve and
FCR-D reserve can vary, the values of Kdroop for both controllers differs correspondingly,
since Kdroop is strictly related to the quantities of reserve for each service.
The calculations in subsection 3.3.3 shows that in the case both FCR-N and FCR-D are
provided, the droop settings are the same when the FCR-N reserve takes 20% of the battery
capacity while FCR-D reserve takes 80% of the battery capacity. Thus three possibilities
of the reserve distribution are investigated: 50% of the capacity is booked for FCR-N
and 50% of the capacity is booked for FCR-D; 20% of the capacity is booked for FCR-N
and 80% of the capacity is booked for FCR-D; 80% of the capacity is booked for FCR-N
35
==PAGE:46==
4. Case studies
and 20% of the capacity is booked for FCR-D. These possibilities are taken as examples
for investigating the system performance during different weight of the services. Having
different proportions are mainly for the interest of economic aspects, however payments
calculations for the ancillary services is outside the scope of this work.
Table 4.1. Definition of the study cases.
Case 1.1: test 100% battery capacity for FCR-N provision with
0.2% of droop
Base case
Case 1.2: test 100% battery capacity FCR-D provision with
0.8% of droop
Case 1.3: test the battery for LFSM-O provision with 4% of
droop, suggested by the grid code
Case 2.1: test 20% battery capacity for FCR-N provision; 80%
battery capacity for FCR-D provision
Case 2
Case 2.2: test 50% battery capacity for FCR-N provision; 50%
battery capacity for FCR-D provision
Case 2.3: test 80% battery capacity for FCR-N provision; 20%
battery capacity for FCR-D provision
Case 3
Case 3: test the battery providing FCR-N, FCR-D and LFSM-O
altogether, all having a 4% of droop, suggested by the grid code
4.2
Case 1 - Test the battery for providing one service
FCR-N or FCR-D or LFSM-O at one time
4.2.1
Case 1.1 - Test the battery for FCR-N provision with full power
capacity
FCR-N service is designed to support continuously frequency maintenance support near
the nominal frequency. In this case, the battery provides full power capacity [-1,1] pu
for FCR-N service. FCR-N is a symmetrical reserve product. This means that it must
be possible to activate the reserve capacity both as upward balancing and downward
balancing. The droop setting is then determined by the amount of contracted FCR-N
service provision which is equal to 0.2%. This number is rather small, which means the
controller is extremely sensitive and there is no reserve available supporting other demands
at the maximum frequency deviations.
The top sub-plot in Figure 4.1 is a scatter plot of power setpoints regulated by FCR-N
controller as a function of grid frequency. The grid frequency input is using historic
frequency data on 06-Dec-2020, this is the day with the highest number of events in
FCR-N interval as mentioned previously. The bottom subplot shows the distribution of
the frequency on that day, it is centered around 50 Hz mostly between [49.9, 50.1] Hz
following a gaussian curve. It can be seen from the graph on top that the power setpoints
follows the droop characteristic for FCR-N controller, the power saturation for upward
regulation occurs sporadically, the maximum frequency drop is down to 49.82 Hz, however
power saturation for downward regulation occurs continuously and reaching 50.12 Hz.
Table 4.2 presents the duration of over and under frequency events inside FCR-N interval
36
==PAGE:47==
4. Case studies
for the day, longer time is found to have over-frequency events, thus the SOC level is
expected to increase along the day.
Figure 4.1. Top sub-plot: scatter plot of FCR-N controller power output with respect to frequency,
bottom sub-plot: historic frequency distribution on 06-Dec-2020.
Table 4.2. Time share in FCR-N interval.
FCR-N upward regulation
FCR-N downward regulation
frequency [49.9,50] Hz
frequency [50,50.1] Hz
Time share [min]
631
808
In order to observe how the battery SOC changes along the day providing frequency
regulation service, the initial SOC level is set as an variable from 0.2 pu to 0.8 pu with
an increment of 0.2 pu in the test. Figure 4.2 shows the SOC curves and SOC protection
signal with different initial conditions. The SOC level follows similar trend for the day in
general. The battery absorbs some excess power from the grid until 9 to 10 am, the load
starts to increase til 2 to 3 pm and the battery releases some power to balance the load
demand, the battery then charges continuously until the end of the day. It can be seen
that two curves SOC0=0.8 pu and SOC0=0.6 pu almost converge, this is due to both of
the two curve get to a condition of reaching SOC upper limit, the former is saturated and
the latter is about to be saturated at the highest point.
37
==PAGE:48==
4. Case studies
Combining the two graphs, 0.8 pu of initial SOC triggers the SOC protection at 0.9 pu
mostly, while 0.2 pu of initial SOC triggers the SOC protection at 0.1 pu mostly. Table 4.3
shows the duration when SOC protection is on in each condition. The worst case is when
the battery starts at 0.8 pu, there is less capacity to absorb power before it hits the SOC
limit 0.9 pu, which means less capable providing regulation for over-frequency. However
it is important to have enough space for downward frequency regulation at this point of
time. Starting the day with 0.6 pu has a lack of capacity to charge more in the end of the
day, while a start of 0.2 pu hits the low SOC limit during peak load time. In this case, the
initial SOC at 0.4 pu can be able to supply the FCR-N service without hitting the SOC
limits.
Hitting the SOC limits comes with a risk of not being able to meet the regulation demands,
and a proper initial SOC level can avoid hitting the SOC limits at a condition when no
SOC recovery strategy is implemented in the system.
Figure 4.2. SOC level with different initial conditions and SOC protection signals - FCR-N
controller.
38
==PAGE:49==
4. Case studies
The Table 4.4 shows the energy transfer from FCR-N controller providing upward and
downward regulation. The reference energy is calculated by the given frequency data and
droop setting Kdroop = 0.2%, it is the total energy that the battery is supposed to provide
to the grid (AC) including both upward and downward regulation. The reference FCR-N
upward regulation is 83.49 kWh and 120.6 kWh for reference FCR-N downward regulation.
Table 4.3. SOC protection triggering time for each initial SOC condition.
SOC0 [pu]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Triggering time [min]
12
0
6
48
The inverter and battery internal losses occur during both discharging and charging of
the battery. In order to get an accurate energy comparison for upward and downward
regulation for this case during different initial SOC levels, the losses have been accounted
for in the table. Note, the reference energy is the AC energy that is actually transferred
with the grid. The FCR-N upward regulation energy is a discharging energy, in this
discharging process the DC power from the battery is transferred to AC power, and a
small part of this DC power becomes losses which is caused by the battery and inverter.
Thus the amount of energy transferred to the grid for upward regulation should be the DC
battery power subtracted by this losses. Similarly, the downward regulation energy is a
charging energy, the AC grid power is delivered to the battery in a form of DC power with
some losses, thus the amount of energy flowing out from the grid should be DC battery
energy plus the losses from inverter and battery and after that it can compare with the
reference AC energy.
In this case, the battery with initial SOC of 0.4 pu, 0.6 pu, 0.8 pu can fully supply FCR-N
upward frequency regulation, while with 0.2 pu initial SOC is not able to fully fulfil the
upward regulation requirement. The battery with initial SOC equal to 0.2 and 0.4 can
fully provide downward regulation, while with 0.6 pu and 0.8 pu the battery is not capable.
This is an important aspect because a penalty is charged by the TSO if the guaranteed
power is not reached.
Table 4.4. Energy transfer in Case 1.1.
Initial SOC level [pu]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
FCR-N upward [kWh]
80.05
83.49
83.49
83.49
Compared to reference [kWh]
-3.435
0
0
0
FCR-N downward [kWh]
-120.6
120.6
118.9
99.17
Compared to reference [kWh]
0
0
-1.707
-21.4
4.2.2
Case 1.2 - Test the battery for FCR-D provision with full power
capacity
FCR-D service is designed to be activated only in the case of large disturbances which has
caused the system frequency to fluctuate drastically in power system. It is a symmetric
reserve with a ±0.1 Hz dead-band around the nominal frequency range. In this case, the
testing for FCR-D provision is using full power capacity [-1,1] pu. A droop of 0.8% is set
to the controller. The top sub-plot in Figure 4.3 is a scatter plot of the power setpoint
39
==PAGE:50==
4. Case studies
from FCR-D controller with respect to grid frequency. The input frequency profile is using
historic frequency data on 08-Dec-2020, the bottom sub-plot shows the distribution of
measured frequency on that day, it follows a gaussian curve in general, the highest number
of measurements occurs at 50 Hz, frequency range extends to [49.74, 50.2] Hz interval. The
power output for the whole day is between -0.2 pu and 0.4 pu, and most of the time it is
below 0.25 pu. This adjusted power is much smaller than FCR-N controller in case 1.1
([-1,1] pu), even there are larger frequency variations in the current case. This is because
the FCR-D controller has to cover a larger frequency range with the same capacity and
the frequency in the current case doesn’t deviate to the maximum frequency deviations.
Figure 4.3. Top sub-plot: scatter plot of FCR-D controller power output with respect to frequency,
bottom sub-plot: historic frequency distribution on 08-Dec-2020.
Table 4.5 shows the events duration inside FCR-D interval, compared to case 1.1, there are
much less events and mostly small deviations in FCR-D interval. A bit more FCR-D upward
regulation is needed according to the table, thus the SOC does not vary significantly but a
slightly drop during the day. Figure 4.4 presents the SOC variation with different initial
values through the day together with SOC protection signals, the battery only outputs a
little power around 8 to 10 am. The SOC almost stays at the initial SOC for the whole
day, and the 4 curves have the same trend, the SOC protection is never triggered. Figure
4.5 shows a zoom-in of the battery SOC variation at SOC0 = 0.6 in this day, the SOC
total deviation is about 0.02 pu, this number is rather small, hence the initial condition
doesn’t seem to be a factor affecting the battery performance in this case.
40
==PAGE:51==
4. Case studies
Table 4.5. Time share in FCR-D interval.
FCR-D upward regulation
FCR-D downward regulation
frequency [49.5,49.9] Hz
frequency [50.1,50.5] Hz
Time share [min]
32
21
Figure 4.4. SOC level with different initial
conditions and SOC protection
signals - FCR-D controller.
Figure 4.5. Zoom-in SOC curve at SOC0 = 0.6 -
FCR-D controller.
The Table 4.6 shows the FCR-D upward and downward frequency regulation requirements
and the fulfillment levels. The reference energy in this case is: 2.638 kWh and 1.129 kWh
for upward and downward FCR-D regulation requirements respectively. It can be observed
that these requirements are achieved by all the initial SOC conditions.
Table 4.6. Energy transfer in Case 1.2.
Initial SOC level [pu]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
FCR-D upward [kWh]
2.638
2.638
2.638
2.638
Compared to reference [kWh]
0
0
0
0
FCR-D downward [kWh]
1.129
1.129
1.129
1.129
Compared to reference [kWh]
0
0
0
0
4.2.3
Case 1.3 - Test the battery for LFSM-O provision with a 4% of
droop
In this case, the battery is tested for LFSM-O functionality, this service is required by
the storage facility belonging to category A and a droop of 4% is set in DK2 according
to the grid code. However, the measured frequency in real time doesn’t go into this
LFSM-O interval. In order to test LFSM-O controller, one day of frequency data is created
by choosing the day (06-Dec-2020) which has the most number of frequency events and
enlarge these frequency deviations around 50 Hz by 10 times. It should be noted that this
frequency data is not realistic, it is taken as an example for testing purpose.
Figure 4.6 shows the scatter plot of the power output of LFSM-O controller together with
the distribution of the created frequency. The frequency is centered around 50 Hz and
41
==PAGE:52==
4. Case studies
symmetrically distributed between 49 Hz and 51 Hz. The controller has no output at
frequency below 50.5 Hz, the maximum output is -0.36 pu at 51.22 Hz. For a 4% of droop,
the battery can absorbs maximum 0.5 pu (16.75 kW) of power.
Figure 4.7 shows the battery SOC during the day for a 4% of droop controller with different
initial conditions, the SOC doesn’t see a significant change. Figure 4.8 is a zoom-in of the
battery SOC variation, the SOC increases only around 0.04 pu during the day. It can be
seen from Table 4.7 that the LFSM-O regulation requirements are all met in the 4 initial
SOC conditions.
The fact is that the LFSM-O reserve is rarely activated and a 4% of droop leaves room for
other usages of the battery. Thus, in this case the battery can be used for other purposes
which discharges maximum 1 pu of power or absorbs maximum 0.5 pu of power with the rest
of the power capacity, one example could be EV charging. However, implementing other
applications on the battery has a risk of power saturation which leads to not being able
to absorb the guaranteed power for LFSM-O service. On the other hand, the availability
payment (from capacity market) for LFSM-O service is usually very low, and the revenue
in the case of downward regulation are less profitable comparing to up-regulation in some
circumstances. Therefore, the penalty level of the LFSM-O in Danish electricity market
can be investigated and an evaluation can be made regarding the economic possibilities on
the battery serving LFSM-O and other application at the same time.
Figure 4.6. Top sub-plot: scatter plot of LFSM-O controller power output with respect to
frequency, bottom sub-plot: created frequency distribution.
42
==PAGE:53==
4. Case studies
Table 4.7. Energy transfer in Case 1.3.
Initial SOC level [pu]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
LFSM-O [kWh]
4.157
4.157
4.157
4.157
Compared to reference [kWh]
0
0
0
0
Figure 4.7. SOC level with different initial
conditions and SOC protection
signals - LFSM-O controller.
Figure 4.8. Zoom-in SOC curve at SOC0 = 0.6
- LFSM-O controller.
43
==PAGE:54==
4. Case studies
4.3
Case 2 - Test the battery for providing both FCR-N
and FCR-D
In this case, both FCR-N and FCR-D is provided from the battery with the full power
capacity. For those entities who participate in electricity market for providing Frequency
containment reserves (FCR) can get paid in two separate markets: Capacity Market
and Ancillary Services Markets. Both FCR-N and FCR-D providers are compensated
for providing capacity and energy, the provided energy is remunerated according to the
balancing market prices, which are determined in real-time. While the capacity fee is paid
based on the provided capacity even when it doesn’t get activated. Knowing that the
FCR-D has lower reimbursement level than FCR-N normally [30], the incentive for having
also FCR-D provision is that FCR-D reserves are activated less often than FCR-N, if the
battery wants to fulfill also EV charging demand for example, it would interfere less in the
EV charging process.
For the design of the FCR-N & FCR-D controller, FCR-N reserve has to be allocated
first since it is supposed to be activated dealing with small fluctuation constantly, while
the larger disturbances in the system is supplemented by FCR-D reserve. The FCR-D
functionality is built over the FCR-N control functionality, this means that when the
frequency enters into FCR-D interval, the power output is the sum of power output from
FCR-D controller and maximum injected or delivered power of FCR-N controller.
Figure 4.9 demonstrates the executed frequency profile in this case on the top sub-plot and
the power output from FCR-N & FCR-D controller during three power capacity distribution
scenarios on the bottom. The three scenarios are that: 1.6 pu of power capacity allocated
for FCR-N and 0.4 pu of power capacity allocated for FCR-D; 1 pu of power capacity
allocated for FCR-N and 1 pu of power capacity allocated for FCR-D; 0.4 pu of power
capacity allocated for FCR-N and 1.6 pu of power capacity allocated for FCR-D. The sum
of FCR-N and FCR-D is always equal to 2 pu since the whole power capacity is booked
for providing FCR-N and FCR-D services. The frequency profile on the top-subplot is
the historic data on 06-Dec-2020 when most of the frequency deviations are found in this
day. The frequency deviate extremely random, its duration and magnitude has irregular
behaviour. This is the results of real-time mismatch of production and consumption, due
to some prediction errors or unforeseen events. The bottom sub-plot depicts the controller
power output with different portions of services, it is indicated that the controller becomes
more aggressive with a large allocation of FCR-N reserve (the orange curve has a wider
range of power output). The Table 4.8 shows that the frequency is within FCR-N interval
for the most of the time, which means that the power output from the FCR-N & FCR-D
controller highly depends on the outcome from FCR-N control.
Table 4.8. Time share in FCR-N and FCR-D interval.
FCR-D upward
regulation
[47.5,49.9] Hz
FCR-N upward
regulation
[49.9,50] Hz
FCR-N downward
regulation
[50,50.1] Hz
FCR-D downward
regulation
[50.1,50.5] Hz
Time share
[min]
0.4
631
808
0.6
44
==PAGE:55==
4. Case studies
Figure 4.9. Top sub-plot: frequency profile on 06-Dec-2020; bottom sub-plot: FCR-N & FCR-D
controller power output regarding three reserve distributions.
Figure 4.10 shows the scatter plot of the power output as a function of frequency during the
three scenarios, the orange curve has a higher power output than others, the highest output
reaching 0.85 pu (28.475 kW) and -0.81 pu (-27.135 kW). While the blue curve which is
also the least sensitive one has a range of [-0.24,0.34] pu ([-8.04,11.39] kW) of linear output.
In order to observe how the SOC of the battery behaves during the three scenarios, the
SOC starting at 0.5 pu is chosen since it doesn’t result in any SOC protection triggering
through the day in the three cases, so that the battery is fully capable to provide the
required amount of regulation. The SOC curves are shown in Figure 4.11. The SOC level
for the orange curve shows the most variations, while the blue curve goes more smoothly.
This is also reflected in Figure 4.9 and Figure 4.10 where the power output from the orange
curve is larger. In general, the three curves follows the same trend, which is also quite
similar to the SOC variation in case 1.1 when testing FCR-N functionality.
To have a quantitative overview of the controller with different weights of FCR-N and
FCR-D, the controller output is analyzed in energy level. The Table 4.9 shows the amount
of energy that is required from the grid in the three scenarios. Apparently, with a greater
reserve of FCR-N, the upward and downward regulated energy for both FCR-N and FCR-D
is increased. A large amount of regulation energy means that the revenues in the real time
balancing market is higher. Thus, the distribution with 1.6 pu of FCR-N and 0.4 pu of
FCR-D can be the most profitable case in the balancing market among the three.
45
==PAGE:56==
4. Case studies
Figure 4.10. Scatter plot for FCR-N & FCR-D controllers output with different distributions,
the dash lines are for marking the whole range of the controllers.
Figure 4.11. SOC variation starting at SOC0= 0.5 - FCR-N & FCR-D controller.
Table 4.9. Energy transfer in different power distribution scenarios.
FCR-N:FCR-D
FCR-N:FCRD
FCR-N:FCR-D
0.4 pu : 1.6 pu
1 pu : 1 pu
1.6 pu : 0.4 pu
FCR-N upward [kWh]
16.66
41.64
66.62
FCR-N downward [kWh]
24.05
60.12
96.19
FCR-D upward [kWh]
0.06213
0.1164
0.1706
FCR-D downward [kWh]
0.0739
0.01722
0.2705
46
==PAGE:57==
4. Case studies
4.4
Case 3 - Test the battery providing FCR-N, FCR-D
and LFSM-O with 4% of droop
In this case, FCR-N, FCR-D and LFSM-O are provided at the same time from the battery.
The maximum power adjustment from each service is linked to their own frequency interval
and the droop settings. The battery is never able to provide full capacity from -1 pu to 1
pu since the over and under frequency range is asymmetric. For the sake of simplicity and
just to give an example, the droop for the three is all set to 4%. In order to test also the
LFSM-O functionality, this test case is conducted using the frequency created in case 1.3
where the frequency has 10 times larger deviation than normal days.
In the design of the FCR-N & FCR-D & LFSM-O controller, LFSM-O functionality
is implemented on the basis of FCR-N&FCR-D controller. This means that when the
frequency enters into LFSM-O interval, the controller output is the sum of power output
from LFSM-O controller and the maximum injected power from FCR-N & FCR-D controller.
The controller remains the same as FCR-N & FCR-D controller in the part which has
FCR-N or FCR-D control.
Figure 4.12. Top sub-plot: scatter plot of FCR-N&FCR-D&LFSM-O controller power output
with respect to frequency, bottom sub-plot: created frequency distribution.
As it has been calculated in sub-section 3.3.3, the power output for FCR-N region is
[-0.05,0.05] pu, FCR-D region is [-0.05,-0.25] pu and [0.05,0.25] pu, and LFSM-O region
is [-0.25,-0.75]. The Figure 4.12 shows the scatter plot of FCR-N & FCR-D & LFSM-O
controller power output with respect to frequency together with the created frequency
distribution. The power output is between [-0.61,0.25] pu ([-20.435,8.375] kW). Table 4.10
shows that, the FCR-D downward regulation has a large share in the control process,
47
==PAGE:58==
4. Case studies
though LFSM-O service only takes a small part, this means that the battery SOC level
still tends to see an increase during the day. Figure 4.13 shows the SOC variation during
different initial conditions, all of the initial conditions have a similar performance and
all of them is capable of fulfilling the regulation requirements except the one starting at
SOC0=0.8 pu triggering the SOC protection for a few times. Figure 4.14 is a zoom in plot
at SOC0 = 0.6 pu, the variations are not large, an small increase in SOC level can be seen
after the day, this is because the proposed controller covers a large portion of injecting
power from the grid.
Table 4.10. Time share in FCR-N, FCR-D and LFSM-O interval.
FCR-D upward
regulation
[47.5,49.9] Hz
FCR-N
regulation
[49.9,50.1] Hz
FCR-D downward
regulation
[50.1,50.5] Hz
LFSM-O
[50.5,51.5] Hz
Time share
[min]
389
356
518
111
Figure 4.13. SOC level with different initial
conditions and SOC protection
signals - FCR-N & FCR-D &
LFSM-O controller.
Figure 4.14. SOC variation starting at SOC0 =
0.6 - FCR-N & FCR-D & LFSM-O
controller.
Table 4.11. Energy transfer in case 3.
FCR-N:FCR-D:LFSM-O
0.1 pu : 0.4 pu : 0.5 pu
FCR-N upward [kWh]
2.454
FCR-N downward [kWh]
2.525
FCR-D upward [kWh]
36.73
FCR-D downward [kWh]
38.05
LFSM-O [kWh]
19.71
In Table 4.11, the controller output is analysed in energy level, the largest regulated energy
is provided by FCR-D downward regulation, this is closely related to the frequency profile
that the frequency has a large share in the FCR-D downward interval. However, it is
48
==PAGE:59==
4. Case studies
not realistic enough to make conclusion in this case since the frequency data is created
manually, further effort on investigations of LFSM-O service to be delivered in Denmark
and the payment conditions would be necessary regarding the economic impact.
49
==PAGE:60==
5
TEST IN THE LAB
This chapter presents the test for frequency response in the laboratory. It is conducted in
PowerLabDK located in DTU Lyngby Campus. The BESS installed in the lab has only
LFSM-O functionality. The main purpose of the test is to validate the designed LFSM-O
controller in Matlab Simulink against an existing controller and understand the whole
system with hands on experience.
5.1
Lab setup
Figure 5.1 illustrates the lab setup through control, measurement and power connections
perspectives. The power connection is between the labcell and inverter which is on top of
the BESS. The labcell is used as an interface between the BESS and either the AC grid
or the power amplifier, connecting AC grid or the power amplifier to the high power and
signal cables of the BESS. It provides voltage, current, power and frequency measurements
and receives commands for busbar operation through Scada.
A Deif (measurement device) is implemented next to the Inverter to log voltage and current
values on a cloud server, the PC then receives measurements with active, reactive, and
apparent power values calculated from the Deif measurements conveyed by a visualization
software Grafana. A high-fidelity power analyser is used to investigate the waveforms,
namely their frequency and total harmonic distortion.
The PC controls the power amplifier through the NI CompactRIO. The interface to the
CompactRIO is the LabVIEW software, and the CompactRIO sends voltage setpoints to
the power amplifier, with a high sampling rate (40 MHz). The power amplifier generates
the required waveform, having access to the AC grid. This way it can emulate voltage and
frequency fluctuations of the power grid.
Figure 5.1. Experimental setup built at DTU PowerLabDK.
50
==PAGE:61==
5. Test in the lab
The PC controls the BESS through the Energy Management System (EMS) with connection
to a microcontroller (Rasberry Pi) through a cloud. It receives measurements and fault
signals from the string control module (SCM) and the inverter. It controls power setpoints
on the AC side of the inverter and state of charge limit for the BESS. String control
modules in the BESS measure voltage and current values of the string, and voltage and
temperature values of the cells. The measurements are then visualized through the Grafana
software in real time. The inverter provides frequency, 3-phase voltage, current, active/
reactive/ apparent power and DC voltage values. The Figure 5.2 shows the picture of
BESS installed in the lab.
Figure 5.2. BESS installed at DTU PowerLabDK
To start the test, first thing is to confirm the safety rules, once the water pipes and circuit
breakers are closed, the storage is ready to be energized, power flows to the the EMS and
SCM, signals are sent to the cloud. The power amplifier then needs to generate a grid
frequency signal, a peak voltage 8.5533 V is set to the power amplifier to simulate a 230 V
grid signal. The frequency setting is discussed in next section.
5.2
Frequency profile
In order to test the LFSM-O function, a test frequency profile is produced. Starting at
50 Hz, increase in frequency with steps of every 10 seconds. The test frequency is split
into three different areas to observe the output of the system in the three services ranges,
Figure 5.3 depicts the three ranges.
The frequency first enters into FCR-N test region, starting from 50 Hz ramps up to 50.15
Hz and continuously ramps down to 49.85 Hz and back to 50 Hz with a constant step of
0.05 Hz, following a sudden increase to 50.1 Hz and sudden drop til 49.9 Hz. It should
51
==PAGE:62==
5. Test in the lab
be mentioned here during the slow ramping up and down processes, both of them have
one more extra step to test the response in the edges. Once the frequency goes back to 50
Hz, it follows a similar trend after entering into FCR-D test region, the frequency step in
the ramping part is 0.1 Hz. Finally, the LFSM-O has only over-frequency response, to not
stress the system too much, the frequency ramps up only to 51.45 Hz and then down to
50 Hz, following a few sudden increases and sudden drops. The reason of using jumps is
to better observe the controller output from the BESS. This frequency profile is running
continuously, round by round with each round starts from 50 Hz and ends at 50 Hz.
Figure 5.3. Created test frequency profile.
5.3
Lab results vs. Simulink results
The BESS can decide to deliver or absorb power for other usages. Four scenarios are
considered in the test. The measurement results uploaded to the cloud are present in
Figure 5.4 (blue curves) and Figure 5.5. Figure 5.5 is a scatter plot of the measured active
power output against the test frequency. The droop characteristic can be observed in the
cases when the dispatched power is 0 kW, 25 kW charging, 33.5 kW discharging. The
BESS starts to absorb excess power when frequency is greater than 50.5 Hz, the controller
is expected to react in FCR-D (one step to 50.6 Hz) and LFSM-O regions. To be able to
obtain the droop value of the lab controller, the calculation is present below. At frequency
equals to 51.45 Hz, the active power output is -16 kW. The droop is around 4%. This
droop value is complied with grid code in DK2.
Kdroop = −∆f
∆P = (51.45 −50.5)/50
−16/33.5
= 3.98%
(5.1)
• Pdisp = 0 kW
The whole capacity is used for LFSM-O provision. No active power flowing until the
controller reacts. At t = 534 s, the battery starts to absorbs power, after 4 steps
it charges the maximum power -16 kW. The power limit of the inverter is 33.5 kW,
thus no saturation occurs.
• Pdisp = −25 kW charging
The battery charges 25 kW power, the output active power sees the same trend as in
52
==PAGE:63==
5. Test in the lab
no dispatched power case, however the saturation occurs at around 51 Hz when the
power reaches the limit of the inverter.
• Pdisp = −33.5 kW charging
The battery absorbs the maximum power can be flowing through the inverter, no
capacity left for frequency regulation.
• Pdisp = 33.5 kW discharging
The battery delivers the maximum power can be flowing through the inverter,
over-frequency regulation is available. No saturation occurs, it reduces 16 kW of
discharging active power for LFSM-O service.
To validate the LFSM-O controller designed in Matlab Simulink, the same dispatched
power conditions for the battery is applied in the model: 0 kW, 25 kW charging, 33.5 kW
charging and 33.5 discharging power. The result from Simulink is present in Figure 5.4
(red curves). The two resulting curves are aligned in the four charging scenarios. To sum
up, the 4% of frequency controller in the EMS can fully supply LFSM-O service at the
circumstances during 0 kW dispatched power and 33.5 kW discharging dispatched power
in this test.
Figure 5.4. Comparison between lab results and Simulink results:
blue curves shows the
measurements from Dief, red curves shows the Simulink output.
53
==PAGE:64==
5. Test in the lab
Figure 5.5. Scatter plot of the measured power output against measured frequency in the lab.
54
==PAGE:65==
6
CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
6.1
Conclusion
In this report, a complete BESS system including battery string, converter and EMS
control system has been modelled, and the system’s suitability for providing frequency
stability services has been investigated. It is tested through a number of case studies
whether the system can comply with the DK2 grid code for frequency regulation.
The case studies are aiming at finding out the system performance during the different
types of frequency regulation to be delivered by the 95.04 kWh battery with ±33.5 kW
power limit. There are three types of reserves in the Danish grid code: FCR-N (normal
range), FCR-D (disturbance range) and LFSM-O (only over-frequency support). Among
the three, FCR-N reserve is most often activated in real time.
For FCR-N provision with the full power capacity from the battery, in most initial SOC
conditions the battery hits the SOC protection a number of times; this means that the
battery is likely not able to fulfil the guaranteed amount of energy for the frequency
regulation. The FCR-D reserve is only activated when large disturbances occur, so that
even with an aggressive droop setting and full power capacity deployed, the battery is
able to fulfill the energy demand in most cases without deviating the SOC level to a large
extent. This leaves room for implementing other applications on the battery. LFSM-O
is the easiest service to comply with, as it only actives during frequencies above 50.5 Hz,
which rarely occurs. The provision of LFSM-O with a 4% of droop is mandatory in DK2.
The controller is tested with a manually created frequency profile with large variations.
The battery is able to fully fulfill the regulation demand, the SOC only slightly increases.
In the case when both FCR-N and FCR-D are provided, sharing the full power capacity
from the battery, three different capacity distributions are investigated. The incentive of
having different proportion is a balance between obligation (risk or allocated capacity)
and remuneration from providing FCR-N and FCR-D services in Capacity Market. The
remuneration of the primary reserve in Capacity Market is based on availability, not on
actual energy delivered. A more aggressive control behaviour can be found with a larger
weight of FCR-N reserve. In the balancing market, this can be more profitable since more
reserve is activated which means higher remuneration level. However, the risk is that an
aggressive controller has a greater chance of hitting the SOC limits, that is to say the
battery fails to fulfil the guaranteed amount of energy. Consequently, a penalty is fined
from the TSO which may lead to economic losses.
When FCR-N, FCR-D and LFSM-O are all provided simultaneously, the sum of the
reserves can never be symmetric which results from the the whole frequency range being
asymmetric. This means that the battery is not able to discharge the full power during the
55
==PAGE:66==
6. Conclusion & future work
most severe frequency drop (49.5 Hz in FCR-D region). With a 4% droop being set to all
the three, the controller has a relatively weak behaviour compared to previously mentioned
cases. In the test, the battery was able to output the required amount of energy without
deviation in the chosen initial SOC conditions. This is because of limited energy exchange
with the grid due to the less aggressive droop and low frequency deviations. Hence, the
effective frequency support of the battery is simply smaller if all three services need to be
supplied simultaneously than if the entire capacity is booked for e.g. FCR-N.
To sum up, the initial SOC can be a significant limitation on the regulation behaviour.
A large scale of FCR-N implementation on the battery has a chance of getting high
reimbursement level but it may also lead to risk of getting fined if the SOC-protection
is triggered. The grid frequency variations are caused by unforeseen events and forecast
errors, thus it is hard to predict since it has extremely random behaviour. In real time
operation, it will not be sufficient to set an initial SOC analysed based on only one day
of historic frequency data and hope the battery is not going to hit the SOC limits while
providing the contracted regulations - instead a probabilistic methodology is needed (see
future work). Furthermore, other usages of the battery is not considered in this study, the
battery has the potential of fulfilling power demands other than only used as a frequency
regulation provider.
6.2
Future work
The main focus of this work is to model and test the battery for the provision of frequency
regulation. The models are built on the basis of giving an example of storage facility
providing FCR-N, FCR-D and LFSM-O control functionalities, the model might be limited
in real life since the battery can be used in different applications to provide a range of
other services to the power system. To be able to adapt the model in a more practical way,
the investigation activity can be continued in the following directions:
• Test the battery performance for frequency regulation provision with a
larger data set.
The current work uses one day of historic frequency data to test the battery perfor-
mance for frequency control, this would not be sufficient enough to deduce conclusions
on the capability of providing the purposed regulation services. Extending the fre-
quency data allows to estimate the probability of hitting the SOC limits, which would
be important in order to evaluate the value in investing a bigger battery.
• Implement SOC recovery strategy on the EMS.
The initial SOC is a limitation on the battery performance. A SOC recovery process
is to recover the SOC to around 0.5 pu which is an optimum level of the battery.
This strategy can be advantageous on the fulfilment of contracted amount of energy
which as a result reduces the risk of paying penalty to the TSO. Besides, a SOC
recovery process can be beneficial on the life-time of the battery. Another aspect is
that an optimization of the profit can also be considered since the battery can choose
to charge energy from the grid at a lower electricity price and discharge energy to
56
==PAGE:67==
6. Conclusion & future work
the grid at a higher electricity price.
• Financial income possibilities from FCR-N, FCR-D and LFSM-O services.
The provision of primary frequency control is the most cost-effective service in current
ancillary service market, therefore investigating the marketing clearing mechanism
for FCR-N, FCR-D and LFSM-O and the penalty level can be advantageous. As a
role of market participant, an analysis of the possible revenues from providing the
combination of these services or separately can be done. This helps to find a more
profitable bidding strategy participating in the primary frequency reserve market.
• Equip the BESS with other applications
The battery has the potential of implementing other applications such as EV charging
or load powering other than only be used as a frequency regulation provider. In
this work, the battery has 0 dispatched power, it would be interesting to assess the
battery performance after adding the dispatched power on top of the battery.
57
==PAGE:68==
REFERENCES
[1]
The climate act in Denmark. [Online]. Available:
https://climate-laws.org/geographies/denmark/laws/the-climate-act.
[2]
Clean and renewable energy in Denmark. [Online]. Available:
https://denmark.dk/innovation-and-design/clean-energy.
[3]
Number of wind turbines and capacity. [Online] Available:
https://winddenmark.dk/tal-fakta/fakta-om-vind-danmark/antal-vindmoeller-
kapacitet.
[4]
Jin Zhong. Coordinated control for large-scale EV charging facilities and energy
storage devices participating in frequency regulation. ELSEVIER., 2014.
[5]
Palo Alto. KEMA, Inc. Research evaluation of wind generationsolar generationand
storage impact on the California grid. California Energy Commission, 2010.
[6]
Utility-scale batteries innovation landscape brief. IRENA, 2019.
[7]
NREL USAID. Grid-Scale Battery Storage - Frequently Asked Questions. Available:
https://www.greeningthegrid.org/, https://www.nrel.gov/usaid-partnership/.
[8]
Woo Yeong Choi. Operating method of BESS for providing AGC frequency control
service considering its availability maximization. Transactions of the Korean Institute
of Electrical Engineers — 2016, Volume 65, Issue 7, pp. 1161-1168, 2016.
[9]
Gilbert Laporte Marco Veneroni Samuel Pelletier, Ola Jabali. Battery degradation
and behaviour for electric vehicles: Review and numerical analyses of several models.
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 103 (2017), pp. 158-187, 2017.
[10] Daniel Ioan1; Stan Ana Irina1; Teodorescu Remus1; Sauer Dirk Uwe2 Swierczynski,
Maciej1; Stroe. Selection and performance-degradation modeling of limo2/li 4ti5o12
and lifepo4/c battery cells as suitable energy storage systems for grid integration with
wind power plants: An example for the primary frequency regulation service. Ieee
Transactions on Sustainable Energy — 2014, Volume 5, Issue 1, pp. 6583344, 2014.
[11] Electricity storage and renewables: costs and markets to 2030. IRENA, October,2017.
[12] Technology Data – Energy storage. Danish Energy Agency and Energinet, 2018.
[13] Wei Yang Chunqing Tan Yongliang Li Yulong Ding Haisheng Chen, Thang
Ngoc Cong. Progress in electrical energy storage system: A critical review. Progress
in Natural Science, 19 (2009), pp. 291-312, 2009.
[14] Ana-Irina Stan Remus Teodorescu Dirk Uwe Sauer Maciej Świerczyński, Daniel
Ioan Stroe. Selection and Performance-Degradation Modeling of LiMO2/Li4Ti5O12
and LiFePO4/C Battery Cells as Suitable Energy Storage Systems for Grid
58
==PAGE:69==
References
Integration With Wind Power Plants: An Example for the Primary Frequency
Regulation Service. IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy, 5 (1) (2014), 2014.
[15] Vinod Kumar S. S. Sharma and R. R. Joshi. An Overview on Energy Storage Options
for Renewable Energy Systems. National Conference held at ITM, Bhilwara, At
Bhilwara, Rajasthan, 2010.
[16] P. Braun. Optimizing a hybrid energy storage system for a virtual power plant for
improved wind power generation: A case study for Denmark. Proc. 6th Int.
Renewable Energy Storage Conf. and Exhibition, 2011.
[17] H. Kamath B. Dunn and J.-M. Tarascon. Electrical energy storage for the grid: A
battery of choices. cience, vol. 334, no. 6058, pp. 928-935, Nov. 2011.
[18] Electricity energy storage technology options: a white paper primer on applications,
costs and benefits. DEC,2010.
[19] Jan Martin; Gabderakhmanova-Tatiana; Rohde Gunnar; Marinelli Mattia Engelhardt,
Jan; Zepter. Double-String Battery System with Reconfigurable Cell Topology
Operated as a Fast Charging Station for Electric Vehicles. 2021.
[20] Jesper Gejl Lage. Design of energy management strategies for a reconfigurable battery
system coupled with electric vehicle fast chargers and photovoltaics. Master’s Thesis,
June 2021.
[21] Andrew Burke Hengbing Zhao. An Intelligent Solar Powered Battery Buffered EV
Charging Station with Solar Electricity Forecasting and EV Charging Load Projection
Functions. 2014.
[22] Matthew T. Lawder. Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) and Battery
Management System (BMS) for Grid-Scale Applications. IEEE Vol. 102, No. 6, June
2014.
[23] Gunnar Rohde Mattia Marinelli Zoltan Mark Pinter, Dimitrios Papageorgiou and
Chresten Træholt. Review of Control Algorithms for Reconfigurable Battery Systems
with an Industrial Example. IEEE, 2021.
[24] Jakob Glarbo Mølle. Frequency Stability (I/I) Active Power and Frequency Control.
31750 - Power System Stability and Control, November 25, 2020.
[25] Danish Technical Standard. Ancillary Services to Be Delivered in Denmark —
Tender Conditions, (18/05/2020).
https://en.energinet.dk/-/media/F7C86E8D588742F1A60377289150B30D.pdf.
[26] Energinet. Technical regulation 3.3.1 for electrical energy storage facilities. Effective
from 18 December 2019.
[27] ENTSO-E. Supporting document on Technical requirements for Frequency
Containment Reserve provision in the Nordic Synchronous Area, (27.01.2021).
https://energinet.dk/El/Systemydelser/Nyheder-om-systemydelser/2021-01-28-
Udkast-til-nye-tekniske-krav-for-frekvensreserver-i-Oestdanmark.
59
==PAGE:70==
References
[28] DTU. PowerLab DK. https://www.powerlab.dk/. Accessed: 2021-05-07.
[29] Nihal Kularatna. Rechargeable battery technologies: an electronic engineer’s view
point. Energy Storage Devices for Electronic Systems, 2015.
[30] Corentin Evens Poria Hasanpor Divshali∗. Optimum day-ahead bidding profiles of
electrical vehicle charging stations in FCR markets. Electric Power Systems Research
190 (2021) 106667.
60
==PAGE:71==
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
