==PAGE:1==
Damage Detection of Laboratory
Specimen
Hussain Nawar Ajina
s163789
Master’s Thesis
09-01-2022
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Brovej, Building 118,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
Tlf +45 4525 1700
==PAGE:3==
Damage Detection of Laboratory Specimen
This Master Thesis was prepared by:
Hussain Nawar Ajina
Supervisor:
Rune Brincker, Professor
Co-Supervisors:
Sandro Diord Rescinho Amador, Assistant Professor
Evangelos Katsanos, Associate Professor
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for graduating
the degree of Master of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University
of Denmark.
Project period:
August 2021 - January 2022
ECTS:
1 x 30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Civil Engineering
Class:
No conﬁdentiality
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis is prepared at the Department of Civil Engineering as a partial
fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. in Civil Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark. The project is accredited 30 ECTS points.
The project spanned from August 2021 to January 2022 with Professor Rune
Brincker as the main supervisor.
The project is a continuation of the work regarding methodologies concerning vi-
bration based structural health monitoring found in Mazlum Komurcu’s project
Illustration of Structural Health Monitoring on a Small Test Specimen [13].
==PAGE:5==
ii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my Professor, Rune Brincker, for giving me the opportunity
to be his Master thesis student. There is no doubt that his thorough knowledge
and broad experience regarding the ﬁelds of vibrations, structural dynamics and
structural health monitoring was very essential for ﬁnalizing this thesis.
I would also like to show my gratitude to my co-supervisor, Assistant Professor
Sandro Amador, for assisting me in the initial work regarding the FE-model and
providing with critical feedback in our meetings.
I also wish to express my appreciation for Associate Professor Evangelos Kat-
sanos. Without him and his introduction to the ﬁelds of vibration based struc-
tural health monitoring this project would not be possible.
A special thanks to my fellow student and friend Mazlum Komurcu for collab-
oration in creating the FE-model.
Finally, I would like to thank postdoc Amirali Sadeqi for the helpful discussions
we had regarding the numerical analysis.
==PAGE:7==
iv
==PAGE:8==
Abstract
This thesis develops a vibration based 3-level damage identiﬁcation scheme
which aims to detect (level 1), localize (level 2) and quantify (level 3) single
structural damages originated from stiﬀness changes. The damage identiﬁcation
scheme is applied on a laboratory specimen made of aluminum and is performed
purely by using the natural frequencies as the damage indicators.
Moreover, the scheme is build on the premise called Scenario Based Damage
Assessment, where a ﬁnite element model representing the laboratory specimen
is created.
In addition, the critical failure mechanisms of the specimen are
parametrized in the FE-model producing the hypothetical changes in frequencies
which are stored in the sensitivity matrix. A numerical analysis is conducted to
assess the robustness of the level 2 and level 3 approaches.
The level 2 approach, called the MAC-SBDA, compares the frequency change
patterns between the measured frequency changes and the hypothetical sce-
narios. In the numerical analyses, it is observed that the MAC-SBDA is very
accurate to localize damages regardless of its location and severity.
For level 3, the pseudo-inverse approach is introduced, which returns a damage
quantiﬁcation index. Numerically, it became apparent that the accuracy of the
quantiﬁcation depended on the deﬁnition of the sensitivity matrix.
Eventually, the 3-level damage identiﬁcation scheme is performed on experimen-
tal tests. Here, loosening the torque of the bolts on the laboratory specimen
represented experimental damages. Detection of damage proved to be possible
on almost all damaged bolts by the use of the proposed level 1 method where
the coeﬃcient of variance is determined. Moreover, both the level 2 and level
3 approaches proved to be competent methods able to localize correctly, and
estimate a sensible value of the damage extent.
==PAGE:9==
vi
==PAGE:10==
Resumé
Denne tese udvikler en vibrationsbaseret skadesidentiﬁkationsmetode som består
af 3-niveauer.
Formålet er at detektere (niveau 1), lokalisere (niveau 2) og
kvantiﬁcere (niveau 3) enkelte strukturelle skader, der opstår ved modiﬁka-
tioner i stivheden.
Skadeidentiﬁkationsmetoden anvendes på et laboratorie
emne bestående af aluminium og udføres udelukkende ved at bruge de naturlige
frekvenser som skadesindikatorer.
Desuden er metoden bygget på præmis-
sen kaldet Scenario Based Damage Assessment, hvor der skabes en ﬁnite el-
ement model der repræsenterer laboratorieemnet.
Derudover er de kritiske
skadesmekanismer for emnet parametriseret i en FE-model, hvilket frembringer
de hypotetiske ændringer i frekvenser, som er lagret i sensitivitetsmatricen. En
numerisk analyse er blevet udført for at vurdere robustheden af niveau 2 og
niveau 3.
Niveau 2-tilgangen, kaldet MAC-SBDA, sammenligner frekvensændringsmøn-
strene mellem de målte frekvensændringer og de hypotetiske frekvensændringer
deﬁneret ved scenarierne. I de numeriske analyser er det observeret, at MAC-
SBDA er meget nøjagtig til at lokalisere skader uanset dens lokation og skadens
intensitet.
For niveau 3 introduceres den pseudo-inverse tilgang, som returnerer et skadek-
vantiﬁceringsindeks. Numerisk blev det tydeliggjort, at nøjagtigheden af kvan-
tiﬁceringen afhang af deﬁnitionen af sensitivitetsmatricen.
Til sidst udføres den 3-niveau’s skadesidentiﬁkationsmetode på eksperimentelle
test. De eksperimentelle skader er her deﬁneret ved at løsne tilspændingsmo-
mentet på boltene af det inspicerede emne. Påvisning af skader viste sig at være
mulig på næsten alle løsnede bolte ved brug af den foreslåede niveau 1-metode,
hvor variansen bestemmes. Desuden viste både niveau 2 og niveau 3 tilgange sig
at være egnede metoder ved eksperimentelle analyser, der både kunne lokalisere
korrekt og estimere en antagelig værdi af skadens omfang.
==PAGE:11==
viii
==PAGE:12==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgments
iii
Abstract
v
Resumé
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Scope of Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Laboratory Specimen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Scenario Based Damage Assessment
7
3
Theoretical Background
11
3.1
Sensitivity of Natural Frequencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Pseudo-inverse Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Modal Assurance Criterion in a Scenario Based Scheme
. . . . .
14
3.3.1
MAC-SBDA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Experimental Setup and Modal Parameter Estimation
17
4.1
Coeﬃcient of Variance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Numerical Damage Identiﬁcation of Laboratory Specimen
21
5.1
Finite Element Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1.1
Accuracy of FE-model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Deﬁnitions of Predeﬁned Damage Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Localization Through MAC-SBDA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3.1
Inﬂuence of Damage Intensity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3.2
Inﬂuence of Number of Modes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Quantiﬁcation Through a Pseudo-inverse Approach . . . . . . . .
32
5.4.1
Inﬂuence of Damage Intensity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
==PAGE:13==
x
CONTENTS
5.4.2
Pseudo-inverse as a Damage Localizer . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Application of 3-Level Damage Identiﬁcation Scheme on Labo-
ratory Specimen
37
6.1
Damage Deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Damage Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Damage Localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Damage Quantiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7
Conclusion
43
7.1
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Bibliography
46
A Dimensions of Laboratory Specimen
49
B Experimental Modeshapes
51
C Numerical Modeshapes
55
D Frequency Changes for Predeﬁned Scenarios
59
D.1 Scenario 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
D.2 Scenario 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
D.3 Scenario 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
D.4 Scenario 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
D.5 Scenario 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
D.6 Scenario 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
D.7 Scenario 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
D.8 Scenario 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
E Robustness Check for Level 2: MAC-SBDA
69
E.1
Inﬂuence of Damage Intensity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
E.1.1
Scenario 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
E.1.2
Scenario 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
E.1.3
Scenario 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
E.1.4
Scenario 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
E.1.5
Scenario 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
E.1.6
Scenario 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
E.1.7
Scenario 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
E.1.8
Scenario 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
E.2
Inﬂuence of Modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
F Robustness Check for Level 3: Pseudo-inverse Method
81
==PAGE:14==
CONTENTS
xi
G Experimental Damage Detection
85
G.1 Bolt 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
G.2 Bolt 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
G.3 Bolt 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
G.4 Bolt 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
G.5 Bolt 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
G.6 Bolt 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
G.7 Bolt 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
G.8 Bolt 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
==PAGE:15==
==PAGE:16==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
DLAC
Damage Localization Assessment Criteria
EFDD
Enhanced Frequency Domain Decomposition
FEM
Finite Element Model
MAC
Modal Assurance Criterion
OMA
Operational Modal Analysis
SBDA
Scenario Based Damage Assessment
SHM
Structural Health Monitoring
Symbols - Greek
∆
Indicate change
µ
Mean
ωi
ith natural Frequency
σ
Standard Deviation
Symbols - Latin
∆ˆu
Column vector for damage quantiﬁcation index
∆f
Column vector containing the measured frequency changes
A
Perturbed modeshape matrix
ai
Column vector for ith perturbed modeshape
B
Unperturbed modeshape matrix
==PAGE:17==
xiv
NOMENCLATURE
bi
Column vector for ith unperturbed modeshape
I
Identity matrix
K
Stiﬀness matrix
M
Mass matrix
S
Sensitivity matrix
T
Transformation matrix
Nm
Number of modes
Nsc
Number of scenarios
tii
The ith diagonal entries of T
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The application of structural health monitoring (SHM) is essential to maintain
and conserve the service life of mechanical and civil structures in today’s soci-
ety. Particularly approaching the end of the limited service life of structures,
damages and material deterioration is indeed inevitable. As a result, several
SHM techniques are currently being applied with sole purpose of prolonging the
service life as well as saving repair costs and increasing performance eﬃciency.
SHM techniques can be classiﬁed into either local or global practices. Some
local SHM applications include digital image correlation, ultrasonic testing, vi-
sual testing and optical methods [2]. Damage assessment based on vibration
characteristics establishes a branch within global SHM applications. Namely,
vibration based SHM is rising to be a robust method to identify damages in
structures by analyzing the global dynamic properties such as the natural fre-
quencies, modeshapes and damping. A structural damage can be classiﬁed as
an alteration in the material and geometric characteristics that fundamentally
can aﬀect the safety and performance [4] [6].
According to Rytter [16], a complete identiﬁcation of a structural damage is
composed of four diﬀerent levels. The premier level is identifying the actual
presence of damage. This level requires the least amount of information and
can be performed relativity eﬀortlessly by use of statistical measures. The next
two levels are to determine the location and severity of the of detected damage.
These levels demand considerable knowledge and information of the monitored
structure, both in the undamaged and damaged state.
The last level is to
==PAGE:19==
2
Introduction
diagnose the damage and assess its impact on the remaining service life of the
structure.
In summary, Rytter’s four levels can be listed as follows;
Level 1 Is the structure damaged?
Level 2 Where is the damage?
Level 3 How severe is the damage?
Level 4 What is the remaining service life?
In present, only vibrations based SHM methods concerning Level 1 are commer-
cialized [14].
1.1
Objective
The aim for this thesis is to demonstrate the application of vibration based SHM
on a laboratory specimen employing both numerical analysis and experimental
investigations. Moreover, the objective is to develop a vibration based damage
identiﬁcation scheme, where single structural damages can be detected, localized
and quantiﬁed. The vibration based damage identiﬁcation scheme will follow
the concept of Rytter’s 4 level of damage identiﬁcation[16], where the ﬁrst 3
levels will be studied, thus being the focal point of this thesis.
Figure 1.1: Rytter’s four levels of damage identiﬁcation. The dashed circle
highlights the focus of the thesis.
For each of the 3 levels, an approach is presented. For Level 1, a statistical
approach is introduced where the coeﬃcient of variance of the natural frequen-
cies is calculated in the undamaged state of the laboratory specimen. Damage
is then detected, when the measured frequencies of damaged state exceed the
threshold of calculated coeﬃcients of variance. For Level 2 and Level 3, two ap-
==PAGE:20==
1.2 Scope of Work
3
proaches are presented that require a numerical model of the specimen, where
hypothetical damage scenarios are parametrized. Here, the perturbed frequency
changes are compared with the estimated frequency changes gathered from the
parametric model. The comparison of the two entries are performed by two sep-
arate methods, one estimating the location of the perturbation and one yielding
an approximated extent of the severity of the damage. The three approaches
are all listed in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1: SBDA based damage identiﬁcation scheme
Level
Classiﬁcation
Approach
Level 1
Detection
Coeﬃcient of Variation
Level 2
Localization
MAC-SBDA
Level 3
Quantiﬁcation
Pseudo-Inverse Method
Moreover, the Level 2 localization and Level 3 quantiﬁcation approaches are
built on the framework called Scenario Based Damage Assessment (SBDA).
This thesis also aims to study the pros, cons and limitations of the two SBDA
approaches by addressing the following points.
• Accuracy of localization of damage
• Accuracy of quantiﬁcation of damage
• Inﬂuence of damage intensity
• Inﬂuence of number of modes
• Inﬂuence of number of predeﬁned scenarios
1.2
Scope of Work
The dynamic modal properties of a structure are governed by the physical prop-
erties and the boundary conditions. Any scaled change in the mentioned will
aﬀect the modal parameters such as frequencies, modeshapes and damping. This
project will practice damage identiﬁcation by solely using the natural frequency
changes. Not only are the natural frequencies great damage indicators, they
can easily be extracted experimentally with a conﬁdent level of accuracy [18].
This thesis uses Operational Modal Analysis (OMA) testing and Enhanced Fre-
quency Domain Decomposition (EFDD) [3] to extract the natural frequencies of
the laboratory specimen. The theoretical background of OMA and EFFD will
==PAGE:21==
4
Introduction
not be touched upon in this thesis. Moreover, the natural frequencies from the
numerical model are derived by simple modal analysis by using the commercial
software Ansys APDL.
Finally, this project will concern structural damage as change in the stiﬀness.
In the numerical model, the stiﬀness change will be deﬁned as a reduction of
the Young’s-Modulus in the ﬁnite elements, whereas the experimental model
will concern damage as stiﬀness loss in its bolts.
1.3
Laboratory Specimen
The presented damage identiﬁcation scheme will be implemented on a U-shaped
specimen. The specimen consists of three individual aluminum plates bolted
together by a total of 8 bolts. The specimen is depicted in Figure 1.2, whereas
the measured dimensions are found in Appendix A.
(a) Specimen
(b) Bolts
Figure 1.2: Laboratory specimen
The particular reason behind the choice of this specimen for the demonstration
and application of vibration based SHM is the fact that perturbations can easily
be implemented without replacing the diﬀerent parts of the specimen.
The
idea is that the torque of the bolts can be controlled by a torque wrench, thus
controlling the change in stiﬀness. The numbering of the bolts are visualized in
Figure 1.3.
==PAGE:22==
1.3 Laboratory Specimen
5
Figure 1.3: Bolt numbering
==PAGE:23==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2
Scenario Based Damage
Assessment
This chapter deals with the concept of Scenario Based Damage Assessment
(SBDA) and how this concept includes the proposed vibration based 3-level
damage identiﬁcation approach. SBDA mainly scopes out Level 2 and Level 3
in Rytter’s damage identiﬁcation scheme. However, this chapter will introduce
a newly revised version where the ﬁrst 3 levels are all enforced equally.
SBDA was originally introduced by Hansen in 2016 in his PhD dissertation
[11], and later applied in Forsting and Jacobsen’s [9] as well as Komurcu’s [13]
Master thesis projects. However, a scenario based damaged detection scheme
dates back to 1996 in Contursi, Messina, and Williams paper [19].
The main aspiration of SBDA is to compare modal parameters of hypothetical
damage scenarios of a structure with the actual measured modal parameters.
The hypothetical modal parameters of the scenarios are set up in a Finite El-
ement (FE) model where each possible scenario is computed through modal
analysis. In theory, an inﬁnite number of damage locations can occur, however
with SBDA, it is viable to narrow down the the number of damage locations,
where only the most critical positions are inspected [15]. Figure 2.1 displays a
step by step protocol to perform this newly revised SBDA.
==PAGE:25==
8
Scenario Based Damage Assessment
FE Model
Experimental Model
Step 1 – Model validation
Step 2 – Hypothetical damage scenarios
Real life damage
Step 3 – Testing in perturbed state 
Step 4 – Application of 3-level Damage identification
Level 1:
Detection
Coefficient of Variance
Level 2:
Localization
MAC-SBDA
Level 3:
Quantification
Pseudo-inverse 
Δ𝐮ෝ= 𝐒ାΔ𝐟=> 50%
Figure 2.1: Concept of Scenario Based Damage Assessment inspired by
Hansen’s original illustration [11]
==PAGE:26==
9
The four steps presented in Figure 2.1 are further elaborated in the following
sections:
Step 1 - Model validation
The initial step of the SBDA protocol is to create a ﬁnite element model that
represents the experimental model. The FE-model need to have the exact di-
mensions and material properties as the investigated specimen. Once an ini-
tial FE-model has been created, a modal analysis is performed to compute the
mass-scaled modeshapes and natural frequencies. Subsequently experiments are
conducted on the investigated specimen, where OMA is practiced to extract the
modal parameters. Following this, the experimental modal parameters are used
to validate the FE-model to assess the reliability of the model as a representa-
tion of the investigated specimen. It has to be noted that multiple tests have to
be performed to extract the experimental frequencies in order to determine the
coeﬃcient of variance which will be used later in Step 4 for Level 1 - Damage
Detection.
Step 2 - Hypothetical damage scenarios
Once the FE-model is designated to be a satisfactory representation of the spec-
imen, the hypothetical damage scenarios are deﬁned. In this project, the alu-
minum specimen is investigated and therefore the damage scenarios are nar-
rowed down to eight which correspond to the number of bolts in the specimen.
Each scenario is representing a loss of stiﬀness in an individual bolt. A modal
analysis is then performed for each damaged case to compute the perturbed
frequencies. The change in frequencies for each scenario is then stored in a sen-
sitivity matrix denoted as S. It has to be noted that the sensitivity matrix is
partially dependent on the accuracy of the FE-model.
Step 3 - Testing in perturbed state
Assuming damage has transpired, the specimen is tested in the same way as
in Step 1. The frequencies from the perturbed state is gathered in order to
determine the measured frequency changes. The frequency changes are ﬁnally
stored in a column vector, ∆f.
Step 4 - Application of 3-level damage identiﬁcation
The ﬁnal step is to apply the 3-level damage identiﬁcation. Firstly, the measured
frequency changes of the perturbed state are plotted with calculated coeﬃcient
of variance. Once damage is clearly present, the MAC-SBDA is used to compare
the measured frequency changes with the sensitivity matrix computed from the
hypothetical scenarios to indicate the most probable location of the damage.
The last stage is to utilize the pseudo-inverse approach to give an estimate of
the damage extent. This extent is returned as an actual stiﬀness reduction.
==PAGE:27==
10
Scenario Based Damage Assessment
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3
Theoretical Background
In this chapter, a deﬁnition of the sensitivity of the natural frequencies will
be introduced along side the theoretical background behind the scenario-based
Level 2 and Level 3 approaches.
3.1
Sensitivity of Natural Frequencies
When a damage in a structure occurs, the stiﬀness will be diminished, which
results in the reduction of the natural frequencies. The change of natural fre-
quency caused by stiﬀness reductions can be explained by diﬀerent theoretical
frameworks found in the literature [11] [12] . The deﬁnition of frequency change
that is touched upon in this thesis relates to the ﬁndings of Sadeqi’s paper [17].
Two systems are considered, a system B representing the unperturbed state, and
a system A deﬁning the perturbed state where there is a change in the stiﬀness
matrix and/or mass matrix. The free response of the unperturbed undamped
state can be expressed,
ω2
biMbi = Kbi
(3.1)
Likewise for the perturbed system, the free response is deﬁned,
ω2
ai(M + ∆M)ai = (K + ∆K)ai
(3.2)
==PAGE:29==
12
Theoretical Background
Where bi is the modeshape of the unperturbed system, ai is the modeshape of
the perturbed system, ∆M is the change in the mass matrix and ∆K is the
change in the stiﬀness matrix. Subscript a and b symbolize the perturbed and
unperturbed state respectively.
A projection quantity tii is now introduced that describes the diagonal entries
from the matrix T which portrays the linear relation between the perturbed A
and unperturbed B eigenmodes,
A = BT
(3.3)
Or for a single eigenmode,
ai = bitii
(3.4)
Calculating the inner product of (3.2) and substituting with (3.4) yields the
following,
ω2
aibT
i Mbitii + ω2
aibT
i ∆Mai = bT
i Ktiibi + bT
i ∆Kai
(3.5)
Expression (3.5) can be reduced considering I = bT
i Mbi and ω2
bi = bT
i Kbi are
applicable for mass-normalized modes [3]. This leaves,
ω2
aitii + ω2
aibT
i ∆Mai = ω2
bitii + bT
i ∆Kai =⇒
tii(ω2
ai −ω2
bi) = −ω2
aibT
i ∆Mbi + bT
i ∆Kai
(3.6)
Dividing with the perturbed frequency ω2
ai and multiplying with tii on both
sides of the equation, the dimensionless second order frequency is obtained [17],
ω2
ai −ω2
bi
ω2
ai
= 1
tii
bT
i (−∆M + ∆K 1
ω2
ai
)ai
(3.7)
Generally, it is quite diﬃcult to attain accurate versions of mass and stiﬀness
matrices using commercial ﬁnite element software, while it is easy to secure the
modal parameters. Relation (3.7) gives an exact estimation of the right hand
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Pseudo-inverse Method
13
side, which means by only the using left hand side, it will be suﬃcient when
calculating the change in the natural frequencies for structural modiﬁcations
aﬀecting the stiﬀness and mass matrix.
In a scenario based scheme, the frequency changes are utilized to determine
the two entries, namely the sensitivity matrix S and the measured frequency
change vector ∆f. As speciﬁed already, the sensitivity matrix stores the pre-
dicted frequency changes found by simulating hypothetical damage scenarios in
a numerical model, thus having the dimensions (Nm × Nsc).
s∆ωj =


∆ωj1
∆ωj2
...
∆ωjNm

,
S =
s∆ω1
s∆ω2
, ..,
s∆ωNsc

(3.8)
The measured frequency changes are contained in a column vector ∆f with the
dimension (Nm × 1).
∆f =


∆ω1
∆ω2
...
∆ωNm


(3.9)
3.2
Pseudo-inverse Method
The relation between the measured frequency changes ∆f and the predicted
frequency changes S can be expressed in the mathematical form [11],
∆f = S∆u
(3.10)
The column vector ∆u in (3.10) links the measured and predicted frequency
changes. Isolating ∆u the expression turns into,
∆u = S−1∆f
(3.11)
If the changes in frequencies between the predicted and measured changes are
proportional to the perturbed matrices ∆M and ∆K, ∆u will compute which
==PAGE:31==
14
Theoretical Background
scenario the perturbation is occurring as well as the extent of the structural
perturbation. In other words, ∆u operates as an index vector which can lo-
calize and quantify a perturbation with respect to the particular parametrized
scenarios. However, a well conditioned and accurate sensitivity matrix has to be
constructed in order to successfully identify and quantify the exact perturbation.
When the sensitivity matrix S consists of more modes than number of prede-
ﬁned damage scenarios, then it is considered as over-determined.
Therefore
(3.11) is reformulated such as the Morse pseudo inverse of sensitivity matrix is
determined.
∆ˆu = S+∆f
(3.12)
Despite the fact that expression (3.12) covers both Level 2: localization and
Level 3: quantiﬁcation, the equation will solely be used as a damage quan-
tiﬁcation index. For Level 2 localization, a separate method will therefore be
proposed which is presented in the following section.
3.3
Modal Assurance Criterion in a Scenario Based
Scheme
This section introduces a method for localization of structural perturbations in
a scenario based scheme. The approach is based on the modal assurance criteria
(MAC) which is an established method within the ﬁeld of structural dynamics
and modal analysis. The MAC measures the degree of linear correlation between
a sets of vectors by calculating the angle between. If the vectors are perpendic-
ular to each other, the MAC value will be zero, whereas parallel vectors yield
the MAC value 1. Mathematically, the MAC value between two vectors b1 and
b2 can be calculated by the following expression,
MAC(b1, b2) =
(bT
1 b2)2
(bT
1 b1)(bT
2 b2)
(3.13)
The MAC method is originally used to compare the correlation between eigen-
modes. Ewins was one of the ﬁrst researchers to introduce the idea of MAC into
modal analysis [8], where numerically computed mode shapes were compared.
In addition, the MAC method can likewise be used to compare numerical eigen-
modes with experimentally derived modeshapes for validation of ﬁnite element
models.
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Modal Assurance Criterion in a Scenario Based Scheme
15
MAC-methods are a very explored ﬁeld in terms of damage detection and dam-
age localization methods. Contursi, Messina, and Williams. were the ﬁrst to
adopt the MAC method, comparing frequency patterns in their "Damage Local-
ization Assurance Criteria" (DLAC) [19]. Diﬀerent researchers later introduced
similar methods with modes shapes [5] and the combination of modeshapes and
frequencies [10]. Since this thesis is only concerned with damage localization
in regards to frequency changes, it will present the MAC-SBDA, which is an
analogous approach to Contursi, Messina, and Williams DLAC method. The
idea is that a structural perturbation in an experimental model can directly be
correlated with a perturbation in a numerical model by comparing the frequency
change patterns. The MAC-SBDA was introduced and applied by Forsting and
Jacobsen [9] in their Master thesis project.
3.3.1
MAC-SBDA
The MAC-SBDA method deals with the same entries as the pseudo-inverse
method, the measured frequency changes ∆f and the sensitivity matrix S. The
MAC-SBDA method can be written is the mathematical form similar to (3.13),
MAC(∆f, S) =
(∆fT S)2
(∆fT ∆f)(ST S)
(3.14)
The idea is to identify the scenario in S that is best correlated to the measured
frequency changes ∆f. The most similar scenario will yield the highest value
in the MAC-matrix which provides the most probable location of the single
damage. In addition, the true damage location leads to the least error in the
predicted frequency change[17].
In contrast to the pseudo-inverse approach,
this method does not give an estimate of the extent of the damage, however the
number of predeﬁned damage scenarios does not aﬀect the MAC-values, hence
the need of an over determined system is not needed.
==PAGE:33==
16
Theoretical Background
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4
Experimental Setup and
Modal Parameter Estimation
Diﬀerent techniques and methods exist to determine the modal parameters from
vibration based experiments. This thesis uses frequency domain decomposition
methods, where the global dynamic properties are derived by the means of
OMA [3]. This chapter will present the experimental setup of the laboratory
specimen as well as the estimation of the modal parameters in the unperturbed
state (Step 1 in Figure 2.1). The experimental setup of the laboratory specimen
is presented in Figure 4.1a. Moreover, 17-uni-axial accelerometers are mounted
on the specimen to record the excitation. The placement of the accelerometers
are seen in Figure 4.1b.
(a) Setup of specimen
(b) Position of accelerometers
Figure 4.1: Experimental setup of laboratory specimen
==PAGE:35==
18
Experimental Setup and Modal Parameter Estimation
The specimen is placed on a sponge which resembles a free-free testing condition.
The excitation of the specimen is performed by a so called scratch test. A soft
wooden object is used to scratch the edges of the specimen to excite the diﬀerent
modes, thus inducing random vibrations. The frequencies are excerpted by using
Enhanced Frequency Domain Decomposition (EFDD) where the singular values
from the spectral matrix are determined. The plot of the power spectral density
function for a test in the reference state is visualized in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Singular values of spectral matrix showcasing the ﬁrst eight modes
The natural frequencies can be determined by the peaks of this plot. A total of
8 modes is excited with conﬁdent level of accuracy. The frequencies are listed
in Table 4.1, whereas the modeshapes are found in Appendix B.
Table 4.1: Natural frequencies derived from experimental tests
ω1
ω2
ω3
ω4
ω5
ω6
ω7
ω8
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
118.28
274.58
380.37
541.89
965.49
1216.57
1589.44
2306.18
4.1
Coeﬃcient of Variance
The coeﬃcient of variance is a statistical tool which can measure the dispersion
of a frequency distribution [7]. It is deﬁned as the ratio between the standard
deviation σ and the mean µ. In a damage detection scheme, the coeﬃcient of
variance can be calculated for each mode for a number of frequency data sets.
cv = σ
µ
(4.1)
The calculated coeﬃcient of variance of each mode will showcase the dispersion.
==PAGE:36==
4.1 Coeﬃcient of Variance
19
This means that any measured frequency change for mode i that is greater than
its estimated coeﬃcient of variance indicate the presence of damage.
ωbi −ωai
ωbi
> σωbi
µωbi
(4.2)
The coeﬃcient of variance for each mode have been calculated for a total of 10
reference tests. Figure 4.3 displays the results.
Figure 4.3: Coeﬃcient of variance for each mode
The most dispersion is seen in the higher modes which is expected since they are
more complicated to excite than lower modes of the specimen. The dispersion
recorded falls into the range between 0.17% to 0.47%.
==PAGE:37==
20
Experimental Setup and Modal Parameter Estimation
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 5
Numerical Damage
Identiﬁcation of Laboratory
Specimen
This chapter will apply the presented Level 2 and Level 3 damage identiﬁcation
methods in a numerical model that represents the laboratory specimen. The
main focus will be localization and quantiﬁcation by applying the MAC SBDA
-and pseudo inverse approach respectively in parametric damage simulation.
The intention is to evaluate robustness of these two methods, by identifying their
strength and weakness, before they are utilized in an experimental investigation.
5.1
Finite Element Model
The ﬁnite element model of the laboratory specimen was created in collaboration
with Komurcu in his master thesis project. [13]. Since the FE-model is already
a satisfactory representation of the specimen, it will be reused in this latter
analysis. A graphical depiction of FE-model is observed in Figure 5.1 whereas
the FE-properties is found in Table 5.1. The eigenmodes and eigenvalues are
found in Appendix C. More detail regarding the FE-model is found in Komurcu
thesis [13].
==PAGE:39==
22
Numerical Damage Identiﬁcation of Laboratory Specimen
Figure 5.1: FE-model
Table 5.1: Finite Element properties
Element type
No. elements
E-modulus
Poisson Ratio
[-]
[-]
[GPa]
[-]
Shell
86
6.7
0.34
5.1.1
Accuracy of FE-model
The accuracy of the presented FE-model is predominately dependent on the
choice of ﬁnite elements, the mesh, the modeling of joints and matching of the
real material properties. Several considerations have been taken into account
when studying the mentioned when constituting the proposed FE-model. As
seen in Table 5.1, shell elements were used to create the FE-model, which are a
mathematical simpliﬁcation of solids. In fact, choosing more accurate elements
such as solid elements will only increase the accuracy. Solid elements contain a
thickness which essentially means more nodes, degrees of freedom and integra-
tion points than the used shell elements. Likewise, creating a ﬁner mesh will
increase the accuracy of the model. However, with increasing nodes and inte-
gration points, the average computational processing is also heavily increased
which is a disadvantage.
Accurate modeling of the joints is also a factor in the assessment of the accuracy
of the proposed FE-model. The joints are not modeled in the FE- model, rather
a simpliﬁed approach is chosen, where the stiﬀness of the elements is reduced
from E = 6.7 GPa to E = 4.1 GPa, as shown in Figure 5.2. Precise modeling
of joints is a complicated task and requires thorough knowledge of the utilized
FE-software. In real life cases, it is rare that the FE-model replicates the in-
==PAGE:40==
5.1 Finite Element Model
23
vestigated structure perfectly, and in many cases simple FE-models are used to
save costs, man hours and computational time.
Figure 5.2: Simpliﬁed modeling of the joints
In the vibrations based SHM ﬁeld, the FE-model can primarily be validated by
comparing the numerical modal parameters with the experimentally obtained
ones.
These include the natural frequencies and the mass-normalized mode-
shapes. The natural frequencies are compared by calculating the relative devia-
tion for each mode. As for the modeshapes, the original formulation of the MAC
presented in (3.13) is used to determine the linear correlation between a pair of
modes. The validation of the frequencies is observed in Table 5.2 for the ﬁrst
eight pairs. It is observed that numerical frequencies deviate 4.68% - 11.30% for
most of the modes. Even though these deviations are considerably large they
are still acceptable. The MAC value for the ﬁrst 9 modes are displayed in Figure
5.3
Figure 5.3: MAC for the ﬁrst 9 modes
==PAGE:41==
24
Numerical Damage Identiﬁcation of Laboratory Specimen
Apparent from Figure 5.3 is that there is a satisfactory correlation between
the modeshapes for the ﬁrst 8 modes, which permanently disregard mode 9 for
further analysis. The ﬁnal values of the MAC are included in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Mode pairs between experimental tests and FE-model
Pair
FEM-Frequency
OMA-Frequency
Deviation
MAC
[-]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[%]
[%]
1
112.99
118.28
4.68
99.27
2
271.19
274.58
1.25
99.39
3
354.33
380.37
7.35
98.30
4
591.99
541.89
-8.46
97.55
5
994.97
965.49
-2.96
97.05
6
1211.50
1216.57
0.42
96.98
7
1597.10
1589.44
-0.48
95.67
8
2072.00
2306.18
11.30
90.25
5.2
Deﬁnitions of Predeﬁned Damage Scenarios
Once the FE-model is presumed to be an adequate description of the laboratory
specimen, the sensitively matrix S has to be constructed by producing a num-
ber of predeﬁned damage scenarios. In Komurcu’s thesis [13], a four scenario
case study was conducted, where each scenario resembled damage in two bolts
simultaneously. This thesis will introduce a case study where eight predeﬁned
damage locations are parametrized. Each damage scenario will here replicate
a location where a single bolt is positioned in the experimental model. The
position and numbering of the predeﬁned scenarios is visualized in Figure 5.4.
It is observed that for each scenario, two adjacent shell elements have prede-
ﬁned damage where the Young-Modulus is reduced. Moreover, three sensitivity
matrices will be constructed based on the reduction of the Young-Modulus, S15,
S50 and S75, which designate 15%, 50% and 75% E-module reductions. The fre-
quency changes for the ﬁrst 8 modes for each scenario is found in Appendix D.
Unique frequency changes are seen for all 8 scenarios, except for scenario 2 and
3, where the frequency pattern is very similar. Moreover, very little frequency
changes were observed for scenario 4.
==PAGE:42==
5.3 Localization Through MAC-SBDA
25
Figure 5.4: Predeﬁned hypothetical damage scenarios representing the posi-
tion of the bolts on Figure 1.3
5.3
Localization Through MAC-SBDA
The MAC-SBDA approach acts solely as a damage localizer, hence it is crucial
to inspect the accuracy of the approach by simulating damages in diﬀerent
locations on the FE-model. All the simulated damages will be characterized
in the same manner as the parametrized scenarios, which is the reduction of
the E-modulus of the shell elements. For each unique simulation, the change
of frequency will be stored in the vector ∆f. As a starting point, a damage
is simulated in a location identical to the ﬁrst predeﬁned scenario. Figure 5.5
showcase the results, and it is conﬁrmed that the damage is indeed localized
correctly, which is expected since the the simulated damage is fundamentally
equal to the frequency change for scenario 1.
==PAGE:43==
26
Numerical Damage Identiﬁcation of Laboratory Specimen
Figure 5.5: MAC at damage location 1
Figure 5.6 and 5.7 display diﬀerent simulations of damages within the predeﬁned
scenarios, but here single shell elements are perturbed instead. It is observed
that by simulating a damage in a single element, the MAC is still able localize
the correct damage scenario, however with a lower MAC value. In addition, the
distribution of the MAC implies that the damaged shell element on the side of
the specimen have the most contribution in terms of damage, hence the clear
MAC pattern.
Figure 5.6: MAC at damage location 1 but only one side element is reduced
==PAGE:44==
5.3 Localization Through MAC-SBDA
27
Figure 5.7: MAC at damage location 1 but only one top element is reduced
The behavior of the MAC on occurring damages outside the deﬁned damage
scenarios are also reviewed. It is of great interest to study if damages occurring
outside the 8 predeﬁned scenarios can be localized to the nearest possible sce-
nario. In Figure 5.8 it is detected that the simulated damage close to the ﬁrst
predeﬁned scenario actually yield the correct location, however with a signiﬁ-
cant lower MAC value. A damage far distant from the the scenarios are also
simulated in Figure 5.9, where the MAC showcases very low values which essen-
tially means, little correlation. However the damage is still in relative proximity
to scenario 1, which again return a MAC value in the correct position.
Figure 5.8: MAC at simulated damage outside the predeﬁned scenarios
==PAGE:45==
28
Numerical Damage Identiﬁcation of Laboratory Specimen
Figure 5.9: MAC at simulated damage outside the predeﬁned scenarios
To summarize this section, it is ﬁrmly established that despite the simulated
damages are dissimilar from the predeﬁned scenarios, correct localization is still
possible. Moreover, it is revealed that the closer the simulated damage is to the
parametric scenario the higher the MAC-value.
5.3.1
Inﬂuence of Damage Intensity
The inﬂuence of damage intensity on the MAC-SBDA is examined through a
simulation study where frequency changes for damage cases in the range of 5 %
to 90 % are computed. The simulations of damage are carried out on location 1,
which is as stated, equivalent to the ﬁrst predeﬁned scenario. Firstly, the relation
between the frequency changes and the E-Modulus reduction are portrayed for
the ﬁrst 8 modes in Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: Frequency change for location 1 for diﬀerent damage intensities
==PAGE:46==
5.3 Localization Through MAC-SBDA
29
The frequency changes follow predominantly linear behavior for damages up to
60 %. Eventually nonlinearity develops, where some of the eigenmodes begin to
interchange. The reasoning behind this phenomenon is the fact that the struc-
ture has reached a plastic state where there is a clear change in the eigenmodes.
It is therefore necessary to discover if damages in the nonlinear segment can be
localized through the MAC. Figure 5.11 demonstrates the MAC values for all
simulation cases when utilizing S15 as the sensitivity matrix for both with noise
and without noise. The addition of noise can be implemented on the frequency
changes as ωbin = ωbi + ωbi · randn · 0.002.
(a) Without induced noise
(b) With induced noise
Figure 5.11: Inﬂuence of damage intensity for location 1 where S15 is the
sensitivity matrix
It is observed that the intensity of damage does not aﬀect the accuracy of the
location of the damage even at damages where nonlinear behavior is apparent.
The MAC-SBDA only fails at small damages when noise is introduced. This
is because the frequency changes are very small and equal to the added noise.
Furthermore, the choice of sensitivity matrix does not disturb the MAC-values
as observed in Figure 5.12.
==PAGE:47==
30
Numerical Damage Identiﬁcation of Laboratory Specimen
(a) The used sensitivity matrix is S50
(b) The used sensitivity matrix is S75
Figure 5.12: Inﬂuence of damage intensity for location 1 with diﬀerent sensi-
tivity matrices
Similar simulations are found on the other 7 damage locations in Appendix E.
Generally, the same observations are seen, where the MAC can determine the
location of the perturbation regardless of the damage intensity. However, in the
mentioned appendix, the simulations performed for damage location 2 and 3 do
fail at some intensities. This is only because the frequency change patterns for
scenario 2 and 3 are identical, and the only diﬀerence between the two scenarios
are the degree of frequency change.
==PAGE:48==
5.3 Localization Through MAC-SBDA
31
5.3.2
Inﬂuence of Number of Modes
All the above-mentioned investigations are performed with the ﬁrst 8 eigenmodes
to resemble the number of excited modes from the experiments. However, it is
pertinent to know the minimum amount of modes that are required when apply-
ing the MAC-SBDA numerically. The number of required modes is dependent
on the normalized frequency changes. To exemplify this, scenario 6 and 7 are
considered, where the normalized frequency changes for a 50% reduction are
depicted in Figure 5.13. It is revealed that these two scenarios have an indis-
tinguishable change in frequency for the ﬁrst 6 modes. Only at mode 7 clear
diﬀerentiation can be registered. Figure 5.14 display the inﬂuence of the modes
on the MAC for scenario 6 and 7, which conﬁrms that the localization is indeed
functional with use of a minimum of 7 modes.
(a) Scenario 6
(b) Scenario 7
Figure 5.13: Frequency change scenario utilizing S50
(a) Scenario 6
(b) Scenario 7
Figure 5.14: Modes required
==PAGE:49==
32
Numerical Damage Identiﬁcation of Laboratory Specimen
5.4
Quantiﬁcation Through a Pseudo-inverse Ap-
proach
Quantiﬁcation is the subsequent step to the localization in a Rytter’s damage
identiﬁcation scheme. Numerically, it has to prove whether or not the pseudo-
inverse approach can estimate the extent of a damage accurately. To demon-
strate the concept of quantiﬁcation through the pseudo-inverse approach, a 30
% damage is simulated in damage location 1 using the ﬁrst 8 modes and all 8
scenarios. Solving the equation of system in (3.12) provide a damage quantiﬁ-
cation index ∆ˆu which is displayed in Figure 5.15 where 5.15a is solved without
noise and 5.15b solved with noise.
(a) Without induced noise
(b) With induced noise
Figure 5.15: ∆ˆu at 30 % damage simulation at location 1 while using S15)
Estimating the damage extent in Figure 5.15 can be done by two separate meth-
ods. The ﬁrst method is to read oﬀthe value in the correct localized scenario.
Since the damage is located in scenario 1, the value of the ﬁrst bar is read oﬀ.
This value is estimated to be ∆ˆu = 2.36. By multiplying with the reference
damage (15% because S15), this number can be converted to an actual damage
percentage which is 35.37 %.
The second method to estimate the damage extent, is to sum all columns in
∆ˆu. This will yield a value very close to the ﬁrst column which is ∆ˆu = 2.35,
or ∆ˆu = 35.32%. Even though both approaches seem to give a good estimate
of the damage extent, the ﬁrst approach is in fact the method of choice when
quantifying a single damage.
The second approach becomes unreliable once
noise is added to the system. Figure 5.15b showcases the same simulation but
with the addition of noise. By choosing the ﬁrst method, the damage extent is
found to be ∆ˆu = 2.69, while the second method yield ∆ˆu = 3.22.
==PAGE:50==
5.4 Quantiﬁcation Through a Pseudo-inverse Approach
33
5.4.1
Inﬂuence of Damage Intensity
Similar to the MAC-SBDA, the inﬂuence of the severity of damage is inves-
tigated for the pseudo-inverse approach. Again, damage case 1 is used, where
E-modulus reductions between 0% and 90% are simulated. By choosing the ﬁrst
method when estimating the extent of the damage, utilizing all the columns in
the selected sensitivity matrix S are in fact not necessary. The correct scenario
is already known before hand by using the MAC-SBDA, and therefore all the
columns in S-matrix except for the column containing the correct scenario can
be neglected. Figure 5.16 showcases the diﬀerent damage simulations for dam-
age location 1, where 8, 4 and 1 scenarios are utilized to calculate the estimated
E-modulus. It is seen that by neglecting the other 7 scenarios and only using an
S containing the correct scenario, the accuracy of the damage extent is improved
mostly for all damages over 40%. Still, the quantiﬁcation follows nonlinear be-
havior where the largest damages have unrealistic estimations. The nonlinear
behavior can mainly be explained by the frequency changes seen in Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.16: Inﬂuence of number of scenarios, S15 is the sensitivity matrix
To combat the improbable estimations of the larger damages, a ﬁtting sensi-
tivity matrix can be chosen. Three diﬀerent sensitivity matrices were deﬁned,
each with a diﬀerent reduction in the Young’s Modulus. The impact of these
sensitivity matrices on the quantiﬁcation for damage location 1 is examined
in Figure 5.17. It is observed that the accuracy of the quantiﬁcation depends
heavily on the deﬁnition of the sensitivity matrix. Small stiﬀness reductions are
better quantiﬁed when using a sensitivity matrix that is deﬁned by small stiﬀ-
ness reductions. On the contrary, larger stiﬀness reduction are better quantiﬁed
by the use of a sensitivity matrix with already high stiﬀness reductions.
==PAGE:51==
34
Numerical Damage Identiﬁcation of Laboratory Specimen
Figure 5.17: Inﬂuence of sensitivity matrix when simulating damages between
0 % and 90% damages on location 1
5.4.2
Pseudo-inverse as a Damage Localizer
The main approach for Level 2 localization in this thesis is to use the MAC-
SBDA. However, the pseudo-inverse approach can also act as a damage localizer
if the right conditions are satisﬁed. An essential condition for obtaining a correct
localization is to have more modes than number of predeﬁned damage scenarios,
which makes the system over-determined. In an experimental setting, it can be
quite challenging to excite many modes with conﬁdent accuracy, if a high number
of damage scenarios is deﬁned. As mentioned, this thesis deals with 8 modes
in total throughout the numerical analysis to mimic the experimental setup.
For that reason, the number of scenarios is decreased from 8 to 4, to cause the
equation of system to be over-determined.
Figure 5.18a showcases an example using a determined system with 8-modes
and 8-scenarios whereas Figure 5.18b displays a over-determined 4-scenario lo-
calization. Yet again, the same simulation study is conducted as in Figure 5.11,
where the accuracy of localization is studied through diﬀerent Young’s-Modulus
reductions on damage location 1.
==PAGE:52==
5.4 Quantiﬁcation Through a Pseudo-inverse Approach
35
(a) 8 modes and 8 scenarios
(b) 8 modes and 4 scenarios
Figure 5.18: Localization through pseudo-inverse approach using S15 as sen-
sitivity matrix
It is revealed that the pseudo-inverse approach can only localize the ﬁrst 4
damage simulations with a determined system, whereas with a over-determined
system, the ﬁrst 5 damages could be localized. Comparing the accuracy with
MAC-SBDA where all damage simulations could be localized, it is documented
that the pseudo-inverse is simply not suitable for localization.
==PAGE:53==
36
Numerical Damage Identiﬁcation of Laboratory Specimen
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 6
Application of 3-Level
Damage Identiﬁcation Scheme
on Laboratory Specimen
This chapter will apply the 3-level damage identiﬁcation framework (Step 4 in
Figure 2.1) in an experimental setting, where individual structural perturbations
in the laboratory specimen will be detected, localized and quantiﬁed.
6.1
Damage Deﬁnitions
As stated previously in the report, the specimen has eight bolts, which are the
critical failure mechanism of the specimen. For that reason, the experimental
investigation will focus on the loss in stiﬀness in the individual bolts.
The
chapter will mainly demonstrate the framework on bolt 1 as an exempliﬁcation,
however uncommon observations for other bolts will be mentioned and discussed.
==PAGE:55==
38
Application of 3-Level Damage Identiﬁcation Scheme on Laboratory
Specimen
Figure 6.1: Bolt 1
In the undamaged state, all bolts have a torque of Mundamaged = 3 Nm. A
perturbation will then be deﬁned by reducing the torque by the use of a torque
wrench. Three diﬀerent levels of damage intensities on each bolt will be consid-
ered.
• Damage intensity 1: Reduction of torque to 2.0 Nm which equals to a 33%
relative loss of stiﬀness of the individual bolt
• Damage intensity 2: Reduction of torque to 1.5 Nm which equals to a 50%
relative loss of stiﬀness of the individual bolt
• Damage intensity 3: Reduction of torque to 0 Nm which equals to a 100%
relative loss of stiﬀness of the individual bolt
The particular reason behind the choice of three levels of damage intensities is
to investigate at which state damage can be detected. On the other hand, it
is also necessary to ascertain if the provided damage identiﬁcation framework
can distinguish between two damages that are close to each other in magnitude,
hence the choice of damage intensity 1 and 2.
6.2
Damage Detection
Detecting the perturbation is the ﬁrst step in the presented damage identiﬁca-
tion scheme. This is done by calculating the particular frequency change for each
damage intensity and plot them with the coeﬃcient of variance. The change in
frequency is here calculated as (100 · ωbi−ωai
ωbi
) for each mode to match the units
of the coeﬃcient of variance. For bolt 1, the coeﬃcient of variance along with
frequency change is presented in Figure 6.2.
==PAGE:56==
6.3 Damage Localization
39
(a) 2 Nm torque
(b) 1.5 Nm torque
(c) 0 Nm torque
Figure 6.2: MAC at bolt 1 for three damage intensities
Clear damage is present, since the frequency changes are greater than the cal-
culated dispersion in the frequencies.
This is likewise the case for all other
investigated bolts except for bolt 4. However, minor uncertainties were identi-
ﬁed in the measured frequencies for some of the bolts, where the increment in
frequency change was irregular. Nevertheless, it is ﬁrmly established that by
reducing the torque of a single bolt with 33%, it impacts the frequency changes
considerably.
In addition, the frequency changes grow larger as the damage
intensities increase which is of course anticipated.
6.3
Damage Localization
Since damage is clearly detected, the MAC-SBDA can now be utilized to com-
pare the measured frequency patterns from the experiments, with the hypothet-
ical damage scenarios stored in the sensitivity matrix.
==PAGE:57==
40
Application of 3-Level Damage Identiﬁcation Scheme on Laboratory
Specimen
(a) 2 Nm torque
(b) 1.5 Nm torque
(c) 0 Nm torque
Figure 6.3: MAC at bolt 1 for three damage intensities
Figure 6.3 display the MAC distribution for the three damage intensities con-
cerning bolt 1. It is observed that the correct scenario is indeed localized in all
instances with varying MAC-values. More explicitly, the damage case with best
correlated MAC pattern, in accordance with parametric scenarios, is when the
bolt has 0 torque. This observation is also registered in many of the localized
bolts found in Appendix G. Numerically its was proven that the damage inten-
sity does not eﬀect the MAC distribution even though nonlinear behavior was
prevailing. However, the bolts will behave in a diﬀerent manner to the numer-
ical scenarios and therefore unpredictability is palpable. Moreover, damages in
bolts 3 and 4 are the only instances that could not be localized correctly. As
for bolt 3, damage could be detected for all damage intensities. However, since
the hypothetical frequency changes in scenario 2 and 3 in the S-matrix is indis-
tinguishable, one could argue that it is diﬃcult to localize the correct scenario
between the two. Damage in bolt 4 could not be localized since the presence of
damage were very minimal, which again was also seen numerically.
==PAGE:58==
6.4 Damage Quantiﬁcation
41
6.4
Damage Quantiﬁcation
The ﬁnal step in the 3-level damage identiﬁcation framework is to quantify
the structural perturbation by using the pseudo-inverse approach. Here, it is
important to highlight that the experimental damage varies from the parametric
scenario deﬁnitions in terms of physical units. The hypothetical damage in the
parametric model is deﬁned as the reduction of Young’s-Modulus whereas the
experimental damage is governed by torque reductions. However, the relative
reductions in percentage can still be compared since proportionality exists in the
pseudo-inverse approach. Additionally, only damages that are localized correctly
can be quantiﬁed, since the correct scenario is chosen before solving the system
of equations in the pseudo-inverse approach. Therefore, estimating the damage
extent for perturbations induced for bolt 3 and 4 are not possible. Finally, it
has to be noted that the discoveries discussed in the numerical analysis will all
be implemented. Only the columns containing the correct localized scenario
in the S will be utilized as the sensitivity matrix. In addition, the best ﬁtted
sensitivity matrix will be used to quantify the damage.
Table 6.1 showcase the quantiﬁed damages for bolt 1, alongside all other bolts
by using the pseudo-inverse approach.
Table 6.1: Quantiﬁed value of each bolt
Torque
2.0
1.5
0
Relative stiﬀness loss
33%
50%
100%
Quantiﬁed value of Bolt 1
18.64%
26.8%
48.33%
Quantiﬁed value of Bolt 2
19.29%
32.40%
80.87%
Quantiﬁed value of Bolt 3
-
-
-
Quantiﬁed value of Bolt 4
-
-
-
Quantiﬁed value of Bolt 5
27.55%
50.9%
81.47%
Quantiﬁed value of Bolt 6
21.48%
43.63%
74.29%
Quantiﬁed value of Bolt 7
28.38%
43.61%
79.50%
Quantiﬁed value of Bolt 8
15.02%
27.47%
66.47%
It is seemingly seen that the pseudo-inverse approach yield realistic results for
the damage extent for all cases. Still, there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the
estimated damage extent for the diﬀerent bolts even though the same damage is
applied. It has to be noted that it is improbable that accurate estimations of the
damage extent are achieved. As mentioned, minor uncertainties were discovered
in the frequency changes where some modes did not behave properly. Moreover,
the MAC proved that even though the correct scenario is localized, the general
MAC values for many of the investigated bolts were not high. This indicates that
==PAGE:59==
42
Application of 3-Level Damage Identiﬁcation Scheme on Laboratory
Specimen
the correlation between the measured frequency changes and the parametrized
scenarios are not the same. Therefore, it can not be expected that increments
for damages in the parametrized scenarios are synonymous with increments in
damage for the real life damage cases.
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The application of vibrations based Structural Health Monitoring has been
demonstrated on a laboratory specimen, by performing a 3-level damage iden-
tiﬁcation scheme that is essentially established on a scenario based framework.
Both numerical and experimental investigations were executed to validate the
identiﬁcation scheme.
The numerical study scoped out Level 2 and Level 3, where the MAC-SBDA
approach and the pseudo-inverse approach were applied. The MAC-SBDA show-
cased promising results numerically. It was possible to localize diﬀerent locations
of stiﬀness reductions in FE-model, even in the nonlinear segment. The degree
of damage only aﬀected the localization for smaller frequency changes where
noise was apparent.
Quantiﬁcation of the damages through a pseudo-inverse approach in the numer-
ical model proved to be robust if the best ﬁtting sensitivity matrix was chosen
and only using the column containing the correct localized scenario. It was ev-
ident that nonlinear behavior was present when quantifying diﬀerent levels of
damage, where larger stiﬀness reductions yielded unrealistic results. However,
with the correct sensitivity matrix, even larger damages in nonlinear segment
could be quantiﬁed.
Experimentally, the 3 level damage identiﬁcation scheme was applied where the
torque on each individual bolt was reduced. Three damage intensities were cov-
ered, and the goal was to discover at which intensity damage could be detected.
Identifying the presence of damage was done by using the statistical approach
called the coeﬃcient of variance. It was proved that damage could be detected
==PAGE:61==
44
Conclusion
for all three damage intensities for all 8 bolts except for bolt 4.
Moving to Level 2, localization was performed by using the MAC-SBDA. The
MAC-SBDA method highlighted the correct damage locations in almost all in-
stances except for damage in bolt 3 and bolt 4.
Lastly, the experimental damages were quantiﬁed solving the system of equa-
tions in the pseudo-inverse approach. Only the correct localized scenarios were
quantiﬁed, and it was observed that realistic values for the quantiﬁcation was
recorded.
Overall the 3-level damage identiﬁcation scheme proved to be a robust frame-
work when applying it on the laboratory specimen. However, many improve-
ments and modiﬁcations can be implemented which is discussed in the next
section.
7.1
Further Work
The presented damage identiﬁcation framework can further be improved by
conducting a more thorough analysis.
• The inﬂuence of accuracy of FE-model could be investigated. Here, dif-
ferent FE-models are created each with diﬀerent meshes, elements and
deﬁnitions of the joints. Namely, it is of great interest to see which level of
accuracy is needed for the FE-model when utilizing scenario based damage
assessment. Creating a very accurate model where the joints are modeled
as the real life bolts will provide a more insight full knowledge on the
localization and quantiﬁcation aspect. A more accurate FE-model enable
more modes to be used in regards to the 8 modes utilized in this thesis.
• The inﬂuence of support conditions is also very relevant to analyze. This
project deals with very simple boundary condition, that mimics a free-
free setup. However, in dynamic analysis, the support conditions heavily
inﬂuence the frequencies. Applying the presented damage identiﬁcation
scheme in a model where diﬀerent support conditions are used.
• The impact of symmetry is also a very important factor in damage detec-
tion. It is desired to have a damage identiﬁcation scheme that can distin-
guish two symmetrical damages. Even though this was touched brieﬂy in
this thesis, a more thorough analysis is needed for validation.
• The next step in developing this damage identiﬁcation scheme is to look
at the occurrence of multiple damages. The introduced MAC-SBDA can
==PAGE:62==
7.1 Further Work
45
only localize single damages, however a wide range of modiﬁcations exist
in the literature regarding multiple damage localization concerning the
MAC.
• Environmental eﬀects such as temperature changes must also be investi-
gated to further validate the presented damage identiﬁcation scheme.
==PAGE:63==
46
Bibliography
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
[1] H. N. Ajina. Experimental and numerical analysis to demonstrate SHM.
Internal, 2021.
[2] O. Avci, O. Abdeljaber, S. Kiranyaz, M. Hussein, M. Gabbouj, and D. J.
Inman. A review of vibration-based damage detection in civil structures:
From traditional methods to Machine Learning and Deep Learning applica-
tions. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 2020.
[3] R. Brincker and C. E. Ventura. Introduction to Operational Modal Analysis.
John Wiley & Sons, 2015. ISBN 9781119963158.
[4] D.M.Frangopol and J.P.Curley. Eﬀects of damage and redundancy on struc-
tural reliability. J. Struct. Eng., 1987.
[5] I. Duvnjak, D. Damjanović, and A. Skende. Mode Shape-Based Damage
Detection Method (MSDI): Experimental Validation. Applied Sciences, vol.
11, p. 4589, 2021.
[6] E.Cosenza and G.Manfredi. Damage indices and damage measures. Prog.
Struct. Eng. Mater, 2000.
[7] B. Everitt. The Cambridge Dictionary of Statistics. Cambridge University,
1998.
[8] D. J. Ewins. Modal Testing: Theory and Practice. Research Studies Press,
Somerset, UK, 1984.
[9] A. Forsting and J. Jacobsen. Damage localization using Scenario Based
Damage Assessment. Technical University of Denmark, 2021.
[10] H. Guo and Z. Li. A two-stage method to identify structural damage sites
and extents by using evidence theory and micro-search genetic algorithm.
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 23 769–782, 2009.
[11] J. B. Hansen. Scenario-based Structural Damage Localization and Quan-
tiﬁcation Using Operational Modal Analysis. Aarhus University, 2016.
==PAGE:65==
48
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[12] G. Hearn and R. Testa. Modal analysis for damage detection in structures.
Journal of Structural Engineering, 117 p. 3042-3062, 1991.
[13] M. Komurcu. Illustration of Structural Health Monitoring on a Small Test
Specimen. Technical University of Denmark, 2021.
[14] P. Kraemer, H. Friedmann, and C. Ebert. Vibration-based ice detection
of rotor blades in wind turbines — the industrial realization of an SHM-
system. Structural Health Monitoring 2015, 2015.
[15] T. Lauwagie and E. Dascotte.
A Scenario-Based Damage Identiﬁcation
Framework. Topics in Modal Analysis II, Volume 6, 2012.
[16] A. Rytter. Vibrational Based Inspection of Civil Engineering Structures.
Aalborg University, 1993.
[17] A. Sadeqi, S. R. Amador, J. Jacobsen, H. N. Ajina, and R. Brincker.
Structural damage localization using a modiﬁed sensitivity analysis. De-
partment of Civil and Environment Engineering, Denmark Technical Uni-
versity, 2021.
[18] J.-J. Sinou. A review of damage detection and health monitoring of me-
chanical systems from changes in the measurement of linear and non-linear
vibrations. Laboratoire de Tribologie et Dynamique des Systemes UMR-
CNRS 5513 Ecole Centrale de Lyon, 2013.
[19] T.Contursi, A.Messina, and E.J.Williams. Damage detection and localisa-
tion using natural frequency changes. Proceedings of the Identiﬁcation in
Engineering Systems, Swansea, 1996.
==PAGE:66==
Appendix A
Dimensions of Laboratory
Specimen
Figure A.1: Dimensions of laboratory specimens [cm] [1]
==PAGE:67==
50
Dimensions of Laboratory Specimen
==PAGE:68==
Appendix B
Experimental Modeshapes
==PAGE:69==
52
Experimental Modeshapes
Figure B.1: Mode 1 - First bending mode of top plate
Figure B.2: Mode 2 - First torsion mode of top plate
Figure B.3: Mode 3 - Second bending mode of top plate
==PAGE:70==
53
Figure B.4: Mode 4 - Second torsion mode of top plate
Figure B.5: Mode 5 - Third bending mode of top plate
Figure B.6: Mode 6 - First torsion mode of bottom plate
==PAGE:71==
54
Experimental Modeshapes
Figure B.7: Mode 7 - Second bending node of bottom plate
Figure B.8: Mode 8 - First torsion mode of middle plate
==PAGE:72==
Appendix C
Numerical Modeshapes
==PAGE:73==
56
Numerical Modeshapes
Figure C.1: Mode 1 - First bending mode of top plate
Figure C.2: Mode 2 - First torsion mode of top plate
Figure C.3: Mode 3 - Second bending mode of top plate
==PAGE:74==
57
Figure C.4: Mode 4 - Second torsion mode of top plate
Figure C.5: Mode 5 - Third bending mode of top plate
Figure C.6: Mode 6 - First torsion mode of bottom plate
==PAGE:75==
58
Numerical Modeshapes
Figure C.7: Mode 7 - Second bending node of bottom plate
Figure C.8: Mode 8 - First torsion mode of middle plate
==PAGE:76==
Appendix D
Frequency Changes for
Predeﬁned Scenarios
==PAGE:77==
60
Frequency Changes for Predeﬁned Scenarios
D.1
Scenario 1
(a) Scenario 1
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure D.1: Frequency change for scenario 1 for the three diﬀerent sensitivity
matrix
==PAGE:78==
Scenario 2
61
D.2
Scenario 2
(a) Scenario 2
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure D.2: Frequency change for scenario 2 for the three diﬀerent sensitivity
matrix
==PAGE:79==
62
Frequency Changes for Predeﬁned Scenarios
D.3
Scenario 3
(a) Scenario 3
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure D.3: Frequency change for scenario 3 for the three diﬀerent sensitivity
matrix
==PAGE:80==
Scenario 4
63
D.4
Scenario 4
(a) Scenario 4
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure D.4: Frequency change for scenario 4 for the three diﬀerent sensitivity
matrix
==PAGE:81==
64
Frequency Changes for Predeﬁned Scenarios
D.5
Scenario 5
(a) Scenario 5
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure D.5: Frequency change for scenario 5 for the three diﬀerent sensitivity
matrix
==PAGE:82==
Scenario 6
65
D.6
Scenario 6
(a) Scenario 6
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure D.6: Frequency change for scenario 6 for the three diﬀerent sensitivity
matrix
==PAGE:83==
66
Frequency Changes for Predeﬁned Scenarios
D.7
Scenario 7
(a) Scenario 7
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure D.7: Frequency change for scenario 7 for the three diﬀerent sensitivity
matrix
==PAGE:84==
Scenario 8
67
D.8
Scenario 8
(a) Scenario 8
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure D.8: Frequency change for scenario 8 for the three diﬀerent sensitivity
matrix
==PAGE:85==
68
Frequency Changes for Predeﬁned Scenarios
==PAGE:86==
Appendix E
Robustness Check for Level 2:
MAC-SBDA
==PAGE:87==
70
Robustness Check for Level 2: MAC-SBDA
E.1
Inﬂuence of Damage Intensity
E.1.1
Scenario 1
(a) Scenario 1
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure E.1: Inﬂuence of damage on MAC for location 1
==PAGE:88==
Inﬂuence of Damage Intensity
71
E.1.2
Scenario 2
(a) Scenario 2
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure E.2: Inﬂuence of damage on MAC for location 2
==PAGE:89==
72
Robustness Check for Level 2: MAC-SBDA
E.1.3
Scenario 3
(a) Scenario 3
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure E.3: Inﬂuence of damage on MAC for location 3
==PAGE:90==
Inﬂuence of Damage Intensity
73
E.1.4
Scenario 4
(a) Scenario 4
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure E.4: Inﬂuence of damage on MAC for location 4
==PAGE:91==
74
Robustness Check for Level 2: MAC-SBDA
E.1.5
Scenario 5
(a) Scenario 5
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure E.5: Inﬂuence of damage on MAC for location 5
==PAGE:92==
Inﬂuence of Damage Intensity
75
E.1.6
Scenario 6
(a) Scenario 6
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure E.6: Inﬂuence of damage on MAC for location 6
==PAGE:93==
76
Robustness Check for Level 2: MAC-SBDA
E.1.7
Scenario 7
(a) Scenario 7
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure E.7: Inﬂuence of damage on MAC for location 7
==PAGE:94==
Inﬂuence of Damage Intensity
77
E.1.8
Scenario 8
(a) Scenario 8
(b) S15
(c) S50
(d) S75
Figure E.8: Inﬂuence of damage on MAC for location 8
==PAGE:95==
78
Robustness Check for Level 2: MAC-SBDA
E.2
Inﬂuence of Modes
(a) Scenario 1
(b) Scenario 2
Figure E.9: Modes required for scenario 1 and 2
(a) Scenario 3
(b) Scenario 4
Figure E.10: Modes required for scenario 3 and 4
==PAGE:96==
Inﬂuence of Modes
79
(a) Scenario 5
(b) Scenario 6
Figure E.11: Modes required for scenario 5 and 6
(a) Scenario 7
(b) Scenario 8
Figure E.12: Modes required for scenario 7 and 8
==PAGE:97==
80
Robustness Check for Level 2: MAC-SBDA
==PAGE:98==
Appendix F
Robustness Check for Level 3:
Pseudo-inverse Method
Figure F.1: Quantiﬁcation of scenario 1
==PAGE:99==
82
Robustness Check for Level 3: Pseudo-inverse Method
Figure F.2: Quantiﬁcation of scenario 2
Figure F.3: Quantiﬁcation of scenario 3
Figure F.4: Quantiﬁcation of scenario 4
==PAGE:100==
83
Figure F.5: Quantiﬁcation of scenario 5
Figure F.6: Quantiﬁcation of scenario 6
Figure F.7: Quantiﬁcation of scenario 7
==PAGE:101==
84
Robustness Check for Level 3: Pseudo-inverse Method
Figure F.8: Quantiﬁcation of scenario 8
==PAGE:102==
Appendix G
Experimental Damage
Detection
==PAGE:103==
86
Experimental Damage Detection
G.1
Bolt 1
Level 1: Detection by Coeﬃcient of Variance
(a) Bolt 1
(b) 2 Nm torque
(c) 1.5 Nm torque
(d) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.1: Frequency changes at bolt 1 for three damage intensities plotted
with coeﬃcient of variance
==PAGE:104==
Bolt 1
87
Level 2: Localization by MAC-SBDA
(a) 2 Nm torque
(b) 1.5 Nm torque
(c) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.2: MAC at bolt 1 for three damage intensities
Level 3: Quantiﬁcation by Pseudo-inverse
Table G.1: Quantiﬁcation of bolt 1 damages
Torque
2 Nm
1.5 Nm
0 Nm
Relative reduction
33%
50%
100%
Sensitivity matrix
S50
S50
S50
Quantiﬁed value
18.64 %
26.8 %
48.33 %
==PAGE:105==
88
Experimental Damage Detection
G.2
Bolt 2
Level 1: Detection by Coeﬃcient of Variance
(a) Bolt 2
(b) 2 Nm torque
(c) 1.5 Nm torque
(d) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.3: Frequency changes at bolt 2 for three damage intensities plotted
with coeﬃcient of variance
==PAGE:106==
Bolt 2
89
Level 2: Localization by MAC-SBDA
(a) 2 Nm torque
(b) 1.5 Nm torque
(c) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.4: MAC at bolt 2 for three damage intensities
Level 3: Quantiﬁcation by Pseudo-inverse
Table G.2: Quantiﬁcation of bolt 2 damages
Torque
2 Nm
1.5 Nm
0 Nm
Relative reduction
33%
50%
100%
Sensitivity matrix
S50
S50
S75
Quantiﬁed value
19.24 %
32.4 %
80.1 %
==PAGE:107==
90
Experimental Damage Detection
G.3
Bolt 3
Level 1: Detection by Coeﬃcient of Variance
(a) Bolt 3
(b) 2 Nm torque
(c) 1.5 Nm torque
(d) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.5: Frequency changes at bolt 3 for three damage intensities plotted
with coeﬃcient of variance
==PAGE:108==
Bolt 3
91
Level 2: Localization by MAC-SBDA
(a) 2 Nm torque
(b) 1.5 Nm torque
(c) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.6: MAC at bolt 3 for three damage intensities
==PAGE:109==
92
Experimental Damage Detection
G.4
Bolt 4
Level 1: Detection by Coeﬃcient of Variance
(a) Bolt 4
(b) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.7: Frequency changes at bolt 4 for 0 Nm damage intensity plotted
with coeﬃcient of variance
Level 2: Localization by MAC-SBDA
Figure G.8: MAC at bolt 4 for 0 Nm damage intensity
==PAGE:110==
Bolt 5
93
G.5
Bolt 5
Level 1: Detection by Coeﬃcient of Variance
(a) Bolt 5
(b) 2 Nm torque
(c) 1.5 Nm torque
(d) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.9: Frequency changes at bolt 5 for three damage intensities plotted
with coeﬃcient of variance
==PAGE:111==
94
Experimental Damage Detection
Level 2: Localization by MAC-SBDA
(a) 2 Nm torque
(b) 1.5 Nm torque
(c) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.10: MAC at bolt 5 for three damage intensities
Level 3: Quantiﬁcation by pseudo-inverse approach
Table G.3: Quantiﬁcation of bolt 5 damages
Torque
2 Nm
1.5 Nm
0 Nm
Relative reduction
33%
50%
100%
Sensitivity matrix
S50
S50
S75
Quantiﬁed value
27.57%
50.94 %
81.47%
==PAGE:112==
Bolt 6
95
G.6
Bolt 6
Level 1: Detection by Coeﬃcient of Variance
(a) Bolt 6
(b) 2 Nm torque
(c) 1.5 Nm torque
(d) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.11: Frequency changes at bolt 6 for three damage intensities plotted
with coeﬃcient of variance
==PAGE:113==
96
Experimental Damage Detection
Level 2: Localization by MAC-SBDA
(a) 2 Nm torque
(b) 1.5 Nm torque
(c) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.12: MAC at bolt 6 for three damage intensities
Level 3: Quantiﬁcation by pseudo-inverse approach
Table G.4: Quantiﬁcation of bolt 6 damages
Torque
2 Nm
1.5 Nm
0 Nm
Relative reduction
33%
50%
100%
Sensitivity matrix
S50
S50
S75
Quantiﬁed value
21.48 %
43.63 %
74.29%
==PAGE:114==
Bolt 7
97
G.7
Bolt 7
Level 1: Detection by Coeﬃcient of Variance
(a) Bolt 6
(b) 2 Nm torque
(c) 1.5 Nm torque
(d) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.13: Frequency changes at bolt 7 for three damage intensities plotted
with coeﬃcient of variance
==PAGE:115==
98
Experimental Damage Detection
Level 2: Localization by MAC-SBDA
(a) 2 Nm torque
(b) 1.5 Nm torque
(c) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.14: MAC at bolt 7 for three damage intensities
Level 3: Quantiﬁcation by Pseudo-inverse
Table G.5: Quantiﬁcation of bolt 7 damages
Torque
2 Nm
1.5 Nm
0 Nm
Relative reduction
33%
50%
100%
Sensitivity matrix
S50
S50
S75
Quantiﬁed value
28.38 %
43.61 %
79.50%
==PAGE:116==
Bolt 8
99
G.8
Bolt 8
Level 1: Detection by Coeﬃcient of Variance
(a) Bolt 8
(b) 2 Nm torque
(c) 1.5 Nm torque
(d) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.15: Frequency changes at bolt 5 for three damage intensities plotted
with coeﬃcient of variance
==PAGE:117==
100
Experimental Damage Detection
Level 2: Localization by MAC-SBDA
(a) 2 Nm torque
(b) 1.5 Nm torque
(c) 0 Nm torque
Figure G.16: MAC at bolt 8 for three damage intensities
Level 3: Quantiﬁcation by Pseudo-inverse
Table G.6: Quantiﬁcation of bolt 8 damages
Torque
2 Nm
1.5 Nm
0 Nm
Relative reduction
33%
50%
100%
Sensitivity matrix
S50
S50
S75
Quantiﬁed value
15.02 %
27.47 %
66.5 %
