==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering
Evaluation of approaches to
breaking down the monolith
Casper Skjærris (s164429)
Sarah Alexandra Maria van Dam (s153659)
University Supervisor:
Hubert Baumeister (huba@dtu.dk)
Company Supervisor:
Mehran Toosi (mehran.toosi@visma.com)
Visma e-conomic, Copenhagen 17th of January, 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet, Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Today, there is a lot of legacy systems, which were built with either no architecture and
very little regard to architecture. These systems are struggling to keep up with today’s
development and demand. The systems need to be able to be released frequently with
a short time to market and with minimal cost, but often the old systems are big balls of
mud and maybe even beginning to develop into a distributed monolith making matters
even worse and complicating the deployment process. This thesis will explore a legacy
system, which needs to be restructured to improve the time to market. The system is
e-conomic made by Visma e-conomic, which is a financial bookkeeping system, which
have been developed over the last 20 years. This is a classic example of a monolith,
which is headed towards becoming a distributed monolith.
We analysed their system to see how the system is used by the users, how much it is used,
as well as how it is built. Based on the analysis, we propose one strategy, which have
different approaches for breaking down the monolith as well as the necessary changes to
the organisational structure and the financial cost involved. The approaches are based
on the strangler pattern. The strategy is shown and verified by a proof of concept, where
we extract a small part of a future module.
The result was a successful strategy first going to a modular monolith and then develop-
ing a microservice based on the module in addition to a new organisational structure and
financial considerations supporting the strategy. In conclusion, we managed to prove
that it is possible to restructure an old legacy system using the strangler pattern and
give a practical example of how to use it on a real system.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
The thesis “Evaluation of approaches to breaking down the monolith” was prepared at
the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science
degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
The thesis was carried out in cooperation with Visma e-conomic. However, the results,
opinions, and conclusions expressed in this thesis are our own and are not necessarily
those of Visma e-conomic.
The thesis consists of a written part and a software prototype.
January 16, 2022
Sarah Alexandra Maria van Dam (s153659)
Casper Skjærris (s164429)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our two supervisors, Mehran Toosi and Hubert Baumeister, for
their support and guidance through this whole process. We would also like to thank
all of the people, who have helped us with our research, from Visma e-conomic. Here
we would like to especially thank Toni Petrina, Lasse Bager, and Christian Johansen,
who have been available for several interviews and have been open to answer all of our
questions.
Furthermore, we would like to thank the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark and Visma e-conomic for this
opportunity to write an industrial thesis about breaking down a monolithic architecture.
Lastly, we would like to thank our friends and family for the support during our thesis
both through the relaxed moments in the beginning of the thesis and the more stressful
ones towards the end.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Glossary
Add-on Additional functionalities to e-conomic that can be activated through the e-
conomic marketplace. Sometimes at an increased cost for using e-conomic.
Admin agreement An agreement, where the agreement holder can create agreements
for other companies.
Administrator A user of e-conomic having an admin agreement.
Agreement A company subscription to e-conomic.
Agreement type Subscription type to e-conomic. Different agreement types can have
different features and limits to how much they are allowed to use the program.
Assembly Collection of code that are compiled together. For C# projects assemblies
are defined by .csproj files and are compiled into .dll files.
Book an entry Approving the draft entry and thereby locking the transaction contain-
ing the account, contra account and the amount.
Cluster A cluster is a group of files, which is the result of our algorithmic analysis.
Component A component is a functional part of the system, which can be extracted
to a microservice.
Daybook The daybook is a list of all draft daybook entries in e-conomic.
Daybook entry Accounting entries. Can be 5 different types.
Distributed monolith A distributed monolith is the result of a bad attempt to intro-
duce microservices into a monolithic application. The microservices are dependent
on data from the monolith and updates to the monolith might also add workflows
around the microservice, creating tight coupling between the monolith and the
microservice. This can create problems when deploying either the monolith or
microservice.
e-conomic A web-application used for bookkeeping and various related tasks produced
by Visma.
Invoice Summary of products/services sold to a customer and the price of it.
==PAGE:10==
viii
Glossary
Ledger report Report over all daybook entries grouped by account.
Microservice A software component, that exists to perform a specific service, usually
within a specific domain. When talking about microservices, a network of them
work together to provide full functionality of a software application.
Module A tab inside the e-conomic application.
Has two sub-types: Core module,
which are modules everyone with an agreement has access to, and Add-on Module,
which are modules activated by acquiring an add-on for one agreement.
Monolith A software application that is deployed as a single unit. It usually has a
large codebase which gives it the name.
Reverse an entry Making an entry where the account and contra account is flipped
and with the negated amount, thereby ’cancelling’ the original entry.
Software Product line A software product line is used to create different related ap-
plications with a shared code base.
Superuser A superuser is the owner of the agreement and has all privileges. There can
only be one superuser of an agreement .
User A user of e-conomic.
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Glossary
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
5
2.1
What is an accounting system?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Big ball of mud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Distributed monolith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Modular monolith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.4
Microservice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Software product lines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Architectural recovery
13
3.1
Exploring the domain by a qualitative analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
Use cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.2
Communication in the domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.3
Business components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Current architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Organisational flexibility to change
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Quantitative analysis of the codebase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4.1
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.2
The outcome
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.5
Dependency analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.6
Evaluation of the architectural recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Architectural synthesis
45
4.1
Ideal domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
Proposed macro services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
4.3
The new organisational structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4
Heat mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.5
Financial considerations to improve time to market . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.5.1
Example based on our proof of concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.6
Breaking down approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.6.1
The strangler pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.6.2
Using the strangler pattern
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.7
Test strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.8
Decisions of the synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5
Architectural prototyping
65
5.1
Proof of concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.1.1
Moving to a module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.1.2
Moving from module to microservice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.2
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.3
Prototype findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6
Discussion
77
6.1
Results of the analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.2
Results of the prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.3
The future plan for e-conomic’s monolith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7
Conclusion
81
Bibliography
83
A
Assemblies in clusters
87
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Software development has changed over time since personal computers emerged in the
mid-1990s [Ham20]. Applications used to be small enough to fit onto a floppy disk that
could install the software locally. Today most commercial applications are much bigger
and more complex and often run on a server in the cloud instead of on-premise. This
thesis aims to show how one can analyse older software applications, also called legacy
systems, which are built with a different set of requirements and improve these by util-
ising some of the advantages of applications built today to fulfil the current requirements.
The thesis is done in cooperation between the Technical University of Denmark and
the company Visma e-conomic. Visma e-conomic has built its software application e-
conomic over the course of 20 years. Over the years, e-conomic has had many developers
and architects working on the solution to create the current functionalities to meet the
customers’ needs. The product e-conomic has become a big ball of mud over the years.
The big ball of mud creates a problem for the Visma e-conomic since it is not scalable
and developing new features inside the application takes too long. They need a solution
to figure out how to divide the monolith into independent services, which are easier to
scale and faster to build, extend, and deploy independently.
Our goal is to create a strategy for decoupling Visma e-conomic’s monolith and, with
this strategy, create a proof of concept. To create a decoupling strategy, we need to
analyse the system, though doing a fully comprehensive analysis of the entire system is
not possible within the time frame of the thesis. Therefore, we have decided to look at
the part of the system that is the most used by the users and is the core functionalities
of the system. We decided to apply the strategy for two functionalities instead of ex-
tracting a complete component for the proof of concept.
This strategy for analysing existing applications to break them into smaller, more man-
ageable pieces to improve scalability and extensibility will benefit other companies hav-
ing software products, which suffer the same diﬀiculties as Visma e-conomic does. This
thesis provides research for analysing legacy applications to recover their architecture
and its functionality. Additionally, we use methods such as the strangler pattern to
strangle a monolithic application into smaller services. We have not found any research
completing an analysis of a product and showing how to break down a monolith based
on the results. This thesis will be a practical case showing the breakdown process from
start to finish.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
Summary of chapters
We will introduce the necessary information to understand the background of the the-
sis in chapter two. General background on an accounting system is introduced to get
an understanding of the domain terminology and concepts such that e-conomic will be
easier to understand. The different architectures used will be introduced; the so-called
“big ball of mud”, a modular monolith, a distributed monolith, and a microservice ar-
chitecture. One way to improve the development and deployment of products is using
software product lines, which we will explain as we will apply them later in our solution.
Finally, we have done a literature review, where we are introducing articles, which we
will draw on when developing our solution.
The architectural recovery is the third chapter. It will consist of a qualitative analysis,
where the product e-conomic is analysed from a user’s perspective looking at the use
cases of the core system and the essential business components and how these compo-
nents communicate. This analysis will give us an understanding of how the system is
used. Building upon the knowledge of the system, we will look into the current archi-
tecture of e-conomic and the current organisational structure to find out what needs to
be done and what is already there. To better understand the codebase, a quantitative
analysis of e-conomic is done to give insight into how the system is built. In addition to
the quantitative analysis, a dependency analysis is done with a different tool to challenge
the findings.
Chapter four regards the architectural synthesis, which will give a proposal to an ideal
domain of an accounting system if it had been developed today, and a division of the
monolith as macro services. With the proposed macro services, a new organisational
structure is designed, which will entail an organisational hierarchy and bounded con-
texts based on the macro services and a general software product line for development.
Next, a heat map is created based on the use cases and usage of the users to find the
module to extract. When extracting code and changing the architecture of a product,
financial considerations must be made. The model SIMPLE is used to estimate the
cost of changing the organisation, creating core assets for all product lines, and creating
products within product lines compared to stand-alone products. Now that the financial
side is covered, different approaches for breaking down the monolith is proposed, which
all use the strangler pattern. Last but not least, a test strategy is constructed to support
the approaches for breaking down the monolith.
Chapter five contains the proof of concept we produced. It starts by extracting function-
ality to a module to show how a modular monolith can be derived with the proposed
strategy from chapter four. After a module is successfully extracted, we will build a
microservice and move the functionality of the module to the microservice. The proof
of concept will confirm that the monolith can be broken down into services, which can
be developed and deployed independently. The chapter ends describing a test strategy
and a sub-conclusion of the prototype.
==PAGE:15==
1 Introduction
3
The last two chapters are chapter six and seven. Chapter six is a discussion of all the
previous chapters and what work can be done in the future. The last chapter, chapter
seven, is the conclusion of the thesis.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This chapter aims to introduce the necessary background for the thesis. The background
entails an introduction to what accounting is and especially how modern accounting
systems work. Furthermore, we will go through different architectures and methods to
build and deploy applications and how those differ. This is followed by an explanation
of software product line engineering. Lastly, we will give a literature review of the most
relevant work we base the thesis on.
2.1
What is an accounting system?
Accounting is not as complicated as people make it out to be. Accounting is keeping
track of your transactions. When we dive deeper into what that means, we might dis-
cover why most people prefer a modern accounting system over pen and paper. But
first, a bit about the basics of accounting.
We have different accounts when running a company or just doing our private account-
ing. All of these accounts are collected at what is called “the chart of accounts”. The
accounts can be divided into assets, liabilities, equities, revenues, and expenses. Assets
are the holdings that a company owns, such as buildings, equipment, and products and
cash and investments. Liabilities are debt and other legal financial obligations, including
loans and accounts payable. Essentially the liabilities can be summed up to the amount
that a company owes its creditors. Equities are the net worth of a company and are
the amount of money the company owes the shareholders. The equity often stems from
the investments that the shareholders made. Lastly, we have expenses and revenues.
Expenses are the cost of running the company, including the production price, employee
wages, possible rent of space and equipment. Revenues are the earnings the company
gets by selling its product.
Knowing the basics accounts, we can now look at how these relate. The accounting
equation states that a company’s assets are equal to the sum of the liability and the
equity. This is because we need to find out how much money a company owes (liabilities)
and how much money is invested in the company (equities) to be able to estimate the
worth of the company (assets). This equation is essential for running a company but
not something the average person would look too much at. Before going into how to use
an accounting system, we have to explain debits and credits. Debits increase the assets
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Background
and decrease the liabilities and equities when looking at the accounting equation, while
credits do the opposite. Credits are decreasing the assets and increasing the liabilities
and equities. Knowing a bit about a company’s economics and how all of these accounts
are related, we can get into how we use accounting. Accounting is in general used for
two things; bookkeeping and reports.
Bookkeeping is the task of logging all of the transactions of a company. The transac-
tions can involve one or more of the five types of accounts mentioned earlier, and as a
minimum, it contains a date, a description, a debit and a credit account, and an amount.
Depending on the system and the detail of the transaction, additional fields can be added.
In an accounting system, you will first create a draft entry by entering the minimum
five fields as mentioned and then save it to the daybook journal. Now, this draft entry
is not booked, which is when the entry goes to what is called the general ledger. The
general ledger is where you have all your booked entries across the five different types
of accounts. In digital accounting systems, you would also attach any documentation
regarding the transaction. If you sell a product, you will attach the invoice you sent
the customer. If you buy something, then you will attach the receipt. When you know
that the entry is done, meaning that you have attached the necessary documents and
entered the correct data for the entry, then you can book it, and it will be saved to
the general ledger and will be locked, meaning you cannot change the entry. What you
can do, if you did make a mistake and you already booked the entry; you can reverse it.
Reversing an entry creates a new entry with all the same information, except with debits
and credits switched. The reverse entry results in the balance on the debit and credit
accounts being as before you created the original entry. In other words, you reversed
the entry.
Now, as for the reason for all of the tedious work of keeping track of all transactions;
reports. From the general ledger, you can create reports showing the progress of your
company. You can focus the reports on earnings from different revenues or expenses and
compare those to see how your company is doing. You can also make a report and check
the company’s worth calculating the assets by summarising the liabilities and equities.
One common use case is also preparing all of the VAT reports, this is especially useful
when you are doing the taxes for a company and the government requires all the forms
at the end of the year.
2.2
Architecture
When speaking about software architecture, there are different viewpoints.
From a
deployment viewpoint, the architecture determines how many tiers are deployed and
how these tiers are deployed. The tiers refer to the physical separation of code, not
to be confused with layers, which refers to a logical separation of code [Bae21]. The
monolith and microservice architectures belong to this viewpoint as two opposites. The
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Architecture
7
monolith architecture is a 1-tier architecture having a single application deployed, which
contains all code necessary for the application to run [LF14].
Thus, monolith is an
extensive term and have various categories of them [Too21a]. A well-designed monolith
can be organised into a layered and modular fashion, allowing different teams to work
on each module without impacting each other. However, having all the code in a single
codebase allows the developers to break design, e.g., by adding a dependency to an
implementation of another module instead of querying it through an interface. Due to
this risk when developing new code, it is often seen that monoliths evolves into hard to
maintain codebases over time and can even be classified as “ball of mud” in some cases.
2.2.1
Big ball of mud
The term big ball of mud was first described by Yoder and Foote in 2009 [FY09]. A big
ball of mud classifies programs with no architecture set up before development starts,
usually due to time or money constraints. Having no architecture might not be a problem
for a small program. Still, as time progresses and multiple developers work on the code,
the codebase grows larger and larger with little to no cohesion between different classes,
resembling a “big ball of mud”. Business logic will usually be all over the place. There is
no separation between user interface (UI) logic and business logic. Code changes to one
class will most likely have unforeseen consequences in seemingly unrelated parts of the
code. At some point, the big ball of mud will have grown so big that it is not feasible
to continue implementing new features within it. When this happens, it is now the
choice to either rewrite the existing codebase to something more structured or build a
separate new application. However, the first option will usually be a strict non-functional
development that most business owners might not see as a good investment. Whereas,
the second option to build a new application is probably not a stand-alone unit, requiring
it to query or save data through the big ball of mud which creates a system that can be
classified as a distributed monolith.
2.2.2
Distributed monolith
A distributed monolith is the outcome of having a monolith that is a big ball of mud
that becomes too big to eﬀiciently extend with new functionality. A functionality might
require changes across different development teams because no domain components exist,
so that no ownership can be given to an individual team. New applications are instead
created to mitigate the delay that cross-team approval might cause, which implements
the new functionality.
However, these applications rarely work as stand-alone units,
which means they are tightly coupled to the monolith. Due to these new applications
being tightly bound to the monolith, changes to the monolith might require changes
to the new applications or vice-versa, making them dependant on each other during
deployment. [Too21b]
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Background
2.2.3
Modular monolith
The idea of a modular monolith is based on the principle ‘separation of concern’. The
idea is to capture the business areas in different modules, which exposes an interface
that acts as the contract between modules, which results in strong encapsulation. The
dependencies between each module should be kept to a minimum. A method to keep
the dependencies to a minimum is using the mediator pattern. With the mediator pat-
tern, it is possible to achieve loose coupling and strong cohesion within the monolith
[Grz19]. Isolating the code into modules gains some advantages of using microservices.
These advantages include smaller pieces of code that can be delegated to specific teams
within a company as changes to this code will not affect other business areas, which also
benefits time to market.
A typical software architecture for monoliths is the layered pattern. Usually, the mono-
lith is split into three layers: presentation layer, application/business logic layer, and
persistence/data layer. This pattern also supports modular monoliths. When creating
modules in a layered architecture, the modules will cross the layers to create vertical
slices. By mixing presentation, logic, and data layers into the same module with the
vertical slices, each module becomes a stand-alone “unit” within the monolith. Each of
these modules is still bound together by a single deployment, so it will still be a monolith
and have the advantages of intra-process communication. It also incorporates parts of
microservice advantages such as more isolated pieces of code and clear boundaries on
business capabilities. However, maintaining a modular monolith is not only a program-
ming issue. It is as much an organisational issue as a development issue that processes
must be implemented to keep boundaries clear and ensure that dependencies are kept
to a minimum. Otherwise, the monolith is susceptible to descending into a ball of mud.
2.2.4
Microservice
On the other side of the deployment viewpoint is the microservice architecture. Mi-
croservice architecture is an n-tier deployment architecture, meaning that there can be
any number of deployment units. From the name, these units usually correspond to the
number of services or domains that an application touch upon. Microservices have the
advantage of being smaller pieces of code, and each microservice has its own codebase
isolating them from the other microservice in the network. Microservices are usually
bounded within a sub-domain reducing the domain knowledge required by the develop-
ers to start working on the individual microservices. Having smaller domains and the
domains isolated from each other reduces the risk of bugs, as a change to a microservice
will only affect how that microservice operates.
Nevertheless, microservices also come with some disadvantages.
When different mi-
croservices have to communicate, it is different processes communicating with each other
(usually through message passing or HTTPS), which comes with some overhead both in
development time, increased diﬀiculty in testing, and increased run-time compared to
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Software product lines
9
intra-process communication. Another concern is how to recognise and react to failures.
There is a single point of failure in a monolith, which escalates up to the user reporting
something went wrong. In microservices, you run into the issue of detecting whether
a microservice is “online” and how to report the failure if a request is never completed
[LF14].
2.3
Software product lines
Software product lines are using product lines for software engineering purposes. The
definition of software product lines is as follows.
“A software product line is a set of software-intensive systems sharing a common, man-
aged set of features that satisfy the specific needs of a particular market segment or
mission and that are developed from a common set of core assets in a prescribed way.”
[Lin08]
Essentially, product lines are all about reusing the business strategy. The more the com-
pany is able to reuse, the more the investment is amortised over all of the core assets
resulting in a more significant benefit for the company. The greatest advantage of using
product lines is the decrease in time to market and increased product quality, which
translates into a more considerable revenue.
Figure 2.1: The benefit developing software products utilising software product lines
compared to the traditional approach. Here the current practice is the tradition ap-
proach, which Visma e-conomic is using. [DL99]
In Figure 2.1, the advantage of software product lines can be seen compared to tradi-
tional product development. The start-up cost of using product lines is much higher
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Background
than a traditional approach, but adding new products over time is much cheaper be-
cause of the core assets used for all product lines.
A common set of core assets is needed for a company that utilises software product line
engineering. These core assets need to support all of the goals of the company. The core
assets consist of many elements, including the following.
• Domain model
• Software architecture and design
• Test strategy and test data
• The knowledge and skills of the employees
• Processes and tools
• Budgets and business strategy
• Platform components and services
These core elements are used in all product lines in the company. The products within a
product line share a domain, which can be deployed individually from the other domains.
The products are the features within a domain, and these features share some common
code, which is specific for the domain and the product line. A feature is made up of
reused code within the domain and unique code for the feature.
2.4
Literature review
In Mazlami et al. [MCL17], an algorithmic approach to divide an existing monolith into
macro services is suggested. A monolith is analysed based on its version history by
creating a data structure of the set of current files, a set of all commits (in the case of
Git as version control), and a set of all developers. Then, three transformation functions
from the data structure to an undirected, weighted graph are proposed. Similar for all
functions is that the set of current files is transformed to the vertices of the graph. First
is “logical coupling”, which creates edges between all files in the same commit. The
weight of the edge is the sum of commits where two files are both present. Second is
“semantic coupling”, which calculates the edge weight between two files by the similarity
of the class-names. The third is “contributor coupling”, and the edge weight between
two files is calculated by the number of developers working on both files. Finally, a
clustering algorithm based on creating a minimum spanning tree is proposed to split the
generated graph into clusters. Each cluster can be translated into its own macro service.
In Mishra et al. [MKN18], a microservice discovery method is introduced. Mishra et al.
proposes to reverse engineer the artefacts of an existing monolith by generating a class
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Literature review
11
diagram. Based on the class diagram, components are discovered. Each component is
then made into a microservice. The next part is determining the interface between those
components and restructuring the data schema to avoid having duplicate data in data
stores for the new microservices.
In Lewis & Fowler [LF14] the concepts, monolith and microservice, are introduced. Ad-
ditionally, design concepts for microservices, such as “Decentralised data management”
and “Design for failure”, are explained. The focus is having the data split across the mi-
croservices, instead of having one big database as well as preparing for all of the things,
which can go wrong.
Yoder et al. [YM20] introduces a framework for an iterative way of decoupling a monolith,
namely the Strangler Pattern. The framework involves extracting business capabilities
into microservices (e.g., using Macro-then-micro), replacing the original monolith ser-
vice with the microservices by using façade or proxy patterns. Yoder et al. also state
that to successfully use the “strangler pattern”, the organisation must also be ready and
help facilitate a change in the organisation to allow for the microservice architecture to
“strangle” the monolith.
In Dehghani [Deh18], the idea of finding macro services, which can be later turned into
microservices using a dependency graph, is explored. It suggests starting with services
that are already somewhat decoupled (have a low number of dependants), if possible,
to get started. However, once the migration is started, services essential to the busi-
ness that has a tendency to be changed should be prioritised as new macro services. It
is noted that the decoupling should be of business capabilities and not code, meaning
that the code should be rewritten inside the new service rather than be copied from the
monolith. Writing the code within the new service results in revising the original user
story for the feature allowing the new team to get better domain knowledge. In addition,
the original code might have a lot of boilerplate code from the monolith, which is no
longer required in the new macro service.
From Cartwright et al. [CHL21], patterns on how to identify product lines from existing
software is introduced. Furthermore, several patterns for the delivery of replacement
systems are presented. Patterns of note are “dark launching”, where calls are replicated
and executed both on the original and replacement systems. Only the original system
will modify data and return data to the user. However, it is possible to test that the
replacement system performs as expected through logging. After dark launching the
system, it is possible to work “canary release” into the delivery. The replacement sys-
tem will no longer work with a read-only database. Instead of replicating all calls, calls
from a subset of users will be diverted to the replacement system (e.g., using a proxy
to divert them). Then over time, as the replacement system proves its performance, it
is possible to increase the users of the replacement system. Finally, when all users are
moved to the replacement service, it will be possible to delete the original system.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Background
Megargel et al. [MSW20] presents two approaches; starting from scratch and building
the application as microservices or converting an existing monolith to microservices.
The relevant part for us is the migration. Here they divide the process of migrating
from a monolith to microservices into six phases. These six phases are 1. Decouple
monolith, 2. Develop local microservices, 3. Implement local microservices, 4. Deploy
microservices to the cloud, 5. Implement microservices on the cloud, and the final phase
6. Decommission monolith. For each of the phases, there are 2 to 3 smaller steps. The
most interesting is identifying the microservices to construct from the monolith. For
this, they record and analyse the interactions with the interface of the monolith. They
then compared the data to known domain models of similar businesses, and finally, they
construct a list of microservices needed. They start extracting the components and con-
verting the monolith component by component from this list.
Li et al. [LML20] presents an approach based on the “strangler fig”-pattern and domain-
driven design (DDD), referred to as the microservice migration using strangler fig pattern
and DDD (MMSD). The approach has five phases A. Service identification, B. Prepara-
tory task, C. Service prioritisation, D. Service implementation, integration and testing,
and lastly E. Removal of legacy modules. In this article, one exciting takeaway is the
service prioritisation. Each service is valued on five different criteria; function to be mod-
ified, performance problem, core function, related service, and separate service. These
are to decide which microservices to extract when in the migration process.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Architectural recovery
We started by performing an architectural recovery to determine the current state of
the system. Our architectural recovery consisted of a qualitative analysis followed by a
quantitative analysis. We began the recovery by conducting interviews with employees
of e-conomic, who were previous customers of e-conomic. The employees helped us get
an overview of who the users of e-conomic are, what tasks they perform inside e-conomic,
and how important the different features are to them. The information gathered during
the interviews gave an understanding of the system and provided a baseline for what was
considered the most critical functionality inside e-conomic. After the interviews were
done, we spoke with some of the technical leads to gain an understanding of what design
patterns e-conomic is designed by to map how the business cases were aligned in the
code. The last phase of the qualitative analysis was to understand how the organisation
of the company was and to see if it was compatible with moving away from a monolith
centred development style.
After the qualitative analysis, we performed a quantitative analysis of the e-conomic
codebase. The purpose of the quantitative analysis was to find how the business com-
ponents found in the interviews were located and connected within the code. The first
analysis we did was an algorithmic approach to find candidates for macro services by
looking at the least coupled parts of the code. The quantitative analysis concluded with
a dependency analysis of the codebase. The dependency analysis generated a depen-
dency map of direct dependencies between assemblies rather than files that was looked
at in the initial analysis. The dependency map was created to challenge the macro ser-
vice candidates found and to get an idea of which assemblies within the monolith would
be the hardest to untangle and extract and whether this was even feasible.
3.1
Exploring the domain by a qualitative
analysis
To gain knowledge about the business domain, we interviewed five employees, who before
working at e-conomic were customers of e-conomic. The interviewees had a background
as accountants or auditors and had used e-conomic as a part of their daily job. Their
experience in e-conomic ranged from two to ten years as customers and all had at least
two years of experience at e-conomic as well, working either in customer support, as
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Architectural recovery
business analysts, or as product owners.
The purpose of the interviews was to get familiar with the domain. This meant figuring
out the different user types in e-conomic, what tasks the customers perform when using
e-conomic, and lastly getting a demonstration of how these tasks were performed. An
important part of the demonstration was to capture how different users might perform
the same task in different ways, and to capture these workflows and the reason for them.
To get this information, we have had ten predefined questions for the interviews. The
predefined questions are listed below:
1. What was your role when you used e-conomic?
2. What was the company size?
3. Which modules of e-conomic did you have access to?
4. Which activities (workflows) did you do in e-conomic?
5. How often did you do those?
a Were they scheduled or were they triggered by some action?
6. Does the activity require input from other users or systems?
7. What was the result/goal of the activity?
a Any expected failure scenario?
b If so - Would that lead to an alternative workflow?
Interview results
The first couple of questions were designed to learn who the cus-
tomers of e-conomic are. In part, what companies and their sizes, as well as who the
users are within these companies. The interviewees had all been employed at auditing
companies that also provide accounting services. A couple of the interviewees had been
working as auditor trainees and auditors and as part of that had to do accounting for
their customers. The auditors mainly used e-conomic for teaching their trainees in the
field and validating their work, as well as providing auditing services for their customers,
who use e-conomic.
The company size of our interviewees was not relevant as these users were not end-users.
Instead, the interviewees acted as middlemen, and their customers were the relevant
customers. We were told that their customers ranged from small to medium businesses
[Com21] and that they usually used the core e-conomic modules without any add-ons.
The purpose of the rest of the questions was to get an understanding of what e-conomic
is used for and how to use the program. The answers for these questions provided the
information for the use cases of e-conomic which are described in Section 3.1.1. Dur-
ing the demonstration, we were shown the two main workflows of e-conomic, “Purchase
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Exploring the domain by a qualitative analysis
15
2 Pay” (Accounting of expenses), and “Quote 2 Cash” (Creating and booking invoices
in addition to registering their payment), and a couple of different ways to perform these.
The interviews uncovered eight modules; sales, accounting, reports, inventory, projects,
journal pro, administration, smart inbox, and settings. Furthermore, there were nine
add-ons, which overlapped with some of the modules, since not all modules were in the
basic application and therefore needs to be bought separately by the customer. The
following add-ons were uncovered; smart pay, document handling, smart inbox, smart
bank, projects, inventory, subscriptions, budget, and journal pro.
3.1.1
Use cases
The combination of interviews and demonstrations showed us five main use cases inside
e-conomic: creating invoices, creating daybook entries (for performing bookkeeping),
creating reports, performing project management, and performing inventory manage-
ment. The use cases are illustrated in Figure 3.1. During this section we will further
describe each use case and how they are related by modules inside e-conomic.
Figure 3.1: High level use cases in e-conomic.
The use cases shown in the demonstrations are in eight different modules of e-conomic,
whereof three of these modules were seen as part of the core modules that everyone
with an e-conomic agreement has access to. These are the sales, accounting, and report
modules (We later refer to the component of the sales module as invoice). The use cases
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Architectural recovery
“Create invoices”, “Create daybook entry”, and “Create report” belong to these modules.
In Figure 3.2 the aforementioned use cases are broken into more detailed use cases.
The sales module is primarily for creating and sending invoices as part of the “Quote
2 Cash” workflow. The accounting module is the pillar that everything is built around,
allowing for accounting to be done. The report module can create reports of the data
generated in the other modules of e-conomic and is an essential tool for auditing the
accounting. The report module is also to give the business owners an overview of how
their business is performing. To gain this overview, the report module supports generat-
ing ledger reports, VAT statements, and a period total for any period within the same
accounting year. The default for these reports is to only base them on booked entries.
Nevertheless, it is possible to include draft daybook entries, if you want to see how an
order or an invoice will change your balance. In addition to this, to gain an overview of
how the report has been calculated, it is possible to click any line in the report, and it
will show which entries the line is composed of.
It is worth noting in Figure 3.2, the use case “Create draft daybook entry” is being
extended by three use cases. These three use cases are enabled by different add-ons.
However, the add-ons are tools to more easily create the draft daybook entry and were
heavily emphasised in all the interviews, which is why we think they are important to
add to the use case diagram.
The main use cases inside the accounting module are creating a draft daybook entry
and booking a draft daybook entry, which locks the entry. Moreover, it is possible to
reverse an entry, which involves finding the entry in already booked daybook entries
and confirming the reverse. This creates two new draft daybook entries; a daybook
entry with opposite account and contra account and the negated amount of the booked
daybook entry and a copy of the booked entry.
In addition to the core modules, there are the previous mentioned add-ons to e-conomic,
which either enrich the existing data or gives entirely new features. Of these, we were
shown the inventory module, which enriches information regarding products in the sales
module. It allows the user to bind their products and bills to suppliers through e-conomic.
The use cases for the inventory module can be seen in Figure 3.3a.
The second module, we were shown during the demonstrations, was the projects module.
The projects module allows the user to set up a main project, which can be either internal
or external. An example scenario for an external project would be if the e-conomic user
is a consultancy being hired by another company to perform some tasks. The tasks can
then be registered as a main project; where deliverables and sub-tasks can be registered
as sub-projects and activities to the main project. This allows the user to keep track of
the status of the task, they were hired to do including its sub-tasks and activities related
to it. When the task is over, an invoice can be created either based on an agreed-upon
price or based on the hours registered on the project. Another feature introduced by
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Exploring the domain by a qualitative analysis
17
Figure 3.2: Use cases of core modules.
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Architectural recovery
the projects module is that users are able to add their employees as users in e-conomic,
however, only with limited access within the projects module. There are three different
types of employee roles: a project manager, who has the same access inside the projects
module as the user has. A time logger, who can register time and, if given permission by
the project manager or agreement owner, also approve time. Lastly, there is a mobile
time logger, that can only access e-conomic through the e-conomic mobile app and only
has access to register time. The use cases for the projects module is shown in Figure 3.3b.
(a) Use cases of the inventory module.
(b) Use cases of the projects module.
Figure 3.3: Use cases: Add-on modules
The final module shown during the demonstration was the administration module, which
can be seen in Figure 3.4. A user can be an administrator in e-conomic, which means
that they administrate agreements for other companies. This is done through the admin-
istration module. The administration module acts as a gateway to access the different
agreements from one place instead of having to log in and out of different agreements.
With the administration module, a new agreement type, internal, is also added. The
administrator can create the agreement as internal if their customer does not need ac-
cess to e-conomic themselves, i.e., a company hiring an accounting oﬀice to do their
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Exploring the domain by a qualitative analysis
19
accounting.
Figure 3.4: Use cases of the administration module.
There are two main user types described in e-conomic, which are users and administra-
tors. A user will in most cases be either a business owner, a bookkeeper, or an accountant
at a company. However, from e-conomic’s point of view all of these user types are just
seen as users. Thus, the use case diagrams will not differentiate between them as they
all have access to the same set of functionalities. In addition, during the interviews, we
were also informed that auditors might access the user’s agreement and use the report
module to check for any discrepancies.
3.1.2
Communication in the domain
Based on the use cases from Figure 3.1 and the demonstrations during the interviews,
we created communication diagrams for “Create invoice” and “Create daybook entry”.
The communication diagrams show which components are used during a use case and
the interaction between them. We also cover two alternative workflows for creating a
daybook entry based on what add-ons the users have bought for their agreement. The
first of the two alternatives is “Create daybook entry from bank reconciliation”, which
is available for all users, with the prerequisite that they have an export of their bank
statement. The second alternative is “Create daybook entry from the smart inbox mod-
ule” which requires the smart inbox module to have been bought and an invoice to be
sent to the inbox.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Architectural recovery
The first communication diagram is describing the communication between the compo-
nents for the “Create invoice” use case. The communication diagram can be seen in
Figure 3.5. There are four inputs from the user in order to complete the process. The
user only provides input to the invoice component. First, a draft invoice is created,
where a customer needs to be selected from the customer component. When the cus-
tomer of the draft invoice has been added, the draft invoice is saved, which makes it
ready for further editing. Secondly, invoice lines can be added for products and services.
When doing so, the product component is contacted to select a product and the price
of it. When the price of the draft invoice is updated, the VAT component is contacted
to get the new price including VAT based on the products of the invoice. Thirdly, if
the user has the projects module, the user can select a project, which the invoice can
be invoiced to. The action of selecting a project will contact the projects component.
Lastly, when the draft invoice has been filled out, the user can send and book the draft
invoice, which sends the invoice via e-mail to the selected customer and books the draft
invoice in the accounting component.
Figure 3.5: Communication diagram - Create invoice
The next use case, which we created a communication diagram of, is “Create daybook
entry”. The communication diagram is shown in Figure 3.6. Creating a daybook entry
starts by updating the form that needs to be filled out based on one of five daybook
entry types. Secondly, other components are contacted in order to fill out the form.
The components can be customer, suppliers, or invoice depending on the daybook entry
type and can be contacted in any order. Next, the user selects an account and contra
account from the ‘chart of accounts’ component. If an account is selected that does not
already have a VAT code connected, the VAT component can be contacted to select the
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Exploring the domain by a qualitative analysis
21
VAT type for the component during the creation of the draft daybook entry. Once that
has been filled out, the draft daybook entry can be saved and is ready to be approved
and/or booked depending on the setup of the accounting rules.
Figure 3.6: Communication diagram - Create daybook entry
Another way to create daybook entries is to create them during the bank reconciliation.
The communication of the components used in this use case is shown in Figure 3.7.
From the bank component, an entry that you wish to transfer to the daybook needs to
be selected. These entries can be created either as customer payment, supplier payment,
or journal entry, which are all daybook entry types. In case of a customer payment or
supplier payment, the invoice component is contacted by the bank component to match
the payment with an invoice. Next, an account for the draft daybook entry needs to be
chosen from the ‘chart of accounts’ component. Finally, the draft daybook entry can be
transferred from the bank component to the accounting component, allowing the user
to approve and/or book it in the accounting component.
The final communication diagram is showing how to create daybook entries from the
smart inbox module and is shown in Figure 3.8. This process starts by the user selecting
a document from the smart inbox module and a daybook entry type. Then the smart in-
box module performs optical character recognition (OCR) on the document, in the effort
to fill out the daybook entry form. Based on the daybook entry form the smart inbox
component will contact the ‘chart of accounts’, VAT, suppliers, or invoice component
to get the rest of the information for the draft daybook entry. When the information
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Architectural recovery
Figure 3.7: Communication diagram - Create daybook entry during bank reconciliation
is filled out, the smart inbox component will contact the accounting component to save
the draft daybook entry. As with the bank reconciliation, the user can now navigate to
the accounting component in order to approve and/or book the draft daybook entry.
Figure 3.8: Communication diagram - Create daybook entry from the smart inbox mod-
ule
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Exploring the domain by a qualitative analysis
23
3.1.3
Business components
The interviews resulted in the recovery of essential workflows between the core modules
and add-ons. These workflows suggested some domain concepts, which created the basis
of the business components. Navigating the platform, we looked for domain concepts
and how they were shared between the cores modules and add-ons to build upon the
knowledge gained from the interviews. The collected knowledge made us able to infer a
diagram consisting of 22 business components including the add-ons available through
the e-conomic marketplace. This can be seen in Figure 3.9. To classify business com-
ponents, we looked at which modules were available on the platform and which domain
concepts were used across the modules e.g., by data being accessed or having some cal-
culation done.
Figure 3.9: The discovered business components of e-conomic.
By inspecting the business components in Figure 3.9, we find that most of the system
has dependencies across the entire platform, forming a big circle of dependencies, with
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Architectural recovery
the most coupled business components also being the core modules found during the in-
terviews. However, there is also a smaller group of business components that is disjoint
from the remaining business components, which might suggest that would be an easier
area to extract to start the microservice migration.
Next to the smaller group of business components, we see the authentication compo-
nent, which is disjoint from the rest of the business components. The authentication
component consists of the authentication through Visma Connect as well as multi-factor
authentication (MFA). From the smaller group, the first component is the administration
component, which is the layer on top of the e-conomic platform, that allows adminis-
trators to bind multiple agreements to their agreement. The administration component
keeps the information about which modules and add-ons are activated for an agreement.
Due to this, the administration component is connected to the marketplace component,
where new add-ons and modules can be added to an agreement. The last component
of the smaller group is the navigation component, which allows for a user to search for
functionality in the activated add-ons and being navigated to them in the user interface.
In the bigger group of business components, we see business components for the three
core modules as mentioned previously; invoice, reports, and accounting as well as sev-
eral other business components. The accounting component is connected to the ‘chart
of accounts’ component, which maps the accounts and spending of a company to a cat-
egory. It is possible for each account to have its own VAT setting and on top of that, it
is possible to create a report for a specific account. The accounting component is also
connected to the bank component, which enables accounting based on bank transactions.
Furthermore, the accounting component has access to the document handling compo-
nent that enables reading documents, performing optical character recognition (OCR),
and storing the documents. Another integration point of the accounting component is
the smart inbox component and the notification centre component. The smart inbox
component allows for documents to easily be sent to e-conomic from external software.
The notification centre component allows for a user to get notified whenever something
new has arrived in the smart inbox component or whenever an attachment has been
requested from the accounting component. In addition, the accounting component has
a connection to the suppliers component, allowing the user to set up their suppliers in
the suppliers component, and from the accounting component binding the draft daybook
entries to suppliers. Finally, the accounting component has a connection to the projects
component, enabling the accountant to bind a draft daybook entry to a specific project.
The invoice component is connected to the subscription and the smart pay components,
which are both add-ons for e-conomic. The smart pay component integrates with an
external partner to transfer the payments of invoices to the user’s bank account immedi-
ately, whereas the subscription component can auto-generate invoices for subscriptions.
The invoice component integrates with the customer component, which allows the user
to save their customers and generate reports based on them, to easily find the recipient
for an invoice. Additionally, the invoice component integrates into the projects com-
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Current architecture
25
ponent, allowing the invoice to be associated with a project for the customer. Finally,
the invoice component integrates with the product component. The product component
allows for products to be created inside e-conomic and adds standard information such
as price per unit and name. The integration from the invoice component to the product
component allows for invoice lines to be for specific products.
In addition to the core modules, there is the settings component, which handles the
creation of new VAT codes, accounting years, and setting up connections for immediate
payment and bank integration if those add-ons are activated.
The final component found is the inventory component, which integrates with the prod-
uct component and adds additional information regarding the products related to their
inventory status.
Additionally, it integrates to the suppliers component acting as a
bridge between products and suppliers of the products. A final integration from the
inventory component is the reports component, allowing reports to be made based on
product groups and historic product data.
This concludes the qualitative analysis of the domain, which resulted in a component
mapping from a domain perspective. To gain insight into how e-conomic is currently
structured, we will first look at the current architecture of e-conomic.
3.2
Current architecture
After the interviews with the business experts, an introduction to the current state of
the system was given by the technical leads.
The e-conomic monolith has been developed over 20 years without adhering to any one
architecture. When adding new features, dependencies have been added to existing code
to reuse as much code as possible. Thus, creating a big ball of mud. In the past couple
of years, steps have been taken to create a layered architecture in the monolith. At
the time of writing, the monolith consists of a three-layer backend, which consists of
an application service in the upper layer, a domain service in the middle layer, and an
infrastructure layer consisting of a repository and a utility component. In addition to
the services mentioned, there is also a legacy component that spans across the different
layers. The legacy component integrates with each of the layers and also handles user
interactions happening through the ASP Core and ASP.NET web forms, which are
bundled in the monolith. The application service exposes endpoints for outside sources
to communicate with the monolith. This includes an internal API, that provides access
for other e-conomic services to contact the monolith, a public API in REST and SOAP
that integration partners can use to access e-conomic, and a controller for jobs being
queued through the “outbox pattern”. The architecture of the monolith can be seen in
Figure 3.10.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Architectural recovery
Figure 3.10: Architecture of the e-conomic monolith.
As seen in Figure 3.10 the monolith has an endpoint for incoming jobs through Hangfire,
which is used for processing background tasks in .Net and .Net Core applications. The
monolith itself is also the publisher of these jobs, making the monolith both the server
and a client. The main purpose of the monolith is to respond to user interactions and
the API. These actions can make the monolith act as the Hangfire client by producing
jobs that are stored in the monolith database. In order for the monolith to perform
both roles, a separate process of the monolith is running with the single purpose of
being the Hangfire server. Thus, creating a distributed monolith. Knowing the current
architecture of economic, we also need to look into the current organisational structure,
since the software architecture is related to the way the organisation is structured.
3.3
Organisational flexibility to change
Changing the software architecture of a product affects more than the software; it affects
the people working on the software. The software architecture forces the employees to
work in a way that supports the architecture, which is why the organisational flexibility
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Organisational flexibility to change
27
to change needs to be evaluated, before a change in the software architecture can be
done. First, one needs to assess what the current organisational structure is in form of
hierarchies and team structures. Secondly, the organisational structure fitting the new
software architecture needs to be researched and planed. Thirdly, a plan for how to go
from one structure to another needs to be created and sat in motion. Not all changes in
software architecture requires a change to the organisational structure, but going from a
layered application to a domain driven application will often require some changes. The
layered application can have teams for each of the layers; presentation, application, and
persistence. Where a domain driven application will often have a team for each domain,
where they do all layers for the domain within the team requiring team members to
specialise and own the domain.
In Visma e-conomic they have a monolithic application as described in the previous
section. New initiatives are developed as microservices where possible, which means
that the knowledge of microservices is partially present. Currently, the organisation is
split into six pillars, each with a director. These six directors are all peers and they
respond to the CEO. These six pillars are Planet Wow, Sales/Marketing, Core, Suite,
Eco & Fintech, and Engineering. The six pillars can be seen in Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: The current organisational structure of e-conomic.
Today, the Core pillar is developing and maintaining the monolith and all other pillars
will depend on the Core pillar, since there is always some connection to the monolith,
when developing new products and features. The Suite pillar is focusing on new initia-
tives outside of the accounting domain. The Eco & Fintech pillar creates new technical
and commercial initiatives within fintech as well as investing in an ecosystem to grow
the platform. Lastly, the engineering pillar has the task of re-engineering the e-conomic
monolith, such that it is able to withstand growth as well as supporting the other pillars.
The Planet Wow pillar supplies the support for Visma e-conomic’s customers and the
Sales/Marketing pillar is creating the marketing for e-conomic and have people focusing
on go to market (GTM) and the net promoter score (NPS). The net promoter score is
measuring the growth of e-conomic and the customers experience with e-conomic.
All pillars are working independently and there is not enough communication currently.
The four last mentioned departments are all developing solutions, which ends up block-
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Architectural recovery
ing each other. Core, Suite, and Eco & Fintech needs their own set of user experience
employees (UX), product managers (PM), product owners (PO), business analysts (BA),
developers (Dev) and quality assurance employees (QA). All pillars have several agile
teams working towards the goal of the department.
The engineering pillar provides
technical leads, site reliability engineering (SRE) employees, and development and op-
erations (DevOps) employees to support the other pillars as well as having their own
developers. This is one of the big diﬀiculties in Visma e-conomic with the current or-
ganisational structure, the departments are not working towards one common goal. Not
having a common goal is hindering the overall time to market of e-conomic, since the
development is taking longer than necessary. The monolith is being extended, broken
down, and solutions to interact with the monolith is being built all in parallel without
communication and a common goal, which delays all processes. The company needs to
focus on having a common goal and using all the expertise in the company to increase
the overall development and time to market for e-conomic.
Knowing the current architecture and organisational structure, we will need to look into
the state of the codebase. Due to e-conomic being a fully build and deployed application,
we will now conduct a quantitative analysis of the codebase to get an overview of how
the monolith is structured compared to how it is presented from a domain perspective.
Once the current codebase has been analysed, we will compare the results of the domain
analysis and the algorithmic analysis to form a basis for a plan of how to decouple the
monolith to possibly create microservices.
3.4
Quantitative analysis of the codebase
The graph-based clustering algorithm, mentioned in Mazlami et al. [MCL17], is meant
to find candidate microservices based on an analysis of the version history of a mono-
lith. The version history will often reflect how the monolith was built. The algorithm
has three main steps; first, it scans the monolith. Secondly, it creates a graph of the
monolith with a chosen strategy. Third, it performs a clustering resulting in a set of
candidate microservices.
The first step of the algorithm is scanning the version history of the monolith. Here it
is important to gather the necessary information for further processing. The monolith
representation as presented in Mazlami et al. [MCL17] is a 3-tuple, M = (CM, DM, HM).
The 3-tuple contains a set of classes, a set of developers, and a set of history changes.
The set of classes CM = {c1, c2, c3, ..., cn} contains all the classes which are found in the
monolith and DM is the set of developers who contributed to the monolithic codebase.
The history changes HM is an ordered set of history changes, where a history change is
a 3-tuple consisting of a set of classes that changed, the developer that made the change,
and the timestamp at which the change occurred, hi = (Ei, di, ti)|hi ∈HM. The set
of classes Ei in the history change hi is the classes which were changed and they are a
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Quantitative analysis of the codebase
29
subset of all classes Ei = {c1, c2, ..., cn|ck ∈CM}. The developer di is in the set of all
developers di ∈DM.
The second step creates a graph representing the monolith based on the results of the
scan from step one, GM = (VM, EM). The vertices in the graph are always the classes
in the monolith, |VM| = |CM|. However, the edges describe a relationship between the
classes. They will connect the vertices differently depending on the strategy chosen.
There are different coupling strategies, such as; logical coupling, contributor coupling,
and semantic coupling. These strategies are also called weight functions since they will
create the edge if it does not exist, but they will also apply a weight to the edge describ-
ing how strong the coupling is between the two vertices. The greater the edge weight
value, the stronger the coupling is between the two classes. The largest undirected graph,
which can be created, is a complete graph because two classes can only be connected
once, resulting in the number of edges being bound, |E| ≤|V | · (|V | −1)/2.
The third step of the algorithm is dividing the monolithic graph, GM, into a set of candi-
date microservices (CMS) by removing edges to decouple the graph, {GCMS−1, GCMS−2,
..., GCMS−n}. This results in the same number of vertices and a smaller number of edges,
(VM, EM) →{(VCMS−1, ECMS−1), (VCMS−2, ECMS−2), ..., (VCMS−n, ECMS−n)} | |VM| =
∑n
i=1 |VCMS−i| and EM > ∑n
i=1 |ECMS−i|. To make the clustering process easier and
ensure that every time an edge is removed, a new disjoint set is created, a minimum
spanning tree (MST) of the graph is created. To ensure the most important edges are
kept, the reciprocal fraction of the edge weight is calculated. This means that the great-
est edge weights will now be the smallest and conserved when creating the MST. With
the conserved edges in the MST, the edges with the largest weight are picked, which
are found by sorting the list of edges and then reversing it. Now the edge with the
greatest weight is extracted and deleted from the list until the desired number of can-
didate microservices is reached. The decoupled graph is traversed to find the candidate
microservices by finding each cluster of connected vertices.
In Mazlami et al. [MCL17], they discovered that the two most eﬀicient strategies to use
were the logical and semantic couplings. The strategies have a better result for reducing
domain redundancy, the size of the microservice, and the team size. Therefore, the focus
has been on explaining these two strategies in depth.
Logical Coupling
The logical coupling strategy is based on the single responsibility
principle [Mar03], which says “A class should have one, and only one, reason to change”.
This principle translates that for a feature having one purpose, the files committed
together should change for the same reason, e.g., the feature. This is also very important
for a microservice architecture since the purpose is to create strong boundaries between
the services.
Adhering to the single responsibility principle will force the candidate
microservices to do exactly that.
The function, used to create the edges and their
weight, works on the history changes. For each pair of classes ci, cj ∈CM|ci ̸= cj in a
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Architectural recovery
history change, hi ∈HM, an edge is created between the classes’ corresponding vertices.
This can be described by the weight function δ in Equation 3.1.
δhi(ci, cj) =



1
if ci, cj changed in hi
0
if otherwise
(3.1)
The final weight of an edge is the sum of all the weights for all the history changes shown
by Equation 3.2.
∆(ci, cj) =
∑
h∈HM
δh(ci, cj)
(3.2)
The graph, constructed with this strategy, adds the value one to the edge weight each
time a pair of classes change in the same commit.
Semantic Coupling
The semantic coupling strategy builds on domain-driven design
(DDD), where it creates clear boundaries between different domains. Domain-driven
design is used to define clear boundaries for microservices. The hope is that classes have
a unique terminology relating to the domain being repeated throughout related classes.
All classes are tokenised to find the terminology of a class. The tokenisation results in a
list of words which we refer to as a document. The way that the weight function works
is by calculating the cosine similarity of the difference between the term frequency (tf)
vector and the inverse document frequency (idf) vector. The term frequency is the natu-
ral logarithm taken to the number of occurrences of a term. The term frequency vector
contains the term frequency for all the terms in two documents. The inverse document
frequency is the frequency of how many documents the term occurs in across a document
set. The inverse document frequency vector contains each inverse document frequency
in the term set between two documents. Computing the cosine similarity between these
vectors results in a single value showing how similar the domain concepts are for the two
documents, considering how similar the concepts are throughout the entire domain.
For two classes ci, cj ∈CM|ci ̸= cj in the monolith, each class is tokenised to a map from
each word to their number of occurrences, Wi and Wj. From the word map of each of
the classes; a term set T is created by combining all the words from Wi and Wj. The
term set is the basis for relating the two classes ci and cj. Now the raw term occurrence
(called raw term frequency in Mazlami et al. ) f(tk, Wi) can be calculated for a term
tk ∈T and a map of words for class ci. The raw term occurrence is defined as the
value in the word map of the key, term tk. To make up for outliers the logarithmic term
frequency is used. This results in Equation 3.3.
tf(tk, Wi) =



0
if f(tk, Wi) = 0
1 + loge(f(tk, Wi))
if otherwise
(3.3)
After the logarithmic term frequency is computed, it needs to be compared to the inverse
document frequency. To calculate this, a complete document map Wall = {W1, W2, ...}
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Quantitative analysis of the codebase
31
is needed. The complete document map Wall is a map of classpaths, which maps to
the word maps for each of the classes in the monolith. Here the logarithm is taken to
the number of classes over the number of classes a term is present in. This results in
Equation 3.4.
idf(tk, Wall) = loge
(
|Wall|
|{Wi ∈Wall : tk ∈Wi}|
)
(3.4)
Based on the tf and idf vectors, the vectors X and V can be computed. An element
xk of the vector X is calculated by computing the logarithmic frequency of a term tk
multiplied with the inverse document frequency of the same term tk. This computation
is made for all terms in the term list to get the complete vector X. This can also can be
expressed by the formula: ∀tk ∈T : xk = tf(tk, Wi) · idf(tk, Wall) for the class ci. The
same computation is made for vector V for class cj. Given the vectors X and V the
final step can be made, which is computing the cosine between these two vectors. The
results are the final weight of the edge between the vertices representing the classes ci
and cj as shown in Equation 3.5.
w(ci, cj) = cos(X, V )
(3.5)
3.4.1
Implementation
We created an implementation of the analysis tool based on the formal explanation
provided by Mazlami et al. [MCL17] using Python 3.9 [Pyt21]. The monolith is imple-
mented as a class with three fields. For the set of classes, we chose to store the file path
for each class ci ∈CM. The e-conomic application is written in C# and e-conomic’s
C# coding guidelines states to only have one class per file [e-c21]. Due to the coding
guidelines, we will not have to tokenise each git difference to look for new classes added
or existing classes deleted. Due to the sheer size of the monolith, we did not store the
content of the files inside the monolith representation as Mazlami et al. [MCL17]. In-
stead, for analyses that require the content of the classes, we read the files on the fly.
For the set of historical changes, we defined a class History that represents a change to
the version history. The History class contains three fields; a set of edits, a timestamp,
and a developer. The timestamp is the commit timestamp and the developer is the de-
veloper who committed the change. The Edit class contains two fields. The name of the
file that was changed and an enum EditType that specifies whether the file was ‘newly
added’, ‘content changed’, ‘renamed’, or ‘deleted’. A class diagram of the implemented
tool can be seen in Figure 3.12.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Architectural recovery
Figure 3.12: Class diagram of our analysis tool.
Weight functions
We have chosen to implement the logical and semantic coupling
weight functions. For the logical coupling, we have stayed close to the design proposed
in Mazlami et al. They did not describe how edges should be created between vertices.
They did, however, define a weight function based on the count of commits that con-
tained both files represented by the vertices. Based on this, we decided to create an
edge for all pairs of vertices that had been in the same commit, resulting in all edges
added would have at least a weight of 1.
For the semantic coupling, we had to create a complete graph and calculate the edge
weight for all pairs of vertices. After the edges had been calculated, we went through
all edges and deleted those with a weight of 0. We found some ambiguities between the
usage of sets and lists in the description of the semantic coupling, as well as how they
used n. After some research, we went with an implementation not using any lists to
avoid duplicates based on [Ham19]. Instead, we started by tokenising all files. During
the tokenisation, we counted how many times a token had been seen in the current file.
This result was stored in a hash table mapping the word to its count. These hash tables
were then stored in another hash table, where the file path was used as a key for the
hash table of its tokens and token counts. This hash table was the one described as the
document set in Mazlami et al. Additionally, a part of calculating the inverse document
frequency (idf) for a term is to find the number of documents that the term appears
in. Instead of calculating this for every term during every idf calculation, we chose to
do this calculation as part of the tokenisation. We created a hash table from the token
value to their document count allowing for constant lookup time during idf calculation.
Each time a tokenisation is complete, we iterated over the tokens of the document. If
the token value already existed in the hash table, we increased its count by one, other-
wise adding it with value one. With the alterations to the semantic coupling we have
described, we decreased the run time of the semantic coupling from an estimated time
of 100 days to approximately 8 hours.
After running one of the coupling functions, we get a graph as an output. This graph
is now ready for the clustering algorithm that should provide a suggestion for which
clusters there might be in the code as a template for which files should be considered
together when extracting microservices. The code for the clustering algorithm is shown
in Algorithm 3.1.
To create the minimum spanning tree, we chose to use Kruskal’s algorithm [Cor+01],
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Quantitative analysis of the codebase
33
1 def
mst_clustering ( original_graph : Graph ,
no_components :
int ,
is _f ir st _c l us te ri n g :
bool = True) −> l i s t [ Graph ] :
2
graph = original_graph
3
4
if
i s _f i r s t _c l us te ri ng :
5
for edge_key in graph . edges :
6
edge = graph . edges [ edge_key ]
7
edge . weight = 1.0/ edge . weight
8
9
mst = kruskal ( graph )
10
mst_edges = sorted (mst . edges . values () , key=lambda ed :
ed . weight )
11
mst_edges . reverse ()
12
13
all_vertices = l i s t ( graph . v e r t i c e s . values () )
14
already_clusters = find_disjoint_graphs ( mst_edges ,
all_vertices ,
50 ,
i s _f i r s t _ cl us te ri n g )
15
already_clusters_count = len ( already_clusters )
16
if
already_clusters_count >= no_components :
17
return
[ graph ]
18
19
filtered_graph = combine_clusters ( already_clusters )
20
filtered_mst = kruskal ( filtered_graph )
21
22
filtered_mst_edges = sorted ( filtered_mst . edges . values () , key=lambda ed :
ed .
weight )
23
filtered_mst_edges . reverse ()
24
25
for n in range( already_clusters_count ,
no_components) :
26
filtered_mst_edges . pop (0)
27
28
return find_disjoint_graphs ( filtered_mst_edges ,
all_vertices ,
50)
Algorithm 3.1: The MST Clustering Algorithm used for the logical coupling strategy.
which sorts the edges and picks the minimum edge that will not result in any cycles.
When the minimum spanning tree is created, all vertices are connected with only one
way to traverse all the vertices, which ideally means there needs to be one edge less
than the number of vertices. However, based on what weight function is used, the graph
extracted from the monolith might be disconnected. Due to this edge case, we altered
the implementation to use a for-each loop of the sorted edges instead of a while loop
based on the MST edge count. By going through the sorted edges exactly once, we
know that the MST will contain all vertices that have at least one edge connected to it.
Since it is sorted, we know that the MST generated will also be the tree with the lowest
possible weight.
In Algorithm 3.1, we have shown how we chose to implement the clustering algorithm
proposed in [MCL17]. In addition to Kruskal’s algorithm, we use two functions within
the clustering algorithm. The first is find_disjoint_graphs which looks through the
edges of the minimum spanning tree to find any clusters/disjoint graphs that might exist.
Each found cluster is then created as its own Graph object and a list of all clusters are
returned. The second function is combine_clusters, which takes a list of graphs and
returns a new graph where the edges and vertices of each of the input graphs are added.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Architectural recovery
We are not using a “reduce clusters” function on the result, as seen in the paper, we
chose to return a list containing the clusters that exist after the clustering. Instead, we
created a function recursive_clustering that runs an initial clustering and for each
cluster found. If the cluster contained a single vertex, it was printed and discarded, but
if the cluster has less than 500 vertices, it was added to the result list. Otherwise, the
function was called recursively on the cluster, and the smaller clusters were added to
the result list returned by the function. The recursive clustering function can be seen in
Algorithm 3.2. We made this alteration because running the clustering algorithm only
once resulted in approximately 20 clusters with 50 or fewer files and one large cluster
with 10.000+ files. By recursing on the bigger clusters, we achieve the same results as
Mazlami et al. described that they were getting from ReduceClusters with the trade-off
of a higher number of clusters than n being created. To keep the resulting list of clusters
from being too large, we filtered out clusters with less than 50 vertices in them. The
filtered clusters were reported in a separate text file to map manually to the components
they belonged to.
1 def
recursive_clustering ( original_graph : Graph ,
no_components :
int ,
is_first_run :
bool = True) −> l i s t [ Graph ] :
2
r e s u l t = [ ]
3
c l u s t e r s = mst_clustering ( original_graph , no_components ,
is_first_run )
4
for
c l u s t e r
in
c l u s t e r s :
5
cluster_size = len ( c l u s t e r . v e r t i c e s )
6
if
cluster_size == 1:
7
print ( f ’ Single
f i l e
c l u s t e r :
{ l i s t ( c l u s t e r . v e r t i c e s . values () ) [0]}\ n
’ )
8
continue
9
if
cluster_size < 500:
10
r e s u l t . append( c l u s t e r )
11
else :
12
reduced_clusters = recursive_clustering ( cluster , no_components ,
False )
13
r e s u l t . extend ( reduced_clusters )
14
return
r e s u l t
Algorithm 3.2: Recursive clustering
We chose to run the graph search algorithm before the loop to get the initial count of
clusters within the graph. Doing this meant that we did not need to search through the
graph every time we removed an edge since removing one edge from the MST resulted in
precisely one new cluster. However, doing this search before the loop also meant that we
potentially will not create any new clusters, if there is already n or more clusters within
the graph. In contrast, the algorithm proposed in Mazlami et al. will always create at
least one new cluster.
==PAGE:47==
3.4 Quantitative analysis of the codebase
35
3.4.2
The outcome
Running the algorithmic analysis on the monolith, we got a set of clusters within the
monolith that were highly coupled based on the weight metric used. We also got a
list of smaller clusters, which had a size, which we assessed was too small to be its
own candidate microservice. We mapped the clusters to the previously found business
components to create value from the result. First, we started by extracting the 15 most
used words in all the files within the large clusters because we wanted to categorise
the clusters based on the terms used within them.
However, this strategy was not
very eﬀicient since the terminology was too similar between the clusters for us to be
able to assign the cluster to a business component. This resulted in a more manually
categorisation. We looked at all the file paths in a cluster, and from the file paths and
choosing some of the files to inspect the content, we assigned the cluster to one or more
business components. As we discovered from the graph of the monolith, the codebase
was very entangled, which meant that both the larger clusters and the smaller clusters
had code belonging to one or several business components. Some of the small clusters
for the logical coupling only had one file in them, so we chose to exclude these small
clusters to simplify the process.
3.4.2.1
Logical coupling
For the logical coupling strategy, the clustering algorithm was run with n=22 and min-
imumClusterSize=50. Running the algorithm led to 33 clusters being found, with an
additional 90 clusters requiring manual processing. From the 33 clusters found, 11 clus-
ters could not be mapped to one of the business components defined in Section 3.1.3.
Additionally, 21 of the manual clusters could not match any business components. The
clusters that we could not map to a business component mainly consisted of code related
to the infrastructure of the monolith, development and update tools, and code related to
frontend (ASP classic). From the remaining clusters, it was possible to find 14 business
components. Some of these business components, such as invoices, were split across
multiple clusters suggesting that logical coupling was not the best strategy to divide
the codebase of e-conomic into business components. Of the 22 clusters that we could
map, we also had some clusters that contained code that would fit into multiple business
components. We believe that due to the company using squash merges for their pull
requests, this led to the logical coupling not being as useful in our scenario. An addi-
tional nine business components were found by manually processing the smaller clusters.
The business components customer and navigation were not discovered using the logical
coupling strategy. However, we found additional components such as billing, user, and
agreement.
3.4.2.2
Semantic coupling
The clustering algorithm ran with the same parameters on the semantically coupled
graph as the logical coupling ran with. We initially noticed that removing the cheapest
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Architectural recovery
1 def
mst_clustering ( original_graph : Graph ,
no_components :
int ,
is _ f i r s t _ cl us t e r i n g :
bool = True) −> l i s t [ Graph ] :
2
graph = original_graph
3
4
if
i s _f i r s t _ c l u s te ri n g :
5
for edge_key in graph . edges :
6
edge = graph . edges [ edge_key ]
7
edge . weight = 1.0/ edge . weight
8
9
mst = kruskal ( graph )
10
mst_edges = sorted (mst . edges . values () , key=lambda ed :
ed . weight )
11
mst_edges . reverse ()
12
13
all_vertices = l i s t ( graph . v e r t i c e s . values () )
14
already_clusters = find_disjoint_graphs ( mst_edges ,
all_vertices ,
50 , True)
15
already_clusters_count = len ( already_clusters )
16
if
already_clusters_count >= no_components :
17
return
[ graph ]
18
19
filtered_graph = combine_clusters ( already_clusters )
20
filtered_mst = kruskal ( filtered_graph )
21
22
filtered_mst_edges = sorted ( filtered_mst . edges . values () , key=lambda ed :
ed .
weight )
23
filtered_mst_edges . reverse ()
24
25
edges = dict ( filtered_graph . edges )
26
edges_from_vertex :
dict [ Vertex ,
l i s t [ Edge ] ] = {}
27
28
for edge_name in edges :
29
edge = edges [ edge_name ]
30
if
edge . v1 in edges_from_vertex :
31
edges_from_vertex [ edge . v1 ] . append ( edge )
32
else :
33
edges_from_vertex [ edge . v1 ] = [ edge ]
34
if
edge . v2 in edges_from_vertex :
35
edges_from_vertex [ edge . v2 ] . append ( edge )
36
else :
37
edges_from_vertex [ edge . v2 ] = [ edge ]
38
39
current_edge_number = 0
40
for n in range( already_clusters_count ,
no_components) :
41
edge_to_pop = current_edge_number
42
while current_edge_number < len ( filtered_mst_edges ) :
43
edge = filtered_mst_edges [ current_edge_number ]
44
# navigate
vertex
edges and ensure
at
l e a s t 2 v e r t i c e s
in
i t
45
if
vertex_is_connected_to_ten ( [ edge . v1 ] ,
edges_from_vertex ,
50 , 1 ,
{edge . v2})\
46
and vertex_is_connected_to_ten ( [ edge . v2 ] ,
edges_from_vertex
,
50 , 1 , {edge . v1}) :
47
filtered_mst_edges . pop(edge_to_pop)
48
edges_from_vertex [ edge . v1 ] . remove ( edge )
49
edges_from_vertex [ edge . v2 ] . remove ( edge )
50
break
51
current_edge_number += 1
52
edge_to_pop += 1
53
54
return find_disjoint_graphs ( filtered_mst_edges ,
all_vertices ,
50)
Algorithm 3.3: The extended MST Clustering Algorithm used for the semantic coupling
strategy.
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Quantitative analysis of the codebase
37
edge from the MST resulted in many disjoint single vertices or clusters of two to three
vertices due to the language being too similar between the files analysed. To solve this
problem, we changed the clustering algorithm to traverse the graph such that an edge
can only be removed if it results in two graphs that both contain at least ten vertices. If
removing the edge would not result in any clusters of less than ten files, we would remove
the edge. Otherwise, we would choose the next cheapest edge that fits the criteria for
removal. This changed the clustering algorithm, and the updated algorithm can be seen
in Algorithm 3.3.
With this approach, a total of 103 clusters were found, and these clusters were mapped
to 22 business components. The business components found were mainly the same as in
the logical coupling. However, a couple of the business components; bank, navigation,
and customer, were found, which could not be found by the logical coupling. Never-
theless, the additional components billing, messaging, and user were missing from the
semantic coupling clusters.
The bank component contains code related to the bank
reconciliation. We have both smart bank, bank, and accounting clusters in the seman-
tic coupling clusters, suggesting that bank reconciliation could be extracted from the
accounting component to be its own microservice from a domain perspective.
3.4.2.3
Analysis result
After categorising the clusters found by the logical and semantic coupling, we created
a diagram showing how the components found by the analysis were connected. Each
component was drawn, and an edge was added between two components if they had any
shared clusters of code. This diagram can be seen in Figure 3.13.
A key difference that we see between the result of the logical coupling and the semantic
coupling is that the terminology of the messaging cluster is not unique enough to result
in its own cluster. When comparing the files found in the messaging cluster from the
logical coupling to the clusters found in the semantic coupling, we see that most files
are actually inside the invoice cluster. This difference opens the question of whether to
make a microservice specific to messaging in order to keep services as small as possible.
This would result in microservices outside of the business domain, but it could also be
integrated into the invoice service since it seems to be the only service that requires
sending messages resulting in the microservice having more than one responsibility.
In Figure 3.13, only billing, marketplace, and messaging were isolated clusters, while all
other parts of the code were either connected by git commits or shared domain terms.
It can also be seen that the business components, which are split across the most as-
semblies, are the accounting, invoice, document handling, and authentication, which
confirms the data from the interviews. The domain experts said that bookkeeping, in-
voices and scanning document were the most used functionality.
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Architectural recovery
Figure 3.13: Business components connected by shared clusters. The red arrows are
connected by the semantic coupling, the blue arrows by the logical coupling, and the
black arrows are connected by both coupling strategies.
The thicker the arrows are
the more clusters are shared between the endpoints. The number on the component
describes the number of assemblies containing code regarding the component.
The
percentage describes how many assemblies are within the component compared to all
assemblies containing business functionality.
Looking at the percentages in Figure 3.13, we can see that 69% of the assemblies contains
code that has been classified as belonging to the accounting sub-domain and 46% of
the assemblies regards the invoicing and document handling. This overlap means that
assemblies do not belong to a single sub-domain. To figure out which assemblies were
spread the most between the algorithmic clusters, a list of the most occurring assemblies
within our algorithmic clustering was made.
• Economic was used in 26 business components.
• Economic.Repository was used in 23 business components.
==PAGE:51==
3.5 Dependency analysis
39
• Economic.Entities was used in 22 business components.
• Economic.Dto was used in 21 business components.
• Economic.InternalAPI.Endpoints was used in 20 business components.
• Economic.Constants was used in 19 business components.
• Economic.Mapper was used in 17 business components.
This list showed that the most used assemblies are the legacy business logic of the
monolith, the repository, and the internal API endpoints, which makes sense since most
of the functionality and the communication are located here. Furthermore, the entities,
DTOs, constants, and the mapper closely follow the most used assemblies, which is the
data on which the monolith is built. To look more into the assemblies of e-conomic, we
decided to do a dependency map.
3.5
Dependency analysis
To support and challenge the algorithm analysis, we chose to do a dependency map. The
dependency map was made with the tool NDepend [HD21]. Here the entire codebase is
analysed, including the auto generated code and ASP that we discarded in the algorithm
analysis in Section 3.4. To ensure that the results from the two analyses were comparable,
we had to be prepared to go through the dependencies that might have come from the
auto generated code and the remove those. However, as the auto generated code and
the ASP is in the first cluster of the dependency map it turned out to not be a problem.
The dependency map generated by NDepend shows the direct dependencies between
assemblies and can be seen in Figure 3.14.
Figure 3.14: Dependency mapping of the system e-conomic.
In Figure 3.14 the dependency map shows that the code is divided into six clusters of
assemblies with dependencies between them. The size of each cluster is measured on the
lines of code in each assembly within the clusters. Inside a cluster, each assembly that
makes up the cluster is represented and the size of the representation is based on the
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Architectural recovery
lines of code inside the assembly. Additionally, dependencies between assemblies inside
a cluster is shown by arrows. This results in a directed acyclic graph (DAG) inside each
cluster, as well as a DAG between all the clusters, where the arrows between the clusters
are showing that all assemblies within the cluster has a dependency to an assembly in
the other cluster.
Even though it is hard to see, the dependencies are very similar to what was found
during the algorithm analysis. With further analysis, it can be seen that the first cluster
going left to right is the frontend of e-conomic, the REST and SOAP API’s, and the
code handling the messaging and outbox pattern. The second cluster is primarily the
utilities and auto generated code. The third cluster contains what e-conomic calls “core”
and here most business logic is found. The fourth cluster is the Domain service, Appli-
cation service, and Internal API model also mentioned in the diagram of the layered
architecture in Figure 3.10. The fifth cluster is the repositories and data transfer objects.
The sixth and last cluster is SQL helpers, entities, and enums of the system. The three
first clusters of the dependency map contain what is within the “legacy” box in Figure
3.10. Based on the extracted dependency map, we see that e-conomic has managed to
keep the newer and structured codebase clean from any references to the legacy system
underneath. However, as Figure 3.14 shows, the three first clusters are by far the biggest
in terms of cluster size, showing that the legacy code with no defined structure is the
largest part of the monolith, which is a big contributor to the monolith being a big ball
of mud.
When the dependency map was generated in NDepend, we also got a model of how
close to the ideal level of abstractness each assembly of the monolith is by creating an
abstractness vs instability graph [Die21]. The purpose of this analysis is to discover,
which assemblies in the codebase are too concrete and too coupled making them a pain
to change (assemblies in the zone of pain), and on the other side of the spectrum, which
assemblies are too abstract and too instable making the assembly useless (assemblies
in the zone of uselessness). The ideal level of abstractness is calculated based on five
parameters. The first parameter is afferent coupling (Ca), which is the number of types
outside the assembly that depends on types within the assembly. Second is efferent
coupling (Ce), which is the number of types outside the assembly used by child types
within the assembly. Third is instability (I) that is the ratio of efferent coupling to the
total coupling
I =
Ce
Ce + Ca
.
(3.6)
Fourth parameter is the abstractness (A), that is the ratio of the number of abstract
types (for C# this is abstract classes and interfaces) to the total number of types within
the assembly. The final parameter is the distance from the main sequence (D) which
is calculated as the perpendicular distance of an assembly from the idealised line (main
sequence) A + I = 1 giving
D = |−I + 1 −A
√
2
|.
(3.7)
==PAGE:53==
3.5 Dependency analysis
41
Figure 3.15: Abstractness vs instability in the monolith. The zone of pain is in the
lower left corner and the zone of uselessness is in the upper right corner. Each dot is an
assembly within the monolith.
These parameters can help determine candidates for refactoring by choosing an assembly
based on the highest distance from the main sequence. The abstractness and instability
values have been calculated for each of the assemblies of the monolith and have been
plotted to an abstractness vs instability graph, which can be seen in Figure 3.15.
The abstractness vs instability graph shows that the overall state of the assemblies is
not too bad. Most assemblies in the monolith are very instable but still concrete. Since
the assemblies being highly instable means that other assemblies of the monolith do
not depend on them, they are not required to have abstractions for any dependants.
Some examples of the assemblies within the lower right corner of the abstractness vs
instability graph are Economic.Mapper and Economic.ApplicationService. Furthermore,
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Architectural recovery
there are no useless assemblies, however, there are nine assemblies in the zone of pain,
making these assemblies candidates for refactoring as part of the monolith decoupling.
The assemblies in the zone of pain are: Economic.Entity, Economic.Constants, Eco-
nomic.Validation.Model, Economic.InternalApi.Model, Economic.Dto, Economic.Infra-
structure, Economic.Sql.Model, Economic.Utilities, and Economic.Stats. When further
inspecting these assemblies, four of the assemblies, Economic.Entity, Economic.Constants,
Economic.InternalApi.Model, and Economic.Dto are assemblies full of data types shared
between the assemblies of the monolith. Any change to the models of these assemblies
will most likely require changes to the logic of the remaining monolith, giving an incen-
tive to move models and entities out of the monolith and to microservices that own their
own entities.
3.6
Evaluation of the architectural recovery
The purpose of the architectural recovery was to get familiar with e-conomic as a plat-
form and the codebase of it in addition to documenting the current state. We have
achieved this by creating use case diagrams of the features in e-conomic and by creating
communication diagrams based on the use cases we were shown during the interviews.
These diagrams have been verified by presenting them to some of Visma e-conomic’s em-
ployees, who were interviewed, as well as product line managers from Visma e-conomic.
Based on the knowledge gained during the interviews, we created a component diagram
based on the domain concepts that were introduced and how they worked together in-
side e-conomic. Afterwards, we went with a quantitative analysis of the codebase to
determine if the code represented what the business experts had described. The quan-
titative analysis consisted of performing an algorithmic analysis of the codebase based
on Mazlami et al. that created a weighted graph based on each file inside the codebase.
The files were connected based on either a logical coupling and/or a semantic coupling.
This analysis then found components within the codebase and how they were connected
to each other. The results were two diagrams mostly containing the same components
with only a few outliers. The component diagram based on the codebase in Figure 3.13
captured a few components, which were working in the background and therefore not
within the scope of the domain of the interviews seen in Figure 3.9. We also see that
the code is more interconnected than what is represented in Figure 3.9 suggesting that
the code has been created with a focus on code reuse rather than separation of domains,
which further suggests that the monolith is in fact a big ball of mud.
To gain more insight to the codebase and to challenge the result we found in the algorith-
mic analysis, we also performed a dependency analysis. From the dependency mapping
we found that assemblies were created based on technical tasks rather than domain ori-
ented meaning and that some of the current business components are dependent on up
to 26 assemblies. This means that an extraction of assemblies will not be enough to
decouple the monolith.
==PAGE:55==
3.6 Evaluation of the architectural recovery
43
From these results and the current architecture of e-conomic, we can see that the com-
pany is trying to improve the architecture of the monolith, but that they currently still
have the majority of the code in the legacy part of the system. From our analysis of the
organisational structure, we concluded that Visma e-conomic do have some teams work-
ing on microservices and that the knowledge is partly present. They do also favour new
development as microservices instead of adding to the existing monolith. The problem
that e-conomic is having with the organisational structure is that the development is
split across four departments and especially the Core and the Engineering department
are both working on the monolith but there is not suﬀicient communication between
them to ensure they are working to complement each other. In conclusion, we got a bet-
ter grasp on how the system was connected from a data and from a domain perspective,
which will be useful for the architectural synthesis.
==PAGE:56==
44
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4
Architectural synthesis
During the architectural recovery, the current state of the monolith was discovered as
well as the most important use cases according to the business experts. In this chapter,
we will propose a plan for decoupling the monolith based on the key performance indica-
tors (KPIs) decided by e-conomic. The most important of these KPIs is time to market
especially for the pillar Suite, which are creating software around the accounting system
to ease the workflow of their customers and keep them inside the e-conomic eco system.
Currently, smaller companies and start-ups can build stand-alone services faster than
e-conomic can build the services and integrate them with the monolith because of too
much technical debt is making new development diﬀicult. Thus, we will start this chap-
ter by defining what exactly an accounting system should consist of as a core accounting
service, with which additional microservices, based on the components found in the re-
covery, should be able to integrate with. Next, a set of proposed macro services for an
initial decoupling strategy is given and a heat map is created to help prioritise, which
macro services should be created. The chapter ends with some financial considerations
and different decoupling approaches as well as a test strategy. The financial considera-
tions will estimate the cost of creating software product lines to build the microservices
compared to building stand-alone applications. The decoupling approaches will be the
basis of the proof on concept given in the next chapter.
4.1
Ideal domain
As part of our plan for how to decouple the monolith, we had a workshop with some of
the auditors and accountants working at Visma e-conomic. The purpose of this work-
shop was to define the domain of an accounting system. The domain can help create
boundaries for modules within the monolith, which later can be extracted to microser-
vices. The domain diagram developed during the workshop can be seen in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1 shows that within the accounting domain, account and VAT are the two most
central sub-domains as well as the daybook, which has a collection of which transactions
have been made on which accounts. The VAT of a transaction is determined by the law
and it can change depending on factors such as who the supplier or customer is or where
they are from, as well as what merchandise is being sold or bought in the transaction.
Furthermore, some accounts might have special taxation rules, making VAT a very com-
plicated sub-domain with lots of associations.
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Architectural synthesis
Figure 4.1: The accounting domain.
The domain can be restricted to only these mentioned sub-domains: account, VAT, day-
book, customer, supplier, and merchandise - and fully support accounting. However, to
make the accounting process easier, the domain model proposed in the workshop also
suggested some additions that make the accounting system closer to an enterprise re-
source planning (ERP) system. The first of these additions are invoices, a sub-domain
that binds the sales of a company to their accounting system, instead of having two
different systems for accounting and invoicing. The same can be said for the supplier
invoice, which gathers purchases instead of sales in the accounting system. Some com-
panies might be selling projects instead of merchandise, as such this is also added to the
domain model. On top of that, in order to create reports of what is happening within
the system, it is a help to have a collection of the accounts, suppliers, and customers of
a company. This is represented by the chart of accounts, a supplier list, and a customer
list. A final extension that was added to the domain model was having an inventory of
merchandise, which bind each piece of merchandise to a physical location, which can be
managed through the accounting system.
Even though e-conomic was not build with a domain model in mind, we see when
comparing the ideal domain to the connection of the clusters found in Figure 3.13, that
most of the concepts also live within the existing monolith. However, some of the sub-
domains such as the supplier invoice was not found as a component within the monolith,
but is implicitly present through a connection between the invoice component and the
supplier component. Furthermore, we see that the associations required by the ideal
domain model are also present in the monolith, however, due to the system having
evolved over time with no constraints on the model, it has become very entangled. We
will attempt to divide the monolith to detangle the sub-domains by proposing macro
services.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Proposed macro services
47
4.2
Proposed macro services
Based on the architectural recovery, we made a clustering by cutting, where the graph in
Figure 3.9 was least connected and therefore conserving the most important connections
in the codebase with regards to the coupling strategies. This resulted in a set of proposed
microservices. We then took the two results and added connections between components
that had shared source code to get an initial set of macro services to cut the monolith
into. This resulted in the following proposed macro services.
• Agreement, authentication, administration, marketplace, billing, and user
• Invoice, projects, customer, supplier, product, and subscription
• Accounting, VAT, chart of accounts, bank, budget, and reports
• Smart bank, smart pay, and payroll
• Smart inbox, smart scan, smart approval, and document handling
• Notification centre and messaging
The first thing we decided was to split up the responsibility of invoice and accounting,
since these are the biggest components and the most central parts of e-conomic. Since
the inventory project was deprecated at this time, we excluded it from the proposed
macro services. Our next decision was to disregard all connections which only existed
in the logical coupling, since the logical coupling were strongly affected by the squash
commits, which showed that parts of the code without any connection to each other were
connected from the logical coupling perspective. Since we wanted the macro services to
be as independent as possible, we decided to let each macro service own its own settings,
instead of having an independent component for the settings. The navigation component
was only used as a tool for the frontend so we decided to disregard this component as well.
The proposed macro services were therefore focused on administration, invoicing, ac-
counting, payments, document handling, and notifications. These macro services do not
have a single responsibility, but they are the first division of the monolith, which can
later be further divided. On the basis of the macro services, we are proposing a new
organisational structure, which we will further explain in the next section.
4.3
The new organisational structure
When the system is changed the organisation will have to change to support the new
software architecture. Based on the initial analysis of the organisational structure and
the solutions discussed above a new organisational structure is proposed. The new struc-
ture should be based on the development of the product, which can be split into three
parts; one focusing on the what, one focusing on if, and one focusing on how. The what
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Architectural synthesis
needs to be handled by the new product department. The if is a joint task between
the new product and the new engineering department. The how is handled by the new
engineering department. The new organisational hierarchy can be seen in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: The new proposed organisational structure of e-conomic showing the depart-
ments and the employees working in them.
The difference from the old organisational structure in Figure 3.11 is going from six
directors to having five directors. The director of Eco & Fintech stays the same, since
they are creating products, which are independent on e-conomic. The Planet Wow and
Sales/Marketing departments will also stay the same. Effectively, this means that the
Suite, Core, and Engineering departments will be collected into two new departments:
one for products and one of engineering. The new directors are based on what they are
employed to do, their disciplines, and not the different types of products. The director
of products will focus on what the customers need by doing idea inception and market
research. When the product department has decided what is needed, they will work
with the engineering department to figure out if it is feasible. Lastly, the engineering
department will figure out how to develop the idea, in addition to integrating and de-
ploying the developed idea.
One of the very important factors in the new organisational hierarchy is that it is di-
vided by disciplines. Being organised by disciplines will make the knowledge sharing
and methodology decisions within a discipline quicker and more consistent. It will also
improve the development of the employee’s careers, their learning, and their communi-
cation with their director within their discipline.
The new software architecture is based on bounded contexts, which we call the areas of
ownership in Figure 4.3. The areas of ownership will group business domains, which are
closely related. They will force the teams working in the area of ownership to know the
domain in depth and therefore decrease the time spend to create a new feature. The
areas are all independent, such that each area can choose the technologies most fitting
as well as being able to release independently of each other. Each area can consist of
several agile teams and be the owner of several microservices, where the number of mi-
==PAGE:61==
4.3 The new organisational structure
49
Figure 4.3: Areas of ownership in the new organisational structure.
croservices is either equal or larger than the number of teams. There will be six areas
corresponding to the six proposed macro services, which we suggested previously in Sec-
tion 4.2.
Figure 4.4: Software product line for the new organisational structure.
In the new organisational structure, the development of products will utilise software
product lines, which will make the company more eﬀicient by streamlining the develop-
ment and reusing the knowledge within each area of ownership. It is also easier to revise
the financial calculations to optimise the return on investment having product lines. The
proposed structure for the product lines can be seen in Figure 4.4. The product line
needs people from all of the disciplines of the organisation for the different stages of
the product line. The driving factors are the what, if, and how as previously mentioned.
Within the product line, there is cycles going back to improve the earlier processes. This
is part of the agile process as well, making sure that the product is reviewed and the
feedback is implemented to improve the product. There will be at least one product
line for each of the areas of ownership, but since the areas of ownership contain several
business domains, there will be some areas which will benefit from having two or maybe
even more product lines. The domains in the areas of ownership are closely related, but
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Architectural synthesis
they do not necessarily share a common asset base, which is what groups products in a
product line.
The software product line (SPL) will have six phases in total, and it will start with
an idea inception and market research phase. This first phase is done in corporation
between the business analysts (BA), the project managers (PM), and the user experience
employees (UX). All these employees are all in the new product department and will
therefore know the products being developed within the organisation. They will figure
out which features are needed. The next phase is the feasibility and shaping phase,
which is done by the user experience employees (UX) from the product department
and the lead developers (Dev) and lead quality assurance employees (QA) from the
engineering department. They will figure out if the idea is feasible and how it should
be created within the existing product. The third phase is the development and quality
assurance. This phase is done solely by the engineering department’s developers and
quality assurances employees.
The phase will implement and test the feature.
The
fourth phase is the continuous integration (CI) and continuous deployment (CD), which
the site reliability engineering (SRE) employees will make sure of. The fifth phase is
the marketing phase, which will be done by the go to market employees (GTM) and the
business analysts (BA). This is a corporation between the Sales/Marketing department
and the product department, who will based on the customers feedback market the
product in the best way. From this phase there will be a feedback loop back to the
first phase since they will get feedback from the customers on the marketing.
The
feedback will help inspire new features and adjust the existing features. The last and
sixth phase is the Wow phase, which is done by the Planet Wow department, which
consists of supporting the customers of e-conomic. This phase also delivers feedback
from the customer when they use the system. The feedback is used to improve the
development of features in the development phase. To start the process of creating the
areas of ownership, we need to know where to start, which we will figure out by creating
a heat map.
4.4
Heat mapping
To help prioritise which microservices to create and determine the impact on the users,
a heat map of the actual usage of the use cases found during the architectural recov-
ery was created. The data was extracted partly from business intelligence (BI) data
and partly from the production database of the monolith. Visma e-conomic has some
huge companies as customers, and to prevent their usage of the system from skewing
the result, we chose to do an 80 percentile of the users and base the heat map on their
usages. Inside e-conomic, there are two types of agreement types, external and internal.
External agreements are users with access to e-conomic, while internal agreements are
agreements created by accounting oﬀices, which are selling an accounting service to a
third company. Users with the internal agreement will not be able to log in to e-conomic.
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Heat mapping
51
Figure 4.5: Heat map of e-conomic. The use cases are written vertically. The external
agreements are written horizontally.
The colour of the squares indicates the degree
of usage; the darker the shade, the more used the feature is. The degree of usage is
calculated as log2(usage count)
Only the accounting oﬀice owning the internal agreement will be able to access the agree-
ment by selecting it from their admin overview. Each accounting oﬀice has an external
account, meaning that we can look entirely at the external agreements if we are only
interested in the active users of e-conomic. The 80 percentile was based on how many
users they had created inside e-conomic. After completing the analysis, we found that
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Architectural synthesis
the 80 percentile was all agreements with only one user. This segment turned out to
be 90 per cent of all e-conomic customers under the external agreements. Historically,
there has been a total of 12 different types of external agreement types, whereas new
customers signing up can select between six different agreement types today. To ensure
that all users are considered, we included usage data from the six discontinued agree-
ment types as well as the six current agreement types. The six discontinued agreement
types are: BDO Automatisering, BDO Fakturering, Partnerbundle m/Scanning, Part-
nerbundle m/Scanning 25.000+, PartnerBundler m/Smart Inbox & Smart Bank, and
PartnerBundler m/Smart Inbox & Smart Bank 25.000+. The current six agreement
types are Startup, Small Business, and the four different sizes of the Professional agree-
ment, which only differs on the possible number of transactions to be booked per year.
The 12 agreement types make up the horizontal axis of our heat map seen in Figure 4.5
and the use cases make up the vertical axis. The heatmap allows us to get an overview
of how much each use case is used compared to the other use cases while also seeing the
distribution between the different agreement types. The usage data between the differ-
ent use cases vastly differ. Some use cases such as booking a journal entry occurs up to
multiple billion times a year, while activities related to the projects module had usages
down to 68,000 times a year. To make them more comparable, we took the logarithm
of all the numbers as they are all important for e-conomic.
From the heat map, it can be seen that booking a journal entry, scanning a document,
booking an invoice, and creating a product are the use cases, which are most used.
It can also be seen that generally, BDO Automatisering, which is one of the legacy
agreement types, are using the system the least, while the most extensive professional
agreement type is using the system the most. Furthermore, it is interesting to see that the
usage from the small business agreement is very similar to the usage of the professional
agreement, even though there is a limit to how much the smaller agreement types can
use the system. The data shows that, on average, the number of daybook entries a
user creates within e-conomic fits their agreement type. Thus, for the usage from the
small business agreements to be approximately the same as the smallest professional
agreement, the number of small business agreements must be an equivalently higher
percentage of the customer base than the professional agreements. Now that we know,
which functionalities are the most used in e-conomic, we can prioritise them. With this
prioritisation, we need to start looking at the financial cost of creating software product
lines and extracting the functionalities.
4.5
Financial considerations to improve time
to market
At Visma e-conomic, they are currently debating, whether to start creating software
product lines, as a way to help improve time to market. Each unit that can be de-
==PAGE:65==
4.5 Financial considerations to improve time to market
53
ployed individually will move into its own software product line. For Visma e-conomic,
this would mean an initial six software product lines, one for each area of ownership.
However, eventually, each microservice would be its own product line. Initially each
component within the area of ownership is then going to be a product in the product
line. There is an initial cost for moving towards software product lines that might not
make it the ideal solution. In this section, we are going to introduce the Structured
Intuitive Model for Product Line Economics (SIMPLE) proposed by Clements et al. in
2005 [CMC05], which was created to get an estimate of what the cost of starting up a
software product line is. Next, we will apply the model to Visma e-conomic’s business
case. The SIMPLE model builds upon the Böckle model using the same cost functions,
but with the added time perspective, such that it can be evaluated, if it is feasible to
merge existing product lines or add new products to a product line. Furthermore, SIM-
PLE also makes it possible to evaluate, if going with a software product line engineering
is the best option for development by calculating the return on investment.
The SIMPLE model models a scenario where a company has: x current product lines, y
wished final products, k products to build, and d products to remove, where x, y, k, d ≥0.
To calculate the cost of this transition, SIMPLE relies on four basic cost functions: Corg
includes costs to the organisation (the company in this case) that comes from adopting
to the product line approach. Corg also covers costs such as personal training and re-
organisation. The second cost function is Ccab, the cost of developing a core asset base
such as core libraries for the company, establishing development and testing environ-
ments, the architecture of the software product lines, and non-software assets such as
time plans, budgets, and scope definitions as mentioned in Section 2.3. The two final
cost functions are on a product level and as such must be calculated for each product.
These are Cunique that is the cost of writing code unique to the product, that must be
built on top of the core asset base and Creuse which is the cost of reusing assets from
the core asset base as well as code specific for the product line. Creuse is also creating
and using code specific for all products in the product line. The cost of the reuse may
come from developing common code for the product line, locating code or time to write
adaptors for the product to use the core asset as well as the testing from the product’s
usage of the core assets. In the SIMPLE model, these four cost functions are used and
compared to a fifth cost function Cprod, which is the cost of building the product from
scratch in a stand-alone fashion.
In the SIMPLE model, the cost of building a product line with n products is
CSPL = Corg + Ccab +
n
∑
i=i
(Cunique(producti) + Creuse(producti)),
(4.1)
while the cost of building the products individually is
Cstand−alone =
n
∑
i=i
(Cprod(producti).
(4.2)
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Architectural synthesis
In addition, to create new products, SIMPLE also considers to update an existing prod-
uct. From the product line perspective, they introduce the cost function Ccabu, which is
a measure of the cost to upgrade the core assets base. From a stand-alone perspective,
they introduce Cevo, which is usually defined to be some percentage of the original cost
of developing the product. For Cevo there is no common codebase, meaning that all code
is developed specifically for the solution resulting in no code reuse from other products.
However, during the evolution of the product, there will be a cost of maintaining the
code. The cost of releasing a new version of a product in the product line is then
Csplu = Ccabu + Cunique + Creuse.
(4.3)
When releasing a new version, there is a cost for maintaining the core asset base of
the company, the unique code for the product, and the code, which is reused within
the product line.
The core asset base is the same for the entire company and the
cost of maintaining it is split across all product lines. With the cost of updating an
existing product, it is possible to compare the cost of converting from a set of stand-
alone products to a product line versus continuing to evolve the existing set of products.
The cost of setting up a product line is given in the first equation then adding the cost
of releasing a new version within a product line therefore becomes
Cconvert = Corg + Ccab +
n
∑
i=1
(Cunique(producti) + Creuse(producti))
+
n
∑
i=i
(Ccabu(producti) + Cunique(producti) + Creuse(producti)).
(4.4)
Comparing this to the cost of continuing to update the stand-alone applications
Ccont =
n
∑
i=1
(Cevo(producti)),
(4.5)
means that any cost savings must come from the shared codebase between the stand-
alone applications, which is not a lot. It is important to mention that the first round of
product updates might not show any savings due to the initial cost to the organisational
change and creation of the core asset base. This means in cases where an application
is not likely to ever change moving the product to a product line is not necessarily the
correct option.
A way to evaluate whether a move from stand-alone services to a product line is worth it,
one can calculate the return on investment (ROI) or rather expected ROI. The return
on investment is defined as cost-saving divided by the cost of investment. With the
SIMPLE model, the cost of investment is the Corg and the Ccab. The cost savings is the
difference between the cost of continuing to update a current set of products, Ccont, and
the cost of building them as a product line, Cconvert,
ROI = Ccont −Cconvert
Corg + Ccab
.
(4.6)
==PAGE:67==
4.5 Financial considerations to improve time to market
55
4.5.1
Example based on our proof of concept
For this example, we made assumptions in cooperation with the technical leads of Visma
e-conomic to estimate the cost of using software product lines. At the time, there were
enough employees for 11 teams with each team having on average seven employees. We
based the calculations on 27 components from the new organisation in Section 4.3. Each
of these components has an average of five features. We chose to simplify the calculations
by not considering the different types of employees and their different salaries. Therefore,
we assumed that an average employee had an annual salary of 400,000 DKK and that
a year was 264 working days (22 working days per month). This means that a man-day
approximately had a price of 1500 DKK.
Cost of organisation
We first need to estimate the organisational cost, which is a
onetime expense. The organisational cost is the cost of reorganising to use software
product lines, which includes hiring new employees, process improvement, training new
employees, and adjusting new and existing employees. We have estimated having a need
to form three new teams in addition to the current 11 teams, because we will need two
teams per area of ownership and two teams developing and supporting the platform.
We are expecting that 10% of the employees will change jobs due to the change, which
means we need to replace eight employees in addition the 28 new employees. We also
assume a success rate of 20% for hires having a cost of two man-day per possible hire.
For the new organisation we will need 12 product lines - two for each area of ownership
and 11 processes.
• The new hires will cost 360 man-days.
• Training new employees will cost 340 man-days.
• Adjusting the new employees will cost 748 man-days.
• Adjusting the old employees will cost 2541 man-days.
• Adopting and optimising processes and communication channels will cost 600 man-
days.
This makes in total 3989 man-days, which translates into 5.983.500 DKK for the organ-
isational cost.
Cost of the core asset base
The second cost we need is the cost of developing the
core asset base for software product lines. This cost includes the cost of redesigning the
development environment, the testing environment, the change to the database, and the
coding standards. These four areas will be time boxed and need to be done within the
first quarter giving three months to completion by a new team called the pioneer team.
The pioneer team will be four employees: two developers and two technical leads. It was
decided to use Debezium for the capture data change and create an API gateway. To
fully incorporate Debezium two technical leads and one SRE employee are required for
==PAGE:68==
56
4 Architectural synthesis
two months, and to create the API gateway we need two technical leads and one SRE
employee for three months.
• The pioneer team’s assignments will cost 264 man-days.
• Using Debezium will cost 132 man-days.
• Creating the API gateway will cost 198 man-days.
The estimated total cost of the core assets is 594 man-days translating into 891.000
DKK.
Cost of unique code
The cost of the unique code is the code specifically needed
in the components including the strangling process and the new code needed for the
final component. As previous mentioned, an average of five features per component are
assumed, and each feature is defined as supporting an end-to-end user scenario. This
cost is estimated to 90 man-days per feature and therefore 450 man-days per component.
Cost of reusing code
The cost of reuse includes the cost of locating the code in the
core asset base, checking it out of the repository, tailoring it for use in the intended
component and performing extra tests associated with reusing it. It is assumed that it
will take two man-days per feature per employee to reuse the code, which means the
cost of reuse per component is 70 man-days.
Total cost of implementing software product lines
We have in total 27 compo-
nents, which means that the final cost of the developing the software product lines and
strangling the monolith into components will be
CSPL = 3989 + 594 +
27
∑
i=1
(450 + 70) = 18.623 man-days →27.934.500 DKK.
(4.7)
Over time, we need to look at the evolutionary cost, since the cost should be significantly
lower with software product lines. Since e-conomic will not change significantly and all
new features will cost less due to the code reuse and less time waste, we have assumed
that the cost is 15% less every year until the cost is 50% of the original cost, where the
curve will flatten out. This is 25 man-days per component per year, so the total for the
first year is 675 man-days.
Cost of continuing the current development
Calculating the cost of developing
the same system is not relevant, since the system is already built. Furthermore, the
cost of the stand-alone production would not be comparable to the cost of converting
the existing system to use software product lines. Therefore, we will be looking at how
much time and money is wasted with the current development.
==PAGE:69==
4.6 Breaking down approaches
57
Based on a survey done in Q2 an Q3 in 2020, 26% of the time is wasted on every new
feature as well as maintaining old features. This is due to locating what is needed and
figuring out how to develop it within the monolith without breaking anything. Currently,
it takes on average five months to develop a new feature. If Visma e-conomic continued
as now building features in the monolith, they will continue to waste time and money.
We have chosen to calculate, how much money would potentially be wasted, when not
doing anything. First, we must calculate how much time the decoupling of the monolith
will take. We will start onboarding a single team of seven employees and onboard an
additional team every second month. The on-boarded teams are working at 50% eﬀi-
ciency, since they still need to maintain the code. With this approach it will take two
and a half year to decouple the monolith using software product lines.
Every year we waste 26% of time for each of the 77 employees, which approximately is
5300 man-days every year. This will in total be
5300 man-days · 2, 5 years = 13.250 man-days →19.875.000 DKK.
(4.8)
The true waste is probably larger, since we did not take into account that the lead time
and complexity is doubling every year.
Result
As we did not calculate the cost of a stand-alone product, we cannot calculate
a return on investment, though we can still compare the cost of decoupling the monolith
and the cost of the time and development wasted continuing with the monolith. During
the two and a half years, the amount of money wasted is still less than the cost of decou-
pling the monolith using software product lines. Though looking at the waste and the
maintenance of the modular monolith for an extra 14 months, the time wasted over the
total three years and eight months will become larger than the time spent decoupling
the monolith and maintaining it. In conclusion, decoupling the monolith will start to
really save the company money after three years and eight months. The decrease in
development time and the decrease of the maintainability time is not taking into consid-
eration.
Based on these results, it is beneficial to decouple the monolith in the long run for
the company. In the next section we will therefore look into how the monolith can be
decoupled.
4.6
Breaking down approaches
Based on the further analysis, we are considering three different approaches, when going
from a monolithic architecture. The first approach is to go directly to microservices, the
second is to move to a modular monolith and then go to microservices, and the third
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Architectural synthesis
approach is going to a modular monolith and then to a serverless architecture. There
are also different ways of breaking down a monolith focusing on workflows, domains,
functionality, or data driven approach.
Going directly to microservices is not an option for Visma e-conomic, since the monolith
is a big ball of mud. Secondly, going to a serverless architecture is not the most practical
approach for the business, since the cost is large for a system, which is used as much as e-
conomic. This leaves the third approach as the most feasible and cheapest. The last two
approaches started by going to a modular monolith, that will create more opportunities
for the company later. Having a modular monolith will make it possible later on to create
and connect new microservices or serverless services. The modular monolith will also
decrease the time to market, since the development and the deployment will be simplified
and less intertwined. As for the different focuses, it is not currently possible to break
down the monolith based on the data, since the database tables are very large and covers
data from multiple business components. Focusing on domains might also not be the
best option, since the system is not build based on domains, as previously mentioned.
Breaking the monolith down based on the found workflows and the functionality is the
best options, where the functionalities are more finely grained than the workflows. This
will also support further development and the organisational structure.
4.6.1
The strangler pattern
Figure 4.6: The map of how the strangler pattern can be utilised in the context of
breaking down a monolith [YM20].
The strangler pattern is a map of different tasks, which gives many possibilities of break-
ing down a monolith. The map can be seen as a decision tree. In every task you need to
decide what the next task needs to be. The goal is reaching the task “Proxy monolith
components to microservices”. The strangler pattern can be applied several times and
==PAGE:71==
4.6 Breaking down approaches
59
it does not require an application to be completely broken down as an end result. The
pattern actually addresses the importance that not all applications benefit from being
completely broken into microservice, so many result in a partial monolith with a set
of microservices. This is enforced by breaking the monolith into macro services before
microservices to always keep the end result in mind. The strangler pattern is meant
for going to microservices, but the same principles can be used for going to a modular
monolith and then continuing to microservices at a later point in time.
First choice is to create a strangler application or to do a complete rewrite when going to
microservices. Rewriting the entire application is very expensive and would limit further
development and is therefore not an option. Choosing to break down the monolith into
modules is part of paving the road towards microservices and dividing the monolith into
larger clusters covering several domains is doing macro services before microservices. We
will also make sure to start small with a proof of concept, showing how the extraction
would look like.
4.6.2
Using the strangler pattern
To apply the strangler pattern on the monolith, we will start by going to a modular
monolith, which encapsulates the different functionalities and will allow us to extract
the modules to microservices or serverless functions. By moving to a modular monolith,
we will reduce the risk of side effects happening when calling an endpoint, which allows us
to A/B test the further extracted component whether it is a microservice or a serverless
function alongside the monolith. Serverless functions are single-purpose features, which
are not bound to a specific server as opposed to microservices and they are stateless
and contain no data. They do however still need a server to be executed, but this is
handled by a cloud service provider. The requirement is that the feature is event driven
and therefore able to be triggered by an API call and that the feature is independent,
such that the code can be executed and shut down shortly after. Serverless functions
are meant to save the developers time, give them freedom to choose any programming
language, and potentially be cheaper than a more traditional approach, since the solution
is only running, when activated, so there is no idle time. [Spl21]
4.6.2.1
Going to a modular monolith
The first challenge is to move from a big ball of mud to a modular monolith. The first
module will be the worst, but it will also “Pave the road” for the remaining microservices.
1. Recovering the minimum set of classes based on the chosen focus.
2. Encapsulating these classes with an interface.
3. Extracting the classes and replacing them with the interface.
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Architectural synthesis
Between step two and three, unit-tests will be made to test the interface, and after step
three, integration tests will be made to test that the system still functions in the same
way. This approach has started the strangling process with “Pave the road” and “Start
small”.
4.6.2.2
Extracting from the modular monolith
With the monolith being modular, it is now possible to extract services or functionality
from the modular monolith to start breaking it down.
Going to microservices
Going to microservices from a modular monolith, the start
small step is over. From here the steps “Macro then micro”, “Extract component and add
façade”, and possibly “Proxy monolith components to microservices” are to be executed.
For the strategy we are proposing, each microservice to be extracted from the monolith
follows the five steps below.
1. Setting up an empty project which can be pinged.
2. Extracting the module to the empty project.
3. Setting up the microservice environment.
4. Setting up the continuous integration and continuous deployment.
5. Deprecating the module in the monolith.
Between step one and two communication tests are made to test that the empty project
can receive instructions and answer with a result. Between step three and four, inte-
gration tests are made to be sure that the microservice works in the same environment
as the monolith. Step two through four is part of the “Macro then micro” step of the
strangler application since each module is a macro service. Step 5 fulfils the step “Ex-
tract component and add façade” and “Proxy monolith components to microservice” by
replacing the legacy module with events being sent to the microservice and in case of the
monolith needing a result while it is still being decoupled also awaiting them from an
event channel. Once the monolith is more decoupled, it is also possible to add an API
gateway and use the façades to route directly to the microservice, or in case multiple
microservices needs to return part of the response then orchestrating these events. In
cases, where an API gateway is not possible, the monolith will have to act as a proxy to
the microservice.
Going to serverless functions
An alternative from extracting to a microservice
could be to extract to a serverless function. This could be an alternative for some of
the background tasks mentioned in the architectural recovery, which was first discovered
when doing the analysis of the codebase.
The steps change a bit when choosing to
migrate to a serverless function, however, the strangler pattern can still be applied.
Migrating to a serverless function can be summarised in the five steps listed below.
==PAGE:73==
4.7 Test strategy
61
1. Setting up a serverless handler in a new project and a serverless infrastructure.
2. Extracting the module to the serverless project.
3. Building the serverless messaging in the monolith.
4. Setting up the continuous integration and continuous deployment.
5. Deprecating the module in the monolith.
Between step two and three, communication tests are made to test that the serverless
handler can receive instructions and answer with a result to the monolith. Between step
three and four, integration tests are made to be sure that the serverless function works
in the same environment as the monolith. Here a spin on the step “Microservices first”
is taken, as the serverless function is not as such a microservices, but the functionality
is being extracted directly out in step two. Step three is then a variation of the “Proxy
monolith components to microservice”, where the invocation of the serverless function
can be done through the monolith by implementing messaging towards the provider of
the serverless function.
Proposed strangler flow
Using the approaches for breaking down the monolith de-
scribed above, most of the steps from the strangler pattern has been utilised. The exact
flow can be seen in Figure 4.7. As mentioned as part of our approaches, we need to test
the code while we are extracting it as well as the end result. Therefore, we have made
a test strategy, which we will describe in the next section.
4.7
Test strategy
With the different strategies to break down the monolith, we need to look at testing. The
testing is as big a part of the development as designing and implementing the solution.
Since the focus is on extracting modules from the monolith, we need to put extra focus
on the integration tests of the modules as they are extracted and later implemented as
services. To make sure that all areas of testing are covered, we have made a testing
strategy. [Fra21]
We have decided on the following phases of testing, which are done by different roles in
the company. Each phase has a set of objectives as well as a procedure for how it should
be done. The first four test phases are general for product development, where the last
two phases are more specific for our task at hand. We need to check that the extracted
modules are doing the same as the code, which was originally in the monolith.
• Unit tests
• Regression tests
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Architectural synthesis
Figure 4.7: Phases of strangler pattern used to break down e-conomic.
• Integration tests
• Load and performance tests
• Dark launching
• A/B tests
==PAGE:75==
4.7 Test strategy
63
We will use unit test for making sure the individual user stories for the products are
automatically tested. The objectives of the unit tests are to make sure that the story
is implemented as defined and that all exceptions from the system is thrown where
expected, such that the pre- and post-conditions of the user story is satisfied. The pro-
cedure for completing the objectives for the unit tests are that the developers implement
the unit test fitting the user stories. The quality assurance employees go through the
unit tests making sure that all the pre- and post-conditions are satisfied and lastly that
all the code including tests is buildable. Since the unit tests are testing the user stories,
they are run at every build locally.
The next phase is the regression tests, where the user stories already existing in the code
is tested automatically. The objective is to test that the original user stories can run
with the new code. Since the tests are already done, they are simply run by the develop-
ers. The regressions tests are run on the teams’ development staging environment, but
they should also be able to be run locally.
The third phase is integration tests, which are automated tests on the test staging envi-
ronment. The objective of the integration test is to test the user stories from the different
teams together to make sure that none of the code is introducing breaking changes to
the existing functionalities. The integration tests are handled by the lead developers
and lead quality assurance employees.
The performance tests are also done on the test staging environment, and they aim to
make sure that the code is scalable and able to perform at the level which is necessary
for the product. Part of the performance tests is to test the load, which the code is
able to handle given a large number of concurrent users of the system, such that a real
life situation can be handled. The performance tests also aim to test the stability and
reliability of the product. The performance tests are done by the quality assurance em-
ployees and the technical leads.
The two specific test phases we wish to do are the dark launch test and A/B test. The
dark launch test can be done both manually or semi-automatic. Ideally, the dark launch
is set up as a semi-automatic test to ease the process. The objective of the dark launch
test is to test that, with the same pre-conditions and inputs that the code in the newly
extracted module, is performing in the exact same way as it did within the monolith.
Here the quality assurance employees set up a log to record the output of the module
and pipe a copy of all input to the monolith over to the module as well. The results
in the log are finally compared to the results from the monolith to see if there are
any discrepancies between the two. The dark launch test can be done in the test stag-
ing environment but if more real data is needed a verification can be done in production.
Lastly is the A/B test, which is the final test, though also the only one of the test
phases, which is not an actual test. The A/B test is part of the strangler pattern, where
a few customers are forwarded to the module instead of using the monolith. This is
==PAGE:76==
64
4 Architectural synthesis
to verify the strength of the solution and it will happen in the production environment.
The objective is to slowly get all customers to use the module instead of the monolith,
without them ever noticing the transition. The phase is handled by the technical leads
and lead quality assurance employees.
4.8
Decisions of the synthesis
The ideal domain of an accounting system and the knowledge that e-conomic is not
build with a domain in mind, revealed that most of the required dependencies between
components are present for both, though there are many more dependencies between
components than necessary. This should be improved to make development easier, and
one way to do this is to move to a component-based architecture. The components,
which we proposed as macro services are larger clusters containing several components
from the algorithmic analysis in the architectural recovery. These proposed macro ser-
vices divide the monolith into six proposed macro services covering the most important
areas of an accounting system. These proposed macro services are also used as a founda-
tion for the areas of ownership in the new organisational structure. The new structure
needs to fit within the new architecture. To speed up the time to market and lower the
communication across departments, we suggest the organisation goes from having three
very separate developing departments for the e-conomic product to having two; one to
decide new features and one to develop them. The product department is in charge
of business decisions and comes with the acceptance criteria of new features and the
engineering department is in charge of developing it. The product department will find
out, which products the customers need and which adjustments to the current products
should be made. The engineering department will figure out, if it is feasible in coopera-
tion with the product department. But the engineering department will single-handed
figure out, how to develop it. This will make sure that all development is within a single
department and ensuring that the product is not moving in different directions, without
anyone realising it.
With the proposed macro services, a heat map was created to find out, which use cases
were the most used by the customers of e-conomic. It showed that creating invoices,
daybook journal entries, products, and scanning documents were the most used by the
customers. This led us to a financial calculation of what it would cost to develop software
product lines compared to stand-alone applications and the benefit of reuse. Knowing
the most important use cases and the financial cost of extracting a use case, different
approaches to breaking down the monolith was evaluated. The first part was making a
modular monolith being the basis of any approach, since the monolith currently is too
large to divide currently. After considering both a service-based and a functionality-
based architecture, where the service-based architecture was the financially most bene-
ficial strategy and the most fitting with the company’s current state of development.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
Architectural prototyping
After discussing the different approaches for breaking down the monolith, the ideal
domain, and the usage data, the next phase is creating a prototype to show that the
strategy works.
Hypothesis
Creating software product lines will result in fewer dependencies between
components, which in turn will decrease development time resulting in cheaper develop-
ment costs and decreased time to market for the entire solution compared to continuing
to develop within the monolith.
Doing a prototype instead of transforming the solution from the beginning is a cheaper
way of verifying, if a chosen approach will work well with the existing codebase. Pro-
totyping is often used within software engineering. They should be easy and quick to
set up such that the main focus is on creating a solution. Generally speaking, there
is two types of prototypes: exploratory prototypes and experimental prototypes. An
exploratory prototype aims to explore possibilities of new technologies and to assist in
clarifying requirements. An experimental prototype aims to build a solution to a partic-
ular problem.
Since we want to solve a particular problem to decouple the monolith by extracting single
endpoints, we need to do an experimental prototype. Visma e-conomic has already made
some exploratory prototypes to explore new technologies.
5.1
Proof of concept
For our experimental prototype, we will be extracting the upload and retrieval of a doc-
ument in e-conomic from the big ball of mud. Uploading documents to e-conomic is
meant for pictures or electronic versions of receipts, invoices, and credit notes to provide
proof of, what an expense has gone towards. For this, e-conomic allows uploading docu-
ments that can either be attached to existing daybook entries as part of the bookkeeping
process, or new daybook entries can be created based on an uploaded document. The
functionalities were found to be essential for the system as well as very used by the
users, which can be seen on the heat map in Figure 4.5. It made sense to choose the two
functionalities, such that we were able to provide an entire workflow and see that the
document is uploaded. Our extraction will be of all functions within the big ball of mud,
==PAGE:78==
66
5 Architectural prototyping
which are necessary for the upload and retrieval of a document. All other functionality,
which is not essential is not extracted due to the time constraint and making the proto-
type as simple as possible. The two functionalities are called CreateNewDocument and
GetDocument within the internal API for inbox.
We will begin making the prototype by extracting the functionalities to a module within
the monolith following the utilisation of the strangler pattern described in Section 4.6.2.
To find the functionality used for the upload and retrieval, we track all function calls
from the inbox endpoint in the API all the way to the repositories accessing the data
from the database. This will help us recover the minimum set of classes. When the
classes are found interfaces are made for them in the module. Lastly, we create assem-
blies and implement the classes we recovered and made interfaces for.
When having successfully created a module, we want to extract the module to a microser-
vice. Going from a module to a microservice requires additional steps. As previously
mentioned in Section 4.6.2.2, we have some general steps for creating the microservice.
These contain setting up the project, extracting the classes to the microservice, setting
up the environment for the microservice, and then the continuous integration and de-
ployment. The last step is deprecating the module in the monolith. These are the broad
steps and in the next couple of sections, we will explain how we implemented it in our
prototype.
5.1.1
Moving to a module
To create the module following the steps described in Section 4.6.2, we used various
steps from the strangler pattern. First, we created the strangler application to strangle
the monolith. The next phase of the strangler pattern was a cycle of paving the road
and starting small as seen in Figure 4.7. The steps were performed until the module was
independent of the rest of the monolith. The next phase was macro then micro, where
we normally would extract larger parts of the codebase, but for the prototype we only
extracted the two functionalities. This strategy was used to simplify the extraction at
first with the intention of breaking down the macro services later on. Since we were do-
ing a prototype, we did not extract more than necessary. Therefore, it was even smaller
than a microservice, which did not follow the flow, which we showed in Figure 4.7. As
this iteration of the prototype is only a module within the monolith, we did not use the
rest of the phases in the strangler pattern.
To create the module, we wanted separation of the different layers in the code. To achieve
this, we created three main assemblies: one for the contract of the module, one for the
business logic of the module, and one for the infrastructure of the module. These three
assemblies were only connected from the bottom up to create only the most necessary
dependencies in the code to improve the maintainability of the code. The three assem-
blies rely on inversion of control and Liskov’s substitution principle to keep the business
==PAGE:79==
5.1 Proof of concept
67
Figure 5.1: Assemblies of the module prototype.
logic isolated from the big ball of mud. It achieves isolation from the big ball of mud
by defining interfaces for contact with the module, for what is going on within the mod-
ule and for data needed outside of the module. Classes within the module depends on
these interfaces by injecting them into the classes. Liskov’s substitution principle states
that any object should be replaceable by any of its sub-classes without breaking the
application. Applying this principle to interfaces, any implementation of the interface
injected into our module must provide the same result, making the module independent
of where the data comes from. Additionally, to the three main assemblies, two testing
assemblies were created: one for unit tests and one for integration tests. The unit test
assembly tests the different services in the business assembly, whereas the integration
test assembly aims to test the repositories in the infrastructure assembly we extracted.
The integration test is testing that the module is working with the rest of the monolith.
Lastly, a utility assembly was created, which we used as a NuGet package. In Figure
5.1, it is possible to see the different assemblies created as well as the dependency, which
the infrastructure layer has on the monolith.
The contract assembly contains the interface of the InboxApplicationService, which
contains the two endpoints we are extracting as well as all the enums, DTOs, and ex-
ceptions, which the contract needs.
The enums and DTOs are the objects that the
InboxApplicationService receives and delivers, and the exceptions are the ones, which
the InboxApplicationService can throw. It is important to have all this information in
the contract since the contract will be the layer, which the code needing the module will
be able to access.
The business assembly contains the interfaces of all the services, repositories, and utility
classes needed for the module in addition to the entities, DTOs, and enums, which the
==PAGE:80==
68
5 Architectural prototyping
services and repositories require. During the extraction phase, we used the composite
pattern to implement the interfaces to create an abstraction before calling back to the
monolith. We removed the composite patterns one after another when we implemented
the methods in the module instead. Creating the module, we wanted to focus on inver-
sion of control by using dependency injection, such that the classes would only have the
necessary services that they need. In the original code in the monolith, a context with
all services was passed to each class, and the necessary services were retrieved whenever
needed. This created many unnecessary dependencies, which we did not want. Our
solution helped us to make the business assembly independent of the monolith.
The infrastructure assembly contains the implementation of the repositories and compos-
ite patterns for the repositories, services, and utilities, which we declared to be outside
the scope of the module. We had hoped that a dependency on the monolith would not
be necessary, but when diving deep into the implementation of the repositories, it was
too much work within our time frame, to be completely independent of the monolith in
the infrastructure layer.
5.1.1.1
Implementation and diﬀiculties of the module
The first challenge we encountered was to create a module within the monolith. To do
this, we went with a functional approach to determine the minimum set of classes. To
begin with, we chose a set of use cases that our proof of concept should support and
had to discover, where they were implemented in the existing codebase.
To find the implementation of our chosen use cases, we used a top-down approach fol-
lowing the endpoints when applying the existing functionality. We followed the code
from the API controller down through the layers until reaching the data layer resulting
in a set of classes and functions. The logic for our chosen functionality was split between
18 services, 20 repositories, 93 models split between various entities, DTOs, and enums.
These are the classes and functions that need to be extracted and encapsulated.
To encapsulate the extracted module, we had to determine, which interfaces and which
data the module should expose to the rest of the system to provide the document han-
dling functionality. We put the data into a new assembly called Economic.Document-
Handling. Contract. To implement the contract, another assembly was created called
Economic.DocumentHandling.Business. This assembly has implementations for the in-
terfaces in the contract, as well as other code needed to handle the business logic. Infor-
mation that is needed from outside this module as well as persistence is accessed through
interfaces registered in the business assembly and implemented in a third assembly called
Economic.DocumentHandling.Infrastructure. This makes it possible to inject the inter-
face of the module into the API controller, to replace the old implementation with the
module. The e-conomic monolith uses Autofac as an inversion of control container. An
inversion of control container allows registering various classes and interfaces to resolve
==PAGE:81==
5.1 Proof of concept
69
later. When resolving a class or an interface through the inversion of control container,
the container will return an instance of the resolved class or interface while also adhering
to the lifestyle of the class e.g., whether it should be newly created each time it is resolved,
a single instance is created per scope, or it is a singleton [Fow04]. While extracting the
business layer, we noticed that some of the services within the big ball of mud had cir-
cular dependencies making it impossible to resolve them within the inversion of control
container. This had been “solved” within the big ball of mud by not injecting the service
into the constructor of the class but instead adding a service provider to the EContext
and resolving the service needed on the fly within the functions, in which it was needed
in. To get rid of these workarounds, we had to change the business logic to resolve the
circular dependency, so we could rely on the services being injected into the constructor.
When we moved the business logic to our business assembly, we noticed utility functions
such as extensions or helper methods to strings and date times were implemented in
various places in the big ball of mud, and that the business logic depended on them. We
decided that it was not part of the domain, and as such, it should not be implemented
within our module, however, we also could not have dependencies to the big ball of mud,
as we then would not have reached the purpose of getting a decoupled business layer.
To solve this problem, we created a new assembly called Economic.UtilityPoC, which
serves as a NuGet package to perform these utility functions, wherever they might be
needed. This assembly structure can be seen in Figure 5.1.
Initially, we tried to make the infrastructure layer completely independent of the mono-
lith. The biggest challenge here was to implement our own persistence logic, as the
monolith had its own “homegrown” logic to access the database and perform CRUD
operations that were very coupled to the rest of the monolith. As we did not have the
time to go through this and extract it, we tried to go with an Entity Framework Core
(EF Core) database first solution, where we had EF Core generate a database context
and entity classes for each of the models within the database. We then reimplemented
each of the repository functions to use EF Core and LINQ to perform the CRUD func-
tions and tested a few of the updates through the integration tests, which we created.
However, when we tried to launch the application, we ran into a problem with the in-
version of control container, that multiple versions of Microsoft.Extensions.Logger was
used and the versions were not compatible with each other. After having spent a couple
of days trying to fix this problem, we did not have any more time to spend on it due to
our time plan, and we had to revert to using the composite pattern on the repositories
to get a working solution. Unfortunately, this also meant that only the contract and
business layer can be considered a proper module, having the infrastructure layer being
the glue between the monolith and the module.
==PAGE:82==
70
5 Architectural prototyping
5.1.2
Moving from module to microservice
After having finished the first iteration of the prototype, having created a module within
the monolith, it was time to start the second iteration of the prototype and create a
microservice based on the module. The microservice has no references to the monolith.
To move the module to a microservice, we followed the steps described in Section 4.6.2.
When the module was extracted to the microservice, we had a microservice that con-
sisted of the four core assemblies. The three from the module as well as an assembly for
the microservice specific code called MicroservicePoc. An updated package diagram can
be seen on Figure 5.2. For the microservice we had to implement all the functionality of
Figure 5.2: Assemblies of the microservice prototype.
the infrastructure layer as the microservice must be independent and the infrastructure
layer could no longer rely on results from the legacy codebase.
The first task was to set up a database. This gave us a chance to revisit the models within
the module and see, which models and which properties within them was actually used in
our prototype and was not just there, because some of the other business cases used them.
We chose to create the database in a code-first approach using Entity Framework Core
(EF Core). This meant that we created classes for each of the tables that we wanted
inside the database. These are later referred to as the entity classes. Each property
within the entity classes is then converted into a column within the database. To regis-
ter an entity class to become a model in the database, a DatabaseContext class needs
to be created that inherits from the EF Core class, DbContext. Inside the DatabaseC-
ontext a DbSet for each of the entity classes is created, which allows querying the table
of the entity class. Additionally, an implementation of the function OnModelCreating
==PAGE:83==
5.1 Proof of concept
71
needs to exist inside the DatabaseContext. Here the entity classes are added to a model
builder, that specifies that the class should be mapped to a table and the name of the
table. There are two ways of adding keys, indexes, and constraints to the database
models. It can either the done inside the entity class using data annotation attributes
or within the model builder using Fluent API. We chose to use attributes within the
entity classes as much as possible. However, the functionality of attributes is limited
compared to Fluent API, requiring us to add the primary keys of the tables that had
composite primary keys within the model builder instead of within the entity class. For-
eign keys within EF Core are created based on a rule that says if a property is called
“xId” and another property within the entity class is called “x” and has the type of an
entity class, a column is created for “xId” having a foreign key to the Id of entity class
of “x”. The property “x” will work as a navigation property within the program. Thus
some queries can be simplified by using navigation properties instead of writing the joins
within the code. When the models were created, a migration was created through EF
Core. This migration generated two new classes, the migration class and a database
model snapshot class. The migration class contains two functions Up and Down. The
function Up is the code that EF Core needs to upgrade the database from the current
state (in our case an empty database) to the new state (the tables, columns, and keys
added). It can be applied by running the EF Core command database update and using
the code-first approach. This allows the microservice to own the data it uses instead of
having to conform to how the database looks. If the microservice needs extra data, this
can be added to the existing entity classes or a new class, and a new migration can be
performed to add it to the database model. The function Down will reverse the changes
and restore the database to the previous state, if any mistakes were made.
After the database model was migrated to the microservice, the repositories within the
infrastructure layer had to be rewritten. For this, the DatabaseContext class was in-
jected into each of the repositories, and the queries were performed by using LINQ
statements on the DbSet properties within the DatabaseContext. When that was done,
we also had to implement how the EContext (the current user sessions) was created.
Previously the composite pattern had just been used to map our needs into the ECon-
text of the monolith. Now, we had to get some information about the current user as
part of the invocations of the microservice. For this a DTO was added to the contract
assembly called SessionInfo. This DTO contains information about what agreement is
being handled; if it is an admin agreement, acting on behalf of the user, or if it a regular
agreement, where user has access to the system. Additionally, the DTO stores which
of the document handling add-ons the agreement has access to. With this information,
the EContext implementation in the infrastructure layer can provide agreement, setup,
and user data by lazy loading the properties if needed by the function invoked inside
the microservice.
The final areas within the infrastructure layer now need to send events to other services
(in this case the monolith). This was done by creating an abstract event listener and an
event producer within the MicroservicePoc assembly. The event listener contains logic
==PAGE:84==
72
5 Architectural prototyping
for subscribing to a Kafka topic and fetching messages, converting the message to a re-
sponse, and delegating the response to the event producer. When a message is received,
a new thread is started that calls a protected abstract function that converts the request
to a response, and then finally sends the response to the event producer. Two generali-
sations of the abstract class was created; one for a request to create new documents and
one for getting documents by their id. The event listener for creating a new document
subscribes to a topic named “MicroservicePoc.UploadDocument” and sends the result to
be produced at the topic “MicroservicePoc.UploadDocument.Result”, and likewise for
the get document event listener. When a message is received, the payload is converted
to a DTO either of the type GetDocumentRequest or UploadDocumentRequest using
the NewstonsoftJson library. The event listener then creates a new thread in which the
corresponding function was invoked with the parameters of the request. In case of an
exception being thrown inside the business layer, it is caught by the task handling the
thread and the event producer is invoked to create an event containing the error message
instead.
The event producer is very simple. It wraps the result within a class called Response,
that contains a boolean that indicates, whether it was a success or not. If it was a success
the Result property is set otherwise the ErrorMessage property is set to provide an error
message. The wrapper is then serialised using NewtonsoftJson and the serialised result
is sent to the provided Kafka topic. To allow multiple uses of the microservice and not
having messages getting mixed up and to track a message between different components,
we added a GUID to the request DTOs and the response class called RequestTraceToken.
When we were able to handle events from the microservice side, they had to be produced
inside the monolith. For this we created a new assembly called Economic.Document-
Handling.EventHandled, in which we created a class called InboxApplicationService-
Proxy implementing the interface of the inbox application service from the contract
assembly. We replaced the registering of the module implementation in the internal
API Autofac configuration with the proxy, thus routing calls from the API to use the
new class instead of the module. With a consumer and a producer class similar to that
of the microservice, we were able to implement a proxy within the monolith by creating
a request DTO. In the request DTO we are setting the request trace token and sending
the event through the producer. It would then start waiting for a response using the
consumer, reading messages until it found one with a matching request trace token, com-
mitting the message, deserialising the result, and returning it to the front-end through
the internal API. Here we ran into another diﬀiculty related to the legacy codebase. The
internal API is a .NET Framework assembly, which turned out not have the necessary
dependencies for running Kafka. After a while we found a Kafka redistributable called
“librdkafka.redist” that could be added as a NuGet package, which solved the problem.
After migrating the code to the microservice, we had to set up inversion of control
for the microservice as well. For this we used the Microsoft NuGet package Microsoft.
Extensions.DependencyInjection instead of Autofac which was used in monolith. We
==PAGE:85==
5.1 Proof of concept
73
chose this because the Microsoft library comes with a function to register the database
context within the inversion of control container. On program start-up, we are regis-
tering each service and repository used by their interfaces to a service collection. A
service provider is then built from the service collection. Each event received by the mi-
croservice is then handled within its own service scope, allowing us to inject instances of
the various services and repositories that are required to resolve the request of the event
without mixing different e-conomic contexts. To ensure that an e-conomic context is reg-
istered, the first thing we do when handling an event is to resolve a SessionInfoProvider
and register the SessionInfo received in the event. After this is done, an e-conomic con-
text can be created by services that depend on it by injecting an EContextFactory into
their constructor and creating an e-conomic context from it. Another service, which
required a workaround to register in our inversion of control container, was the PDF
service client, which is another application created by Visma e-conomic and used within
document handling as a NuGet package to help with functions related to PDFs. The
PdfServiceClient class is internal and makes it impossible to register with our inver-
sion of control container. However, the NuGet package contains an extension method
for Autofac containers. Thus, we created a workaround, where we created an Autofac
container, registered the PdfServiceClient within the Autofac container, and then cre-
ated a registration within our own service collection to register an IPdfServiceClient
and resolve it using the Autofac container.
Having now extracted the module from the monolith to a microservice, we stood in
front of a couple of new decisions. How should the microservice be deployed, how should
communication occur, and how should data be migrated from the monolith database to
microservice to ensure a single source of truth. These decisions are being handled in the
later subsections.
5.1.2.1
Event handling and migrating the database
After having migrated a part of the database from the monolith to our microservice, we
also had to migrate the data. To do this, we used the tool Debezium. Debezium is an
open-source platform that performs change data capture (CDC). When first enabling
CDC tracking on a table, Debezium will create a snapshot of the current data and
create Kafka events containing each row within the table. For our data migration, we
created a data sink for each table in the microservice database. These sinks subscribe
to a Kafka topic for each of the original tables and convert the original data to the new
database model. Additionally, there are a few tables that were outside the domain of
the microservice but were needed in the current business flow. As we did not have time
to change how the business logic worked during the development of the prototype, we
instead added copies of those tables with the data that we needed. Using Debezium and
CDC we can keep an updated copy of those tables in the microservice. This makes the
microservice independent of the monolith as it would otherwise have to query it through
some external service.
==PAGE:86==
74
5 Architectural prototyping
Using Debizum, we had already set up a Kafka broker. Thus, using Kafka messages
to invoke the microservice from the monolith API layer seemed like a straightforward
choice, as we already had Kafka consumers set up in the microservice. We only needed
to create a Kafka source and sink within the monolith. The source to forward the call
received in the API layer and a sink to receive a response from the microservice. The
Kafka source and sink were created behind an interface like the one in the module from
the first iteration of the prototype. However, instead of having the business logic in the
implementing class, it created a Kafka event, waited for the response, and mapped the
result similar to the façade pattern. This resulted in the monolith being a proxy for the
microservice, as we did not have access to an API gateway.
5.1.2.2
Deployment
Figure 5.3: The e-conomic solution deployed with our prototype.
The final step of the prototype was to get it deployed and running alongside the mono-
lith. We created a docker-compose file that runs the prototype microservice alongside
==PAGE:87==
5.2 Testing
75
a PostgreSQL database and Debezium. The Debezium installation within the docker-
compose also contains a Kafka container. This Kafka container needs to be set up to
have the correct topics as well as configuring the topic for creating new documents to
have a max payload size of 10 megabytes, since the default Kafka max message size is
one megabyte. To configure our Kafka topics, we added a temporary docker container
that adds these topics if they do not exist, so they are ready after a docker-compose
up command is executed. The container network created by our docker-compose file
needs to be run inside the same network where the monolith is deployed allowing the
two applications to communicate through the Kafka broker. This was no issue on our
development machines as the monolith was deployed locally. However, for the staging
environments and should it eventually go into production, the docker-compose network
needs to be deployed in the same virtual private cloud as the virtual machine that hosts
the e-conomic monolith. A diagram of how the deployed e-conomic solution will look
after deploying it our prototype can be seen in Figure 5.3.
5.2
Testing
While building the prototype, there has been both automatic and manual testing of it.
For automatic testing, we created assemblies for unit and integration tests to test our
solution as previously mentioned in the chapter. For unit testing, we went through the
existing tests that existed for the original GetDocument and CreateNewDocument func-
tions and the functions further called by them and extracted those to our unit testing
assembly. We modified the tests to use classes from our module instead of classes from
the big ball of mud. Thus, we could prove that the business logic had not changed
in our move to a module. After we started to implement our repository functions in-
stead of using the repositories within the big ball of mud, we added integration tests of
some of the repositories to ensure that we could get access to the database with Entity
Framework Core and that the LINQ statements that we had written were correct. We
especially focused on the repository functions with joins since they were more complex.
This meant that for the final version of the module, after we had to revert to using the
composite pattern for the big ball of mud repositories, the integration tests were redun-
dant. However, they could still be used to test the repositories within the microservice.
In addition to the automatic testing, we did manual end to end testing of our module
and microservice to test that it still provided the correct result within the solution as a
whole. We were able to test that our code was injected into the internal API by running
the solution in debug mode and putting breakpoints within the module.
5.3
Prototype findings
We ended up having moved two highly used functions to a microservice that had no cou-
pling to the monolith. We had expected that extracting the features from the monolith
==PAGE:88==
76
5 Architectural prototyping
would be a challenging task. However, it turned out that creating the module within the
monolith was the most significant task. After that had been done, we already had the
abstractions in place to extract the code. Our initial plan was to make a complete verti-
cal slice within the monolith for our module. Unfortunately, this was not possible until
we migrated to the microservice, as the infrastructure layer of the monolith was very
complicated to extract because of how entangled the code was. Due to the complexity, it
was impossible for us to extract it within the time frame of our prototype. However, we
believe that the module was a good first step and going with a fully modular monolith
before extracting the modules into microservices will go a long way towards improving
time to market. Having business layers that are isolated from other sub-domains reduces
the required knowledge of the accounting domain and what side-effects making a change
within your own domain might cause. At the same time, we have shown that it is feasible
to extract a microservice from the monolith and start a strangler process.
Looking at the business logic for our prototype, there is just a single assembly that we are
dependent on, which is the utility assembly. The only dependants of the assembly are
the internal API, which is invoking the functions within the module, and the infrastruc-
ture layers that are implementing the repository functions required by the business layer.
The microservice proof of concept even shows that it is possible to make the module
fully decoupled of any references to the monolith by adding events. This can also be true
for the module once more modules are created. Then, using the mediator pattern, the
infrastructure layer would only need to know about the contract assemblies of the other
modules to invoke functions within them. If we compare this to the original implementa-
tion, it was spread between the assemblies Economic, Economic.Dto, Economic.Entity,
Economic.Repository, Economic.Constants and Economic.RepositoryService. These as-
semblies have a total of 40 direct dependencies to other assemblies as well as a lot of
dependants as seen in the dependency graph. Thus, we have proved the first part of the
hypothesis, that using software product line engineering, which focuses on small deploy-
able units, will result in fewer dependencies. As we did not try to implement the same
functionality within the monolith, we cannot say the development time of the prototype
was actually faster. However, previous work done by Foote [FY09] and experience from
earlier projects in Visma e-conomic shows, that developing within a big ball of mud
makes even the smallest change take an enormous amount of time. With this in mind,
we can say that the three weeks, we have spent on the prototype shows that development
time will decrease and therefore also result in cheaper development costs.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
In this chapter we are reviewing the decisions which we took during the thesis, discussing
the alternatives, and looking at what possibly could be done in the future to complete
the decoupling of the monolith.
6.1
Results of the analysis
First was the analysis. The first decision we had to take was deciding who to invite to
interviews regarding the use cases of e-conomic. For this, we chose to invite employees
at e-conomic instead of interviewing actual users of e-conomic. By interviewing employ-
ees at e-conomic, we were able to start the process faster, as we did not have to go
through the process of figuring out, which companies would have been open to speak
with us. Moreover, we got to speak with in house experts of how e-conomic should
be used. However, doing this meant that we were only reinforcing, what the company
already believed was the most crucial use cases to the customers. To challenge the re-
sult from the interviews, we later created a heat map, which confirmed that the core
functionalities highlighted during the interviews were indeed used a lot by the customers.
We tried to make up for the missing customers in the interview by choosing interviewees,
who were previous customers of e-conomic. Nevertheless, we might have missed some
use cases that the customer base believe is crucial.
As part of the quantitative analysis, we were looking at different pieces of code to extract
from the monolith. We used two main approaches to do so. The first was to implement
a recommendation tool for microservices that Mazlami et al. proposed in [MCL17]. We
chose the two coupling strategies that based on their article gave the least average do-
main redundancy: namely logical coupling and semantic coupling. However, neither of
these coupling strategies were ideal for our business case. The logical coupling only con-
tained nine of the previous 20 years of code history, as the version history was converted
from SVN to git in 2012. This meant that many of the legacy system’s original commits
could not be used for the class graph. Additionally, we were only getting a subset of
the remaining commits, as we were only looking at the master branch. After doing the
analysis, we were told by some of the longtime employees that merges to the master
branch had multiple features squashed together before merging to master. The second
coupling strategy chosen was the semantic coupling, which analyses the language of each
of the files and connects them in a weighted graph based on how common the language
==PAGE:90==
78
6 Discussion
between the files are. For the semantic analysis, we found that the language was too
common between the various files, which meant we had to give a limit of how small the
clusters created by the analysis algorithm were allowed to be to avoid cutting leaves off
the graph. Thus, we were not able to auto-generate macro/microservice candidates as
we had hoped. However, the analysis still proved useful, as it cut down the monolith
into chunks of code that were somewhat related to each other, sometimes across different
assemblies.
The second quantitative analysis made was a dependency analysis. This analysis was
done by using the tool NDepend to create a dependency map of the assemblies within
the e-conomic monolith as well as an abstractness vs instability graph of the solution.
The dependency map showed that most of the business logic was stuck in the middle
of the monolith with lots of dependants making it diﬀicult to extract the assemblies
directly. Moreover, it showed that the assemblies were not created for an architectural
or infrastructural purpose, meaning that the monolith cannot be strangled based on the
assemblies. Rather the monolith needs to be divided by looking through the individual
files as the first analysis did.
As the assemblies within the monolith get gradually
decommissioned, some changes inside the monolith might have to be done to ensure
that the use cases, not yet migrated from the monolith, remains functional. To ensure
that does not become too much of a problem, the monolith should stay away from the
zone of pain in the abstractness vs instability graph, which is why it is important also
to keep in mind, which assemblies within the monolith are the worst to work on and
preemptively refactor those.
6.2
Results of the prototype
Building the prototype, we experienced that it was not as straightforward making
changes within the monolith in its current state. We were able to slice into the mono-
lith and create a module that consisted of a business layer free of any dependencies to
the monolith, while allowing the monolith to use the business layer through a common
contract between them. This could be further extracted into a NuGet package in order
to add a version to it. That way, a team can own the module and develop new features
and bug fixes independently for it, like it was a microservice, and push the new versions
to an internal NuGet repository. When building a new version of the monolith, it will
then consist of the various modules fetched as NuGet packages and registering their
services in the class responsible for the inversion of control. To fully reach that point,
the infrastructure layers of the NuGet packages also need to be a part of the module, so
the monolith team does not require that knowledge. Due to time constraints, we were
not able to make the infrastructure layer independent in our modular prototype. How-
ever, by converting to an object-relational mapper (ORM) or moving the homegrown
SQL into a library of its own, instead of having it mixed into various assemblies of the
monolith, this would not be a problem. As proven with our microservice prototype, once
==PAGE:91==
6.3 The future plan for e-conomic’s monolith
79
the module is created, the repository logic needed is very basic.
In Section 4.7 we mentioned a testing strategy.
During our work on the prototype,
we have performed the first three steps of the testing strategy, which ensures that the
business logic is working correctly and that it integrates with the rest of the system
without having broken anything. Should e-conomic wish to use our prototype for their
system, the next steps would be to performance test the microservice as well as perform
dark launching. They can perform performance tests on the microservice in isolation
by deploying it and have a script that produces Kafka events to the topics that the
microservice is subscribing. The load on the computer or virtual machine that hosts
the docker network is monitored and the logs of the microservice is reviewed to ensure
everything is happening as expected and messages are not lost. Dark launching can
be done using the proxy class we created for the prototype, when a request to either
GetDocument or CreateNewDocument is made, the proxy must be invoked in addition
to the legacy logic. The response from the proxy is logged within the monolith while
the response from the legacy code is returned to the user. This makes it possible to test
the prototype in production without changing the user experience. When enough logs
have been gathered and the results of the prototype have been approved, they can start
A/B testing.
At e-conomic, they use a tool called FeatureFlag which they have built into their mono-
lith. This tool works on an agreement basis to determine which version of a feature the
customer should be using. This tool can be used for A/B testing by letting a couple of ex-
perienced users use the prototype first, and if no issues are reported users can gradually
be onboarded to use the prototype for document handling instead of using the monolith.
However, before the prototype is ready to finish the rest of the testing strategy, it needs
to become a minimal viable product. The prototype is currently lacking the feature to
get all documents uploaded within the agreement, meaning only documents, of which
you know the id, can be retrieved. To prevent any change in the user experience, the
module or microservice, with which ever e-conomic chooses to go with, needs to have
the feature added.
6.3
The future plan for e-conomic’s monolith
Our proposed utilisation of the strangler pattern suggests going to a fully modular mono-
lith before migrating the modules out of the monolith into microservices. Going to a
fully modular monolith will still make it possible to use software product lines. Visma
e-conomic will start out by having one software product line, and each of the modules
will be a product within the software product line. In case Visma e-conomic chooses
to create microservices after they have reached a modular monolith, the initial software
product line will gradually be decomposed, having products become their own software
product lines. Thus, the management of e-conomic needs to decide if it is a worthwhile
==PAGE:92==
80
6 Discussion
intermediate first step to move to a fully modular monolith. No matter with which ap-
proach e-conomic chooses to go with, their deployment process must change. In the case
of the modular monolith, they should either use a tool that builds the monolith based on
a list of NuGet packages and their versions or they need a process, where the .csproj files
manually are verified to ensure that each package reference is present with the correct
version. The artefact created either by the manual process or through the tool can be
taken through the steps of their deployment pipeline. In the case of transitioning to a
microservice, a plan for when requests are being forwarded to the microservice instead
of the monolith needs to be made.
The plan needs to specify, if that is to happen
through a new deployment of the monolith where the support for those use cases have
been disabled or if it should be handled in the networking layer, determining, where the
request is being forwarded.
For the immediate future, the findings of this thesis suggest that the monolith should
be split into six modules. One module for each proposed macro service from Section
4.2.
This allows the monolith to be split up into larger chunks of code related to
each other minimising the communication across different modules.
Creating larger
modules in the beginning follows the “start small” step from the strangler pattern as
less code will have to be refactored. This leads to earlier small successes and lessens the
overhead of creating a module for each component in addition to the encapsulation and
cross-communication requirements that come with it. The macro services are also solid
candidates for extracting into a first round of “microservices”. Once the code has been
extracted from the monolith, it is then up to the team owning it to decide, whether it is
a service that they are expecting future features in. If it is, it could be a candidate for
further decoupling into actual microservices. If not, then it can stay as a macro service.
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In conclusion we have created a decoupling strategy for Visma e-conomic’s monolith
based on both qualitative and quantitative analyses of their monolith as well as an anal-
ysis of their organisation. The strategy was developed with an ideal domain, a set of
proposed macro services, a new organisational structure, financial considerations, and
a test strategy in mind. The decoupling strategy involves several approaches to take
dependent on the future decoupling and development. To show that the strategy would
work in practice, a proof of concept was made using two of the approaches given in
the decoupling strategy. To determine the code to extract, we used the usage data of
e-conomic, such that it would be as beneficial and realistic for Visma e-conomic as possi-
ble. The proof of concept resulted in some diﬀiculties, but the final result was successful
and verified that the strategy is able to decouple the monolith in a structured and useful
manner. The financial example showed that it is beneficial for Visma e-conomic to de-
couple their monolith even though it has a large initial cost since the development time
and the complexity of the code will decrease over time. The investment in decoupling
the monolith will be earn back approximately within four years compared to the current
waste of time and resources.
In the future, Visma e-conomic can continue to use the strategy to decouple the monolith.
Though the analysis and synthesis, which the thesis performed, need to be redone after
major changes to make sure that the company focuses their energy, where it is most
beneficial for them. This also means that the calculations for the financial considerations
needs to be redone to make sure the return on investment is in the favour of the company
every time a major decoupling is taking place.
==PAGE:94==
82
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[Bae21]
Baeldung. Difference Between Layers and Tiers. 2021. url: https://www.b
aeldung.com/cs/layers-vs-tiers.
[CHL21]
Ian Cartwright, Rob Horn, and James Lewis. Patterns of Legacy Displace-
ment. (accessed 2021/08/11). 2021. url: https://martinfowler.com/art
icles/patterns-legacy-displacement/.
[CMC05]
Paul Clements, John McGregor, and Sholom Cohen. The Structured Intuitive
Model for Product Line Economics (SIMPLE). Technical report CMU/SEI-
2005-TR-003. Pittsburgh, PA: Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mel-
lon University, 2005. url: http://resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/ass
et-view.cfm?AssetID=7611.
[Com21]
European Commision. SME definition. 2021. url: https://ec.europa.eu
/growth/smes/sme-definition_en.
[Cor+01]
Thomas H. Cormen et al. Introduction to Algorithms. 2nd edition. The MIT
Press, 2001.
[Deh18]
Zhamak Dehghani. How to break a Monolith into Microservices. (accessed
2021/08/11). 2018. url: https://martinfowler.com/articles/break-mo
nolith-into-microservices.html.
[Die21]
Erik Dietrich. Concreteness Entering the Zone of Pain. 2021. url: https:
//blog.ndepend.com/abstractness-entering-zone-pain/.
[DL99]
Weiss. D.M. and C.T.R.. Lai. Software Product-Line Engineering: A Family-
Based Software Development Process. 1999. url: https://pdfs.semantic
scholar.org/8e4c/4fee0613cc80d21c58a8089483dac486e0ef.pdf.
[e-c21]
e-conomic. Coding guidelines - C#. 2021. url: https://docs.e-conomic
.ws/docs/chsarp-coding-guidelines.
[Fow04]
Martin Fowler. Inversion of Control Containers and the Dependency Injec-
tion pattern. 2004. url: https://martinfowler.com/articles/injectio
n.html.
[Fra21]
Agile Axiom Framework. Test Strategy. 2021. url: https://agileaxiomfr
amework.com/test_strategy.html.
[FY09]
Brian Foote and Joseph Yoder. “Big Ball of Mud.” eng. In: (2009).
[Grz19]
Kamil Grzybek. Modular Monolith. visited 2021/10/26. 2019. url: http:
//www.kamilgrzybek.com/design/modular-monolith-primer/.
==PAGE:96==
84
Bibliography
[Ham19]
Yassine Hamdaoui. TF(Term Frequence)-IDF(Inverse Document Frequency)
from scratch in python. visited 2021/09/08. 2019. url: https://towardsd
atascience.com/tf-term-frequency-idf-inverse-document-frequenc
y-from-scratch-in-python-6c2b61b78558.
[Ham20]
Tim Hamilton. Innovation over Time: A History of Software Development.
2020. url: https://praxent.com/blog/history-of-software-developm
ent-innovation.
[HD21]
Zen Program HD. Ndepend. 2021. url: https://www.ndepend.com/.
[LF14]
James Lewis and Martin Fowler. Microservices. (accessed 2021/08/11). 2014.
url: https://martinfowler.com/articles/microservices.html.
[Lin08]
Carnegie Mellon University Linda Northrop. Software Product Lines. 2008.
url: https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/8e4c/4fee0613cc80d21c58a8
089483dac486e0ef.pdf.
[LML20]
Chia Yu Li, Shang Pin Ma, and Tsung Wen Lu. “Microservice Migration
Using Strangler Fig Pattern: A Case Study on the Green Button System.”
eng. In: Proceedings - 2020 International Computer Symposium, Ics 2020
(2020), pages 519–524. doi: 10.1109/ICS51289.2020.00107.
[Mar03]
Robert C. Martin. Agile software development: principles, patterns, and prac-
tices. Prentice Hall PTR, 2003. url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?i
d=515230.
[MCL17]
Genc Mazlami, Jurgen Cito, and Philipp Leitner. “Extraction of Microser-
vices from Monolithic Software Architectures.” eng. In: Proceedings - 2017
Ieee 24th International Conference on Web Services, Icws 2017 (2017). Edited
by Shiping Chen Altintas Ilkay, pages 524–531. doi: 10.1109/ICWS.2017.6
1.
[MKN18]
Mayank Mishra, Shruti Kunde, and Manoj Nambiar. “Cracking the monolith:
Challenges in data transitioning to cloud native architectures.” eng. In: Acm
International Conference Proceeding Series (2018), a35. doi: 10.1145/3241
403.3241440.
[MSW20]
Alan Megargel, Venky Shankararaman, and David K. Walker. “Migrating
from Monoliths to Cloud-Based Microservices: A Banking Industry Exam-
ple.” eng. In: Software Engineering in the Era of Cloud Computing (2020),
pages 85–108. issn: 21978433, 16177975. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-33624-
0_4.
[Pyt21]
Python. Python 3.9.7 (tags/v3.9.7:1016ef3, Aug 30 2021, 20:19:38) [MSC
v.1929 64 bit (AMD64)] on win32. 2021.
[Spl21]
Splunk. What Are Serverless Functions? 2021. url: https://www.splunk
.com/en_us/data-insider/what-are-serverless-functions.html.
[Too21a]
Mehran Toosi. Monolith Decomposition Patterns. 2021.
[Too21b]
Mehran Toosi. Notes on distributed monoliths. 2021.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
85
[YM20]
J.W. Yoder and P. Merson. “Strangler Patterns.” eng. In: 27th Conference
on Pattern Languages of Programs (October) (2020), a25. url: https://re
factory.com/papers/StranglingTheMonolith.pdf.
==PAGE:98==
86
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX A
Assemblies in clusters
Invoice.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Infrastructure
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.AspNet
Economic.Constants
Economic.DomainService
Economic.DomainService.Interface
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.Infrastructure
Economic.Infrastructure.Interface
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Mapper
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.JobService
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Pdf
Economic.Pdf.Interfaces
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.RepositoryService
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Economic.Rest.Infrastructure
Economic.Rest.Tests
Economic.Service.Interface
Economic.Sql
Economic.UtilityService
Economic.UtilityService.Interface
Economic.Validation.ErrorCodes
Economic.Validation.Model
Economic.Web
Economic2.Api
eco.rest
secure
==PAGE:100==
88
A Assemblies in clusters
Product.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.Constants
Economic.DomainService
Economic.DomainService.Interface
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Mapper
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.RepositoryService
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Economic.Service.Interface
Economic.Utilities
Economic.UtilityService.Interface
Economic2.Kernel
External.Model
eco.rest
SmartPay.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.Constants
Economic.DomainService
Economic.DomainService.Interface
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Mapper
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Messaging
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.RepositoryService
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Economic.Sql
==PAGE:101==
A Assemblies in clusters
89
Economic.UtilityService
Economic.UtilityService.Interface
Economic.Web
External.Model
eco.rest
Projects.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.Constants
Economic.DomainService
Economic.DomainService.Interface
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.Infrastructure
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.Rest.Infrastructure
Economic.Rest.Model
Economic.Rest.Models.Mapper
Economic.Rest.Tests
Economic.Rest.WebApi
Economic.Validation.ErrorCodes
secure
SmartInbox.txt:
Economic
Economic.Constants
Economic.Entity
eco.rest
Inventory.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.Constants
Economic.DomainService
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Model
==PAGE:102==
90
A Assemblies in clusters
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Economic.Service.Interface
eco.rest
DocumentHandling.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.AspNet
Economic.Constants
Economic.DomainService
Economic.DomainService.Interface
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.Infrastructure
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Mapper
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.JobService
Economic.MachineLearning.PdfService
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Messaging
Economic.Messaging.EmailHandlerService
Economic.Pdf
Economic.Pdf.Interfaces
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.RepositoryService
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Economic.Service.Interface
Economic.Validation.ErrorCodes
Economic.Web
Economic2.DocumentHandling
Economic2.Finance
Economic2.Importing
Economic2.Kernel
External.Model
UpgradeHelpers
WebFileHandling
eco.rest
Subscription.txt:
==PAGE:103==
A Assemblies in clusters
91
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.Constants
Economic.DomainService
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.RepositoryService
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Economic.Service.Interface
Bank.txt:
Economic
Economic.AspNet
Economic.Constants
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.Utilities
Economic.Web
UpgradeHelpers
eco.rest
Authentication.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Infrastructure
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.ApplicationService.VismaConnect
Economic.Constants
Economic.Cryptography
Economic.Data
Economic.DomainService
Economic.DomainService.Interface
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.Infrastructure
Economic.Infrastructure.Interface
==PAGE:104==
92
A Assemblies in clusters
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.RepositoryService
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Economic.Rest.WebApi
Economic.Sql
Economic2.Api
Economic2.Kernel
WebUtilities
eco.rest
secure
Administration.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Infrastructure
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.Constants
Economic.Cryptography
Economic.DomainService
Economic.DomainService.Interface
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.Infrastructure
Economic.Infrastructure.Interface
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.RepositoryService
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Economic.Service.Interface
Economic.UtilityService
Economic.UtilityService.Interface
eco.rest
secure
Agreement.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
==PAGE:105==
A Assemblies in clusters
93
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.Constants
Economic.DomainService
Economic.DomainService.Interface
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.JobService
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.RepositoryService
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Economic.Service.Interface
Economic.Web
eco.rest
secure
Budget.txt:
Economic
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
VAT.txt:
Economic
Economic.Constants
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.Infrastructure.Interface
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.JobService
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.Utilities
Economic.UtilityService
Economic.UtilityService.Interface
Economic.Web
Economic2.Finance
Economic2.Importing
eco.rest
==PAGE:106==
94
A Assemblies in clusters
Accounting.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.Connection
Economic.Constants
Economic.Cryptography
Economic.Data
Economic.DataModel
Economic.DomainService
Economic.DomainService.Interface
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.Infrastructure
Economic.Infrastructure.Interface
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Mapper
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.JobService
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Messaging
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.RepositoryService
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Economic.Rest.Infrastructure
Economic.Rest.Models.Mapper
Economic.Rest.WebApi
Economic.Service.Interface
Economic.Sql
Economic.Sql.Interface
Economic.Sql.Model
Economic.Sql.Traced
Economic.SqlQueryVisualizer
Economic.UtilityService.Interface
Economic.Web
Economic2.Api
Economic2.Core
Economic2.DataApi
Economic2.Dimensions
Economic2.DocumentHandling
Economic2.Finance
Economic2.FormHandler
Economic2.Importing
==PAGE:107==
A Assemblies in clusters
95
Economic2.Kernel
Economic2.Reflection
EntityCodeGeneration
External.Model
WebFileHandling
WebUtilities
eco.rest
eco.rest.specs
secure
NotificationCenter.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.DomainService
Economic.DomainService.Interface
Economic.Dto
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.UtilityService
Economic.UtilityService.Interface
Marketplace.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.Constants
Economic.Infrastructure
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.RepositoryService
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Economic.UtilityService
Economic.UtilityService.Interface
Economic.Web
Economic2.Api
eco.rest
Settings.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Infrastructure
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.Constants
==PAGE:108==
96
A Assemblies in clusters
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.Infrastructure
Economic.Infrastructure.Interface
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.RepositoryService
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Economic.Service.Interface
External.Model
eco.rest
SmartBank.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.ApplicationService.VismaConnect
Economic.Constants
Economic.Data.Model
Economic.DomainService
Economic.DomainService.Interface
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.Infrastructure
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.JobService
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Messaging
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Economic.UtilityService
Economic.UtilityService.Interface
Economic.Validation.ErrorCodes
Economic.Web
Economic2.FormHandler
External.Model
WebUtilities
Suppliers.txt:
==PAGE:109==
A Assemblies in clusters
97
Economic
Economic.Constants
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.Validation.Model
eco.rest
ChartOfAccounts.txt:
Economic
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
eco.rest
Customer.txt:
Economic
Navigation.txt:
Economic
UpgradeHelpers
User.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.Constants
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.Infrastructure
Economic.Infrastructure.Interface
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.JobService
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
==PAGE:110==
98
A Assemblies in clusters
Economic.RepositoryService
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Economic.Service.Interface
External.Model
secure
Billing.txt:
Economic
Economic.Constants
Economic.DomainService
Economic.DomainService.Interface
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.Infrastructure
Economic.Infrastructure.Interface
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.RepositoryService
Economic.RepositoryService.Interface
Reports.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.Constants
Economic.DomainService
Economic.DomainService.Interface
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.InternalApi.Model
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.Service.Interface
Economic.Sql
Economic.UtilityService
Economic.UtilityService.Interface
Economic.Web
UpgradeHelpers
eco.rest
==PAGE:111==
A Assemblies in clusters
99
Messaging.txt:
Economic
Economic.ApplicationService
Economic.ApplicationService.Interface
Economic.Dto
Economic.Entity
Economic.InternalApi.Endpoints
Economic.Mapper
Economic.Messaging
Economic.Repository
Economic.Repository.Interface
Economic.Service.Interface
==PAGE:112==
100
==PAGE:113==
==PAGE:114==
