==PAGE:1==
Effective development and responsible use of
Artificial Intelligence technologies in health­
care
Master’s Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in
healthcare
Master’s Thesis
January, 2022
By
Jan Turowski
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Image by Bokskapet from Pixabay
Link:
https://pixabay.com/photos/hospital-equipment-medicine-patient-
3098683/
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk/english
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Technology, Man­
agement and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Jan Turowski ­ s190301
ii
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This works looks at the issue of successful implementation and responsible use of the AI
technologies in healthcare. First, through a series of expert interviews combined with ref­
erencing relevant sources of knowledge, it is determined what the areas of most promising
potential for growth and beneficial implementation of AI are. Where could value be deliv­
ered at a relatively low cost? How could the technology be best put to work avoiding as
many potential problems as possible that could arise in the process? Second, with the
same methodology ideas are explored to mitigate or prevent the hurdles in the process
of implementing a new technology in healthcare. What are the possible ways to prepare?
What approach should yield higher chances of success? What would best be avoided?
Finally, a major part of the work takes a look at the ethical side of AI in healthcare focusing
on the liability allocation in case of errors. For this part a second round of expert inter­
views was conducted, but the methodology was similar to the one used a priori. Here, the
discussion involves more legislation sketching out possible scenarios on how future lia­
bility schemes could work in practice. In the end, it is assessed to what extent the ethical
concerns may be blocking the tendency to increase AI presence in healthcare.
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Henning Boje Andersen, Professor Emeritus, DTU Management
Supervisor of this thesis project.
Kathrin Kirchner, Associate Professor, DTU Management
Co­supervisor and reviewer of this thesis project.
Rasmus Aagaard, MSc Human­Centered AI, DTU Compute
Creator of this thesis template.
iv
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Background
1
2
Introduction and problem formulation
2
2.1
Artificial Intelligence introduction and overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Most prevalent AI applications and healthcare digitization . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Potential AI applications in healthcare and research
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Scepticism about AI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
The importance of ethics in AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.7
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology
10
3.1
Motivation and design of this qualitative study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Methodology and data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Business­side of AI, issues of effective implementation in healthcare
16
4.1
Approach to interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.2
Interviews ­ first round . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Interviews’ summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4
Digital technologies and AI in Danish Healthcare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.5
AI implementation by large companies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Ethical aspects of medical AI, issues of legal and safe implementation
34
5.1
Regulations to govern healthcare technology development and operation
. 34
5.2
Responsible artificial intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.3
Liability for AI decisions and actions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.4
Additional issues related to increasing AI presence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6
Strengths, weaknesses and areas to further research
50
6.1
Strengths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.2
Weaknesses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.3
Areas of further research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7
Conclusions and perspectives
52
Bibliography
54
A Appendix
62
A.1 Interviewed experts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
A.2 Declaration of Helsinki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.3 21st century cures act . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
A.4 Directive 93/42/EEC on medical devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
A.5 Guidance MEDDEVs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
A.6 MDR (Medical Device Regulation)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
v
==PAGE:8==
A.7 Regulation on in vitro diagnostic medical devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.8 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.9 Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
A.10 1968 Vienna Convention on Road Traffic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.11 Consumer Protection Act 1987 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
A.12 NTSB report investigating the Florida crash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
vi
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:9==
1
Background
Human civilization begun when hunter­gatherers abandoned their nomadic lifestyles in
favor of agricultural food cultivation and stationary life in settlements. [1] The Neolithic
agricultural revolution happened over 10.000 years ago in various places simultaneously
and despite progress and innovation in irrigation or ploughing methods, once settled, the
lives of citizens did not change much on a generational basis. Later came the industrial
revolution, which harnessed the power of fossil fuels to give rise to factories and mass
production. It improved efficiency fostering the growth of science and technological ad­
vancement, bringing about notable changes of sufficient magnitude to make a life of a
son much different to the one of a father. At the dawn of the third millennium humanity is
speeding down the highway of a digital revolution with enough dynamics to profoundly in­
fluence and change artificial and natural environments on a decadal basis. Yet civilization
and modern­day lifestyles are not a natural default, but an unprecedented occurrence.
Continuous effort is needed to sustain the current world order. Education, infrastructure,
governance, entertainment, production, agriculture, communication or healthcare ­ those
are all examples of societal spheres that need to function sufficiently well, so that human
civilization prevails and prospers. Healthcare is of huge importance taking up substantial
educational and material resources due to the complexity of a human organism and vari­
ous methods to treat it’s pathologies. As humans oftentimes dedicate their life to studying
and practicing medicine it is not easy to improve the efficiency of health delivery without
compromising on quality. Computational advancements are increasing the speed and
accuracy at which it is possible to model complex processes for the benefit of healthcare.
Discussion has arisen with regard to how much and how quickly will be developed. The
technology needs to adhere to to a more foundational set of ethical principles that form
the bedrock of human values and guide development on a deeper level.
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction and problem formulation
2.1
Artificial Intelligence introduction and overview
Artificial intelligence is a very popular concept used across many scientific disciplines due
to its broad applicability. Some researchers even take on the challenge of defining the
concept unambiguously and end up using several pages to complete the task. [2]
An illustrative definition (considering the purpose of this paper) of what AI is, is the label
of “prediction technology”. In a broad understanding AI is exactly what the abbreviation
stands for, namely an attempt to mimic or replicate natural, biological intelligence. In
practice this comes down to using accessible, past information to accurately predict the
future and make better decisions in the present.
The increasing reliability and operating speed of such “prediction technologies” has opened
a new set of possible use cases outside of the somewhat known calculations on organi­
zational data gathered from daily medical work, such as patients’ admissions, length of
stay, etc., into more prevention and diagnosis related, which include many highly inter­
dependent variables. [3] [4] This is a step that can, at least theoretically, now be taken
with sufficient computational power available to model and compute complex processes.
As a result broad interest in AI development or implementation seems to arise almost
universally in various business sectors. [5]
A distinction can be made between AI as a decision support tool and fully automated
technology with an autonomous, self­driving car serving as a flagship example of the lat­
ter. (The systematic approach to categorize various levels of autonomy will be discussed
in a designated section of the thesis.) In healthcare­oriented research it is legislatively
more simple to set the focus on decision support, since having a complex system, which
performs autonomously under normal operation, not only poses technological challenges,
but also issues of ethical and legal nature, which due to the arising ambiguity may become
just as difficult, if not harder to solve.
In various business sectors the problem with AI arises due to it’s confusing legal status
as the policy makers simply can’t keep up with advancing technology. Even a commonly
known and widely available device such as a smartwatch remains largely unregulated in
how it collects and shares health­related data with the mother company. [6] Healthcare,
with it’s high stakes, tends to be more conservative and innovation is constrained by vari­
ous centralized approval procedures, which set high top­down standards aiming at higher
reliability at the expense of time. [7]
Overall the complexity and high accountability in healthcare sector jobs, or at least se­
lected ones of them, puts the pace of AI technologies implementation in question if not
their implementation per se. This is particularly difficult to assess with many variables of
this system and their dynamic interdependence. Part of the problem is the issue of inex­
plainability. Where AI technologies stand out is their capability to process data in a way
that is oftentimes unknown even to developers themselves. The program maps real­life
complexity assigning appropriate weights to its calculation steps, but how exactly deci­
sions are made once this complexity is modeled remains unclear. [8] And how could one
accurately regulate a process, whose mechanisms, or inner workings of hidden layers are
unknown or how could one expect patients to trust judgements that can’t be backed by a
clear and reasonable explanation?
2
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:11==
Recently, the most successful and reliable approach is supervised learning where a train­
ing set with known outcomes is used to teach the program on how to behave in the future.
This is contrary to unsupervised learning, which is only fed with raw data in which patterns
are supposed to be identified. The latter is yet not as advanced and is not being as widely
commercialized, but arguably, once matured and reliable, this would be the technology
to better deserve the label of AI with ideas including adaptive surveys which dynamically
alter questions as the conversation with a patient progresses. [9]
It is to be noted that current AI algorithms are task­based and only operate well in a nar­
row setting producing better results with standardized, repetitive inputs. Though in many
aspects they outperform humans, the creative and adaptive element remains still beyond
comparison. [10] In that sense the idea of a truly intelligent, yet artificially created being
is nothing more than a blurry vision without a specified date to hold on to. Nonetheless,
this does not mean that there there is shortage of potential applications.
Another aspect to consider when introducing AI, is what could be broadly grouped as
ethical concerns. An illustrative example of such concern shows how discrimination may
arise with the internal bias in training data sets used for supervised learning. This has
famously been revealed with the Amazon algorithm used for hiring practices. It turned
out that the machine tended to favor men over women. In the end, the investigation
revealed that this simply was a generally prevalent trend in company’s hiring practices,
which only was augmented by the computer and became more easy to spot. [11] This
touches upon one of the several issues of ethical nature, which will also be examined
in greater detail, focusing especially on responsibility for judgements and decisions that
resulted after deployment of an autonomously running AI system.
Important thing to mention is the idea of concept drift when an algorithm is trained on a
changing data set and needs to be updated as new data is acquired. This is a problem
in the healthcare sector as long­lasting legislative approval processes allow little room for
flexibility in how the algorithm is altered once it has successfully undergone such testing.
[12]
Last, but not least there’s a challenge of scalability. How far and quickly can AI progress
in healthcare, which remains a largely conservative field? It takes a long time to develop
a proper algorithm, accurately assess it and ensure sustainable implementation. In some
cases extreme shortages of medical personnel and more state­held, centralized power
could make room for larger companies to have faster access to sensitive health data.
How the policy makers will react and what the development will be is hard to evaluate.
[13]
2.2
Most prevalent AI applications and healthcare digitization
AI is a very broadly applicable tool that could have an impact on multiple levels and stages
in the healthcare value chain, not only in the hospital setting a patient directly interacts
with. This paragraph aims to identify some of the areas where AI is already prevalent,
where the technological, ethical or financial barriers may be less difficult to overcome.
For example, there exist many publications regarding the use of AI technologies in biomed­
ical research, pharmaceutics. [14] [15] Hopes are connected to improved recognition of
shapes and complex protein interactions to understand and replicate some of the nat­
urally occurring patterns. Recent breakthrough is said to have come when applying AI
to protein­folding problem and achieving promising results. DeepMind’s new analysis
method is a gateway to better and faster understanding how complex proteins are formed
in living tissues, what would enable quicker drug development processes and thus, more
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
3
==PAGE:12==
responsive and accurate treatment. [16] Similarly, genomic diagnostics sees potential for
improvements on molecular level. [17]
Nonetheless, it remains important to note that AI applications which would directly affect
the work of physicians and patients’ care experience are of primary concern for this paper
­ innovation on “hospital or clinic floor” and not as much in research labs of pharmaceutical
or technological companies.
There’s no doubt that there exists a link between both activities, but a distinction is made
between indirect and direct impact on the level of doctor­patient interaction. After all, a
terminally ill patient is not likely to care how his life­saving drug was developed, but he
definitely does care about the quality of care received during his treatment.
At the time of writing (2021) there exist several, functioning AI solutions in healthcare. In
every case, they are only assisting human decision making or workflow. An autonomous
AI system, capable of making and independently executing complex decisions, evaluating
the outcomes of its own actions and possibly also self­corrections, such a system remains
a thing of the undefined future. [18]
Commonly referenced is the popularization of Electronic Healthcare Records (EHR). AI
is applied to organize, visualize and later also possibly analyze treatment data. [14] This
has already proven to be a successful aid in diagnostics. What ought to be highlighted is
that such an algorithm remains nothing more than an aid with a human professional taking
responsibility for the final decision and guiding further treatment. Expensive, long train­
ing of medical professionals and the supervision they provide over technology remains a
crucial part of the equation.
Electronic Healthcare Records is an AI application, which does not not venture beyond
the realm of software, where the only possible way to interact with the environment is
via a computer screen display. In contrast, another growing AI branch is based on hard­
ware solutions. Healthcare robots or work­assisting machines are especially prevalent in
elderly care. [14] They are also used to assist surgeons in performing complex manipula­
tions during invasive treatment. Nonetheless, the robot remains under continuous control
of a human. [19]
Different examples of AI are capable of working with human emotions. A robotic guardian
is watching the well­being of children affected by cancer. It is able to detect early stages
of depression or even correctly guess if patients experience suicidal thoughts. It can then
alert appropriate human professionals to deliver case­specific assistance. [19]
Monitoring of rehabilitation progress is yet another domain of AI implementation. Gradual
improvement in performance, or lack of such, can be measured and noted. It may be
tempting to put this application into data­based diagnosis assistance systems, but in this
case data is not simply fed to a piece of computer logic, but acquired externally and to
some extent independently. [19]
A distinctive example illustrating the flexibility and adaptability of AI­based systems to
rapidly arising needs comes from the outbreak of the COVID pandemic. The technology
was used to improve symptoms detection for air travel passengers while still at the airport
facilities. [20] COVID was a major challenge for humanity and arguably the most extreme
example of how rapidly a disease can spread in a world with such a high degree of physical
and informational connectivity. [21] It could be that without advanced AI technologies
humanity won’t be able to adapt fast enough in the future time of need.
4
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:13==
2.3
Potential AI applications in healthcare and research
In the context of this sections ”potential” refers to problems in areas where the quality of
patient care, personnel working conditions or work efficiency are improved. Those areas
were not considered prior due to a lack of competitive technology to address them or sim­
ply because innovation has not yet lead people to think that those particular applications
could in fact be realized.
The most simple idea for expansion in AI is to take existing solutions and apply them on
a broader scale. Even, if there might already be a reliable algorithm to scan and analyze
particular radio images, there remain other areas of interest. Being able to reliably scan
a knee doesn’t necessarily mean the exact same logic can be applied to an elbow. But
simply having the experience allows for accelerated expansion and adaptation. Nonethe­
less, though conceptually simple, only a few developers or companies manage to scale
their AI solutions beyond the initial scope. [22]
A promising domain has to do with targeted drug delivery. Substances required for treat­
ment of particular organs may cause notable side effects in other places. Precise applica­
tion of correct chemicals solves the issue. Recent development of nanorobotics AI branch
gives reasons to believe in future breakthroughs in such intelligent delivery systems. [23]
Another potential application worth mentioning is a still somewhat abstract idea of an
automated nursing assistant. [24] The complexity of tasks performed by professionally
trained nurses gives room for nothing more than a vision of an autonomous machine that
could replace them fully. Yet, breaking the job down into smaller pieces allows defining
some of the more repetitive or simpler tasks, which do not seem overly complex to au­
tomate. How this could be done, remains a matter of investigation this paper tackles in
later paragraphs.
What’s more, potential is identified in increasing patient engagement with their treatment
process. It has been proven that active participation in one’s treatment yields better re­
sults leading to faster recovery and also that lack of patient’s compliance with prescribed
treatment is not uncommon and remains a challenging problem. [25] For example medi­
cation non­adherence, as simple an issue as it may seem, is extremely common affecting
40­50% of patients with chronic diseases. [26]
Researching existing literature points to potential AI applications in healthcare, mostly
taking the angle of defining a need or an existing problem and pointing to AI as a solution
at hand. How this then relates to what is being developed with the example of Danish
healthcare is a different question to be addressed in this paper.
2.4
Scepticism about AI
No matter how much optimism increasing computational power might invoke when look­
ing at it with a naked eye, it’s dishonest to omit some of the outstanding challenges to
overcome. First and foremost AI only works well and reliably in a very narrow domain and
broadly applicable and adaptable systems do not yet exist. [27] When a problem is clearly
defined and repetitive it is at least conceptually a much more simple job to put computers
to work.
This could be a brilliant solution in many situations, but there are times when complex
cases arrive. The details of an experienced, clinical human judgement could be too so­
phisticated to even define, not to mention modeling and successful implementation. Hu­
man brain connects pieces of past experiences in an unprecedented way using a variety
of inputs it can then pattern­match and has an extraordinary ability to filter out irrelevant
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
5
==PAGE:14==
noise and adapt to a new situation. AI, as of today, remains limited to a fairly narrow scope
where it can master a particular task and outperform humans in that domain, but not as
much outside of it. [28] As stated by Hagendorff Wezel ”Artificially intelligent software
must always be adapted to the specific data set or context in which it is used.” and the job
is to be done by humans.
Also, simply looking at a lives of modern day citizens from developed countries calls for
scepticism as the most advanced AI technology seems to manifest itself in automated
vacuum cleaners or lawnmowers. Though one may arguably call these “smart robots”,
but should also bear in mind that they do not deliver astounding results once their en­
vironments become more complex or cluttered adding on top of that their limited ability
to relocate objects. [29] The remaining portion of AI interaction mostly breaks down to
personalized searches in search engines, voice assistants or navigation instructions and
those remain largely in the domain of information processing and organizing with little
ability to interact with the environment without human initiative. So, hardware remains a
limitation.
As far as enquiry processing and our abilities to communicate are considered, there has
surely been a leap in the past two decades, but this does not immediately mean that hu­
manity is on the verge of developing autonomous systems with ability to independently
and directly influence the environment on a level comparable to biological creatures, es­
pecially humans.
Taking a step back towards the process of development, it is to be noted that even once AI
is successfully running, the implementation is not evident and often lags behind or even
terminates leaving a raw project which only functions in a laboratory setting. Long regu­
latory processes and lack of reliable studies to indicate consistent performance hinders
making use of functional software. [30] What’s more the number of startups developing
AI has increased dramatically [31] with the funding doubling from 2017 and 5 times as
large as in 2016 when comparing both figures with 2020. [32] Taking this into account
it’s not hard to see the sheer amount of competition in AI development, which decreases
the likelihood of finding a product­market fit. Considering this, the media coverage and
research focus towards AI likely leads to an overestimation bias of what it can do and
may already be doing. [33] This was well summarized by prof. Irina Shklovski at the IT
University of Copenhagen who referred to the statistical nature of AI algorithms, which
will always feature a margin of error. Statistics are after all ”really good guesses” that
may work well for the majority of cases, but in some will lead to erroneous conclusions
and implications will follow. [34] So one of the questions comes down to how willing are
societies to accept that chance is a factor for an algorithm making judgements about, for
example the treatment of their loved ones.
2.5
The importance of ethics in AI
Ethical issues remain a part of broad discussion about AI and to what extent or how
exactly it ought to be implemented. A major role is to be played by politicians and other
policy makers, but this does not complete the picture. One thing is having restrictions in
place that set common rules to follow, but knowing how to play the game right to ensure
success is quite another. To deliver reliable and trustworthy technology, the companies
implementing it should also consider the end user’s, his rights and privacy. Transparent
behaviour, customer consideration and taking care of the public opinion about a given
organization is paramount for high­quality reputation and recognized brand. What’s more,
a systematized and honest regulatory ethical review of an algorithm to be implemented is
a considerable piece of the puzzle to maximize the quality of developed solutions. [35]
6
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:15==
There are potential flaws in decision making patterns by clinicians who may be pressured
to go along with the judgment made by an algorithm instead relying on their own experi­
ence. [30] Their confidence may be undermined what in turn can make patients prone to
question the expert’s authority, just like a passenger may feel like his taxi chauffeur takes
a longer route to the destination based on the connection proposal set by Google Maps
on his smartphone. There are other factors to choosing a way other than length, such as
traffic, infrastructure condition, recent road blocks, etc. Though one can’t be certain the
chauffeur considers those aspects as well, but ultimately it is the passenger making the
final call and he may request rerouting for his own psychological comfort.
But even excluding patients from the equation makes the ethical aspect of behavioral in­
fluence at least questionable. Peer pressure may arise to go with the algorithm’s decision
for the sake of faster task execution and diagnostics in a rushed environment. Oftentimes
clinics and hospitals are overloaded with patients and it’s easy to get caught up in a spiral
of ever accelerating work pace. So having an AI decision support tool is a tempting way
to speed up.
Another aspect has to do with proposed treatment. One thing is diagnosing the patient,
quite another proposing treatment. There may and quite often are multiple ways to treat
a disease and the basis for such selection are quite often different. In a case of a termi­
nally ill patient he or she might prefer treatment leading to maximum reduction of suffering
whereas the default approach could be increasing his lifespan as much as possible. Clin­
icians themselves are likely to have their own practices, which may not align with the un­
derlying logic of an algorithm. Also, it remains unclear if every time a treatment proposal
is made the doctor responsible is aware of all the assumptions made by the algorithm. In
the end those devices are meant to reduce the workload and having medical personnel
go through a detailed report of an AI analysis, understanding all the aspects, comparing
them with their own judgement, such a process might just as well turn out being more
daunting than making the decision themselves. [30] [36]
Ethical dilemmas are an issue which is to a large extent may be resolved by always label­
ing AI a “decision support” tool never assigning it full responsibility. Nonetheless, what in
practice may still block development is the human attitudes towards cases when AI has
misjudged the situation. If a human makes the decision assisted with the computer logic
and such decision is wrong, the easiest thing to do for the tech company is directly blame
the clinician and claim their program to be nothing more than a “decision support”. Such
an attitude will inevitably lead to decreased trust towards AI technology. People are not
perfect, get tired and make judgement mistakes. One could easily imagine a situation
where a patient comes in early in the morning waking up the doctor on duty who has just
had to deal with a large inflow of casualties from a bus accident. The doctor then is much
more likely to increase his reliance on the machine to reduce his own workload, which on
some level of analysis is the very purpose of this device. If a mistake is revealed later
and the only accountable is the overloaded doctor, no one from medical personnel will
likely treat the developing company as a reliable partner and future deals will be lost. No
one likes being treated unfairly and having their work disrespected even if such behaviour
happens to be legally sound. [30]
However, a legally sound behaviour is also not always a given. Taking into account the
pace of technology development, complexity of our legal systems and multiple stakehold­
ers involved, starting with a patient, later clinician, entity employing him and ending with
a tech company or even policy makers, having all those people cooperate flawlessly is
wishful thinking and responsibility gaps are likely to arise. How they will then be dealt with
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
7
==PAGE:16==
by courts and prosecutors in reasonable time is unclear. [37]
Another important ethical aspect is risk distribution in a population. As algorithms are de­
signed and trained with data coming from real health institutions, they will most accurately
cover a “typical” representative of a given population. If Poland is in over 90% composed
of people of a specific ethnic origin [38], with a particular complexion covering a specific
height span and likely characterized by other attributes which stand out in collected data,
if this is the case then the algorithm will make most accurate judgement for a “typical”
Pole. All of a sudden a patient from a particular racial minority shows up and is being
diagnosed with the latest state­of­the­art AI algorithm. In that case such a patient will be
exposed to a greater risk of misdiagnosis as he may not be adequately represented in the
data set. [30]
When prescribing a specific treatment it is not always clear to all the parties involved why a
certain drug works. Expecting doctors to understand the nature of all the complex biolog­
ical processes happening in a human body, which are thoroughly researched by teams of
specialists at research labs of pharmaceutical companies, such an expectation is simply
unrealistic. One could argue that the very point of our societies is mutual interdependence
where we benefit from one another’s work with a certain degree of trust that the job has
been done well. Ideally we could trust each other fully, but in real life it makes sense to
be realistic about our reliability and the inevitability of errors. With that in mind, a question
arises regarding the explainability of AI algorithms. Could they be implemented just on
the basis of the results they deliver for the sake of efficiency or does it make sense to
keep pushing for greater transparency at the expense of time and money? Would at least
most patients be comfortable knowing that software processing their data and assigning
a diagnosis is reliable, but won’t provide an explanation of why exactly a given diagno­
sis was chosen and treatment proposed? Is claiming that the result corresponds to the
training data set satisfactory or not? [39]
2.5.1
The trolley problem
Since the ethical issues play an important role in the discussion tackled in this paper, it
was deemed imperative to mention the famous trolley problem.
In the original version a person is put in a scenario of a choice to decide whether a trolley
that has gone out of control should proceed on its current route or should its track be
changed by pulling a railroad switch. In the first case the trolley will run over 5 people
chained to the railroad, whereas in the second it will ”only” cause a single casualty, but
this time as an outcome of an active choice.
8
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the trolley problem [40]
Presented version of the trolley problem is the most classical one, but in healthcare the
ethical dilemmas are manifested in different ways. A recent example is how governments
need to make rapid decision about the distribution of vaccines, which not always were in
limitless supply. Often it was the elderly groups that were more likely to suffer severely or
even fatally and those were the reasons to prioritize them in the vaccination process. On
the other hand there are more mobile and younger people who are more likely to spread
the disease and thus sustain in in the society for longer causing economical downturn
harmful for many in ways difficult to even quantify. [41]
Another way in which the trolley problem is relevant to consider is related to the efficiencies
AI implementation may bring in healthcare. If an urgent need arises and a fast response
is needed to mitigate the damage to the society, AI could be of help. Nonetheless, as it is
a statistical tool, it may be an adequate response to solve the problem for the majority, but
still put some individuals in harm’s way therefore placing those in the position of power in
the shoes of the lever operator from the trolley problem.
2.6
Hypothesis
With the background provided by introducing AI and some of it’s challenges the following
hypothesis and subsequent research questions are formed.
With increasing prevalence of progressively more advanced AI technologies, their impact
on healthcare will grow, but the development and deployment pace will be hampered by
ethical constraints.
2.7
Research questions
• Where is the growth potential of AI technologies in medicine?
• What are the hurdles of effective AI implementation in healthcare, how to mitigate
and what is the perceived role of ethical issues?
• What are the primary ethical challenges of responsible development and deploy­
ment of medical AI systems?
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
9
==PAGE:18==
3
Methodology
3.1
Motivation and design of this qualitative study
This paragraph serves as a bedrock to design and lay the foundation for the qualitative
research to come next. It is meant to structure research approaches and provide best
preparation possible to get the optimal experience from “field work”. The extent to which
theory can be used to accurately predict reality is uncertain due to prevalent biases. [42]
Nonetheless, being aware of the issue an attempt is made to mitigate the occurring biases,
namely: design bias, selection/participant bias, data collection bias, measurement bias,
analysis bias and publication bias.
It is imperative to set a goal for undertaking a given study. [43] What is expected to be
taken out of the work put in? What would be considered successful and what insufficient?
This paper does not address a very specific issue, nor does it tackle a specific case or
aims to solve a particular problem. Therefore, the goal can not simply be defined as
solving this particular problem. So, this study has a less precise goal and begins with a
more exploratory research question allowing room for potentially unexpected conclusions
and areas of exploration. [43]
The goal is to build up knowledge of how AI technologies for healthcare are developed
and effectively implemented, but also to understand how responsibility for mistakes would
be allocated as the autonomy and prevalence of such technologies increases. In other
words, the goal is set to either confirm or refute stated hypotheses providing arguments
and seeking most specific conclusions. That set, another step is to attempt to answer the
research questions related to the hypothesis with the highest degree of precision possible.
Qualitative research is an emergent process with a substantial degree of flexibility. Initial
ideas are well represented with a comparison to a “rough sketch”. Emphasis is placed
upon inductive reasoning and how earlier stages of research influence the subsequent
ones in the process.
What’s more, the researcher and the characteristics of the re­
searched subject are subject to development and change. [43]
This study is relevant for multiple reasons, some of which are stated below. AI, Machine
Learning, autonomous systems, these and other buzzwords are so commonly and broadly
used nowadays that it’s hard not to come across them interacting with media, especially
those technologically inclined. For example Google Searches for “machine learning” have
increased roughly seven­fold over the past eight years. [44]
Yet, looking around one may remain somewhat sceptical about the impact AI can have
on us and our daily lives. After all, we still drive the cars ourselves, clean our own houses
or go shopping ourselves. Of course, some examples may come in, such as personal­
ized YouTube suggestions, automated lawnmowers, vacuum cleaners etc., but one may
remain somewhat sceptical when comparing information available online or in the media
with how much AI technology advancements affected the routines of an ordinary, working
citizen.
This scepticism has prompted investigation of AI capabilities when applied in healthcare.
How far­reaching and influential can artificial intelligence be practically? How much main­
tenance does this technology require and does it make sense to let it operate with in­
creasing autonomy? How important it is to have a person watching over and how much
are we, as a society accustomed to relying on human judgement? In other words, how
10
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:19==
big a role will ethical issues continue to play when exposing AI to tasks with increased
levels of responsibility in a field as critical for civilization as healthcare.
How is this study conducted on a conceptual level? As mentioned, qualitative findings
unravel in an inductive way, meaning first efforts are directed towards understanding situ­
ations of people or groups before more general theories are developed. In the case of this
work, the subject matter is the people working (directly or indirectly) with AI with their differ­
ent angles and incentives. With time qualitative research studies emerge and slight shifts
of foci are not uncommon. This makes qualitative studies non­linear and non­sequential
with data gathering and analysis occurring simultaneously. [43]
There are different approaches on how one should incorporate literature review into re­
search. Arguments arise on both sides, one stating that it should be done before any
research progress is made, another preferred supplementing ongoing work as steps are
taken. Here, a mixed solution is adapted. Parts of literature have indeed been ana­
lyzed beforehand, but some paragraphs were added or reviewed further down the road.
For example, initial thinking was leaning more towards investigating strictly medical envi­
ronments for AI development, but it turns out that Denmark has multiple institutions and
companies whose omitted involvement would do injustice to the process of seeking best
possible understanding of the network.
Additionally there are issues related to choosing the correct papers to analyze. Narrowing
the scope to only those positions, which tackle precisely the subject chosen for investi­
gation could impede the openness to various angles and broader scope of questions that
would more accurately represent reality. In the end this ought to be set as a goal and
overfocusing on particular literature may set findings off target. [43]
The scope of this qualitative research study is confronted with a situation of dynamic tech­
nological change and evolving public opinion about AI. Such instability is a factor when
asking questions about accuracy and durability of results and conclusions to come. This
uncertainty is taken into account when assessing findings. Unforeseen and unpredictable
factors, the so­called “black swans” by their very definition can not be prepared for, thus
conclusions and forecasts can only hold with a certain degree of probability. [45] With
the magnitude of ongoing AI research, chances are that a certain discovery may render
parts of this paper obsolete or in the need of updating. Within the timespan dedicated to
conduct this study, the state of affairs is likely to change, at least in some minor way.
3.2
Methodology and data collection
To answer the research questions information will be drawn from multiple sources of
knowledge. The main distinction is between expert interviews, referencing academic pa­
pers on the subject in questions and scientific symposia tackling the challenges of safe
and effective AI technology expansion in healthcare.
3.2.1
Publications
Parts of this paper, especially the more foundational ones, were developed by research­
ing existing publications. Selection of papers was done either by accessing content avail­
able online, which was found with the help of Google Scholar search engine or through
suggestions from some of the experts. Restricted access was at times lifted with DTU cre­
dentials broadening the scope of available material. The most frequently used keywords
and phrases were: ”AI in healthcare”, ”ethics of healthcare AI”, ”liability of autonomous AI
operation”, ”AI startups in healthcare”, etc.
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
11
==PAGE:20==
Cited publications differ in their scope and research areas. The main ones could be cat­
egorized as follows:
• Technical papers about Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning, etc.
• Papers touching upon the ethical and legal issues of technology
• Regulations, laws and legislative proposals for different governing bodies
• Sociological papers addressing potential impacts on a societal level
• Miscellaneous articles on research design and related to some of the concepts men­
tioned throughout.
3.2.2
Interviews’ methodology
As mentioned before, some of the up to date data about the development of AI in the
healthcare sector is to be gathered through a series of expert interviews. The interviews
were conducted in two rounds. The first round tackled the AI technology in healthcare
from the implementation standpoint, whereas the second one placed emphasis on liability
concerns as AI autonomy increases.
For both rounds, the starting point was a set of preliminary ideas (anchoring points) out­
lining the areas to address, which were used as guidelines. [46] As stated by Silverman
”Departures from the guidelines are not seen as a problem but are often encouraged”
and this is how the data collection process developed. A boilerplate approach to the en­
tire process of was purposefully avoided with flexibility embedded right from the start. At
the same time the discussion was constraint to remain within the area of focus. [47] The
method for conducting interviews is labeled a ”General Interview” by Turner, meaning
that the ways questions were worded depended on the researcher, but their stem was
relatively fixed. [48]
So the anchoring points were used as guidelines to shape a more profound conversa­
tion, which would develop gradually. It was assumed that the insight shall come from the
interviewees themselves as they possess greater expertise in their respective fields and
are able to better guide the conversation towards relevant findings. Keeping in mind the
limited time allocated for interviews, interviewees were encouraged to speak up about
aspects they find most relevant and preoccupying and once dialogue was established,
further questions were shaped building on what has already been said together with pre­
vious research done in preparation for the talk. The aim was to make use of the time to
the highest degree possible.
To retain information shared by interviewed experts the approach was to take notes of
what is being said, paying particular attention to references, names, relevant data and
potential, unforeseen insights coming from the experts themselves. Once enough inter­
views are conducted, the gathered information, together with relevant publications was
used to build up a comprehensive discussion.
The interviews were conducted digitally via a video call for convenience, but also as an
additional precaution against the COVID pandemic, which remains highly impactful on
the global society at the time of writing. Digital approach has its drawbacks. It was found
that in­person conversations yield better results, as the respondents tend to give more
exhaustive answers. [49] Nonetheless, the difference was deemed less significant in
comparison with the aforementioned benefits of online, video meetings.
12
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:21==
Interviews first round
First round of interviews was conducted in June, July and August 2021. The starting
point was a set of twelve preliminary interview questions. Those were the best guesses
of how the situation may be. First interview was conducted with a practising nurse from
the center of oncology in Warsaw who preferred to remain anonymous. Even though she
does not have a background in AI technologies, it was deemed a sound beginning to
better understand how to continue. The following questions were used for the interview:
• What patients are you mostly exposed to?
• Would you say your environment would represent the most common cases?
• Have you ever received training on ethics? If so, is this something that’s being done
continuously?
• What machines (software, hardware) do you find most useful in reducing your work­
load?
• Is new technology being introduced regularly? If so, what is the nature of this tech­
nology?
• Is there something you could imagine as being very helpful that may already lie
within the capabilities of existing technology?
• What are the most difficult parts of the job? Could you imagine technology replacing
humans in those tasks?
• Taking into account the complexity of your tasks, can you imagine your job being
fully automated?
• What is your outlook on employment security in healthcare with such rapid devel­
opment of AI?
• Which tasks appear too advanced for existing technology and yet with progressing
innovation could potentially be done by machines?
• Having discussed the potential capabilities of AI, do you see ethical issues that could
block the implementation of AI?
The second interview was with Anja Storgaard from the Unit for Health Research and
Innovation in the Capital Region of Denmark. Together with the answers from the first
conversation, a set of to the following areas of foci was developed for further data collec­
tion (Listing order is not relevant.):
• The importance of ethics in AI development and implementation
• Sources of funding
• Most significant challenges faced in development and implementation process
• Origin of the idea for the project to pursue and value proposition
• Relevant markets
• Potential for expansion
• Interference with the current workflow
• Data­related challenges
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
13
==PAGE:22==
This was the bedrock used throughout the further data collection process.
With the exception of the first interview, the focus was on the Capital Region in Denmark
where a significant percentage of the population resides, which is then reflected in the
amount of healthcare oriented research in collaboration with its eleven hospitals. [50] It
was not clear from the beginning who would reply to requests and agree for an interview,
but ultimately representatives of the entities listed below gave their consent.
• Corti
• Cerebriu
• Radiobotics
• Clinical Research Centre at Hvidovre Hospital
• Unit for Health Research and Innovation at the Center for Regional Development
• The CT Innovation Unit at Herlev and Gentofte Hospital
• Quality of Life Technologies Lab (university­based research unit in Genève)
In terms of for­profit companies, research was focused on finding and targeting local mar­
ket leaders who stand out amongst aspiring healthcare startups with their high degree of
progress, considerable development and an established market position. Those startups
were pinpointed based upon insight from professionals at the Unit for Health Research
and Innovation at the Center for Regional Development who are familiar with healthcare
innovation activity as they link state­ and private­based entities in that domain. What’s
more, Tværspor ­ a research undertaking in support of healthcare development, pub­
lished a document showing examples of how AI is developed in the Danish society. Many
of the indicated areas would indeed justify labeling Corti, Cerebriu and Radiobotics as
representative of the countries development goals. [51]
Interviews second round
The second round of interviews was conducted in November and December 2021. Here
the interviewees were selected based upon advice from prof. Henning Boje Andersen
who was supervising this thesis project. This time, the ethical side of things was in focus
with attention being paid to issues of liability. Therefore, the goal was to reach people
who could provide insight in this domain. Just as the first time, the outreach was done by
e­mail towards people with expert knowledge. In the end, not all the professionals were
available, so there is a degree of randomness in the process ­ convenience sampling. In
the end six experts agreed for an interview:
• Audrey Lebret
Dr. Audrey Lebret investigates the interactions between new technologies, biomedicine
and human rights at the Faculty of Law at University of Copenhagen. [52] Audrey’s
insights are presented in the section entitled ”Bias in AI”.
• Bent Dalager
Bent is the founder of NewTech at KPMG Denmark working with AI implementation
for businesses. His unit currently has around one hundred employees. [53] Bent’s
insights are presented in the section entitled ”Current attitude towards AI and future
trends”.
• Kim Lyngby Mikkelsen
Kim works at the Danish Patient Compensation Association as a Medical coordina­
tor. He takes care of the analysis of compensation submissions to see if the claim is
14
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:23==
indeed justified. He has thorough knowledge of how the compensations are granted
and which parties needed to be involved in the process. What’s more he has ac­
cess to annual statistics of claims, including their number and approval rate. Kim’s
insights are presented in the section entitled ”Different options for the allocation of
responsibility”.
• Léonard van Rompaey
Léonard works at the Faculty of Law at University of Copenhagen. His current post­
doc project deals with ”Private Governance for Responsible and Trustworthy Artifi­
cial Intelligence”. He has professional interest in studying liability issues related to
AI systems. [54] Léonard’s insights are presented in the section entitled ”Different
options for the allocation of responsibility”, but also in the final ”Conclusions and
perspectives”.
• Pola Elisabeth Schwöbel
Pola is a PhD Student at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at Technical University of Denmark. She writes her thesis in invariance
learning. Details will follow later in the paper. [55] Pola’s insights are presented in
the section entitled ”Bias in AI”.
• Bert Hoorne
Bert works with healthcare strategies at Microsoft and has professional as well as
personal interest in the development of technology for health. [56] Bert’s insights
are presented in the section entitled ”AI implementation by large companies” and
specifically in the ”Microsoft” subsection.
In the section dealing with the ethical side of AI development, findings coming from the
second round of interviews will be embedded into the context being discussed. This is in
contrast to the first round, which was accumulated in designated paragraphs. The differ­
ence arose due to the nature of investigated issues. The first part dealt with implemen­
tation and took interviews as the primary information source. The second part touches
upon the issue of liability, where academic publications, legal documents or other official
statements were of equal importance.
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
15
==PAGE:24==
4
Business­side of AI, issues of effective
implementation in healthcare
4.1
Approach to interviews
As stated before, interviews were conducted with the aim of getting the most accurate
depiction of the situation possible while operating within the given constraints. In prac­
tice the actors could be broken down into three groups dealing with AI development from
different perspectives either less or more directly. It is to be noted that there were differ­
ences with how easily a certain organisation or person could be reached, respond and
eventually agree for an interview.
Figure 4.1: Actors interviewed in the first round
Most interest was shown by facilitators together with researchers and developers and
they were also the groups in focus. Practitioners were more difficult to reach, but at the
same time not as targeted. Lower responsiveness is attributed to incentives of those pro­
fessional groups and their work­related aims. [57] There often is no incentive placed on
practitioners to engage in development work outside of their regular tasks and increased
workload during the 2020 COVID outbreak [58] leaving, at least for most, practically nei­
ther the room nor motivation for long­term consideration of AI projects.
Interviews took around 3 months to schedule, prepare and execute largely due to avail­
ability issues and in some cases, lack of responsiveness. If successful, it took on average
3 weeks from the point of first outreach to interview. Taking into account the project scope,
available resources and the goal of this study, a decision was made to conclude data col­
lection once it was deemed representative for analysis. Even though Denmark is home to
more startups developing AI in healthcare [59], the ones that were ultimately interviewed
are said to be among market leaders in their respective areas and were set as examples
having relatively high degrees of implementation of their products. That taken into account
they were deemed representative for the targets set. This insight came from facilitators
who have a thorough overview of healthcare startups in Denmark.
As the author of this paper, I have only received COVID vaccine once most of the data col­
lection was completed. So for increased safety, which added up to locational constraints,
all interviews, except for one, were conducted online via a video call. With the exception
of the first two, the order of interviews was largely random, or at least random among the
16
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:25==
members of a particular group, as it depended mostly on the parties involved and their
availability.
4.2
Interviews ­ first round
4.2.1
Practitioners
In the first round a practicing nurse from Poland was interviewed for the purpose of this
paper. She will remain anonymous though her intakes will be presented without restric­
tions. As mentioned, outreach turned out to be difficult. The high degree of occupancy
with their professional duties especially in the times of a pandemic is said to be the cause.
The interview took place in an interesting period of time as the interviewee was working in
a designated COVID ward and had to adhere to special procedures ensuring increased
levels of hygiene and strict isolation.
The comments, suggestions and insights regarding AI implementation made by the inter­
viewed nurse were mostly related to practical problems she encountered. She mentioned
having to perform fairly repetitive tasks such as blood pressure measurements, blood
sugar measurements, daily drug preparation. In truth those are areas where technolog­
ical solutions already exist, but have not yet been implemented in this specific case due
to budget constraints.
When it comes to potential for more sophisticated technologies better suited for the label
of artificial intelligence, the only example that came up was decision assistance targeting
deep or shallow cannula puncture, which is a choice to be made for every patient requiring
cannula insertion. Faster and more simple is the shallow puncture, but oftentimes when a
patient’s stay is prolonged he may need to have it replaced multiple times to maintain high
hygiene standards. This causes harm especially to elderly whose skin does not recover
as fast. Deep cannula, on the other hand, can last much longer and is a better solution
for prolonged care. Accurately assessing the need for a deep puncture up front could
improve care quality and save time of the personnel. It is to be noted that a deep puncture
demands sterile, surgical conditions and a presence of an anesthesiologist making it a
more complex procedure to undertake. Judgement accuracy would be an important, but
not critical factor. After all, choosing one solution over the other does not have immediate
life threatening consequences.
Ethical issues were also addressed. The discussion leaned towards inflexibility of the
ethical system in Poland, which assigns mandatory attendance of resources to patients
who arrived prior regardless of the potential higher chances of survival the newly incoming
patients may have. This inflexibility in part, simplifies implementation of potential AI solu­
tions, at least when the ethical question concerns patient prioritization if urgent treatment
is required.
4.2.2
Facilitators
Four interviews were conducted with people who don’t directly work with developing the
AI technology, but facilitate cooperation between engineers, doctors or other healthcare
employees, state representatives, university professors and remaining relevant parties.
Anja Storgaard, Henriette Raaschou, Marie Smed and Rasmus Fält are working with tech­
nology innovation at both Harlev Hospital and The Capital Region. What’s more Henriette
comes from a technical background herself having worked as a radiographer before tran­
sitioning to innovation. They have direct interest in staying updated about AI development
in the healthcare sector of the Capital Region of Denmark and provided numerous insights
presented below.
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
17
==PAGE:26==
First part relates to data. It was mentioned that there’s no shortage of decent quality data
generated by Danish hospitals and other entities. There are however issues of standard­
ization across different parts of the country as there are multiple systems implemented
by various municipalities. The implementation of electronic healthcare records is a large­
scale ongoing project to be addressed later in the paper. The lack of unified workflow
generates problems with the AI algorithms, whose reliability is closely connected to in­
puts. They require certain variables and parameters to ensure consistency. This is an
issue, which proves challenging.
Further data­related hotspot areas could be well identified with the following bullet points:
• With much of the data being available, how to deliver it to researchers, universities,
professors or companies ensuring privacy protection with sufficient workflow?
• When is an AI algorithm ready? When is it good enough? How does it improve in
the future?
• What input data to make a decision, which variables accurately represent a diagno­
sis?
• Where to store the data to ensure safe access for multiple parties? Who can deliver
enough computation power for running tests?
There are around 100 AI healthcare startups with projects currently under implementa­
tion in Denmark, many of which are based on diagnosis assistance with visual inputs.
The most prominent mentioned multiple times in interviews as ones with high degrees of
implementation are Corti, Cerebriu and Radiobotis.
An area of potential AI implementation pointed out was the problem of patient no­shows
for surgery. Necessary human and material resources are organized and all of a sudden a
patient is absent. It’s a major waste of time, source of growing ques, unnecessary delays
and frustration. At the time the interview was conducted there was no advanced solution
addressing the problem.
Another insight concerned the attitudes of researchers and developers. It was said that
they tend to lean towards staying on the “safe side” avoiding the insecure territory of
life and death judgements before the technology matures, experience grows and public
opinion changes together with the regulations.
A large­scale project driven towards implementation in the past years is the healthcare
platform for data collection and management developed by an American company Epic.
Epic was an undertaking, which consumed a lot of resources and took a long time to
implement. Having such a magnitude of impact Epic will be mentioned separately in a
dedicated paragraph of this paper.
In relation to Epic, it was also stated that one of the decisive factors when implementing
cutting edge technology in state­funded public sectors such as healthcare, is the manage­
rial power to decide on a solution once enough discussion has been done as achieving
unchallenged consent from start to finish verges on the impossible.
What’s more it was said that AI technology, being still immature, simply requires time
to develop and allow the policy makers to create adequate regulations. This, in turn,
would lead to higher degrees of implementation, which have already improved since the
beginning of AI healthcare startups.
Part of the discussion touched upon funding, which comes from a variety of sources.
18
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:27==
Large private pharmaceutical companies such as Novo Nordisk, LEO Pharma or Lund­
beck. State grants, EU research project Horizon Europe and private investors are also
amongst the largest contributors.
4.2.3
Researchers and developers
AI researchers and developers were the largest group among the interviewed parties. In
total five interviews were conducted with the representatives listed below:
• Cathal White from Radiobotics
• Linda Camilla Andresen from Clinical Research Centre at Hvidovre Hospital
• Robert Lauritzen from Cerebriu
• Igor Matias from Quality of Life Lab
• Lars Maaløe from Corti
The most relevant insights related to research questions are presented in the following
lines.
Insights from Radiobotics
First thing to note is that developing the algorithm is time­consuming. Radiobotics made
a few before getting to one, which undergoes the American legislative approval and has
already obtained the European CE certificate. Once software passes this stage it can not
be altered without going through the process again. Only minor, adaptive changes are
allowed.
It appears that from the ground up algorithms are designed as a decision­support tool
always having a human responsible behind the final judgement. There is no legal mech­
anism to do otherwise.
Project at Radiobotics was motivated by an outstanding shortage of radiologists. They
focus on three markets: Denmark, UK and the USA. Denmark is of importance, but it is
no secret that being a smaller and more conservative place, it does not show as much
potential for expansion. Nonetheless Copenhagen played a major development role.
It was highlighted that their aim is to make a tool, which delivers consistent quality for
the most daunting, repetitive and error­prone tasks humans have to deal with. A single
patient could be diagnosed differently by various professionals who would assign varying
severities of condition. An algorithm has a certain, consistent and repetitive approach,
independent from emotional aspects clouding human judgement. For the targeted scope,
it proved to be equally as effective as human professionals. AI can do well with accu­
rate measurements, sporting abnormalities and of course its processing power. It’s in
such areas that Radiobotics sees the greatest potential. Spotted pathologies can be then
assessed by humans who make the final call.
Insights from Clinical Research Centre at Hvidovre Hospital
Many factors influence research ideas and contrary to the idealistic vision, the most urgent
ones often are not addressed prior. Why? What actually frustrates medical personnel sim­
ply isn’t shiny and popular enough to catch attention. These days everyone is obsessed
with AI solutions, but oftentimes a more simple, rule­based software technology can work
just fine without adding the necessary complexity to the process.
Also, researchers themselves pressure to work on “life­saving” problems. People wish
to be involved in the most impactful and critical ideas, but at the same time they tend
to incline towards what looks best on paper and attracts most attention. Searching for
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
19
==PAGE:28==
a cure for cancer is a better sell than structuring hospital’s data management system,
even though it may be that most employees and patients are more adversely affected by
poor performance of the latter. Lately, the most up to date ideas lean towards Artificial
Intelligence and its potential uses even though this may in fact be an “overkill” for the task
at hand and temptation to proceed is more related to prestige than targeting the problem
in question. As progressive as this technology may be, overfocusing on using it, shifts the
foci from more simple and conventional solutions, which might be just as good or better
considering their higher degree of simplicity and the clarity they provide.
Another aspect is an innate problem related to academia and research. There’s expec­
tation and pressure to always push for new knowledge creation. And as Linda pointed
out, when one makes a thorough research of literature, it turns out that many of the pro­
posed problems to investigate have already been solved. It’s just that in most cases such
solutions never went beyond the research and design phases not to mention successful
implementation. So, even though it could make sense to iterate on existing knowledge,
the academia environment leans towards different angles and perspectives. With that in
mind, it remains crucial to consider implementation from the very beginning of projects,
regardless if new knowledge is created or if it’s about expanding the existing ideas. In
Denmark, considering implementation at early stages is not as common as for example
in the UK or the US where implementation­focused research groups are nothing out of
the ordinary.
In some cases the question of issues to investigate is also one of funding. If someone
with little inside knowledge of the clinic environment invests in healthcare research he’ll
be more satisfied hearing, at least in the popular sense, the most impactful words, such
as “AI” or the aforementioned “cure for cancer”. This is a similar bias towards more presti­
gious research ideas as described earlier with researchers themselves. People are more
willing to invest in “saving lives” or “making a difference” than in fixing an unreliable data
management system. In the end it is the capital flow that directs human efforts and so
they may not be optimally allocated. So there is a need to adapt to investors’ expectations
and best case scenario try to meet them halfway.
There are baseline questions, which cast doubt on the validity of some projects. One to
consider is the very usefulness of a system to be developed. To illustrate the point an
example of park­assistance systems implemented in some of the more recent cars was
used. It is yet another system, which is meant to assist, but in fact its very existence and
necessary maintenance just adds another layer of complexity to the whole process. Of
course, arguably there are settings in which such assistance would be helpful like for less
experienced clinicians or drivers following up on the car example. However, overreliance
on technology for such assistance may cause harm in the long run as younger people will
have fewer incentives and less pressure to gain experience and confidence to accurately
“park the car themselves”.
Knowing the above and still wanting to move on with development one has to assume
the validity of an AI decision support project. But now more specific questions begin
to arise. Which project is a sound one to pursue? When a patient arrives at a hospital
seeking emergency assistance, he is first examined by a physician who needs to make an
accurate judgement about his condition and assign (or not) human and physical resources
to help him. This needs to be done well, but at the same time fast and efficiently to make
sure the ward doesn’t get blocked due to an excessive number of pending patients. It’s a
difficult job to execute, but even more to define. What is it that the doctor looks at when
examining or better written, eyeballing the patient? How could this be done by an AI?
20
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:29==
Which parameters to monitor? What is the final output?
As ethical aspects are concerned, it is to be pointed out that there already exist many
machines which make judgements and decisions for us. Laboratory test results are often
nothing more than a number on a screen displayed after some sensory inputs have been
processed by software logic. Even if they wanted to, after some time humans can’t follow
up with understanding of all these logical patterns. This simply is too much work for a
human brain to handle, so reliance is not as much a choice, as it is a necessity. So in time
Linda does not see AI reliant judgements to be a decisive ethical issue.
Considering data availability and accessibility, this again did not appear as a major issue.
Healthcare generates a lot of data, which is hard to make use of later on. There surely
are obstacles when trying to access personalized records, but those are to be overcome
if a sound project is undertaken.
Last point is one about healthcare being a conservative branch. Daily issues of life and
death nature make it into a field where experiments are taken with distance. Because
if something works, why risk the change? What is it that needs to be fixed? Denmark
is a developed country and its healthcare is a “fairly ok” functioning unit. Ideas for its
improvement still make sense, but they won’t be perceived as critical without a burning
need dictating it.
Insights from Cerebriu
Cerebriu started out in 2018 without a fixed mindset about where the development should
go. As the team progressed and discussed development potential with clinics they did
eventually converge to a well­defined idea. The algorithm is meant to supplement MRI
scanners in real time as they function. As data is generated, the AI will assess if addi­
tional, more thorough scanning protocols are worthwhile. 5min is the target range to either
continue or cut short on the in­depth scan, which would take up to 30­60min. Previously
a radiologist would have first assess the preliminary finding and later schedule additional,
more accurate testing if he had doubts about the patient’s condition. Not only does this
reduce the time it takes to scan freeing the device to deliver more efficiency, but also
diminishes the use of agents in the process. What makes it even more versatile is that
it would practically become a supplement to an existing device not adding any additional
layers to the process and not involving hands on medical personnel with more work.
What’s more, the software is not meant to provide high­certainty, detailed judgements,
but to help prioritize patients and allocate resources accordingly. Apparently, it is not un­
common to scan patients who show up with a headache. A headache, even an acute one
needs to be diagnosed, but determining that it’s not severe ought to be resolved without
delays. The problem lies partially in the scanning time itself, but also in the logistical chal­
lenge of prioritizing the radiologist’s attention towards patients with acute and dangerous
conditions and making sure that the rest who is healthy is not kept uncertain more than
absolutely necessary.
MRI is a complicated device and currently there exist only 3 major providers who all to­
gether cover 85% of the global market demand. Those companies are General Electric,
Siemens, and Philips. Cerebriu in the current development phase only works towards
adapting its system to those three biggest players. It took roughly 1.5 years to develop the
algorithm and initially it cannot be adjusted to accommodate data from too many providers.
This is now unnecessary and can be done in later stages of development. Regarding the
versatility of use, the focus is now on diagnosing strokes and detecting cancer cells. It
takes time to adapt software to deal with diversified problems and a specialized solution
does not necessarily apply to a different problem with desired accuracy. Cerebriu works
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
21
==PAGE:30==
on a platform, which should function as a bedrock towards future development. At some
point they intend to move outside of their current focus on brain scans towards address­
ing different needs detecting pathologies occuring in other body parts. An example would
involve early and reliable breast cancer detection thus responding to an existing need not
only in the Danish, but many societies globally.
Despite having their headquarters located in Copenhagen, Cerebriu does not focus on
the small market in Denmark. The perspectives lie to a much larger extent abroad in the
US, Great Britain or emerging Asian markets, such as India or Japan.
Discussing reliability of judgement, Robert claims numbers comparable to a human ra­
diologist. This would mean that the AI cannot yet outperform a human by a lot, but as
mentioned earlier, extreme accuracy might not be what it takes to prioritize patients well.
Other ideas involve having a mobile scanner to deliver cheap and accessible MRI diag­
nosis across neighbourhoods. It brings such examinations to a whole new level, but for
now remains a conceptual idea.
Most time consuming challenge at the time is data collection. There exists privacy related
anxiety and obtaining access to data is difficult. This is mostly true regarding the Danish
environment, therefore there have been efforts towards working with data generated in
India or the US, which turns out to be much more available. Having to deal with data
obtained abroad does not allow for a smooth transition to a market where people are of a
varying racial origin or accustomed to a different climate environment. How well and with
how much effort can AI be adapted to cope, remains a finding to investigate for future
stages.
Insights from Quality of Life Technologies
In the lab researchers look into the data generated by modern day wearables, such as
smartphones, smartwatches or other devices of similar nature, and look into utilizing them
with the aim to improve one’s quality of life. Despite having the same scheme, there are
multiple projects in development. It is to be noted that the concept stands out in compari­
son to other ones discussed previously. It is not about applying AI in the healthcare sector
per se, but focuses more on prevention and early detection. Nonetheless, as research
was conducted and a real life example like this one came up, it was deemed relevant
enough to contribute.
What is to be highlighted about Igor’s work is that the process is still in early stages of
development and changes might apply to some of the initial concepts as the project un­
ravels. The job is to deliver a proof of concept and analyze to what extent data could be
utilized. At this stage, the idea is to investigate Alzheimer’s disease. The treatment is
ineffective once later stages develop, but could nonetheless deliver results much earlier
on. What makes the problem challenging is an exceptionally large time span. The idea
is to detect and reliably predict the development of illness in the elderly stages of life as
early as 20 years before occurrence. Such a vast amount of time in the world of technol­
ogy could mean a whole new era when one considers and compares 2021 with 2001 and
how big a gap separates these two. It turns out that there are symptoms which could sug­
gest Alzheimer’s a lot in advance, but rarely does a person even think about examination,
especially not with the preconceived notion that it could in fact be this particular disease.
Igor’s motivation to pursue such a project comes largely from the wide accessibility of such
a solution, which could be deployed as an application for anyone with a smartphone. Like
this, there’s potential to reach most of the globe and make a huge impact. Also, there
are only limited regulatory concerns as the application would either be cheap or free of
22
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:31==
charge.
When some of the ethical concerns were brought up, such as having to deal with issues of
privacy and also how conclusions would then be dealt with, the answer was fairly simple.
The data would be under the control of the user and so would the conclusions. Overall Igor
is of the opinion that the biggest obstacle when it comes to development of such projects
are ethical dilemmas and privacy concerns. One could easily imagine a scenario when
someone is alerted by his wearable about an ongoing condition, which could for example
threaten his profession, which may demand certain health standards. Worries about data
leakage and if such information could then be used against the individual, such or similar
worries remain a factor.
Insights from Corti
Corti was founded in 2016 with the idea to analyze and assist the judgement of various
types of healthcare related conversations. They are now 80 people and even though they
have not yet gone through the point of breaking even, they show substantial revenue. The
project has a far reaching vision to develop analytical tools for all kinds of conversations,
but to begin with, 112 acute only calls were chosen as there is much less data and more
precise scope. It is also a case where the decision is binary as the patient either does
or does not have cardiac arrest. At first Corti dealt only with cardiac arrest cases, but
they are now looking beyond that. The problem is that dispatchers, doctors, nurses or
other medical professionals are often uncertain about their judgement and recommenda­
tions they made to patients. Their diagnosis relies heavily on education, experience and
environmental factors leading to uncertainty at the end. Corti wishes to reduce it.
An interesting point is that Corti’s algorithm now works with many languages and expan­
sion is not difficult, even though additional validation sets are required. This is partially
solved as the algorithm itself is in part a data collection tool, so having it implemented in
a new setting gives access to data.
An important note is that Corti does not diagnose. Lars made it very clear to note that
they only develop decision support tools. It reflects the pattern from previous talks and
the legal obstacle standing in the way of autonomous solutions. This is also what Lars
pointed out. They are thinking about long term autonomy for their systems, but as of now
it would not comply with the legal requirements, so they must stick to supporting humans.
Also, according to Lars, even putting aside the legal aspects the technology is not yet
ready for fully autonomous operation.
The company is funded by venture capital for the most part and as of now mostly operates
in Nordics and the US. It took them half­a­year to develop the prototype, which evolves
to this day.
4.3
Interviews’ summary
Below the most important takeaways from the interviews will be summarized in relation
to first of two of the research questions. Key points will be assigned to respective groups
who they originated from.
4.3.1
Where is the growth potential of AI technologies in medicine?
Practitioners
• repetitive and time consuming work (automated drug preparation, skin temperature
measurements, which was a particularly important issue during the COVID pan­
demic, continuous blood sugar measurements)
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
23
==PAGE:32==
• decision support with regard to performing a deep or shallow cannula puncture upon
admittance reducing unnecessary injuries later on
• solutions towards geriatric care improvement
Facilitators
• major resources waste such as patient no­shows for surgery
• repetitive and time­consuming tasks (e.g. neural responsiveness, EEG analysis)
• breast cancer detection
Researchers and developers
• daunting, repetitive and error­prone tasks
• vision­based AI to determine a patient’s emotional state upon a hospital visit in the
acute department and identifying if he has calmed down having received profes­
sional assistance. Elderly patients in focus
• where time is lost in a repetitive manner
• breast cancer
• prevention of diseases in the early stages of development by using data generated
with wearable devices. (e.g. Alzheimer’s disease)
4.3.2
How to mitigate the hurdles of effective AI implementation in
healthcare?
Practitioners
• NIL
Facilitators
• input data well suited for AI technology (standardized, easily accessible, currently
image­based data is in focus)
• addressing deficiency of skilled personnel
• dedication from management with enough regulatory power
• development ideas from the clinic floor
• a clearly defined and well understood value proposition
• implementation considered from the beginning
• experience with technology and better knowledge of the network
• having a unified and standardized solution
Researchers and developers
• hospital trials
• skilled personnel deficiency
• market size
• addressing an actual need from the clinic floor
• sustainable, long­term funding with a narrow focus
• considering implementation from the beginning
• avoiding addition of complexity to an existing workflow
• development ideas from the clinic floor
24
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:33==
• peoples’ perception of an AI solution being implemented
• little or no involvement from the user’s side
• potential for expansion
• dedicated effort to obtain regulatory certifications
4.4
Digital technologies and AI in Danish Healthcare
4.4.1
Government Strategy for Artificial Intelligence in Denmark
Danish government declares the will to allocate resources to develop AI technologies and
increase the number of relevant projects in the society. [60] Despite already having a high
degree of digitization implemented in the systems on national level, a relative compari­
son by McKinsey [61] states that Denmark is in fact not a leading country in terms of AI
development even when accounting for its relatively small size. Thus the central govern­
ment developed and published a strategy highlighting key areas where greater resource
allocation or organizational improvements are required.
Even in a broader sense encompassing more than just the healthcare sector there’s em­
phasis on making AI a decision support tool of all kinds. Interesting paragraph clearly
states that the final judgement must always be made by a human, which is particularly
important with patients and their trust­based relationship with a physician, which is to re­
main an exclusively human endeavour.
An identified bottleneck is the supply of employees who possess the skills needed for ef­
fective work with AI systems. According to the note, more than 50% of Danish businesses
had difficulties finding or retaining employees with the right digital skill set and motivation.
This is an implication to further increase facilitating opportunities for new students to obtain
relevant education.
Similar mindset is developed around the research domain. There’s a need and will to
allocate resources into AI­centered research endeavours and prompt creation of fresh
academics who would further develop the branch. The projected demand is expected to
exceed capacities if investments are not made. Lack of satisfaction with the current set
of investments originates from a relatively low position of Denmark when set aside with
countries comparable in size such as Israel, Finland or Sweden. This is a comparison of
private investment funds and the number of patents applied for in AI. [61]
Notable highlight from the note is that the healthcare sector remains the primary area
of focus for AI technologies set aside only with 3 additional sectors: energy, agriculture
and transport. Having the healthcare system closely tied to the government and related
public funding could be seen as a disadvantage restricting access for companies who
wish to develop solutions for the sector. Due to its sensitive purpose healthcare remains
a branch, which falls under various regulations and legal constraints [62]. But surprisingly,
this could also be seen as an advantage. The biggest American­based companies on the
market are at an unfavorable position towards locally oriented startups, which are more
likely to have the knowledge and human resources necessary to understand the web of
specific regulations protecting healthcare. Such an approach is, in part, the mindset of
an emerging Alvenir startup, which tackles speech recognition aiming at healthcare as a
potential source of demand. [63]
One of the most relevant commitments is the focus on providing access to public sector
data for companies and researchers. Previous learnings indicate lack of data access as
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
25
==PAGE:34==
one of the major hindrances in exposing skilled professionals to development opportu­
nities. It is specified that a large part of the data collection enabling process will target
speech recognition projects in Danish. This may turn out to be a decisive claim as the
public sector is, in fact, generating large pools of data from call centres regarding affairs of
common interest relevant for practically all citizens or people residing in the country, such
as taxes or to some extent even healthcare. Making smart use of this resource opens
clear development possibilities to improve systemic efficiency. [64]
4.4.2
Epic platform and possibilities for AI growth in Denmark
The standardization and organization of data in Danish healthcare is set to lay the foun­
dations for easier development of AI technologies. The task is partly realized through
a major publicly­funded project of implementing a platform developed by an American
company Epic.
Epic is a Us­based company, which developed software by the same name serving data
management in the healthcare sector, commonly known as the Electronic Healthcare
Records. [65] Epic makes for an information­rich case as it was selected for implemen­
tation in the Capital Region of Denmark in 2013. It was to replace an existing IT solution,
which was unreliable and lacked stability suffering from frequent crashes. Once chosen,
Epic was meant to target 12 hospitals serving almost 3mln people. [66] It was a huge
publicly­funded project worth around $ 0.5bln of taxpayers’ money, chosen largely thanks
to Epic’s experience with setting up many Electronic Healthcare Records projects around
the world, mainly in the US. Epic’s most prominent competitor, especially significant on
the local, Danish market is Systematic, which has been selected in regions of western
and later also southern Denmark since 2002, which is 11 years before Epic begin it’s
implementation work in the East. [67]
Since the rollout of Epic started, the system has experienced major criticism, with claims
going as far as to say that it disrupted workflows, created frustration and possibly even in­
creased patients’ exposure to unnecessary risks. In a survey conducted during 2018 and
later 2019 by the Capital Region among physicians and other healthcare professionals,
Epic was ranked as unsatisfying by 7 out of every 10 participants. [66] What’s more the
transition has been a source of media coverage for years where it has often been judged
as too expensive and even raising claims of possible system withdrawal starting in 2022.
The claims came largely from frustrated doctors who signed a petition opposing further
development of the platform in 2018. [68]
26
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.2: Survey on Epic’s healthcare platform [66]
Voices of dissatisfaction could originate in prevalent emphasis on implementing a stan­
dardized solution across the participating hospitals. Standardization was meant to unify
and improve the quality of care across the board and there are indeed reasons to be­
lieve this is a justified approach. [69] Nonetheless, omitting local specificity and needs of
a particular setting altogether could have adverse consequences and standardization is
not always a superior method. [70] Resources are not uniformly distributed and popula­
tions may have varying needs depending on location, so one­size­fits­all solution may not
always apply.
Overall, the case of Epic and its implementation is not to be easily labeled “successful”.
The long­lasting and unordered transition disturbed existing workflows and led to major
sources of dissatisfaction amongst clinicians. It was a process with mostly applied top­
down methodology and this does not seem to correspond well to the needs of knowledge
and information intensive sector such as healthcare. [66]
Nonetheless, despite many drawbacks, Epic is an implemented solution and is also likely
to remain one considering the efforts put into launching it online. Its top­down implemen­
tation and emphasis on standardization is a way to create data accessible for AI­oriented
research, but problems were reported with this goal as well, as mentioned by Metcalf­
Rinaldo and Jensen [71] who studied Epic implementation at Herlev/Gentofte Hospital.
Even though such an issue was reported, it is believed that prospective efforts will lead
to improvements and Epic will eventually contribute to data accessibility for AI research.
A problem that complicates standardization on a national level is an effective presence of
two major providers of Electronic Healthcare Records, namely Epic covering eastern part
of Denmark and Systematic operating in the west. The lack of consensus on a common
system for the entire sector will lead to increased efforts for developers aiming to design
a solution for the entire Danish healthcare market. This may come as a surprise, since
Denmark with its population slightly short of 6mln (2020), amongst developed countries
arguably is a more adequate place for a unified solution, than many other, larger nations.
Looking broadly at Epic and relevant literature, which covers the issues the system en­
countered mostly right after release, leaves additional room for scepticism regarding AI
implementation in healthcare or at the very least the pace at which it is actually possi­
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
27
==PAGE:36==
ble. Arguably, the case should become more simple with a narrower scope, as not every
company must target so many sector employees as it is necessary when implementing
Electronic Healthcare Records, but the complexity of Epic’s case and the emerging learn­
ings should not be disregarded.
4.4.3
Effective data collection and utilization for research purposes
Having identified data accessibility and delivery format as one of the primary factors influ­
encing the development of AI technologies, it shall be examined in greater depth taking
a closer look at Denmark in particular with the aim of identifying ways to improve delivery
while maintaining required privacy levels to ensure societal trust towards development
projects does not plummet.
Research highlights the importance of well designed data collection in healthcare. [72]
Two approaches could be taken to achieve the desired outcome. First, a stringent, top­
down approach enforces standardization across the board using both standardized pro­
cedures and data collection tools. This however can only be implemented prospectively
by replacing existing mechanisms or creating new ones if there were none. The flexible
approach allows using diversified data collection tools as long as the operating proce­
dures remain standardized. [73] So the focus is on the final product, not as much how
exactly it was delivered.
When attempting to harmonize data collection attention is to be paid to possible over­
lapping of data sets, which may lead to surprising connections and cross­dependencies
with the possibility to influence future analysis. This is a complaint based on in­depth
data structuring research referenced above and yet it has not come across as a major
hindrance in the interviews. In all cases, the data, once obtained, delivered satisfactory
results in terms of consistency and was later compared with judgements made by human
professionals resulting in high confidence rates. Nonetheless, in the case of startups, it
appears that the data collection process itself was a major development step consuming
many work hours due to its lack of efficiency. This does not reflect on an acceptable so­
lution when thinking about effective and large­scale operation. It is indeed confirmed that
problems with data quality are a factor and inconsistencies are then reflected in results.
[74]
Another aspect has to do with ethical and privacy concerns related to simplified access to
health data. This is an issue that keeps coming up and yet a study [72] points towards a
surprisingly low number of occurrences of concerns ethical in their nature in health data
reports. This however is attributed not to the lack of such problems, but to decreased
reporting rates. Issues of ethical or legal nature are not as transparent or well defined
as the technological ones, which tends to lead to lower publicity rates of the former. On
top of that, oftentimes Danish development projects do not need to obtain full ethical re­
views of their cases, but they simply file for permission from the Data Protection Agency
making the process at least in relative terms, more simple than in Switzerland as brought
up by the study. What remains notable is that most data used for researching health in
Danish society comes from routinely collected sets automatically rendering most studies
retrospective. Despite having a certain structure, the scheme to obtain health data still
remains big enough an issue to come as a burden when undertaking an AI project. Dif­
ficulties also gain on importance as cross­national collaboration is at play adding more
actors to the process.
A notable example of an attempt to structure health data on a national level comes from
Iceland. Despite its small size and implied relative simplicity of the job, the task of unifying
health records failed due to underestimation of ethico­legal issues and importance of indi­
28
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:37==
vidual’s consent to allow access to his personal records. [75] Part of the issue was hiring
a private company to develop and later manage such a sensitive project. In the end the
project was rendered illegal by the rule of the National Court and definitively abandoned.
This should serve as an indicator and a precaution not to underestimate non­technical
barriers in such large­scale societal projects, especially in the domain of health.
4.5
AI implementation by large companies
This section will explore how AI technologies application for healthcare is tackled by es­
tablished companies. Their strategies to leverage an established market position will be
depicted together with examples of efforts and proposals towards potential, or existing
customer base.
4.5.1
IBM Watson
Watson is a supercomputer device developed by IBM and named in honour of IBM’s
founder Thomas Watson. IBM puts effort to leverage its use across multiple industries
including the healthcare sector. Watson uses cognitive computing, which is described as
“(...) systems that learn at scale, reason with purpose, and interact with humans naturally.
... By means of self­teaching algorithms that use data mining, visual recognition, and
natural language processing, the computer is able to solve problems and thereby optimize
human processes. (...)” [76] Cognitive computing differs from AI since it still requires
human input and interaction to work. IBM Watson is a platform enabling different sources
of data input making it ideal for diversified applications within healthcare, which generates
far from standardized data varying from one clinic to another. Efforts are put to even
structure what hospitals are generating, making ground for further processing, but there
remains plenty to get done before standards are set broadly. [77]
In one of its potential use cases Watson is meant to serve as a diagnosis assistance
suggesting various options to the clinician who uses them to aid his own judgement. This
is a vital aspect as one in five diagnoses are incorrect or incomplete. [78] The amount of
data generated by healthcare systems nowadays far exceeds processing capabilities of
humans and most of the currently applied IT solutions, which can not do much beyond
storing and retrieving health records. [79] Most computers are unable to comprehend and
process natural language and make sense of large, unstructured data sets, both of which
are what IBM has developed Watson for.
Watson’s health application has been adopted by over 500 companies, which are most
often found in the United States within the Hospital and care industry including The Amer­
ican Red Cross or the Northwest Community Healthcare Corp. [80] As Watson is not a
specific solution and has a fairly generic focus spread out across various industries, im­
plementation is a commitment to making it work in a specific domain of a particular use
case. Some of the examples in healthcare include: improved organisational performance,
effective diabetes management, advanced oncology care or ameliorated drug discovery,
all of which seem largely disconnected from one another in terms of expert knowledge
required and type of data to work with. [81] This illustrates the generic nature of how IBM
approaches the AI challenge, which differs significantly from how investigated startup en­
deavours target the issue.
What’s to be noted is that despite generating over $1bln in annual revenue Watson Health
is not profitable and the company was looking to sell it if an appropriate buyer appeared.
[82] Difficulties with obtaining profitability are sometimes attributed to the generic nature of
Watson, which does not correspond well to the need for specialized and highly reliable so­
lutions in such a sensitive field. [82] Overall there seems to have been over excitement in
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
29
==PAGE:38==
the initial stages of Watson’s development and subsequent reduction of research person­
nel in the project shows that the technology is nowhere near replacing human physicians,
at least at this stage. [83]
4.5.2
Google & DeepMind
Founded in 2020, DeepMind set as its mission the development of “general artificial intel­
ligence”, which could cope with a variety of tasks in an adaptable way. [84] The mission is
described as striving ”To solve intelligence and then to use that to solve everything else.”
The algorithm became famous when it beat the human champion in a Chinese game of
Go, whose complexity vastly outweighs more commonly known chess. [85]
The reason for setting Google Health aside with DeepMind in the headline is the acquisi­
tion that happened in 2014. Initially the idea was to allow DeepMind to retain a high degree
of independence and freedom to focus largely on research endeavours, but over time
external pressures arose to enact tighter control over DeepMind’s Health Team raising
privacy­related questions about Google now potentially having access to NHS’s patients
data. [86] [87]
It is worth noting that DeepMind works with a broad range of AI applications for its models.
Aside from projects with higher degrees of publicity such as the aforementioned Go algo­
rithm, they used AI to master video games based solely on image recognition coming from
analysis of gameplay material. They also worked with optimization of power systems, eye
disease diagnostics, search algorithms or patient assistance applications for healthcare.
Lately an effective algorithm to solve the “protein­folding” problem was adopted and is the
company’s major achievement. [88] The algorithm was trained on known proteins whose
shapes have already been identified and uses that as the basis for predictions. [16] This
is said to possibly have a huge impact on drug development based on accurate protein
recognition. [89]
A crucial remark about DeepMind is that it is not a financially sustainable entity. In 2020
their losses exceeded revenue by about 200mln £. [90] Research continues because the
mothership company, in this case Google, agreed to continue the financial support. It
appears that it is not as much the promise of revenue gains, but more access to cutting
edge research in AI is the underlying assumption behind Google’s strategy. Yet, to what
extent they are willing to persist and how much value they see coming from the purchase,
is not clear. It remains notable that even though DeepMind’s revenue is increasing it is
largely due to its main customer being its owner and using the technology to improve
power management of data centers together with voice assistant AI.
4.5.3
Microsoft
Microsoft claims working with healthcare mostly with indirect projects. Since January 2021
they’ve awarded around 180 grants and provided the grantees with support to use tools
developed by Microsoft as a platform for their research. Amongst others, they collaborate
with BC Cancer, Business Data Evolution, Cascadia Data Alliance, Novartis Foundation
which are some of the entities that are doing the actual research. [91]
What’s more they provide a service called Microsoft Cloud for Healthcare priced at around
100$ as a product towards health­related organizations to develop and build solutions
mostly for improvement of patient­doctor communication while also addressing compli­
ance issues and privacy. Purchasing the subscription gives access to the development
platform together with round­the­clock technical support and Microsoft’s network of orga­
nizations engaged in health research with their varying angles.
It is not entirely clear what is the company’s strategy in the process. Opinions and claims
30
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:39==
arise pointing out that the value lies in healthcare data, to be processed and stored in the
cloud as cloud­based solutions are becoming an increasingly more popular product. [92]
This data could overtime prove its value as a development resource to be leveraged for
new projects in the years to come.
Microsoft does not seem to invest in specific healthcare solutions, but more to create an
environment for its partners to do the research, while at the same time offering some
readily­made solutions as part of its cloud­based subscription plan targeting healthcare
organizations and mostly offering tools for improvement of organizational performance
and communications. Recently COVID proved to be a major anchoring point with regard
to the foci of what the products offered are. One of the primarily advertised solutions is a
vaccine scheduling application. [93]
A current and outstanding case was the outbreak of the COVID virus in 2020. When num­
bers of cases started to rise in the United States, authorities used Microsoft­developed
chatbot to learn about the conditions of a specific individual. The chatbot was asking
questions related to symptoms and once it determined that there is a risk of infection it
redirected patients further to human professionals for subsequent testing and to deliver
the necessary care if need be. [94] The chatbot’s algorithm used its natural language
processing capabilities to serve as a first link in the chain of diagnostics filtering those
who were concerned about their state, but in fact did not show symptoms related to the
virus. The chatbot proved to be an astounding success, reducing the volume of calls by
40%. The framework was then adopted on a larger scale worldwide reaching more than
43.5 mln users across 26 countries. [94]
Another application was the use of a device called HoloLens 2, which was also devel­
oped by Microsoft. It served as a virtual reality headset that was worn by a single clinician
entering a room with patients and at the same time others could watch and obtain infor­
mation relevant for treatment. It was a way to limit exposure to a single person who could
have been chosen as one from a lowest­risk group , and at the same time not interfere
with the information flow towards the remaining personnel needed to successfully manage
treatment. [94]
Even taking advantage of a broadly applicable tool Microsoft Teams played a role as it
was widely used for telemedicine to schedule and provide remote care in large­scale. This
example stands out as Teams is nowhere near being a healthcare specific tool and yet its
flexibility and availability allowed it to prove itself successful adapting to an arising need.
Some of the information was gathered in an interview with Bert Hoorne who works at
Microsoft and is involved in multiple research projects related to healthcare. Bert stresses
that the company does not venture beyond providing development tools and computing
power being a platform for smaller partners. It is those smaller partners who then own the
data, work with algorithms and assume responsibility for the quality of the solution they
deliver. So the job at Microsoft breaks down to sustaining and nourishing a network of
collaborations and facilitating implementation of various projects.
4.5.4
Amazon
Even though the company started out selling books, now its activities are much more far
reaching ranging from online retail, providing cloud services, cinematographic production
to having its own lines of technologies, such as the eBook reader kindle.
A newly developing idea is called Amazon Care, which rolled out at the beginning of 2020
and continues to scale as the years progress. [95] It is meant to serve as a platform for
virtual care delivery and physical appointment scheduling if those are indeed necessary.
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
31
==PAGE:40==
The development might have been influenced, or at least accelerated by the pandemic,
since it is estimated that as many as 46% of US patients began using virtual appointments
compared to the 11% before COVID. [96] Also, in a case of physical appointment Ama­
zon’s business model is designed to get the clinicians to visit patients where they live, not
the other way around. How accessible this will turn out to be for a common citizen and
what the price range would be, this remains yet to be unraveled as the platform develops.
Amazon Care also intends to target people who might experience problems due to the
lack of movement, if their career requires a sitting lifestyle. This is especially relevant for
increasing numbers of people working from home. The idea is to focus on improving the
habits and workstation setup. It was chosen as US employees point to musculoskeletal
disorders as one of the major causes of forced leave from work. [97] Same goes for sleep
disorders, which are another targeted area of health management.
Amazon has already been involved in a major healthcare project called Haven as a joint
venture with two other major companies. After fewer than three years of effort it was
announced that Haven is to be shut down. [98] This casts doubt on whether and to what
extent could the new venture become successful in the environment of the US healthcare
system, which proves challenging.
The market influence and available computing power Amazon has at its disposal, could
prove useful in managing the issue of chronic diseases. The stable nature of patients’
needs for medication allows for a more clear definition of efficiency improvements. [95]
In 2018 Amazon bought a drugstore business PillPack, which had a license to sell drugs
all over the United States. They then created a delivery service similar to their regular
retail deliveries mostly aiming to supply those with chronic conditions. The collaboration
resulted in the creation of Amazon Pharmacy, which is one of the ways to assist people
interacting with healthcare regularly. If and potentially when and how Amazon Care could
step in is yet unsure as, at the time of writing (2021) there still isn’t enough data to make
judgements as the service is not mature and much of the activity revolved around working
with employees and their families. But the competition is fierce for the market with both
startups and established companies looking to enter the virtual healthcare sector (e.g.
HelloMD, Teladoc Helath, or Doctor on Demand).
Having gone through the current and near­future portfolio of Amazon’s healthcare branch,
there’s a trend indicating the increased use of artificial intelligence as part of commercial
operations. Nonetheless, it is to be noted that many of the revenue­seeking angles are
not as much about cutting edge AI research and implementation as they are about finding
market applications and scaling whichever technology applies best, whether it is AI or not.
4.5.5
GE Healthcare
GE is a case that can straight up be linked with the previous paragraph about Microsoft
as one of its projects is developed in direct collaboration. Microsoft Azure is used to
provide cloud access to users of GE Healthcare Mural. The concept builds on the idea
of Electronic Healthcare Records, by delivering a platform to allow for structured and
organized information delivery. It is meant to accumulate and display patient­ or system­
relevant data to prioritize attention of managers and clinicians. [99] It was designed to
solve problems regarding continuous patient monitoring and issues such as bed capacity
management. Data monitoring and alerting if it spans out of predefined constraints can
be tailored to protocols specific to a given hospital. During COVID Mural has increasingly
been used to allow for remote interaction with patients limiting exposure.
Mural is labeled a decision support tool when the solution is presented by GE Healthcare,
32
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:41==
even though the focus as of now seems to be information organizing and display. This
could indicate the future course of development and the company’s strategy to start using
the data for such purposes.
Another major program in focus is GE Edison. It is a connectivity platform aimed at expe­
diting the use of artificial intelligence in healthcare. It is targeting developers who could
make use of data generated by GE’s devices and create more case­specific applications,
but also for the company’s internal use utilizing its vast network of hardware such as
X­ray, CT, MRI, ECG and Ultrasound machines the company has been delivering long
before artificial intelligence was in focus as it is in the beginning of the third decade of the
twenty first century. [100] Those applications are then meant to become incorporated into
existing workflows, which feature the use of GE’s medical devices.
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
33
==PAGE:42==
5
Ethical aspects of medical AI, issues of
legal and safe implementation
This section marks the shift of focus from implementation strategies towards ethical chal­
lenges and barriers for healthcare AI. Legal issues, development of legislation and societal
attitude are all parts of the discussion mentioned below. What’s more it will be examined
how liability for mistakes and potentially harmful decisions or actions should be allocated
when operating AI with high degree of autonomy.
5.1
Regulations to govern healthcare technology
development and operation
5.1.1
Limits of decision support and the start of autonomy
What does it take for an AI system to be considered autonomous? Is there a simple binary
distinction between non­autonomous and autonomous systems or additional complexity
should be considered?
Cambridge English Dictionary provides the following definition: “an autonomous machine
or system is able to operate without being controlled directly by humans”. This however
does not seem sufficient as it does not touch upon the burden of responsibility, which
could still be assigned to a human.
For better understanding five levels of autonomy are proposed. This is what AI systems
can, at least on a conceptual level, deliver. (refer to Table 5.1)
A notable insight is that examined cases of ongoing AI implementation efforts did not ven­
ture beyond level 1, which is the lowest possible having minimum autonomy assigned to
an AI system. There’s no permission to directly interact with the environment and a hu­
man not only holds the responsibility at all times, but also can choose not to examine any
recommendations from the AI system. Major part of the development work is still focused
on that area and it remains in question if and how likely it is to move beyond, especially
in the healthcare sector. [102]
An interesting shift occurs one step further within the next level. Here AI is allowed to
come up with its own judgement and take action accordingly. Nonetheless, for every
such action it remains under continuous human supervision and a person overlooking
the operation can and is required to overwrite a decision deemed wrong. Even though
increases in efficiency are possible, this solution leaves humans as a bottleneck in the
system. Thus, efficiency gains are limited if one considers depleting focus required for
such uninterrupted cross­verification. Even if those limits can increase, they remain a
constraint. [103]
Relating this classification with previous findings it is not instantly clear where one could
allocate Cerebriu’s solution enhancing MRI processing speed. According to the product
description (see [104]) the algorithm expedites the scanning process by real­time analy­
sis of image and highlighting areas of interest to the radiologist who can then decide to
cut short on the procedure time if he is satisfied with the output. This description points
to level 1, which is a low rank in the autonomy scale. As established in the interview, it
34
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:43==
Level
Short definition
Illustration in
self­driving
cars
Illustration in
an AI for drug
administration
Who makes
the final
decision
(burden of
responsibility)
0
No AI
No assistance
Standard care
Human
1
AI suggests
decisions to
a human
GPS guidance
system suggests
direction
Clinicians
can see the
AI recommendation
Human
2
AI makes
decisions, with
permanent
human
oversight
Car following
lanes on the
motorway,
driver has to
keep hands
on the wheel
AI changes the
doses, with
human doctors
continually
checking
Human
3
AI makes
decisions,
with no
continuous
human
oversight but
human backup
available
Autonomous
car with a human
behind the wheel,
asks for driver’s
help if the AI
cannot deal with
the situation
AI changes
the doses, and
can alert human
users in case of
high uncertainty.
Continuous
human oversight
not required.
AI
4
AI makes
decisions,
with no
human backup
available
Autonomous
self driving car
with no driving
cockpit
AI changes
the dose with
no human
backup
AI
Table 5.1: Five stages of autonomy [101]
remains within the boundaries of feasibility to program the AI to automatically conclude
the scan upon detection of a particular pathology pattern, which would render any further
analysis redundant, but at the current stage this is not being done.
Seeing how even most developed AI projects don’t score high on the autonomy scale
adds fuel to scepticism about how far they can practically go. Would we ever get comfort­
able with the idea of increased levels of autonomy of an AI system and allow minimal or
withdrawn levels of human supervision?
This and other cases of decision support score low on autonomy scale showing how even
some of the most prominent and to date processes are yet to cross the barrier of going
autonomous. The step from decision support towards various degrees of autonomous
systems is a significant one.
5.1.2
Declaration of Helsinki
In 1964 the WMA General Assembly adopted the Declaration of Helsinki, which still is the
basis governing healthcare research involving human subjects. It lays out the basic and
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
35
==PAGE:44==
supplementary principles not to be overridden by any national policies, which must build
on this universal foundation set by the international laws. [105] Below some of the most
prominent points laid out by the declaration: [105]
• Medical progress is based on research which ultimately must rest in part on experi­
mentation involving human subjects.
• In current medical practice and in medical research, most prophylactic, diagnostic
and therapeutic procedures involve risks and burdens.
• Special attention is also required for those who cannot give or refuse consent for
themselves.
• The environment, and the welfare of animals used for research must be respected.
• The design and performance of each experimental procedure involving human sub­
jects should be clearly formulated in an experimental protocol. This protocol should
be submitted for consideration, comment, guidance, and where appropriate, ap­
proval to a specially appointed ethical review committee.
Overall there are 37 principles detailing further aspects of medical research. Declaration
of Helsinki could potentially play an essential role during pilot projects for AI operations
with increased levels of autonomy setting guidelines for researchers and physicians im­
plementing these projects. The front page of the Declaration, which is currently in force
is accessible in Appendix A.2.
The declaration is a relevant document for multiple reasons. First, it is an international
convention issued by the World Medical Association and is frequently used as a basis for
country specific regulations. Second, it acknowledges that immature healthcare technol­
ogy can only progress and achieve high levels of reliability when humans are involved
as patients. Nonetheless, despite seeing the necessity of testing new solutions it also
stresses the importance of appropriate oversight and documentation in case of low con­
fidence rates.
5.1.3
Four, main principles of clinical ethics
The 4 main ethical principles in clinical ethics are: [106]
• Beneficence
It is an obligation of the physician to act towards the benefit of the patient. This
principle is not simply about avoiding harm, but also about benefiting patients and
promoting their welfare.
• Nonmaleficence
Nonmaleficence is in its center about avoiding all forms of harm to a patient. Harm
understood through death, pain or suffering, incapacitation, but also offense and
deprivation of the goods of life.
• Autonomy
The principle of autonomy states that every person has its natural worth and should
be able to exercise the power of making rational decisions and moral choices and to
self­determine his own faith. The philosophical grounds for autonomy originate from
Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) and John Stuart Mill (1806–1873) who first structured
the concepts in relation to human subjects. [107]
• Justice
In healthcare context most relevant sub set of justice is distributive justice. Distribu­
36
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:45==
tive justice is about fair distribution of limited healthcare resources to adequately
fulfil the needs of patients and ensure societal consent.
They were formalized by Tom Beauchamp and James Childress at the end of the XX
century. [108] The first two principles could be traced all the way back to Hippocrates and
his famous “to help and do no harm” whereas the subsequent ones evolved later on.
Main principles of clinical ethics are likely to act prohibitively towards enforcing certain
practices over everyone for the sake of benefiting the population. The autonomy principle
clearly states that one should retain the right of consent (or refusal) to participate in a
certain medical procedure. So if some patients are not comfortable with interacting and
being subjected to computerized AI treatment they should be able to decide accordingly.
Autonomy became particularly important with the mass vaccination of global societies
during the COVID pandemic in 2021. Yet in this case the conflict of public health and
personal freedom caused some countries to impose restrictions on the non­vaccinated
balancing between public interest and personal freedoms.
5.1.4
Current and incoming regulations in the EU
Regulatory efforts towards artificial intelligence in general
The European Union is taking the pioneering steps in introducing laws and regulations
to cope with the increasing prevalence of AI technologies across multiple sectors of the
economy. It is the first major governing body to start adapting the legal system to the
ongoing technological change following the approach taken with General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) was introduced in 2018. [109] The new regulatory proposals are de­
signed to deliver specific requirements regarding the use of AI for all stakeholders in the
process (developers, deployers and users). This is to ensure safety and respect towards
human freedoms, at the same time allowing businesses to uptake the technology making
use of the possibilities to achieve desired productivity gains.
Those regulations are to be introduced in the Artificial Intelligence Act, which breaks down
the technology into distinct risk categories and heavily regulates higher­risk applications.
This breakdown is depicted in the figure below.
Figure 5.1: Risk­based approach governing the development of the new AI Act in the EU
[109]
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
37
==PAGE:46==
To illustrate how those categories are manifested in real­life applications, below descrip­
tions are included with occasional examples: [109]
High risk
Systems will be classified as ”high risk” when deployed in certain domains where decisions
are of major impact on individuals.
• Critical infrastructures (e.g. transport), that could put the life and health of citizens
at risk;
• Educational or vocational training, that may determine the access to subsequent
education and professional course of someone’s life (e.g. scoring of exams);
Limited risk
Those systems will have designated transparency obligations to ensure that the user is
aware he’s interacting with a machine (e.g. chatbots).
Minimal risk
Relatively free use of AI systems such as video games boosters or spam filters, which
pose minimal or no risk at all in case of malfunction.
As of now the AI Act based on risk is meant to enter in force in 2022, but the date is
not yet definitive. [109] It’s important to note that the Act is designed to leave room for
subsequent updates as it is hard to predict all areas requiring regulatory intervention for
such rapidly evolving technology.
AI in medicine ­ relevant regulations
The aforementioned law applies to AI on a generic level, but on top of that there are laws
introduced to directly address healthcare­related challenges and the specific nature of this
field. It’s important to note that there is an EU­binding definition of a medical device:
• The term medical device is applied to any instrument or other tool, including any kind
of software, intended by the manufacturer to be used for human beings for the pur­
pose, among others, of diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment, or alleviation
of disease. [110]
Directive 93/42/EEC
(European Economic
Community)
Directive on medical devices
Will be replaced by MDR on 26 May 2020
(first page accessible in Appendix A.4)
MEDDEVS
Non­binding guidelines on legislation related to
medical devices (first page accessible in Appendix A.5)
Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI
Non­binding expert guidelines on the development of AI
(first page accessible in Appendix A.9)
MDR (Medical
Device Regulation)
Regulation on medical devices
Applies from 26 May 2020
Repeals Directive 93/42/EEC
(first page accessible in Appendix A.6)
IVDR (In Vitro
Diagnostic Medical
Device Regulation)
Regulation on in vitro diagnostic medical devices
Applies from 26 May 2022
(first page accessible in Appendix A.7)
Table 5.2: Framework for legal regulation of medical devices in the EU [111]
38
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:47==
5.1.5
Current regulations in the US
The governing body approving and supervising medical devices in the United States is
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which appoints the approval processes that each
product needs to pass before entering service.
FDA’s definition of medical devices is phrased differently than the European one:
• A medical device is an instrument or other tool intended for use in the diagnosis of
disease or other conditions, or in the cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of
disease, in man or other animals, or intended to affect the structure or any function
of the body of man or other animals. [112]
Three classes of regulation frameworks apply depending on the magnitude of risk a given
medical device presents. Being assigned class III leads to the most strict control and de­
mands meticulous testing.
Primarily two regulations govern AI deployment in the American healthcare:
• 21st Century Cures Act (2016) [113] (first page accessible in Appendix A.3)
• Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (passed in 1938, last amendment in 2017,
first page accessible in Appendix A.8) [114]
As it turns out trying to design and deploy systems, which would aspire to replace, for
example, radiologists or other physicians in performing their duties turns out to be a road
filled with obstacles requiring substantial resources dedicated towards testing, document­
ing and legalizing a given technology. Therefore, the most common approach for com­
panies developing AI­based systems is to always ”aid” humans and ensure that higher
degrees of autonomy are not present. Liability is to always lie with an educated profes­
sional and as of now there appears to be little indication to change such state of affairs.
[111]
5.2
Responsible artificial intelligence
Part of this thesis is to investigate responsible development of AI technologies. This bears
the question of what ”responsible AI” would even mean in the context of healthcare. With
that, it is given that responsible AI should fulfil the following criteria and deliver the follow­
ing results listed below:
• It should lead to stable and lasting improvements in medical systems’ efficiency
and effectiveness compared to care received traditionally before AI implementation.
Those improvements could be measured in the quality of patient care, faster recov­
ery, reduction of resources utilization, monetary savings, better work conditions of
medical personnel or reduced environmental impact.
• It should have lower error rates, which lead to mistakes, confusion and subsequent
mistreatment. Legal framework should ensure that any caused harm, which can not
be foreseen and avoided, is compensated. Compensation should target the victim
directly or his family and loved ones.
• It should have legal mechanisms in place to prosecute malicious design and oper­
ation of AI technologies where monetary or other personal gains were prioritized at
the expense of patient’s quality of treatment or in violation of his rights (e.g. privacy).
Life, health and well­being of both the patients and clinical personnel should be in
focus.
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
39
==PAGE:48==
• It should allow humans to override a malfunctioning system or if there exists a sus­
picion of such malfunction until doubts are clarified and any problems resolved.
• It should be ensured that patients are adequately informed of the technology assist­
ing their treatment and retain the right to refuse participation. If they refuse, they
should also be aware of possible drawbacks and delays in treatment. Lack of con­
sent is only justified in case of immediate threat to patient’s life or other emergency
condition threatening severe harm.
• It should be avoided that a private corporation is in full or partial control of a widespread
AI system, whose disruption or manipulation could adversely affect a significant por­
tion of the healthcare sector.
5.2.1
Unethical design of AI technologies and responsibility for
mitigation, prevention and prosecution
To explore in more detail the aspect of responsibility, it shall be examined what effects
could arise by intentional malpractice and ill­will at the stages of AI development, deploy­
ment and operation. Though in this case there’s no discussion regarding who should be
held liable for AI manipulation, it is still important to realize who should hold oversight and
intervene if such cases are detected.
Mass­scale utilization of AI systems, is a potential gateway for external influence and
anonymous attacks, which could aim to destabilize some part of the society. If, let’s say,
the targeted sector would be a fleet of autonomously driven trucks, consequences of such
disruption could be catastrophic for all affected supply chains in society. [115] Healthcare
is another sensitive example. Malfunctioning AI implemented as a critical decision­making
system would spread confusion and chaos directly threatening lives and health of patients.
What’s more the path from influencing a major system such as healthcare, to affecting a
society as a whole is not difficult to sketch. Such a scenario, should be avoided. Arguably
the degree of safety devotion could be compared to the precautions taken to prevent losing
control of an operational nuclear power plant. Nuclear power has an outstanding safety
record resulting in 99.8% fewer deaths than for example brown coal. [116] Nonetheless, it
must be noted that United Stated did use it to conduct a nuclear strike on Japan in times of
the Second World War. What’s more later on during the Cold War the world was close to
a nuclear disaster when one person’s caution and cold­blooded reasoning was the only
thing standing in a way of a potential war. Vasili Arkhipov ­ a Soviet officer ordered to
withhold a strike even though he had all the information to open fire according received
training and instructions. [117]
The comparison of healthcare AI systems with weaponry may be too far reaching. After
all it would probably be much harder to cause a mass­scale disruption by manipulating
world’s AI driven health systems than by using means of war. But exerting influence on
a smaller scale, for example in a country like Denmark, it is more imaginable that all the
hospitals may share a common link in the system chain, which could be targeted.
Yet even a global­scale disruption is not completely out of the question. A parallel could be
drawn with the Facebook’s 2021 outage. At the beginning of October 2021 Facebook and
its subsidiaries including Messenger, Instagram, WhatsApp and also third party services,
which used the ”Log in with Facebook” function became globally unavailable for almost
six hours. [118] Even though Facebook software is not in control of anyone’s medical
diagnosis, nor is is responsible for steering a car or piloting a plane, it may very well serve
as an example of how a globally available system may fail completely and disappoint the
40
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:49==
expectations of its users. Users who do in fact depend on it, even though the failure to
deliver expected results may not introduce direct threats. In truth, how many people were
affected and to what degree is difficult to assess. Even though Facebook downtime looks
to have been caused by a mistake and not an act of sabotage, it should still serve as
a precaution. Critical systems where human life and health is on the line should not be
exposed to a total failure nor should it be possible to manipulate them on such a wide
scale.
Drawing on the example if a hypothetical, big corporation was responsible for the de­
velopment and maintenance of a large­scale AI system, its users would be at a major
disadvantage in terms of bargaining power as many processes would likely depend on
the corporation. [119] Even expanding on the findings of this paper, some market ar­
eas are dominated by only a few providers (case of MRI machines and Cerebriu), each
holding a substantial double­digit percentage value of the market share. The complexity
of offered technology leaves little room for small and medium companies with marginal
product history. As a result it’s not possible to make prompt changes without affecting
patients what ultimately makes the company’s position stronger. This is visible in highly
regulated, safety­oriented and often technologically advanced fields such as aviation or
healthcare.
Here, it is paramount that nation states or wider­reaching institutions such as the EU,
design appropriate mechanisms to prosecute any misconduct. [120]
5.3
Liability for AI decisions and actions
This chapter will explore how AI liability could be allocated based on existing models and
definitions. It shall also take a look at examples of existing autonomous systems and
discuss their legal status. What’s more, it will explore the potential for misuse and manip­
ulation and understand how mechanisms of prevention should look like and who should
provide oversight. On top of that, possibilities of manipulation for personal gains by hu­
man operators will be looked upon and how this could disrupt safe operation of the system
as a whole.
Before exploring how legislative and social factors are likely to shape the liability allo­
cation for healthcare AI, a certain approach is brought up by a study. Nicholson at al.
in Figure 5.2 shows how clinicians may feel increased pressure to follow standardized
procedures in their diagnostic practices instead of trying to rely on their judgement and
what most beneficial outcome for the patient be. [121]
Scenario
AI recommendation
AI accuracy
Physician action
Patient outcome
Legal outcome (probable)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Follows
Rejects
Follows
Rejects
Follows
Rejects
Follows
Rejects
Good
Bad
Bad
Good
Good
Bad
Bad
Good
No injury and no liability
Injury and liability
Injury but no liability
No injury and no liability
No injury and no liability
Injury but no liability
Injury and liability
No injury and no liability
Standard of care
Correct
Incorrect
Incorrect (standard
of care is incorrect)
Correct (standard 
of care is incorrect)
Nonstandard care
Figure 5.2: Potential liability for physicians using Artificial Intelligence [121]
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
41
==PAGE:50==
This raises concerns regarding overstandardization of vital decision­making by encour­
aging a more passive attitude amongst clinicians, which is easier to control and influence
externally.
5.3.1
Current attitude towards AI and future trends
This paragraph is largely based on an expert interview conducted with Bent Dalager on
16/12/21. Bent runs an advisory unit at KPMG, called NewTech, which he founded sev­
eral years ago. [122] The unit grew from having only five employees initially to around
one hundred during the time when the interview was conducted. They provide advisory
and assistance services to other organizations wishing to increase productivity by en­
larging the use of AI in their operations. Big part of the work involves rule­based robotic
software automation, but also statistically­driven machine learning models, including the
brain­mimicking deep learning technology.
First thing to bring up is the definition of Artificial Intelligence. Bent argues that it does not
necessarily need to focus on relatively popularized neural networks. AI does not need
to be a system that develops and learns. Yet the definitions of AI are not uniform across
various sources. This becomes of critical importance when making policies, such as the
mentioned EU AI Act. Even though EU AI Act is not yet in force, based on his industry in­
sight Bent said it is likely to have a broad definition covering a wide range of software tools.
Another thing to note is Bent’s remark about the development potential present in the
more traditional rule­based systems. The technology is not as widely spoken about as
it has been around for longer and people got accustomed to having it around. As Bent
put it ”it’s the rule­based models that took us to the moon”. Yet, even though not as
modern they still have many applications in the business setting and many of NewTech’s
clients are being supplied with such solutions. Interestingly, rule­based models, despite
their continuing relevance for business do not pose challenges from the ethical domain
to the same extent that statistically­based models do. As there is no inference and self­
improvement during operation, the problem­solving tool is fixed and, assuming all works
well, its outputs predictable. With ambiguity out for the questions the discussion about
liability allocation becomes much more narrow. For healthcare applications, this should
prompt additional research towards possible applications of rule­based technology as it
may allow substantial savings and innovation, at the same time avoiding all the regula­
tory concerns. The medial pressure to overfocus on neural­network based solutions may
draw investors to underestimate the other possibilities, which could be better­suited for
the current legal framework
Under the current regulatory ambiguity, companies tend to adopt a conservative ap­
proach. Bent brought up a personal example of having a computer­vision driven system
for parallel parking disabled. He mentioned that one of the German car manufacturers
deliberately switched it off out of concern for its public image. The car took part in an
accident involving a child in Germany while it operated in autonomous mode for parallel
parking. Despite reliability records of the system the company made an effort to avoid
bad publicity and try to settle the case with the family right away at the same time block­
ing the feature from further expansion and usage. According to Bent, this is an example
of how the current attitudes are likely to hold back the deployment of AI driven systems.
People expect the computer to make absolutely no mistakes, which is unrealistic. Using
a broader metric to assess if an AI system does better than humans performing the same
task does not appear to be the prevalent way of thinking. If people are exposed to a sin­
gle tragedy involving a child the compassion is greater compared with numbly stating the
42
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:51==
number of genocide victims. [123] Same mechanism applies here. Even though there
may be improvements on a general level, opinions will be shaped based upon a single
instance, which is likely to be exploited by some of the media. This leads to companies
developing a cautious attitude in an attempt to avoid court litigation and public outcry.
According to Bent, the incoming AI act is likely to push for more strict regulatory con­
trol over high­risk AI systems healthcare or autonomous transport is a part of. On top of
that in places emphasis on privacy putting for example systems working with recruitment
into the same basket as autonomous cars or healthcare devices. What’s more it lacks a
proper formulation of what ”human oversight” should mean in a given context. Also the
emphasis on human element renders many of the productivity gains invalid as the work
required to properly oversee a decision may take the time that was gained by deploying
the algorithm in the first place. This would be the case with Corti and emergency calls
automation, where the critical setting requires immediate action making every second
count.
5.3.2
Different options for the allocation of responsibility
Legal framework to govern the implementation and operation of fully autonomous sys­
tems is yet to be established if such systems are indeed to proliferate. There are some
ideas on methods and approaches, which could guide policy makers and those shall be
examined in this section.
First, there are intention/culpability­based models. In those models the fault and responsi­
bility for a given conduct is assigned based upon agent’s knowledge and awareness. This
is an idea, which forms the bedrock of much of the criminal law stating that voluntaries is
a key element. In the case of autonomous systems an immediate problem arises as as of
today, it can’t be said that such systems have situational awareness to judge and assess
the effects of the actions intended. [120] Despite this, intention/culpability­based models
can be applied to human developers and others involved in the process of designing and
programming of the AI systems in questions. This however would only be applicable if
those humans would have the capacity to predict harmful behaviour before in was put in
operation or if they acquired such information later on. They could be prosecuted either
for intentional manipulation or withholding of information for a malicious purpose, what in
both cases would justify culpability­based models. [120]
Another model to allocate responsibility is formed by the risk/negligence principles. Just
like in the case of intention/culpability there needs to be an element of awareness and
knowledge of a given misconduct, which endangers safe operation, but could have nonethe­
less by avoided if an agent was not negligent. This does not necessarily mean that one
must be aware of the immediate consequences, but simply increasing the risk by failing to
act accordingly is enough. [124] This has been well encapsulated by John Oberdiek who
says that an ordinary person is expected to take ”reasonable epistemic care” to make sure
her duties are performed well. In Anglo­American law there is a notion of the duty of care,
which is only ascribed to those whose actions could lead to foreseeable harmful effects
if not done right. [120] The duty of care could apply to developers and others involved in
the process of AI programming, but even though those people can be clearly identified, it
is not at all clear weather they could have reasonably predicted a specific misjudgement
or mistake of an AI system. There are ways to take precautions by assuming faults and
imperfections, but ultimately everything can not be predicted. What should be regarded
as foreseeable and what should not will be better understood with experience and time
seeing such systems in operation. [120]
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
43
==PAGE:52==
Another important model to allocate responsibility is strict legal liability. This one ap­
plies when human freedoms are violated and allows for attachment of responsibility to a
given agent without the proof of fault. This means, that it does not matter if a responsible
agent actually engaged in the conduct or if the conduct was accompanied by a particular
mental state. An important concept, especially taking into account the scope if this study
is the notion of vicarious liability. Here responsibility is allocated by means of a specific
relationship with an agent. In a case of a misconduct the first person is held liable for the
outcome. A prominent example is a relationship between an employee and employer.
A clinic or other medical entity could be held liable for actions of its employees (nurses,
doctors) even though the agents could have acted very much independently.
Last, but not least there is an option of reducing the focus on allocating blame and re­
sponsibility, but rather focusing on compensating everyone who was harmed by the oper­
ation of autonomous systems. The idea is to develop an AI­specific mandatory insurance
scheme and distribute the finances on a ”no­fault” basis. [125] To some extent this is how
the patient compensation scheme functions in Denmark. As determined in an expert inter­
view on 03/12/21 with Kim Lyngby Mikkelsen who works as a medical coordinator for the
Danish Patient Insurance Association, oftentimes the doctors would not even hear about
a patient receiving compensation based on effects of the procedure they were responsible
for. If there are no issues of ill­will or negligence the case would be handled without their
involvement. This could be almost directly transferred to AI­based systems as long as
sufficient confidence can be placed in their operation. Such an approach was mentioned
as a possibility in an interview with PhD Léonard Van Rompaey who is a law expert at the
University of Copenhagen dealing with ambiguity of the legal status intelligent machines
necessitate.
5.3.3
Liability of autonomous vehicles
Even though the focus throughout this paper is on healthcare, this paragraph will exam­
ine liability arising for the operation of autonomous cars, which are already present in the
United States where they are being tested on public roads in some of the cities. This is
a an example of an AI technology, which is classified as ”high risk” by the incoming EU
regulation, just like medical devices. Therefore it was deemed relevant for analysis. On
top of that autonomous cars enjoy more media publicity as they can potentially have a
very notable effect on daily lives of many more people in comparison with healthcare, the
task of which is less frequent from an individual’s perspective. This makes data about
testing and development of autonomous cars more abundant and our state of knowledge
about them more mature.
Much of the liability regulation currently in force can be traced back to the United Nations
Convention on Road Traffic held in Vienna, which in it’s original version was passed all
the way back in 1968. [126] (First page accessible in Appendix A.10) Even though many
of the nations, which subscribe to the convention have their own amendments or laws
passed in place of some of the paragraphs, the Vienna Convention could be regarded as
a bedrock with international outreach. Knowing that and setting aside the stage of devel­
opment of AI systems in 2021 with a 53 years old regulation, the conclusion of legislative
lagging behind technology is evident. Another regulation relevant for the discussion is the
1987 Consumer Protection Act (first page accessible in the Appendix A.11) passed in the
UK, which will serve as an example. [127]
Seeing the current state of affairs regarding automobiles, the liability could be viewed
44
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:53==
from two angles. First, as the Vienna convention states, it is the driver’s responsibility
to fulfil the Duty of Care and that ”every driver shall at all times be able to control his
vehicle”. [126] [128] This applies regardless of how advanced technologically the vehi­
cle is and independent of the driver’s level of familiarity with the technology on board. If
this familiarity is insufficient, the driver should not operate the vehicle as he is required to
poses a certain level of competence allowing safe conduct. [129] So overall it is the driver
who is responsible for safety. Yet, in the United States the National Transportation Safety
Board has already updated a definition of ”a driver” to account for situations where there
is no possibility of vehicle occupants to actually take control over the machine. [130] This
update begins to account for vehicles, which do not even have a steering wheel by design
or are operating as a publicly available taxi service where passengers are not expected
to take responsibility for the safety of the trip. An example is Waymo, which is operating
as a level 4 fully autonomous vehilce in same areas of the United States. [131]
The second part of discussion puts more pressure on the manufacturers as the regulation
regarding product safety protects consumers who purchased a malfunctioning product
that does not live up to the standards promised. When this is the case there’s no need
to prove there was negligence on the manufacturer’s side. It’s sufficient to show that the
product was defective. A later legislative update also points to software developers in
parallel with the manufacturer if their work on the product was divided. [127] [132]
Relevant insight is provided by the NTSB report on the collision of a Tesla Model S with a
semitrailer, which occurred on May 7, 2016 in Florida. It’s important to note that NTSB is
not a prosecutor, but a safety organization with no goal to allocate blame. It’s mission is
solely ”to determine the probable cause of transportation accidents and to formulate safety
recommendations to improve transportation safety.” [133] As the report states there were
multiple factors, which contributed to the increased likelihood of crashing. The truck driver
should have yielded to an approaching car, the Tesla driver should have been paying at­
tention to the road and the manufacturer should have made sure that the system is not
operated in an environment it was not designed for or in an inappropriate, inattentive man­
ner as it was. [134] (first page accessible in Appendix A.12) Also, a parallel is drawn with
aviation, which is a sector with a higher degree of automation than automotive. Automa­
tion is not designed to diminish the human role, but to supplement it adequately and still
live room for manual pilot intervention in case of a system failure. Such a human­centered
design was also recommended to the manufactures and developers of autonomous car
systems in the United States. [134]
As of today there are tools to allocate responsibility for AI operation in the case of au­
tonomous vehicles. However, they are based on legislation, which at a core was meant
to provide order on roads with human drivers and therefore it is difficult to set any kind
of schematic set of rules, which would allow the justice system to deal with the operation
of autonomous vehicles on a large scale where both the manufacturer and the driver can
approach them with sufficient confidence, assured of his legal responsibilities and safety.
5.3.4
Manipulation of diagnosis
Let’s assume that a neural network algorithm was deployed to detect dermatological
anomalies and it is the sole decision maker regarding the diagnosis and proposed treat­
ment. Knowing the statistics of the algorithm and how frequently it makes mistakes an
insurance company, could adapt it’s compensation mechanisms in favor of more auto­
mated ones to cut costs. Yet even though this may be a conceptually sound approach,
there is evidence of how, with little intervention, judgement made by AI can be completely
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
45
==PAGE:54==
reversed. [135] The study brings up examples of how data could be altered to receive
higher compensation from the insurance provider. Knowing of such practices, the insur­
ance company is likely to take precautionary measures verifying the claims in more detail.
This however adds costs and could vastly diminish the acquired benefits. So the trade­off
comes down to balancing the trust towards the users of the technology and controlling
the environment for better confidence towards the system. Summary of the cited findings
by Finlayson et al. is presented in the graphics below.
Figure 5.3: Adversarial attacks on medical machine learning, study by Finlayson et al.
[135]
5.4
Additional issues related to increasing AI presence
Aside from liability issues, other problems are called out, which may intensify as the shares
of jobs performed by AI algorithms increases. This section will discuss three major ones,
whose importance was highlighted by Al Badi et al. in a study prioritizing AI implementa­
tion challenges in the United Arab Emirates healthcare sector. [136]
• Bias
• Job security
• Privacy and Surveillance
46
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:55==
Following the main thread of this paper the focus will be on healthcare, but if examples
from other domains could provide insight, they will also be brought up.
5.4.1
Bias in AI
Many of the advantages of AI systems have been provided throughout this paper, but for
all the performance they are capable of delivering, the drawback is that they are a reflec­
tion of the data sets they are trained on. This is a major source of bias in how decisions
are made. Adding on top of that the bias imposed by human developers who may unwill­
ingly (or willingly) influence decision making towards one end of the spectrum.
The problem with biases coming from raw data sources is that they are at times difficult
to spot and may end up being reveled only after a major mistake is made. In one case
an algorithm was trying to detect hidden military vehicles in a forest environment, but
coincidentally the photographs, which featured the machines also had different weather
conditions to those where the forest was empty. In the end, the computer learned to rec­
ognize gloomy from fair weather and was as good as random with detecting what is was
supposed to. [137] In healthcare, different concerns are most often brought up, namely
those of discrimination of minorities. According to the The European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ”The enjoyment of any right set
forth by law shall be secured without discrimination on any ground such as sex, race,
colour, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association
with a national minority, property, birth or other status.” [138] So if a country’s constitution
guarantees equal access to public healthcare to it’s citizens, so should the the quality of
treatment not be lower for someone who stands out, but nonetheless holds the rights of
a citizen. Yet despite being aware of the problem it is likely to arise due to the statistical
nature of predictions made by Machine Learning. After all the minorities, by definition, will
occupy less space on a hard drive filled with data meant to reflect the entire population
of a given nation. A medical condition may require treatment, which differs significantly
for representatives of various races or people with a prominent feature, which somehow
makes them extraordinary. In such cases, unless it becomes a part of the examination,
diagnosis and treatment proposal procedure, people are more likely to suffer from inade­
quate judgement. [139]
An interview conducted with Ph.D. Audrey Lebret who deals with issues of human rights.
According to Audrey it is hard or maybe even impossible to avoid addressing the issue
of bias altogether. An example could involve dealing with an urgent situation where one
must choose the beneficiary of a organ donation. Oftentimes there are too few donors
available and a choice must be made regarding who should be selected for treatment. If
the choice was to be made by an AI algorithm it is very easy to lean towards discriminat­
ing one social group against another and special attention should be paid to how such
algorithms operate.
On 14/12/21 an interview was conducted with Pola Elisabeth Schwöbel who is a PhD
student at the Technical University of Denmark. Pola works with invariance learning,
which aims to mitigate the effects of mistakes coming from slightly altered data (mirror
image, turned, changed color saturation, etc.), which was input to the system. This part
is something humans can intuitively do quite well, but what proves more challenging for
computers. After all, it’s not difficult for a human to recognize a car as a car even if it has
been turned upside down or it’s wheels were taken off. This is not always true for AI. Paula
has also looked into bias, which arises in other areas such as recruitment. For example,
women may be traditionally less visible in computer science study lines, which may lead
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
47
==PAGE:56==
to false conclusions of their lower abilities in the field and prohibit them from obtaining a
job post where candidates were assessed by some statistical AI­driven engine. To make
such cases more just data could be balanced by a human who could artificially equalize
the sample of women with that of men. This however is something to be cautious about
as data manipulation could lead to a misrepresentation of the case or even to introducing
bias in the opposite direction to the one tackled. Especially in the domain of healthcare,
changing data would need to be documented and would probably need some degree of
supervision due to the high stakes and potential harm.
5.4.2
Job security
A major part of the discussion about AI development is its impact on job security. With
its broad applicability across diversified domains of economic activity, discussions and
predictions are made to better understand the issue. Simply assuming that increased
automation will inevitably lead to job losses across the board is insufficient, as this has
proven not to be the case during the industrial revolution and mechanical automation
happening at that time. [140] An enhanced and more accurate look is required for bet­
ter comprehension. One can’t simply look at an entire economic sector holistically and
make far reaching inferences. Individual job complexity and characteristics are a factor
to consider. [141] For example, a radiologist performing tasks where a large portion of
the job is concerned with visual analysis, he is more likely to face decreasing job security.
On the other hand, a surgeon skilled in a certain domain whose task is not as schematic
and easily definable, he is not as easily replaceable. Even in the case of a professionally
trained nurse who is performing a variety of tasks often depending on the current need,
which is subject to dynamic change, even in such a case the feasibility of automation is
lowered. One may argue that it is in fact lower than in the case of a surgeon, even though
it takes longer time to educate the former. The finding aligns with what has been said
during the interview with a professional nurse.
Taking inspiration from an old saying, which states that “every stick has two ends”, one
could also ask the reversed question, namely if AI development has the potential to pro­
gressively lead to job increase. Bizarre as it may seem this is exactly what happened in
the textile industry as automation in production progressed. [142] At some point the eco­
nomic dynamic of substantial price decrease has led to soaring demand and resulted in
the need to employ more workers who now worked in parallel with the newly installed ma­
chines simply to produce much more keeping up with the rising demand. Nonetheless,
since healthcare is the primary concern of this paper, can one expect increases in de­
mand for radiographic examinations simply because they became much more efficient?
On the other hand, having faster processing times could encourage more people to take
preventive measures and examine their health proactively.
Most significant innovations in the past have led to temporary periods of job losses, which
were then followed by a gradual recovery together with business transformation and return
to, or even exceeding the baseline. [143] Is this the logic that could then be applied to a
healthcare sector, which is not purely driven by markets, but oftentimes involves increased
degree of state engagement where the workforce takes exceptionally long time to educate
themselves before beginning their contribution? This assessment remains uncertain.
5.4.3
Privacy and Surveillance
As this subsection is among the final paragraphs of the chapter on ethics, some insights
are visible based on the preceding research. Based on the discussion of future trends and
incoming regulations in the EU, privacy and surveillance appears to be a major concern
next to the uncertainty driven by AI mistakes and subsequent legal ambiguity.
48
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:57==
Perhaps the most relevant and quite recent (2020, 2021) example of AI­driven mass
surveillance came about with an attempt to control the spreading and monitor citizen com­
pliance during the ongoing COVID pandemic. This is an example of unprecedented scale
with multiple governments imposing restrictions of varying severity with a fairly mature
mass­surveillance technology at their disposal. At the early stages of the pandemic in
spring 2020, claims were raised of the insufficiency of manual tracking to sustain the pan­
demic in contrast to automated monitoring, which was meant to deliver enough tracking to
avoid quarantines altogether. [144] Though, looking down at the spread of the virus one
and a half years later, this could have been overly optimistic or alternatively could have
required too aggressive state intervention.
China was among countries, which used AI­driven contact tracing to battle the virus and
its strict strategy has proven quite successful. [145] Similar efforts were planned by Israel.
As far as the western world is concerned there are regulations, which drive privacy protec­
tion, some of which precede AI technologies as we know them today. The EU there is the
2018 GDPR whereas the US has the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) dating back to 1996. What’s more there’s the 2018 California’s Consumer Privacy
Act (CCPA). Especially the older HIPAA does not offer full protection for the COVID pan­
demic driven surveillance as it does not take into account cell phone geolocation, which
is a major source of sensitive data with the potential to assess the risk of exposure. [145]
On the other hand GDPR is a better suited, more up to date framework, which by default
prohibits processing of personal health data. However it raises exceptions, such as the
one in Article 9(2)(i), which grants permission for health data processing in situations of
”serious cross­border threats to health”. [146] It would not come as a surprise is COVID
was deemed sufficient to fall under such definition and data utilization could apply without
individual’s consent. Nonetheless, the regulation also states that the processing of loca­
tion data should first be undertaken in an anonymous way and if data is in the end utilized,
the member state should ensure that the individual has the right to a judicial remedy. [146]
So, privacy protections appear to be in force to prevent recklessness and overuse of mod­
ern means of citizen monitoring. Nonetheless, there may still remain a certain degree of
uncertainty regarding everything that’s happening ”behind the scenes” as some govern­
ments are likely to take greater advantage of what is at disposal. On top of that, when
faced with a threat of greater force and magnitude than the current COVID pandemic,
it’s hard to imagine the governments of even the most democratic states not to take ex­
treme preventive measures when enough lives are at stake. Looking in those terms, the
methods seem justified, yet the public anxiety comes from power abuse and ill­driven
surveillance restricting their democratic freedoms. The shear scale of AI deployment and
variaty of healthcare and legal systems worldwide will most certainly bring about cases of
excessive state oversight. Yet to what extent will they remain marginal compared to the
benefits derived from big data processing, will be more clear as technology matures and
spreads.
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
49
==PAGE:58==
6
Strengths, weaknesses and areas to
further research
6.1
Strengths
This study has tackled the issue of effective development and responsible use of AI in
healthcare from multiple angles. The professional experience of interviewed actors cov­
ered a broad range of expertise areas, often at the top of the respective fields. Their
insight greatly enriched the thesis and often provided surprising perspectives and incen­
tives to explore a different thread of thought or develop a more accurate point of view. So,
it’s the people who shared their knowledge that are a major strength and the foundation of
this work. Even though the outreach was difficult and often unresponsive, the end result
of patience and scheduling flexibility proved worthwhile.
Another strength is said to arise in the very design of the study. Since the nature of
discussions was based on qualitative research, there was a lot of freedom in what the
interviewees were talking about. This ensured that the data received better reflects their
interests and foci and as a result a more accurate picture of the current stage of systemic
development.
Since the potential for AI in the healthcare sector is of major interest across multiple dis­
ciplines both in research and commerce the conclusions and reasoning provided in this
work are likely to be of interest to multiple stakeholders across borders, especially in de­
veloped countries where there is more stability and capital available for investments and
research in healthcare.
Last, but not least the work was done with an explicit effort to avoid personally inflicted
bias towards one or the other end of the opinions’ spectrum in the field. Opinions of pos­
itive nature are set aside with the sceptics delivering a healthy conflict to the exploration.
Even though, some degree of bias will undoubtedly remain, it will not be as prominent due
to the mitigating measures.
6.2
Weaknesses
The first weakness to be noted is that the vast majority of expert interviews was con­
ducted remotely. The benefits of in­person encounters were briefly touched upon and
even though the remote approach was justified, some of the information may have been
lost in the process.
Second, focusing on Denmark did make a lot of sense in researching the findings, but at
times information given by Danish professionals was mixed with examples coming from
international, European or American setting. This is not a wrong attitude as Denmark is
indeed part of the EU and also subscribes to many international articles. Nonetheless,
possibility of some contextual conflict exists and is noted here.
Last, but not least a note of criticism comes at the convenience sampling of in inter­
viewees. As the the availability of targeted professionals was not always sufficient to
accommodate an interview, at times fewer professional opinions were noted than initially
50
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:59==
desired. Those interviewed are in no way short on outstanding expertise, nonetheless it
was not the case that everyone whose opinion was sought ended up contributing.
6.3
Areas of further research
As it was indicated earlier on in this paper, AI development in healthcare or other business
sectors is far from settled. There are limits to what can be explored in a single research
study and for how long can it’s findings remain current and relevant. This paper is no
exception. Even less so, since it tackles a fast moving field where ”state of the art” of
yesterday may be ”obsolete” of tomorrow. With that, below is the list of areas in the need
of further research as new information, unravels:
• Examining the EU’s AI Act as it enters in force and what effects will it have on Europe
and the world.
• Observing the development of self­driving cars and the adaptation process of legis­
lation in various world regions as this appears to be a faster moving field. Automotive
industry with concerns about liability could set the stage and provide examples for
healthcare regulation.
• Looking out for technological breakthroughs that could simplify the examination pro­
cesses or minimize the risk for patients and how those could influence healthcare.
• Observing implemented AI solutions, such as the one by Corti. How does the tech­
nology prevail as years go by? Does it keep up with performance? What is the
opinion of the human dispatcher? etc.
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
51
==PAGE:60==
7
Conclusions and perspectives
To conclude, it must be noted that healthcare can not be directly compared with other
areas of the market, as it is subject to strict regulations allowing little experimentation and
demanding high degree of certainty and repetitiveness on products or procedures being
introduced in the field. Despite this strict approach, there is potential to use AI technology
to mitigate situations of major resource waste, such as preventing patient ”no shows” for
a planned surgery. In this case the potential for benefits is substantial with little risk in
case thing go wrong. What’s more a sound development strategy targets some repetitive
process where human analysis is too time consuming compared with artificial computing
power. A process, which serves a substantial portion of the population in a way that leaves
room for efficiency improvements. Spot­on examples are set by Corti, Radiobotics and
Cerebriu analyzing acute phone calls, radioimaging or MRI scans. How the technology
has progressed over the past couple of years, especially with regard to image recognition
leaves room for optimism of seeing the growth of AI share for visual analysis. Regard­
ing decision support, there seems to be a potential to target specific problems where a
specific early­on decision made correctly right at the start, allows for improvement of care
quality or saving resources further down the line, yet the risk for the patient is minimized.
This is well represented by the example of correctly choosing a deep or shallow can­
nula puncture at admission or by automatic sorting compensation claims according to the
necessity for a doctor’s opinion or a lack thereof. In both cases the risk of AI misjudge­
ment is low and accurate decisions can improve process efficiency or patient’s well­being.
To ensure that the process of implementing AI­based healthcare innovation has a greater
chance of success and can progress more smoothly, there are some important things to
keep in mind. First and foremost the source of data for analysis must be stable and it would
be ideally if it was also standardized across a broader market, meaning that the procedure
would be at least similar generating data of comparable quality and format. Data, access
to which would be well defined and efficiently controlled to allow researchers and en­
trepreneurs to work smoothly, while at the same time protecting privacy sufficiently. This
is an area where there is potential for centralised governing bodies to unify healthcare
delivery and documentation in various parts of the state, so that entrepreneurs could later
on innovate more easily. Another factor increasing chances of success of AI technology
is when it responses to a very concrete need, which is then ideally also amplified by a lack
of skilled personnel. Again Cerebriu and Radiobotics provide good examples as they are
largely motivated by an ongoing shortage of radiologists in many of the developed coun­
tries. On top of that, the proposed solutions should not add any complexity to the existing
workflows and ideally would not require any involvement whatsoever from the user’s side.
For example Cerebriu incorporates it’s software into the existing products changing noth­
ing about the user interaction and yet cutting down time needed for processing. As soon
as the technology becomes too complex and starts requiring users to change their work­
ing habits chances of smooth implementation go down rapidly. Involvement should be
minimal with as little adaptation as feasible to achieve the result. One more thing to keep
in mind when innovating in healthcare is the necessity to dedicate much effort towards
obtaining regulatory certifications. Legislative approvals are long­lasting processes that
are likely to constrain a lot of the development work. Yet since they mean a difference
between life and death of the product, they should serve as the baseline on which other
building blocks ought to be build. Last, but not least there is the issue of the general
52
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:61==
societal perception of AI and how a product would perform in a given setting. This is a
tough barrier as people don’t easily accept changes especially if they occur in a domain
as sensitive as healthcare. This is presumably tackled best with results and patience. As
soon as the technology has proven its worth and becomes more widespread, reliable and
visible, trust will follow.
Finally, there remains the question of liability for harm caused by AI­driven systems. Cur­
rent legislative frameworks provide tools for determining who should be held accountable,
but they lack a more clear and unambiguous structure better suited for such technology.
The model of democratic countries encourages, regulation that reflects the majority and if
the majority is conservative towards AI innovation in health, the implementation will con­
tinue to lag behind what is technologically possible. Also, as long as the expectations
are disconnected from the imperfect nature of such systems, which are not 100% error­
prove, the discussion will remain difficult. If however, an agreement is reached to assume
an incomplete certainty there is a way to continue. A solution ensuring that the wolf is full
and the sheep are whole would be one that is similar in its nature to the current scheme
adopted in the Danish Patient Insurance Association where those who suffered some
damage would receive an adequate monetary compensation. This would be applicable
in case both the user and the producer of an AI product designed, deployed and utilized
the product without negligence and making sure things are as safe as they can get and
all the laws are complied with. So if everything was done by the books and an accident
happened nonetheless by some random chain of events, the injured party would sign a
waiver of rights to seek blame allocation and in exchange would be compensated from a
designated insurance fund. A fund, which could be backed, by public resources or some
mandatory insurance scheme comparable to the one for car drivers. This scheme, sug­
gested in an interview with Léonard Van Rompaey would only make sense if it receives
public acceptance and also if the technology can in fact deliver a clear benefit compared
to a it’s human­based equivalent. The benefit could either be in the quality of care time
savings or the reduction of the existing error­rate. So, to what extent will the share of AI
in healthcare grow is a question of societal trust and the reliability of the solution together
with how well and securely it handles sensitive data. There are some ethical dilemmas,
or edge cases such as the infamous ”trolley problem”. Those will continue to come up in
the public discussion just as we continue to discuss plane crashes and not the safe and
successful flights, which greatly outnumber the crashes. The final conclusion is that tools
are largely available to increase prevalence of AI in healthcare, but some of the issues of
ethical nature, such as liability or privacy will continue to hamper the pace of development.
Nonetheless, considering the importance of security and reliability in this sector such a
conservative approach could prevent mistakes arising from rushed implementation.
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
53
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[1]
Jean­Pierre Bocquet­Appel. “When the world’s population took off: the springboard
of the Neolithic Demographic Transition”. In: Science 333.6042 (2011), pp. 560–
561.
[2]
Dimiter Dobrev. “A definition of artificial intelligence”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1210.1568
(2012).
[3]
Kevin W Eva. “What every teacher needs to know about clinical reasoning”. In:
Medical education 39.1 (2005), pp. 98–106.
[4]
Joyce Victor­Chmil. “Critical thinking versus clinical reasoning versus clinical judg­
ment: Differential diagnosis”. In: Nurse Educator 38.1 (2013), pp. 34–36.
[5]
Sreetama Dutt et al. “Insights into the growing popularity of artificial intelligence in
ophthalmology”. In: Indian Journal of Ophthalmology 68.7 (2020), p. 1339.
[6]
Lawrence O Gostin, Sam F Halabi, and Kumanan Wilson. “Health data and privacy
in the digital era”. In: Jama 320.3 (2018), pp. 233–234.
[7]
Temidayo O Akenroye. “Factors influencing innovation in healthcare: a conceptual
synthesis”. In: The Innovation Journal 17.2 (2012), p. 1.
[8]
Wojciech Samek, Thomas Wiegand, and Klaus­Robert Müller. “Explainable arti­
ficial intelligence: Understanding, visualizing and interpreting deep learning mod­
els”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.08296 (2017).
[9]
Pranav Rajpurkar, Vinaya Polamreddi, and Anusha Balakrishnan. “Malaria like­
lihood prediction by effectively surveying households using deep reinforcement
learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09223 (2017).
[10]
James Shaw et al. “Artificial intelligence and the implementation challenge”. In:
Journal of medical Internet research 21.7 (2019), e13659.
[11]
Effy Vayena, Alessandro Blasimme, and I Glenn Cohen. “Machine learning in
medicine: addressing ethical challenges”. In: PLoS medicine 15.11 (2018), e1002689.
[12]
Alexey Tsymbal. “The problem of concept drift: definitions and related work”. In:
Computer Science Department, Trinity College Dublin 106.2 (2004), p. 58.
[13]
AI In Healthcare Heatmap: 1.2K+ Deals Across Genomics, Drug Discovery, And
More. URL: https://www.cbinsights.com/research/artificial-intelligence-healthcare-
heatmap-expert-intelligence/. (accessed: 25.11.2021).
[14]
Jian Guan. “Artificial intelligence in healthcare and medicine: promises, ethical
challenges and governance”. In: Chinese Medical Sciences Journal 34.2 (2019),
pp. 76–83.
[15]
Jake Luo et al. “Big data application in biomedical research and health care: a
literature review”. In: Biomedical informatics insights 8 (2016), BII–S31559.
[16]
Robert F Service. ‘The game has changed.’AI triumphs at protein folding. 2020.
[17]
Raquel Dias and Ali Torkamani. “Artificial intelligence in clinical and genomic diag­
nostics”. In: Genome medicine 11.1 (2019), pp. 1–12.
[18]
Marc Hanussek, Matthias Blohm, and Maximilien Kintz. “Can AutoML outperform
humans? An evaluation on popular OpenML datasets using AutoML benchmark”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.01564 (2020).
[19]
Pavel Hamet and Johanne Tremblay. “Artificial intelligence in medicine”. In: Metabolism
69 (2017), S36–S40.
[20]
What is artificial intelligence and how is it used? URL: https://www.europarl.europa.
eu/news/en/headlines/society/20200827STO85804/what-is-artificial-intelligence-
and-how-is-it-used. (accessed: 26.11.2021).
54
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:63==
[21]
Els Maeckelberghe and Peter Schröder­Bäck. “Covid­19: a test for our humanity”.
In: European Journal of Public Health 30.5 (2020), pp. 853–854.
[22]
Arif Cam, Michael Chui, and Bryce Hall. “Global AI Survey: AI proves its worth, but
few scale impact”. In: (2019). URL: http://dln.jaipuria.ac.in:8080/jspui/bitstream/
123456789/1323/1/Global-AI-Survey-AI-proves-its-worth-but-few-scale-impact.pdf.
[23]
Jia Yang et al. “Development of micro­and nanorobotics: A review”. In: Science
China Technological Sciences 62.1 (2019), pp. 1–20.
[24]
Brian Kalis, Matt Collier, and Richard Fu. “10 promising AI applications in health
care”. In: Harvard Business Review (2018).
[25]
Thomas Davenport and Ravi Kalakota. “The potential for artificial intelligence in
healthcare”. In: Future healthcare journal 6.2 (2019), p. 94.
[26]
Fred Kleinsinger. “The unmet challenge of medication nonadherence”. In: The Per­
manente Journal 22 (2018).
[27]
Vincent C Müller. “Ethics of artificial intelligence and robotics”. In: (2020).
[28]
Thilo Hagendorff and Katharina Wezel. “15 challenges for AI: or what AI (currently)
can’t do”. In: AI & SOCIETY 35.2 (2020), pp. 355–365.
[29]
Ilesanmi Daniyan et al. “Development and Performance Evaluation of a Robot for
Lawn Mowing”. In: Procedia Manufacturing 49 (2020), pp. 42–48.
[30]
Thomas Grote and Philipp Berens. “On the ethics of algorithmic decision­making
in healthcare”. In: Journal of medical ethics 46.3 (2020), pp. 205–211.
[31]
Lara Anne Hale. “Faster Horses: Collaborative AI Innovation between Incumbents
and Startups”. In: ().
[32]
Funding of artificial intelligence (AI) startup companies worldwide from 2014 to
2021. URL: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20200827STO85804/
what-is-artificial-intelligence-and-how-is-it-used. (accessed: 26.11.2021).
[33]
Zachary Grossman and David Owens. “An Unlucky Feeling: Persistent Overesti­
mation of Absolute Performance with Noisy Feedback”. In: (2011).
[34]
Professor: Udviklere og ingeniører lades i stikken i debat om AI­etik. URL: https:
//www.version2.dk/artikel/professor-udviklere-ingenioerer-lades-stikken-debat-ai-
etik-1093844. (accessed: 19.01.2022).
[35]
Jessica Morley and Luciano Floridi. “An ethically mindful approach to AI for health
care”. In: Available at SSRN 3830536 (2020).
[36]
Rosalind J McDougall. “Computer knows best? The need for value­flexibility in
medical AI”. In: Journal of medical ethics 45.3 (2019), pp. 156–160.
[37]
F Santoni de Sio and G Mecacci. “Four responsibility gaps with artificial intelli­
gence: Why they matter and how to address them”. In: (2021).
[38]
Poland Demographics Profile. URL: https://www.indexmundi.com/poland/demographics_
profile.html. (accessed: 26.11.2021).
[39]
Sven Nyholm. “The ethics of crashes with self­driving cars: a roadmap, II”. In:
Philosophy Compass 13.7 (2018), e12506.
[40]
The Trolley Problem — Origins. URL: https://sarabizarro.medium.com/the-trolley-
problem-73e22048d88e. (accessed: 26.11.2021).
[41]
The COVID­19 Trolley Problem. URL: https://www.chicagobooth.edu/review/covid-
19-trolley-problem. (accessed: 26.11.2021).
[42]
Joanna Smith and Helen Noble. “Bias in research”. In: Evidence­based nursing
17.4 (2014), pp. 100–101.
[43]
Richard Frankel and Kelly Devers. “Study design in qualitative research—1: De­
veloping questions and assessing resource needs”. In: Education for health 13.2
(2000), pp. 251–261.
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
55
==PAGE:64==
[44]
Google Trends for Machine Learning, Drug Discovery, And More. URL: https://
trends.google.com/trends/explore?date=all&q=machine%5C%20learning. (ac­
cessed: 26.11.2021).
[45]
Nassim Nicholas Taleb. The black swan: The impact of the highly improbable.
Vol. 2. Random house, 2007.
[46]
David Silverman. Doing qualitative research: A practical handbook. Sage, 2013.
[47]
C McNamara. General Guidelines for Conducting Research Interviews. Retrieved
June 13, 2017. 2006.
[48]
Daniel W Turner III. “Qualitative interview design: A practical guide for novice in­
vestigators”. In: The qualitative report 15.3 (2010), p. 754.
[49]
Matthew Krouwel, Kate Jolly, and Sheila Greenfield. “Comparing Skype (video
calling) and in­person qualitative interview modes in a study of people with irritable
bowel syndrome–an exploratory comparative analysis”. In: BMC medical research
methodology 19.1 (2019), pp. 1–9.
[50]
Hospitals in The Capital Region of Denmark. URL: https://www.regionh.dk/english/
Healthcare-Services/Pages/Hospitals---websites.aspx. (accessed: 26.11.2021).
[51]
SUND teknologi Eksempler på afprøvning af kunstig intelligens i sundhedsvæsnet.
URL: https://www.regioner.dk/media/14804/ai-eksempelsamling_elektronisk.pdf.
(accessed: 11.01.2022).
[52]
Audrey Lebret. URL: https://jura.ku.dk/english/staff/research/?pure=en/persons/
574269. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[53]
Bent Dalager. URL: https://home.kpmg/dk/en/home/contacts/d/bent-dalager.
html. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[54]
Léonard van Rompaey. URL: https://jura.ku.dk/english/staff/research/?pure=en/
persons/575520. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[55]
Pola Elisabeth Schwöbel. URL: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/persons/pola-elisabeth-
schw%5C%C3%5C%B6bel. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[56]
Bert Hoorne. URL: https://hoornebert.be/. (accessed: 13.01.2022).
[57]
Edwin A Locke. “Toward a theory of task motivation and incentives”. In: Organiza­
tional behavior and human performance 3.2 (1968), pp. 157–189.
[58]
Cecilia Vindrola­Padros et al. “Perceptions and experiences of healthcare workers
during the COVID­19 pandemic in the UK”. In: BMJ open 10.11 (2020), e040503.
[59]
AI in Healthcare Startups in Denmark. URL: https://tracxn.com/explore/AI-in-
Healthcare-Startups-in-Denmark. (accessed: 26.11.2021).
[60]
Ministry of Finance, Business Ministry of Industry, and Financial Afairs. “National
Strategy for Artificial Intelligence”. In: (2019).
[61]
Stine Krause Jens Riis Andersen Sarah Frandsen. “Harnessing the opportunity of
artificial intelligence in Denmark”. In: (2019). URL: https://www.mckinsey.com/
featured- insights/europe/harnessing- the- opportunity- of- artificial- intelligence- in-
denmark.
[62]
Chung­Feng Liu et al. “The Critical Factors Affecting the Deployment and Scaling
of Healthcare AI: Viewpoint from an Experienced Medical Center”. In: Healthcare.
Vol. 9. 6. Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. 2021, p. 685.
[63]
TECHSAVVY MEDIA. “Alvenir: Forskning og open source kan godt forenes med
et kommercielt startup”. In: (2021). URL: https://techsavvy.media/alvenir-forskning-
og-open-source-kan-godt-forenes-med-et-kommercielt-startup/#:~:text=Alvenir%
3A%20Forskning%20og%20open%20source%20kan%20godt%20forenes%20med%
20et%20kommercielt%20startup,-november%2029%2C%202021&text=Stifterne%
20af%20Alvenir%20(fra%20venstre, og%20Rasmus%20Arpe%20Fogh%20Egeb%
56
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:65==
C3%A6k.&text=DTU%20har%20dog%20rettighederne%20til,danner%20grundlag%
20for%20spinoutet%20Alvenir..
[64]
Bernd W Wirtz, Jan C Weyerer, and Carolin Geyer. “Artificial intelligence and the
public sector—applications and challenges”. In: International Journal of Public Ad­
ministration 42.7 (2019), pp. 596–615.
[65]
Epic website. URL: https://www.epic.com/. (accessed: 03.12.2021).
[66]
Jørgen P Bansler. “Challenges in user­driven optimization of EHR: A case study
of a large Epic implementation in Denmark”. In: International Journal of Medical
Informatics 148 (2021), p. 104394.
[67]
Arthur Allen. “Lost in translation: Epic goes to Denmark”. In: (2019).
[68]
Overlæge om Sundhedsplatformen: Skrot det system. URL: https://www.dr.dk/
nyheder/regionale/sjaelland/overlaege- om- sundhedsplatformen- skrot- det- system.
(accessed: 03.12.2021).
[69]
Maya Balakrishnan, Aarti Raghavan, and Gautham K Suresh. “Eliminating unde­
sirable variation in neonatal practice: balancing standardization and customiza­
tion”. In: Clinics in perinatology 44.3 (2017), pp. 529–540.
[70]
Richard MJ Bohmer. “Medicine’s service challenge: blending custom and standard
care”. In: Health care management review 30.4 (2005), pp. 322–330.
[71]
Stephan Mosko Jensen Oliver Metcalf­Rinaldo. “Learnings from the implementa­
tion of Epic”. In: (2016).
[72]
Lester Darryl Geneviève et al. “Factors influencing harmonized health data collec­
tion, sharing and linkage in Denmark and Switzerland: a systematic review”. In:
PloS one 14.12 (2019), e0226015.
[73]
Isabel Fortier et al. “Invited commentary: consolidating data harmonization—how
to obtain quality and applicability?” In: American journal of epidemiology 174.3
(2011), pp. 261–264.
[74]
Kristian Antonsen, Charlotte Vallentin Rosenstock, and Lars Hyldborg Lundstrøm.
“The Danish anaesthesia database”. In: Clinical Epidemiology 8 (2016), p. 435.
[75]
Vilhjálmur Árnason. “Coding and consent: moral challenges of the database project
in Iceland”. In: Bioethics 18.1 (2004), pp. 27–49.
[76]
IBM Watson Health solutions. URL: https://www.ibm.com/watson-health/solutions.
(accessed: 22.12.2021).
[77]
Bonnie Feldman and Ellen Martin. “Big Data in Healthcare Hype and Hope”. In:
2012.
[78]
Memorial Sloan Kettering Research Featured in Report on Top Cancer Advances
of 2013. URL: https://www.mskcc.org/news/msk-research-featured-report-top-
advances-2013. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[79]
Howard Lee. “Paging Dr. Watson: IBM’s Watson supercomputer now being used
in healthcare”. In: Journal of AHIMA 85.5 (2014), pp. 44–47.
[80]
Companies using IBM Watson Health. URL: https://enlyft.com/tech/products/ibm-
watson-health. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[81]
Four ways in which Watson is transforming the healthcare sector. URL: https :
//healthcareglobal.com/technology-and-ai-3/four-ways-which-watson-transforming-
healthcare-sector. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[82]
IBM Reportedly Looking to Sell its Unprofitable Watson Health Business. URL:
https://www.enterpriseai.news/2021/02/25/ibm- reportedly- looking-to-sell-its-
unprofitable-watson-health-business/. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[83]
AI Can Outperform Doctors. So Why Don’t Patients Trust It? URL: https://hbr.
org/2019/10/ai-can-outperform-doctors-so-why-dont-patients-trust-it#. (accessed:
22.12.2021).
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
57
==PAGE:66==
[84]
Elizabeth Gibney. “What Google’s winning Go algorithm will do next”. In: Nature
News 531.7594 (2016), p. 284.
[85]
Elizabeth Gibney. “Self­taught AI is best yet at strategy game Go”. In: Nature 10.1
(2017), pp. 68–74.
[86]
Google DeepMind: the story behind the world’s leading AI startup. URL: https:
//www.techadvisor.com/feature/small-business/google-deepmind-what-is-it-how-it-
works-should-you-be-scared-3788396/. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[87]
DeepMind’s health team joins Google Health. URL: https://deepmind.com/blog/
announcements/deepmind-health-joins-google-health. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[88]
AlphaFold: a solution to a 50­year­old grand challenge in biology. URL: https://
deepmind.com/blog/article/alphafold-a-solution-to-a-50-year-old-grand-challenge-
in-biology. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[89]
Guo­Wei Wei. “Protein structure prediction beyond AlphaFold”. In: Nature Machine
Intelligence 1.8 (2019), pp. 336–337.
[90]
Google Waives $1.5 Billion DeepMind Loan as AI Costs Mount. URL: https://www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-12-17/deepmind-says-2019-revenue-jumped-
158-on-ai-research-work. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[91]
AI for Health grantees making an impact. URL: https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/ai/ai-for-health-projects#primaryR8. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[92]
Ofer Shimrat. “Cloud computing and healthcare”. In: San Diego Physician. org
(2009), pp. 26–29.
[93]
MazikCare COVID­19 Test Scheduler. URL: https://appsource.microsoft.com/en-
us/product/dynamics- 365/mazikglobal.mazikcarec19testscheduler?tab=Overview.
(accessed: 22.12.2021).
[94]
Michael Y Uohara, James N Weinstein, and David C Rhew. “The essential role
of technology in the public health battle against COVID­19”. In: Population Health
Management 23.5 (2020), pp. 361–367.
[95]
Why Amazon’s push into healthcare could be its most important project yet. URL:
https://www.zdnet.com/article/why-amazons-push-into-healthcare-could-be-its-
most-important-project-yet/. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[96]
Oleg Bestsennyy et al. “Telehealth: a quarter­trillion­dollar post­COVID­19 reality”.
In: McKinsey and Company 29 (2020).
[97]
Fact Sheets. BMUS: The Burden of Musculoskeletal Diseases in the United States.
[98]
Why Haven Healthcare Failed. URL: https : / / hbr . org / 2021 / 01 / why - haven -
healthcare-failed. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[99]
GE Healthcare Website. URL: https://www.gehealthcare.com/products/healthcare-
it. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[100]
Medical EXPO website. URL: https://www.medicalexpo.com/prod/ge-healthcare-
70717.html. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
[101]
Paul Festor et al. “Levels of Autonomy and Safety Assurance for AI­Based Clinical
Decision Systems”. In: International Conference on Computer Safety, Reliability,
and Security. Springer. 2021, pp. 291–296.
[102]
Eric J Topol. “High­performance medicine: the convergence of human and artificial
intelligence”. In: Nature medicine 25.1 (2019), pp. 44–56.
[103]
Janis Davis­Street et al. “Cognitive Issues for Safe Operations: Addressing Bias
and Mindfulness to Decrease Human Error”. In: SPE International Conference and
Exhibition on Health, Safety, Environment, and Sustainability. OnePetro. 2020.
[104]
Cerebriu: machine learning for diagnostic medical imaging. URL: https://www.
healtheuropa.eu/cerebriu-machine-learning-for-diagnostic-medical-imaging/99790/.
(accessed: 06.12.2021).
58
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:67==
[105]
World Medical Association et al. “World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki.
Ethical principles for medical research involving human subjects.” In: Bulletin of the
World Health Organization 79.4 (2001), p. 373.
[106]
Basil Varkey. “Principles of clinical ethics and their application to practice”. In: Med­
ical Principles and Practice 30.1 (2021), pp. 17–28.
[107]
Paul Guyer. “Kant on the Theory and Practice of Autonomy”. In: Social philosophy
and policy 20.2 (2003), pp. 70–98.
[108]
Tom L Beauchamp, James F Childress, et al. Principles of biomedical ethics. Ox­
ford University Press, USA, 2001.
[109]
Regulatory framework proposal on artificial intelligence. URL: https : / / digital -
strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/regulatory-framework-ai. (accessed: 05.12.2021).
[110]
Directive concerning Medical Devices. 93/42/EEC ­ Council. URL: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:1993L0042:20071011:en:
PDF. (accessed: 05.12.2021).
[111]
Filippo Pesapane et al. “Artificial intelligence as a medical device in radiology:
ethical and regulatory issues in Europe and the United States”. In: Insights into
imaging 9.5 (2018), pp. 745–753.
[112]
How to Determine if Your Product is a Medical Device. URL: https://www.fda.
gov/medical-devices/classify-your-medical-device/how-determine-if-your-product-
medical-device. (accessed: 06.12.2021).
[113]
SHR Bonamici. “SHR 34­114th Congress (2015–2016): 21st Century Cures Act”.
In: Published December 13 (2016).
[114]
Lincoln Tsang et al. “The impact of artificial intelligence on medical innovation in
the European Union and United States”. In: Intellectual Property & Technology
Law Journal 29.8 (2017), pp. 3–11.
[115]
Autonomous Systems: Social, Legal and Ethical Issues. URL: https://www.raeng.
org.uk/publications/reports/autonomous-systems-report. (accessed: 12.12.2021).
[116]
What are the safest and cleanest sources of energy? URL: https://ourworldindata.
org/safest-sources-of-energy. (accessed: 12.12.2021).
[117]
Nicola Davis. “Soviet Submarine Officer Who Averted Nuclear War Honoured with
Prize”. In: The Guardian 27.10 (2017).
[118]
Nayera Mohamed Shousha and Leena Rowan Abdelgawad. “DOWN IN MINUTES,
OUT FOR SIX HOURS: A BRIEF REPORT ON FEELINGS DURING THE OUT­
AGE OF WHATSAPP, INSTAGRAM, AND FACEBOOK”. In: ().
[119]
Mark Andrejevic. “Big data, big questions| the big data divide”. In: International
Journal of Communication 8 (2014), p. 17.
[120]
Karen Yeung. “A study of the implications of advanced digital technologies (includ­
ing AI systems) for the concept of responsibility within a human rights framework”.
In: MSI­AUT (2018) 5 (2018).
[121]
W Nicholson Price, Sara Gerke, and I Glenn Cohen. “Potential liability for physi­
cians using artificial intelligence”. In: Jama 322.18 (2019), pp. 1765–1766.
[122]
Contact our experts. URL: https://home.kpmg/dk/en/home/services/advisory/
newtech.html. (accessed: 20.01.2022).
[123]
Paul Slovic et al. “Iconic photographs and the ebb and flow of empathic response
to humanitarian disasters”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
114.4 (2017), pp. 640–644. ISSN: 0027­8424. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1613977114.
eprint: https://www.pnas.org/content/114/4/640.full.pdf. URL: https://www.pnas.
org/content/114/4/640.
[124]
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart. Punishment and responsibility: Essays in the phi­
losophy of law. Oxford University Press, 2008.
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
59
==PAGE:68==
[125]
Mady Delvaux. “Report with recommendations to the commission on civil law rules
on robotics”. In: European Parliament 27 (2017).
[126]
19 . Convention on Road Traffic. URL: https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetailsIII.
aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=XI-B-19&chapter=11&Temp=mtdsg3&lang=en#.
(accessed: 18.12.2021).
[127]
Dodd­Frank Wall Street Reform. “Consumer Protection Act”. In: Public Law 111
(2010), p. 203.
[128]
Google car crash: who’s to blame when a driverless car has an accident? URL:
https://theconversation.com/google-car-crash-whos-to-blame-when-a-driverless-car-
has-an-accident-55664. (accessed: 18.12.2021).
[129]
Mansfield and Another v Weetabix Limited and Another: CA 26 Mar 1997. URL:
https://swarb.co.uk/mansfield-and-another-v-weetabix-limited-and-another-ca-26-
mar-1997/. (accessed: 18.12.2021).
[130]
Google’s driverless cars are now legally the same as a human driver. URL: https:
//www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2016/02/10/googles-driverless-
cars-are-now-legally-the-same-as-a-human-driver/. (accessed: 18.12.2021).
[131]
Waymo website. URL: https://waymo.com/. (accessed: 01.01.2022).
[132]
Peter Cartwright. “The General Product Safety Regulations 2005: Implementing
Directive 2001/95–EC in the UK”. In: The Yearbook of Consumer Law 2007. Rout­
ledge, 2018, pp. 309–325.
[133]
NTSB, purpose and mission. URL: https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp- srv/
metro/documents/whatisntsb0091710.pdf. (accessed: 01.01.2022).
[134]
Collision Between a Car Operating With Automated Vehicle Control Systems and
a Tractor­Semitrailer Truck Near Williston, Florida May 7, 2016. URL: https://
www . ntsb . gov / investigations / accidentreports / reports / har1702 . pdf. (accessed:
01.01.2022).
[135]
Samuel G Finlayson et al. “Adversarial attacks on medical machine learning”. In:
Science 363.6433 (2019), pp. 1287–1289.
[136]
Fatma Khamis Al Badi et al. “Challenges of AI Adoption in the UAE Healthcare”.
In: Vision (2021), p. 0972262920988398.
[137]
Robert Challen et al. “Artificial intelligence, bias and clinical safety”. In: BMJ Quality
& Safety 28.3 (2019), pp. 231–237.
[138]
C Humphrey M Waldock. “The european convention for the protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms”. In: Brit. Yb Int’l L. 34 (1958), p. 356.
[139]
Mildred K Cho. “Rising to the challenge of bias in health care AI”. In: Nature
Medicine (2021), pp. 1–2.
[140]
Aaron Smith and Janna Anderson. “AI, Robotics, and the Future of Jobs”. In: Pew
Research Center 6 (2014), p. 51.
[141]
Charlie Taylor et al. Australia’s automation opportunity: reigniting productivity and
inclusive income growth. Tech. rep. Technical report, McKinsey & Company, 2019.
[142]
Mark Muro, Robert Maxim, and Jacob Whiton. “Automation and artificial intelli­
gence: How machines are affecting people and places”. In: (2019).
[143]
Angus Loten. “AI to drive job growth by 2020: Gartner”. In: Wall Street Journal
(2017).
[144]
L Ferretti et al. “Quantifying SARS­CoV­2 transmission suggests epidemic control
with digital contact tracing. Science 368”. In: Article Article eabb6936. https://doi.
org/10 1126 (2020).
[145]
Carmel Shachar, Sara Gerke, and Eli Y Adashi. “AI surveillance during pandemics:
ethical implementation imperatives”. In: Hastings Center Report 50.3 (2020), pp. 18–
21.
60
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:69==
[146]
GDPR. URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj. (accessed: 22.12.2021).
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
61
==PAGE:70==
A
Appendix
A.1
Interviewed experts
Name
Function
Date of
interview
Anonymous
Nurse at Warsaw Oncology Center
18/06/21
Anja Storgaard
Chefkonsulent at the Enhed for
Sundhedsforskning og Innovation
06/07/21
Cathal White
Business Development Manager
at Radiobotics
12/07/21
Linda Camilla
Andresen
Chief of Staff and Laboratory for the
Clinical Research Centre at
Hvidovre Hospital
20/07/21
Henriette Raaschou
Co­founder of RAIT
(Radiological AI Testcenter)
and Innovation Leader in Healthcare
21/07/21
Marie Smed
Specialkonsulent at Region Hovedstaden
(Sundhedsforskning og Innovation)
28/07/21
Rasmus Fält
Adviser at the Center for Regional Udvikling
04/08/21
Robert Lauritzen
CEO and Co­Founder of Cerebriu
06/08/21
Igor Matias
Ph.D. Candidate at University of Geneva
Member of the Quality of Life Technologies
(QoL) lab founded by prof. Katarzyna Wac
18/08/21
Lars Maaløe
CTO at Corti
19/08/21
Audrey Lebret
Postdoc at the Faculty of Law at University
of Copenhagen
02/12/21
Kim Lyngby Mikkelsen
Medical coordina tor at the Danish Patient
Compensation Association
03/12/21
Léonard van Rompaey
Industrial postdoc at the Faculty of Law of
University of Copenhagen
10/12/21
Pola Elisabeth Schwöbel
Ph.D. Candidate at the Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science at the
Technical University of Denmark
14/12/21
Bent Dalager
Founder of NewTech at KPMG Denmark
16/12/21
Bert Hoorne
Healthcare Industry Technology Strategist at
Microsoft
12/01/22
Table A.1: Interviewed experts, their functions and dates of interviews
62
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:71==
A.2
Declaration of Helsinki
WMA DECLARATION OF HELSINKI – ETHICAL PRINCIPLES FOR
MEDICAL RESEARCH INVOLVING HUMAN SUBJECTS
Adopted by the 18th WMA General Assembly, Helsinki, Finland, June 1964
and amended by the:
29th WMA General Assembly, Tokyo, Japan, October 1975
35th WMA General Assembly, Venice, Italy, October 1983
41st WMA General Assembly, Hong Kong, September 1989
48th WMA General Assembly, Somerset West, Republic of South Africa, October 1996
52nd WMA General Assembly, Edinburgh, Scotland, October 2000
53rd WMA General Assembly, Washington DC, USA, October 2002 (Note of Clari:cation added)
55th WMA General Assembly, Tokyo, Japan, October 2004 (Note of Clari:cation added)
59th WMA General Assembly, Seoul, Republic of Korea, October 2008
64th WMA General Assembly, Fortaleza, Brazil, October 2013
Preamble
1.         The World Medical Association (WMA) has developed the Declaration of Helsinki as a statement of ethical
principles for medical research involving human subjects, including research on identi:able human material
and data.
The Declaration is intended to be read as a whole and each of its constituent paragraphs should be applied
with consideration of all other relevant paragraphs.
2.         Consistent with the mandate of the WMA, the Declaration is addressed primarily to physicians. The WMA
encourages others who are involved in medical research involving human subjects to adopt these principles.
General Principles
3.         The Declaration of Geneva of the WMA binds the physician with the words, “The health of my patient will
be my :rst consideration,” and the International Code of Medical Ethics declares that, “A physician shall act in
the patient’s best interest when providing medical care.”
4.         It is the duty of the physician to promote and safeguard the health, well-being and rights of patients,
including those who are involved in medical research. The physician’s knowledge and conscience are dedicated
to the ful:lment of this duty.
5.         Medical progress is based on research that ultimately must include studies involving human subjects.
6.         The primary purpose of medical research involving human subjects is to understand the causes,
development and eEects of diseases and improve preventive, diagnostic and therapeutic interventions
(methods, procedures and treatments). Even the best proven interventions must be evaluated continually
through research for their safety, eEectiveness, eFciency, accessibility and quality.
7.         Medical research is subject to ethical standards that promote and ensure respect for all human subjects
and protect their health and rights.
8.         While the primary purpose of medical research is to generate new knowledge, this goal can never take
precedence over the rights and interests of individual research subjects.
9.         It is the duty of physicians who are involved in medical research to protect the life, health, dignity,
integrity, right to self-determination, privacy, and con:dentiality of personal information of research subjects.
The responsibility for the protection of research subjects must always rest with the physician or other health
care professionals and never with the research subjects, even though they have given consent.
10.       Physicians must consider the ethical, legal and regulatory norms and standards for research involving
human subjects in their own countries as well as applicable international norms and standards. No national or
international ethical, legal or regulatory requirement should reduce or eliminate any of the protections for
research subjects set forth in this Declaration.
11.       Medical research should be conducted in a manner that minimises possible harm to the environment.
12.       Medical research involving human subjects must be conducted only by individuals with the appropriate
ethics and scienti:c education, training and quali:cations. Research on patients or healthy volunteers requires
the supervision of a competent and appropriately quali:ed physician or other health care professional.
Figure A.1: First page of the amended Declaration of Helsinki
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
63
==PAGE:72==
A.3
21st century cures act
130 STAT. 1033 
PUBLIC LAW 114–255—DEC. 13, 2016 
Public Law 114–255 
114th Congress 
An Act 
To accelerate the discovery, development, and delivery of 21st century cures, and 
for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of 
the United States of America in Congress assembled, 
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS. 
(a) SHORT TITLE.—This Act may be cited as the ‘‘21st Century 
Cures Act’’. 
(b) TABLE OF CONTENTS.—The table of contents for this Act 
is as follows: 
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents. 
DIVISION A—21ST CENTURY CURES 
Sec. 1000. Short title. 
TITLE I—INNOVATION PROJECTS AND STATE RESPONSES TO OPIOID 
ABUSE 
Sec. 1001. Beau Biden Cancer Moonshot and NIH innovation projects. 
Sec. 1002. FDA innovation projects. 
Sec. 1003. Account for the state response to the opioid abuse crisis. 
Sec. 1004. Budgetary treatment. 
TITLE II—DISCOVERY 
Subtitle A—National Institutes of Health Reauthorization 
Sec. 2001. National Institutes of Health Reauthorization. 
Sec. 2002. EUREKA prize competitions. 
Subtitle B—Advancing Precision Medicine 
Sec. 2011. Precision Medicine Initiative. 
Sec. 2012. Privacy protection for human research subjects. 
Sec. 2013. Protection of identifiable and sensitive information. 
Sec. 2014. Data sharing. 
Subtitle C—Supporting Young Emerging Scientists 
Sec. 2021. Investing in the next generation of researchers. 
Sec. 2022. Improvement of loan repayment program. 
Subtitle D—National Institutes of Health Planning and Administration 
Sec. 2031. National Institutes of Health strategic plan. 
Sec. 2032. Triennial reports. 
Sec. 2033. Increasing accountability at the National Institutes of Health. 
Sec. 2034. Reducing administrative burden for researchers. 
Sec. 2035. Exemption for the National Institutes of Health from the Paperwork Re-
duction Act requirements. 
Sec. 2036. High-risk, high-reward research. 
Sec. 2037. National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences. 
Sec. 2038. Collaboration and coordination to enhance research. 
Sec. 2039. Enhancing the rigor and reproducibility of scientific research. 
Sec. 2040. Improving medical rehabilitation research at the National Institutes of 
Health. 
21st Century 
Cures Act. 
42 USC 201 note. 
Dec. 13, 2016 
[H.R. 34] 
VerDate Sep 11 2014 
12:03 Mar 29, 2017
Jkt 069139
PO 00255
Frm 00001
Fmt 6580
Sfmt 6582
E:\PUBLAW\PUBL255.114
PUBL255
dkrause on DSKHT7XVN1PROD with PUBLAWS
Figure A.2: First page of the 21st century cures act
64
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:73==
A.4
Directive 93/42/EEC on medical devices
This document is meant purely as a documentation tool and the institutions do not assume any liability for its contents
►B
COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 93/42/EEC
of 14 June 1993
concerning medical devices
(OJ L 169, 12.7.1993, p. 1)
Amended by:
Official Journal
No
page
date
►M1
Directive 98/79/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
27 October 1998
L 331
1
7.12.1998
►M2
Directive 2000/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
16 November 2000
L 313
22
13.12.2000
►M3
Directive 2001/104/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 7 December 2001
L 6
50
10.1.2002
►M4
Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 September 2003
L 284
1
31.10.2003
►M5
Directive 2007/47/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
5 September 2007
L 247
21
21.9.2007
1993L0042 — EN — 11.10.2007 — 005.001 — 1
Figure A.3: First page of the directive 93/42/EEC on medical devices
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
65
==PAGE:74==
A.5
Guidance MEDDEVs
Guidance MEDDEVs 
The MEDDEVs promote a common approach to be followed by manufacturers and notified 
bodies that are involved in conformity assessment procedures. 

The MEDDEVs are drafted by authorities charged with safeguarding public health in
conjunction with all stakeholders (industry associations, health professionals
associations, notified bodies and European standardisation organisations). This is in
accordance with the relevant annexes of the directives

MEDDEVs are carefully drafted through a consultation process with all interested
parties and are subject to a regular updating process

These documents have particular reference codes and are endorsed at the medical
devices expert group (MDEG) plenary meetings

The guidelines are not legally binding. However, due to the participation of the
aforementioned interested parties and the experts from competent authorities, it is
expected that the guidelines be followed, ensuring the uniform application of
relevant directive provisions.
Disclaimer: Please note that the amendments introduced by Directive 2007/47/EC or 
previous amending directives have not yet been incorporated into all MEDDEVs. 
List of guidance MEDDEVs 
See below a complete list of all guidance MEDDEVs, including links to further information: 
Title 
2.1 Scope, field 
of application, 
definition 
MEDDEV 2.1/1 (18 kB) Definitions of 'medical devices', 'accessory' and 
'manufacturer' 
April 1994 
MEDDEV 2.1/2 rev.2 (14 kB) Field of application of directive 'active 
implantable medical devices' 
April 1994 
MEDDEV 2.1/2.1 (12 kB) Treatment of computers used to program 
implantable pulse generators 
February 1998 
Figure A.4: Fist page of guidance MEDDEVs
66
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:75==
A.6
MDR (Medical Device Regulation)
I 
(Legislative acts) 
REGULATIONS 
REGULATION (EU) 2017/745 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL 
of 5 April 2017 
on medical devices, amending Directive 2001/83/EC, Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and 
Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 and repealing Council Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC 
(Text with EEA relevance) 
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, 
Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 114 and 
Article 168(4)(c) thereof, 
Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, 
After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, 
Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee (1), 
After consulting the Committee of the Regions, 
Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure (2), 
Whereas: 
(1)  
Council Directive 90/385/EEC (3) and Council Directive 93/42/EEC (4) constitute the Union regulatory framework 
for medical devices, other than in vitro diagnostic medical devices. However, a fundamental revision of those 
Directives is needed to establish a robust, transparent, predictable and sustainable regulatory framework for 
medical devices which ensures a high level of safety and health whilst supporting innovation. 
(2)  
This Regulation aims to ensure the smooth functioning of the internal market as regards medical devices, taking 
as a base a high level of protection of health for patients and users, and taking into account the small- and 
medium-sized enterprises that are active in this sector. At the same time, this Regulation sets high standards of 
quality and safety for medical devices in order to meet common safety concerns as regards such products. Both 
objectives are being pursued simultaneously and are inseparably linked whilst one not being secondary to the 
other. As regards Article 114 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), this Regulation 
harmonises the rules for the placing on the market and putting into service of medical devices and their 
accessories on the Union market thus allowing them to benefit from the principle of free movement of goods. 
5.5.2017 
L 117/1 
Official Journal of the European Union 
EN     
(1) Opinion of 14 February 2013 (OJ C 133, 9.5.2013, p. 52). 
(2) Position of the European Parliament of 2 April 2014 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and position of the Council at first reading 
of 7 March 2017 (not yet published in the Official Journal). 
(3) Council Directive 90/385/EEC of 20 June 1990 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to active implantable 
medical devices (OJ L 189, 20.7.1990, p. 17). 
(4) Council Directive 93/42/EEC of 14 June 1993 concerning medical devices (OJ L 169, 12.7.1993, p. 1). 
Figure A.5: First page of the MDR (Medical Device Regulation)
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
67
==PAGE:76==
A.7
Regulation on in vitro diagnostic medical devices
REGULATION (EU) 2017/746 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL 
of 5 April 2017 
on in vitro diagnostic medical devices and repealing Directive 98/79/EC and Commission Decision 
2010/227/EU 
(Text with EEA relevance) 
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, 
Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 114 and 
Article 168(4)(c) thereof, 
Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, 
After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, 
Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee (1), 
After consulting the Committee of the Regions, 
Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure (2), 
Whereas: 
(1)  
Directive 98/79/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (3) constitutes the Union regulatory 
framework for in vitro diagnostic medical devices. However, a fundamental revision of that Directive is needed to 
establish a robust, transparent, predictable and sustainable regulatory framework for in vitro diagnostic medical 
devices which ensures a high level of safety and health whilst supporting innovation. 
(2)  
This Regulation aims to ensure the smooth functioning of the internal market as regards in vitro diagnostic 
medical devices, taking as a base a high level of protection of health for patients and users, and taking into 
account the small and medium-sized enterprises that are active in this sector. At the same time, this Regulation 
sets high standards of quality and safety for in vitro diagnostic medical devices in order to meet common safety 
concerns as regards such products. Both objectives are being pursued simultaneously and are inseparably linked 
whilst one not being secondary to the other. As regards Article 114 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the 
European Union (TFEU), this Regulation harmonises the rules for the placing on the market and putting into 
service of in vitro diagnostic medical devices and their accessories on the Union market thus allowing them to 
benefit from the principle of free movement of goods. As regards Article 168(4)(c) TFEU, this Regulation sets 
high standards of quality and safety for in vitro diagnostic medical devices by ensuring, among other things, that 
data generated in performance studies are reliable and robust and that the safety of subjects participating in 
performance studies is protected. 
(3)  
This Regulation does not seek to harmonise rules relating to the further making available on the market of in 
vitro diagnostic medical devices after they have already been put into service, such as in the context of second- 
hand sales. 
(4)  
Key elements of the existing regulatory approach, such as the supervision of notified bodies, risk classification, 
conformity assessment procedures, performance evaluation and performance studies, vigilance and market 
surveillance should be significantly reinforced, whilst provisions ensuring transparency and traceability regarding 
in vitro diagnostic medical devices should be introduced, to improve health and safety. 
(5)  
To the extent possible, guidance developed for in vitro diagnostic medical devices at international level, in 
particular in the context of the Global Harmonization Task Force and its follow-up initiative, the International 
Medical Devices Regulators Forum, should be taken into account to promote the global convergence of 
5.5.2017 
L 117/176 
Official Journal of the European Union 
EN     
(1) Opinion of 14 February 2013 (OJ C 133, 9.5.2013, p. 52). 
(2) Position of the European Parliament of 2 April 2014 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and position of the Council at first reading 
of 7 March 2017 (not yet published in the Official Journal). 
(3) Directive 98/79/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 October 1998 on in vitro diagnostic medical devices (OJ L 331, 
7.12.1998, p. 1). 
Figure A.6: Frist page of the regulation on in vitro diagnostic medical devices
68
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:77==
A.8
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
1
1 The following additional definitions applicable to this Act are provided for in other Acts:
Butter. The Act of March 4, 1923 (21 U.S.C. 321a), defines butter as ‘‘the food product usually 
known as butter, and which is made exclusively from milk or cream, or both, with or without 
common salt, and with or without additional coloring matter, and containing not less than 80 
per centum by weight of milk fat, all tolerances having been allowed for.’’
Package. The Act of July 24, 1919 (21 U.S.C. 321b), states ‘‘The word‘package’shall include 
and shall be construed to include wrapped meats inclosed in papers or other materials as pre-
pared by the manufacturers thereof for sale.’’
Nonfat Dry Milk, Milk. The Act of July 2, 1956 (21 U.S.C. 321c), defines nonfat dry milk as 
‘‘the product resulting from the removal of fat and water from milk, and contains the lactose, 
milk proteins, and milk minerals in the same relative proportions as in the fresh milk from 
which made. It contains not over 5 per centum by weight of moisture. The fat content is not 
over 11⁄2per centum by weight unless otherwise indicated.’’, and defines milk to mean sweet milk 
of cows.
2 See footnote for section 403(h)(3) regarding the stylistic use of a list consisting of ‘‘(a)’’, ‘‘(b)’’, 
etc. 
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT 
[As Amended Through P.L. 117–11, Enacted April 23, 2021] 
øCurrency: This publication is a compilation of the text of Chapter 675 of the 75th 
Congress. It was last amended by the public law listed in the As Amended 
Through note above and below at the bottom of each page of the pdf version and 
reflects current law through the date of the enactment of the public law listed at 
https://www.govinfo.gov/app/collection/comps/¿
øNote: While this publication does not represent an official version of any Federal 
statute, substantial efforts have been made to ensure the accuracy of its contents. 
The official version of Federal law is found in the United States Statutes at Large 
and in the United States Code. The legal effect to be given to the Statutes at 
Large and the United States Code is established by statute (1 U.S.C. 112, 204).¿
CHAPTER I—SHORT TITLE 
SECTION 1. ø21 U.S.C. 301¿ This Act may be cited as the Fed-
eral Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
CHAPTER II—DEFINITIONS 1 
SEC. 201. ø21 U.S.C. 321¿ For the purposes of this Act— 2 
(a)(1) The term ‘‘State’’, except as used in the last sentence of 
section 702(a), means any State or Territory of the United States, 
the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. 
(2) The term ‘‘Territory’’ means any Territory or possession of 
the United States, including the District of Columbia, and exclud-
ing the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the Canal Zone. 
(b) The term ‘‘interstate commerce’’ means (1) commerce be-
tween any State or Territory and any place outside thereof, and (2) 
commerce within the District of Columbia or within any other Ter-
ritory not organized with a legislative body. 
(c) The term ‘‘Department’’ means the Department of Health 
and Human Services. 
(d) The term ‘‘Secretary’’ means the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services. 
VerDate 0ct 09 2002 
14:18 Jul 13, 2021
Jkt 000000
PO 00000
Frm 00001
Fmt 9001
Sfmt 9001
G:\COMP\FDA\FFDACA.BEL
HOLC
July 13, 2021 
G:\COMP\FDA\FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT.XML
    
As Amended Through P.L. 117-11, Enacted April 23, 2021
Figure A.7: First page of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
69
==PAGE:78==
A.9
Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEPENDENT 
HIGH-LEVEL EXPERT GROUP ON 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
SET UP BY THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICS GUIDELINES 
FOR TRUSTWORTHY AI 
 
 
Figure A.8: First page of the Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI
70
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:79==
A.10
1968 Vienna Convention on Road Traffic
XI B 19.   TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS - ROAD TRAFFIC         1
19. CONVENTION ON ROAD TRAFFIC
Vienna, 8 November 1968
.ENTRY INTO FORCE:
21 May 1977, in accordance with article 47(1).
REGISTRATION: 
21 May 1977, No. 15705.
STATUS: 
Signatories: 37. Parties: 85.
TEXT: 
United Nations,  Treaty Series , vol. 1042, p. 17; and depositary notification 
C.N.19.1992.TREATIES-1 of 3 March 1992 (amendments); C.N.120.1993.TREATIES-2 
of 6 August 1993 (acceptance of the amendments); C.N.924.2004.TREATIES-4 of 
28 September 2004 (proposal of amendments) and C.N.998.2005.TREATIES-3 of 
29 September 2005 (acceptance of amendments); C.N.569.2014.TREATIES-XI-B-19 of 
23 September 2014 (proposal of amendments to articles 8 and 39 of the Convention) and 
CN.529.2015.Reissued.06102015-Eng.TREATIES-XI-B-19 (reissued) of 6 October 2015 
(acceptance 
of 
amendments 
to 
articles 
8 
and 
39 
of 
the 
Convention)1; 
C.N.162.2015.TREATIES-XI-B-19 of 19 March 2015 (proposal of amendment to 
paragraph 1 of Annex 2 to the Convention)2 and C.N.155.2016.TTREATIES-XI.B.19 of 
8 April 2016 (Acceptance); CN.5.2021.Reissued.15012021.TREATIES-XI-B-19 of 14 
January 2021 (Amendment to article 1 and new article 34 bis)3.4
Note: The Convention was prepared and opened for signature by the United Nations Conference on Road Traffic, held at 
Vienna from 7 October to 8 November 1968.  It was convened by the Secretary-General of the United Nations pursuant to 
resolutions 1129 (XLI) and 1203 (XLII)5 adopted by the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations on 27 July 1966 
and 26 May 1967, respectively.  The Conference also prepared and opened for signature the Convention on Road Signs and 
Signals (see chapter XI.B-20) and adopted the Final Act.
.
Participant6
Signature
Accession(a), 
Succession(d), 
Ratification
Albania...........................
29 Jun
 2000 a
Armenia .........................
  8 Feb
 2005 a
Austria ...........................  8 Nov  1968 
11 Aug  1981 
Azerbaijan......................
  3 Jul
 2002 a
Bahamas.........................
14 May  1991 a
Bahrain...........................
  4 May  1973 a
Belarus...........................  8 Nov  1968 
18 Jun
 1974 
Belgium .........................  8 Nov  1968 
16 Nov  1988 
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina7............
  1 Sep
 1993 d
Brazil .............................  8 Nov  1968 
29 Oct
 1980 
Bulgaria .........................  8 Nov  1968 
28 Dec  1978 
Cabo Verde....................
12 Jun
 2018 a
Central African 
Republic...................
  3 Feb
 1988 a
Chile...............................  8 Nov  1968 
Costa Rica......................  8 Nov  1968 
Côte d'Ivoire ..................
24 Jul
 1985 a
Croatia7 ..........................
23 Nov  1992 d
Cuba...............................
30 Sep
 1977 a
Czech Republic8 ............
  2 Jun
 1993 d
Democratic Republic of 
the Congo.................
25 Jul
 1977 a
Participant6
Signature
Accession(a), 
Succession(d), 
Ratification
Denmark9.......................  8 Nov  1968 
  3 Nov  1986 
Ecuador..........................  8 Nov  1968 
Estonia ...........................
24 Aug  1992 a
Ethiopia..........................
25 Aug  2021 a
Finland...........................16 Dec  1969 
  1 Apr  1985 
France ............................  8 Nov  1968 
  9 Dec  1971 
Georgia ..........................
23 Jul
 1993 a
Germany10,11 ..................  8 Nov  1968 
  3 Aug  1978 
Ghana.............................22 Aug  1969 
Greece............................
18 Dec  1986 a
Guyana...........................
31 Jan
 1973 a
Holy See ........................  8 Nov  1968 
Honduras........................
  3 Feb
 2020 a
Hungary .........................  8 Nov  1968 
16 Mar  1976 
Indonesia........................  8 Nov  1968 
Iran (Islamic Republic 
of).............................  8 Nov  1968 
21 May  1976 
Iraq.................................
  1 Feb
 2017 a
Israel ..............................  8 Nov  1968 
11 May  1971 
Italy................................  8 Nov  1968 
  2 Oct
 1996 
Kazakhstan.....................
  4 Apr  1994 a
Kenya.............................
  9 Sep
 2009 a
Figure A.9: First page of the 1968 Vienna Convention on Road Traffic
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
71
==PAGE:80==
A.11
Consumer Protection Act 1987
Changes to legislation: Consumer Protection Act 1987 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before
04 October 2021. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made
appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
Consumer Protection Act 1987
1987 CHAPTER 43
An Act to make provision with respect to the liability of persons for damage caused
by defective products; to consolidate with amendments the Consumer Safety Act 1978
and the Consumer Safety (Amendment) Act 1986; to make provision with respect to
the giving of price indications; to amend Part I of the Health and Safety at Work etc.
Act 1974 and sections 31 and 80 of the Explosives Act 1875; to repeal the Trade
Descriptions Act 1972 and the Fabrics (Misdescription) Act 1913; and for connected
purposes.
[15th May 1987]
Be it enacted by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, as follows:—
Extent Information
E1
Act extends to Northern Ireland with specified exceptions, see s. 49
Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C1
Act excluded (30.10.2005) by The Veterinary Medicines Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/2475), reg. 44
C2
By the Toys (Safety) Regulations 1989, S.I. 1989/1275, reg. 15(1) it is provided that those Regulations
shall be treated for all purposes as if they were safety regulations within the meaning of this Act
C3
Act extended (6.4.1992) by S.I. 1992/711, reg. 30
Act extended (24.2.1995) by S.I. 1995/204, reg. 16(1)
Act applied (1.1.1995) by S.I. 1994/3142, reg. 18(6)
C4
Act continued (1.10.2015) by The Consumer Rights Act 2015 (Commencement No. 3, Transitional
Provisions, Savings and Consequential Amendments) Order 2015 (S.I. 2015/1630), art. 8(8)
C5
Act applied in part (with modifications) (20.5.2016) by The Standardised Packaging of Tobacco
Products Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/829), reg. 18 (with regs. 14(5), 20)
Commencement Information
I1
Act not in force at Royal Assent see s.50; Act fully in force 1.3.1989 (subject to reservations in S.I.
1988/2076).
Figure A.10: First page of the Consumer Protection Act 1987
72
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
==PAGE:81==
A.12
NTSB report investigating the Florida crash
Collision Between a Car Operating With 
Automated Vehicle Control Systems 
and a Tractor-Semitrailer Truck 
Near Williston, Florida 
May 7, 2016 
Accident Report 
NTSB/HAR-17/02 
PB2017-102600 
National 
Transportation 
Safety Board 
Figure A.11: First page of the NTSB report investigating the Florida crash
Effective development and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence technologies in healthcare
73
==PAGE:82==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk/english
