==PAGE:1==
Building nice-looking order sequences for
side-loaders
A mathematical implementation of visual attractiveness in the vehicle
routing problem
Master Thesis
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Technology, Management, and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
A mathematical implementation of visual attractiveness in the vehicle routing problem
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
André Runge Rossen & Anton Petersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management,
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
André Runge Rossen - s164373
Signature
Date
Anton Petersen - s163760
Signature
Date
ii
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
Anton Petersen
17-01-2022
17-01-2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The logistics and planning industry sometimes experience trust-issues from their cus-
tomers, inherently due to the subjective nature of what a ”nice-looking” order sequence
is. This is also the case for the company AMCS, which is why this thesis seeks to examine
the aforementioned thoroughly. The task within this thesis is to find out how to quantify
and implement this ”nice-looking” component into an automated route generation tool.
The thesis utilised a 2-step metaheuristic framework to improve visual attractiveness of
the provided instances. Other methods were also explored, but were found to produce
unsatisfying results. The proposed framework consisted of an implemented ALNS. The
convergence of a distance optimisation was proved before the visual attractiveness was
applied as the second step. Two metrics should determine whether or not a solution was
visually attractive, and those were investigated individually. Namely, the cluster entries
and time difference metrics. The metaheuristic framework was tested on a total of 9 dif-
ferent instances, showing increases in the visual attractiveness parameters upwards of 73
% and 93 %, for the cluster entries and time difference criteria, respectively. Thereby, the
proposed approaches are believed to perform very well, especially given their ability to be
used on somewhat different instances.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We would like to give a big thanks to our supervisor Richard Martin Lusby from DTU
Management. Not only did he help us with establishing a contact to AMCS, he has also
provided great support throughout the project period. Furthermore we would like to thank
Kristian Milo Hauge for providing us with this unique project and the real-life data to
support it.
iv
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
AMCS Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Presentation of the data provided by AMCS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Considering the problem from a Mathematical perspective . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
The Vehicle Routing Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Visually Attractive Solutions in Vehicle Routing Problems . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
The Travelling Salesman Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Method
11
2.1
Choosing a way of modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Formulating the Problem as a Mathematical Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Choosing a Clustering Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Providing an Exact Solution Method for the Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Metaheuristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
Devising a Metaheuristic Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Results
37
3.1
Study of the Results and Quality of the Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2
Computational Performance of the ALNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.3
Measuring the cost of visual attractiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4
Discussion
53
4.1
Tuning of the ALNS framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2
Evaluation of the destroy/repair methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.3
Quality of cluster algorithm in terms of visual attractiveness . . . . . . . . .
60
5
Conclusion and Remarks
65
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
Bibliography
67
A Appendix
69
A.1 Parameter tuning data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.2 VAA plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Throughout the history of mankind humans have increasingly structured their everyday
life. From the early primitive populations organising who takes care of the home and who
goes hunting, to the people of the modern world organising how to balance work, leisure
and family. Inevitably, with the invention of the computer the organising of such tasks
started to become automated. With the increase of availability of computer power the
task organisation has seen a move towards optimality. Now, humans face another problem
as mathematical optimality sometimes implies seemingly illogical moves.
Specifically, within the industry of route planning, the engineers sometimes experience
trouble with convincing their customers that the solutions they come up with is, in fact,
the best possible.
This makes way for the topic of ”nice-looking” solutions. What if the engineers could
impose a ”nice-looking” criterion on the solutions they produce? And what effect would
this impose on the otherwise optimal solutions?
This is the problem that is going to be investigated throughout this thesis. Namely, the
invention and implementation of ”nice-looking” criterion on order sequences. The topic
to include this criterion on is route planning for side-loaded garbage trucks.
Furthermore, the interpretations of the ”nice-looking” criterion used within this report
has been presented to AMCS and endorsed by the contact person.
1.1
AMCS Group
Advanced Manufacturing Control Systems Limited (AMCS Group) is the developer of
AMCS platform:
”An enterprise grade cloud and software platform that is designed based on the best
practice processes of thousands of waste & recycling companies across the globe.”
- AMCS Web page [1]
Their software is used for several things, and among these is waste collection. Moreover,
they provide a tool for route planning of garbage collection truck fleets. While AMCS’
software produces cutting-edge solutions they sometimes experience distrust and problems
from the drivers to whom they deliver optimal driving routes. AMCS’ experience is not
unique which shows in the literature where several studies support the claim that drivers
might have their own opinion on what a good route is [2]. However, this phenomenon is
experienced only in real-life instances because it stems from the fact that the truck drivers,
fleet commanders and developers of routes might have different opinions of what defines
a good route. While a mathematically optimal route is considered good by the engineer
and fleet commander, the truck driver might have a strong opinion against the solution.
One apparent difference between a truck driver’s habits, and an optimal route, might be
caused by the computer solely prioritising costs while the truck driver might consider a
route that is easy to drive, visits customers close to each other consecutively, or even
something that solely benefits himself e.g. time for a lunch break in the local park.
This might ultimately lead to unwillingness to adapt to the ideas of their superiors, which
in turn might result in the drivers taking their own decisions and thus travelling on far-
from-optimal routes.
One proposed measure to decrease this level of distrust is to enhance the visual attrac-
tiveness of the generated routes [3].
Often, the measures taken to increase the visual
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
1
==PAGE:10==
attractiveness will lead to an increase in price, and thus a decrease in optimality, but
the literature suggests that the increase of trust, and thereby adherence to the provided
routes, might weigh up for the added cost price [3][4].
1.2
Presentation of the data provided by AMCS
Throughout the report data sets provided by AMCS are used. Namely, two different sets
of data have been provided by AMCS. These data sets contain information about orders
on a given set of roads. Each road has a unique road ID and a number which determines
whether an order is on one or the other side of a given road ID. Furthermore, the orders
are grouped in Link Clusters (LCs). AMCS defines Link Clusters as a group of orders each
belonging to the same road ID on the same side of the road. Therefore, when travelling
to the first order on a LC it is assumed that all orders on that LC are visited. As such, a
complete route is denoted by R and the link clusters LCi ∈R.
Furthermore, it should be noted that road IDs define unique stretches of roads with no
interruptions such as three- or four- way intersections. Thus, if a road is interrupted by a
three way intersection, the straight part of the intersection will have different road IDs on
each side of the intersecting third road. A further explanation of road IDs can be found
in Figure 1.1. When planning routes on the data provided by AMCS these LCs will be
most important, as the route will described by the order in which the LCs are visited.
Figure 1.1: Road IDs, orders and link clusters on a road map. Each red dot represents a
unique order.
The problem from AMCS involves side-loader vehicles which means that there is a differ-
ence in travelling from i to j compared to travelling from j to i. This comes from the fact
that the distances are determined from the actual route from one point to another, rather
than it being the euclidean distance.
This ultimately yields an asymmetrical distance
matrix.
Furthermore, when generating routes for side loaders AMCS experiences that the routes
travel between areas creating confusion from the drivers.
Thus, a proposal from the
AMCS contact person is, to devise a method that is able generate routes while being able
to distinguish between certain areas in their network[5].
A summary of the data sets is shown in Table 1.1. From the table it is evident that there
is no apparent correlation between the number of orders and LCs, for example one can see
2
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:11==
that set 1.3 contains more orders than set 1.2, yet has fewer LCs. This, of course, simply
means that there must be a higher density of orders on the roads in set 1.3.
Another important thing to notice is, that by defining the roads by the LCs the problem’s
size is drastically decreased which decreases the required computation time to solve the
problems. This is further examined in Chapter 2.
Data set
Orders
Link Clusters
Data style
AMCS’ solution
1.1
903
194
Rural & city
44.7 km
1.2
1172
363
Rural & city
304.0 km
1.3
1526
325
Rural & city
254.2 km
1.4
1762
367
Rural & city
112.7 km
1.5
1815
320
Rural & city
66.4 km
2.1
933
205
Manhattan
6:13 hh:mm
2.2
1382
320
Manhattan
5:55 hh:mm
2.5
1074
240
Manhattan
5:49 hh:mm
2.6
1127
266
Manhattan
7:19 hh:mm
Table 1.1: A summary of the names, sizes and types of data sets provided by AMCS
One thing that is not evident from Table 1.1, is that by using LCs to define the routes,
travelling is solely allowed from the last order within a LC to the first order within another
LC, these orders are referred to as last ID and first ID. Lastly, each data set includes a
source and a terminal.
Although, when plotting the road networks these sources and
terminals are not included. An example plot of a data set is shown in Figure 1.2. Note
the difference between how AMCS plots their data and how the data is plotted in this
report. This is due to the fact, that AMCS has access to road data which, due to it being
unimportant for the scope of this project, is not included within the data made available
here.
(a) A plot of data set 1.1. No road data
(b) AMCS’ plot of data set 1.1. With road data
Figure 1.2: Comparison of the representation of the data.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
3
==PAGE:12==
1.3
Considering the problem from a Mathematical
perspective
Solving logistical problems using mathematical models is one of the core concepts within
Operations Research. Here, models are formulated and solved to optimality by either an
algorithm in multiple steps or with more advanced and complex routines. Within the
field of operations research mathematical models are often used as a method of deciding
how to best distribute resources among different variables. That being work-power, a fleet
of vehicles, machines in a production and many other examples[6]. These problems of a
real-life system are quantified and formulated into a mathematical model where both the
solution and the model itself should represent reality as close as possible. That said, every
problem has a balance between the information you feed the model and the solvability of
that said model.
This information leads to an objective function, which is the main target of the model, and
to a set of constraints, which are the physical boundaries to the problem. The variables in a
model are called decision variables and are the ones the model tries to optimise respecting
the constraints and objective function. To solve such mathematical models one has to use
a toolbox which can help solve the problem. The main tool in this toolbox is the Linear
Programming (LP) tool mainly introduced by George Dantzig in the late 1940’s. This
approach can solve a problem where all information gathered and modelled is considered
to be linear and continuous. If a problem contains decision variables which are discrete
the problem is no longer considered a LP, but rather a Mixed Integer Program (MIP)
where some decision variables are taking integer values and some are not. These tools
are the main way of solving mathematical models in operations research, but when the
problems increase in size, due to either the number of constraints, and/or variables, the
computational time increases and sometimes the problem cannot be solved to optimality
within an acceptable time limit. These problems could then be approached in a different
manner which not necessarily provides an optimal solution, but can be a strong tool in
finding a good feasible solution with low computational effort.
When considering the problem described in Section 1.4.1 and Section 1.2 as a mathematical
model, one has to elaborate how the data is shaping the problem and reason on how this
problem could be interpreted as a well-studied problem from the literature. The strength
of finding a similar well-defined problem is that there is a solid academic foundation to
build upon. Given that the problem revolves around garbage truck planning, one would
intuitively investigate how this could be formulated as a Vehicle Routing Problem, and
search for variants which could be applied to this instance. Since many waste collection
problems are modelled as that type of problem it supports the claim even further [7].
1.4
The Vehicle Routing Problem
Some of the well-studied problems in operations research are the variations of the Vehicle
Routing Problem (VRP). The most studied of all variants is the capacitated vehicle routing
problem (CVRP), which revolves around the transportation of goods from a depot to
a set of customers.
Each customer has a certain demand that must be met in order
for the problem to be solved. To ensure deliverance of the goods the VRP considers a
homogeneous fleet of vehicles. Each vehicle starts at the depot with a limited capacity
and incur equal costs when travelling between the customers. The incurred cost, costi,j,
when travelling from customer i to j is usually measured in units of either distance or
time [7].
4
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:13==
Several other variants of the VRP exist and include, but are not limited to: The VRP with
time windows(VRPTW), the VRP with pickup and delivery (VRPPD), the multi depot
vehicle routing problem (MDVRP) and many more [\cite {Irnich2014}]. Furthermore,
one is not limited to the special cases of the aforementioned examples, and the literature
shows examples of combinations such as the capacitated vehicle routing problem with time
windows (CVRPTW).
The VRP is a minimisation problem, and thus, common for all variants is that the objective
is to minimise the cost of distribution. Often, this means minimising the total distance
travelled while respecting the capacity constraints, but as mentioned above cost can be
considered in units different from distance.
Let
xi,j =
{
1
if going from node i to node j
0
otherwise
and then let the total distance travelled equal the cost of travels, thus Di,j = distance from
i to j. Furthermore, let di be the demand of customer i, and ui be the cumulative demand
of customers 0, .., i. Lastly, let K be the fleet of vehicles and Q defines the capacity of a
single vehicle. A mathematical model for the VRP can be formulated as
Objective function min Z =
∑
i,j∈V
(Di,jxi,j)
(1.1)
s.t.
∑
i∈V,i̸=j
xi,j = 1
∀j ∈V
(1.2)
∑
j∈V,j̸=i
xi,j = 1
∀i ∈V
(1.3)
∑
j∈V
x0,j = |K|
(1.4)
ui + dj = uj
∀xi,j = 1, i, j ̸= 0
(1.5)
dj ≤ui ≤Q
∀i ∈V
(1.6)
xi,j ∈B
∀i, j ∈V
(1.7)
Of course, the objective function minimises the total distance travelled. The constraints
1.2 and 1.3 ensures that each node is visited and exited exactly once.
Constraint 1.4
restricts the solution to consist of exactly K routes. The constraints, 1.5 and 1.6 secures
that the capacity of each truck is not exceeded. Sub-tours are infeasible tours, that need
to be eliminated in order for the VRP solution to be valid. The mathematical formulation
concludes in a solution of which an example is represented in Figure 1.3 where K = 4, and
each colour represents a sequence for the vehicles.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.3: VRP explanation with 4 vehicles visiting a cluster each.
1.4.1
The Vehicle Routing Problem with side-loaders
Side-loaders or automatic side loaded garbage disposal trucks are a type of garbage trucks
that, as the name suggests, are loaded from the side rather than the front- or back.
Automated side loaders are equipped with a lifting system, usually on the front of the
truck, that allows the truck to lift and empty trash cans from the side of the road into the
truck’s garbage container. Contrary to front- or back-loaders these types of trucks do not
necessarily require more than a single operator, which of course decreases expenses related
to salaries. Furthermore, the automated system decreases the risk of injuries among the
workers [8].
In an operations research setting the side-loaders differ from the other types of trucks as
they are unable to service both sides of a road simultaneously. Therefore, for a side-loader
to service both directions on a given road it is required to traverse both back and forth.
This implies a set of constraints when modelling the travel of side-loaders and in turn
increases the total required distance travelled.
1.4.2
Clustered Vehicle Routing Problem
One of the variants of the VRP is the clustered VRP(cluVRP), introduced by Sevaux
and Sörensen [9], where the nodes are grouped into predetermined clusters. The cluster
constraint ensures that when a node is visited in a cluster, all the other nodes in the same
cluster have to be visited before leaving. This variant is the hard constrained cluVRP,
and can be relaxed to one where the objective function is penalised when leaving a cluster
if all nodes in that cluster are not visited consecutively. One could also constrain this
problem even further by applying requirements to the order sequence of the clusters, or
predetermining which vehicle should visit which cluster. This type of constraint is mostly
applied if the vehicles have different properties and not every vehicle can handle a special
type of goods, e.g. hazardous waste. The literature has different approaches to solving this
variant of the VRP both in terms of the chosen method and the way of solving the problem
6
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:15==
[10][11]. An interesting approach is to divide the problem into two smaller problems; one
problem where the optimal route between the clusters is determined, called inter-cluster
route, and a second problem where the route in each cluster is determined, called an
intra-cluster route. When dividing the problem into two smaller sub-problems a variety
of options to solve it arise.
1.5
Visually Attractive Solutions in Vehicle Routing
Problems
The concept of a ”nice-looking” solution in regards to a VRP is often referred to as visual
attractiveness in the literature and is mostly a concept used in real-life examples. The
topic of interest in this project is framed thoroughly in Section 1.4.1 and leads to a further
investigation of this concept. The literature touches briefly upon it and discusses how to
quantify the visual attractiveness of a given solution. In this project the focus is heading
towards the construction of routes of a VRP solution and how others in the literature have
done it previously. The term and interest of visual attractiveness is a relatively narrow
field of study and first occurs in the article by Poot et al.[4] from 2002.
Others have
then investigated the topic with other measures and tried to analyse the topic in many
directions. A thorough review is carried out by Rossit et al.[3] which compares the different
measures to one another. Because what defines an attractive route? Who determines this
and who are benefiting from visually appealing routes?
This discussion will in most cases lean towards a more practical standpoint and thus, has
the literature discussing multiple ways of interpreting this concept. When looking at a
solution to a VRP, solved with any tool, one would almost always look at the quality
of the solution and how the objective value compares with other known results to this
instance. But when trying to solve a problem while optimising on other parameters as
well the solution obviously changes. Therefore, the quality is harder to determine due to
the lack of universal agreements on how to evaluate visual attractiveness. Rossit et al.[3]
proposes a more methodical approach in regards to the current ways of quantifying visual
attractiveness in routing problems. The article mentions that there is not one unique
way of doing this. It is often constrained to the current variant of the problem and some
metrics perform better in certain cases than others do. This article is a review of the
current literature which have considered visual attractiveness as a part of their solution
and emphasises on trying to evaluate the different metrics used in this field of study. This
measurement can be, like many other constraints added to a given mathematical problem,
costly to implement and comes with some sort of evaluation on the solution quality. This
can lead to an increase of the original objective value, in most cases total distance or time
travelled, and then the discussion of how much of an increment is acceptable to proceed
with arises.
The different measurements serve different purposes, but [3] mentions ”Compactness”,
”Non-overlapping” and ”Route complexity” as concepts to analyse in regard to visually
appealing routes. ”Compactness” is measured in many different ways, exemplified in the
relation of the average distance between two consecutive nodes and the average from
the 20 % largest distances or a measure of the distance from a node to the center of
a route. These methods are formulated in [12] and [4]. A shared application for all of
these methods to measure compactness is that it is mostly applicable on VRPs with a
fleet size of n > 1 where each vehicle could be constrained to a specific region or have
a free choice of customer. ”Non-overlapping” is self explanatory in the way that when
constraining a model in terms of this measurement the sub objective is to minimise the
total crossings between two different routes. This is also only relevant when having a fleet
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
7
==PAGE:16==
size of n > 1. ”Route complexity” is a more ill defined term and different approaches
have been investigated throughout the literature, one example being the sum of ”bending
energy” as proposed in Gretton and Kilby [3].
Here the model seeks to minimise the
amount of sharp turns and thereby converting a ”zigzag” route to a solution which travels
more along the outer boundary of the network instead of going from inner to outer nodes.
Another example is described in Constantino et al.[13] where the complexity is measured
through a connectivity index, a number that is proportional to the number of connected
zones within the generated solutions.
Figure 1.4: Example of how the literature interprets visual attractiveness. The left figure
maximising visual attractiveness and the right minimising total cost.[3]
The two plots in Figure 1.4 show the same network, but are optimised with respect to two
different objectives. On the left figure the routes are non-overlapping and more compact
while the routes on the right are at lowest cost, but more overlapping.
For a route to be ”nice-looking” or perform well on any of the mentioned visual attractive-
ness measurements one have to consult the ones driving the determined routes. Because
in the end of the day this application is used to promote a more practical way of driving a
route compared to a route only optimised in regards to distance. This concept as a whole,
as mentioned in Section 1.4.1, is developed to satisfy the customers’ needs and the drivers’
demands and is therefore a very specific and subjective manner of study. The different
measurements mentioned in [3] are well documented and are thoroughly discussed, but if
the ones exposed to or driving the route are dissatisfied it does not matter whether the
route has a high compactness score or low route complexity.
When considering all of the above elaborations in Section 1.4 the problem investigated
in this project clearly has similarities to VRP although, there are some key differences.
The capacity of the truck is unlimited, Q = ∞, and thereby this yields a fleet size K = 1
since there is no need for returning to the depot to empty the truck. The depots on the
other hand can be located in different places, but does not have any influence on the
measurement of visual attractiveness since they are usually located far from the network
of customers. When this is the case one could also try to investigate other problems to
see whether they could contribute to a better understanding of how to model this problem
in the best way possible. The Travelling Salesman problem could be an interesting topic
of choice since it has the attributes of only having one ”vehicle” and minimises the total
distance travelled. This problem will be explained further in the following section.
8
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:17==
1.6
The Travelling Salesman Problem
The Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP) is another one of the well-studied mathematical
problems in the field of operations research. The objective is to minimise total distance
travelled while only visiting each of the n cities once, and that the tour has to be a cycle.
This concludes that the starting point of the tour is irrelevant. The problem is defined on
a graph G = (V, E) which consists of a set of vertices, V and the edges from each vertex
to one another, E. The value of the edges represent the distances, Di,j, between all nodes.
This matrix is typically symmetric, making the distance from i to j equal to the distance
from j to i. There exist variants where the distance matrix is asymmetric, thus making the
costs of travelling from nodes i to j different from travelling from j to i. Furthermore, this
implies a directed graph rather than an undirected graph that is apparent in the symmetric
TSP. For the travelling salesman problem a mathematical model could be formulated as:
Objective function min Z =
∑
i,j∈V
(Di,jxi,j)
(1.8)
s.t.
∑
i∈V,i̸=j
xi,j = 1
∀j ∈V
(1.9)
∑
j∈V,j̸=i
xi,j = 1
∀i ∈V
(1.10)
∑
i,j∈Q
xi,j ≥|Q| −1
∀Q ⊊V, |Q| ≥2
(1.11)
xi,j ∈B
(1.12)
The TSP is formulated this way and the objective function minimises the total distance
travelled, the constraints 1.9 and 1.10 force a visited node to be exited again. Constraint
1.11 ensures that every subtour is eliminated and thereby enforcing a solution as a complete
tour. A solved TSP could look like the one presented in Figure 1.5. The nodes in this
problem are exactly the same as the ones presented in the solved VRP in Figure 1.3. The
arrows indicate which way the salesman travels, but as mentioned earlier this could have
been the other way around since the problem solved is symmetrical.
The TSP is known to be very hard to solve computationally since the fact that the number
of possible tours for the symmetrical variant grows with a magnitude of 1
2(n −1)! [14].
This quickly leads to a huge number of constraints and the computational time to solve
an instance increases dramatically.
Although the different constraints can shorten the
execution time when the problem size increases one might not be able to solve the problem
with a MIP without making use of other routines.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 1.5: TSP example with the same nodes as in Figure 1.3.
10
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:19==
2
Method
2.1
Choosing a way of modelling
The variant of the VRP which was first investigated in terms of modelling the problem
of the project has now shown to be quite equal to the TSP since a vehicle has to visit
all nodes in the graph exactly once while minimising the total distance driven. One of
the differences, which makes the problem differ from the TSP, is the fact that a start
and ending point is defined, in the literature often referred to as a source and terminal.
Furthermore, due to the limitations of a side-loader the distance matrix is asymmetrical
which leads to a directed graph rather than the undirected graph that is prevalent in the
common TSP.
One could argue that the problem in its original form should be modelled as an asymmet-
rical TSP or a VRP with fleet size of K = 1 with some slight modifications in terms of
source and terminal nodes. Nonetheless, the problem should be extended to implement
visual attractiveness and thus making the problem more unique.
The visual attractiveness measurements presented within the literature, and summarised
in Section 1.5, applies to variants of the VRP where the problems are constrained by
capacity, time windows and more. This is vastly different from the problem within this
project, where the only major constraint is the asymmetrical distances due to the vehicle
being a side-loader.
The differences in the problems of the literature and this project, means that the mea-
surements do not necessarily lead to an increase of visual attractiveness. Thus, making
the measurements inapplicable within this project. A reasoning has to be made on how to
implement visual attractiveness in the problem based on the knowledge obtained through
studying others’ work on visual attractiveness. When considering the way some of the
measurements work, as explained in Section 1.5, it is clear that a visually appealing route
is defined as being compact relative to either the center of a cluster or as a proportion of
the maximum distance. This could imply that a set of clusters defined on the graph such
that each cluster has to be visited exactly once, would lead to a more visually attractive
route.
These clusters could be served by multiple vehicles while making sure each vehicle serves
exactly one cluster. However, since the problem consists of one vehicle in total, it has to
translate this behaviour into a route where each cluster is only visited once. A generated
route would then be considered inherently visually attractive, due to the adherence to
certain parts of a network when driving the route.
The aforementioned aspects of having only a single vehicle, yet a directed graph with a
source and terminal, makes the problem a combination of the cluVRP and TSP. However,
since the problem is to promote visual attractiveness a model has to be specifically built
to account for these requirements as well.
To conclude how the model should be defined a summary of all the parameters is carried
out. The problem consists of a single vehicle, which has to start at a source, s, and end at
a terminal, t. This vehicle has to visit all customers on a given graph where the objective
is to minimise the total distance travelled. Furthermore a constraint, where the vehicle
has to visit some predetermined clusters one at a time, is needed. This constraint is added
as a hard constraint to ensure that a cluster is visited only once. It is expected that the
objective cost would benefit from a relaxation of this constraint since the choice of where
to go next is more free and there might be other clusters worth visiting before finishing
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
11
==PAGE:20==
the current one. When this is assumed it is necessary to state that a there is a trade
off between visiting the clusters in a strict manner and the total distance travelled. The
visual attractiveness will, as stated in Section 1.5, often come with a cost.
The described problem is now to be formulated as a mathematical model, where each
customer is visited exactly once and the proposed route has to start at a certain source, s,
and end at a given terminal, t. The model is carried out according to the description within
this section, and therefore, is inspired from aspects of both the TSP and the cluVRP.
In this model there is a set of decision variables and parameters. The parameters are
predetermined for each of the different instances. The decision variables are xi,j and yi,j,k
and follow this description:
xi,j =
{
1
if going from node i to node j
0
otherwise
and
yi,j,k =
{
1
if going from i to j and ki ̸= kj
0
otherwise
The parameters are CIn,K and β. CIn,K is a cluster information matrix of size n times
K where n is the number of orders and K is the total number of clusters. Each node is
associated with one cluster, so the sum of each row is equal to 1 and the matrix would be
denoted as such
K Clusters
CIn,K = n orders


CI1,1
CI1,2
· · ·
CI1,K
CI2,1
CI2,2
· · ·
CI2,K
...
...
...
...
CIn,1
CIn,2
· · ·
CIn,K


−→


1
0
· · ·
0
0
0
· · ·
1
...
...
...
...
0
1
· · ·
0


The last parameter, β, is the amount of cluster entries allowed. Ideally β = 1 to ensure
that every cluster is only visited once. With these decision variables and parameters the
mathematical model is now formulated and explained.
2.2
Formulating the Problem as a Mathematical Model
The problem is from the description formulated as a mathematical model with an objective
function and multiple constraints. This model is defined such that the visual attractiveness
is maximised according to the interpretation of how visual attractiveness is achieved.
Recall, that interpretation revolves around the assumption, that routes with adherence to
12
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:21==
predefined clusters are visually attractive.
Objective function min Z =
∑
i,j∈V
(Di,jxi,j) −Dt,s
(2.1)
s.t
∑
i∈V
xi,j = 1
∀j ∈V
(2.2)
∑
j∈V
xi,j = 1
∀i ∈V
(2.3)
xi,i = 0
∀i ∈V
(2.4)
xi,j + xj,i ≤1
∀i, j ∈V
(2.5)
∑
i,j∈S
xi,j ≥|S| −1
∀S ⊊V, |S| ≥2
(2.6)
xt,s = 1
(2.7)
yi,j,k1 ≥CIi,k1xi,jCIj,k2
∀i, j ∈V, ∀k1, k2 ∈C
(2.8)
∑
i,j∈V
yi,j,k ≤β
∀k ∈K
(2.9)
xi,j, yi,j,k ∈B
(2.10)
The objective function minimises the total distance travelled, but added is a subtraction of
the distance travelled from terminal to source. This feature will be elaborated further when
the whole model is explained. Next, in 2.2 and 2.3, is two flow conservation constraints
which ensures that when a customer is visited the vehicle moves on to next one. The
constraints 2.4 and 2.5 are inherently included in 2.6 however, anecdotally included these
two proved to reduce the convergence time of the algorithm. Constraint 2.6 is a sub-tour
elimination constraint and ensures a complete tour. Constraint 2.7 is to secure that the
tour is a cycle which has the source and terminal connected. This link between the source
and terminal is subtracted in the objective function, which allows the final solution to
imitate the form of a tour rather than a cycle. This implementation was necessary in this
framework and proved to be behaving as intended. In figure Figure 2.1 the same instance
is solved, but the one on the left is without constraints 2.8 and 2.9 and the one on the
right is with.
(a) Solved without cluster constraints
(b) Solved with cluster constraint
Figure 2.1: Augerat benchmark instance ”A-n39-k6”.[15]
There is a significant difference in the two computed solutions and the difference in total
distance of the route without cluster constraints is 499 and the total distance for the route
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
13
==PAGE:22==
with cluster constraints is 515. Thus, confirming the expectation that visual attractiveness
constraints increase the cost of a solution.
The two proposed solutions consist of 39
nodes and the clusters are generated using the k-medoids algorithm which will be further
examined in Section 2.3. One could also have used another algorithm to cluster the nodes,
but the later framework will consist of this method and it is therefore applied on the
benchmark instance as well.
2.3
Choosing a Clustering Algorithm
In the mathematical model formulated in Section 2.2 there is a predetermined set of
clusters as a parameter which are ensuring the solution to behave as intended. These
clusters can be defined free of choice since they are not a part of the data described in
Section 1.2. The clusters have to be distinct from one another and the number of clusters
in the graph has to be a reasonable amount, considering there are two extreme scenarios,
namely the one where all nodes belong to the same cluster K = 1 and the one where all
nodes are defining a cluster, K = n. The choice of algorithm heavily relies on the fact
that this should be able to create the exact same clusters every time and that there is no
human interaction involved. The differences between human and algorithmic clustering
methods is to be discussed later.
Three clustering algorithms have been chosen for further investigation and these will be
compared to each other and briefly analysed to make a final conclusion on whether per-
forms the best on some chosen training sets. The algorithms investigated are the k-means,
k-medoids and DBSCAN.
The k-means algorithm was introduced by MacQueen, J. in [16] and has the purpose of
partitioning a population of N dimensions into a given set of clusters, k. This procedure
starts by choosing k random starting points which define a cluster each. Afterwards, one
point at a time is added to a cluster based on the lowest mean to all of the cluster. When
a point is added the mean of that cluster is updated and this stops when all points are
assigned a cluster.
The k-medoids has an obvious comparison to the k-means and also consists of a prede-
termined number of clusters and a N-dimensional data set. Here a medoid is chosen as
a representative for each cluster k. These medoids are chosen such that it seeks to min-
imise the distance from all of the nodes belonging to that cluster. The distances is often
referred to as dissimilarities. So for each iteration of the algorithm one could evaluate the
dissimilarities and when this is minimised the clusters are defined as best as possible [17].
The Density Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise is distinct from the two
others since it does not use a predetermined number of clusters, but rather seeks to de-
termine dense populations in a data set and confine these to a cluster. However, this
algorithm uses another set of parameters to determine the clusters. It takes ε and ”min-
imum points” as inputs and these two parameters respectively describe the maximum
distance from each one of all nodes in a given cluster, and the minimum amount of nodes
to define a cluster. This will secure that whenever a node is not close enough to any other
node in an already defined cluster, a new cluster will be created. As this procedure goes on
all nodes will either be clustered or not, and since a non-clustered node is not acceptable
for this problem, ε has to be suﬀiciently large to capture all nodes in the graph [18].
All these methods are evaluated with the silhouettes metric which is also described in [17]
and is defined as −1 ≤s(i) ≤1 where s(i) being the silhouettes score of each node in a
cluster. When the score is close to 1 it means that the nodes are well-placed in each clus-
ter. Whereas, a score of -1 is a sign of an ill-placed node. The score of zero is considered
to be neutral, so neither good nor bad.
14
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:23==
The procedure is carried out by making a suﬀicient number of trials of each clustering
method and then calculating their individual silhouette score and storing the ones per-
forming best. The number of trials is to provide a more reliable result in terms cluster-
quality and ensuring the same solution every time. So that each time the algorithm is
run the same cluster distribution is obtained. And additionally the three methods has an
outer loop which is defined as the different input parameters for each of the clustering
methods.
Algorithm 1: Pseudocode: Choice of clustering
Define number of iterations, N;
sb(i) = 0;
for Specific input parameter for chosen clustering algorithm do
for n = 1:N do
Compute and define clusters from chosen clustering algorithm;
Compute s(i);
if s(i) > sb(i) then
sb(i) ←s(i);
end
end
end
Output: Best defined cluster based on the best silhouette score.
Algorithm 1 is performed for each of the clustering methods and then the best performing
determines which method is used. This approach ultimately yields the following results
k-means
k-medoids
DBSCAN
# of trials
250
250
250
# of clusters
[4; 15]
[4; 15]
undefined
Instance 1 s(i)
0.34
0.45
0.23
Instance 2 s(i)
0.51
0.51
0.24
Instance 3 s(i)
0.62
0.62
0.26
Table 2.1: A summary of the different clustering methods and their performance.
In Table 2.1 a summary of the performed clustering determination is shown and here it
is clearly shown that the DBSCAN performs worse than the two others and can be ruled
out. The two others are performing equally good when testing on instance 2 and 3, but
the k-medoids algorithm is superior to k-means when testing on instance 1. This means
that the k-medoids algorithm will be determining the clusters for each instance. Even
though the chosen algorithm performs better it should be noted that according to [17] a
silhouette score below 0.51 is considered to be ”...weak and could be artificial...”, but since
it scores above in the two other sets this procedure is still acceptable and will be carried
on in further work done in the thesis.
2.4
Providing an Exact Solution Method for the Problem
This section will provide insights to how the problem could be solved and how the different
solution methods could be improved later in the thesis. The approach to derive an exact
solution would be to divide the original problem into multiple sub problems, i.e. one for
each cluster, and then solve one of those clusters to optimality with the mathematical
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
15
==PAGE:24==
(a) k-means
(b) k-medoids
(c) DBSCAN
Figure 2.2: A zoomoed in view of the three different cluster methods on instance 1.
model defined in Section 2.2. Since each sub problem could be defined as solving a cluster
the constraints added for the purpose of the visual attractiveness are redundant. A set
of benchmark instances will also be solved as a part of the argumentation to why the
proposed model is applicable and to prove its quality.
When solving the problem a choice has been made in regards to how the solution is
presented. Namely, the proposed solution will only consist of the aforementioned LCs
since once you enter a road link, and service the customer related to first ID, one will
always traverse the road until the customer last ID is serviced. This procedure yields
a major reduction in the number of customers in the graph and thereby reduces the
computational time with a large margin. Such a reduction also means that the distance
matrix only consists of the customers in the start and end of an LC. Additionally it should
be mentioned that when executing the clustering algorithm it is done with all available
customers in the graph, and not only the ones presented in the solution.
The well-studied TSP is, as elaborated in Section 1.6, a computationally hard problem to
solve, but nonetheless if the proposed mathematical model can solve the problem in an
acceptable time then this solution approach would be the choice of method since optimality
is guaranteed. Even though the literature declares that the TSP for large instances is time
consuming to ”brute-force” with a MIP, it will still be solved and provided a time limit
to ensure that there will be a solution to compare with. Such a solution should provide
a lower bound for the problem since it could consist of multiple sub-tours and then by
definition not be a satisfying solution.
16
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.3: Solved instance for 3600 seconds. Each arc colour representing a sub-tour.
Only the first and last ID nodes are present.
The solution in Figure 2.3 shows multiple tours as a solution to the the data from instance
1, meaning that the solution is feasible with the current constraints in the model, but it
is not acceptable in terms of the expected solution quality. This clearly shows that the
proposed MIP does not solve the problem within an acceptable amount of time, especially
considering the real-life application where the routes has to be generated within a short
time span. It is worth mentioning that this instance is solved without including the source
and terminal. The exclusion of source and terminal is due to the fact, that they are always
in the start and the end of the route. Furthermore, when considering visual attractiveness
the source and terminal are assumed to be redundant.
This solution instinctively leads to another topic of how the problem should be solved.
Solving the full instance provided bad solutions in an unreasonable amount of time and
is therefore not a valid method to utilise. Solving a single cluster as a sub problem was
done within acceptable time, but solving each cluster will increase the total run time, and
since the amount of clusters increase with problem size this procedure might cause some
longer run times and therefore not being able to produce satisfying results.
It might be a very strong tool in a later comparison, when run time is not a topic of dis-
cussion, but as the problem description demands real-life applications this would produce
feasible but not good quality solutions.
Since the solution seen in Figure 2.3 is of very low quality and is solved with higher run
times than what is considered acceptable, one of the proposed sub-problems is now solved
to prove that the MIP is applicable on the instances provided. This would eventually lead
to a further elaboration on which method is chosen in regards to solving the problem.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.4: A zoomed in view of a solved sub-problem. All nodes included. Yellow/Pink
node →source/terminal.
In Figure 2.4 a solution to the intra-cluster route is seen. The solution is found with
the proposed MIP and is solved to optimality with a single route unlike the solution in
Figure 2.3 which consists of multiple tours. Here the ideal approach would be to solve
each cluster’s shortest route and then solve the order of the clusters, or the other way
around. This two step approach is seen in literature and is carried out in [10]. Here an
inter-cluster route is solved first to secure a proper order sequence of the clusters. In the
second step of this approach each cluster is solved to optimality and when all clusters are
solved the route is complete.
2.4.1
Initial findings
An attempt to implement this two-step MIP approach is carried out in this section and the
findings will be presented with results and figures. The instances in Table 1.1 are solved
with this method with a time limit of 1200 seconds for each cluster. Since the MIP previ-
ously has shown bad quality solutions when solving large instances this stopping criterion
could potentially come in use. If the stopping criterion is met the solutions are considered
infeasible within the time limit. This does not necessarily mean that it cannot produce
an optimal solution to the problem, but rather that the solution takes unsatisfyingly long
time to converge. This is highly correlated with how the customers are distributed in the
network. Given a non-uniform distribution of customers, the distribution of customers in
the different clusters can be highly different. Thus, resulting in some clusters with few,
and some with many customers in them. Inevitably, this means that the algorithm gets
stuck in the large clusters and therefore, cannot produce solutions within a satisfying time
limit.
A tighter restriction to the clustering method could provide more clusters, but not neces-
sarily small enough to run the MIP.
In Figure 2.5 the completion of the two-step method is seen. Here instance 1 is solved to
optimality. The route starts in the salmon coloured cluster, then moves on to the green to
conclude the route by going to the blue, then the light green and cyan afterwards. This
route also takes into consideration where the source and terminal is placed. The distance
for the found route is 56.1 km, and this corresponds to an increase in the total route length
18
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.5: A complete route for instance 1 visiting every cluster exactly one time - Solved
with the proposed MIP in two steps.
of 25.5 %, Table 1.1. This is a reasonably large increment of route length compared to
what have been found to be acceptable, though it is worth mentioning that the run time
for the two-step approach applied to instance 1 is approximately 50 seconds. This is a very
acceptable run time to solve a whole instance and the method is proved to be applicable.
When increasing the instance size and solving instance 2 the problems start to arise.
Looking at Figure 2.6 the solution is shown, and the same conditions apply to this instance.
Here the clustering algorithm have determined a total of 11 clusters, and this naturally
increases the run time of the method. Secondly, some of the cluster are more compact
and the MIP again increases in total run time. These are the two main issues to why the
scalability of this approach is poor. The solution seen in Figure 2.6 enters the network
in the red cluster, at the center, and exits in the top right corner, from the lighter green.
When looking at the quality of the solution the total length of the visual attractive route is
671.4 km, compared to the route length in Table 1.1 the total distance has doubled. This
increment is beyond dissatisfying and in addition the total run time was approximately
985 seconds. These results will not by any means be considered satisfying to use. The tight
cluster entry constraint is proving to find some poor quality solution in terms of distance
travelled. IF the constraint is relaxed the two-step MIP approach is not suitable. This is
due to the nature of the two-step method and the corresponding tight cluster-constraint.
The two-step method was a way of reducing the problem size. When changing β > 1
in (2.9) the problem would not be applicable in the same two-step approach, and other
methods would be warranted.
The two-step approach is still very relevant since it can minimise two objective without
having to take a bi-objective model into consideration. When these two solution methods
proved to be insuﬀicient, either in terms of solution time or quality, or both, a new proposal
of method should be considered. One approach to find good feasible solutions within a
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.6: A complete route for instance 2 visiting every cluster exactly one time - Solved
with the proposed MIP in two steps.
short time span could be to use a metaheuristic. The metaheuristic handles large data
sets quite well and can utilise different structures nicely. The metaheuristic as a solution
method for this problem is elaborated and more in-depth explained in the next section,
and will be the primary choice of method to solve the problems in this thesis.
Later, the proposed metaheuristic solutions will be compared to the ones found when
solving the MIP and thereby strengthen and solidify the metaheuristic solution.
2.5
Metaheuristics
Metaheuristics, first described by Fred Glover as ”a master strategy that guides and mod-
ifies other heuristics to produce solutions beyond those that are normally generated in a
quest for local optimality” [19] combines the heuristics’ ability to search for local improve-
ments and high level strategies to devise a master strategy of escaping local optima in
search of global optimum [20].
While, heuristics built on local search- or construction-algorithms etc. each serve as a
single tool to produce solutions based on domain knowledge, metaheuristics combine the
strengths of the heuristics and thereby provide a stronger tool.
Metaheuristics are a
strong tool to solve large instance problems that are otherwise unsolvable using only exact
methods. Although, it should be noted that while metaheuristics aim to solve problems
to optimality the sole nature of heuristics, and metaheuristics alike, do not allow for any
certainty that an optimal solution has been reached unless a benchmark or a set of bounds
is known. Therefore, by definition metaheuristics are used to eﬀiciently search for near-
optimal solutions within the solution space. The solution space is a description used in
operations research particularly to define all the possible solutions to a given problem.
20
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.7: An example of a solution space and solution neighbourhoods. The red dots
represent a single solution.
The solution neighbourhood is another term, which defines the reach of a given search
algorithm. Figure 2.7 includes an explanations of the two terms, and furthermore, two
examples of a solution neighbourhood.
Another advantage of utilising metaheuristics is their inherent ability to be non-problem
specific. This allows for heuristics to be used for a range of problems, compared to exact
solutions that are tailored to solve specific problems.
While the term metaheuristics was defined in 1980 by F. Glover [21] the actual use of
metaheuristics predates this first definition of the term. The evolution of metaheuristics
has vastly increased since then resulting in a wide range of different metaheuristics. Often,
the metaheuristics are designed using inspiration from real world situations. One example
as such, could be the Simulated Annealing local search algorithm, which is named so
because of its analogy to the annealing process liquid metals undergo while solidifying[20].
2.5.1
Simulated Annealing
The Simulated Annealing (SA) metaheuristic is a local search algorithm designed to find a
global optimum in large scale search spaces. SA works by examining two solutions in each
iteration. One neighbouring solution, s∗and the current solution, s. SA will then accept
the neighbouring solution on either of two different criteria. The first criterion is, that
SA will always accept a neighbouring solution if cost(s′) < cost(s) given a minimisation
problem, where cost(s) resembles the cost of solution s. The second acceptance criteria is
what makes SA different from regular hill-climbing heuristics and it is also the reason for
the algorithms’ name [20]. SA incorporates a probability function, P(s, s′, t), which allows
for worse solutions to be accepted based on the temperature parameter tk. The subscript,
k, defines the maximum allowed number of steps taken by the SA and the temperature is
defined in Equation (2.11).
tk =
(
1 −(k + 1)
kmax
)
(2.11)
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
21
==PAGE:30==
Furthermore, tk should evolve such that
tk > 0 for all k
lim
k→+∞tk = 0
(2.12)
Having the temperature evolve as described in Equation (2.12) ensures that the probability
of accepting a worse than the current solution decreases over time. The probability of
accepting non-improving solutions is the strength of the SA algorithm, and it is what
enables SA to escape local optima and thus, search through large neighbourhoods with
a decreased risk of getting stuck in local optima compared to simpler local search or
hill-climber heuristics. The probability formula is shown in Equation (2.13)
ρaccept = exp
(
−∆s,s′
tk
)
(2.13)
where ∆s,s′ = cost(s′)−cost(s) and negative values indicate a new better solution is found.
The following pseudocode describes the Simulated Annealing algorithm in a solution space
s ∈S
Algorithm 2: Simulated Annealing
Set initial solution s ←s0 ∈S;
Set temperature change counter k = 0;
Set maximum iterations kmax > 0;
while k < kmax do
T ←tk;
Generate neighbouring solution s′;
Calculate ∆s,s′;
if ∆s,s′ ≤0 then
s ←s′;
else
if ∆s,s′ > 0 with probability ρaccept then
s ←s′;
end
k ←k + 1
end
end
2.5.2
Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
The Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search algorithm was developed by S. Ropke and D.
Pisinger [22]. Based on the large neighbourhood search (LNS) introduced by P. Shaw
[23], the ALNS metaheuristic utilises large moves within the solution space contrary to
the otherwise often used local search heuristics, hill climbers etc.
Rearranging large parts of a solution in a given solution space costs vastly more compu-
tation power, which indeed leads to the amount of solutions per unit of time in an ALNS
being far fewer than those of a heuristic utilising smaller moves [22]. However, the ALNS
algorithm has been proven to produce great results within large instances, which makes it
a fitting metaheuristic to use with the large data sets from AMCS.
The ALNS is an extension of the LNS and therefore, it utilises destroy and repair methods
that remove a part of the solution and afterwards repairs it. The difference between the
LNS and ALNS is, that the ALNS extends the LNS by being able to use several destroy
and repair methods, denoted Ω−and Ω+, rather than a single of each.
This enables
22
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:31==
the user to utilise a larger range of destroy and repair methods, namely as in the Ropke
and Pisinger paper, where they used insertion heuristics to repair the destroyed parts.
Interestingly, they found that methods which on their own might deliver bad solutions,
can provide great results within the ALNS as they are used along with other methods.
Furthermore, the ALNS can be extended in applicability by being built on a simulated
annealing framework.
Thus, it extends the acceptance criterion within the ALNS to
include the possibility of accepting a solution worse than the current one. Of course, this
possibility decreases over time such as it does in the general SA algorithm. The probability
is calculated as shown in Equation (2.13).
The termination criterion in the ALNS can be defined according to what makes the most
sense with respect to the data it is applied on. Often, this is a predefined run time or
number of iterations.
A difference done in the paper by Lusby et. al [24] compared to the ALNS from Ropke
and Pisinger [22], is that Lusby establishes a framework wherein a number of trials and
iterations are run before updating the temperature and weights for the destroy- and repair
methods. Specifically, they define a number of trials ntrials in which the ALNS is executed
using the same temperature. Within this they run a number of iterations, nits, where the
weights are updated after each trial of nits iterations. This approach of running a number
of trials before rewarding the best performing actions is based on the machine learning
concept of reinforcement learning. In short, reinforcement learning utilises a number of
trial-and-error moves and then gives a delayed reward to the best performing actions.
The pseudocode describing the ALNS built on a simulated annealing framework is shown
in Algorithm 3. Note, that sb is the best solution found so far, s′ is the current solution
and cost(s) resembles the cost of a solution.
Algorithm 3: Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
Inputs initial solution s; Set best solution sb = s;
Set initial weights ρ−= (1, 1, .., 1); ρ+ = (1, 1, .., 1);
Set starting temperature T;
Set stopping criterion tlimit;
while t < tlimit do
for i = 1 : ntrials do
reset method scores;
for j = 1 : nits do
Select destroy and repair methods Ω−and Ω+ using weights ρ−and ρ+;
Generate new solution, s′;
if cost(s′) < cost(s) or ρaccept > rand(0, 1) then
s ←s′;
if cost(s′) < cost(sb) then
sb ←s′;
end
end
Update method scores;
end
Update weights ρ−and ρ+;
end
Update temperature T = Tα;
end
The ALNS takes a random feasible solution, s, as input and then in each iteration chooses
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
23
==PAGE:32==
a pair of destroy and repair methods using the weights ρ−and ρ+. These methods are
chosen using the fitness proportionate selection method otherwise known as the roulette
wheel principle. This probability, ϕ(−,+)
j
, is calculated in Equation (2.14)
ϕ(−,+)
j
=
ρ(−,+)
∑|Ω(−,+)|
i=1
ρ(−,+)
i
(2.14)
After each iteration of the ALNS execution the chosen destroy and repair methods are
evaluated and rewarded a score depending on their performance. Furthermore, the util-
isation of each method is counted. The accumulated scores and counts are denominated
by Sh and Vh respectively, where h ∈[Ω+ ∪Ω−]. The scores are denominated by Ψ and
are given based on the formulation below
Ψ =











ω1
if a new global best is found
ω2
if a new current best is found
ω3
if the solution is accepted
ω4
if the solution is not accepted
(2.15)
In Equation (2.15) the parameters ω are defined such that ω ∈R+ and the magnitude
follows ω1 ≥ω2 ≥ω3 ≥ω4 ≥0. Furthermore, to control how sensitive the weights are
to the values added within Ψ a reaction factor γ ∈[0; 1] is introduced. The weights are
updated using the reaction factor as shown in Equation (2.16)
ρ(−,+) =



(1 −γ)ρ(−,+) + γ Sh
Vh
if Vh > 0
ρ(−,+)
if Vh = 0
(2.16)
From Equation (2.16) it is evident that if the reaction factor, γ, increases so does the em-
phasis on the scores given to the destroy and repair methods within the loop of iterations,
and therefore one should consider the value of γ accordingly.
2.6
Devising a Metaheuristic Solution
As explained in Section 2.4 the size of the problems addressed in this project leads to in-
feasibly long solution times if using an exact approach. A metaheuristic circumvents this
problem and will enable solutions to be made within reasonable time frames. Thoroughly
explained in Section 2.5, metaheuristics provide a fast method of searching through solu-
tion neighbourhoods. Although, the literature provides several examples of metaheuristic
solution approaches and therefore, one must examine the characteristics of ones’ problem,
and then choose a valid solution accordingly.
2.6.1
Findings in the literature
To determine which solution method is best when solving the problem instances provided
by AMCS, it is obvious to look into the literature on vehicle routing problems. One paper
by D. Pisinger and S. Ropke [25] examines the LNS method and finds that it provides
very good results when used to solve transportation science problems. However, as they
also mention, the LNS is limited in the way that it utilises only a single destroy and repair
method. This can be of no problem if the LNS algorithm is to be used when solving a
single problem instance or several very similar problems.
In this project, the problems are considered to be within the field of transportation science
24
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:33==
yet they vary in shape and size, and furthermore the visual attractiveness adds another
element which varies a lot between the different data sets. Therefore, an LNS might prove
to lack the flexibility that is required within a single algorithm to provide good solutions
to all of the instances from AMCS. However, the adaptive large neighbourhood search
expands the LNS by adding flexibility and therefore, can be considered a good approach
in this project.
2.6.2
Devising an adaptive large neighbourhood search algorithm
In the ALNS the neighbourhoods are determined by the repair and destroy methods.
Therefore, it is crucial that one chooses these methods such that the framework is able
to produce great solutions. As explained in Section 2.5.2 the ALNS needs an input of
a feasible solution. This is also referred to as warm starting the algorithm. The warm
start function can be any random feasible route. In this project the warm start algorithm
utilises a greedy heuristic that sequentially finds the cheapest insertion and thus, provides
a feasible solution.
As mentioned in Section 2.4, a feasible solution consists of a vector of link clusters. Consec-
utively throughout the execution of the ALNS the solution is changed by the destroy and
repair methods which explores the solution neighbourhoods and returns the best found
solutions.
Although the main purpose of this project is to explore the methods of quantifying and
implementing visual attractiveness, it is crucial to the further work that a well-performing
ALNS algorithm has been developed. That is, an ALNS that can consecutively generate
routes that are of comparable solution quality to those generated by AMCS.
Therefore, the first step of building the ALNS is to build a robust algorithm which performs
well on the distance optimisation problem.
Explained in Section 2.5.2, the ALNS is built upon a simulated annealing framework.
Therefore, the main components to develop are the destroy and repair methods.
The
literature presents different approaches to destroying and repairing neighbourhoods, yet
some are more often represented than others. Inspired by preliminary testing and these
findings within the literature, the following destroy methods have been determined.
Destroy Worst
Inspired by the findings of Ropke and Pisinger [22] the worst removal destroy method
is implemented within the ALNS. Although, rather than a single destroy method it is
divided into two different methods. One utilising a percentage threshold of all the internal
distances. The other, using a fixed number based on LC magnitude which is explained in
Equation (2.17) .
This is due to the assumption that the threshold based destroy method will become less
effective the better the solution gets, as it will inevitably remove fewer and fewer link
clusters from the solution as the algorithm progresses. The absolute value based removal
method will however, continue removing the exact same number of link clusters from the
solution.
In a given solution, the cost of travelling between a pair of nodes i and j is defined as
dist(i, j).
The worst removal methods then identifies the most expensive link clusters
within the current solution by utilising a magnitude array. This magnitude array contains
the cost of removing a single LC from the solution array. As such, the magnitude of an
LC within the solution is defined as
magnitude(LCn) = −(dist(LCn−1, LCn) + dist(LCn, LCn) + dist(LCn, LCn+1)) (2.17)
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
25
==PAGE:34==
Note, that dist(LCn, LCn) resembles the distance travelled within the link cluster LCn and
that the cost is negative as it is a removal and thus impacts the total distance negatively.
Based on a predefined number, the worst removal method then removes M link clusters
from the solution.
A pseudocode describing the destroy worst method is provided in
Algorithm 4. Furthermore, Figure 2.8 gives a graphical example of how the threshold-
and fixed removal differs.
Algorithm 4: Destroy worst
threshold ←M(fixed or % threshold)
magnitudeArray ←magnitude(route)
Removemagnitude(LCn) ≥M
Figure 2.8: The worst removal method. Threshold removes LCs above the 75th quantile
and fixed number removes a fixed number of the highest cost.
Destroy consecutive
The consecutive destroy method removes a sequence of the current solution. The sequence
starts at a randomly selected LC and then removes this LC plus the sequence of length
L = nLC/10 where nLC represents the total number of LCs in the given data set. To
ensure that the destroy method does not choose an infeasible starting point e.g. if the
start of the removal sequence is the last LC in the current route, the number of removed
LCs would only equate to one. Therefore, a subset of the current route is temporarily
considered routetemp ∈route and within routetemp a random LC is selected. A pseudocode
explaining the consecutive destroy method is presented in Algorithm 5. Furthermore, a
graphical explanation is given in Figure 2.9.
Algorithm 5: Destroy Consecutive
nLC ←length(route)
N ←nLC
10
rind ←random(routetemp)
Remove rind, .., rind+N from route
Figure 2.9: The consecutive removal method. It removes a consecutive part of the solution
from a random LC in the solution.
Destroy Random
The last destroy method is a random removal. This method selects a number of N random
link clusters within a solution and removes these. The aim of using a random removal
26
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:35==
method is to randomise the solution order. Furthermore, similar methods are suggested
within the literature [22][24].
After destroying the current solution, a repair method is selected. These repair methods
are chosen in a similar order to the destroy methods and subsequently rewarded according
to their performance.
First proposed by Rosenkrantz et al.
[26] and later extended by Fischetti et al.
[27]
are four repair methods used within the generalised travelling salesman problem. These
include a cheapest insertion, nearest insertion, farthest insertion and random insertion
methods. As mentioned in Section 1.4.1 the problem within this project resembles that of
a TSP and as such, the aforementioned repair methods can be assumed to perform well
within this project.
Nearest insertion
The nearest insertion repair method chooses a random unassigned LCu, finds the nearest
assigned link cluster LCi ∈route, and then inserts the unassigned link cluster on the
index i −1. A mathematical expression for the nearest insertion move is presented in
Equation (2.18)
argmin
LCi∈R
min
LCu dist(LCi, LCu)
(2.18)
A graphical explanation is given in Figure 2.10
Figure 2.10: The nearest insertion method. Here, the unassigned LC is assigned after the
LC that has the lowest distance to the unassigned LC.
Cheapest insertion
Although similar to the nearest insertion method, the cheapest insertion considers both the
distance ”to” and ”from” the insertion node. This makes it a more complicated than the
nearest insertion, yet also provides a more intelligent insertion heuristic. A mathematical
expression of the cheapest insertion is presented in Equation (2.19)
argmin
LCi,LCk∈R
min
LCu{dist(LCi, LCu) + dist(LCu, LCk) −dist(LCi, LCk)}
(2.19)
Furthermore, a graphical explanation is granted in Figure 2.11
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 2.11: The cheapest insertion method. Here, the unassigned LC is inserted where
it grants the largest decrease in objective value.
Farthest insertion
The farthest insertion method is a direct opposite approach to the nearest insertion. The
farthest insertion heuristic is known from the literature, and within the scope of solving
travelling salesman problems revolves around the idea, that connecting points farthest
away from each-other starting from a sub-tour of two nodes, produces good results when
considering a path that visits all nodes exactly once.
argmax
LCi∈R
max
LCu dist(LCi, LCu)
(2.20)
Similarly, it is assumed that this repair method will work well within the scope of this
project, although varying results are expected seeing as the repair method will not produce
a full solution from an empty solution. However, it is still assumed that the method has its
validity within this ALNS framework. Equation (2.20) shows a mathematical expression
for the farthest insertion, and the figure below shows a graphical example of the repair
method.
Figure 2.12: The farthest insertion method. This method is the opposite of the nearest
insertion.
Random insertion
The fourth repair method is a random insertion. This insertion method randomly chooses
a place within the non-empty, destroyed route, and inserts an unassigned link cluster. As
with the random destroy method, the aim of this insertion method is to widen the solution
neighbourhood and allow for the ALNS to utilise its simulated annealing properties to
escape from local optima.
2.6.3
Expanding the ALNS and implementing visual attractiveness
Now, the algorithm designed above solely solves the distance optimisation problem and
thus, so far it includes no measures to increase the visual attractiveness of the solutions
it develops. The paper by D. Rossit et al. [3] thoroughly investigates a range of differ-
ent visual attractiveness measures, yet as mentioned in Section 1.5, due to the unique
characteristics of this project, none of the known methods prove directly applicable here.
However, Rossit et al. also highlights the subjective nature of visual attractiveness and
28
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:37==
therefore, justifies that other methods might be applicable when visual attractiveness is
the main scope of the problem.
In this case, a cluster based method has been decided, and by the analysis in Section 2.3
it can be concluded that the clustering method k-medoids performs best.
Comparing with the literature, clustering has seen its use within the topic of visual attrac-
tiveness. Although, usually clusters are implemented in VRPs with more than a single
vehicle as this enables the clustering to ensure no crossings, which is one of the visual
attractiveness parameters otherwise mentioned in this report and the literature. Never-
theless, clustering can also be used to restrict the route similarly to how it is done and
described in Section 2.4.
In a similar way, the ALNS is extended to include ways to prefer solutions in which the
routes adhere to the generated clusters.
The extended algorithm works by using the distance optimising ALNS as a type of warm
start for an extended ALNS framework. This is later referred to as the first step, and
second step. As such, the extended ALNS consists of two steps as shown below. Note,
that cluster reentries define the number of times a cluster is visited.
First step: Generate a near-optimal solution to the distance optimisation problem.
Second step: Explore the solution neighbourhood using a threshold that allows for a
maximum of 12% increase in distance while decreasing cluster entries.
Inevitably the extended model will increase the cost of the solution. Therefore, a thresh-
old is implemented such that the extended model will not accept any solutions with an
objective value higher than 12% of the best solution from the first step. The threshold has
been determined based on findings by Lu and Dessouky [13] in a study of several instances
of the cost of visual attractiveness.
As the objective in the extended model has changed the model adapts another set of
destroy and repair methods. Although, not all the methods used in the second step differ
from the first step. Namely, the destroy methods destroy random and destroy consecutive
are reused, and the repair methods repair nearest, repair cheapest and repair random are
reused.
The new destroy and repair methods are described below
Destroy intra-cluster
The intra-cluster destroy method chooses a cluster and removes a predefined number of
LCs in the route, that belong to this cluster. This destroy method is implemented so that
the algorithm is capable of removing and reordering link clusters within a cluster and thus
helps increase the visual attractiveness of the solutions.
Figure 2.13: The intra-cluster destroy method. In this example cluster 4 is chosen, and a
fixed number of LCs within this cluster are removed.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
29
==PAGE:38==
Repair Euclidean
Contrary to the first step where distance is optimised, the second step optimises visual
attractiveness, which is based on cluster entries. The euclidean distances between orders
versus the actual distance can vary a lot. Of course, this is due to the limitations of a
side-loader and the roads between a given two orders. The idea of a euclidean distance
repair method is, that using the euclidean distances rather than actual distances will result
in better solutions in terms of visual attractiveness due to the fact, that orders belonging
to the same area are prioritised in the solution.
Repair intra-Cluster
The intra-cluster repair method examines the non-full solution and finds the first sequence
of link clusters with the same cluster ID as the unassigned link cluster, and then inserts
the link cluster between the first and second link cluster within the sequence.
Figure 2.14: The intra-cluster repair method. It takes an unassigned LC and inserts it in
its belonging cluster.
This repair method is implemented as it directly affects the cluster entry count within
the solutions. Thus, the idea of this repair method is to provide a way of enhancing the
routes’ adherence to the clusters generated within the problem instances.
Minimising time difference on road IDs
The cluster-based method introduced in the former section is built upon a mathematical
analysis on how one could force an algorithm to produce routes, that adhere to certain
areas within a physical neighbourhood. As seen in Section 2.4 this does not necessarily
provide satisfying results when β = 1. Therefore, another approach is introduces.
The second approach to improve visual attractiveness revolves around reducing the time
between servicing the orders, on side 1, and side 2 of a given roadID. The hypothesis is
that this minimisation of time difference ensures that the drivers finish an area before
leaving towards another. Furthermore, this can be interpreted as some sort of adherence
to clusters. Not the same clusters as defined earlier, but rather by the definition that a
cluster is a dense population of orders on a given network.
2.6.4
Elaboration of the ALNS framework
The structure of this problem has shown to be such that it aims towards minimising two
objectives, one at a time, since as mentioned in Section 2.4.1 a multi-objective MIP is out
scope in this report . First, the distance is minimised in the first step and afterwards either
the cluster entries or time difference between road sides is minimised. This method ensures
a good solution in terms of distance, and afterwards the second step allows an increment
in total distance yet also an increase in visual attractiveness. Thereby, generating some
room for improvement in terms of the second objective.
When an iteration is ongoing in the framework of the ALNS the different objective values
are evaluated along the way. In the first step only distance is minimised. When the second
step starts the visual attractiveness is maximised while the distance is monitored and not
increased beyond the threshold.
30
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:39==
Figure 2.15: Example of how the CE is determined.
The first objective evaluates the total distance of the route and is carried out straight
forward as:
∑
i,j∈V
Di,j · xi,j
(2.21)
Where D is the distance matrix and x is whether an arc from i to j is traversed. This is
also seen in the mathematical model proposed in Section 2.2.
The second step, where the objective is to minimise the maximum number of entries in a
single cluster, is evaluated in such way that for every iteration it is determined how many
times the routes moves into a cluster. Granted an example instance with 5 clusters, a
result could look like
Cluster entries = [2, 4, 3, 1, 3]
(2.22)
The above example has an objective value of 4, since the second element is equal to 4.
This means that the lowest possible score is 1 and that
[2, 4, 3, 1, 3] and [4, 4, 3, 3, 4]
(2.23)
are producing the same objective value of 4. This objective is later referred to as: ”Cluster
entries (CE)”.
In Figure 2.15 the concept of this metric is shown. The green arrow indicates where the
network is entered, and the red where it is exited. Whenever an arrow enters a cluster the
cluster entries of that cluster increases by one.
The second approach to modelling visual attractiveness is minimising time difference. This
is included in the model, by having a timer that starts when one side of a road link is
traversed and stops when the other side has been visited.
Granted an example of a solution:
Solution route →[· · · , RL14,1, RL25,2, RL26,1, RL14,2, · · · ]
(2.24)
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
31
==PAGE:40==
The objective value for road link 14 will be determined such that the time it takes to
travel from one side of road link, RL14,1, to the second side of that same road link, RL14,2
is the time difference for that road link. This value is determined for all road links in
the solution, and the maximum time difference will determine the objective value for that
given solution. This way of evaluating the objective value is referred as: ”Time difference
(TD)”. The objective is to minimise this value and secure a solution where customers are
visited within shortest possible times.
Figure 2.16: Example of how TD is determined. O is the starting point, and X the end
point.
Algorithm 6: The 2-step ALNS framework
Inputs initial solution f; Set best solution c1(f) = fb;
Set initial weights ρ−
1 = (1, 1, .., 1); ρ+
1 = (1, 1, .., 1);
Set starting temperature T1;
Set decrease parameter α1;
Set stopping criterion tlimit;
while t1 < tlimit do
Execute ALNSfirst(fb, ρ1, T1, α1)
end
Extract results from first step, ALNSfirst;
Set best solution from first step fb;
Evaluate fb with new cost function, set c2(fb) = sb;
Set initial weights ρ−
2 = (1, 1, .., 1); ρ+
2 = (1, 1, .., 1);
Set starting temperature T2;
Set decrease parameter α2;
while t2 < tlimit do
Execute ALNSsecond(sb, fb, ρ2, T2, α2)
end
The difference between the first step, and second step, is the input of destroy and repair
methods, the fact that the initial solution value, fb, is only allowed a certain increase, and
32
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:41==
the input parameters vary since different metrics are evaluated. Apart from this the two
different ALNS frame works are similar.
2.6.5
Parameter Tuning
This section will thoroughly go through every choice of parameter for the ALNS and an
argumentation of choice will be carried out. A further discussion of this topic will be
presented later on in the thesis.
The parameter tuning serves the purpose of making sure the metaheuristic performs as
good as possible on a given problem. Some of the parameters are mutually interdependent
and this is due to the nature of the model and the fact that the parameters comes in pairs.
The two pairs which are set to be tuned are the pair of T and α and the other pair being ω
and γ. The tuning of the parameter T or α should heavily inflict the other, and the same
goes for the tuning of ω or γ. It is worth noting that there is a set of other parameters
present in the implemented metaheuristic. These are chosen either by inspection or ”trial
and error”. This could for instance be the amount of percentage the destroy methods
remove, the number of trials and iterations in the framework, or the given threshold in
the second step of the framework. These parameters are also adjusted throughout the
testing of the algorithm and might not have the greatest impact on the solution quality,
but rather the performance of the metaheuristic.
The tuning is done by choosing some training sets and running multiple samples such that
the choices are build on a reasonable statistical foundation. The sample size is chosen
based on the boxplots presented in Figure 2.17.
Figure 2.17: Boxplot of objective values for instance 1 with different sample sizes.
From this figure the boxplots of the calculated objective values are seen. Most of the
results look quite similar except the one with a sample size of 30.
Due to the major
difference in this instance, it is regarded as faulty and not considered valid.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
33
==PAGE:42==
Even though the box of sample size 20 looks acceptable the sample size is chosen to be 40,
as this is the closest valid number according to the plot. The choice of a sample size of 40
would also secure more stability and robustness in the results, especially in terms of the
standard deviation which should be converging to it’s minimum when increasing sample
size. The run time of each sample is 150 seconds. This is established due to the run time
of AMCS’ algorithm ”thorough” being approximately 150 seconds.
The training sets from Table 1.1 are instances: 1, 2 and 3. Since the network of customers
are quite different from set to set, three significantly different sets are chosen. This is to
obtain a more broad tuning compared to if all the sets had the same customer distribution.
When doing this it is expected that the results may be distinct from one another, so a
justified choice will be presented for each parameter. The tuning is done for the first step of
the algorithm and afterwards the two different second steps, as mentioned in Section 2.6.4.
The second step of the algorithm uses the tuned first step as input, such that it has the
best conditions to perform under.
And the tuning of the first step is both done in a
forwards and backwards sequence of parameter choice to see if the tuning ends up equal,
or there might be some flaws to discuss and comment later on. The sequence of the tuned
parameters is: T →α →ω →γ, the backwards sequence is just the sequence in reverse.
All the results regarding tuning are recapped in the following tables and will show the
mean and standard deviation for the 40 samples of each parameter. Each parameter will
be tuned based on an interval of five values which are chosen throughout the developing of
the algorithm and since the instances are, as mentioned, not entirely similar a reasoning
regarding the choice of parameter will be made. That being said that if all indicates a
lower or higher value of choice a re-run with a new range of values is carried out.
Instance 1
Instance 2
Instance 3
T
µ
σ
µ
σ
µ
σ
D90/4
46.4
0.286
332.8
8.4
282.4
10.5
D90/5
46.3
0.326
328.4
8.0
280.4
11.0
D90/6
46.3
0.308
328.6
7.4
278.0
11.4
D90/7
46.2
0.317
328.1
7.3
275.5
12.5
D90/8
46.4
0.322
327.0
7.6
276.7
11.3
D90/9
46.2
0.403
324.5
8.3
280.0
11.1
D90/10
46.4
0.357
327.0
7.6
277.4
11.1
Table 2.2: A summary of the performance for each T-value for the three tuning sets. While
D90 being the 90th quantile of all distances.
Instance 1
Instance 2
Instance 3
α
µ
σ
µ
σ
µ
σ
0.95
46.7
0.491
330.9
9.5
278.3
10.6
0.98
46.5
0.694
333.4
11.3
277.6
10.6
0.99
46.5
0.446
330.2
8.4
276.9
10.5
0.999
46.2
0.354
325.6
6.8
277.1
11.4
0.9995
46.4
0.362
328.4
7.9
277.1
11.9
Table 2.3: A summary of the performance for each α-value for the three tuning sets.
34
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:43==
Instance 1
Instance 2
Instance 3
ω
µ
σ
µ
σ
µ
σ
[25, 15, 5, 0]
45.9
0.402
326.2
6.5
281.5
10.2
[25, 20, 10, 0]
46.2
0.399
325.0
5.9
278.1
11.0
[20, 10, 5, 0]
46.2
0.336
327.6
7.9
276.2
11.9
[20, 5, 3, 0]
46.1
0.352
327.0
6.9
276.7
11.1
[15, 10, 1, 0]
46.1
0.331
326.3
6.1
275.2
13.1
Table 2.4: A summary of the performance for each ω-value for the three tuning sets.
Instance 1
Instance 2
Instance 3
γ
µ
σ
µ
σ
µ
σ
0.1
46.0
0.353
326.4
7.0
276.4
11.8
0.2
46.1
0.331
325.1
6.4
278.0
10.6
0.3
46.2
0.350
327.7
7.9
278.4
12.1
0.4
46.1
0.353
326.3
6.8
274.3
12.2
0.5
46.4
0.364
325.4
6.4
278.8
11.7
Table 2.5: A summary of the performance for each γ-value for the three tuning sets.
All the results from the parameter tuning of the first step of the framework is presented
in Table 2.2, Table 2.3, Table 2.4, and Table 2.5. The green coloured cell indicates the
parameter value which produces the lowest mean.
The mean was the main aspect of
the choice of parameter. Especially if the standard deviation across all the five different
values where close to each other. A significantly low standard deviation could influence
the choice, making it more biased towards the very low standard deviation, if the mean
at the same time produces satisfying results. It is clear to see that not every result is
in compliance with one another and this yields a brief argumentation to why the said
parameter value has been chosen. The deciding component will vary from parameter to
parameter since each one of the results have different properties to explore and discuss.
Looking at table Table 2.2 it is clear to see that after the tuning is carried out a high valued
denominator is preferred and combining this with the fact that it has run two times with
different intervals, explains why the table contains more values compared to the others.
The overall judgement based on the two runs provides a clear indication that T = D90/8
is the one best suited.
When investigating Table 2.3 the value of α = 0.999 is the one performing the best when
looking at all three training sets as a whole. Even though the test for instance 3 produces
a slightly lower α-value the difference between them are very small. Whereas the best
performing value has a mean of 276.9 km the one that performs the best in the other
routes is 277.1 km. So a very small difference in average objective value. This eventually
lead to a choice as mentioned and this parameter value will be the one used in further
tuning and testing.
In Table 2.4 the weights to tune are chosen from an idea of having some different values
proportional to one another. An example is, that the first set of weights have the pro-
portion of [5, 3, 1, 0] and the other investigated weights are different. This leads to a
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
35
==PAGE:44==
situation where it is hard to predict whether to come up with some new sets of weights if
the chosen parameter value is on either of the boundaries of the interval. This time each
of the instances prefer a different set of weights, but all the results are within a significant
range of each other. So if one were to also include the standard deviation as a piece of
influence one could argue the set of weights equal to ω = [25, 20, 10, 0] is the best per-
forming. That being said, all the chosen weights are performing close to equally good and
thereby the choice might seem more insignificant than the others.
Lastly the Table 2.5 contains a situation looking much like the one before, where a different
value is performing best for each of the three training sets. Again a utilisation of the
standard deviations will be the determining factor in regards to choosing a parameter
value. When considering all things together a value of γ = 0.2 is proposed.
This concludes the total tuning of the first step of the metaheuristic framework. The
two different second step approaches are tuned like-wise and will conclude the tuning for
the whole framework. This eventually leads to the metaheuristic performing as good as
possible and producing good quality solutions. The underlying results for the tuning of
the two second step approaches are in Appendix A.1. The tuning and the reliability of
the end results will be discussed later in the thesis.
After the tuning was carried out both in a forward and a backwards sequence of parameters
an interesting, and concerning, finding appeared. The results for the tuning of the pa-
rameters did not converge to the same values when performing a forwards and backwards
tuning sequence. This is concerning in such way that the algorithm could produce equally
good or bad results independent of the parameters. The fact that this is the case could be
an explanation to the relatively high standard deviations seen in Table 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, and
2.5 for instance 2 and 3. One could also expect the standard deviations to decrease as the
tuning went on, but that is not the case either. Remember that the reason the tuning was
biased towards the means was due to a request of obtaining the lowest possible objective
value when running the algorithm.
The problem with the parameters not being tuned properly is that the convergence of the
metaheuristic is not guaranteed and then there might be unexplored neighbourhoods and
the solution space could also not be completely searched within. Since the tuning is to
optimise the performance of the metaheuristic and convergence and it is seen to be rather
random or not aligned at all.
The parameters chosen were the ones found when performing the forward sequence. After
this conclusion the two different sets of parameter for the second step of the framework
was tuned with the forwards sequence and not both.
36
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:45==
3
Results
Within this section of the report the results obtained from the devised algorithms are
presented. The presentation is done through plots of the acquired solutions, where each
node represents an order, and each edge represents a move.
The solutions are acquired using the ALNS algorithms described in Chapter 2 which has
been run on the DTU HPC using 4 cores at 2 GB memory per core. The processor is a
2.9 GHz Intel Xeon 6226R [28].
3.1
Study of the Results and Quality of the Solutions
In the literature this is often presented in tables showing the different key metrics such as
objective value, run time etc.
However, when it comes to visual attractiveness simply looking at the numbers is not
suﬀicient. Therefore, a range of plots showing the generated solutions are to be presented.
One thing to notice in the plots is, that the orders are plotted with different colours.
These colours represent the clusters explained in Section 2.3. Furthermore, a second plot
of each solution is given. In this plot only the LCs that connect two different clusters are
coloured. Thereby, an easy overview of where the route enters and exits each cluster is
provided.
Note, that clusters are drawn on all plots because even when not optimised for, the clus-
ters help determine the visual attractiveness of a given solution. Although, only the CE
algorithm optimises for cluster entries.
Another thing to note, is that the plots are all drawn in a coordinate system which is why
the edges appear as euclidean distances. However, this is not the case, and is simply an
effect of plotting in a coordinate system without any road data available. However, this
should not cause much confusion when examining the plots, as the overall perspective is
more important than the minor details of the routes.
3.1.1
Without visual attractiveness
As explained in Chapter 2 the performance of the distance optimising algorithm is crucial
to the further quality of visually attractive solutions. This is, of course, because it allows
for a one-to-one comparison with the solutions generated by AMCS. However, it is also
interesting to examine the plotted solutions to get an idea of how they look visually. As
touched upon in Chapter 1 the problem this report revolves around does not identically
match any of those examined in the literature and therefore, the more conventional mea-
surements of visual attractiveness, such as those described by D. Rossit [3], do not directly
apply in this case. Therefore, the visual attractiveness within this project relies much on
a visual inspection of the generated routes in combination with the objective value of the
generated route. Then, it is up to the inspector to weigh the value of visual appeal versus
objective cost to grant a measurable benefit of the improvements proposed by this project.
To help determine the visual attractiveness of a route that has been visually optimised, a
non-visually optimised route is plotted for each instance.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.1: Best found solution when minimising total distance in instance 4.
Examining the plot in Figure 3.1 it is apparent that the orders are very spread out, yet
they are also somewhat segmented into areas without assigning them to clusters.
One can imagine, that the orders within the bottom left part of the plot are situated in
some city, and the same for the green cluster in the bottom right. The rest of the orders
are spread out over a larger area, which could mean that they are situated along some
connecting roads. In this case, even when the route has not been visually optimised, it
may come off as a somewhat nice-looking solution. However, when the clustering tool is
applied the colouration of the orders provide some insight as to where the route could be
visually improved. Namely, the area around the dark blue cluster seems off to even the
untrained observer. Especially, the fact that the route moves towards the dark blue area
from the turquoise stands out and would likely lead to confusion from the driver.
The plot in Figure 3.2 shows a route travelling between a vastly more compact sequence of
orders. While, the salmon coloured cluster in the lower right part of the plot is somewhat
naturally separated from the rest, the remaining orders would seem very densely connected
if no cluster-indicating colours were added to the plot.
When closely examining the plot, it becomes obvious that there are a few oddities present.
An example is that the salmon coloured cluster is visited twice. This leads to the dark
green cluster being exited and entered several times as well, which might be ideal to
minimise when considering the visual attractiveness.
38
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.2: Best found solution when minimising total distance in instance 5.
3.1.2
With visual attractiveness
The plots shown in Figure 3.3, 3.4, 3.5 and 3.6 are the best found solutions. It is important
to notice that the acceptable increase of total distance is 12 %. Each of the four solutions
are found with the framework elaborated in Section 2.6.4 and used with the parameters
determined in Section 2.6.5.
Even though some of the nodes in the figures are placed closely together it is the greater
scope of movements which is important to explain and justify. The expected behaviour is
that fewer arcs are traversing back and forth between clusters.
In Figure 3.3 and 3.4 the total amount of cluster entries are minimised. When comparing to
the plots shown in Figure 3.1 and 3.2 there is a clear distinction between the first step and
the second step of the framework and how their visual attractiveness is noticeably different.
One can see that the sequence of which the clusters are visited is quite different. As an
example, comparing the two solutions from instance 4 to one another shows a difference
in how the route connects the blue and cyan cluster in Figure 3.1, which changes to a
connection between the magenta and light green clusters in Figure 3.3. An explanation
to this could be that the orders in the blue cluster are not as compact as the surrounding
orders. Therefore, when minimising the total distance, this is utilised to generate another
solution route where the blue cluster is entered multiple times.
When investigating the solution presented in Figure 3.4 one can see that the salmon
coloured cluster in the bottom right of the graph is only visited once where the solution
proposed in Figure 3.2 is visited twice. Other than that, the routes are quite similar.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.3: Plot of the best found route when minimising the amount of cluster entries in
instance 4.
Figure 3.5: Plot of the best found route when minimising the time difference in instance 4
40
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.4: Plot of the best found route when minimising the amount of cluster entries in
instance 5.
Figure 3.6: Plot of the best found route when minimising the time difference in instance 5
When looking closer at the solutions that minimise the time difference, Figure 3.5 and
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
41
==PAGE:50==
3.6, there is a significant change to the solution compared to when optimising the cluster
entries in instance 4, but a rather insignificant change in instance 5. Here, the route can
move freely between the predetermined clusters without any increase in objective value.
This difference is especially seen when studying instance 4 where the proposed route moves
in and out of the clusters before the clusters are fully visited. This is clearly highlighted
when comparing the plots in Figure 3.7 and 3.8. Here every entry and exit node is coloured
to give a better overview of where the changes are present.
When analysing the cluster entries it becomes evident, that whenever the number exceeds
one, the solution is no longer guaranteed to be visually attractive. This is due to the
uncertainty of how the solution moves around in the network, between the clusters. How-
ever, it should be noted that while a CE above one does not guarantee a visually attractive
solution, it does not prove the opposite either. Therefore, a visual inspection is necessary
to determine whether a solution with CE > 1 is visually attractive.
From all the plots different discussion points arise, namely whether cluster entries is a
valid measurement of visual attractiveness and how the quality of the solution depends on
the quality of the generated clusters. These topics are further discussed in Chapter 4.
Figure 3.7: Zoomed in view of the entry and exit nodes for instance 4 when minimising
distance.
42
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.8: Zoomed in view of the entry and exit nodes for instance 4 when minimising
CE.
3.1.3
A visual comparison of the proposed solutions
As seen in the figures and explained briefly in Section 3.1.2 the solutions are vastly different
when applying the visual attractiveness constraints. When comparing the figures to one
another, and taking into consideration that the representation is slightly misleading you
can see that the solution has found routes within the clusters.
It is clear that overall visual appearance of the routes do not differ that much from each
other, but this could be due to the allowed increase in total distance, which limits the
solution space. When this threshold increases the visual attractive part of the framework
has a lot flexibility to explore the solution space.
However, it should be stated that
the framework works as intended and provides more visually attractive routes within the
allowed distance increase. The metric regarding the time difference is not designed, in
comparison to the cluster entries, to bound the route in the clusters. It produces good
quality solutions in terms of the more practical part of the initial formulated problem.
However, one issue could be that minimising time difference between two sides of a road,
connecting two physical neighbourhoods, can lead to traversing the same road multiple
times i.e. deadheading. This could possibly lead to the TD objective synergising very
badly with the desire to minimise the total distance travelled.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.9: Zoomed in view of the entry and exit nodes for instance M5 when minimising
distance.
Figure 3.10: Zoomed in view of the entry and exit nodes for instance M5 when minimising
CE.
When investigating instance M5 there are some clear differences in terms of visual at-
44
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:53==
tractiveness. From Figure 3.9 and 3.10 the difference between the two proposed solutions
is quite noticeable. For the solution minimising distance, the highest number of cluster
entries is 9 which is in the cyan cluster and this is reduced to a total of 2 cluster entries
when changing the objective.
The changes to the solution are present in all of the clusters, but the more obvious one
is the light green cluster which now is served without interruptions, and the significant
minimisation of the times the solution enters and exits the blue and cyan cluster are also
worth noting.
Although, a visual inspection of the solutions might be a subjective matter of evaluation
there are some clear improvements present from instance to instance. Some of the in-
stances are showing none to very little improvement in visual quality, Figure 3.4 whereas
in Figure 3.10 there are some huge differences to be observed.
3.2
Computational Performance of the ALNS
In this section a thorough description of how the metaheuristic framework performs on a
more computational level is carried out. This includes an analysis of the solution plots, the
computational performance of the algorithms and a quantification of the costs of visual
attractiveness.
Throughout this section a range of tables are shown. These tables present the perfor-
mance of the different algorithms and furthermore, the utilisation of the destroy and
repair methods utilised in said algorithms. Because the destroy and repair methods differ
from algorithm to algorithm, a list of acronyms with their corresponding destroy or repair
method is provided below. Note, that the destroy method: Worst Removal, is divided
into two where the fixed amount removal is Dworst−1 and the threshold based removal is
Dworst−2.
Drand:
Random removal.
Used in both the first and second step.
Dcons:
Consecutive removal.
Used in both the first and second step.
Dfixed:
Worst removal 1.
Used in the first step.
Dthresh:
Worst removal 2.
Used in the first step.
Dint−clu:
Intra-cluster removal.
Used in the second step.
Rnear:
Repair nearest.
Used in both the first and second step.
Rcheap:
Repair cheapest.
Used in both the first and second step.
Rfarth:
Repair farthest.
Used in the first step.
Rrand:
Repair random.
Used in both the first and second step.
Reuclid:
Repair euclidean.
Used in the second step.
Rint−clu:
Repair intra-cluster.
Used in the second step.
3.2.1
Assessment of the performance in the first step of the
algorithmic framework
The performance of the first step is assessed by comparing the generated solution values
with the ones in Table 1.1. It is important that the first step performs well, otherwise there
is no way of ensuring that the second step can produce acceptable solutions. Furthermore,
a well-performing first step justifies the framework, and allows for the assumption that
the second step can produce great routes.
The goal is to provide as best as possible solutions both in regards to quality of the
solution, the value of the objective and the consistency of the algorithm. All these metrics
can be justified by comparing the best found solution, the produced mean, and standard
deviation on the basis of 100 trials.
These will be provided in tables where all three
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
45
==PAGE:54==
objectives, distance, CE, and TD, are shown, but only one of them is optimised for at a
time. This is to get a clear overview of how the different visual implementations change
the solution. In the tables the mean, standard deviation, and best found solutions are
provided.
As mentioned earlier the two sets of instances minimise the total distance
travelled and total time spent respectively. The distance is either presented in [km] or
[hour:minutes] according to how AMCS presents their results.
Taking a look at Table 3.1, where the objective is to minimise the total distance, the
provided means are slightly above the solution values in Table 1.1, but the best found
solutions show very satisfying results.
The standard deviations, which can give an indication of the robustness of the algorithm,
are quite high for two of the solved instances, namely instance 2 and 3. This indicates
that the algorithmic framework works as intended although, there might be room for
improvement. The explanation could be that the metaheuristic has trouble escaping local
minima, but that being said the standard deviation is expected to increase when the total
route distance increases as well. However, this might not be the only explanation for these
two examples and therefore, this topic will be addressed more properly in Chapter 4.
µdist
σdist
µCE
σCE
µTD
σTD
Best found
Instance 1
46.2
0.398
5.83
0.587
1:04
00:18
44.78
Instance 2
330.6
8.397
5.95
0.435
2:49
00:40
312.32
Instance 3
276.9
11.937
6.21
0.518
1:49
00:43
254.69
Instance 4
117.0
1.469
5.55
0.687
1:52
00:48
114.25
Instance 5
68.9
1.062
6.4
0.910
1:37
00:33
66.50
Instance M1
6:23
00:02
6.11
0.737
1:39
00:44
6:20
Instance M2
6:04
00:02
11.2
0.910
2:21
00:33
5:59
Instance M5
5:57
00:01
10.39
1.286
2:20
00:26
5:55
Instance M6
7:32
00:02
9.77
0.973
3:26
00:44
7:26
Table 3.1: Summary of the results in the first step when minimising total distance.
When investigating the utilisation of each of the proposed destroy and repair methods
there are some interesting findings. A brief summary of the usage of each destroy and
repair method are found in Table 3.2 where the mean for the 100 trials for each instance
is denoted.
From this table it is clear that some of the destroy methods are more utilised than others,
but the tendency is rather instance specific. For all the instance in set 2, the Manhattan
styled networks, a fairly uniform distribution is present. None of the destroy methods
are used more than 30 %, and this distribution could both indicate a healthy relationship
between each of the methods, but also that each of methods are producing equally bad
results. Nevertheless, when looking at the results in Table 3.1 the solutions produced are
of high quality meaning that even if the destroy/repair methods individually produce bad
results the usage of all of them together produces solutions of high quality.
Changing the scope to the New Zealandic instances the distribution is rather different.
Here the first destroy method, Drand, is the most used and the least used destroy method is
Dthresh. This behaviour is expected since there should eventually be, as the algorithm con-
verges, fewer connections between two customers which exceed the predetermined thresh-
old and hereby making this destroy method redundant.
A common factor for all of the instances is that the repair method Rcheap is by far the
46
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:55==
most utilised method, and the other methods might only have been chosen in the first
few iterations of the metaheuristic and then converged to a state where the only repair
method which could produce acceptable solutions was this. These results seemingly make
all the other repair methods redundant by questioning the value of including them in the
ALNS framework. A further discussion on this topic is done in Chapter 4.
Total
Drand
Dcons
Dworst1
Dworst2
Rnear
Rcheap
Rfarth
Rrand
Instance 1
16122
51.5
22.0
16.5
9.9
0.3
99.2
0.2
0.2
Instance 2
5176
43.6
29.8
17.8
8.8
0.8
98.0
0.6
0.6
Instance 3
7621
43.8
39.4
10.9
5.9
0.6
98.5
0.4
0.4
Instance 4
7446
56.6
38.9
3.3
1.1
0.7
98.5
0.4
0.4
Instance 5
6295
31.7
25.7
20.8
21.8
0.7
98.4
0.5
0.5
Instance M1
19068
28.3
25.5
24.0
22.3
0.6
99.0
0.2
0.2
Instance M2
7492
29.2
20.5
25.7
24.5
0.8
98.4
0.4
0.4
Instance M5
14071
29.3
23.5
24.3
23.0
0.4
99.0
0.2
0.2
Instance M6
10748
29.6
25.3
24.0
21.1
0.6
98.8
0.3
0.3
Table 3.2: Summary of the usage of the different destroy and repair methods when min-
imising total distance.
(a) Instance 4
(b) Instance 5
Figure 3.11: Plots of the accepted solution and the global best when minimising the total
distance.
Figure 3.11 shows a blue line which corresponds to the accepted solutions generated by the
ALNS, and the red line represents the current global best solution. The upwards spikes
in the blue line indicates acceptance of worse solutions. The observed behaviour is that
local minima are found around 500 iterations and 1500 iterations.
The expected behaviour is that the magnitude of these spikes decrease as the algorithm
progresses. However, when examining the plots in Figure 3.11, this is not clearly apparent.
If the probability does not decrease suﬀiciently the algorithm will continue to select worse
solutions and might never converge to a (hopefully) global optimum. This is why the
tuning of the parameters is very important. A proper discussion of this topic is done in
Chapter 4.
The plots shown in Figure 3.12 and 3.13 are the accepted solutions of the two different
second step objectives, the number of cluster entries and the time difference respectively.
When looking at Figure 3.12 it is very clear to see that when it finds a new global best,
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
47
==PAGE:56==
it stays at that level.
When achieving a new global best the solution is still able to
change the route it creates without harming the objective value. This is also explained in
Section 2.6.4. However, since it appears that the algorithm is not willing to change from
its global best there could be some issues with the acceptance criterion and a mismatch
between the parameters within.
(a) Instance 4
(b) Instance 5
Figure 3.12: Plots of the accepted solution and the global best when minimising the
number of cluster entries.
(a) Instance 4
(b) Instance 5
Figure 3.13: Plots of the accepted solution and the global best when minimising the time
difference.
Taking a closer look at Figure 3.13 one can identify some results which is expected from
the metaheuristic framework. Namely, a rapid change to the solution in the start of the
time span, but then as time goes the probability decreases and fewer worse solutions are
accepted. Though it seems that the probability decreases a bit too rapidly since neither
of the plots shows an acceptance of worse solutions beyond 2/5 of the run time.
A thorough analysis and discussion of the findings within this section, is carried out in
Chapter 4.
3.3
Measuring the cost of visual attractiveness
Although the visual attractiveness in this project is evaluated by visual inspection, it is
crucial for the usefulness to somehow be able to measure it. This measure is done by
comparing the cost of the non-visual attractive routes and the routes that are optimised
48
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:57==
towards visual attractiveness. Furthermore, a threshold of 12 % is imposed, such that the
second step still provides acceptably long routes.
When testing the performance of the second step, a total of 100 trials are recorded. All
of the trials use the same initial solution.
3.3.1
Minimising cluster entries
In Table 3.3 the results from the cluster-optimisation algorithm are shown. Within the
table there is a ∆distance-column which shows an increase in distance compared to the
distance optimised routes presented in Table 3.1. This is to give an easy overview of the
cost of visual attractiveness.
µdist
∆distance
σdist
µCE
σCE
µTD
σTD
Best found
Instance 1
50.6
(+9.5 %)
0.72
2.81
0.394
1:00
00:19
2
Instance 2
363.4
(+9.9 %)
7.77
4.17
0.378
3:02
00:37
4
Instance 3
306.0
(+10.5%)
3.60
3.12
0.39
00:57
00:19
3
Instance 4
126.2
(+7.8 %)
2.22
2.61
0.490
1:48
00:40
2
Instance 5
75.4
(+9.4 %)
1.52
3.21
0.433
1:02
00:29
2
Instance M1
6:47
(+6.3 %)
00:10
2.96
0.243
1:34
00:45
2
Instance M2
6:36
(+8.8 %)
00:08
4.04
0.491
2:50
00:39
3
Instance M5
6:23
(+7.3 %)
00:06
2.79
0.456
2:19
00:45
2
Instance M6
8:04
(+7.1 %)
00:07
3.71
0.456
3:40
00:54
3
Table 3.3: Summary of the results in the second step when minimising cluster entries.
Within the data presented in Table 3.3 it is clearly evident that the mean cluster entry
count µCE is now vastly lower. This is, of course, expected whenever the optimisation
algorithm seeks to minimise CE. However, one interesting thing to notice is the magnitude
of the standard deviation σCE.
The robustness of the first step has been assessed and while this is very high, the same
conclusion can not be drawn for the CE algorithm. Investigating the numbers show that
the standard deviation σCE is almost 20 % of the mean for instance 4. Furthermore, the
CE algorithm has a higher average deviation in cluster entries than the distance optimising
algorithm, even though the latter does not optimise on CE at all. However, to a certain
degree this can be explained by the fact, that the cluster entries are small integer values.
Thus, the range from e.g. 2 to 3 will mean a high deviation.
Furthermore, the fact that the CE algorithm, to a high degree, utilises the same destroy
and repair methods as the distance optimising algorithm could be a benefactor to the
similarities.
In the case of the CE algorithm, when investigating the utilisation of the different destroy
and repair methods, the findings show that there is an apparent difference among the
instances. Again, the results summarised in Table 3.4 show the mean value of 100 trials,
and as this table relates only to the CE algorithm, there is no direct comparison with the
results in Table 3.2.
Interestingly the results found when running the CE algorithm on the Manhattan style
networks show that there is no longer a uniform distribution of the destroy methods.
Bear in mind, that the CE algorithm utilises three destroy methods, rather than the four
utilised by the distance optimising algorithm and furthermore, only two of them are equal
to the ones used in the distance optimising algorithm.
Now, Dint−clu is the preferred
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
49
==PAGE:58==
destroy method, with a high preference for instance M2, and an almost equal preference
in the instance M1. However, this can be expected as this destroy method was added
to specifically enhance cluster entries rather than focus on the conventional improvement
criteria i.e. minimising travelling distance.
Examining the repair methods show that Rcheap is still preferred yet in the instances M1
and M2 it is challenged by Rnear. Again, this is an interersting topic to dicuss and will be
further evaluated in Chapter 4.
Total
Drand
Dcons
Dint−clu
Rnear
Rcheap
Rrand
Reuclid
Rint−clu
Instance 1
34566
28.5
25.4
46.1
0.4
99.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
Instance 2
11456
29.0
26.3
44.7
1.6
97.5
0.3
0.3
0.3
Instance 3
19251
5.7
38.3
56.0
6.2
93.0
0.2
0.4
0.2
Instance 4
12130
30.3
30.7
39.0
2.4
96.7
0.3
0.3
0.3
Instance 5
13348
31.0
30.8
38.2
6.6
92.7
0.3
0.3
0.3
Instance M1
32601
22.8
32.3
44.9
11.6
85.8
0.1
2.1
0.4
Instance M2
24218
6.5
17.9
75.5
24.5
74.6
0.2
0.5
0.3
Instance M5
32042
20.9
15.4
63.7
3.0
96.4
0.1
0.3
0.2
Instance M6
24953
16.8
24.8
58.4
3.8
95.6
0.2
0.2
0.2
Table 3.4: Summary of the usage of the different destroy and repair methods when min-
imising the number of cluster entries.
3.3.2
Minimising time difference in road segments
Earlier it was explained how the visual attractiveness of generated routes with a CE of
more than one is not guaranteed. Another implementation of visual attractiveness was
then introduced. Namely, the minimisation of time difference between visiting side 1 and
2 of a given road.
Through preliminary tests the TD method showed promising results, where the generated
routes seem to adhere to certain areas within the order distribution. These areas could be
interpreted in the same way the otherwise predefined clusters are, and therefore the TD
method might improve visual attractiveness of the solutions.
µdist
∆distance
σdist
µcc
σcc
µTD
σTD
Best found
Instance 1
50.5
(+9.3%)
0.812
6.2
0.865
00:08
00:03
00:05
Instance 2
366.1
(+10.7%)
5.942
6.37
0.661
1:17
00:43
00:20
Instance 3
305.5
(+10.3%)
5.244
6.05
0.757
00:18
00:02
00:16
Instance 4
128.1
(+9.5%)
1.238
4.76
0.726
00:18
00:04
00:10
Instance 5
74.8
(+8.6%)
0.897
6.35
0.743
00:20
00:03
00:13
Instance M1
6:47
(+6.3%)
00:06
6.34
1.075
00:07
00:01
00:06
Instance M2
6:18
(+3.8%)
00:05
11.95
1.058
00:24
00:11
00:10
Instance M5
6:18
(+5.9%)
00:07
10.32
1.595
00:18
00:06
00:10
Instance M6
7:55
(+5.1%)
00:06
10.44
1.373
00:29
00:15
00:13
Table 3.5: Summary of the results in the second step when minimising time difference.
Assessing the time differences in Table 3.5 shows that the TD algorithm is able to consec-
utively produce great results. In all instances except instance 2, the algorithm is able to
produce solutions with very low µTD-values and at the same time, the standard deviation
50
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:59==
σTD is low.
A possible explanation as to why the algorithm does not work as good when solving in-
stance 2 is due to how the data is structured. An example of when the time difference
between two sides of a road should not necessarily be low, is if an area has only one major
entrance road that has orders on both sides. Here, it would most likely always make the
most sense to service the orders on the inward drive, then continue with the orders within
said area, and lastly, service the orders on the second side of the entrance road. If the
area is suﬀiciently large this will lead to the time difference on the entrance road being
very high.
Examining the utilisation of the destroy- and repair methods used by the TD algorithm
shows somewhat similar results to those of the CE algorithm. The repair method Rcheap
is still, by far, most preferred. However, assessing the utilisation of destroy methods it
is evident that the TD algorithm barely utilises the Dcons method, although, it is not
significantly small to prove that the consecutive destroy method most likely does not add
any value in the TD algorithm.
Total
Drand
Dcons
Dint−clu
Rnear
Rcheap
Rrand
Reuclid
Rint−clu
Instance 1
23060
50.7
3.9
45.4
0.2
99.3
0.1
0.1
0.1
Instance 2
8438
38.1
12.0
49.9
0.6
98.3
0.3
0.4
0.3
Instance 3
9742
32.3
25.3
42.5
1.2
97.7
0.3
0.4
0.3
Instance 4
8882
34.9
10.4
54.7
1.0
98.0
0.3
0.4
0.3
Instance 5
8680
32.6
29.8
37.6
1.3
97.7
0.3
0.3
0.3
Instance M1
24000
23.4
11.6
65.0
3.7
95.5
0.1
0.5
0.1
Instance M2
10771
22.1
4.8
73.1
2.0
96.4
0.3
0.7
0.5
Instance M5
18888
27.4
5.5
67.1
1.8
97.4
0.2
0.4
0.3
Instance M6
15146
18.3
3.4
78.3
0.6
98.7
0.2
0.2
0.2
Table 3.6: Summary of the usage of the different destroy and repair methods when min-
imising the time difference.
3.3.3
”Result based” comparison of the computational performance
To summarise the findings within this chapter Table 3.7 shows a comparison of the three
algorithms. Within this table it is trivial to see that the two proposed extensions to the
distance optimising algorithm, do perform well within the allowed acceptance criteria.
Namely, the limitation of restricting the solution neighbourhood to only contain the so-
lutions within 12 % higher than the objective value of the distance optimising algorithm.
Furthermore, when assuming both µCE and µTD act as a direct measure of visual attrac-
tiveness it can be concluded that the trade-off in the conventional measure of cost i.e. µdist
increases slightly by 8.8 % for the CE algorithm, while the µCE comparatively decreases
by an average of 54 %. Likewise, the TD algorithm increases distance by 7.7 % while
decreasing the µTD by 80 %.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
51
==PAGE:60==
µdist
∆distance,CE
∆distance,TD
µCE
∆CE,distance
µTD
∆TD,distance
Instance 1
36.2
(+9.5 %)
(+9.3 %)
2.81
(-52 %)
00:08
(-88 %)
Instance 2
330.6
(+9.9 %)
(+10.7 %)
4.17
(-30 %)
1:17
(-54 %)
Instance 3
276.9
(+10.5%)
(+10.3 %)
3.60
(-42 %)
00:18
(-83 %)
Instance 4
117.0
(+7.8 %)
(+9.5 %)
2.61
(-53 %)
00:18
(-84 %)
Instance 5
68.9
(+9.4 %)
(+8.6 %)
3.21
(-50 %)
00:20
(-79 %)
Instance M1
6:23
(+6.3 %)
(+6.3 %)
2.96
(-52 %)
00:07
(-93 %)
Instance M2
6:04
(+8.8 %)
(+3.8 %)
4.04
(-64 %)
00:24
(-83 %)
Instance M5
5:57
(+7.3 %)
(+5.9 %)
2.79
(-73 %)
00:18
(-87 %)
Instance M6
7:32
(+7.1 %)
(+5.1 %)
3.71
(-62 %)
00:29
(-86 %)
Table 3.7: Summary of key results comparing the parts of the metaheuristic with one
another.
52
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:61==
4
Discussion
4.1
Tuning of the ALNS framework
There is no doubt that the proposed framework and implemented metaheuristic is working
as shown in Chapter 3. Almost all the results have shown to be satisfying in terms of the
solution quality, but for few of the instances the convergence of the solution is not as
expected. If the robustness of the framework was satisfying all the solved instances would
have a lower standard deviation with corresponding converging objective values as the
algorithm proceeds. As mentioned in Section 2.6.5 some flaws were encountered when
performing the tuning of the parameters for the ALNS framework. These flaws resulted
in an insecurity whether the algorithm would perform as good as possible. One of the
issues mentioned was, that performing the tuning sequence the forwards and backwards,
did not show the same results. When the tuning sequences do not show equal values, it
insinuates that there might be some randomness in the convergence of the metaheuristic.
When taking a closer look at each of the parameters explained in Section 2.5.1 and Sec-
tion 2.5.2 and tuned in Section 2.6.5 there is, as mentioned previously, a pairwise cor-
relation between the parameters.
Equation (2.11) states that the temperature in the
acceptance criterion should go towards zero as the metaheuristic progresses, and ideally
reach this value when the algorithm is about to terminate. If this is not the case and
the temperature decreases too rapidly, the SA acceptance criterion becomes redundant,
which means that all the accepted solutions beyond this point are strictly better solutions.
This could result in the framework having trouble escaping local minima and thereby not
ensuring proper convergences of the solution. The plot of accepted solutions in Figure 3.12
shows one case of the temperature likely declining too fast.
On the other hand if the temperature decreases too slowly, the ALNS might move re-
peatedly accept worse solutions. The consequence being, that the algorithm no longer
explores the solution neighbourhoods thoroughly leading to worse results overall. A too
slow decrease in temperature is found within Figure 3.11, where the algorithm seems to
be accepting worse solutions throughout the whole run time.
Nevertheless, the solutions found for each instance are of good quality, both in terms of
visual attractiveness and distance.
4.2
Evaluation of the destroy/repair methods
Whenever a problem arises within the field of operations research, the common approach
is to try and formulate the problem as one of the well-known and well-studied problems
from the literature [29]. Furthermore, the solution to the encountered problem might be
inspired by methods used to solve similar problems.
In this project the problem formulation is inspired by the TSP and the cluVRP, and the
metaheuristic solution draws inspiration from the literature. This includes the destroy
and repair methods, for which some are equal to methods often used in the literature [30].
However, the problem studied in this project has several unique characteristics which has
resulted in the need of destroy and repair methods more specifically tailored to the project.
Evidently, this means that some of the methods have not been thoroughly documented in
the literature and therefore, the evaluation must be based on the results found within this
project. The aforementioned destroy and repair methods are those specifically made for
the cluster entries algorithm and thus, are those which directly relate to increasing visual
attractiveness.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
53
==PAGE:62==
4.2.1
The utilisation of the different destroy and repair methods
When evaluating the performance of the destroy and repair methods there are one im-
portant thing to consider. Namely, the fact that there are multiple elements which might
influence the utilisation of a given destroy or repair method.
The first thing to consider is the threshold limiting the maximum increase in distance
travelled from the first step solution. This threshold effectively reduces the solution neigh-
bourhoods and therefore, it might limit the usability of certain destroy and repair methods.
An example could be the intra-cluster repair method. While this method is built to de-
crease the number of cluster entries it does in no way consider the travelling distance.
This can lead to the repair method proving a good change in terms of cluster entries, but
a bad one in terms of travelling distance. This is because the destroy and repair method
weights are updated with no consideration of how bad the methods are, i.e. a solution is
rejected and considered equally bad whether it increases travelling distance by 12.1 % or
50 %. The actual eﬀiciency of each destroy and repair method might be heavily influenced
by this threshold.
Secondly, the performance of each of the destroy and repair methods depend on the objec-
tive of the algorithm. This is especially true for the destroy and repair methods that are
devised to increase visual attractiveness, and a consequence of using the same framework
to minimise different objectives.
To understand if the aforementioned claims of the threshold resulting in a certain utili-
sation of repair methods, the CE and TD algorithms are run on all instances. Now, the
threshold is increased to 70 %. Similarly to all of the results presented in Chapter 3, a
total of 100 trials have been run, and the results have been recorded.
The average performance in terms of distance, CE, and TD of these tests are not interest-
ing, as it is known that relaxing the distance threshold will cause the distances to increase
vastly. Consequently, allowing the algorithms to find more satisfying solutions that in the
cases with a threshold of 12 %.
However, the utilisation of the destroy and repair methods is very interesting to analyse.
In the previous recorded results the most used repair method across all the algorithms
and instances is Rcheap. This raises a question of the importance and contribution of all
the other repair methods. Running a relaxed model can help quantify this concern, as it
is known, that the destroy and repair methods added in the CE and TD algorithm are
implemented to increase the visual attractiveness, and therefore are expected to have bad
performance in terms of distance optimisation.
Table 4.1 is a summary of the utilisation of destroy and repair methods for the relaxed
CE algorithm.
When inspecting the destroy methods it is evident that for all but instance 4, Dint−clu is
utilised the most. Granted, this is expected because the method specifically targets orders
within the same cluster and removes them from the current solution.
Furthermore, a change in utilisation is observed for all but the Rrand method, where
Rcheap utilisation is decreased, and the other are increased. The increased utilisation of
the visual attractiveness specific repair methods is expected, as it is inherently known that
these methods prioritise cluster entries higher than distance optimisation. However, the
increased utilisation of nearest insertion method is interesting. A possible explanation is,
that inserting a link cluster prior to the nearest one synergises well with how the clustering
algorithm defines the clusters, whereas the cheapest insertion takes both the prior and post
LC in consideration whenever inserting an unassigned LC. Although, the performance of
the cheapest insertion method is very much dependant on the instance, as can be derived
from the results that show a decreased use of the method in the instances: 1, M1, M2,
54
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:63==
M5, and M6 yet still a high utilisation in the rest of the instances.
Nevertheless, the results evidently show that the threshold has a large influence on the
utilisation of each of destroy and repair method in the relaxed CE algorithm.
There-
fore, the performance of every method, except the random insertion method, can not be
considered irrelevant in the CE algorithm.
Total
Drand
Dcons
Dint−clu
Rnear
Rcheap
Rrand
Reuclid
Rint−clu
Instance 1
23437.0
2.2
38.7
59.1
36.1
6.1
0.2
37.4
20.3
Instance 2
16162.0
1.5
29.4
69.1
39.5
48.5
0.2
9.3
2.4
Instance 3
13900.0
1.3
40.1
58.6
39.0
41.3
0.2
18.4
1.1
Instance 4
9929.0
6.5
42.5
51.0
34.0
40.4
0.3
23.9
1.4
Instance 5
9526.0
9.5
33.1
57.3
20.9
50.3
0.3
27.3
1.1
Instance M1
16829.0
1.2
17.7
81.0
5.7
5.2
0.2
42.0
46.9
Instance M2
10610.0
1.5
16.6
81.9
27.4
18.9
0.3
24.7
28.7
Instance M5
14341.0
1.2
19.1
79.6
7.5
9.0
0.3
15.4
67.8
Instance M6
13210.0
1.5
27.2
71.3
9.1
7.7
0.3
75.2
7.7
Table 4.1: Summary of the utilisation of the different destroy and repair methods when
minimising CE and relaxing the threshold.
The same tests, with an increased threshold, were carried out using the TD algorithm.
The results of the tests are displayed in Table 4.2.
Now in the case of the TD algorithm, there are fewer major changes compared to the
results shown in Table 3.6. However, as the new destroy and repair methods were devised
specifically for the CE algorithm, this is to no surprise. Furthermore, there is a higher
correlation between distance travelled and the time difference, than distance and cluster
entries.
When inspecting the destroy methods there are evidently changes however, the overall
distribution is somewhat the same. That being a high utilisation of the random- and intra-
cluster destroy method and consequently, a lower utilisation of the consecutive destroy
method.
Regarding the repair methods it is evident, that the relaxed model does utilise the nearest-
and euclidean insertion methods a little more, and in the case of instance M1 it is even
above 5 % which leads to the conclusion, that without further testing they cannot be ruled
unimportant.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
55
==PAGE:64==
Total
Drand
Dcons
Dint−clu
Rnear
Rcheap
Rrand
Reuclid
Rint−clu
Instance 1
22400.0
46.4
4.0
49.6
1.2
97.7
0.2
0.7
0.2
Instance 2
8828.0
31.8
11.0
57.2
3.0
94.6
0.3
1.6
0.5
Instance 3
10402.0
30.2
21.5
48.3
2.8
93.8
0.3
2.9
0.3
Instance 4
9955.0
23.3
7.5
69.3
2.8
93.8
0.3
2.8
0.3
Instance 5
9550.0
31.1
29.3
39.5
3.2
94.8
0.3
1.4
0.3
Instance M1
23633.0
4.5
8.3
87.2
6.3
85.5
0.1
7.9
0.3
Instance M2
11101.0
19.3
4.5
76.3
2.5
94.9
0.3
1.6
0.7
Instance M5
18040.0
24.7
5.2
70.1
2.2
95.9
0.2
1.0
0.7
Instance M6
13958.0
17.9
3.9
78.2
0.9
97.4
0.2
1.2
0.2
Table 4.2: Summary of the utilisation of the different destroy and repair methods when
minimising TD and relaxing the threshold.
From the results of testing the relaxed CE and TD models, it can be concluded that the
random insertion method does not increase the performance quality and while the relaxed
methods does show an increase in utilisation for the other repair methods, further tests
are needed to conclude on their usefulness.
4.2.2
Contribution of the different destroy and repair methods
The results in Chapter 3 showed that the repair method Rcheap was by far the most used
repair method, hence making the other methods redundant. This would initially indicate
that when removing the other repair methods the solution should become equally good.
When doing so all the instances have been analysed again with the only difference being,
that the ALNS did not have a choice in repair methods, since the only option was Rcheap.
One could expect to see quite similar results both in terms of mean and standard deviation
of the generated solutions. Especially considering that the utilisation of the lesser used
repair methods could be of a more random aspect than an actual contribution to the
objective value. This means that during first iterations in the framework the probability
of choosing either of the methods is near equal. This implies that when the ALNS first
chooses Rcheap it rarely deviates from it, as the weighting towards this method increases
drastically early in the algorithm’s run time.
This is also a consequence of what is mentioned in Section 4.2.1 in regards to how the
algorithm is able to choose a certain destroy or repair method.
Because when apply-
ing the bound of an allowed increment of 12 % in total distance in the second step of
the framework, many of the repairs made by any other methods will most likely yield
an unsatisfying, and hereby, unaccepted solution. So the metaheuristic mostly searches
through its neighbourhoods with one method and rearranges the order sequence so that
the objective is optimised.
In Table 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5 the summary of the results are seen and here are some clear
indications that the other repair methods do not provide a significant difference. When
looking at the ∆-values, which represents the change compared to the results in Table 3.1,
3.3 and 3.5, the change is very small. The ∆-values are fluctuating around zero, and there
is clearly no certain pattern to observe.
One could expect the biggest changes where Rcheap is used the least, eg. M1 and M2
in Table 3.3. These instances benefit from one other repair method, namely Rnear, and
therefore the results seen in Table 4.4 are quite unexpected. When looking at the values
µCE and σCE in Table 4.4 they have increased, but not as much as for instance 3, indicating
56
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:65==
µdist
σdist
µCE
σCE
µTD
σTD
Best found
Instance 1
0.00 %
-10.80 %
-0.86 %
-14.14 %
0.00 %
-5.56 %
0.71 %
Instance 2
0.00 %
-0.05 %
0.84 %
3.22 %
-0.59 %
-15.00 %
0.79 %
Instance 3
0.01 %
1.59 %
0.32 %
-5.60 %
0.92 %
-2.33 %
0.36 %
Instance 4
0.00 %
9.60 %
0.00 %
13.97 %
11.61 %
-2.08 %
0.13 %
Instance 5
0.00 %
4.99 %
0.00 %
-7.58 %
5.15 %
-9.09 %
-0.15 %
Instance M1
0.00 %
-10.85 %
-2.29 %
-6.65 %
3.03 %
6.82 %
4.85 %
Instance M2
0.00 %
6.82 %
-2.77 %
31.54 %
2.13%
-3.03 %
-5.31 %
Instance M5
0.00 %
1.82 %
-0.10 %
-18.20 %
0.71 %
7.69 %
0.19 %
Instance M6
0.00 %
4.30 %
2.46 %
-3.70 %
0.00 %
9.09 %
-0.01 %
Table 4.3: ∆-values for first step when removing the redundant repair methods.
µdist
σdist
µCE
σCE
µTD
σTD
Best found
Instance 1
0.00 %
-8.91 %
-0.71%
3.81 %
0.08 %
-7.89 %
0.0 %
Instance 2
0.44 %
-2.83 %
-3.84 %
-73.54 %
-10.62 %
-1.13 %
0.0 %
Instance 3
-2.17 %
22.09 %
26.38 %
27.73 %
-8.10 %
-6.75 %
0.0 %
Instance 4
1.66 %
-10.00 %
-1.92 %
1.84 %
10.14 %
30.21 %
0.0 %
Instance 5
-0.80 %
-30.86 %
6.23 %
14.09 %
4.14 %
10.06 %
50.0 %
Instance M1
-2.19 %
-53.00%
4.05 %
72.43 %
-9.63 %
12.44 %
0.0 %
Instance M2
-3.67 %
-53.54 %
7.18 %
8.55 %
-18.87 %
15.21 %
0.0 %
Instance M5
-0.87 %
-25.83 %
2.87 %
1.75 %
-1.07 %
-2.11 %
0.0 %
Instance M6
-0.59 %
-10.71 %
1.89 %
-3.51 %
-2.02 %
-9.17 %
0.0 %
Table 4.4: ∆-values for second step, CE, when removing the redundant repair methods.
the results could be rather arbitrary. Some of the other metrics even benefit from the
removing of redundant repair methods. Since the only part of the framework which utilised
other repair methods, in a significant matter, was the CE algorithm the need for the other
repair methods is not be considered strictly necessary in either parts of the framework.
On the other hand, the computational benefits of minimising the number of repair methods
proved to be insignificant. Testing has shown that the change in total iterations differ from
instance to instance, and it can both be an increase or decrease. One could argue that, if
the performance in terms of computational effort was drastically improved, removing the
redundant repair methods could be beneficial. Since this is not the case, and the repair
methods are used to some degree in a couple of the instances, this procedure was found
to be of zero to minimal impact.
Recall, that the lesser used repair methods proved to be utilised more when relaxing the
threshold, which supports the need for these methods. Especially, if the cost of visual
attractiveness is allowed to increase more than 12 % in terms of distance.
With all of this being framed it is important to state that this redundancy is only present
for the repair methods in the framework. All of the destroy methods contribute signifi-
cantly to the final results for each instance.
If the same tendencies were found for the destroy methods. Namely, that one dominated
the other, one could start questioning whether the ALNS framework was suitable for this
problem. However, as this is not the case, arguably the ALNS is a great approach to solve
the problem of generating visually attractive routes.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
57
==PAGE:66==
µdist
σdist
µCE
σCE
µTD
σTD
Best found
Instance 1
0.00 %
-10.34 %
-1.45 %
-0.23 %
-11.07 %
-36.02 %
-0.68 %
Instance 2
0.05 %
-2.79 %
-2.98 %
-2.57 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
Instance 3
0.49 %
-5.32 %
2.15 %
3.43 %
3.20 %
-13.95 %
13.17 %
Instance 4
0.39 %
30.13 %
1.89 %
-7.44 %
4.22 %
-0.61 %
11.52%
Instance 5
0.53 %
3.90 %
-1.26 %
2.69 %
4.59 %
-24.73 %
46.80 %
Instance M1
-0.68 %
-39.17 %
8.36 %
-22.14 %
35.46 %
201.96 %
0.00 %
Instance M2
0.39 %
-15.16 %
-1.34 %
4.35 %
21.43 %
15.67 %
2.06 %
Instance M5
-0.22 %
-24.63 %
2.23 %
4.83 %
1.52 %
0.96 %
0.00 %
Instance M6
0.41 %
0.27 %
2.59 %
-1.09 %
-16.32 %
-46.18 %
14.33 %
Table 4.5: ∆-values for second step, TD, when removing the redundant repair methods.
4.2.3
The importance of weighting and evaluating the destroy and
repair methods
In the prior section it was established, that the destroy methods are all relevant and
contribute to the algorithm’s performance. However, regarding the repair methods this is
questionable. Albeit, the tests in the previous section did not test removing each of the
seemingly redundant repair methods individually, the overall picture was, that the need
for these rely on the objective. This is evident when increasing the threshold, where the
lesser utilised repair methods suddenly saw an increase in utilisation.
In the last section a question of whether the ALNS is applicable at all was raised. Even
though, the conclusion was that the ALNS is a good choice, the desire to test this claim is
interesting. Therefore, a test of the three different algorithms is done with the adaptability
removed. This means, that the utilisation of the destroy and repair methods should be
uniform.
Again, each instance was run with 100 trials using the three different algorithms.Table 4.6,
4.7, and 4.8 show the results from these tests. Notice, that the tables show the change in
values compared to that of the same algorithm run without removing the adaptiveness.
For reference, the comparison results are shown in Table 3.1, 3.3, and 3.5.
µdist
σdist
µCE
σCE
µTD
σTD
Best found
Instance 1
0.0 %
-19.6 %
-2.2 %
-7.8 %
-0.6 %
-10.1 %
1.2 %
Instance 2
0.0 %
-4.8 %
0.5 %
8.3 %
0.5 %
-1.9 %
0.1 %
Instance 3
-0.1 %
5.5 %
1.8 %
5.8 %
5.8 %
4.1 %
-0.1 %
Instance 4
0.3 %
5.1 %
2.7 %
-1.9 %
12.5 %
11.2 %
0.3 %
Instance 5
0.3 %
-8.1 %
0.5 %
-7.3 %
-2.8 %
3.0 %
0.0 %
Instance M1
0.0 %
11.7 %
-1.3 %
4.6 %
4.8 %
0.0 %
-0.4 %
Instance M2
0.0 %
-23.3 %
-1.0 %
-1.1 %
5.4 %
8.4 %
0.4 %
Instance M5
0.0 %
-10.0 %
0.6 %
-3.4 %
7.9 %
22.8 %
0.0 %
Instance M6
0.0 %
-18.3 %
1.6 %
20.7 %
3.1 %
2.3 %
0.3 %
Table 4.6: Summary of the results of the distance optimising algorithm when the adaptive
part is removed.
When evaluating the results in Table 4.6 it is clearly evident, that removing the weights
58
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:67==
from the distance optimising algorithm makes little to no difference. Although, the results
do not necessarily directly reflect how well the algorithm performs. This is because of
the fact, that the results shown does not take into consideration how fast the algorithm
converges.
To give an estimate of how well the algorithm performs, an examination of how fast the
algorithm converges is done. The convergence of the algorithm is estimated by comparing
the amount of iterations it completes in a time frame of 150 s, and comparing that number
with the amount of accepted solutions. Furthermore, these numbers are compared with
those of the adaptive algorithm i.e. the one without removal of the weights.
Assuming that the algorithms perform equally good on all instances, the instance 4 is
chosen as an example within the calculations. Table 3.2 shows the total iterations for
instance 4 is 7446, furthermore from Figure 3.11a the number of accepted solutions amount
to approximately 4000. The ratio of iterations and accepted iterations is calculated below.
Note that the subscripts w and nw are used to describe weights and no weights respectively.
ϕw = 4000
7446 ≈54%
(4.1)
The number of iterations performed by the non-adaptive algorithm is 7679 and the ac-
cepted solutions is 736. This gives a ratio of
ϕnw = 736
7679 ≈9.6%
(4.2)
Evidently, the algorithm without weights generates a vastly higher amount of bad so-
lutions. This emphasises that the run time of the algorithm would likely have a much
greater influence on the non-adaptive algorithm i.e. if the run time was decreased to a
few seconds it would likely cause a large difference in performance between the adaptive
and non-adaptive algorithms.
Thus, the explanation to the small difference in the numbers shown in Table 4.6 is likely
due to the fact, that even when producing many unacceptable solutions, the algorithm
still converges within the time frame of 150 s. Examining the remaining results shows that
there is some changes, albeit they mostly seem to randomly increase or decrease a little
in values. Although, there are single instances of high increase and decreases, yet even in
this case it cannot be argued that the non-adaptive algorithm overall is better.
Contrary to the results found when removing the adaptability in the distance optimising
algorithm, the results from the cluster entries algorithms show a decrease in quality. With
increases of upwards 5 % the clustering algorithm performs worse when the adaptiveness
is removed.
Furthermore, the objective of the CE algorithm also sees high increases. With upwards
of 26 % more cluster entries the adaptability seems to be even more important in the CE
algorithm, than in the distance optimisation algorithm.
Another thing that should be considered, is that the distance increase threshold indeed
limits the allowed increase in objective value, and therefore restricts the algorithm from
increasing the distance even further. Recall that the results from Table 3.3 did not show
an increase of exactly 12 %, which means that there is room to explore other, and longer,
solutions.
In theory this could be a good thing, if the non-adaptive model showed a
decrease in cluster entries accordingly.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
59
==PAGE:68==
However, the results in Table 4.7 show an increase in cluster entries, which concludes that
the CE algorithm is strictly better when the adaptability is not removed.
µdist
σdist
µCE
σCE
µTD
σTD
Best found
Instance 1
0.8 %
-10.3 %
11.4 %
23.1 %
13.5 %
6.8 %
0.0 %
Instance 2
-2.0 %
91.9 %
8.9 %
32.5 %
3.9 %
-33.2 %
0.0 %
Instance 3
4.8 %
3.9 %
10.7 %
92.2 %
138.6 %
176.3 %
0.0%
Instance 4
1.9 %
-17.5 %
14.9 %
-59.0 %
59.2 %
63.4 %
0.0%
Instance 5
2.8 %
-6.2 %
13.4 %
11.3 %
81.2 %
7.5 %
50.0%
Instance M1
2.2 %
-16.3 %
13.2 %
114.0 %
25.9 %
9.8 %
0.0 %
Instance M2
0.5 %
-13.3 %
26.7 %
42.6 %
4.0 %
8.9 %
33.3 %
Instance M5
2.6 %
-1.9 %
13.3 %
15.4 %
-3.9 %
-1.9 %
0.0 %
Instance M6
2.3 %
18.4 %
20.2 %
22.4 %
9.3 %
-14.8 %
0.0 %
Table 4.7: Summary of the results of the CE algorithm when the adaptive part is removed.
Finally, an investigation of the TD algorithm shows that once again, the mean distance
increases.
Indeed, all instances solved with the non-adaptive TD algorithm shows an
increase upwards 5 %. This can be considered to be a significant increase and especially
combined with the fact, that the objective of the TD algorithm: Time difference, is also
increased. Furthermore, the magnitude of increase in time difference is even greater and
is upwards 66 %.
µdist
σdist
µCE
σCE
µTD
σTD
Best found
Instance 1
0.6 %
-24.3 %
7.1 %
-4.9 %
17.9 %
-34.4 %
33.7 %
Instance 2
0.4 %
-26.7 %
1.7 %
16.8 %
2.8 %
-29.9 %
26.8 %
Instance 3
5.2 %
59.3 %
6.4 %
16.2 %
56.5 %
850.8 %
0.3 %
Instance 4
0.2 %
71.6 %
12.0 %
27.0 %
60.7 %
250.4 %
8.2 %
Instance 5
3.7 %
59.2 %
15.6 %
16.7 %
65.0 %
272.8 %
-3.8 %
Instance M1
2.5 %
10.3 %
15.5 %
-6.6 %
29.8 %
110.0 %
6.7 %
Instance M2
3.4 %
78.3 %
5.2 %
46.1 %
66.7 %
38.2 %
85.5 %
Instance M5
2.1 %
2.0 %
6.6 %
-7.4 %
1.7 %
-41.7 %
5.7 %
Instance M6
1.1 %
42.3 %
-2.9 %
-8.6 %
32.0 %
-27.6 %
71.7 %
Table 4.8: Summary of the results of the TD algorithm when the adaptive part is removed.
The importance of adaptiveness in the algorithms presented within this project has been
highlighted within this section. Albeit, there were single instances where the removal of
the weights did not decrease the value of the solution, the overall gain from doing so
must be regarded as negative. Therefore, confirming that the choice of using an ALNS
framework is a good choice within this project.
4.3
Quality of cluster algorithm in terms of visual
attractiveness
Returning to the determination and generation of the clusters for each of the instances,
there are some interesting topics to discuss after the results have been presented. First of
all, the interaction between the clustering algorithm and human logical sense is reduced
60
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:69==
Figure 4.1: Example of an ill-clustered LC.
to a bare minimum. This is to ensure consistency and stability in this part of the frame-
work. This means that the only nodes which were re-clustered are the ones where an LC,
described in Section 1.1, is disconnected in terms of the assigned cluster or if two identical
road links were not located in the same cluster. No other re-clustering was carried out due
to the intention of having the clusters determined by an algorithm rather than a human,
this was also to make the framework more general. In Figure 4.1 the blue and red nodes
do not align in LC 1 and therefore, in this example, the blue nodes would belong to the
red cluster. Even though the majority of the nodes are blue, the determining factor is
which cluster first ID belongs to.
The clustering approach was developed with the purpose of serving the framework with
as much consistency as possible. Therefore, stating that the clustering could have been
done differently, especially when investigating the solutions and how the routes move
in and out of the different clusters. The lack of quality in the clustering could in the
end harm the results of the visual attractiveness and thereby reduce the probability of
generating nice-looking solutions. The clustering is in fact a major part of the foundation
for the framework of promoting and obtaining visual attractiveness, since if the clustering
is performed very poorly one would inevitably produce low quality solutions.
In Figure 4.2 a rather poor clustering is displayed. Here the dark green cluster is repre-
sented on either sides of the gap, and this seem fairly counter intuitive since it looks like
there should be a clear separation of the light and dark green clusters.
While odd-looking clusters do not necessarily lead to visually unattractive solutions, in-
cidents like the one presented in Figure 4.2 were found to generally impact the visual
attractiveness negatively.
This exact problem could have been reduced to a bare minimum with human interaction.
The human eye could easily spot very ill-clustered groups of nodes and change them to the
nearest and most suited cluster. This approach would cause some major problems in terms
of how much interaction the clustering requires and thereby increase resource costs of the
clustering approach. This approach is inherently what the thesis tries to circumvent, as a
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 4.2: Zoomed in view of an example of poor quality cluster solution in instance 5.
manual inspection of clusters removes the desired objectivity and automation of the task.
Namely, to increase the visual attractiveness of the generated routes.
Although, having practitioners determine clusters within a network could provide great
results, and should therefore not be neglected. Although, in practice this would likely
increase the operational costs of generating routes, and the value of visual attractiveness
would have to be reassessed.
4.3.1
Discussion of the cluster entries measurement
The cluster entries measurement originates from the fact that the mathematical model
formulated in Section 2.2 constrains the problem to a maximum of 1 cluster entry. This
automatically leads to a measurement where the entries to each cluster were monitored
and then a minimisation of this served as an evaluation of the objective function. That
ensures the constraint was still present in a relaxed form.
The problem with this evaluation, and the way the algorithm is built, is that it secures
no guarantee that the best found solution is the one where each of the clusters have their
entries minimised. As briefly explained in Section 2.6.4 two identical objective values can
consist of two different solutions. Such an example is given in the two instances:
[2, 3, 3, 1, 3] and [3, 3, 3, 2, 3]
(4.3)
There is a clear distinction between the two array however, they perform equally good
according to the objective in the framework. The question now arises whether this metric
is appropriate and if it could result in any flaws.
In regards to the ALNS and due to the acceptance criterion in Algorithm 6 a ∆obj = 0
would cause the newest solution to be accepted and thereby be the one carried over in
the next iteration of the algorithm. However, shown in the above example, this is no
insurance that the solutions converges towards a better solution, since it can alternate
between better and worse solutions after every iteration.
This could eventually become a problem regarding the convergence and consistency of the
proposed solutions. Imagine the best solution is found to be 2 cluster entries, but for the
metaheuristic to find that solution it takes a big factor of randomness since there is no
guarantee that the algorithm converges, meaning it could take an arbitrary amount of
iterations to reach the best solution. That said, the mean and standard deviations listed
in Table 3.3 could tell a different story. In broad terms there are two scenarios, namely
one where the mean is far from the best found, and one where the mean is close to. The
standard deviations are, as mentioned in Chapter 3, skewed due to the nature of the
62
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:71==
discrete values and ranges between [0.243; 0.491]. If the distribution of the occurrences
of the solutions were to be plotted, one could get an indication whether it looks like the
ALNS has trouble finding the best possible solution every time. Instance 3 and M2, which
are the two extremes in regards to the two described scenarios, are plotted as a histogram
and analysed.
(a) Instance 3
(b) Instance M2
Figure 4.3: Histograms of the occurrences of different solution values. The solutions can
only obtain integer values.
From the two histograms in Figure 4.3 the two scenarios are easily observed.
Where
instance 3’s best solution is 3, and seems to be an obtainable value in terms of the time
limit, the situation is quite different for instance M2. Here, the highlighted problem seems
to be present as it rarely finds the solution where the objective value is 3. Suggesting,
that this is a very small part of the solution space.
A possible solution to this problem could have been to re-formulate the objective function
and instead of minimising the maximum cluster entries, the objective could have been to
minimise the total entries across all clusters. This would result in the two aforementioned
examples being not equal to each other, but rather
[2, 3, 3, 1, 3] = 12 and [3, 3, 3, 2, 3] = 14
(4.4)
where there is a clear distinction between the two. This formulation could hypothetically
produce better solutions in terms of the mean and the standard deviation. This is because
the leap from 6 to 5, where 5 is the minimum for a network with 5 clusters, is smaller than
the leap from 2 to 1 in the original terminology. Namely, the explanation of how small
integer values influence the standard deviation.
This metric is not superior in all regards and one of the flaws is comparable with the
problem from the original objective function. This is, that there is no clear definition
whether an objective value represents a visually attractive solution or not, and how the
total cluster entries are distributed. Because one could have a situation where four clusters
are visually very attractive, but at the cost of having one cluster being very unattractive,
and what is then the best solution?
The one where most of the clusters are visually very attractive or all of the clusters are
visually less attractive? This could differ from instance to instance, and even person to
person due to the subjectivity of visual attractiveness.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:73==
5
Conclusion and Remarks
5.1
Future work
One topic that could be further investigated is the clustering technique. Recall, that the k-
medoids clustering method was chosen due to the ease of implementation and availability.
However, as it has been pointed out throughout the thesis, there are a few issues with
this method. Therefore, a topic of further investigation could be to find a more intelligent
method of clustering the instances. The idea being, that a better clustering method would
ensure solutions of even greater quality. This is supported by the fact, that the frameworks
perform well on the given data, however there might be improvements if using a better
clustering technique.
There might also be a possibility of combining the aforementioned with a different data
structure. Namely, it would be interesting to include road data while also altering the
clustering algorithm. The idea being, that if the clusters account for the names of the
neighbourhoods and roads it might generate better clusters.
Another direction that might be interesting to investigate, would be a combination of the
two approaches towards increasing visual attractiveness. Namely, the cluster entries and
time difference. This could be done in several ways. One way could be to include one of
the metrics as a constraint in the other algorithm e.g. setting a limit to the number of
cluster entries while optimising the time difference, and vice versa.
A second way could be to formulate a multi-objective function to optimise both objectives
at the same time. This would indeed be a more complicated task to formulate.
5.2
Conclusion
The thesis revolves around how, and if, one can devise a method that is capable of build-
ing ”nice-looking” order sequences for side-loader vehicles. Prior to building any sorts
of models which could produce such orders, a method of quantifying ”nice-looking” was
necessary.
By examining the literature, it was established that the ”nice-looking” component is re-
ferred to as visual attractiveness. This metric was found to be determined in many ways,
and the literature showed that while different approaches have been tested before, the
visual attractiveness of a given route is a very subjective topic.
One measure proposed in the literature is the measurement of compactness. With the
knowledge of compactness and the suggestions from AMCS it was determined, that clus-
tering the data was to be used as a tool to improve the visual attractiveness.
Following the quantification of visual attractiveness, the test instances were divided into
clusters using a k-medoids algorithm. Afterwards, a mathematical model was formulated,
implemented, and solved.
Furthermore, an adaptive large neighbourhood search framework was devised. This frame-
work included a distance optimising step followed by a optimisation of visual attractive-
ness. As time allowed it, an algorithm with another objective was devised. This objective
revolved around minimising the time between visiting two sides of a given road, and was
another metric to increase visual attractiveness.
The ALNS frameworks were able to produce solutions similar to those of AMCS. Further-
more, implementing the visual attractiveness metrics, the algorithms produced routes that
had upwards 73 % fewer cluster entries while only increasing the distance by a maximum
of 12 %.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
65
==PAGE:74==
Furthermore, an improvement of time difference was found to be upwards 93 % while only
increasing the total distance by a maximum of 12 %. Following the interpretation that a
lower number of cluster entries equals greater visual attractiveness, the results provide a
significant improvement.
Furthermore, an inspection of the plotted solutions confirmed that, the generated routes
prioritised finishing an entered area, before moving into another. This was apparent while
optimising for cluster entries and time difference alike.
This thesis shows that not only is visual attractiveness quantifiable, it is also a realistic
metric to implement within an ALNS framework. Furthermore, great results from different
tests on types of instances, has highlighted the applicability of the procedure. This is very
valuable from a practical perspective.
66
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
AMCS Group. AMCS web page. url: https://www.amcsgroup.com/.
[2]
M. Mourgaya and F. Vanderbeck. “Column generation based heuristic for tactical
planning in multi-period vehicle routing”. In: European Journal of Operational Re-
search 183.3 (2007), pp. 1028–1041. issn: 03772217. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2006.02.030.
[3]
Diego Gabriel Rossit et al. “Visual attractiveness in routing problems: A review”.
In: Computers and Operations Research 103 (2019), pp. 13–34. issn: 03050548. doi:
10.1016/j.cor.2018.10.012.
[4]
A Poot, G Kant, and A P M Wagelmans. “A savings based method for real-life vehi-
cle routing problems”. In: Journal of the Operational Research Society 53.1 (2002),
pp. 57–68. issn: 0160-5682. doi: 10.1057/palgrave.jors.2601252.
[5]
Kristian Milo Hauge. Personal Correspondence. 2021.
[6]
Laurence A. Wolsey. Integer Programming-Wiley (1998).pdf.
[7]
Stefan Irnich, Paolo Toth, and Daniele Vigo. “The family of vehicle routing prob-
lems”. In: Vehicle Routing: Problems, Methods, and Applicationsehicle Routing: Prob-
lems, Methods, and Applications (2014), pp. 1–33.
[8]
Sean Murphy. “Automated Garbage Collection”. In: (2014). url: https://eagledumpsterrental.
com/automated-garbage-collection.html.
[9]
M Sevaux and K Sörensen. “Hamiltonian paths in large clustered routing problems”.
In: Proceedings of the EU meeting 2008 workshop on Metaheuristics for Logistics
and Vehicle Routing, EU/ME’08 (2008), pp. 1–4.
[10]
Christof Defryn and Kenneth Sörensen. “A fast two-level variable neighborhood
search for the clustered vehicle routing problem”. In: Computers and Operations
Research 83 (2017), pp. 78–94. issn: 03050548. doi: 10.1016/j.cor.2017.02.007.
[11]
Andrei Horvat-Marc et al. “A decomposition-based method for solving the clustered
vehicle routing problem”. In: Logic Journal of the IGPL 26.1 (2018), pp. 83–95. issn:
13689894. doi: 10.1093/jigpal/jzx037.
[12]
Peter Matis. “Decision support system for solving the street routing problem”. In:
Transport 23.3 (2008), pp. 230–235. issn: 16483480. doi: 10.3846/1648-4142.2008.
23.230-235.
[13]
Miguel Constantino et al. “The mixed capacitated arc routing problem with non-
overlapping routes”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 244.2 (2015),
pp. 445–456. issn: 03772217. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2015.01.042.
[14]
Berthold Vöcking et al. Algorithms unplugged. 2011. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-15328-
0.
[15]
Augerat. CVRLIB. 1995. url: http://vrp.atd-lab.inf.puc-rio.br/index.php/en/.
[16]
J MacQueen. Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate observa-
tions. Tech. rep.
[17]
Leonard Kaufman and Peter J Rousseeuw. Finding Groups in Data An Introduction
to Cluster Analysis. Tech. rep. 1990.
[18]
M. Ester and H-P. Kriegel. “A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in
large spatial databases with noise.” In: ().
[19]
Jay April et al. “Enhancing business process management with simulation optimiza-
tion”. In: Proceedings - Winter Simulation Conference January (2006), pp. 642–649.
issn: 08917736. doi: 10.1109/WSC.2006.323141.
[20]
Fred Glover and Gary A. Kochenberger. Handbook of Metaheuristics International
Series in Operations Research & Management Science. 2003.
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
67
==PAGE:76==
[21]
Kenneth Sörensen, Marc Sevaux, and Fred Glover. “A history of metaheuristics”. In:
Handbook of Heuristics 2-2 (2018), pp. 791–808.
[22]
Stefan Ropke and David Pisinger. “An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic
for the pickup and delivery problem with time windows”. In: Transportation Science
40.4 (2006), pp. 455–472. issn: 15265447. doi: 10.1287/trsc.1050.0135.
[23]
Philip Kilby, Patrick Prosser, and Paul Shaw. “Guided Local Search for the Vehi-
cle Routing Problem”. In: Meta-Heuristics: Advances and Trends in Local Search
Paradigms for Optimization (1997), pp. 473–486.
[24]
Richard Martin Lusby et al. “An adaptive large neighborhood search procedure ap-
plied to the dynamic patient admission scheduling problem”. In: Artificial Intelligence
in Medicine 74 (2016), pp. 21–31. issn: 18732860. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2016.10.002.
[25]
David Pisinger and Stefan Ropke. “Large neighborhood search”. In: International
Series in Operations Research and Management Science 272 (2010), pp. 99–127.
issn: 08848289.
[26]
Daniel J. Rosenkrantz, Richard E. Stearns, and Philip M. Lewis II. “An Analysis
of Several Heuristics for the Traveling Salesman Problem”. In: SIAM Journal on
Computing 6.3 (1977). issn: 0097-5397. doi: 10.1137/0206041.
[27]
Matteo Fischetti, Juan José Salazar González, and Paolo Toth. “A branch-and-cut
algorithm for the symmetric generalized traveling salesman problem”. In: Operations
Research 45.3 (1997). issn: 0030364X. doi: 10.1287/opre.45.3.378.
[28]
Compute DTU. Central DTU HPC Cluster (LSF 10). 2022. url: https://www.hpc.
dtu.dk.
[29]
H.A. Eiselt and C.-L. Sandblom. Operations Research. Vol. 148. 2012, pp. 1–451.
isbn: 9780470611753. doi: 10.1002/9780470611753.
[30]
Stephen L. Smith and Frank Imeson. “GLNS: An effective large neighborhood search
heuristic for the Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem”. In: Computers and Op-
erations Research 87 (2017). issn: 03050548. doi: 10.1016/j.cor.2017.05.010.
68
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:77==
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
69
==PAGE:78==
A
Appendix
A.1
Parameter tuning data
A.1.1
Backwards order: γ , weights , α , T, distance optimisation
46232
46160
46137
46292
46417
334944
320947
319050
337196
319115
286783
267496
260974
265689
262471
46430
45736
46048
46431
46458
327705
314732
317941
325302
325272
260912
257560
278163
263647
271600
46097
46556
45149
45903
46105
323176
319667
322355
335858
335519
263486
269813
285665
289645
281854
46481
46036
45543
46265
46518
340567
325743
332764
334802
316684
290077
262259
272965
260582
290198
46151
45723
45370
45921
45970
320005
327703
320762
319820
317858
285233
274387
272931
289760
289641
45612
46176
46298
45827
46935
317935
335610
319807
321379
341414
284384
286963
261453
262172
291750
45377
46590
46175
46465
46223
320118
315625
321451
343600
335056
253719
282310
281993
284285
253897
46130
46452
45993
45298
46602
330105
329132
330136
336919
316153
283745
289131
258948
291370
290005
46169
46540
45960
46707
46619
323686
334231
328521
337615
318825
260796
262732
287755
273177
287596
46143
46264
46437
46460
46568
322290
337838
317581
325008
323479
291330
285296
277387
290445
262039
46315
46410
46407
46370
46634
335344
324958
341383
330953
333515
264302
263023
278273
272383
285209
46213
45534
45531
45748
46547
335240
338702
334599
317405
334380
272053
281354
265151
270746
272470
45830
46297
46496
45976
46320
325018
321023
324763
322550
318874
286416
290942
272857
284425
273329
45432
45770
46324
45998
46462
321183
316966
322653
322378
325776
265138
260693
283787
290386
290457
46500
46171
45482
46934
45959
322865
334153
319306
315650
318717
289422
260381
282198
261163
259980
46429
45642
46006
46251
46763
317368
340416
322170
332804
336058
290726
260332
263176
270940
260214
45822
46238
46270
46090
46883
328963
336985
336303
334269
323449
290584
263955
290630
273183
286536
45746
45741
46240
46188
46434
334504
324336
330150
318668
321013
276122
283992
285920
279215
283651
46719
45238
45401
45526
46381
321597
321888
322973
331895
320462
280849
275993
286168
272840
272602
46465
45950
46369
46391
46098
339864
332735
340462
318473
318609
282019
281142
265555
289568
278930
46091
46330
46239
45777
45536
323259
319416
325337
333284
332205
260970
287886
284912
292193
278609
45330
45532
46657
46038
45915
321149
327127
329118
332005
334106
282041
268998
260570
285038
286420
45939
45210
46127
46328
46751
316705
322729
337266
322290
337375
289295
260969
278094
288566
262096
46148
45355
46406
46683
45622
323051
321767
321981
322335
321539
288245
286001
288764
289548
270891
46030
45205
46242
46136
46205
351552
315615
318591
322979
337880
284293
291082
261233
260484
281694
46114
45713
45921
46888
46521
326008
324554
323823
320256
322393
285499
289818
289010
287550
264575
46289
45590
45739
46589
46308
323049
324834
320017
323677
320115
288810
290024
262086
260164
280666
45897
45539
46357
46847
46676
320303
325952
333868
342769
322677
290671
260768
290493
284695
261730
46175
46202
46281
46073
46651
312989
306957
324147
319490
323701
274416
273736
286474
289565
289699
46221
46263
46045
46308
46182
334435
323303
317904
318106
316225
287598
288796
261126
258440
280727
46234
46253
46366
46270
45784
336483
320685
322908
331158
320121
264347
285840
264092
290945
289464
46279
46388
46100
46651
45582
319994
327553
333304
322913
321511
285158
260842
261239
276015
286179
46925
46330
45590
46486
46477
329137
331259
319471
314688
333068
264135
287772
284379
276843
281302
46166
45296
46386
46407
46490
331548
333541
336747
337409
309458
260941
261320
264262
289936
264579
46256
46267
45325
46342
46463
315474
326189
325986
333354
330817
285599
272240
289606
290242
264351
46023
46156
46266
46709
46902
323474
337109
320706
319287
340518
291446
285745
280752
263840
279757
46693
46386
45511
46763
46729
314812
318367
337328
323672
314881
291505
280197
267659
280985
287207
45952
46497
45904
46876
46278
331898
321190
321745
315627
336992
286027
257329
285113
260092
284321
46052
46008
45595
46326
46613
318575
320090
335890
317845
318978
268424
288526
261658
268214
282999
46072
46695
46707
45830
46511
321295
317666
327133
320460
332327
287066
270218
291760
290049
291511
gns
46129.48 46010.98
46035
46284.2
46377.3
325941.7 325482.3
326460 326403.7
325677.9
279364.6
275196.5 275630.8 277975.6
277830.2
td
333.1086 423.6679 392.2765
378.6022 349.9906
8139.43 7599.696 6970.045 8003.324
8231.831
11374.92
11693.07 11096.66 11606.67
10922.71
min
45330
45205
45149
45298
45536
312989
306957
317581
314688
309458
253719
257329
258948
258440
253897
um
651435.7 646689.8 648125.8
650663.5 649885.3
um
19847.46 19716.43 18458.98
19988.6 19504.53
Tjek = 3
GAMMA
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
70
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:79==
45866
45881
46584
44812
46204
321056
342507
318297
333589
319313
289057
290168
263000
284604
278800
46309
46400
46151
46828
46504
328175
331910
335987
335004
322509
260392
278633
282782
285805
280640
45879
46684
46256
46438
45440
319929
317205
322665
330201
332260
282299
289239
262080
289838
288667
46233
46219
46208
45887
46410
331339
330902
318779
324614
317963
260064
284244
269249
286781
292065
45932
45956
45510
46686
45506
332622
317058
317149
322615
344353
290978
253089
289800
263999
286541
45789
45428
46629
45816
45658
318873
332292
322847
322833
331732
256622
292225
290328
260964
290435
46071
46114
46374
45863
46563
321729
322159
335598
322310
318647
291356
287930
281472
261916
286202
46602
46484
45799
46092
46359
340772
319393
322356
317306
321767
259906
286409
256449
286345
289770
46387
46475
46176
45889
45379
321495
337337
337764
331686
335096
263239
261118
261475
287026
265458
44952
46366
46427
46329
46289
322614
347197
317307
322361
338298
260660
254471
290763
283744
263170
46394
46237
45870
46446
46438
310396
321612
322127
314860
311807
278197
283468
290785
283725
272126
46394
45577
46194
46450
45478
313188
314889
318923
327040
309234
290275
277250
270783
280499
281493
45953
45823
45952
45970
46204
337618
316524
322209
319624
329065
291280
261259
264327
271455
281624
46521
46833
46776
46151
45417
321631
323931
339580
332815
325354
285438
284838
288649
289983
290528
46579
46091
46235
46553
46637
343745
317295
320208
319854
333202
281505
264081
263571
286521
290438
46466
46305
46499
45800
46510
335073
339877
321574
337675
333496
290560
287376
259831
276930
276854
46121
46283
46389
46591
46298
322721
322160
332628
326566
322103
279749
254148
260765
285953
260808
46396
46264
46146
46447
45310
323004
335242
338217
331852
323349
253232
290296
260976
262622
288575
45810
46217
45939
46955
45470
336082
322817
315102
336720
317683
287523
287435
261016
261200
262854
46676
45367
45655
45787
45941
331700
317888
329306
322003
334168
291614
285914
290060
279590
262309
45632
45630
46589
46146
46491
323028
324789
310243
342561
323344
290710
273620
273571
263316
278309
46570
45951
46474
46600
46573
333124
318059
312841
325788
326166
290848
278133
262083
262498
263196
46141
46235
45962
45666
46346
343116
331126
323999
323636
324537
292278
283238
281206
260634
291032
46307
46689
46541
46142
47166
336544
323800
335931
331051
323824
290818
285926
254838
276549
261908
46371
45874
46413
46413
46251
335839
323865
319733
341887
325066
260333
255671
291008
291170
261414
45573
46899
45584
46357
46917
334072
321774
334565
315552
340464
280959
278230
289960
275214
275547
46166
46174
45861
46399
46179
329813
333000
311944
329067
322538
291606
263595
275118
291665
290601
46090
46308
46576
46314
46577
336964
316965
321787
322709
323770
291631
280434
271074
255866
290006
46254
46382
45968
46345
46339
322547
322293
327616
317147
324834
257593
290850
291179
260183
287446
46470
45731
46724
46348
46435
317684
341087
322078
321431
320654
262148
284935
285869
255409
289723
46220
46269
46541
46004
45537
333496
336505
325848
319482
335880
270437
291122
279264
265253
260312
47023
45793
46091
45456
46259
321817
309480
321510
324545
311194
264487
280759
288718
278443
276640
46403
44846
46726
46456
45953
338772
326223
338791
330659
323147
279845
287092
281129
273555
292491
46587
46669
45784
45950
46307
332225
324312
326980
327748
333578
290256
258248
282701
281705
274150
46561
46199
46826
45769
46461
322984
328047
336046
318666
333984
290640
290581
287495
263723
286611
46100
46312
45063
46339
46204
317511
309491
323326
325253
323204
260206
291339
287681
260740
263282
46713
46066
46375
45458
45054
328559
323094
339499
324648
331358
276056
290412
287993
274327
289262
45760
45545
46251
46340
45423
321853
324803
318957
322180
322499
271472
264377
291135
282294
262104
46381
46149
46274
45780
46233
323643
323671
318325
323068
310437
284389
276727
261902
286711
272281
45646
45891
45771
46234
46283
318471
312673
335254
331430
324532
287528
290354
289707
264759
265912
gns
46207.45
46115.4 46204.08
46157.65 46125.08
327645.6 325131.3 325347.4 326250.9
325660.2
278204.7
278730.9 276794.8 274837.9
278039.6
td
384.2275 414.3089 385.5667
410.2812
484.885
8285.617 8890.291 8354.718 6761.041
8062.959
13198.19
12401.18
12473.1 11358.78
11437.83
min
44952
44846
45063
44812
45054
310396
309480
310243
314860
309234
253232
253089
254838
255409
260312
um
652057.7 649977.6 648346.3
647246.4 649824.9
um
21868.03 21705.78 21213.39
18530.1 19985.67
Tjek = 4
Weights
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
71
==PAGE:80==
46710
46268
46436
46364
46194
321056
342507
318297
333589
319313
289057
290168
263000
284604
278800
45873
47198
46532
46449
46068
328175
331910
335987
335004
322509
260392
278633
282782
285805
280640
46100
46327
46662
45820
45337
319929
317205
322665
330201
332260
282299
289239
262080
289838
288667
46689
46057
46772
46202
45967
331339
330902
318779
324614
317963
260064
284244
269249
286781
292065
47210
46360
46617
46870
46080
332622
317058
317149
322615
344353
290978
253089
289800
263999
286541
46205
46809
46330
46300
46661
318873
332292
322847
322833
331732
256622
292225
290328
260964
290435
46837
46262
46643
46489
46626
321729
322159
335598
322310
318647
291356
287930
281472
261916
286202
46948
46745
47218
45463
46347
340772
319393
322356
317306
321767
259906
286409
256449
286345
289770
46357
45881
47081
46571
46217
321495
337337
337764
331686
335096
263239
261118
261475
287026
265458
47041
47067
45635
46474
45963
322614
347197
317307
322361
338298
260660
254471
290763
283744
263170
45852
46742
46143
46467
46143
310396
321612
322127
314860
311807
278197
283468
290785
283725
272126
47022
47449
45932
46342
46187
313188
314889
318923
327040
309234
290275
277250
270783
280499
281493
46770
45785
45970
45331
46429
337618
316524
322209
319624
329065
291280
261259
264327
271455
281624
46637
46515
46554
46807
46594
321631
323931
339580
332815
325354
285438
284838
288649
289983
290528
47268
45247
47061
46337
46114
343745
317295
320208
319854
333202
281505
264081
263571
286521
290438
46671
46863
46069
46759
45880
335073
339877
321574
337675
333496
290560
287376
259831
276930
276854
46243
46599
46603
46357
46509
322721
322160
332628
326566
322103
279749
254148
260765
285953
260808
46447
46460
47010
45959
46334
323004
335242
338217
331852
323349
253232
290296
260976
262622
288575
46287
46766
44927
46538
45909
336082
322817
315102
336720
317683
287523
287435
261016
261200
262854
46475
46818
46713
46455
46522
331700
317888
329306
322003
334168
291614
285914
290060
279590
262309
46990
47251
46650
46521
46280
323028
324789
310243
342561
323344
290710
273620
273571
263316
278309
46654
45824
46261
45718
45325
333124
318059
312841
325788
326166
290848
278133
262083
262498
263196
46600
46669
46756
46359
46194
343116
331126
323999
323636
324537
292278
283238
281206
260634
291032
45896
46675
46574
46094
46563
336544
323800
335931
331051
323824
290818
285926
254838
276549
261908
47049
46068
46648
45847
45700
335839
323865
319733
341887
325066
260333
255671
291008
291170
261414
47082
46440
46001
46348
46400
334072
321774
334565
315552
340464
280959
278230
289960
275214
275547
46724
46558
46718
46623
46273
329813
333000
311944
329067
322538
291606
263595
275118
291665
290601
47486
45706
46308
46171
46163
336964
316965
321787
322709
323770
291631
280434
271074
255866
290006
46805
46714
46198
46350
46084
322547
322293
327616
317147
324834
257593
290850
291179
260183
287446
46227
46508
46837
46218
46119
317684
341087
322078
321431
320654
262148
284935
285869
255409
289723
46662
46434
46328
46661
46153
333496
336505
325848
319482
335880
270437
291122
279264
265253
260312
46032
46625
46699
45954
46394
321817
309480
321510
324545
311194
264487
280759
288718
278443
276640
45808
45950
46596
46466
46476
338772
326223
338791
330659
323147
279845
287092
281129
273555
292491
46168
46636
45777
45101
46340
332225
324312
326980
327748
333578
290256
258248
282701
281705
274150
46896
45958
46137
46194
45783
322984
328047
336046
318666
333984
290640
290581
287495
263723
286611
46785
47218
46771
46737
46221
317511
309491
323326
325253
323204
260206
291339
287681
260740
263282
47804
45735
44806
46178
46551
328559
323094
339499
324648
331358
276056
290412
287993
274327
289262
47324
46211
46480
46311
46279
321853
324803
318957
322180
322499
271472
264377
291135
282294
262104
47328
46152
46041
46578
45683
323643
323671
318325
323068
310437
284389
276727
261902
286711
272281
46199
45641
46350
45936
46463
318471
312673
335254
331430
324532
287528
290354
289707
264759
265912
gns
46654.03 46429.78
46396.1
46267.98 46188.13
327645.6 325131.3 325347.4 326250.9
325660.2
278204.7
278730.9 276794.8 274837.9
278039.6
td
477.4191 487.0847 499.5729
385.4046
312.907
8285.617 8890.291 8354.718 6761.041
8062.959
13198.19
12401.18
12473.1 11358.78
11437.83
min
45808
45247
44806
45101
45325
310396
309480
310243
314860
309234
253232
253089
254838
255409
260312
um
652504.3 650291.9 648538.3
647356.7
649888
um
21961.23 21778.56 21327.39
18505.22 19813.69
Tjek = 4
Alpha
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
72
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:81==
46553
46336
45910
46436
46153
328896
336963
322418
309417
333806
286549
277243
271359
285600
260394
46301
46343
46690
46508
45872
325016
324820
332685
327860
341685
263757
283929
290074
280756
290098
46568
46613
45345
46114
46541
322804
335812
316832
323900
311226
291560
285185
290512
283396
268462
46297
45479
45800
46164
45883
327782
319961
324103
341549
320294
285511
280246
290264
289899
289340
46187
46399
45941
46048
45767
323115
325450
339398
321913
322539
277500
261922
290086
293206
280260
46333
45798
46384
46199
45375
335358
335769
331916
332380
331112
289782
285978
262183
281697
264277
46927
46475
45399
46428
46779
320341
334764
334026
320906
309829
262791
281966
273783
257683
271825
46334
45849
45439
46481
45425
324480
337866
321831
321594
342814
285161
264116
291430
281781
290930
45522
46330
46355
46034
46316
322377
336351
324307
337581
317636
285283
289731
288263
261836
261205
46069
46474
46741
46456
46011
338428
318007
316980
336924
325839
258195
291708
290032
285952
281336
46200
45854
46124
46155
46510
325398
324019
313297
322012
321448
290194
290468
261006
263819
264822
45629
46324
45743
46155
46813
322468
322429
326562
315913
324502
286880
278142
280135
284557
286102
46327
46345
46595
46165
45211
321919
314351
326959
324882
331535
288225
255373
290728
260920
276337
46356
46063
46235
46521
45550
331925
338556
335498
327401
330880
263047
289598
275587
269751
260120
46617
46167
46824
46177
46441
314413
321947
340014
330579
336259
259779
280443
289786
290370
270361
45560
46278
46546
46165
46342
331792
325272
326758
337658
319507
289998
261144
278329
257285
280394
46486
45731
46693
45879
46443
322653
322273
339002
336600
315081
288344
262038
286314
275150
262647
46433
46328
45950
46284
46514
352681
340041
337083
334115
322571
281056
267207
254635
289625
290292
45999
46218
46254
46358
46760
326795
333558
322406
337996
323693
290845
290924
264783
260370
264424
45820
46364
45610
46036
46721
325897
320224
321392
320174
341542
289828
290592
262259
290600
290964
46621
45810
45202
45952
46098
340835
316942
320567
321594
317771
285255
285140
264743
288681
289348
46111
46207
46541
46204
45893
322025
323773
326016
321683
329150
283590
289972
279441
290720
290214
46362
45672
46112
46227
46051
324201
320418
330665
322295
333324
288886
254801
270676
260583
290451
46806
46361
46214
46552
46826
327845
318054
320008
319119
340109
275629
272681
290446
289407
261883
45627
46390
45457
45063
46860
336231
319255
323846
333302
324757
289276
284885
290201
289294
262086
46192
46874
46047
45437
46099
328681
324562
328266
316841
338391
259294
260724
275040
284425
288940
46169
46351
45855
45874
46026
323592
333610
321480
323209
317987
291170
277712
289297
261148
289450
46192
46614
46354
46071
46655
331718
336198
334061
328874
325128
287550
281799
290219
268163
283196
45874
46408
46618
46244
46620
319426
325729
321024
339742
323745
267080
289838
286523
288904
275080
46448
46267
46198
45640
45718
329771
335680
326790
319187
318462
283713
271160
260004
290098
282035
46188
46518
46269
46409
46525
326756
344512
323166
329738
317921
279113
290096
291099
261899
268546
46257
46212
46398
45696
46104
320261
333811
323160
321887
332569
258606
289408
275876
269497
260484
46039
45845
46472
46280
46918
340422
317348
320707
333947
318407
257852
261158
289230
259604
263013
45762
46266
46022
46388
46495
334978
321520
312955
331545
316673
265850
290431
263588
269760
262386
46391
45867
46970
45660
46866
339146
321138
314599
322378
321561
263517
286496
284919
257500
280707
45985
46019
46526
45951
46385
333091
322391
322783
319332
323615
274609
261055
272428
291330
289158
46487
46283
46431
45862
46678
321402
333569
334342
317118
324118
280753
282259
277463
290348
254954
46433
46557
46118
46495
46441
333605
321535
321859
340765
322020
261884
258486
291216
286026
273612
46238
46236
45658
46086
46483
336491
327285
318506
335476
320270
291357
290399
289932
265345
261944
46353
46292
46793
45455
45912
328410
329088
323329
327092
328160
264230
291668
286522
262553
260524
gns
46226.33 46220.43 46170.83
46107.73
46277
328585.6 327371.3 325539.9
327162
325448.4
278087.5
278453 280010.3 276738.5
274815
td
320.3594
289.779 445.0993
327.8609 444.1651
7415.569 7746.389 7080.695 7934.969
8288.909
11963.35
12094.23 11195.53 12691.88
11922.36
min
45522
45479
45202
45063
45211
314413
314351
312955
309417
309829
257852
254801
254635
257285
254954
um
652899.4 652044.7
651721
650008.1 646540.4
um
19699.28 20130.39 18721.33
20954.71 20655.43
Temperatur
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
73
==PAGE:82==
74
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:83==
A.1.2
Forward order: T , α , weights , γ, distance optimisation
45768
46065
45501
45775
46073
336075
322517
317603
323954
338318
261894
281535
269388
290189
273680
46649
46434
46592
46635
46668
319387
322599
324859
324708
317254
260311
279260
260646
291109
261686
46370
46162
45902
46330
46925
317537
322246
320081
340282
340406
284893
261865
290042
271965
261639
46174
46735
46467
46973
46449
319931
318755
342959
320491
332006
285823
290450
282058
290795
285323
46208
46036
46667
45602
46614
330256
338732
321799
341628
324104
260794
286970
271770
274376
289364
45273
46552
46462
45775
46633
321945
319429
324127
325182
328985
260759
290775
289624
264432
287055
46208
45627
46093
46079
46884
327470
331921
339621
322990
326628
279132
291251
269844
262418
287270
45705
46536
46660
46168
46145
322422
317741
330715
320251
325228
262956
290036
279555
261135
290562
46363
46852
46795
46468
47329
320576
328554
334934
319383
324268
273308
287593
285440
277881
279487
46297
46101
46769
46209
46483
318794
323591
323909
332049
317139
290379
291008
286641
262718
291409
46284
45354
46592
45757
45447
324738
310847
336505
334240
323709
286414
290312
260870
288850
270337
46383
45807
46472
46602
46662
324724
323682
321969
331492
333422
281933
284020
273063
264972
261889
46204
46339
46593
46433
46706
322021
317708
332223
316769
310024
263258
260450
284931
290353
285382
46140
46821
46150
46973
45714
333352
320095
321051
321497
315986
290750
287808
290499
279868
291438
45864
45006
46065
46728
46470
327410
337079
337837
327617
316861
279556
286401
285019
277580
271703
46800
46454
46208
46071
46075
320472
325376
321369
326515
312751
282463
286833
262382
289486
259643
46077
46374
45403
46735
46082
318148
321102
335790
324127
341556
272987
285833
276592
290362
273749
46119
46465
46267
46290
46128
321957
333512
334295
318482
341630
282739
261890
253867
288598
261568
45905
46273
46426
46310
46502
335329
321652
319149
340689
322455
291534
282629
290321
279341
269735
46620
46190
46836
45744
46679
323962
319742
327721
336119
313228
272834
276074
289896
261536
288118
46386
46215
46626
46839
46530
326814
338773
322140
333522
323750
283049
289782
261325
291550
281880
46657
46085
46679
47035
46234
324557
354916
332305
324248
321503
260796
279581
287187
261273
281170
46578
46501
46247
45892
46509
333495
331577
310518
322489
338188
270828
264487
286227
289263
260889
46193
46336
45998
45804
47087
333862
317609
327631
352378
320565
261326
291417
265070
278843
287119
46465
46299
46642
46208
45792
316881
319439
318113
327952
324425
261319
284409
264317
253577
286327
46588
46108
46167
46280
46677
335287
319364
320954
335516
321202
289297
258330
281208
286676
289407
46740
46423
46827
46496
46338
318730
321082
331399
323674
316138
282580
286043
284878
261802
265301
45868
46264
46381
46824
45957
326166
322399
326685
321577
339162
273288
290767
266670
289872
272016
46397
46370
45841
45924
46515
322150
318180
321991
338429
338921
284807
285911
289708
287533
287368
45265
46582
46764
46746
46085
326249
324123
337363
324598
334072
289577
278725
274904
271747
289480
46032
46060
46103
46697
46308
318602
323113
320753
319105
340690
273715
288998
289476
264403
290952
46897
46573
46062
46440
45918
320997
321313
333298
319515
329617
277368
271734
263451
264661
274220
46161
46101
46116
45777
46595
322152
309586
325812
332834
322163
290598
288169
263267
285776
283298
46254
46324
46676
46617
47090
322253
328247
316007
322371
322920
288350
263714
271322
290102
282441
46365
45826
46148
46040
46692
318666
335960
322511
321664
327305
288517
260874
286312
291074
283410
46910
45702
46294
46471
46732
322600
321176
331610
336461
322090
291718
267488
283123
279473
259615
46030
45728
46252
46744
46609
320606
320494
340381
326550
324350
279238
253657
283876
290488
265830
46577
46165
46845
46559
46943
339667
333351
331451
318015
321385
291887
283193
263504
257502
289851
46840
46258
45865
46620
46289
322464
320349
320457
335857
319049
261253
284253
288124
284876
289898
46861
45152
46690
46826
46331
325896
321507
320985
341079
325782
281316
276503
289652
270483
260267
gns
46286.88 46181.38 46353.58
46362.4 46447.48
324615
324486
327022 328157.5
325980.9
277638.6
280025.7 277401.2 277723.5
278044.4
td
388.841 403.4798 357.5122
398.0929 391.9228
5794.214 8326.352 7595.935 8239.934
8627.94
10917.26
11104.51
11055.3 12049.78
11169.71
min
45265
45006
45403
45602
45447
316881
309586
310518
316769
310024
260311
253657
253867
253577
259615
um
648540.5
650693 650776.8
652243.3 650472.8
um
17100.31 19834.34 19008.75
20687.8 20189.57
Tjek = 1
Temperatur
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
75
==PAGE:84==
46041
46227
46638
46603
46084
324929
317689
335281
322922
327036
264324
292568
291020
292280
290640
45679
45637
46381
46175
46598
347876
324117
323623
334434
322651
292547
286611
283510
266540
261896
46118
46292
45849
45877
46064
327463
330747
325277
338089
322027
268406
291447
279413
262702
255717
46414
45799
46380
46601
46396
333593
316208
322533
333587
322227
291672
290834
290676
290660
289952
46479
46056
46233
46568
46458
333340
335155
325781
309927
338627
274755
262728
291299
291401
287432
46442
46049
46304
46252
46336
345231
323412
323885
323776
322543
292659
292818
290747
287636
292048
46425
46432
46779
46444
46266
327158
323043
324057
340117
313352
292612
274653
262008
280839
284932
46337
46528
46340
46830
46560
324109
319441
322473
324571
339346
290735
288520
284194
286393
274096
46721
46495
45917
46677
46547
324706
318791
331428
334360
325987
291389
282512
286381
263091
262037
46570
45469
46771
46210
45414
323959
323079
324896
320859
332425
275227
290209
260302
285472
260004
46343
45849
46190
46241
46518
348114
338818
328790
340127
323479
285351
291316
287939
288383
284989
46602
46313
46624
46519
46496
323059
320047
322280
320060
318498
284361
286753
261868
259787
285887
46596
46579
46360
46302
46584
337689
322988
339398
327690
341109
279354
284715
290351
281297
264653
45764
46847
46305
45763
46581
330145
340289
323038
328034
342582
288701
286834
260978
273758
290988
46643
46828
46754
46303
46775
340707
341376
320727
327421
329772
288563
277051
275448
275318
264869
45901
46411
45889
45902
46472
339390
328547
334980
311110
324452
266285
291713
280645
289940
289340
46613
46409
46566
45788
45442
353139
335706
323731
335019
318432
291184
292617
286593
262045
279881
46399
46120
46723
45956
46424
335289
342167
322894
322087
333802
269106
263508
276632
261240
262587
46454
46424
46761
45928
46642
326344
329610
322416
332690
327254
285779
269374
261326
283236
271818
45604
46874
46653
46252
46357
326064
346972
321359
337772
335072
292066
265766
284951
260930
291051
46289
46545
46231
45576
45930
342036
337203
331404
325798
318324
291756
288577
285232
265283
287010
46663
46215
45636
46574
46487
339968
317359
322662
322456
329098
291715
291189
285352
261425
272873
46305
46144
46263
46112
46494
338646
322950
339894
326905
322781
292782
286577
289564
289947
263511
46255
46484
46859
46171
46961
326814
324726
343841
333607
324245
265057
271195
281875
262134
286975
46411
46444
46011
46149
46264
324147
330219
339402
338336
322777
291429
278761
286535
278928
262406
46821
45634
46396
46551
45683
323527
323689
323333
332834
333847
289158
283691
291470
260970
290327
46477
46681
45987
46327
46328
338499
324737
314364
331593
325322
263994
259516
262158
260715
287993
46476
46137
46454
46705
46592
323162
343036
324745
333248
336056
292445
289721
274171
261488
279735
46359
46355
46421
45930
46405
330360
322335
341862
325505
323043
272492
263299
260108
258027
284361
46521
46403
46334
46441
46455
325961
330917
334686
322899
328837
276027
260454
256139
284982
271800
46536
46292
46170
45761
46336
338032
330665
330261
318144
341161
270988
287355
261606
260886
270505
46134
46395
46587
45842
46129
327434
320971
339029
324828
333188
276808
286219
262486
286732
264089
45848
46753
46488
46337
46285
329765
325168
332924
321931
318613
292276
264463
267053
287292
271553
46479
46270
46325
46071
46020
325839
321546
323162
326125
317290
291160
282986
274739
285216
260522
46495
46452
45884
45591
46090
348139
332540
333296
333964
337147
285172
261598
289832
291136
275629
46589
46537
46284
46690
46676
340860
335438
341809
324120
314565
292382
277239
273522
262048
281883
46594
46634
46477
46296
46407
322445
336985
338593
334591
327037
261682
263998
282718
286076
288728
46529
46572
46745
46007
46615
335799
329110
322499
334878
321633
282321
291166
279179
258727
285761
46752
46051
45714
46196
46756
327167
327743
320659
324118
323677
285026
286291
290394
291299
270980
46487
46604
46491
46158
46407
331606
319331
326440
321945
320550
264324
280512
281047
283082
265842
gns
46379.13
46331 46354.35
46216.9 46358.35
332812.8 328371.8 328592.8 328061.9
326996.6
282351.8
280433.9 278036.5 275483.5
276682.5
td
286.3604 325.9002 308.4876
317.4281 322.1773
8376.375 8021.991
7421.98 7252.302
7636.064
10480.43
11036.01 11353.25 12542.44
11281.16
min
45604
45469
45636
45576
45414
322445
316208
314364
309927
313352
261682
259516
256139
258027
255717
um
661543.6 655136.6 652983.7
649762.4 650037.5
um
19143.16
19383.9 19083.72
20112.17
19239.4
TEMPERATUR ITERATION 2
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
76
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:85==
46525
46085
46976
46756
46277
335361
344313
332973
322732
335772
279736
263563
261928
291220
263939
46074
45533
46433
46710
46066
342007
343438
339304
337976
338622
278579
263795
278459
284462
287278
46327
45519
47008
46359
45765
327403
312010
335812
322584
326614
289844
268934
263221
260990
272520
46063
47133
46422
46547
45521
331122
352568
317102
334822
340906
268934
268995
287806
281146
261844
46366
46249
46389
45881
46296
324202
348823
332817
337466
334977
282868
270164
287562
281012
288347
46904
47115
46573
46597
46567
326040
321295
341104
316378
333178
288889
289087
289600
282823
263513
46883
45818
45839
46378
46249
344798
351971
321760
320119
321852
275701
288330
264253
270976
264475
46532
47378
46181
46330
46094
310331
340899
315041
336502
339806
257377
287650
281708
292171
290542
46061
46661
47341
45955
46462
326444
326464
319740
316789
322120
289955
266783
275819
289698
290292
47193
47505
46554
46166
46288
342091
320272
332020
321266
333296
268174
288422
288700
289831
261385
46602
47509
46743
45483
46665
332178
321825
328301
322207
333640
269019
288157
283140
286302
283778
45598
45869
45941
45887
46297
316120
322556
338117
335399
327072
288393
267969
270615
276704
261744
47060
46326
46127
45946
46862
307058
338869
337313
321131
334432
276916
264000
287898
262760
285407
47468
47333
46316
46117
46845
336926
335843
317037
324024
321907
256762
289209
260473
275847
286015
47267
46750
46667
46541
47008
331483
340662
343566
325856
322955
295740
289311
280941
264833
288187
47351
46829
45938
46607
46233
340216
342775
319109
329839
312035
259145
275951
276747
290374
264343
46934
46617
46610
46497
46355
316868
328956
329665
331655
328860
289653
267369
258800
261687
261072
46172
47108
47288
46583
46854
329776
322285
317698
335879
322645
263475
270832
289031
286785
290215
46514
45903
46647
46560
46505
330673
343762
334800
320300
320381
280533
293929
279075
279352
260669
46030
45743
46577
46194
45940
322935
343922
336312
324903
335676
281740
288148
286038
264015
279788
47178
47111
45841
46635
46528
338934
325396
328738
320356
335794
270839
288390
278947
278045
286615
47198
46047
47390
46543
46145
331116
317747
317882
322436
328314
287436
284617
283160
264474
289518
46881
47151
46590
46435
46201
317516
336271
330474
338220
319069
282376
268934
278177
282174
260697
46673
45164
46351
45847
46280
334761
338193
336774
324053
333342
293427
283435
263221
286175
265248
46878
46755
46459
45525
46681
340511
341640
338627
335760
323103
275340
261855
287290
291578
284865
46772
46530
46486
46458
46535
340687
346130
317772
320331
316338
289571
267292
288700
261134
272912
46381
44902
46415
46657
46533
334415
324720
326062
319962
340237
288274
295028
270945
287308
285189
46600
46540
47059
46420
46739
330692
322178
334164
319243
335940
273913
286744
289719
277413
263390
46507
46878
46248
45405
46476
327096
332592
345181
324034
333238
265357
265381
269056
286757
290395
47444
45509
46826
46370
45952
340395
335979
334419
321317
335310
277004
282218
273441
288491
287334
47535
46625
45349
46313
45972
333116
317483
319317
320645
317398
259300
286328
265517
262000
288171
46521
45403
46299
46059
46818
338587
316708
329660
327253
319168
278055
287442
286990
261316
273323
45428
47188
46306
46696
46274
344329
350023
330279
320965
332491
293938
272156
260256
254360
257840
46821
47479
46486
46558
45891
340673
323146
321503
320952
335225
288244
269733
266851
261924
270519
47097
46579
47209
46087
45861
318011
319637
327757
331540
310616
281770
288535
256463
290410
286577
46498
46939
46659
46348
46269
342459
338809
339541
316488
325000
270120
265797
278928
280917
287207
46455
46431
46767
46635
47231
336264
346897
327982
333684
322604
282667
287330
287192
264812
262428
46708
45623
45584
46073
46536
319926
322265
333994
318782
332257
288316
272171
287780
264847
291110
45992
46907
46757
45729
46216
321342
342005
340628
329390
322293
271409
260591
264376
286397
291215
46792
46851
46544
46052
45882
329872
333002
337892
319353
331306
273984
280172
287022
279943
283481
gns
46657.08 46489.88 46504.88
46273.48 46354.23
330868.4 333358.2 330205.9 325564.8
328394.7
278319.3
277618.7 276896.1 277086.6
277084.7
td
491.0505 693.7082 446.2901
354.1087 361.7443
9492.033 11326.36
8385.33 6750.226
7867.921
10614.4
10602.95 10544.02 11359.47
11921.5
min
45428
44902
45349
45405
45521
307058
312010
315041
316378
310616
256762
260591
256463
254360
257840
um
655844.8 657466.8 653606.9
648924.8 651833.6
um
20597.48 22623.02 19375.64
18463.81 20151.16
Tjek = 4 
Alpha
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
77
==PAGE:86==
45287
46082
45847
45548
46386
332693
323842
324147
321857
319648
285893
272304
288978
271437
275716
46237
46509
45756
46144
46064
322900
321631
329942
318869
336209
282424
289288
260753
284609
285888
46197
45983
46210
46435
45646
321538
336590
336677
324526
334905
289378
283588
266085
262355
273464
46129
45973
46433
46052
46203
322158
321239
324565
321258
334518
285905
288172
282244
259924
289654
45829
45534
46449
46214
46298
322560
321551
335482
336286
327442
290394
287420
284287
265180
257904
45059
46382
46451
46281
45712
335388
327104
337863
333088
331683
262089
291406
260508
282432
262436
45887
46073
46556
45798
45814
321885
322080
322612
322017
321728
287812
280443
270950
258639
254768
46451
46715
46554
46330
45872
343147
316211
331599
322244
326258
284664
275351
291447
289474
276386
46548
45920
46399
46089
45957
337631
331344
326180
327624
325712
278793
287330
262642
290968
260630
45614
45933
46505
46092
46190
326906
327108
335452
338556
324501
290482
264390
260968
260068
269954
46041
46214
46277
46458
46441
333379
335196
325442
336340
320863
283153
286991
287898
277591
255326
45912
46266
46235
46029
45907
326248
320038
332148
338446
324860
285004
277835
290877
270585
261914
46540
46869
46406
46240
46203
318311
320332
320021
323186
323053
260750
276866
263920
285220
291492
46095
45989
45958
46357
46338
321932
321603
335895
324723
318328
289710
284982
279873
273935
281364
45835
46494
46198
46557
46157
320070
317076
311901
323211
320758
291192
288413
257730
292318
267813
46421
46182
45529
45842
46414
334356
333718
325059
333748
338242
290523
290546
268422
274752
262633
46502
46416
45982
45444
46253
320325
314626
335163
329418
315030
261937
290139
276252
292430
290254
46378
45959
46256
45840
46113
331060
321391
321274
316695
331941
264624
282225
261416
257643
285159
45579
46576
45890
46693
46161
340357
321469
332363
316215
326334
281657
286747
278450
281814
290204
46057
45292
45954
45697
45918
333908
327250
322398
322878
332946
292192
280578
284322
271795
291160
46286
45212
46097
46156
46814
323039
325072
316358
334179
335303
290938
282338
288816
274325
285996
45519
46401
45992
45984
46407
323179
321702
339696
341566
326264
275749
291158
261878
290174
262392
46082
46082
45754
46238
46137
327364
325893
314371
331468
334324
284867
258066
261670
264008
282318
45312
46344
46207
46294
46378
324741
322113
320415
322054
336543
281281
291850
261996
285617
290920
45896
46098
45838
45877
46053
319939
333671
319915
321381
332629
287727
261974
289798
261856
290484
45911
46368
46607
46203
45632
311278
321503
319751
338708
316058
290979
282818
260727
268635
290990
45234
46417
45399
46388
46166
324463
326527
341719
327855
321809
279759
286934
285688
281881
288138
46312
46850
45625
46520
46266
327191
321773
319176
319179
328814
261598
257397
286965
274302
290205
45974
46300
46517
45847
45912
324078
324699
330001
323901
324742
286721
271292
286399
289328
279391
46599
46176
46752
45981
46239
320588
335860
314712
324085
322885
291673
284791
278405
277629
262122
45730
45699
46678
46714
46035
322255
322295
334356
333513
321679
282447
264275
291145
291562
253125
46295
46143
46645
46472
46830
327487
321997
342086
330977
320170
265472
290174
287832
263820
270892
45704
45309
45709
46646
45897
325291
341987
334633
317449
327932
286169
265007
281061
264910
267655
46510
45739
46039
46330
46905
323077
323351
335108
323310
323134
262046
262649
287925
285771
262029
45349
45839
46211
45936
46570
333955
323121
332079
325742
323613
285342
271080
285501
273053
289475
46277
46360
46149
46113
46657
326571
334812
329458
323782
332254
284746
278232
260742
292042
261340
46185
45911
46567
44963
46404
321625
326366
322305
321562
327780
289696
262856
272341
264994
261306
45995
45920
45953
45721
45291
331028
320089
327518
334547
322432
282220
255024
261838
285867
291418
46154
46734
45940
46146
45946
319550
325514
321058
319884
323265
289919
275088
288818
283585
260198
45479
46722
46273
46353
46197
323577
320797
321456
333965
316643
262072
265738
289927
290182
284668
gns
45985.03 46149.63 46169.93
46125.55 46169.58
326175.7 325013.5 327558.9 327007.3
326330.8
281499.9
278093.9 276187.4 276667.8
275229.5
td
402.3127 399.1974 335.6754
352.0825 330.5055
6495.567 5992.406 7886.702 6886.609
6104.526
10194.29
11016.68
11902
11127.2
13120.18
min
45059
45212
45399
44963
45291
311278
314626
311901
316215
315030
260750
255024
257730
257643
253125
um
653660.7
649257 649916.1
649800.6 647729.9
um
17092.17 17408.28 20124.37
18365.9 19555.21
Weights
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
78
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:87==
45974
46018
46386
46331
45962
325155
321817
330611
321936
328352
286531
270684
262411
275027
291250
46216
46379
46310
46599
46400
339576
326627
338200
315045
335749
266219
285955
287549
289588
288678
45744
46328
46450
46208
46425
328306
333974
322861
322715
316652
262394
274208
285491
285332
262959
46353
46461
46050
46330
46430
321637
324976
332938
330453
318351
260877
266317
283630
264327
290991
46430
46083
46382
45322
46236
331658
318933
335182
333682
323491
287801
258356
288624
261256
261650
46329
45775
45836
45475
46532
334416
321604
320148
321648
324638
263321
286847
288042
280460
292368
46336
46002
46250
46282
46497
324482
330067
330968
334012
325058
286824
261200
269259
284910
290585
46073
45857
46192
46246
46645
334468
338068
328357
332290
332134
275325
280102
285708
285410
277487
46012
46449
46361
46400
46436
320466
317988
347848
337464
320887
288812
260286
262525
265597
291144
45484
46483
46052
46112
46701
327872
319779
323811
317705
325816
292165
284455
284362
265348
291016
45329
46777
46138
46341
45464
315688
320517
329474
319164
332239
261545
263273
272238
262674
276181
46049
45962
46685
46481
45574
322033
321137
318111
334710
326992
259706
286916
263797
281199
288277
46516
46398
45746
46251
46505
328735
333760
324882
322039
321960
269122
286908
283071
252283
288962
46389
45778
45944
45452
46380
327179
336846
323907
331686
338873
263026
261690
290886
263410
276928
46385
46140
46410
45878
45641
321543
329140
335744
337704
344790
284031
263211
268214
272063
263168
46242
45597
46250
46456
46841
322991
321041
313586
323769
337644
290789
292575
259774
289760
263281
44956
46098
45944
46240
46361
332730
326927
315381
320256
331920
288294
278037
263780
290120
273438
46289
46275
46430
46289
46878
320460
326131
322216
321496
319523
264623
284879
291040
261148
290760
46042
45656
46260
46024
45978
321705
318066
338358
332309
322056
263078
271496
260246
290335
264766
45871
46528
46333
46167
46277
335345
336017
328726
338914
319058
279154
287479
292169
285372
291606
45937
46212
46388
46043
46403
334141
328787
335021
322114
324201
286869
262708
279406
272157
262178
46372
46326
46803
46649
46613
325225
333669
320533
323672
321347
275751
280171
258819
262183
284116
46146
45819
46321
45950
45998
320716
319699
314045
335669
318089
261411
291565
262489
261082
282846
45934
45673
46648
46319
46130
329839
321601
333560
321970
319083
261596
290792
288679
264833
277969
45614
46413
45857
45463
45748
314688
321426
322922
329901
327405
286003
290736
290184
255159
261421
46085
45950
45926
46461
46364
335149
319760
323778
334731
322686
291015
289081
289202
287077
284372
45623
45022
46561
45906
46728
326919
317366
330873
318790
320105
258698
284029
261645
264454
261265
46250
45709
46416
46422
46579
324125
322575
318836
321773
324532
266155
289971
290564
290797
269744
45981
45898
46329
46103
46792
340999
324335
340094
322006
317501
284553
288994
291646
292041
286573
45748
46268
46364
46353
46788
326626
336755
329206
322754
334421
263886
291589
290425
281656
289897
45971
46344
45765
45428
46703
315630
334193
323730
320909
325138
290567
276224
270875
254327
259741
45605
45911
45539
46259
46600
334334
318777
321699
321273
322290
287712
287770
280997
290643
289002
46400
45907
46104
45841
46961
335854
324537
334373
335184
322764
261713
282768
262912
281841
262265
46623
46209
45872
46239
46804
314012
326608
343152
314638
332568
288625
289906
271673
268455
284995
45584
46050
46283
45456
46582
319695
332145
324338
316643
325237
273213
286769
281643
259880
285559
45848
46416
45681
46123
46366
321260
316409
323448
330171
326269
288040
285280
290217
287951
286889
46570
46359
46115
45752
46012
329701
321555
324848
325387
324883
282376
285385
289468
267967
256610
45992
46244
45993
46286
46229
322047
324782
323057
326970
319061
281829
291672
259996
265302
281782
45883
46287
46372
46432
46662
316663
316902
336625
323440
324694
284096
272355
289984
273961
284034
46086
45735
44864
46603
46711
332411
317174
321930
333806
318918
288834
275560
291388
284563
285769
gns
46031.78
46094.9 46165.25
46124.3
46398.4
326412 325061.8 327684.4
326270
325434.4
276414.5
279955 278375.7 274298.7
278813.1
td
352.9756
330.773 350.2762
353.0353 364.0668
6970.916 6394.357 7918.569 6841.238
6434.673
11766.59
10609.06 12063.95 12195.95
11714.47
min
44956
45022
44864
45322
45464
314012
316409
313586
314638
316652
258698
258356
258819
252283
256610
um
648858.2 651111.6 652225.4
646693 650645.8
um
19090.48 17334.19
20332.8
19390.22 18513.21
Gamma
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
79
==PAGE:88==
80
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:89==
A.1.3
Tuning the CE algorithm
3
2
3
3
2
4
4
3
3
4
3
2
2
2
3
3
2
2
3
3
4
4
4
3
4
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
2
4
4
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
2
3
4
4
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
3
3
4
4
3
2
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
4
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
2
5
4
4
5
3
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
4
3
4
4
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
4
4
4
3
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
5
3
4
5
5
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
3
4
3
3
3
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
3
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
2
4
3
3
2
4
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
5
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
5
4
4
3
2
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
5
3
4
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
5
3
3
4
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
4
4
3
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
2
3
2
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
4
4
3
3
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
3
4
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
4
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
4
3
3
3
2
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
5
4
4
4
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
2
4
3
3
4
4
3
2
2
3
3
3
2
2
3
3
4
3
4
4
4
3
3
3
3
2
2
3
3
3
2
3
4
4
4
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
5
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
4
3
4
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
4
5
3
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
2
3
2
3
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
4
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
3
2
3
3
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
5
3
4
4
2
3
3
3
2
gns
2.9
2.75
2.875
2.9
2.775
3.65
3.7
3.475
3.6
3.675
2.7
2.7
2.675
2.6
2.75
td
0.3 0.433013 0.330719
0.3 0.417582
0.653835 0.678233 0.547152 0.663325
0.607762
0.458258
0.458258 0.468375 0.489898
0.433013
min
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
um
9.25
9.15
9.025
9.1
9.2
um
1.412092 1.569503 1.346245
1.453223 1.458357
Tjek  =3
Temperatur
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
81
==PAGE:90==
3
2
3
3
3
4
3
4
5
4
2
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
2
3
3
5
3
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
4
4
4
4
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
2
4
4
3
4
4
3
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
4
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
4
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
2
3
2
2
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
4
4
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
2
3
4
4
3
5
5
3
3
2
3
2
3
3
2
2
3
3
2
5
4
4
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
3
3
5
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
5
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
3
4
4
5
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
5
4
4
3
3
3
2
3
2
3
3
2
3
4
3
3
5
4
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
4
4
3
4
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
3
2
3
2
2
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
2
3
3
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
5
3
3
3
4
3
2
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
5
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
4
4
4
4
2
2
2
3
3
2
3
2
3
3
4
3
3
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
3
4
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
4
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
5
4
4
4
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
3
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
4
3
3
2
3
2
3
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
5
4
3
5
3
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
5
2
3
3
3
3
gns
2.775
2.875
2.875
2.825
2.9
3.4
3.45
3.475
3.525
3.85
2.575
2.625
2.775
2.775
2.85
td
0.417582 0.330719 0.330719
0.379967
0.3
0.583095 0.668954 0.631961 0.805838
0.726292
0.494343
0.484123 0.417582 0.417582
0.357071
min
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
um
8.75
8.95
9.125
9.125
9.6
um
1.495021 1.483796 1.380262
1.603388 1.383363
Alpha
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
82
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:91==
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
5
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
5
3
4
3
4
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
5
3
4
4
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
2
3
3
4
4
5
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
4
4
3
3
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
4
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
4
4
3
4
3
3
2
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
3
4
4
3
3
3
3
2
3
2
3
2
2
3
4
3
4
4
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
4
4
3
4
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
4
4
3
3
4
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
3
3
2
3
2
3
2
2
2
2
3
2
4
5
3
4
5
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
5
3
2
3
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
5
3
2
2
2
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
3
3
2
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
4
3
3
3
2
2
2
3
3
2
3
3
2
4
3
3
3
4
2
3
3
2
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
3
3
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
3
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
4
4
4
4
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
4
4
2
2
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
2
4
4
4
3
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
2
3
3
4
4
3
3
4
3
2
2
3
3
3
2
2
3
3
4
4
4
3
4
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
5
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
3
2
3
2
2
3
3
3
2
3
4
4
4
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
2
2
3
2
3
3
4
3
3
4
4
3
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
5
3
4
3
2
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
5
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
3
4
4
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
2
4
4
4
2
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
5
3
4
3
3
3
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
3
4
4
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
2
4
3
3
4
5
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
5
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
5
4
3
4
4
3
2
3
3
2
gns
2.85
2.85
2.675
2.925
2.75
3.55
3.675
3.45
3.675
3.625
2.7
2.65
2.675
2.7
2.625
td
0.357071 0.357071 0.468375
0.263391 0.433013
0.668954 0.647592 0.589491 0.685109
0.764444
0.458258
0.47697 0.468375 0.458258
0.484123
min
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
um
9.1
9.175
8.8
9.3
9
um
1.484283 1.481633 1.526241
1.406758
1.68158
Tjek
Weights
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
83
==PAGE:92==
3
3
2
3
3
4
3
4
3
3
3
3
2
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
2
4
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
3
4
5
4
3
4
3
2
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
3
4
2
2
3
3
3
2
1
3
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
3
3
3
2
3
2
2
3
2
2
4
3
3
4
4
3
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
2
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
5
3
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
4
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
3
3
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
2
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
5
3
4
3
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
3
3
4
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
4
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
5
3
2
3
3
2
3
3
2
2
3
3
4
4
4
3
4
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
4
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
5
4
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
4
3
2
5
3
3
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
3
4
4
4
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
4
3
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
3
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
2
2
4
3
4
4
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
4
3
2
3
3
2
2
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
2
2
3
2
2
3
2
3
3
2
4
5
4
4
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
4
3
4
3
4
3
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
5
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
5
3
4
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
3
3
3
2
2
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
5
3
4
2
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
5
4
4
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
4
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
3
3
2
3
2
3
4
4
4
4
3
2
2
2
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
5
4
3
2
2
3
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
5
3
3
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
gns
2.75
2.675
2.8
2.75
2.85
3.425
3.55
3.675
3.425
3.575
2.625
2.425
2.55
2.6
2.775
td
0.433013 0.519013
0.4
0.433013 0.357071
0.586835 0.668954 0.685109 0.666615
0.627993
0.484123
0.494343 0.497494 0.489898
0.417582
min
2
1
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
um
8.8
8.65
9.025
8.775
9.2
um
1.50397 1.682311 1.582603
1.589525 1.402647
Gamma
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
84
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:93==
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
85
==PAGE:94==
A.1.4
Tuning the TD algorithm
558
494
543
630
494
1573
2988
1947
1801
2379
1042
1226
1075
1066
1042
515
504
471
740
410
1280
751
1725
2923
1760
1042
1421
1042
1042
1421
647
423
492
374
395
1481
1484
2185
2008
1137
1042
1066
1126
1042
1042
558
479
575
1136
441
1074
1652
1457
2602
1652
1042
1042
1042
1061
1042
703
451
454
434
517
2271
918
3059
755
2457
1075
1226
1075
1042
1042
593
598
504
535
524
1296
1707
1930
1370
1077
1042
1226
1042
1421
1075
404
376
652
411
492
1033
1710
1039
2310
3759
1042
1042
1042
1042
1042
677
394
471
507
513
1924
1868
2055
1772
2085
1421
1042
1246
1075
1226
417
606
524
424
722
2542
1848
1307
1675
1349
1042
1226
1226
1255
1042
408
476
441
530
401
2033
1887
3106
2060
1866
1042
1065
1075
1042
1226
466
558
429
542
489
1779
1367
1708
1786
2377
1075
1060
1075
1042
1042
405
402
506
640
432
1758
1309
1648
1823
1535
1042
1066
1226
1226
1226
519
473
783
429
558
1766
1538
1521
1521
2684
1042
1042
1042
1042
1255
551
471
506
532
474
1885
3534
1400
1589
1628
1115
1042
847
1042
1075
519
441
923
471
594
1413
3343
3109
2290
1464
1042
1421
1042
1075
1421
800
575
385
682
449
1806
2081
1764
1640
1252
1042
1042
1042
1075
1042
574
428
471
591
337
1572
1853
1662
2068
2767
1042
1120
1226
1066
1042
469
558
536
939
405
1867
2811
1686
2056
1856
1226
1065
1042
1042
1042
825
427
682
492
575
1985
1148
1364
1312
2010
1042
1042
1100
1042
1042
474
422
530
1031
441
1358
1315
1777
827
1594
1044
980
1042
1075
1226
512
423
424
392
441
3327
3439
1041
2086
2205
1075
1042
1042
1042
1042
333
515
798
574
404
1930
1529
1696
1187
2210
1226
1421
1042
1060
1042
396
575
532
555
558
1313
1557
1793
1509
1786
1042
1075
1042
1042
1075
533
539
447
396
908
1744
1686
1447
1233
1692
1075
1042
1066
1042
1042
436
671
491
419
475
2428
1764
1948
2172
1327
1042
1042
1042
1075
1100
436
378
524
437
427
1666
1665
1900
1719
2736
1061
1075
1042
1042
1042
481
529
362
843
575
1189
2593
1509
1521
2912
1042
1066
1042
1226
1042
435
588
404
444
472
1444
2357
2623
1575
1375
1042
1066
1042
1042
1226
466
502
396
510
529
1823
1563
1782
1741
1938
1042
1042
1226
1042
1066
629
575
394
404
748
1760
2115
3069
2550
1533
1042
1042
1120
1075
1226
403
404
558
404
405
3584
1096
1476
1739
2143
1255
1066
1042
1042
1042
439
576
558
474
426
2936
1806
1760
1612
2569
1226
1421
1226
1042
1042
595
471
524
433
410
816
2407
1072
1084
3111
1042
1042
1421
1042
1042
951
619
612
471
644
2045
1544
2193
1346
997
1042
1226
1065
1042
1042
497
613
524
457
586
1521
992
1170
957
1191
1152
1042
1042
1075
1421
427
564
641
471
535
2716
1640
1149
1993
2460
1042
1226
1042
1042
1042
510
524
434
361
558
2589
2411
1370
1183
2011
1042
1042
1075
1066
1066
506
471
462
420
686
1716
2912
2289
1806
1531
1042
1421
1075
1095
1042
674
422
517
778
500
3646
1758
1667
2086
1498
1042
1042
1042
1042
1092
423
473
411
558
428
1648
1702
1792
1994
1856
1075
1042
1042
1042
1042
gns
529.1
499.7
522.275
546.775
509.45
1888.425
1891.2 1804.875 1732.025
1944.225
1079.825
1123.625 1086.325 1075.825
1109.725
td
127.9097 75.36252 115.7454
178.0377 111.4125
647.1287 669.5926 544.5975 469.1441
607.0632
80.09179
129.538 91.93976 74.80003
112.4993
min
333
376
362
361
337
816
751
1039
755
997
1042
980
847
1042
1042
um
3497.35 3514.525 3413.475
3354.625
3563.4
um
855.1302 874.4931 752.2827
721.9818 830.9751
Tjek
Temperatur
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
86
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:95==
575
382
497
536
533
1148
1741
1648
1345
1931
1226
1075
1066
1042
1421
469
455
435
560
571
1760
1593
1367
1802
1404
1055
1066
1042
1042
1421
718
674
575
404
692
1174
2572
2217
2369
1791
1042
1075
1042
1042
1421
412
535
558
469
558
1794
2058
1392
1777
1806
1042
1042
1226
1042
1421
391
434
483
603
594
2485
3269
1020
2203
1746
1065
1042
1042
1042
1230
540
404
516
508
477
1920
1094
1775
1766
2726
1226
1042
1226
1042
1421
388
691
429
437
529
3195
2540
2072
859
1347
1421
1226
1042
1042
1421
557
536
653
412
519
1725
2849
1528
2460
1557
1075
1042
1042
1042
1421
575
557
648
492
692
3725
2570
1521
1918
1777
1075
1042
1042
1226
1226
471
575
503
503
641
1716
2570
1875
1531
2220
1042
1066
1042
1075
1424
536
443
396
407
471
2460
1252
2121
3596
1640
1042
1421
1042
1075
1421
544
377
418
470
506
2392
1618
1364
1806
2002
1060
1042
1042
1042
1226
435
441
558
517
638
1233
1353
3294
1687
1964
1226
1042
1042
1060
1414
395
574
750
746
509
1872
1319
1760
1519
2151
1075
1042
1042
1421
1421
395
539
564
483
496
3624
2905
2097
3478
1767
1066
1042
1042
1042
1421
439
718
610
361
405
1968
1603
1600
1930
2330
1100
1042
1042
986
1360
453
509
413
659
507
1994
2227
1307
1474
1759
1042
1066
1075
1042
1421
471
558
653
404
443
755
1896
1571
2072
1551
1042
1066
1042
1138
1421
462
420
405
823
609
1829
1805
2243
2683
1352
1226
1042
1042
1226
1075
512
401
492
422
783
2259
1147
1521
2363
1349
1042
1421
1295
1066
1421
524
394
431
492
641
1591
1376
1795
1076
1148
1042
1226
1075
1042
1127
494
630
575
474
496
1516
937
1487
3069
986
1042
1042
1075
1421
1421
477
404
555
426
802
1570
1782
1014
1670
1760
1042
1042
1066
1075
1421
471
682
772
826
644
2538
2599
1758
1547
1818
1075
1066
1041
1041
1421
391
506
575
365
742
2537
2679
1963
2734
1769
1042
1042
1042
1060
1181
433
464
396
396
428
1787
1637
1648
2561
1521
1042
1042
1066
1042
1421
653
473
428
461
467
3393
1474
1364
1531
2331
1226
1042
1042
1042
1421
492
558
492
457
575
1939
2641
1955
1521
1789
1075
1364
1226
1042
1153
859
574
575
459
504
1149
1670
1521
3388
1760
1042
1042
1421
1044
1421
500
471
471
404
670
3077
2634
3351
1758
1744
1042
1042
1042
1421
1262
461
418
441
491
559
2525
1521
1362
1788
2756
1066
1042
1226
1042
1421
502
442
502
524
467
1792
1396
1229
2892
1382
1075
1042
1075
1075
1421
441
558
682
630
692
2632
2004
2052
1228
1760
1066
1075
1042
1421
1421
441
916
660
474
527
1704
2540
2789
1521
1827
1042
1042
1042
1421
1421
563
403
411
582
692
2134
1408
2566
2202
1552
1066
1226
1042
1042
1120
424
479
474
433
798
2478
1070
1380
2586
1521
941
1042
1421
1042
1354
442
558
421
424
428
2322
1976
1822
2073
1868
1066
1042
1042
1226
1100
445
682
681
704
609
1273
2210
2247
1634
2249
1075
1042
1075
1042
1406
467
496
457
397
511
2159
1277
1702
1269
1602
1255
1066
1042
1226
1077
440
535
403
471
437
1335
3034
3533
1758
1340
1042
1042
1226
1042
1112
gns
491.45
521.65
523.95
502.65
571.55
2061.975
1946.15 1845.775
2011.1
1766.325
1088.85
1088.875 1096.175
1113.6
1338.25
td
91.18003 111.9436 102.1604
113.6016 106.4666
681.9249 620.2376 581.6527 649.0393
372.1289
85.96265
101.4108 101.2852 129.0837
124.0401
min
388
377
396
361
405
755
937
1014
859
986
941
1042
1041
986
1075
um
3642.275 3556.675
3465.9
3627.35 3676.125
um
859.0676
833.592 785.0983
891.7246 602.6356
Alpha
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
87
==PAGE:96==
558
654
799
657
442
1806
1111
1578
1523
1653
1042
1042
1060
1061
1042
443
780
385
707
446
1376
3506
2233
1340
1049
1042
1184
1421
1421
1289
445
410
558
521
515
4588
2008
1773
1794
3850
1042
1226
1060
1042
1042
441
492
420
608
404
2097
1694
1152
1570
1965
1226
1075
1060
1042
1066
471
575
456
395
368
907
1291
1258
1585
1483
1066
1042
1042
1066
1042
435
535
435
591
609
1642
3573
2069
2562
2923
1042
1042
1042
1042
1042
472
511
524
689
462
1521
1680
2456
1792
1114
1041
1042
1042
1042
1075
428
442
538
488
502
1566
1593
3069
1489
1979
1042
1421
1042
1042
1226
405
423
367
447
435
1334
1313
1316
955
2101
1421
1421
1075
1226
1421
472
524
711
515
472
1511
1731
774
1139
1635
1075
1066
1042
1042
1042
492
576
490
468
403
1672
1268
1758
1648
1541
1226
1044
1042
1226
1042
440
825
558
502
692
3673
1942
1692
1792
1358
1042
1226
1066
1042
1075
511
471
618
453
524
1994
2152
2114
2867
1869
1042
1226
1042
1075
1042
591
426
442
483
579
1869
1156
1773
1760
1923
1042
1226
1075
1226
1042
558
404
567
434
362
2087
1473
1088
2134
1235
1042
1042
1421
1075
1042
536
492
575
375
392
1526
2218
1233
1735
2800
1060
1042
1042
1226
1042
524
435
492
820
695
3437
1267
1168
2296
1851
1042
1075
1075
1042
1421
869
645
435
524
748
3019
2260
1395
1712
1171
1042
1127
1060
1042
1042
575
631
466
609
473
1213
1077
1217
2553
1521
1042
1042
1042
1042
1075
682
519
471
1178
579
1468
2579
1251
2028
1531
1042
1042
1421
1066
1075
563
463
405
438
473
1627
2643
1639
1187
3369
1226
1042
1153
1075
1421
411
570
404
686
524
1028
1582
1806
1430
1000
1042
1066
1042
1042
1042
471
396
468
799
529
1316
5184
2612
2517
2203
1042
1042
1042
1042
1042
527
574
700
404
463
2907
1689
1419
3113
1101
1042
1042
1240
1066
1042
457
1046
510
651
471
1867
2351
3060
1872
2704
1042
1042
1042
1602
1042
420
423
506
500
681
2496
1590
4063
1185
2076
1042
1042
1075
1042
1060
515
465
575
631
522
2361
3483
1758
1625
2265
1065
1396
1254
1042
1042
580
404
499
741
563
2332
2348
2802
1615
1766
1042
1042
1094
1042
1226
433
434
558
400
405
1786
2859
1903
925
3243
1066
1042
1042
1100
1226
413
435
506
435
563
1093
1140
3593
2601
1232
1042
1042
1066
1042
1226
625
423
492
451
368
1648
1413
1214
1880
1621
1042
1042
1042
1226
1042
539
459
509
453
465
1648
2868
1081
955
1937
1042
1042
1061
1042
1042
460
401
602
628
424
1770
1758
3223
2036
2090
1042
1042
1042
1042
1042
544
481
378
486
449
2447
2418
1324
3375
2318
1042
1042
1042
1075
1075
406
475
499
631
581
3485
1564
2502
2757
1068
1042
1042
1075
1066
1271
471
524
443
423
444
1822
1575
1713
1566
955
1042
1042
1042
1066
1042
557
570
361
441
463
1806
1770
2797
2623
1426
1066
1226
1042
1100
1075
646
1134
433
466
433
3501
1746
3495
2543
2875
1075
1066
1075
1421
1421
428
547
335
436
471
1681
1760
2003
1511
1310
1042
1066
1042
1421
1151
405
502
494
494
565
1806
1148
1656
1934
1074
1060
1042
1226
1042
1042
gns
505.475
537.4
499.6
551.45
498.975
2018.325 1994.525
1950.75
1888.1
1854.625
1070.175
1102.575 1097.775
1117.1
1118.925
td
91.4467 159.2647 95.93065
152.6717 92.72931
800.3167 834.3715 788.9825
596.272
703.7798
73.91545
108.0486 105.9317 132.5262
123.0909
min
405
396
335
375
362
907
1077
774
925
955
1041
1042
1042
1042
1042
um
3593.975
3634.5 3548.125
3556.65 3472.525
um
965.6788 1101.685 990.8448
881.4698
919.6
Weights
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
88
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:97==
438
419
460
688
558
1258
1752
1665
1714
1555
1042
1226
1042
1042
1226
404
454
668
492
586
2003
1544
893
2023
1560
1066
1042
1226
1421
1075
470
393
405
466
426
1250
1424
1584
1806
1648
1066
1042
1226
1042
1042
404
428
412
361
486
1207
1615
1806
1528
3616
1226
1075
1042
1226
1075
386
401
479
404
574
3124
1051
1221
1306
1973
1042
1042
1226
1226
1042
396
575
575
366
420
3146
2336
2813
1862
2120
1042
1042
1042
1042
1226
539
471
443
422
878
1648
3715
1370
1521
3344
1060
1042
1042
1042
1066
611
435
434
448
552
1342
1692
1306
1865
2239
1042
1066
1069
1042
1042
404
473
505
506
575
2016
1719
3591
898
3328
1042
1075
1042
1042
1075
391
471
428
361
536
1128
1459
2014
2170
3868
1042
1045
1042
1066
1194
1137
420
469
637
368
791
1806
1593
1538
2290
1065
1042
1042
1075
1042
379
399
470
442
845
1895
2800
1601
1521
2229
1042
1115
1042
1226
1226
474
575
431
493
634
1153
1446
1456
1723
2177
1042
1042
1068
1066
1042
339
631
404
467
563
1244
3515
1914
1266
4637
1042
1042
1226
1042
1226
458
457
492
392
558
1584
2485
1605
1921
2346
1041
1075
1060
1042
1041
447
707
429
619
623
2137
2158
1070
2184
999
1042
1075
1042
1042
1042
411
462
470
366
643
1521
1797
1955
1445
4228
1042
1042
1100
1042
1075
471
452
434
468
397
1582
1073
2494
3694
4377
1042
1042
1042
1421
1226
396
689
556
454
404
1927
1042
1794
1149
1886
1042
1066
1066
1042
1042
397
403
533
443
513
1085
1497
1231
4490
1321
1075
1042
1042
1066
1042
401
441
386
452
409
1746
1387
1234
2213
2768
1066
1061
1042
980
1042
404
612
633
509
524
2080
1570
946
1598
3171
1042
1042
1042
1075
1042
474
456
552
558
535
1737
2211
2429
1588
1726
1042
1042
1075
1065
1075
364
558
491
491
405
1521
1370
1858
1279
2554
1421
1042
1075
1226
1042
629
396
424
558
558
735
1841
1341
1566
1301
1066
1042
1066
1421
1611
404
388
528
434
392
2356
980
1458
1521
2637
1226
1042
1042
1421
1042
404
404
582
565
471
2173
1213
2181
1678
1413
1066
1060
1042
1226
1066
515
404
383
440
651
3850
2508
1076
1432
3035
986
1042
1042
1042
1042
366
396
655
643
558
1376
1296
1407
2035
2778
977
1042
1226
1060
1042
435
768
404
577
426
2195
1653
1649
1711
2500
1053
1042
1254
1226
1060
489
405
691
747
487
2377
1856
1758
1345
2923
1042
1042
1066
1042
1042
541
388
469
515
798
2640
1150
1258
3410
2738
1042
1075
1042
1226
1069
405
366
443
471
397
1025
1100
1977
1758
2023
1564
980
1042
1042
1075
474
399
443
667
471
1247
1613
2065
1700
1937
1042
1042
941
1042
1042
404
386
427
682
640
3358
1254
2165
1689
2876
1042
1042
1042
1042
1066
395
575
504
558
522
1149
1187
1407
1521
2717
1226
1042
1042
1042
1042
593
558
471
559
405
1577
1962
2572
1588
1633
1042
1042
1066
1042
1060
404
396
471
575
679
812
3019
1161
924
2099
1042
1075
1042
1042
1075
444
380
515
692
558
2135
1789
1125
1261
1514
1042
1066
1066
1042
1075
435
393
395
465
421
3059
1818
1921
2668
1925
1075
1164
1060
1042
1075
gns
458.3
469.6
484.1
511.325
536.15
1804.725 1767.575
1699.1 1802.725
2450.225
1081.225
1057.675
1076.1 1115.025
1093.8
td
127.159 99.68721
77.7312
100.114 120.7942
735.7827 636.7939 545.9065
689.479
866.8814
108.3447
37.76267 68.62718 123.1719
102.6794
min
339
366
383
361
368
735
980
893
898
999
977
980
941
980
1041
um
3344.25
3294.85
3259.3
3429.075 4080.175
um
971.2864 774.2438 692.2649
912.765 1090.355
Gamma
RUTE 1
RUTE 2
RUTE 3
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
89
==PAGE:98==
A.2
VAA plots
(a) Instance 1 - Distance optimising
(b) Instance 2 - Distance optimising
(a) Instance 3 - Distance optimising
(b) Instance M1 - Distance optimising
(a) Instance M2 - Distance optimising
(b) Instance M5 - Distance optimising
90
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:99==
(a) Instance M6 - Distance optimising
(b) Instance 1 - Cluster optimising
(a) Instance 2 - Cluster optimising
(b) Instance 3 - Cluster optimising
(a) Instance M1 - Cluster optimising
(b) Instance M2 - Cluster optimising
(a) Instance M5 - Cluster optimising
(b) Instance M6 - Cluster optimising
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
91
==PAGE:100==
(a) Instance 1 - Time difference optimising
(b) Instance 2 - Time difference optimising
(a) Instance 3 - Time difference optimising
(b) Instance M1 - Time difference optimising
(a) Instance M2 - Time difference optimising
(b) Instance M5 - Time difference optimising
(a) Instance M6 - Time difference optimising
92
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
==PAGE:101==
Building nice-looking order sequences for side-loaders
93
==PAGE:102==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
