==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Master Thesis
Market opportunities for wheat BSG
products
Markedsmuligheder for hvedemasksbaserede produkter
Morten Dam Laursen
s200364
26/01/2022
Supervisors
Lars Alkærsig
Timothy John Hopley
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In a time where sustainability is a rapidly growing trend acting as a guide line for
much of the world community it is important to identify areas with great potential
both environmentally and economically. As breweries across the world produce a
biproduct called Brewer’s Spent Grain (BSG) which is both nutritious and plentiful,
they seem aloof as to how to properly utilize this sidestream. Most of it is currently
used for feed or biogas, both of which does not take into consideration some of
the qualities that this material possesses. A small market has developed upcycling
barley BSG into food products and ingredients. While still at a low level of maturity,
this market may very well grow in the near future with technological development
and an ample supply of cheap raw materials. This paper investigates the nutritional
properties and components of BSG based on malted wheat in order to analyze
whether it could have a competitive advantage towards the barley BSG. Several
experiments are carried out, reaching the conclusion that wheat BSG does not
possess any such extraordinary qualities.
However, there is still a lot of barley-
wheat BSG being produced as a biproduct every year and this could be utilized
just as well as barley BSG, only with a different sensoric profile. Finally the report
provides suggestions for further research on the topic as wheat BSG has a rather
high component of anti-oxidants.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Lars Alkærsig and Timothy John Hopley
for the magnificent support and guidance throughout the process of creating this
project and report. Each with their own expertise they have provided my with much
useful insight and inspiration to which I am very grateful. Furthermore I would like
to thank Preben Bøje Hansen for assisting me with the brewing equipment and
subsequent experiments which were carried out during the project.
Morten Dam Laursen, s200364, 26/01/2022
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Report structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
Current trends
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Brewers Spent Grain (BSG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Upcycling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Wheat beer spent grain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Entrepreneurship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Where to play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Technical
11
3.1
Technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Brewing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Rodee press . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.3
Protein analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.4
High-performance liquid chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.1
First Brew . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.2
Second Brew
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.3
Literature comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Entrepreneurial
27
4.1
Current disposal of BSG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Analysis of upcycling market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Business Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.1
Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Epilogue
40
5.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
References
42
iii
==PAGE:5==
Appendix A Interview guide
47
Appendix B HPLC Standard Calibration
48
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
In global society in recent years sustainability has been one of the fastest growing
trends in many different shapes and forms within a wide variety of different industries
[1]. While achieving sustainable business practices was previously a good way for
companies to achieve recognition in the general community it has today become
more of a ’hygiene factor’ where companies need to focus on their environmental
footprint and business processes in order to legitimize their products and brand[2].
This means that many companies are interested in finding ways of becoming more
sustainable, whilst also achieving economic benefits.
One way of achieving this
is by valorisation of sidestreams from manufacturing processes, that has otherwise
largely been ignored. Examples of this are manyfold but this report focuses on the
byproducts of the beer brewing industry. The brewing of beer is an ancient technique
which is still highly relevant today as the demand has been steadily increasing over
the years[3] with a yearly production of 1.83 billion hectoliters[4] .
The global demand and consumption of beer results in large quantities of byproducts
being produced, which are increasingly difficult to get rid of in a responsible fashion.
Thus it is important to analyze the potential for these sidestreams to be utilized
differently in the future than they are being today.
This report will investigate the possible uses for Brewers Spent Grain (BSG) and
the literature and research which has been published on the subject in recent years.
1.1
Problem
Building on the general sustainability trend and the global community’s focus on a
more effective resource allocation and utilization, food comes to mind as an area in
which there is substantial room for improvement. As of now, global food production
is responsible for 26% of the global CO2 emissions[5] making it a hot topic for many
research projects and business ventures, whose purpose is to reduce these emissions.
The upcycling of foods is a major trend working to achieve this by utilizing food
waste as well as biproducts from industrial processes, which can be transformed
into food or food ingredients[6].
Alternative proteins, and plant proteins in
general, are ways of using new methods and technologies to extract proteins for
human consumption, that does not require the production of meat or the general
environmental burdens, that come with traditional food production [5].
Many
1
==PAGE:7==
companies have been founded in recent years to create products from upcycled
foods to bring to market in order to reduce waste of food and nutrition [7].
Among the different food sectors in which upcycling is relevant, beer brewing stands
as one with a particular potential. As a biproduct of brewing beer a sidestream
known as ’brewers spent grain’ (BSG) is produced. It is the grain waste from the
process and is highly nutritional, but is currently mainly used for animal feed[8] and
biogas. The yearly global production of BSG is estimated to be around 38 million
tons. These are 38 million tons, which have the potential to become part of the
human diet, as it is nutritious, healthy and in plentiful supply.
Increased urbanization and increase in disposable income among the populations
provides a global growth in the sale of wheat beer in both Western countries and
parts of Asia[9][10]. While still making up a significantly smaller portion of the
market, compared to traditional barley-based beers, wheat beer constitutes a fair
share of the market. Wheat beer is generally characterized as beer where 30% or
more of the malt used is malted wheat [11].
Based on this, it is evident that there is a sizeable production of barley-wheat
BSG in the world, that act as a waste product/side-stream. As wheat possesses
generally different characteristics than barley[12] this report will investigate the
general properties of wheat BSG as well as the possible market possibilities and
differentiation from barley BSG.
1.2
Report structure
This subchapter explains the structure of the report and the reasoning behind it as
a guide to the reader for easier navigation throughout.
Chapter 1 introduces the world surrounding upcycling and sustainability in general
and outlines the specific problem and potential with wheat BSG.
Chapter 2.1 reviews the relevant factors found in Chapter 1 and examines the current
research and literature on the subjects, both showing the relevancy of the report,
but also confirming that no identical studies have been made. Chapter 2.2 reviews
the current literature within entrepreneurship and reflects on its relevancy to the
report. Chapter 2.3 takes the learning from Chapter 1 and 2 and boils it down to a
problem statement formulated in three research questions.
Chapter 3 contains the technical elements of the report, focusing on the brewing
of wheat beer and the specific properties of malted wheat as opposed to barley. It
provides an in detail description of the brewing experiments as well as the BSG
content analysis.
2
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 4 is focused on the entreprenurial aspects of the report. It initially outlines
the status quo of the BSG market and then looks at current methods and businesses
upcycling BSG. Using the knowledge from this, as well as the insight gained in
Chapter 3, this chapter makes qualified suggestions and estimations on the prospects
of upcycling wheat BSG and responding to the general challenges of large scale
upcycling.
Chapter 5 concludes on the report as a whole answering the research question and
providing insight into the feasibility of upcycling wheat spent grain.
3
==PAGE:9==
2
Literature Review
This subsection evaluates the current research and business trends within upcycling
and specifically research on Brewers Spent Grain (BSG) as to map out the current
landscape and setting the scene for the research conducted and the results presented
in this report.
2.1
Current trends
The trends reviewed in this report are in regards to BSG and Upycling in general.
The method for reviewing the research trends within each topic is searching by
keywords on Google Scholar. The keywords’ relevancy are evaluated by looking at
the total amount of hits on Scholar and the relevancy of a cross section of these hits
as seen in Table 2.1
Table 2.1: Google Scholar Literature Review
Key word
Total Hits
Investigated
Relevant hits
Brewers Spent Grain
32,600
100
26
Upcycling
19,400
100
9
”Wheat beer ” spent grain
646
100
15
The relevancy of a piece of literature is determined by whether it touches upon the
topics of this research. This differs for each keyword and the boundaries of relevancy
for each of the three are:
• For ’Brewers Spent Grain’ articles are evaluated on their relevancy towards
using BSG as an ingredient in food.
• For ’Upcycling’ the literature is evaluated on its relevancy towards upcyling
for organic waste and more specifically food.
• For ’Wheat beer spent grain’ literature is evaluated on whether it specifically
researches the properties of wheat BSG as an ingredient in food for human
consumption or research on its nutritional properties.
Using these three keywords it is believed that this report can prove the relevancy
and novelty of the topics being researched and analyzed.
2.1.1
Brewers Spent Grain (BSG)
Brewers Spent Grain has been the topic of many research projects and entreprenurial
ventures over the last 10-15 years and this is not without reason.
Much of the
4
==PAGE:10==
research in regards to BSG reports on the many merits and values of BSG for
various purposes.
Nutrition
A significant part of current research on BSG is focused on analyzing the nutritional
value of the biproduct as both feed for livestock and food for human consumption.
Much research points to the fact that BSG is rich in both protein and fiber leading
to the conclusion that it has potential and benefits for human consumption [13].
This is a conclusion reached by a substantial amount of papers on the subject.
Ingredient
Based on the aforementioned nutritional properties of BSG many researchers have in
recent years been investigating the use of BSG as an ingredient in human foodstuffs.
The most common examples of proposed uses are as an ingredient in snacks [14],
baking [15] and pasta [16]. This research is also backed up by the research done on
consumer surveys using BSG whole grain snacks [17].
Other research
Many other topics and uses of BSG have been researched and represents a multitude
of different possible applications for BSG. These topics include, but are not limited
to:
The use of BSG for biochar and pellets, utilizing the product as a source of energy
[18].
Further studies into the properties of BSG as animal feed, showcasing the nutritional
qualitites of the BSG and its impact on animals [19].
Taking advantage of the richness of content of the BSG to improve soil quality for
agricultural purposes [20].
2.1.2
Upcycling
Merriam-Webster defines ’Upcycling’ as ”to recycle (something) in such a way that
the resulting product is of a higher value than the original item”[21]. This concept
has been a growing topic of scientific publications, since the term was first used
in 1994[22] and fits well into the current global trend of working towards a more
sustainable world, using and reusing resources more effectively and with less waste.
When reviewing current research and literature regarding ’Upcycling’ as a concept it
is evident that it is a growing trend in many different industries with many different
types of upcycling being introduced. Much of the current literature on the subject
is regarding the upcycling of plastics and textiles, however a significant part is also
5
==PAGE:11==
written on organic waste treatment [22]. And among the literature regarding the
upcycling of foods, BSG is one of the most common topics found.
A sampled study from 2015 found that organic waste treatment is the fourth most
occurring upcycling topic found in literature [22] as seen in Figure 2.1 which indicates
that the main focus points of this report are relevant and potentially useful in
increasing the research trend around upcycling.
Figure 2.1: Sampled publications distribution by industrial (sub)/sector [22]
Generally upcycling can mean many things and be relevant in different areas,
industries and scales.
However it is evident from the research reviewed in this
report, that the upcycling of side-streams and food waste are big topics in modern
research and thus researching the upcyclability of wheat BSG falls within the general
upcycling trend.
One thing to notice in the review of ’Upcycling’ literature is that it seems that there
are many synonyms why are also being used (such as ’reuse’ or ’recycling’), which
might have slightly different meanings but still contain the same general idea of
reducing waste by using it for different purposes.
2.1.3
Wheat beer spent grain
The initial idea was to review and investigate the total 646 articles under the search
term ”Wheat beer spent grain”. However it was evident after the first 100 results
that the relevancy of the research found in Google Scholar decreased dramatically.
6
==PAGE:12==
This search term was the most specific and narrow of the three key words in figure
2.1 and thus by far yielded the fewest results. It did however provide a significant
amount of articles and research that are relevant for this report.
There are also many report that, while not entirely relevant to the focus of
this report, are somewhat relevant to the topic and have been considered ”Semi-
relevant”. The distribution between hits that are ”Relevant”, ”Semi-relevant” or
”Not Relevant” are illustrated in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: 100 research papers and articles reviewed after relevancy. See Table 2.1
The content of each of these three categories are as follows:
Not Relevant
This category of search results is clearly the widest containing research articles of
many different subjects regarding wheat BSG.
The biggest portion of the results mainly focused on wheat beer brewing in itself,
with little or no focus on BSG. Besides that the variety of articles is really wide and
includes many different branches of academia going as far as archaeology and soil
science.
As the title suggests none of the results found here are relevant and many of them
only mentions wheat BSG in a passing sentence, without much relevancy to the
article as a whole.
Semi-Relevant
This category of search results was added as there were a variety of studies that
touch upon the subject of ”Wheat BSG” without being entirely relevant. These
7
==PAGE:13==
results are however still providing valuable insight which is used in the analysis
performed in this report.
As this search term is very specific, the results are generally as well, meaning that
there are not many that revovle around the same issues. The semi-relevant research
covers how wheat BSG (as well as other BSG) is used in biorefining or in making
biochar for fuel purposes. These are relevant uses of BSG but not relevant for the
focus of this report.
Furthermore there is research covering food made from BSG (but not wheat,
specifically) and cosmetics being made using wheat BSG.
These all cover some interesting alternative uses for wheat BSG which prove that
there is other research being done on this topic and thus helps to underline the
relevancy of this project.
Relevant
The relevant category covers a few different areas of research but have one area in
particular that covers a large amount of the 15 relevant search results. Mycotoxins
is the focal point of many different research papers involving analysis of BSG. The
reason for this is that mycotoxins poison food through crops[23] (oftentimes cereals)
and are therefore very relevant to consider when wanting to upcycle biproducts based
on these crops, such as BSG. This is no cause for alarm however, but something that
is taken into consideration when evaluating the BSG as well as when analyzing the
business potential of wheat BSG.
Other than toxins there are a few highly relevant articles regarding the general
nutrition of wheat BSG in terms of both fibres, protein, vitamins and anti-oxidant
properties.
All of these are carefully examined alongside the research results in
Chapter 3.2 in order to compare.
8
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Distribution of relevant results. See Table 2.1
While these different search results are all highly relevant for the purpose of
researching the properties of wheat BSG, there were none of them that covered the
exact scope of this report. This proves that while BSG has been researched in many
different formats it seems that none have chosen the exact (or close) focus of this
report, legitimizing it as new and independently created knowledge and research.
2.2
Entrepreneurship
This report investigates state-of-the-art literature within entrepreneurship. This is
done in order to be able to properly analyze the market opportunities as well as
whether or not there is room for products based on wheat BSG. This literature,
supplemented by studies and articles, guides the entrepreneurial analysis of the
report and provides the necessary tools to evaluate the feasibility of a given business
model.
2.2.1
Where to play
In order to commercialize an idea and find a place in the market it is crucial to use
a structured approach. This report uses the approach as described in ’Where To
Play’[24] for that purpose.This book describes how to analyze a current market to
see if there are potential gaps which can be filled by a given product. It is a useful
and practical approach to analyze ones core product/value proposition to see if it
will bring a different/improved product to a market, thus providing the fertile soil
9
==PAGE:15==
for a good business case.
The methods in this book are used in Chapter 4 when evaluating the wheat BSG
products and whether or not there is a place for them in the market.
2.3
Research questions
On the basis of the points made in chapter 2.1 Problem, as well as the overview of
current literature, provided in this chapter, as set of research questions have been
put forward to guide the data gathering, analysis and conclusion of this project.
These three research questions are:
1. Does BSG with a high content of malted wheat possess different or
advantageous traits compared to using malted barley BSG?
2. What is the current state of the market for BSG as a food ingredient and are
there possibilities to enter the market?
3. To which degree is it possible to build a business model which with a reasonable
certainty could compete in the market?
10
==PAGE:16==
3
Technical
In order to answer the first research question this report set up an experiment. This
experiment consists of setting up a brewing process at DTU’s Brewery with malted
wheat in order to obtain the BSG and make the appropriate analyses. In order to
differentiate from current BSG products this report uses a new patented technology
to create a liquid phase of the BSG and analyze its contents.
This chapter is separated into two parts. Chapter 3.1 describes the technologies,
equipment and processes used for both the brewing, the pressing and the following
analytical results. Chapter 3.2 contains the concrete process data as well as the
analytical data derived from the various measurements.
3.1
Technology
The processes involved in the brewing as well as the technologies used are described
in the following subchapters.
3.1.1
Brewing
The brewing process is an ancient one and well known to many. There are however
slight variations in the process and this sub chapter will describe the methods and
equipment used for this project.
For the mashing and sparging of the malted wheat an in-house constructed mashing
system is used (Patent WO2013024065[25]).
It can contain 600L and has a
recirculation system and a heat exchanger. The recirculation system has six filters
at top and bottom.
After the mashing and sparging process the wort is pumped into a boiler for boiling
and later fermentation. This part of the process is outside the scope of this report
as it only focuses on the BSG.
After mashing and sparging for a period of time (see Chapter 3.2.1 and 3.2.2) the
BSG is removed from the mashing system and used in the rotary drum press Rodee.
3.1.2
Rodee press
In order to allow for the possibility to find more applications for the wheat BSG the
grain is pressed and filtrated in order to create 3 different ”products” which are also
sampled and analyzed. This is done to further broaden the horizon of possibilities
for wheat BSG and have more options for the entreprenurial analysis in Chapter 4.
In order to produce these ”products” a rotary drum press is used. The press is fed
11
==PAGE:17==
with BSG from the top and both filtrates and presses the product in one process.
It is equipped with two filters, one being 100µm and the other being 300 µm. This
produces a filter cake having been pressed and with a higher dry matter content and
two different liquid filtrates [26].
3.1.3
Protein analysis
To fully understand the value of wheat BSG many of its contents must be analyzed.
Protein is one of the them as it is an important nutritional factor, that can be a
large factor in determining the value of the BSG. Both the amount of proteins as
well as the type is relevant to determine in order to properly estimate the value.
For the analyses conducted in this report, total protein content is analyzed as well
as soluble protein content.
Dumas
Analyzing the total protein content of materials require a method of measuring the
nitrogen levels. A big part of protein is nitrogen, so by measuring the nitrogen
levels in a sample it is possible to calculate the protein levels present. There are two
common ways for analyzing protein levels: The Kjeldahl method and the Dumas
method[27]. In this experiment the Dumas method is used for measuring the protein
content.
The Dumas measures nitrogen content in samples by incinerating them rapidly in
a chamber with 100% oxygen so as to not have any contamination of other gasses.
After the sample has been incinerated the gasses which are released are detected in
order to get the results. For the experiments conducted in this report the ’Elementar
rapid MAX N exceed’ Nitrogen and Protein analyzer is used[28]. Asparctic acid is
used to calibrate the machine and to calculate the protein levels the protein factor
of 6,25 is used as it is the DTU standard for cereals. All samples are also measured
in triplicates in order to verify results and possible outliers.
Bradford
While the Dumas method is able to measure the total protein levels in samples it is
also relevant to measure soluble protein levels. Being soluble makes these proteins
able to be used differently as ingredients and might be more valuable than the
non-soluble proteins. This aspect is discussed and analyzed in Chapter 4.3.
In order to measure soluble protein levels the Bradford Protein Assay is used[29].
In this method a series of standards are prepared with known protein (albumin)
concentrations. The standards along with the samples are mixed with a coomassie
12
==PAGE:18==
reagent which binds with the proteins and change absorption (and thus the color)
depending on the soluble protein content.
The absorbance of both the standards and the samples are then measured in a
spectrometer. Using the standards’ absorbance a polynomial tendency line can be
drawn as illustrated in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Color response curves using the Standard Test Tube Protocol of the Coomassie Assay
[29]
By using this curve the general protein concentrations of the samples can be
calculated.
As with the Dumas method all samples are measured in triplicates.
3.1.4
High-performance liquid chromatography
When brewing with barley or wheat, the grains used are malted. The process of
malting ensures that the seeds activate enzymes which break down starch and other
parts of the seed into soluble starch, sugars and amino acids [30].
The sugars are the essential ingredients in the fermentation process when turning
the wort into beer. During an effective brewing process almost all of the sugars in
the malt, should be extracted to the wort. For professional brews it is estimated
that the mashing efficiency is between 80-90%[31].
Due to the setup of the brewing process described in Chapter 3.1.1 and 3.1.2
the experiment conducted in this project is not assumed to be as effective as a
professional brew, but probably closer to a home brew.
Whether the efficiency is very high or low, a portion of the sugars will remain in
the spent grain. For the samples taken out in the analysis of the wheat BSG it is
13
==PAGE:19==
important to measure the sugar content in order to determine which types to expect
and at what percentage.
Figure 3.2: Overview of HPLC illustrated by Shimadzu [32]
To measure sugar content the High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is
used.
The way that the HPLC is able to identify types and concentrations of different
contents in a sample is a very useful, effective and quick way of analysing a wide
variety of samples.
The working principle is shown in Figure 3.2. It uses a solvent (mobile phase) to
separate the contents of a sample in a column (stationary phase). The rate of which
different contents move past the detector (retention time) indicates which type of
substance it is [32]. In order to then estimate the concentration of a given substance
a set of known standards are also measured. Using them as a reference point it is
then possible to establish the concentrations of the sugars in the samples by using
the peak area and peak height in the chromatogram.
The chromatogram which is the result of this type of measurement is illustrated in
Figure 3.3
14
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.3: HPLC chromatogram illustrated by Shimadzu [32]
If the samples have concentrations that are too high to measure it is also possible
to dilute the samples to a point where they fit with the standards and extrapolate
the results this way.
The content which will be analyzed in the samples taken from the experiment are
maltose, glucose and fructose.
3.2
Analysis
This section explains the two brewing experiments that was carried out in this
project and illustrate and analyze the data obtained from it.
The reason for carrying out a second brewing experiment was to implement several
changes that would make the process more akin to a brewing process at a commercial
brewery. This is further explained throughout the chapter.
3.2.1
First Brew
The initial brew was conducted along with the brewing method described in Chapter
3.1.1.
The contents for this mashing + sparging process was:
• Approximately 330L + 210L water
• 100kg Weyermanns wheat malt [33]
• 25g Ultraflo Max enzymes[34]
• 140g citric acid
15
==PAGE:21==
The 330L water was heated to 68 degrees Celsius before the acid, enzymes and malt
was added. The mashing process continued for 65 minutes after which the malt was
sparged with 72 degree hot water (210L). While mashing the direction of the flow
was reversed several times as when brewing with a large amount of wheat malt, it
tends to make a hard cake of malt, that stops the flow of water during mashing.
Figure 3.4: Process of making BSG
The thought process behind keeping the temperature at 68 degrees through the
mashing process was to keep the proteins from denaturing too much as the wort was
to be used for a different study of proteins in beer.
After sparging and removing the wort for boiling and fermentation the BSG was
moved on to the further process of the experiment.
As illustrated in Figure 3.4 the BSG moved on to the Rodee (described in Chapter
3.1.2) where it was pressed into three different products. The filter cake was very
similar to BSG only slightly drier. The two filtrates were very similar to each other
and had a consistency like cream or milk.
The samples taken for further analysis are illustrated below in Table 3.1
16
==PAGE:22==
Table 3.1: Sample list first brew
Sample No
Sample Name
Note
1
Malted wheat
2
Milled malted wheat
4
Wort (18 min)
5
Wort (40 min)
6
Wort (60 min)
7
Wort (65 min)
8
Fines from BSG
Carefully scraped off the BSG
9
BSG Dry phase
After Rodee
10
Milk 300
After Rodee
11
Milk 100
After Rodee
Sample 10 (Milk 300) is the filtrate from the 300µm filter and sample 11 the filtrate
from the 100µm filter. Sample 9 is the filter cake. These three samples make up
what is the ”products” of this experimental process.
Dry matter and mineral content
The 10 different samples illustrated in Table 3.1 were placed in porcelain crucibles
and heated with 100 degrees Celsius for 24 hours in order to ensure total evaporation
of liquids. They were since removed from the oven and placed in a container with
desiccants, while cooling down in order to ensure no re-absorbtion of moisture.
The samples were then weighed to calculate the evaporated moisture and the dry
matter contents. Afterwards, the dry samples were placed in an oven again, where
they were heated to 600 degrees Celsius for 24 hours. The purpose of this was to
incinerate everything but the different minerals and miscellaneous elements.
The results of this process are displayed in Table 3.2. The are different elements to
analyze when examining the dry matter content of the different samples. Samples
4-7 of the wort during mashing show an increase in dry matter. This is explained
by the increase of sugars being released from the malted wheat to the wort.
It
should be noted, however, with water evaporation and total mass not being entirely
certain this report is not able to conclude confidently what the relative increase in
DM would be throughout the mashing process.
The dry matter content of sample 9 and 10+11 are are crucial elements to the
further analysis of this report as these are the BSG ”products” which will serve as
the basis for comparing to competitors, building a business model and estimating
the feasibility of it. All of this is described, in detail, in Chapter 4.
17
==PAGE:23==
The ash content is not something which is studied to any greater degree of detail.
This content is made up of inorganic compounds and make up such a small part
of the samples that it does not provide any benefits or downsides to the product.
This is assumed as the wheat malt is food grade and would thus not carry any toxic
inorganic compounds[33].
Table 3.2: Dry matter and mineral content first brew
Sample No
Sample Name
Dry Matter
Ash Content
(% of DM)
1
Malted wheat
96,06%
1,31%
4
Wort (18 min)
11,62%
1,39%
5
Wort (40 min)
11,46%
1,19%
6
Wort (60 min)
13,11%
1,19%
7
Wort (65 min)
13,19%
1,35%
8
Fines from BSG
18,78%
2,13%
9
BSG Dry phase
34,06%
1,57%
10
Milk 300
24,56%
0,64%
11
Milk 100
22,41%
0,71%
Sugar
As explained in Chapter 3.1.4 the malting process creates different types of sugars
which are then converted in the fermentation process of brewing, to get the desired
alcohol content.
As no brewing process is 100% effecient, there are bound to be sugars left in the
BSG. It is relevant and important to measure these sugars of the samples in order
to make a crude estimation of the sugar content in these products, would they be
produced in a streamlined manufacturing process.
The maltose, glucose and fructose concentrations of the different liquid samples are
illustrated below in Table 3.3. From this analysis there seems to be an increase
in maltose and glucose levels throughout the mashing process, which is also the
intention.
Maltose obviously constitutes the far largest portion of the sugars, with fructose
constituting almost nothing.
For this first brew the filtrate products ’Milk 300’
and ’Milk 100’ have a sugar content (all three types combined) of 0,53% and 0,98%
respectively. That the sugar content is almost twice the relative amount in ’Milk
100’ compared to ’Milk 300’ makes sense, as the large filter of ’Milk 300’ would allow
more larger particles to pass through. The output of ’Milk 300’ was also about twice
18
==PAGE:24==
as high as ’Milk 100’. These differences are valuable inside into the choice of filters
in a potential future industrial setup.
Table 3.3: Sugar content first brew
Sample No
Sample Name
Maltose Conc
(g/L)
Glucose Conc
(g/L)
Fructose Conc
(g/L)
4
Wort (18 min)
9,45
1,96
0,38
5
Wort (40 min)
n.a
3,27
0,86
6
Wort (60 min)
7,71
1,62
0,25
7
Wort (65 min)
12,47
2,41
0,40
10
Milk 300
4,63
0,59
0,10
11
Milk 100
8,50
1,13
0,19
More analyses and comments on these sugar contents and the significance of them
are explained and reflected upon in Chapter 3.2.2.
Protein
The protein levels of all the samples were measured using the Dumas method as
described in Chapter 3.1.3.
The purpose of this analysis is to analyze the potential value of wheat BSG.
Protein is an important nutrient in foods and ingredients and finding an alternative
protein source in wheat BSG could potentially be a valuable trait, with marketable
possibilities.
The results of the protein analysis are illustrated in Table 3.4.
The protein content of the malted wheat (sample 1) is within the boundaries
described in the data sheet[33], ensuring that the raw material is of an acceptable
quality. The spike in protein content between sample 5-6 may be explained by the
wort content not being homogeneous and thus the samples are of different contents.
The protein content of the wort is supposed to increase during mashing, as soluble
proteins are released from the malt, however it seems to be a too steep increase to
be likely. These results will be compared to the protein contents of the second brew.
19
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.4: Protein content first brew
Sample No
Sample Name
Protein
(% of DM)
1
Malted wheat
11,81%
4
Wort (18 min)
5,43%
5
Wort (40 min)
5,25%
6
Wort (60 min)
14,70%
7
Wort (65 min)
14,19%
8
Fines from BSG
12,96%
9
BSG Dry phase
4,82%
10
Milk 300
19,86%
11
Milk 100
14,19%
The total protein content of the 3 BSG products are
• BSG Dry phase = 1,64%
• Milk 300 = 4,88%
• Milk 100 = 3,18%
These contents are compared to the second brew and barley BSG in Chapter 3.2.2.
3.2.2
Second Brew
The second brew provides the main body of data for the analysis of this report.
Several minor corrections were made to the brewing process itself as well as to the
samples taken out for analysis. This sub chapter will present the different results
achieved using the techniques described in Chapter 3.1.
Brewing process The brew was made with the following ingredients:
• 330L+200L Water( mashing and sparging)
• 100kg Weyermann Pale Wheat Malt[33]
• 30,5g Ultraflo Max enzymes[34]
• 140g citric acid
The mashing process was similar to the first brew described in Chapter 3.2.1, with
some slight differences. The malt was mashed for approximately 1 hour at 65 degrees
Celsius and then further brought up to 72 degrees Celsius before sparging. The
reason for additional heating was to bring the process closer to a realistic industrial
brewing process as well as to deactivate the enzymes in the wort. The thought was
20
==PAGE:26==
that this would also increase the efficiency of the brew, leaving less maltose and
glucose in the samples.
The samples taken out during this process is similar to the first brew with samples
of the wort at different times, the BSG and the phases from the Rodee. The full
sample list is illustrated in Table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Sample list second brew
Sample no
Sample Name
Note
1
Malted wheat
2
Wort (20 min)
3
Wort (40 min)
4
Wort (60 min)
5
Wort (88 min)
After heating to 72 degrees C
6
Wort (225 min)
Finished mashing+sparging
7
BSG
Before Rodee
8
Milk 100
After Rodee
9
BSG Dry phase
After Rodee
10
Milk 300
After Rodee
As with the first brew, the reason for taking several samples of the wort during
mashing is to investigate and monitor the change of content concentrations such as
sugars and protein. This also provides an inside into the efficiency of this brew.
Dry matter and mineral content
The dry matter contents and the mineral contents for all the samples are illustrated
below in Table 3.6. The method of measuring dry matter and ash content (mineral
content) is the same as used in the initial brewing experiment.
While the dry matter content of the malted wheat and the wort are similar to the
first brew and within a acceptable margin of difference, the results for ”Milk 100”
and ”Milk 300” seem to differ quite significantly. There is a 8-9% decrease in the
dry matter content of these samples compared to the initial brew. It is not quite
clear what causes this change.
This report believes it to be one of two possible explanations. There was a degree
of uncertainty about the actual amount of water added to the second brew, as there
was a slight malfunction in the mashing system in which more water was allowed
in. This could of course cause a lower relative dry matter in the wort. Another
explanation could be that something has happened during the pressing of the BSG
21
==PAGE:27==
as the dry matter contents of both the filtrate and the cake are different. The first
explanation is thought to be more likely, although they are not mutually exclusive.
Although this change is not optimal, the data is not considered by this report to be
wasted or redundant. This study is experimental and studies the general properties
of wheat BSG - it is not a study of a very specific type of wheat BSG, but rather a
general indication of the properties and characteristics of wheat BSG.
The ash content is similar to the ash content measured in the first brew, except from
a significant increase in the ash content of the BSG dry phase. This number is still
considered less than significant and thus not a topic for further analysis.
Table 3.6: Dry matter and mineral content second brew
Sample no
Sample Name
Dry Matter
Ash content
(% of DM)
1
Malted wheat
93,86%
1,54%
2
Wort (20 min)
14,65%
1,32%
3
Wort (40 min)
10,50%
1,36%
4
Wort (60 min)
11,52%
2,49%
5
Wort (88 min)
14,48%
1,11%
6
Wort (225 min)
13,01%
1,33%
7
BSG
27,57%
NaN
8
Milk 100
14,81%
0,63%
9
BSG Dry phase
30,22%
3,28%
10
Milk 300
15,12%
0,44%
Sugar
The sugar content on the second brewing process was analyzed using the same
HPLC-technique and equipment as the first brew.
The results of the second brewing experiment is similar to the first brew. The results
illustrated in Table 3.7 show a very similar concentration and build up of maltose
during the mashing process as revealed by sample 2-5. Sample 6 does not indicate
a decrease at it is taken after sparging, meaning that water has been added during
this process logically lowering the sugar concentration of the wort.
Sample 8 and 10 does not deviate by a large margin from the first brew (Sample
10 + 11) in Table 3.3, but there is an interesting observation to be made. In the
initial brewing experiment, there was a significant difference in maltose and glucose
concentration between ”Milk 100” and ”Milk 300”.
This difference is not to be
found in the HPLC analaysis of the second brew as both the maltose and glucose
22
==PAGE:28==
concentrations are almost identical. The reason for this shift in concentration has
not been identified by this report.
As with the first brewing experiment, the fructose levels are very low and too
insignificant to consider, when analyzing the samples.
Table 3.7: Sugar content second brew
Sample No
Sample Name
Maltose Conc
(g/L)
Glucose Conc
(g/L)
Fructose Conc
(g/L
2
Wort (20 min)
10,28
2,25
0,16
3
Wort (40 min)
8,55
1,87
0,14
4
Wort (60 min)
8,74
1,33
0,19
5
Wort (88 min)
13,97
2,72
n.a
6
Wort (225 min)
7,74
0,82
n.a
8
Milk 100
6,01
0,67
0,20
10
Milk 300
6,00
0,68
0,18
The calibration was done using standards of 2g/L, 0,5g/L, 0,25g/L and 0,125g/L of
each of the three sugars. The details of the calibrations is illustrated in Appendix
B
Protein
The protein levels were measured with the Dumas method[27] using an Elementar
[28] as in the first brewing process. A significant difference in the analysis of the
samples from the second brewing experiment was that this time soluble proteins
were also measured. This was thought to be relevant to get a more detailed view of
the qualities of the wheat BSG products and possibly provide further selling points
for turning it into a commercial product, which is discussed in Chapter 4.
The proteins measured in this process reveal different results than what was the
case of the first brewing experiment. The protein content of the wort is very stable
throughout the mashing process and do not reveal a significant spike as seen in
Table 3.4. The increase of protein content in DM of filtrate ”Milk 100” and ”Milk
300” of 4-6% is also noteworthy, however it can perhaps be explained by general
uncertainty in carrying out the experiment slightly differently. The protein level
measured in the BSG Dry phase is significantly higher than what was measured in
the first brewing process. It is assumed by this report that the 4,82% measured in
the initial brewing experiment is somehow a mistake as that seems to be deviating
from the rest of the results.
23
==PAGE:29==
So the ”products” of the wheat BSG after pressing and filtering have a total protein
content of:
• BSG Dry phase = 7,09%
• Milk 100 = 3,38%
• Milk 300 = 3,07%
The total protein contents of the filtrates are similar to the ones measured in the first
brewing experiment in Chapter 3.1.1. The BSG dry phase is however much lower in
the first experiment, however that is caused by the aforementioned unknown error.
Table 3.8: Protein and soluble protein second brew
Sample no
Sample Name
Protein
(% of DM)
Soluble Protein
Conc (g/L)
1
Malted wheat
13,1%
-
2
Wort (20 min)
7,32%
1,3
3
Wort (40 min)
8,04%
1,01
4
Wort (60 min)
7,42%
1,01
5
Wort (88 min)
7,12%
1,11
6
Wort (225 min)
7,19%
1,13
7
BSG
23,78%
-
8
Milk 100
22,80%
1,24
9
BSG Dry phase
23,45%
-
10
Milk 300
20,28%
1,16
The liquid samples: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 and 10 were measured for their content of soluble
proteins using the Bradford Protein Assay [29] as described in Chapter 3.1.3.
The concentration of soluble protein throughout the mashing and sparging process
is very stable and might have a slight increase in the filtrates (Sample 8+10) however
that is within the margin of uncertainty and can not be concluded with a satisfying
degree of confidence. The soluble proteins which are present in the liquid samples
is likely Albumin. The low concentration of these is likely due to the fact that the
amount of soluble protein decreases as part of the malting process [35] as well as
much of it going into the wort.
3.2.3
Literature comparison
In the previous two sub chapters, the analysis of the first two brewing experiments
have been explained in detail. This sub chapter reviews literature and data of other
24
==PAGE:30==
BSG studies to compare these results to other types of BSG’s and experiments to
illustrate whether or not wheat BSG has any significant advantages or qualities in
comparison.
Initially the potential value of wheat BSG is examined further using external research
and literature to estimate the contents of the samples from the brewing process.
It is outside of the scope and resources of this project to further investigate the
total protein content as well as the soluble protein content found in Chapters 3.2.1
and 3.2.2.
However in a 2008 journal article in the Journal of The Institute of
Brewing[35] different wheat types are measured on their protein content throughout
the malting process. While these results are not expected to be identical with the
malted wheat[33] used for these experiments it is assumed that the compositions are
similar and thus comparable.
Using this article it is expected that malted wheat contains Albumins, Gliadins,
Glutenins and Globulins.
The Albumins are the soluble proteins of the wheat grains[36] and thus most of it
will likely end up in the wort. This would also explain the low amount of soluble
proteins found during the sample analysis.
Gliadins and Glutenins make up the major part of proteins found in wheat[36].
These two mainly make up the Gluten proteins in wheat grains and are the proteins
that can provoke celiac disease. Generally Gluten has recieved much negative media
attention in later years which might reflect negatively on a wheat BSG product.
In terms of product digestibility the protein content of wheat is not a factor
influencing digestibility negatively according to a 2021 study[37]. The total protein
content of the wheat BSG (see Table 3.8) seem to very similar to 100% barley BSG
which also appears in the range 15-27% protein content.
A study made in 2015 compares the content of BSG made exclusively from barley
and BSG made from a mix with barley and wheat. The results of this comparison
are illustrated below in Figure 3.5. This figure provides a detailed view of what
differences there are between barley and wheat malt. While the protein levels are
similar, the lipid content is likely higher in the barley/wheat BSG, while the starch
content is much lower. The significantly lower starch levels in wheat BSG could
be considered a benefit as many people attempt to avoid an excessive amounts of
starch in their diet. There is a significantly higher amount of cellulose in the wheat
BSG and while cellulose in indigestible to humans, it is a crucial fiber to help guide
digestion and bowel movements and to avoid constipation.
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.5: ”Content of readily degradable and non-degradable components in pure barley BSG
and a mixture of barley/wheat BSG in % dry weight”[38]
Previous studies made on the contents of barley-wheat BSG reveals its anti-oxidant
properties. The study concludes that BSG could be a low-cost, high quality way
of obtaining phenolic compounds and other anti-oxidant molecules[39]. The value
of these properties are difficult to estimate, but considered by this report to be of
significant importance.
26
==PAGE:32==
4
Entrepreneurial
4.1
Current disposal of BSG
In order to evaluate whether or not it is sensible to upcycle BSG into various
products, it is crucial to first analyze what the current alternative is.
In order
to examine and analyze the current disposal of BSG by breweries, this report relies
on two different sources of data. Initially a primary data source, built on various
interviews with breweries and secondly on secondary data found in current literature
on the subject.
Interviews
The candidates who were interviewed about BSG disposal were various breweries
(more specifically, brewmasters). Most of the interviewees were Danish breweries
with few exceptions. Whilst these are not perfect representatives for wheat breweries
(as these are mostly placed in Belgium and Bavaria) it seems clear from all current
literature on BSG that the processes for disposal are very similar all around the
world at all types of breweries.
All of the breweries were all interviewed using the same questions. The interview
guide used for this, can be seen in Appendix A. Note that not all breweries chose to
answer all questions.
Generally the breweries in question comprise a large variety of sizes and profiles
as seen in Table 4.1. The literature reviewed in Chapter 2.1 suggests that many
breweries dispose of their BSG by either selling it for cattle feed or natural gas.
This claim is further strengthened by the interviews conducted.
Big and small
breweries alike, the vast majority of them give/sell their BSG to farmers and very
few of the have actually seriously investigated other possibilities.
There are, however, exceptions to this fact as seen in column ’Thoughts’ in Table
4.1. Skanderborg Bryghus and Anarkist have both investigated the possibility of
upcycling their BSG for food purposes. They have both found it too big a challenge
to be worth it. They mention in their interviews that to be able to live up to food
safety standards, they would have to invest a lot in remodelling part of their brewery,
which they do not believe is worth it. The representative from Anarkist mentions
that the rules are too strict in order for it to make sense for them.
Schneider Weisse and Skands have a slightly more curious and optimistic approach
to the upcycling of BSG. For Skands it has been considered to use BSG for growing
mushrooms. Further details are needed, however, to evaluate the feasibility of this.
At Schneider Weisse they have carried out several R&D projects in cooperation with
27
==PAGE:33==
universities, in order to find alternative uses for their BSG. They have researched
using BSG for their own furnace, thus heating their brewery. So far this has turned
out to be too inefficient and costly to be a viable option. Furthermore they have done
studies in making biochar out of BSG, which could then replace regular charcoal.
This also failed to pass their financial expectations, so has not been initiated large
scale.
Nørrebro Bryghus stands out as the only brewery from the interview process, to
actively upcycle their BSG. They have a standing agreement with a company called
Agrain[40], who retrieves all of their BSG and uses it for a variety of products, see
Chapter 4.2.
Table 4.1: Interviews with breweries
Brewery
Yearly prod
Malt
Enzymes
Disposal
BSG
Thoughts
Jacobsen
17.000 hl
Wheat beer:
40/60
Cattle feed +
Natural gas
No
Hancock
Barley
No
Feed (dairy)
No
Skands
3.120 hl
Barley, wheat,
oat
Feed
Mushroom
growth
Thisted
45.000 hl
Barley, wheat,
oat
No
50 % feed
50% gas
No
Fur
4.000 hl
Barley, wheat
Feed
No
Skanderborg
40.000 hl
Barley, wheat,
oat, rhye
(Organic)
No
Feed
Too expensive
Anarkist
300.000 hl
Feed
Too expensive
Rules too strict
Nørrebro
60.000 hl
Wheat beer:
50/50
Organic
No
Upcycles
Agrain
Schneider
Weisse
300.000 hl
Wheat beer:
60/40
No
Feed
Biofuel +
Biochar
Literature
Besides building on the primary data gathered in Table 4.1 this report also digs
deeper into the literature reviewed in Chapter 2.1 in order to further analyze and
confirm the trending practices of commercial breweries. Throughout the literature
reviewed in Chapter 2 it became evident that most breweries dispose of their BSG
28
==PAGE:34==
by either selling/giving it as feed for cattle or selling it for biogas[39]. On top of this
an increasing portion is just being sent to landfills as the breweries see no alternative
applications for it.
This overview comprised of secondary and primary data clearly illustrates the urgent
need for developing alternative applications for BSG.
4.2
Analysis of upcycling market
After covering the current state of BSG-disposal among breweries worldwide, this
report will investigate the current market for upcycled BSG products. This is done
as an analysis of a wide selection of market actors, their size, growth and product
range. Initially to estimate if the market is growing and if so at which pace. Then
to investigate the different products and developments on the market and attempt
to identify opportunities for the wheat BSG products.
A grand total of 13 different BSG upcyling companies are identified and investigated
in this report. Initially with a description of the respective company, its product
range, history and percieved growth. All of this is based on publically available data
and there is such a different in the degree to which the different companies may be
accurately analyzed.
It is assumed that these 13 companies make up a large portion (if not all) of the
upcycling BSG market.
Agrain
Agrain (Circular Food Technology) was founded in 2018 and began production in
2019. They source both spent grain from breweries but also from whiskey distilleries.
Their products include different types of flour, based on the BSG from different types
of beer. There are clear differences in nutritional content depending on whether a
the flour is from an IPA or a Stout as an example. As of January 2022 they have
added bake mixes to their product range. These include a bake mix for making
whole grain rhyebread and one for making buns.
Among other products they produce a granola where BSG is a large component of
the ingredients. They also produce both crackers and crisps where BSG make up
a substantial part of the content. Agrain was interviewed as part of this project.
In this interview they also mentioned having a secret patent-pending technology to
transform BSG into food, that solved a lot of the hygienic, bacterial and economic
issues that other companies might face.
As all of their products are exclusively organic, so are their partners/suppliers.
They currently have partnerships with Ørbæk bryggeri, Nørrebro Bryghus, Nyborg
29
==PAGE:35==
Distilleri and Braunstein, from which they receive their spent grains[40].
Their products are both available from their website but are also being sold in the
supermarket chain Irma, Ø-helse and SpecialKøbmanden.
As they are a Danish company their annual financial status is publically available.
They are currently operating at a significant loss. This may be explained by the fact
that it is a relatively new company still developing products and increasing sales and
because of the Covid-19 pandemic heavily influencing their ability to sell products
to restaurants, cafes, bars etc[41].
Grain4Grain
Grain4Grain was founded in 2018 and is located in San Antonio. They produce
two different types of flour based on 100% spent grains.
Their other products
include bake mixes for making pancakes and waffles. Lastly they produce BSG-
based seasoned coating for breading foods. All of their ingredients are either gluten
free or keto friendly. They put a big emphasis on the high protein content and low
carb and gluten content of their products.
Additionally to developing the aforementioned products Grain4Grain has also
developed technology capable of drying and milling spent grain faster and
significantly cheaper than other industry, they claim. Their technology is currently
patent pending, but should be able to complete the process in less than 20 minutes,
which would usually take 6 hours [42].
Besides promoting their products their website also offers several blog posts about
the nutritional value of BSG and the sustainable perspective of their business model.
Their products are only available in very few shops in Texas and otherwise on the
Grain4Grain website. They are assumed to still be in the early stage of their business
development.
Portland Pet Food
Portland Pet Food is the first company to be analyzed in this report, which is
not exclusively working with the upcycling of BSG. This company was founded
in 2014 and produces several different types of dog treats. All of these products
are characterized by being made with high quality ingredients and without any
unnecessary food additives or preservatives.
Furthermore they make products
specifically for dogs with different allergies to accomodate this.
In their line of products they have a category called ”Brew Biscuits”. Brew Biscuits
are all made from BSG and exist with different flavors. The spent grain is sourced
locally from Hopworks Urban Brewery. Furthermore they have a partnership with
30
==PAGE:36==
Portland’s House Spirits Distillery where they also receive barley[43].
Throughout their existence they have had 2 funding rounds. In 2018 raising $453k
and in 2021 raising $2,4M [44]
RISE Products
RISE Products is an upcycling company founded in New York in 2017. Much like
companies previously reviewed in this chapter they produce BSG flour and bake
mixes for brownies. They do, however, also sell BSG brownies that are ready-to-eat
with high protein and fiber content but low starch.
Just like it was the case with Grain4Grain, RISE Products also have a technology for
drying and milling BSG, which is patent pending. Their claim is that this technology
can also be used to process and upcycle other organic by-products.
They have partnerships with multiple local breweries but also with AB InBev, which
is quite a large actor on the global drinks market.
Besides selling BSG products RISE Products also offer consulting. It is possible to
acquire their services to develop upcycling processes or other sustainable business
practices [45].
According to Crunchbase, RISE Products have had 2 funding rounds in 2017 (pre-
seed and seed) and raised a total of $150k[46].
[47]
NETZRO
NETZRO is a Minneapolis based upcycling food ingredient company founded in
2015. As with many of the other companies analyzed in this chapter, their goal is
to reduce and eliminate food waste. They are working with different processes and
technologies and are not exclusively working with BSG. Their other focus areas also
include upcycling egg shells, fruit waste and general food waste.
As other companies on the upcycling market, NETZRO has developed a prototype
technology with which they dry and mill the BSG they receive from local brewing
companies. They do not sell their ingredients B2C, but rather B2B by selling to
restaurants, bakers and food production companies.
Their goal is to create an
ecosystem all the way from farmers and brewers to the food manufacturing and
consumers. It is therefore also not clear if they offer other BSG ingredients beyond
flour [48].
According to the data available on Crunchbase they have only received funding
once from an angel investor in 2020. A total investment of $205,6k[49] and as of
31
==PAGE:37==
26/01/2022 they have finished a new round of crowdfunding of $164k[50]
Legria
Legria is a Swiss upcycling ingredient company founded in 2018. Their focus is
on upcycling BSG to use in different products and comparing these to the regular
storebought versions of the products. They do this to illustrate the lower sugar and
carbohydrate levels which can be achieved when using BSG as an ingredient.
From the information available to this report it seems that Legria has not fully
developed its products series as it is not available for purchase[51]. The company
does not have any public information regarding funding, investments or rollouts.
This leads this report to assume that they are still in the early stages of developing
their business model and product portfolio.
Evergrain
Evergrain is based out of St Louis, Missouri and is likely the largest upcycling
company which will be investigated in this report.
While founded only in 2020
Evergrain has at least 37 employees and are actively hiring. This makes them much
different than the other companies analyzed in this report as they usually seem to
employ less than 5 people and sometimes only the founder.
In 2021 company was backed by AB InBev to introduce a range of products in stores
that supposedly became available in stores in both Europe and the US during 2021
[52].
The products offered by Evergrain are comprised of two categories: everpro and
evervita. Everpro is a concentrated protein powder (80-85%) based on BSG, which
can be used for plant based drinks, coffees, smoothies etc. as a tasty supplement.
Evervita consists of a range of products that require less processing than everpro and
which are more akin to the products this report has examined from other upcycling
companies. They include high-protein fiber rich ingredients for baked goods[53].
The reason for Evergrains rapid growth and large organization is most likely that
AB InBev invested $100M in the company in 2021 with the purpose of employing 50
people[54]. When a company of the size and significance as AB InBev invests such
an amount in upcycling BSG, one could argue that they do recognize the problem
of proper sustainable disposal of BSG and has found a way to profit from it.
Regrained
Regrained was founded in 2013 in San Francisco and is an upcycling company
focusing exclusively on spent grain.
Their products range includes different types of snacks like puffs with three different
32
==PAGE:38==
flavors. Furthermore they also carry a range of bars simiar to granola bars that are
based on BSG. Aside from their main sortiment they also do ’Limited time’ products
such as a BSG pasta [55].
Much like other companies analyzed by this report, Regrained has a patented
treatment process of the spent grain they use. It is based on evaporating water
from the BSG using infrared heating and thus bringing the grains down to 10-12%
moisture, and using it as an ingredient in their products[56].
They are a quite large company, by industry standards, as they have around 12
employees and are actively hiring [55].
Financially they have received funding on two separate occasions. Once in 2018
receiving $2.5M with Griffith Foods as a major investor. Griffith Foods is a company
developing and investing in sustainable food ingredients.
The second round of
funding took place in 2020 and raised $744.3K[57].
Funbrew
Funbrew is not so much a company as a research project in collaboration with several
different universities and industry actors. Their goal is to develop different foods
and food ingredients on the basis of BSG. Because of their research background they
focsu a lot on the nutritional qualities of BSG like the anti-oxidants and their effect
in the BSG-pasta.
The universities involved are:
University of Bari, University of Helsinki, RISE
Research Institutes of Sweden and University of Bozen-Bolzano. This makes the
project an international collaboration between scientists across Europe. They receive
their funding from national governments[58].
Spent Goods
Spent Goods is a Canadian company founded in 2018 with the focus on making
baked goods using BSG. The company consists of 5 employees and produces pretzels,
bagels and sour doughs.
They cooperate with local Toronto brewery Henderson Brewing for spent grain and
with local bakeries to develop their baked goods. Their products are available in 16
different locations across Toronto, but nowhere outside the area [59].
While no public data is available on their economy and funding it is assumed that
they are operating on a low budget, when taking their product range, distribution
channels and employee count into consideration.
33
==PAGE:39==
Trebodur
As this report relates to upcycling in a food perspective, most companies which are
investigated produce BSG-food ingredients or products. Trebodur is an exception
as they use BSG for a different purpose. The reason for including them is that their
BSG-products are quite unique and offers a different perspective on the possibilities
of upcycling BSG.
Trebodur is a German company developing packaging materials from BSG to
subsitute plastic or paper. One example of application of their material is that it
can substitute the plastic holding together cans in a sixpack. Becuase their products
are made from BSG they are all 100% bio degradable. Their products are not yet
on the market and there is no public infomation available on their financial status
or if they have any patents for their technology[60].
Take Two (Canvas)
Canvas started as a Kickstarter-funded startup in 2017.
They raised $47k for
developing and selling ”barley milk” made with BSG as a main ingredient [61].
In 2018 they were acquired by AB InBev who saw a potential in fnding new ways
of handling BSG instead of it ending up in landfills or used as feed[62].
Their current products consist of four different types of barley milk:
Original,
Unsweetened, Barista and Chocolate.
According to their data one carton (32 fl
oz/950ml) uses approximately 3/4lb (340g) spent grain[63]. According to an article
in Foodnavigator-USA, Take Two uses EverPro from Evergrain[53] (who we analyzed
earlier in this report) to make their barley milk[64]. They appear to be the only
current company making a plant-based milk on BSG making them an actor in the
growing plant drink market. They are available in a large number of stores all over
the US.
This would make sense as they are both part of AB InBev and seem to be part of
a coordinated effort to approach the BSG disposal problem.
Grainstone
Grainstone is an upcycling company based in Australia. They focus on utlizing all
of the different nutritious components of BSG by using a sequential fractionation
extraction process to retrieve all the functional, valuable nutrients of BSG.
So far they have only released one product, which is a BSG flour, much similiar
to the other flours identified in this chapter. They are working on creating protein
isolates and soluble fiber products to be sold to food manufacturing and others[65].
This fragmentation of the the BSG is a slightly different approach to product
development, than other companies have chosen.
34
==PAGE:40==
Aggregated analysis
Following this general overview and analysis of a range of upcycling companies
a series of comparisons are made to gain further insight into the market as a
whole. Initially the different available products are ranked based on their perceived
complexity.
”Complexity” in this report is defined as such:
• The complexity of a production setup, amount of processing equipment and
its level of sophistication.
• The ”completeness” of the product.
While some products are sold as an
ingredient, others may sold as a final consumable.
It should be noted that there is no objective way to value the degree of complexity in
these different upcycling companies. The degree is an estimation based on available
data and perceived complexity of the products.
The different complexitites are
outlined below in Figure 4.1.
This figure provides an insight into the business
models of the different upcycling companies. Comparing this figure to Figure 4.2
it is evident that having a large product range is not necessarily a benefit, if those
products are of low complexity. Many of the companies who only produce flour and
bake mixes do not seem to experience rapid growth or attract the interest of major
investors. This is said with a large degree of uncertainty as most companies in this
industry have been founded within the last 5 years, meaning that they might still be
developing their business model and maturing their products. The scales in Figure
4.2 are also relative meaning that the largest company (Take Two) is the largest of
the companies which have been investigated in this report. They have 50 employees
which also indicate the limited size of the industry as a whole.
The two companies which AB InBev are involved with have very small product
ranges, but high product complexity. They are also widely distributed and carried
in many stores. This is likely due to taking advantage of AB InBevs established
connections, relationships and distribution channels.
35
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.1: Perceived manufacturing complexity of BSG-products analyzed in the report.
Figure 4.2: Comparison of companies’ size (amount of employees, funding, sales) and product
range (amount of different product categories)
NETZRO and Funbrew are absent from Figure 4.2 as no proper data could be found
to add them to the chart.
The two figures are based on the overviews of the different upcycling companies.
These companies are estimated to present a very significant portion of the BSG
36
==PAGE:42==
food product market. This indicates that this industry is in its very early stage
of maturity.
There are still many different product/process development efforts
necessary to really ramp up the size of the industry as a whole. Without having
concrete sales volumes or data its seems that the industry is growing, however,
considering that new companies are founded every year who sees a potential
business case in upcycling BSG. Even though sustainability, upcycling and plant
food products are trending at the moment it seems that the BSG product market
still has some way to go, both in terms of development and investment, but also in
terms of general awareness.
Furthermore there are indications that there might be considerable costs involved
in processing the spent grain and evaporating liquid. This assumption is based on
the fact that several companies have developed technologies to dry and mill BSG
cheaper and faster than what they used to. While interviewing the Bavarian brewery
Schneider Weisse it aslo became evident that the reason for their failure to develop
BSG pellets or biochar were the considerable costs involved in evaporating excess
water from the BSG.
4.3
Business Model
Building on the previous sections of analysis of the product in Chapter 3 as well
as the analysis of current BSG-disposal practices and the upcycling market, this
section will attempt to identify a suitable purpose for the wheat BSG products and
investigate whether it is possible or likely to build a viable and sustainable business
model from this.
Initially this means investigating which of the current product categories (as seen
in Figure 4.2) the wheat BSG would be most suited for.
4.3.1
Products
Building on the findings and experiences of Chapter 3.2 it is relevant to look at
the potential food products which wheat BSG is most relevant for. The general
analysis of Chapter 3.2 lead to the conclusion that wheat BSG did not possess any
major different qualities from barley BSG, except from an assumed larger presence
of anti-oxidant lipids. That the important contents of wheat BSG might not be
fundamentally different from barley BSG is an important finding of this report as
it will help guide the building of a potential business model and evaluating the
feasibility of building a business exclusively on wheat BSG products.
Even though there is not thought to be significant differences between barley and
wheat BSG, there are still many wheat beer breweries in places like Belgium and
37
==PAGE:43==
Bavaria, which produce barley-wheat BSG, which is currently not being upcycled
for food or other purposes. As the interview with Schneider Weisse indicated, at
least some of these breweries are actively looking for applications for their BSG,
meaning that there might still be business potential in the BSG, even if it does not
possess major differences from traditional barley BSG.
The analysis of the upcycling market illustrates a wide variety of products with
different product complexities. These, alongside others are analyzed as potential
possibilities in which the wheat BSG filtrates (”Milk 100” and ”Milk 300”) and/or
the filter cake may be used.
Generally speaking, barley-wheat BSG would likely be able to be used for all
categories illustrated in 4.1.
Anheuser-Busch investing a sizeable amount in barley milk could be a sign that they
believe that this is the future for disposing of BSG and making profits along the
way. It may also be a way for them to fulfill their CSR report as the production
of barley milk is a very sustainable venture. It is of course worth noting that these
two scenarios are not mutually exclusive.
If the first of these two scenarios is correct then making a ”milk”-product might
also be a way to properly utilize wheat BSG. The Milk 100 and Milk 300 are
indistinguishable in terms of look, smell and taste. They have a slightly sweet taste
with a hint of wheat. This is likely due to the choice of wheat[33] but also due to the
fact that this is the product of only malted wheat. However, the nutritional qualities
of Milk 100 & 300 are good with a relatively high amount of proteins and likely also
fibers. It would require extensive sensory testing and development of recipes, but
there seems to be no reason why barley-wheat BSG should not be able to be used
for a barley-wheat milk. The only noticeable difference in terms of nutrition would
the increased gluten levels, which might have an adverse effect on sales, as some
consumers frantically avoid gluten. The market for plant based drinks is in rapid
growth and is capturing market shares from regular milk each year[66]. This might
be why AB InBev is investing in these products and launching them all over the US.
Developing and testing barley-wheat milk, with all its nutritios properties, in the
near future could present an interesting business opportunity, if possible to latch on
to the industry-wide growth.
In terms of producing all the baking-related products it seems that there needs to
be a technological breakthrough in terms of cost structure. Right now most of these
companies receive the spent grain from breweries either free or at a low cost, but
still the price of the products are far above market prices for other versions of the
product. While it is evident that the environmentally conscious consumer would
38
==PAGE:44==
pay a higher price for a sustainable product, these differences would likely need to
be lowered to gain real traction among consumers. An example of this is Agrains
flour which is sold for DKK39,00 ($5,92) for 500g[40] where organic flour from the
same store costs DKK39.95 ($6,06) for 1kg[67], meaning that it is about twice the
price. While finding better technological processes to handle BSG at lower costs is
important, part of the problem might also stem from the small scale production.
Oftentimes production costs pr unit goes down when production is scaled up.
There are also possibilities for using the BSG for its anti-oxidant qualities, and
perhaps developing a method for extracting those.
According to research they
should be of good quality and very useful as a natural source[39]. This is outside
the scope of this report, however, but might be a topic for further research as that
could potentially reveal significant value stored in spent grain and wheat BSG in
particular.
4.4
Feasibility
Initially this report sought to find unique qualities in wheat BSG which could then
lead to a unique value proposition and business model. Since this report is not
able to uncover or reveal any such qualities it seems that it is unfeasible to develop
a business case focusing on barley-wheat BSG and capturing market shares from
barley BSG products only based on that.
The high-complexity products such as BSG-milk is likely to require a large and
advanced production setup, which would require large amounts of funding. This
could be why AB InBev are currently the only ones involved in producing barley-
milk.
However, there is still barley-wheat BSG being produced as a side stream all over
the world and as of now it has not been the focus of much research or attention from
companies. It is the recommendation of this report that a series of barley-wheat
BSG products could be incorporated into an existing company’s portfolio to widen
their profile and sensory/taste horizon.
39
==PAGE:45==
5
Epilogue
This chapter comments on the report as a whole, on its findings, their validity and
which possible limitations there could be. In this process the report is rounded off
by by answering the research questions presented in Chapter 2.3
Furthermore it makes recommendations for further studies into the field of brewers
spent grain.
5.1
Limitations
When concluding that there are no significant advantages or qualities in wheat
compared to barley,
this conclusion was made under some very important
assumptions.
It is possible if further analysis of wheat BSG was done it would
be possible to uncover something, that was covered in this report. However, this
report has split its focus between food science and entrepreneurial science and as
such it is not within its scope to dive further into detail and analysis than what have
been done throughout Chapter 3.
When commenting on the different upcycling companies, their business model,
product complexity, financial situations etc.
this is all assumptions based on
available data. With more data points (i.e interviews) or a longer time frame it
would be possible to make a more precise analysis of these companies and perhaps
adjust the findings of this report slightly.
5.2
Conclusion
This study has provided insight into the current problems regarding the disposal of
brewers spent grains. It has shed light on the growing need for finding profitable
and more sustainable alternatives to current practices. Specifically this report has
focused on analyzing the possibilities of utilizing wheat BSG as a possible food or
food ingredient and whether or not is possesses certain qualities or properties that
are different from barley BSG. While the nutritional value is slightly different, it
was not possible for this report to uncover any significant changes that would lead
to a radically different business opportunity or value proposition.
The current upcycling market seems to be growing. This is determined by the fact
that all relevant upcycling companies have been founded within the last 5-7 years.
This indicated that the industry is in the early stages of maturity and is still lacking
some development before large growth will be accomplished. However it seems likely
that it could be a growing industry in the future, provided that one is able to produce
BSG-products at a cost that would satisfy larger customer segments.
40
==PAGE:46==
While most upcycling companies are rather small, it seems that the ones with a larger
distribution network and mature product portfolio are the companies with a large
financial backing. This indicates that while it would be possible to build a business
model to compete with the smaller companies, it would likely be a severe challenge
to build a business to compete with AB InBev-sponsored companies which have a
wide variety of advantages in terms of label, network and distribution channels.
In conclusion, barley-wheat BSG does not constitute a significantly different material
than barley BSG and as such there seems to be no unique value proposition to be
made from this.
41
==PAGE:47==
6
References
[1]
Bernard Marr. The 8 Biggest Business Trends In 2022. Nov. 2021. url: http
s://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2021/11/01/the-8-biggest-bu
siness-trends-in-2022/.
[2]
Viktor Kullberg and Charlotte Artman. Sustainability, a means to reach higher
profitability? Lund University, June 2019.
[3]
Johann Swinnen. Beer Consumption and Trade in an Era of Economic Growth
and Globalization. Agricultural and Applied Economics Association, 2017.
[4]
Jan Conway. Beer production worldwide from 1998 to 2020. Oct. 2021. url:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/270275/worldwide-beer-produc
tion/.
[5]
Hannah Ritchie and Max Roser. Environmental Impacts of Food Production.
2021. url: https://ourworldindata.org/environmental-impacts-of-fo
od.
[6]
About Upcycled Food. url: https://www.upcycledfood.org/upcycled-foo
d. (accessed: 30.12.2021).
[7]
Upcycled Certified Products. url: https://www.upcycledfood.org/upcycle
d-certified-products. (accessed: 30.12.2021).
[8]
Reann Garrett et al. Development of New Chip Products from Brewer’s Spent
Grain. Journal of Food Quality, 2021.
[9]
Persistence Market Research. Wheat Beer Market - Global Industry Analysis
2016 - 2020 and Opportunity Assessment 2021 - 2031. url: https://www.pe
rsistencemarketresearch.com/market-research/wheat-beer-market.as
p. Accessed 30.12.21.
[10]
Mint. Carlsberg marks entry into India’s wheat beer market, launches Tuborg
White. Sept. 2021. url: https://www.livemint.com/companies/news/car
lsberg-marks-entry-into-india-s-wheat-beer-market-launches-tubo
rg-white-11630733970252.html.
[11]
Bryce Eddings. What Is Wheat Beer? 2020. url: https://www.thesprucee
ats.com/wheat-beer-profile-353432.
[12]
Ernest ˇSturd´ıka Zuzana ˇSramkov´aa Edita Gregov´ab. Chemical composition
and nutritional quality of wheat grain. Acta Chimica Slovaca, Vol.2, No.1,
2009.
[13]
Sana Ikram et al. Composition and Nutrient Value Proposition of Brewers
Spent Grain. Journal of Food Science, 2017.
[14]
Aoife L. McCarthy et al. Brewers’ spent grain; bioactivity of phenolic
component, its role in animal nutrition and potential for incorporation in
functional foods: a review. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 2013.
42
==PAGE:48==
[15]
Anca F˘arca¸s et al. Brewers spent grain – A new potential ingredient for
functional foods. Journal of Agroalimentary Processes and Technologies, 2014.
[16]
Francesca Nocente et al. Upcycling of brewers spent grain by production of dry
pasta with higher nutritional potential. LWT - Food Science and Technology,
2019.
[17]
Shannon Combest and Cynthia Warren. Perceptions of college students in
consuming whole grain foods made with Brewers’ Spent Grain. Food Scince
and Nutrition, 2018.
[18]
Sperandio G. and Amoriello T.AND Carbone K.AND Fedrizzi M.AND
Monteleone A.AND Tarangioli S.AND Pagano M. Increasing the Value
of Spent Grain from Craft Microbreweries for Energy Purposes. Chemical
Engineering Transactions, 2017.
[19]
U. Ben-Hamed, H. Seddighi, and K. Thomas. Economic Returns of Using
Brewery‘s Spent Grain in Animal Feed. International Journal of Economics
and Management Engineering, 2011.
[20]
Emad F.Aboukila et al. Reclamation of calcareous soil and improvement of
squash growth using brewers’ spent grain and compost. Journal of the Saudi
Society of Agricultural Sciences, 2018.
[21]
Upcycle. url: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/upcycle.
(accessed: 30.12.2021).
[22]
Kyungeun Sung. A review on upcycling: Current body of literature, knowledge
gaps and a way forward. Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on
Environment, Cultural, Economic and Social Sustainability, 2015.
[23]
European Food Safety Authority. Mycotoxins. 2020. url: https://www.efsa
.europa.eu/en/topics/topic/mycotoxins.
[24]
Sharon Tal Marc Gruber. Where to play - 3 steps for discovering your most
valuable market opportunities. Pearson Education Limited, 2017.
[25]
Preben Bøje Hansen Peter Stubbe. Filtering apparatus and method for mixing,
extraction and/or separation. 2012. url: https://patents.google.com/pat
ent/US9409105.
[26]
Preben Bøje Hansen Peter Stubbe. A filtration method and apparatus including
a roller with pores. 2007. url: https://patents.google.com/patent/WO20
08131780A1/en.
[27]
VELP Scientifica. Elemental Analysis and the Dumas Method. url: https:
//www.velp.com/en-ww/dumas-method-1.aspx. Accessed 19.12.21.
[28]
Elementar. rapid MAX N exceed NITROGEN AND PROTEIN ANALYZER.
url: https://www.elementar.com/en/products/nitrogen-and-protein-
analyzers/rapid-max-n-exceed. Accessed 19.12.21.
[29]
Instructions Coomassie (Bradford) Protein Assay Kit. Thermo Scientific.
43
==PAGE:49==
[30]
David Lindell John Holland. The Oxford Companion to Beer definition of
malting. url: https : / / beerandbrewing . com / dictionary / kJavT7eNYH.
Accessed 11.11.2021.
[31]
Brad Smith. Ask the Experts: Mash Efficiency. Dec. 2017. url: https://bee
randbrewing.com/ask-the-experts-mash-efficiency/.
[32]
Shimadzu. What is HPLC (High Performance Liquid Chromatography). url:
https://www.shimadzu.com/an/service-support/technical-support/an
alysis-basics/basic/what_is_hplc.html. Accessed 19.12.21.
[33]
WEYERMANN® WHEAT MALT PALE. url: https://www.weyermann.d
e/en-gb/product/weyermann-wheat-malt-pale/. (accessed: 30.12.2021).
[34]
Ultraflo® Max: Faster filtration. url: https://biosolutions.novozymes.c
om/en/products/craft-brewing/ultraflo-max-faster-filtration?utm
_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_campaign=Craft_Brewing_emea_ho
me_page&gclid=Cj0KCQiA8vSOBhCkARIsAGdp6RTOK6KEUlf59PpHKj_VaWRWkv
svWaQyS6DMs-Fyq1aP6LX50XQYCXoaAgQ0EALw_wcB. (accessed: 30.12.2021).
[35]
Yuhong Jin, Kaili Zhang, and Jinhua Du. Effects of Wheat Protein Content on
Endosperm Composites and Malt Quality. Journal of the Institute of Brewing
volume 114 issue 4, 2008.
[36]
Deepak Mudgil B. S. Khatkar Sheweta Barak. Biochemical and Functional
Properties of Wheat Gliadins: A Review. Food Science and Nutrition, 55:3,
2015.
[37]
Ma
Fengyun
and
Baik
Byung
Kee.
Influences of grain and protein
characteristics on in vitro protein digestibility of modern and ancient wheat
species. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture volume 101 issue 11,
2021.
[38]
T. Becker J. Steiner S. Procopio. Brewer’s spent grain: source of value-added
polysaccharides for the food industry in reference to the health claims.
European Food Research and Technology, 2015.
[39]
Azza Naik Ishita Parekh Anagha Khanvilkar. Barley–wheat brewers’ spent
grain: A potential source of antioxidant rich lipids. Journal of Food Processing
and Preservation Volume 41 Issue 6, 2017. URL: https://ifst-onlinelibrary-
wiley-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/doi/full/10.1111/jfpp.13244.
[40]
Agrain v./ Circular Food Technology. ABOUT AGRAIN. url: https://www
.agrainproducts.com/. Accessed 10.11.2021.
[41]
RR Gruppen. Circular Food Technology Aps, ˚
Arstapport. url: https://data
cvr.virk.dk/data/visenhed?enhedstype=virksomhed&id=39615231&lang
uage=da&soeg=circular%5C%20food%5C%20technology. Accessed 22.01.21.
44
==PAGE:50==
[42]
Grain4Grain. We Upcycle Spent Grain to Create Low Carb, High Protein Keto
Friendly Flour and Products. url: https://grain4grain.com/. Accessed
22.01.21.
[43]
Portland Pet Food. Feed your dog like you feed yourself. url: https://port
landpetfoodcompany.com/. Accessed 22.01.21.
[44]
Crunchbase. Portland Pet Food Company. url: https://www.crunchbase
.com/organization/portland-pet-food-company/company_financials.
Accessed 22.01.21.
[45]
Rise Products. Innovative food for a new era. url: https://www.riseprodu
cts.co/. Accessed 22.01.21.
[46]
Crunchbase. RISE Products. url: https://www.crunchbase.com/organiza
tion/rise-products. Accessed 22.01.21.
[47]
Ashwin Goutham Gopi Bertha Jimenez. Method for converting organic
byproducts into food-grade ingredients. url: https://patents.google.co
m/patent/US20180295864A1/en?assignee=%5C%22rise+products%5C%22&o
q=%5C%22rise+products%5C%22. Accessed 22.01.21.
[48]
NETZRO. About Us. url: https://www.netzro.us/about-us/. Accessed
22.01.21.
[49]
Crunchbase. NETZRO, SBC. url: https://www.crunchbase.com/organiz
ation/netzro. Accessed 22.01.21.
[50]
Wefunder. State-of-the-art food tech producing nutritious, upcycled ingredients
at scale. 2022. url: https://wefunder.com/netzro.sbc.
[51]
Legria. Legria – the ingredient YOU have been waiting for! url: https://le
gria.ch/. Accessed 22.01.21.
[52]
Anheuser-Busch InBev. EverGrain Introduces Sustainable and Innovative,
Plant-Based Barley Ingredients. url: https://www.ab- inbev.com/news
-media/sustainability/evergrain-introduces-sustainable-and-inno
vative-plant-based-barley-ingredients/. Accessed 22.01.21.
[53]
Evergrain. Realize the potential in every thing. url: https://evergraining
redients.com/. Accessed 22.01.21.
[54]
Christopher
Doering.
Anheuser-Busch invests 100Mtoupcyclebarleyusedtomakebeer. url: https:
//www.fooddive.com/news/anheuser-busch-invests-100m-to-upcycle-
barley-used-to-make-beer/597434/. Accessed 22.01.21.
[55]
Regrained. url: https://www.regrained.com/. Accessed 22.01.21.
[56]
USDA Regrained Inc. Intermittent infrared drying for brewery-spent grain.
url: https://patents.google.com/patent/US10578358B2/en?assignee
=regrained&oq=regrained. Accessed 22.01.21.
45
==PAGE:51==
[57]
Crunchbase. Anheuser-Busch invests 100Mtoupcyclebarleyusedtomakebeer.
url: https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/regrained/company
_financials. Accessed 22.01.21.
[58]
funbrew. Biotransformation of Brewers’ spent grain. url: https://www.fun
brew.eu/. Accessed 22.01.21.
[59]
Spent Goods. Spent Goods Inside. url: https://spentgoods.ca/our-prog
ress-2020/. Accessed 22.01.21.
[60]
Trebodur. Trebodur the mabeerial. url: https://trebodur.de/. Accessed
22.01.21.
[61]
Canvas. CANVAS: A Revolutionary New Beverage Made from ’Saved Grain’.
url: https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/savethebarley/canvas-a
-new-type-of-beverage-made-from-saved-grai. Accessed 22.01.21.
[62]
ANHEUSER-BUSCH INBEV. A nutritional drink based on saved grains’. url:
https://ab-inbev.eu/news/a-nutritional-drink-based-on-saved-gra
ins/. Accessed 22.01.21.
[63]
Take Two Foods. DRINK LATTES. SHRINK LANDFILLS.. url: https://t
aketwofoods.com/. Accessed 22.01.21.
[64]
Elaine Watson. Barley protein emerging as attractive new option in plant
protein toolbox, says AB InBev-backed upcycling startup EverGrain’. Jan. 2021.
url: https://www.foodnavigator-usa.com/Article/2021/01/07/Barley
-protein-emerging-as-attractive-new-option-in-plant-protein-too
lbox-says-Anheuser-Busch-InBev-backed-EverGrain.
[65]
Grainstone. CREATING THE FOOD INGREDIENTS
BIOMATERIALS
NEEDED TOMORROW USING THE FOOD WASTE STREAMS OF
TODAY, POWERED BY RENEWABLE ENERGY. STARTING WITH
BREWERS SPENT GRAIN. ’ url: https://www.foodnavigator-usa.com
/Article/2021/01/07/Barley-protein-emerging-as-attractive-new-o
ption-in-plant-protein-toolbox-says-Anheuser-Busch-InBev-backed
-EverGrain. Accessed 25.01.21.
[66]
Matt Hale. Exploring the Growth of Plant-Based Milk. Sept. 2021. url: http
s://www.foodmanufacturing.com/consumer-trends/article/21723117/e
xploring-the-growth-of-plantbased-milk.
[67]
Coop. Fuldkorn Speltmel. url: https://mad.coop.dk/irma/u-2080/fuldko
rn-speltmel-p-5707293026384. Accessed 26.01.2022.
46
==PAGE:52==
A
Interview guide
This guide illustrates how the different breweries were interviewed in regards to their
current handling/disposal of BSG.
The questions asked were as follows:
1. What is your yearly production volume (of beer)
2. Which hop do you use?
3. Which malts do you use
4. Do you use enzymes for your brewing process?
5. What do you currently do with your BSG?
6. Have you given any thoughts to disposing of it in other ways?
47
==PAGE:53==
B
HPLC Standard Calibration
Figure B.1: Calibration of standards for maltose, fructose and glucose respectively
48
