==PAGE:1==
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on
MHC­I pathways.
Master Thesis
DTU Health Technology
Department of Bioinformatics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
Begoña Bolos Sierra
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Bioinformatics, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby, Denmark Denmark
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Immunoinformatics and Ma­
chine Learning, Department of Bioinformatics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, MSc
Eng.
Begoña Bolos Sierra ­ s193036
Signature
Date
ii
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
23/01/2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Antigen processing and presentation on Major Histocompatibility Complex class I (MHC­I) is
a fundamental pathway for the activation of the immune system response against infected or
mutated cells that potentially cause disease. It has been shown that a fraction of the proteome
is sampled by MHC­I and some source proteins generate more MHC­I binding peptides than
others. However, the reasons behind why some proteins show a MHC­I enrichment are not
fully understood yet.
With the use of immunopeptidomics data, we have found that 78,7% of the proteome is sam­
pled by MHC­I and that the majority of proteins are represented by one MHC­I binding peptide
in line with other studies. In this project, we have built the first­of­its kind random forest re­
gressor for prediction and feature evaluation of MHC­I protein enrichment, defined in this work
as a measurement of how much each protein is represented in the immunopeptidome across
different human tumor cell lines. Proteins highly abundant in the cell or encoded by highly
abundant mRNA are generally more presented by MHC­I. Moreover, we have found other fea­
tures relevant for the prediction of MHC­I protein enrichment, such as protein length, amino acid
composition, isoelectric point, number of predicted strong and weak MHC­I peptide binders. In
this work, we have collected protein secondary structure information by selecting domains and
pathways of highly MHC­I enriched proteins and evaluating their importance in our model. We
have found relevant features that can be classified into common cellular processes related with
immune system defense, cell cycle and signal transduction, translation and protein transport.
In this project, we have found promising results in the classification of MHC­I highly and lowly
enriched proteins by incorporating protein tertiary structure with predicted 2D protein contact
maps with a dimensionality reduction. Even though, the addition of these features resulted in
a drop in model performance, we consider that this exploratory work opens the door to further
efforts of extracting meaningful features from predicted 2D protein contact maps.
The results of this work contribute to the understanding of MHC­I antigen processing and pre­
sentation pathway and can improve current methods for the prediction of MHC­I antigens by
adding some of the relevant features found. With that said, these improvements are important
for the development of new epitopes as immunotherapies against virus and cancer.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Begoña Bolos Sierra, MSc Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, DTU.
Creator of this master thesis.
Carolina Barra Quaglia, Assistant Professor, DTU Health Tech.
Supervisor of this master thesis.
Morten Nielsen, Groupleader, Professor, DTU Health Tech.
Supervisor of this master thesis.
iv
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Major histocompatibility complex class I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Immunopeptidomics data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
MHC­I protein enrichment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Materials and Methods
6
2.1
Immunopeptidomics data to MHC­I protein enrichment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Gene and protein features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Gene expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Protein features: Abundance, localization, length and chemical features. .
8
2.2.3
Protein domains and pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.4
Protein contact maps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.5
Peptide features: MHC­I binders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Training partitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Baseline model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Random forest regressor and cross­validation framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Model selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Results
15
3.1
Immunopeptidomics data and MHC­I protein enrichment.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Training partitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
MHC­I protein enrichment prediction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.1
Baseline model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.2
Feature collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.2.1
Gene expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.2.2
Protein features: abundance, length, localization and chemical
features.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.2.3
Protein features: domains and pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.3
Peptide features: Predicted number of strong and weak binders. . . . . .
26
3.3.4
Contact maps: 2D protein structure prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.5
Model predictions and correlations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Discussion
35
5
Conclusions
39
Bibliography
41
A List of contaminant proteins
45
B Cell lines and MHC­I binding peptides
46
C Gene and numerical features
47
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
v
==PAGE:8==
D Self organizing maps
47
E
Additional models figures
48
vi
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Major histocompatibility complex class I
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a fundamental molecule in the adaptive immune
system of vertebrates. MHC molecules are located on cell surfaces and their main function is
to present peptides or antigenic fragments to T cells, which upon recognition of their specific
peptide­MHC complex start the activation of adaptive immune responses. In other words, MHC
molecules inform T cells whether there is a need of immune response activation by presenting
protein fragments to the cell surface.
MHC molecules belong to two categories: MHC class I (MHC­I) and MHC class II (MHC­II).
Particularly, MHC­I is expressed by nucleated cells and present immunogenic peptides coming
from intracellular proteins to cytotoxic CD8+T cells. In contrast, MHC­II is expressed on antigen
presenting cells, such us as macrophages, B cells and dendritic cells. MHC­II present immuno­
genic peptides that come from exogenous protein sources to CD4+ T cells, which help on the
activation of other effector cells, such us B cells. Moreover, MHC molecules are polygenic
and codominant, meaning that any individual can express several genes from both co­inherited
genomic information. Another relevant feature is that MHC molecules are polymorphic, mean­
ing that thousands of different alleles can be found in the population. This latest characteristic
makes MHC molecules able to present a vast variety of diverse peptides to T cells [1]. Thus,
MHC molecules play a key role in immune response activation, so understanding antigen pre­
processing and MHC presentation pathways is a relevant topic for basic immunology, cancer
research and development of immunotherapies.
In this project, we are focused on MHC­I molecules, also called human leukocyte antigens (HLA)
that can be found as different genes: HLA­A, B and C. These molecules are heterodimeric trans­
membrane glycoproteins, formed by a polymorphic heavy chain (α) and a light chain (β2m).
These chains form a peptide­binding cleft, where preferentially peptides of 8­9 amino acids
bind through non­covalent interactions [1, 2]. MHC­I structure can be seen in Figure 1.1 A and
B.
In order to present antigenic peptides to the cell surface, several complex steps occur in the
cell forming part of MHC­I processing and antigen presentation pathway, simplified in Figure
1.1 C. MHC­I presentation pathway begins with cytosolic proteins targeted by multiple copies
of ubiquitin by enzymes called ubiquitinases.
The second step is the degradation of proteins by the proteasome: This molecule is composed
of a 20S core barrel and two 19S caps and has protease activity, generating peptide fragments
and releasing them to the cytosol. Generally, cytosolic proteins at the end of their functional
lives undergo this proteasome mediated degradation through the ubiquitin­proteasome pathway
[3]. However, other proteins as misfolded and damaged proteins are entering this degradation
pathway. Part of these proteins are defective ribosomal products called DRiPS, which are de­
graded few minutes after their synthesis. These products are the result of defective transcription
or translation processes, caused by the usage of an alternative reading frame, failed assembly
into more complex proteins or altered ubiquitin modifications among other causes [4]. Other
degraded proteins include mutated proteins in cancer cells and virus­derived proteins from in­
fected cells [3]. In order words, a fraction of peptides that join to the MHC­I have never been
part of functional proteins, but they can still be immunogenic.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
1
==PAGE:10==
Once peptides are generated, they gain access to MHC­I molecules that are present in the en­
doplasmatic reticulum (ER). In order to complete the third step in this pathway, a fundamental
protein called TAP pumps peptides into the ER, where MHC­I molecules are partially folded
and stabilized by chaperone proteins (calnexin, ERp57, calreticulin and tapasin). The complex
of these four molecules ensures an efficient peptide loading between MHC­I molecule and the
peptide [2]. Furthermore, in the lumen of ER, peptides can be further trimmed by ER aminopepti­
dases (ERAP), which trims peptides in the preference 8­9 amino acid lentgh for MHC­I binding.
Finally, the peptide­MHC­I complex is released within vesicles to the plasma membrane and
fuse itself with it. In this cellular location, the peptide can interact with a TCR on CD8+ T cell.
For instance, self proteins will be ignored by CD8+ T cells. However, peptides derived from mu­
tated tumor cells or intracellular pathogens and viruses, will be recognized as non­self activating
the immunity response of cytotoxic CD8+ T and immune­mediated cell death [3].
Figure 1.1: Structural characteristics of major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC­I) and
its peptide presentation pathway. A) PDB structure of HLA­A0301 in complex with a peptide
of proteolipid protein (PDB ID: 2XPG). B) Domain topology of MHC­I complex. C) Simplified
illustration of MHC­I processing and peptide presentation pathway.
Given the complexity of this multi­step machinery, MHC­I peptide presentation can be dysreg­
ulated at many levels and has profound implications on the human immune system. For in­
stance, defects in proteasome expression patterns, defects in TAP protein, ERAP, chaperones
or MHC­I downregulation have been reported to be related with generation of human tumors
[3]. In fact, cancer cells are genetically unstable and can evade CD8+ T activation by either
losing expression of cancer antigens or downregulating MHC­I presentation pathway, which
has been described in 40­90% of human tumors [5]. This evasion directly affects the efficiency
of cancer immunotherapies that work by re­invigorating anti­tumor CD8+ T cells as checkpoint
2
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:11==
blockade, given that tumor cells are less visible or invisible for CD8+ T cells [5, 6]. Given the
complexity of the problem and that defects in MHC­I antigen processing and presentation path­
way can occur to different molecular components and levels of regulation, the understanding of
this fundamental pathway is key for the development of new immunotherapies.
1.2
Immunopeptidomics data
The collection of peptides presented by MHC­I molecules on the cell surface is known as the
immunopeptidome. Given the essential role of MHC in adaptive immunity, large efforts have
been carried out to identify immunopeptidomes. Experimental techniques include binding affin­
ity assays, binding stability assays and peptide­microarrays. However, these techniques lack
of information related with MHC antigen processing and presentation given that they are carried
out in­vitro. An alternative to these techniques is liquid chromatography­coupled tandem mass
spectrometry (LC­MS/MS), which has been applied to detect HLA binding peptides and hold
information about MHC­I antigen processing and presentation [7]. This experimental technique
has improved given technical advances, making possible the detection of thousands of peptides
in a single experiment. An MS­based immunopeptidomics assay can be simplified in a three
step process as can be seen in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Workflow for purification and identification of MHC­I binding peptides through LC­
MS/MS to obtain immunopeptidomics data.
First, there is a sample preparation where cells or tissues are lysed with the presence of pro­
teases and the homogenization of the sample is carried out. Secondly, there is a peptide purifi­
cation step where peptide­MHC­I complexes are purified by immunoprecipitation with antibodies
that bind constant regions of MHC. Subsequently, peptides are detached from the MHC com­
ponents by acid elution and separated with high­phase liquid­chromatography (HPLC).
In the third step, the peptide fraction is analyzed with LS­MS/MS, where peptides are further
separated and infused into the mass spectrometer. Furthermore, peptide sequences are iden­
tified by spectral interpretation and false discovery rate calculation is performed for the control
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
3
==PAGE:12==
of false positive identifications [8].
Even though it has been advances in different steps of the workflow, LC­MS/MS pipelines have
limited sensitivity. Thus, low­abundant peptides are hardly detected as a consequence of highly
abundant peptides, together with detection limits of the instruments. Moreover, contaminant
peptides remain in the sample as a consequence of the experimental procedure. However, this
technique is nowadays the state­of­the­art technology that enables fast identification of thou­
sands of peptides [9]. MS­immunopeptidomics obtained is a source of information for char­
acterizing HLA antigen processing and presentation, which has several applications such as
prediction of HLA antigen presentation by machine learning prediction models. For instance,
NetMHCpan­4.1, which is a MHC­I binding predictor tool that retrieves number of binders, as
well as strong and week binders given a protein sequence [10]. Moreover, immunopeptidomics
data has also applications on rational identification of T cell antigens in both cancer [11, 12] and
pathogens [13, 14].
1.3
MHC­I protein enrichment
Immunopeptidomics data represents the collection of MHC­I peptide binders given a cell or tis­
sue, healthy or diseased. As commented previously, this data is relevant for understanding
HLA antigen processing and presentation pathways, as well as useful for developing new ap­
plications, such us HLA binder predictors or antigen detection. Immunopeptidomics data also
opens up the possibility to explore which fraction of the human proteome is presented on the
nucleated cell surfaces, given that HLA peptide repertoire can be traced back to their source
proteins.
It has been previously suggested that only a small fraction of the human proteome is sampled
by MHC­I processing and presentation pathway. Moreover, some proteins appear to be more
sampled than others by the MHC­I processing and presentation pathway [15, 16]. In other
words, some proteins are source of MHC­I binding peptides and the quantity of these peptides
varies between proteins, whereas other proteins are not presented on MHC­I complexes.
Comprehending why some source proteins generate more MHC­I binding peptides than others
is relevant for understanding MHC­I processing and presentation, and how MHC­I has shaped
its immune function during evolution. But also, can be relevant information for the development
of new immunotherapies. For instance, the development of vaccines that target CD8+ T to in­
fected or mutated cells require the identification of antigens. As it is hypothesized in Hildebrand
work: ”Are viral Ags (antigens) that localize to the nucleus less likely to be presented to CTL
(CD8+ T cells) than a viral protein that resides preferentially in the Golgi apparatus? Will an
up­regulated tumor Ag on chromosome 20 be better presented than a putative tumor Ag on
chromosome 7?” [16]. Thus, information about the original proteins can be relevant for the pro­
cess of antigen selection and development of immunotherapies.
Several studies have been focused on shed light into the origins of MHC­I processing and pre­
sentation. Some of them are focused on subcellular components of source proteins [16], while
others have focused in gene and protein features [17] . Moreover, machine learning approaches
have been applied in order to predict whether a protein is source of MHC­I binding peptides [15,
18]. With the increase of available immunopeptidomic data, more efforts can be carried out to
shed light into understanding MHC­I antigen processing and presentation pathway.
In this work, we have focused on predicting the propensity of a protein to be presented by MHC­
I, and we defined MHC­I protein enrichment as a measurement of how much each protein is
represented in the immunopeptidome across different human tumor cell lines.
4
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:13==
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
5
==PAGE:14==
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Immunopeptidomics data to MHC­I protein enrichment
MHC­I protein enrichment was defined as the number of MHC­I binding peptides per protein
across different tumoral cell lines. The immunopeptidomic dataset in this work was collected
from NetMHCpan­4.1 [10]. The dataset is composed of 655,675 entries, each line with a peptide
sequence and the corresponding cell line. Peptides of this dataset were obtained from mass
spectrometry experiments, which are also referred to as eluted ligands. This data set also
includes peptides from cell lines of other species, as well as contaminant peptides derived from
mass spectrometry experiments. Thus, the dataset is filtered following two main steps:
1. Cell lines were filtered by using human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing of cells. Typing
of cells is often carried out before mass spectrometry experiments in order to have im­
munopeptidomics data associated with a set of alleles. A file containing HLA typing from
NetMHCpan­4.1 [10] was used to select the cell lines associated with HLA. Thus, all pep­
tides coming from non­human cell lines were removed from the dataset.
2. Mass spectrometry experiments have contaminant peptides. In order to remove these
peptides, %Rank score from NetMHCpan­4.1 [10] predictions was used. %Rank of a
specific sequence is computed by comparing its prediction score with a distribution of
prediction scores from a set of random natural peptides. Thus, a %Rank of 0.5% for a
particular peptide, corresponds to the top 0.5% scores obtained from random peptides.
Specifically, %Rank < 0.5 and %Rank < 2 were used as thresholds for detecting strong
and weak MHC­I binders respectively. Moreover, %Rank > 20 was set as a threshold
for detecting contaminant peptides. This threshold was used to remove the contaminant
peptides of the dataset.
Thus, the remaining dataset is composed of 539,531 entries.
Subsequently, MHC­I protein enrichment is obtain as a result of two main steps:
1. Counting the number of peptide sequences matching with each protein sequence in the
human proteome using the reference proteome (UP000005640) downloaded from Uniprot
[19], which contains a total of 20,610 proteins that represent each gene and reviewed by
Swiss­Prot. Blastp was used to match peptides and protein sequences across the different
cell lines [20]. Hence, if a peptide sequence is found being part of a protein sequence,
it would sum a peptide count for that specific protein. After performing the matching with
all the peptides in the proteome, each protein had a number of peptide counts that varies
per cell line.
2. Obtaining a unique target value per protein that integrates all cell lines considered. Count
data generated by sequencing platforms are treated as compositions of a whole, meaning
that the abundance of each component, such as genes, are understood as relative to other
components in the sample. Similarly to this example and other omics data, the nature of
this dataset can be also understood as compositional. Each cell line or sample can be
interpreted as a composition of all peptide counts per protein, which are the components.
In compositional data analysis, a composition is defined as a Aitchison simplex [21], which
is a vector with positive components:
SD =
{
x = [x1, x2, ..., xD] ∈RD|xi > 0, i = 1, 2, ..., D;
D
∑
i=1
xi = κ
}
6
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:15==
Where D is the number of proteins and [∙] is a row vector. κ is equal to 1, meaning that
the components xi sum to unity.
In order to capture protein abundances in each cell line or composition, a center log­ratio
transformation can be applied to transform from Aitchison simplex to a real space. To do
so, a first step called closure is applied to ensure that row vectors sum to 1:
C [x1, x2, ..., xD] =
[
x1
∑D
i=1 x1
,
x2
∑D
i=1 x2
, ...,
x3
∑D
i=1 x3
]
Subsequently, zero values are replaced by small non­zero values [22], and centered log­
ratio (clr) transformation is applied to each sample vector:
clr(x) =
[
log x1
g(x), ..., log xD
g(x)
]
Where g(x) refers to the geometric mean of the sample vector x. In order to carry out the
above mentioned steps the python package scikit­learn was used [23]. Finally, MHC­I pro­
tein enrichment was calculated by summing across sample values into a single value per
protein. Furthermore, the MHCI protein enrichment was standardized in a range between
0 and 1 in order to facilitate its interpretation.
2.2
Gene and protein features
2.2.1
Gene expression
Gene expression data from cells and tissues were obtained from two main sources:
1. Files downloaded from Human protein Atlas corresponding with ”RNA HPA tissue gene
data” and ”RNA HPA cell line gene data” [24]. This data was used to calculate per each
Transcript ID the median of transcripts per million across all cell lines and tissues. Subse­
quently, Retrieve/ID mapping tool from Uniprot [19] was used to map Ensembl Transcript
IDs to Uniprot IDs. The resulting files are two lists where each line contains a protein and
its median across transcripts across cell lines (HPA cell) or tissues (HPA tissue) respec­
tively.
2. RNA­seq data of 69 immunopeptidomics assayed cell lines from Bulik­Sullivan work, which
contains transcript expression [25]. Retrieve/ID mapping tool from Uniprot [19] was used
to map Ensembl Transcript IDs to Uniprot IDs. The resulting file contains per line a protein
Uniprot ID and transcript information of 69 cell lines (Line.1­Line.69).
The selection of the dataset used to account for gene expression was carried out by following
the subsequent steps:
1. Given that we have counted individually MHC­I binding peptides for Line.1 to Line.55 and
we have gene expression information for these same cell lines. We generated a subset of
peptide counts data for these 55 cell lines and this same subset was generated for gene
expression dataset.
2. Spearman correlation function from [23] was used to calculate the correlation between
each peptide count cell line and transcript information from EDGE data. For instance,
Spearman correlation was calculated between peptide counts in Line.1 and transcript ex­
pression in Line.1. This procedure was carried out per each cell line. Thus, a total of 55
Spearman correlation values were obtained.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
7
==PAGE:16==
3. Spearman correlation was again calculated between HPA cell file and each of the lines in
the subset of peptide counts for Line.1 to Line.55. The result was a total of 55 correlation
values. This same procedure was performed with HPA tissue, resulting in 55 correlation
values.
4. The source of information that generated a higher correlation median was selected to
account for gene expression.
2.2.2
Protein features: Abundance, localization, length and chemical features.
Protein features were predicted from online tools or downloaded from different databases:
• Protein abundance was downloaded from paxdb­4.1 [26], corresponding with the file H.sapiens
­ Whole organism (Integrated) with 87% of coverage and protein abundance data for
19,949 proteins.
• Subcellular localization was predicted using DeepLoc­1.0 [27], where proteins were sorted
into 10 different localizations: Nucleus, Cytoplasm, Extracellular, Mitochondrion, Cell
membrane, Endoplasmic reticulum, Chloroplast, Golgi apparatus, Lysosome/Vacuole and
Peroxisome. The output of this prediction provides the likelihood for a protein to be located
in each subcellular localization. The most likely compartment was selected for each of the
20,042 proteins.
• Biopython was imported for obtaining molecular weight, isoelectric point and amino acid
composition. Molecular weight and amino acid composition were calculated with modelu­
lar_weight and count_amino_acids functions from Bio.SeqUtils.ProtParam ProteinAnaly­
sis. Isoelectric point was calculated with the function IsoelectricPoint
• Protein length was obtained iterating over each of the protein sequences with FastaItera­
tor.
2.2.3
Protein domains and pathways
Protein domains and pathways were extracted using DAVID functional annotation tool [28],
where data from different databases are combined. Particularly, in this project information from
the following databases are considered: InterPro, Pfam, KEGG and Reactome.
The functional annotation tool requires two main inputs, a gene/protein list and a background
list. This tool compares both lists to obtain features where the gene list is enriched in. Fisher’s
Exact test is calculated and a p­value determines whether the gene list is specifically associated
or enriched in a particular feature. In this project, the extraction of protein lists and backgrounds
depend directly on: The partitions, the threshold for determining highly MHC­I enriched proteins
and the minimum number of proteins that share a feature for considering it as relevant:
• First, each partition has a training set that is composed by all the rest of the partitions. This
means, that each partition has a different training set. For instance, partition 1 training set
will be composed of partition 2,3,4 and 5.
• Secondly, relevant features are those that are present in proteins with high MHC­I protein
enrichment. To identify these highly enriched proteins, the right tail of each partition train­
ing sets were used. Thus, several thresholds were set to obtain the 5% or 10% of the right
tail of these distribution, corresponding with proteins with high MHC­I protein enrichment.
These subsets were used as different gene/protein lists in DAVID, while the background
set is the whole partition training set.
8
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:17==
• Thirdly, relevant features are domains and pathways that 3 or 5 proteins have in common.
These two values were set to avoid incorporating features that are only in few proteins.
Four different datasets were created, combining two thresholds for identifying highly MHC­I
enriched proteins (5% or 10%), and two thresholds for minimum number of proteins that have
a feature (3 or 5 proteins).
An example of the procedure can be seen in the diagram of Figure 2.1, particularly for the
partition 1, where the thresholds are the 5% of the right tail and a minimum of 3 proteins that
have a feature.
Figure 2.1: Workflow for obtaining protein domains and pathways in DAVID [28]. This diagram
is generated for partition 1 training set, with a threshold for highly MHC­I enriched proteins set to
5%, while features need to be shared by a minimum of three proteins in order to be considered
relevant.
2.2.4
Protein contact maps
Contact maps are 2D representations of protein structures. In this project, ProSPr network [29]
is used to predict contact maps by following the subsequent steps:
1. HHblits [30] from HHSuite was used to generate the multiple sequence alignment in­
put file for ProSPr. HHblits requires a database and a query sequence in fasta format.
The database uniprot20_2016_02 was downloaded and each of the 14,311 proteins were
given as a input.
2. Multiple sequence alignment files (a3m file) generated by HHblits were given as inputs
to ProSPr, which generates a pkl file per protein as an output containing the contact map
prediction.
A subset of 200 contact maps corresponding with 100 highly MHC­I enriched protein and 100
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
9
==PAGE:18==
lowly enriched were converted from pkl files to PNG images and features were extracted by two
different methods:
1. VGG­16 model and PCA.
• Keras was used for loading and preprocessing of images [31]. PNG images were
loaded with lead_img function to a target size of 224x224 and converted to NumPy
arrays and reshaped. Thus, each image was reshaped to an array of the following
dimensions: [1, 224, 224, 3], corresponding with number of samples, rows, columns
and channels. The array was given to preprocess_input function to prepare the array
for the model.
• VGG­16 model was used from Keras and the output layer is removed, meaning that
the final layer is a fully connected layer with 4,096 output nodes which are the fea­
tures. These features were obtained by using predict function and stored in a vector.
• Features were reduced with PCA module imported from scikit­learn [23], with a num­
ber of components equal to 10 and random state set to 22. This last parameter was
fixed to obtain reproducible results every time the PCA analysis was carried out.
2. Self organizing maps.
• Loading and image processing modules were imported, as imageio and PIL.Image.
Moreover, SimpSOM a library for training simple self­organizing maps was installed
[32].
• PNG images representing contact map predictions were reshaped into 68x68, ob­
taining a total of 4,615 pixels per image. A dataframe was generated where rows are
each contact map and the columns are each pixel.
• The dataframe with pixels was normalized with StandardScaler function.
• A map network was generated by calling the function somNet, setting the map sizes
to 40x40 and setting PCI variable to true in order to initialize weights with PCA.
• Function for training the model was used with a 0.4 learning rate and 1000 epochs.
After the training, the map of weights differences between nodes was obtained with
diff_graph.
• Projections of the data in the x and y axes were generated by using the function
project with the normalized training set used.
The first method was used for the complete dataset of 14,311 contact maps.
2.2.5
Peptide features: MHC­I binders
Given a protein sequence, NetMHCpan­4.1 can predict which peptides join to MHC­I and whether
the binding is weak or strong [10]. Each of the 14,311 protein sequences in the dataset were
predicted, obtaining a set of peptides and labeled as strong or weak binders. Thus, the number
of strong and weak binders was counted and stored as two additional features.
2.3
Training partitions
The dataset was partitioned in 5 different sets based on protein sequence similarity. Firstly,
blastp algorithm was used for determine similarity between sequences, and secondly, proteins
were clustered for forming the different partitions through minimum spanning tree algorithm as
follows:
10
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:19==
1. Blastp database was created containing the human reference proteome (UP000005640)
from Uniprot [19]. The same reference human proteome was used to blast sequences
against each other, obtaining an e­value per pair of proteins. Given that not all the proteins
are reported with a sequence match, the maximum e­value of 10 was given as matching
e­value. Thus, the output was a list of all pair of proteins with a e­value associated which
varies in the range between 0 to 10.
2. Minimum spanning tree was used for clustering. The inputs are a list of all pair of proteins
with an e­value associated and a E­value threshold for forming clusters. The clustering
was performed with 14 value thresholds between 1 to 1e­13.
2.4
Baseline model
The model was created based on blastp and following the partitioning scheme commented
above. This means that in order to predict MHC­I protein enrichment for partition 1 proteins,
all the other partitions proteins were used as to generate a database and run blastp to obtain
similar proteins. In other to do so, the subsequent steps were followed:
1. Blastp version 2.12.0 was download [20].
2. Biopython tools as NcbiblastpCommandline module and FastaIterator were imported.
3. Fasta files with subset of proteins that correspond with each partition were generated.
For instance, a fasta file with all proteins in partition 1. Moreover, a database of fasta
sequences was generated per partition, containing all the proteins of the other partitions.
For example, the database for partition 1 is a fasta file that contains proteins of partition
2,3,4 and 5.
4. Blastp was run with each partition fasta file as input against its corresponding database,
max_target_seqs and max_hsps were set to 1.
5. Target protein sequences of each partition, get assigned a MHC­I protein enrichment mea­
sured value of their most similar match protein.
2.5
Random forest regressor and cross­validation framework
Random forest regressor is the model of choice used imported from scikit­learn ensemble [23].
Parameters as the number of trees (n_estimator) is set to 1000 and random_state is fixed to 0.
This last parameter controls the randomness of bootstrapping of samples when building trees.
Random forest models are trained following a 5­fold cross­validation framework considering
partitions generated by sequence similarity explained in Section 2.3. In order to control the split
of samples from partitions during training and testing, the function PredefinedSplit is used from
scikit­learn model_selection [23].
Cross­validation framework looks as showed in Figure 2.2.
The procedure can be simplified in the following steps:
1. Data is labeled setting a partition identifier per each of the proteins.
2. Data is split into 5 different folds depending on the partition identifier.
3. For each data fold:
(a) A test set corresponding with a partition is hold out.
(b) Remaining partitions compose the training set.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.2: Cross­validation framework followed for obtaining MHC­I protein enrichment pre­
dictions with a partitioned model.
(c) Random forest regressor is fitted with training set by using model.fit().
(d) Left out partition is predicted by the function model.predict(). Predictions for the par­
titions are stored.
(e) Feature importances are obtained by using the function model.feature_importances_.
4. Collect all the predictions of each partition.
5. Calculate Spearman correlation between measured and predicted MHC­I protein enrich­
ment.
2.6
Model selection
Models performance is evaluated in terms of Spearman correlation between measured MHC­I
protein enrichment and predicted value. The function used to calculate the correlation is spear­
manr from SciPy [33].
Bootstrapping is performed to allow comparison between models and selection. This algorithm
is used as hypothesis testing for comparing whether Model A has a significant higher perfor­
mance (ρA) than Model B (ρB) by following the subsequent steps:
1. Establish a significant level (α = 0.05 ) and a null hypothesis: ρA ≤ρB
2. Draw a random sample with replacement from prediction distributions from Model A and
Model B. To do so resample function from scikit­learn is used [23], where replace param­
eter is set to true and the number of samples is equal to the whole dataset size (14,311).
3. Calculate Spearman correlation between MHC­I protein enrichment prediction values of
sample A and measured (ρ∗
A). Do the same with predictions of sample B and measured
(ρ∗
B).
4. Create a counting variable k, where we sum one count when ρ∗
A ≤ρ∗
B.
12
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:21==
5. Repeat steps 2, 3 and 4 a number of C times (C=1000).
6. Calculate p­value as k
C .
7. if p­value ≤0.05 (significant level), null hypothesis is rejected. While if p­value > 0.05 the
alternative hypothesis is accepted, since we fail to reject the null hypothesis.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:23==
3
Results
Some proteins present more MHC­I peptides in the cell surface than others. With the aim of
analyzing source of these differences we first constructed a dataset with mass spectrometry
immunopeptidomics data obtained from NetMHCpan­4.1 publication [10]. This dataset was fil­
tered to only contain peptides coming from human cell lines, as well as filtering out contaminant
peptides from the mass spectrometry experiments based on their rank score. Subsequently,
peptide sequences were matched against the human proteome, obtaining a number of peptide
counts per protein across the different human cell lines considered.
In order to have a measure across cell lines of how many peptides are presented on MHC­I
complexes, we defined MHC­I protein enrichment as a result of the integration of peptide counts
across different cell lines into a single value per protein, as explained in materials and methods
Section 2.1. To shed light into why some proteins generate more or less MHC­I peptide binders
than others, we collected features from different sources at a gene, protein and peptide level.
Moreover, protein features also account for different levels of protein structure complexity by in­
corporating information of primary, secondary and tertiary structure. In this section, we present
the correlations between MHC­I protein enrichment and the features collected.
To predict MHC­I protein enrichment and identify which features collected are relevant for ex­
plaining variability in MHC­I peptide binders generation, training and evaluation of random forest
models was used. Additionally, to avoid over­fitting, a partitioned model was proposed where
we grouped proteins based on sequence similarity into clusters. Thus, the dataset was split
into partitions based on blastp results, with a subsequent clustering through minimum spanning
tree. In this section, it is presented the result of this partitioning method, as well as different
model predictions, model performance evaluation and important features obtained.
3.1
Immunopeptidomics data and MHC­I protein enrichment.
The immunopeptidome is a collection of peptides presented by MHC molecules on the cell
surface. These peptides are often detected by mass spectrometry techniques and following
a sequence identification workflow. In this project immunopeptidomics data is obtained from
NetMHCpan­4.1 [10]. This peptide collection includes entries from human and other animal
species, as well as contaminant peptides derived from mass spectrometry experiments. Thus,
as it is shown in Table 3.1, the peptide collection is reduced to only those peptides that are
present in human cells, and further filtered to remove contaminant peptides resulting in a dataset
reduced a 19.3%.
Nº peptides
Nº cell lines
Nº entries
% dataset reduced
Original peptide collection
330,342
256
665,492
­
Non­human peptides
87,970
21
113,658
17.1
Contaminant peptides
6,878
1
12,303
2.2
Final dataset
235,494
234
539,531
19.3
Table 3.1: Immunopeptidomics dataset filtering results.
Meant for identifying the source proteins that MHC­I binding peptides are coming from, the
resulting peptide collection was matched against a total of 20,610 proteins from the human
proteome. Thus, if a peptide sequence is found matching a protein sequence, it is consider
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
15
==PAGE:24==
a peptide count for that particular protein. After following this matching process with all MHC­
I binding peptides against each protein in the human proteome, we can draw the distribution
of peptide counts across the human proteome as can be seen in Figure 3.1. The distribution
of peptide counts decreases exponentially and contains a high number of zero peptide counts
representing 21.3% of the proteome. This means that a high percentage of the proteome is
presented by MHC­I and that proteins are most often represented by one peptide count in the
MHC­I. Furthermore, 75% of the proteins contain a number of MHC­I binders count below 16.
Moreover, the box­plot indicate the presence of outliers, corresponding with proteins with more
than 38 peptide counts that are relevant in order to understand MHC­I processing and presen­
tation, so they are kept in the dataset.
Figure 3.1: Peptide count distribution across human proteome. Peptide counts are obtained
as a result of computing how many peptide sequences match per each of the 20,610 proteins
considered in the human proteome. In the left panel, the box­plot of the number of peptide
counts is shown, whereas in the right panel, it is shown the number of proteins against counts.
In order to shed light on possible source proteins for contaminant peptides in mass spectrometry
experiments, the collection of 6,878 peptides considered as contaminants discarded previously
of the dataset were matched against the human proteome. The list of these proteins is included
in Appendix A
Immunopeptidomics data contains information about the cell line that they were expressed in.
This information is relevant to understand differences between human cell lines and their lack
or abundance in MHC­I peptide binders production. In order to do so, the number of peptides
counts is obtained per each of the considered cell lines across the proteins during the process of
matching peptides and protein sequences commented above. Therefore, it is possible to obtain
the distribution of total peptide counts per cell line as it can be seen in Figure 3.2. The left panel
shows that 75% of the cell lines contain a number of peptide counts below 3,658. Furthermore,
only 13 out of 234 cell lines present a number of peptide counts above the fourth percentile,
which are detected as outliers. These highly enriched cell lines can be detected as the first cell
lines appearing in the right panel of Figure 3.2, where the cell lines appear sorted from higher to
lower enriched. Therefore, certain experimental setups produced more MHC­I binding peptides
than others. The complete graph can be seen in Appendix B. For the purpose of determining if
these cell lines have a similar pattern of MHC­I peptide binders production across the proteins
in the human proteome, a hierarchical clustering was carried out. Figure 3.3 shows groups of
cell lines that share patterns of peptide count across the proteins.
16
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.2: Distribution of total MHC­I binding peptide counts across different cell lines. In the
left panel, the box­plot of the total number of peptide counts is shown. In the right, this value is
shown across each of the cell lines and sorted by their total number of peptide counts. In order
to access to each cell line name, the complete figure can be found in Appendix B.
Figure 3.3: Hierarchical clustering of cell lines given their peptide count profile based on correla­
tion metrics. Different cell lines are represented by columns, whereas proteins are represented
by rows. The dataset was standardized to a scale of 0 to 1, where the white color represents a
zero peptide count, while darker colors represent a higher peptide count value.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
17
==PAGE:26==
MHC­I protein enrichment is obtained as a result of two steps; First, obtaining MHC­I peptide
binders counts per protein and cell line as explained above. Secondly, these peptide counts
are integrated as single target value per protein by following three steps. First of all a center
log ratio transformation of the data set was performed. Secondly, peptide counts were summed
across the different cell lines, considering the data as compositions as explained in section
2.1. Thirdly, the standardization of MHC­I protein enrichment was carried out by re­scaling the
variable between 0 and 1. The distribution of MHC­I protein enrichment is shown in Figure
3.4. The left panel shows that 75% of the dataset presents a protein enrichment under 0.14,
meaning that this percentage of proteins present a low protein enrichment. Given that MHC­
I protein enrichment is the result of MHC­I peptide counts, the distribution of MHC­I protein
enrichment tend to an exponential decrease as it can be seen in the right panel of Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: MHC­I protein enrichment distribution. The variable is obtained as a result of center
log ratio transformation of MHC­I peptide binders counts, with a posterior sum across cell lines
and standardization to obtain a range between 0 and 1. The left panel shows the box plot of
MHC­I protein enrichment, while the panel on the right shows the distribution of the variable
across proteins.
3.2
Training partitions
Partitioned models can lead to better model predictions when there are subgroups in the dataset
that can contribute differently to the prediction of the target value [34]. In addition, partitioning
is used to avoid overfitting by leaving out from the training set an independent data set for test­
ing. In this project we proposed a partitioned dataset where partitions contain proteins grouped
together by their sequence similarity, while proteins between different partitions are not similar
in terms of sequence. Therefore, we can ensure that we train the partitions with proteins that
do not share sequence similarity, and avoid problems related with over­fitting.
With the aim of obtaining a significant measure of sequence similarity between proteins, blastp
e­value was used. The e­value can be understood as the number of expected hits with similar
score that could be found by chance in that particular database. This means that a match be­
tween two proteins is more significant when the e­value is low and closer to zero.
Subsequently, minimum spanning tree was carried out as clustering algorithm by using blastp
e­values as a measure of similarity. Thus, to cluster similar proteins, e­value was used as
threshold for the algorithm, setting the minimum similarity value that members of the cluster
need to share. A range of e­values between 1 to 1e­13 were used as threshold for the clus­
tering algorithm. Different thresholds were used given that the algorithm tends to generate one
18
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:27==
cluster containing high number of proteins, which was translated into partitions of different sizes.
Intended for generating partitions with similar number of proteins, the e­value threshold was re­
duced in order to form smaller clusters with highly similar proteins. The result of this process
can be seen in Figure 3.5, where the number of clusters increments when the e­value threshold
decreases, and less proteins are included in the main cluster.
Finally, formed clusters were divide into 5 different partitions. Considering the dataset size and
the number of final partitions, the e­value threshold was reduced to a threshold of 1e­11, gener­
ating ∼2,900 proteins per each partition and allowing the dataset to be split by an approximate
number of proteins by considering sequence similarity.
Figure 3.5: Minimum spanning tree clustering results when varying blastp e­value thresholds.
The clustering is performed based on sequence similarity defined by blastp e­values. This
figure shows the effect of decreasing the e­value threshold in the number of clusters that are
generated and the number of proteins composing the biggest cluster.
3.3
MHC­I protein enrichment prediction.
Several features that could potentially explain variability in MHC­I protein enrichment were col­
lected. In order to predict this value and obtain feature importance, the model of choice was
random forest model for regression problems. Different models were constructed by adding
features and evaluating whether they have significant performance improvement in terms of
Spearman correlation between measured and predicted MHC­I protein enrichment.
After the incorporation of some of the features described below, the dataset was reduced from
20,610 proteins to 14,311, given the lack of information for some proteins in the complete
dataset. Hence, models were trained with the reduced dataset in order to allow performance
comparison between models and evaluation of feature importance.
3.3.1
Baseline model
A baseline model was constructed in order to create a meaningful reference point to which
compare more complex models. Particularly, the baseline model was constructed from blastp
results, assigning to a query sequence its most similar protein MHC­I protein enrichment value
in the training partition. Figure 3.6 shows MHC­I protein enrichment measured values against
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
19
==PAGE:28==
blast predicted values. In this model, there are highly enriched proteins predicted as low en­
riched proteins represented in the upper left corner of the plot, while there are also low enriched
proteins predicted as highly enriched corresponding to the lower right corner of the plot. Fur­
thermore, the plot presents a high concentration of points in the lower left part, in contrast with
the absence of values in the upper right corner of the plot. Spearman correlation between pre­
dicted and measured values was 0.2329, showing that blast model has higher performance
than a random model.
Figure 3.6: Baseline model MHC­I protein enrichment measured values against predictions.
Baseline model predictions are obtained through blastp similarity, where proteins acquire their
MHC­I protein enrichment prediction from the measured value of the most similar protein.
3.3.2
Feature collection
Gene, protein and peptide features that can potentially explain the variability in MHC­I protein
enrichment were collected. The features in this section can be divided into three main blocks;
Gene expression, protein features and peptide features.
3.3.2.1
Gene expression
Transcriptomic analysis such as RNA­seq generate large datasets with gene expression infor­
mation in order to identify genes that are differentially expressed between conditions in cells
and tissues. RNA­seq data can be obtained from different sources. The ideal source of gene
expression data is RNA­seq data obtained for the cell lines in a particular data set used. For
instance, gene expression data obtained by Bulik­Sullivan [25], which contains transcript ex­
pression levels of 69 assayed cell lines. However this experimental information was not avail­
able for all cell lines included in the collected immunopeptidomics dataset used in this work.
To compensate for this lack of information, we have collected data from The Human Protein
Atlas (HPA), which contains transcript expression levels per gene in 69 cell line samples and
281 tissues and blood samples [24]. This data was used to calculate the median of transcripts
per million (TPM) across the cell lines or tissues, obtaining a value per gene that summarized
transcript expression values across samples.
In order to determine which source of information will be used for the incorporation of gene ex­
pression as a feature, correlation values between RNA­seq and peptide counts were calculated
20
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:29==
for the common cell lines in both datasets. Thus, a subset of 55 cell lines (Line.1­Line­55) was
generated for both datasets. As a result, Spearman correlation values were low for all data
sources as it can be seen in Figure 3.7. However, HPA sources have correlation median values
higher than RNA­seq data. Thus, HPA tissue and cell sources are chosen to be incorporated
accounting for gene expression levels.
Figure 3.7: Spearman correlation between peptide counts and gene expression from different
sources across 55 cell lines (Line.1­Line­55). HPA refers to data from Human Protein Atlas and
EGDE refers to the model developed by Bulik­Sullivan [25].
Gene expression values from cell and tissue range between 0 to 7,973 or 11,355 respectively.
These two variables present a distribution skewed to the right, where 75% of gene expression
is under 7 in cells and 12.29 in tissue. As it can be seen in the left panel of Figure 3.8, both
gene expression from tissue and cell have a linear positive relationship. As gene expression in
cells increase, gene expression in tissue tends to increment as well. Moreover, Spearman cor­
relation that indicates a 0.89 correlation value, meaning a strong positive relationship between
them. Furthermore, right panel of Figure 3.8, shows MHC­I protein enrichment against gene
expression in cell. There are high number of data points where gene expression values are
between 0 to 200 and MHC­I protein enrichment vary in the whole range between 0 and 1.
MHC­I protein enrichment has not a normal distribution it is shown in Figure 3.4, but an expo­
nential distribution. Therefore, we assume that parametric test, as Pearson correlation, does
not fit properly in this case to account for the correlation. However, a non­parametric test can
be used as alternative to Pearson correlation, which is the Spearman correlation test. In the
case of MHC­I protein enrichment and gene expression in cells, this last test shows a positive
correlation of 0.71, as it can be seen in Figure 3.9. Similarly, gene expression in tissue samples
shows a high positive Spearman correlation of 0.71.
3.3.2.2
Protein features: abundance, length, localization and chemical features.
Protein abundance refers to the number of protein molecules present in a cell. While gene
expression gives information generally about transcriptional processes, protein abundances
are the result of regulatory processes such as post­transcriptional, translational and protein
degradation. Thus, protein abundance gives information about the number of protein molecules
in the cell as a result of a dynamic balance between all processes mentioned above.
Protein abundances were obtained from mass spectrometry experiments collected in pax­db
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.8: Human protein atlas gene expression and MHC­I protein enrichment. In the left
panel, gene expression from cell and tissue are plotted against each other. In the right panel,
MHC­I protein enrichment is plotted against gene expression in cell, when this last variable is
in a range between 0 to 1000.
Figure 3.9: Heatmap of Spearman correlation values between features and MHC­I protein en­
richment. Low correlation values are characterized by white color in the heatmap, while darker
blue indicates the increment of the correlation between variables.
[26], and their value varies from 0 to 30,334. However, 75% of protein abundances are un­
der 8.8, generating distribution skewed to the right with mean of 49.6. This distribution can be
seen in the histogram of Figure 3.10. Moreover, it is shown the relationship with MHC­I protein
enrichment, gene expression in cell and protein length. As it is shown in Figure 3.9, protein
abundances are highly correlated with MHC­I protein enrichment. Spearman correlation be­
tween these two variables is positive and high. Moreover, protein abundances present high
and positive correlation with gene expression, however, it has no correlation with other features
considered or the correlation is negative and weak as it can be seen in Figure 3.10.
22
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.10: Relationship between gene expression, abundance, protein length and MHC­I
protein enrichment. A) Features are plotted against each other. B) Histograms of the men­
tioned variables are plotted. For visualization purposes, gene expression in cell is represented
between 0 to 250, while abundance is represented between 0 to 1,000.
It is relevant to consider that the protein length will have an influence on protein enrichments,
given that it is possible that long proteins are degraded into more peptides than short proteins.
Thus, it is expected than longer proteins would generate more MHC­I binding peptides that
shorter proteins. The mean protein length is 569.6, where the shortest protein is composed
by 24 amino acids and the longest contains 5,478 amino acids. The exponential distribution
of protein length can be seen in Figure 3.10, characterized by a long tail to the right. Pro­
tein length appears to be positively correlated with MHC­I protein enrichment with a Spearman
value of 0,29. Furthermore, protein length is highly correlated with molecular weight, to the
extent that Spearman correlation between both variables is maximum and equal to 1, as it can
be seen in Figure 3.9. Protein molecular weight is calculated as the sum of all protein amino
acids molecular weights. This correlation value indicates that both variables vary in the same
way, for instance, meaning that these two variables provide the same information about this set
proteins considered. Furthermore, protein length and molecular weight have correlation values
close to zero with the rest of the features included in 3.9.
Protein isoelectric point (IP) refers to the PH at which the protein molecule carries no net elec­
trical charge. Net charge is affected by the gain or loss of protons which depends on the PH
of the surrounding environment. Overall protein charge depends on each of the amino acid’s
charge that are part of the final protein. It is relevant for its effect in protein stability, aggre­
gation and solubility. In this set of proteins, isoelectric point has a range between 4 and 12,
where the mean value is 7.27. As it can be seen in Figure 3.9, isoelectric point has generally
low negative correlation with gene expression in tissue, abundance, protein length and MHC­I
protein enrichment. Subcellular localization of proteins can play an important role in the gener­
ation of MHC­I binding peptides. Some subcellular compartments, as cytoplasm, contain more
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
23
==PAGE:32==
peptidases and proteases than other parts of the cell, which will carry the protein degradation
to generate peptides that could possibly join to MHCI. As it can be seen in Figure 3.11, cyto­
plasm and nucleus have a positive correlation higher than 0.2 and 0.1 respectively. Moreover,
extracellular localization and cell membrane have a negative correlation below ­0.2. However,
other cellular compartments have correlations closer to zero.
Amino acid composition of a protein refers to the percentage of each of the 20 amino acids that
the protein is composed by. It provides information about protein functionality and structure. As
it can be seen in Figure 3.12, the majority of amino acids correlate positively with MHC­I protein
enrichment. Particularly, tryptophan (W) and cysteine (C) have correlation close to zero.
Figure 3.11: Spearman correlation between different subcellular localization and MHC­I pro­
tein enrichment. This data was collected from DeepLoc­1.0 predictor [27]. The localization are
cytoplasm (Cytopl.), nucleus, mitocondrion (Mitoc.), peroxisome (Peroxi.), plastid, lysosome/­
vacuole (L/V), Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi apparatus (GA), extracellular (Extrac.) and
cell membrane (Cell.mem).
Figure 3.12: Spearman correlation between each protein amino acid composition and MHC­I
protein enrichment.
24
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:33==
3.3.2.3
Protein features: domains and pathways
The primary structure of the protein is based on the sequence of amino acids, but proteins
fold in a three­dimensional conformation can also have an influence on MHC­I protein enrich­
ment. Several secondary structures, mainly α­helices and β­sheets, generate tertiary structures
of independent units called domains which are connected themselves through loops. Protein
domains are regions of proteins that are functional and/or structural units, that respond to a
particular function or interaction, which contributes to the final function of the protein. Thus,
protein domains are relevant in order to understand protein function and structure. Some of the
databases that contain protein families and domains are Pfam [35] and InterPro [36]. Further­
more, proteins can work together in groups in order to carry out a specific function in the cell.
Thus, proteins can be part of biological pathways that are involved in metabolism, regulation
of gene expression, translation or protein degradation. This information is relevant in order to
understand protein function and interaction, which can be obtained from databases such as
KEGG [37] or Reactome [38]. Furthermore, functional annotation tools, such as DAVID [28]
can combine the information of all these above mentioned datasets.
In order to ensure that we add relevant features present in highly enriched proteins, the subset of
highly enriched proteins per each training partition were used. Thus, given a training partition,
we first selected highly enriched proteins by capturing the 5% or 10% of the right tail of this
distribution. Secondly, these two sets of highly enriched proteins were sent to DAVID with the
training set background composed by all the other partitions, obtaining the relevant domains
and pathways for highly enriched proteins. Subsequently, pathways and domains that were in
at least 3 or 5 proteins were filtered and this process was repeated for each training partition.
This process is detailed in materials and methods Section 2.2.3.
The above mentioned workflow generated four different sets of features by varying the threshold
for selecting enriched proteins and minimum number of proteins necessary to keep a feature.
With the aim of assessing which set of features were more relevant for the prediction of MHC­
I protein enrichment, random forest regressor was used to train models with different set of
features and evaluate their performance. The model trained with dataset 3, presents higher
Spearman correlation between MHC­I protein enrichment and predicted value, as it can be
seen in Table 3.2. Furthermore, p­values obtained through bootstrapping shows a significant
difference between performances of the model trained with set 3 and 4. Thus, we assume that
set 3 contains more relevant features than the other sets for the prediction of MHC­I protein
enrichment.
% Enriched proteins
Minimum nº proteins
Spearman corr.
Set 1
5
3
0.378
p­value
Set 2
5
5
0.356
Set 1­2
0.0
Set 3
10
3
0.417
Set 3­1
0.0
Set 4
10
5
0.403
Set 3­4
0.001
Table 3.2: Spearman correlation between MHC­I protein enrichment and random forest pre­
dicted value trained with four different sets. Each set varies 1) Threshold for selecting enriched
proteins, corresponding to different % of proteins in the right tail of training partition distributions.
2) Minimum nº proteins that need to share a feature to consider it as relevant. Additionally, boot­
strapping p­value results between the different sets are included.
Meant for understanding how the features are shared between partitions, we compared the 5
training partitions features in the set 3 selected, as can be seen in Figure 3.13. The majority
of the relevant features are shared between the 5 different training partitions, where few or non
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
25
==PAGE:34==
features are only in one single partition.
Figure 3.13: Domains and pathways relevant for MHC­I highly enriched proteins in different
training partitions. Set of features obtained by selecting the highest enriched proteins as 10%
of training distribution right tail, and with a minimum number of 3 proteins for considering relevant
these features. Domains and pathways are obtained from databases such as InterPro, Pfam,
KEGG and Reactome.
3.3.3
Peptide features: Predicted number of strong and weak binders.
NetMHCpan­4.1 is a tool for predicting peptides that bind to MHC­I given a protein sequence
[10]. Furthermore, NetMHCpan­4.1 results also inform whether a peptide sequence is a strong
MHC binder or a weak binder based on a % Rank score. So as to include peptide information
directly related with MHC­I binding, the number of strong and weak binders per protein were
calculated per each HLA supertype. Supertypes data were merged in one single variable for
strong binder and other variable for weak binders, and normalized by sequence length. Thus,
these variables range in between 0 to 0.045 in strong binder, while weak binders range between
0 to 0.12.
Number of strong and weak binders are highly correlated with an Spearman correlation value
of 0.81 as it can be seen in Figure 3.9. The linear relationship between these two binder types
can also be seen in left panel of Figure 3.14. However, both variables show no correlation with
the features mentioned in sections 3.3.2.2 and 3.3.2.1. The low correlation between MHC­I
protein enrichment and number of strong/weak binders, can be explained by the right panel
of Figure 3.14. The number of strong binders is low when MHC­I protein enrichment has low
values, however, high values of strong binders is translated into a decrease in MHC­I protein
enrichment. Moreover, MHC­I reaches its highest point when it is reached mean MHC­I protein
enrichment value.
26
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.14:
Number of strong and weak MHC­I binders and MHC­I protein enrichment.
NetMHCpan­4.1 predictor generates the number of strong and weak MHC­I peptide binders.
In the right panel, number of strong and weak binders are plotted against each other. In the left
panel, MHC­I protein enrichment is plotted against strong binders.
3.3.4
Contact maps: 2D protein structure prediction
Proteins structures have complex three­dimensional shapes result of the folding of secondary
structures as domains and motifs. Protein structures are often visualized in 3D images, as can
be seen in left panel of Figure 3.15. However, protein structures can also be described as dis­
tances between protein residues in a two­dimensional matrix. This distance matrix, also called
contact map, can be predicted from multiple sequence alignments by deep learning algorithms
such us ProSPr network [29]. ProSPr is a two­dimensional convolutional residual neural net­
work inspired by AlphaFold1, meant for predicting distances between pairs of residues for a
given sequence, as well as secondary structure classes, relative accessible surface area and
torsion angles for each residue. Contact maps have the advantage of being faster to predict
than full protein structures, as well as allowing for the comparison between patterns in different
sequences. ProSPr is an open­source algorithm used in this project to predict contact maps of
the set of proteins, obtaining 2D images as the example shown in right panel of Figure 3.15.
Figure 3.15: Protein structure representations of Human DEAD­BOX RNA helicase DDX5
(P68). In left panel, 3D protein structure obtained from PDB through X­ray diffraction [39]. Col­
ored in green are represented helix structures, while beta strand/sheet structures are colored
in pink. In the right panel, 2D protein structure or contact map predicted by ProSPr [29].
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
27
==PAGE:36==
In order to incorporate tertiary structure information to the model, it is necessary to extract
features from the contact maps. Briefly, two main methods were proposed: The first method
consists in extracting features with the pre­trained VGG­16 model, with a subsequent dimen­
sionality reduction with PCA. This model is a convolutional neural network (CNN) that has been
pre­trained with ImageNet dataset [40]. The fact that is pre­trained saves up time and resources,
and image features are easy to extract by removing the output layer of the network. Addition­
ally, VGG­16 model generates a high amount of features that can be reduced by dimensionality
reduction techniques such as PCA, which are easy to implement. The second method is based
on training a self­organizing map (SOM) and obtaining data projections to be used as features.
SOM is an artificial neural network that builds up a map of the training data. Thus, the map
is a 2D rectangular grid of weights that can be initialized with PCA and is trained using com­
petitive learning [41]. It can be used as data visualization technique that captures topological
differences in the images, as well as clustering and dimensionality reduction techniques.
To determine which method is used for the whole dataset, both methods were applied to a sub­
set of 200 proteins composed by 100 low enriched proteins and 100 highly enriched. In order
to determine the method that clustered better low and highly enriched proteins, a logistic re­
gression model was used to test the classification score of both methods. Finally, the method
that classifies better the subset of proteins is used to extract the features of all proteins of the
dataset.
VGG­16 model generates a total 4,095 vectors per contact map that are reduced to 10 first
principal components by PCA. The first two principal components explain 0.203 and 0.163 of
the variance respectively, whereas the 10 first principal components explain 0.756 of the vari­
ance. As it can be seen in left panel of Figure 3.16, principal components cluster highly enriched
proteins in the bottom left corner of the plot. However, proteins are less clustered in the SOM,
however, highly enriched proteins are slightly more concentrated in the center left on the Figure
3.16 right panel.
Both PCA results and SOM projections were fit to a logistic regression model to evaluate which
method classifies the data with higher classification score. The score obtained with VGG­16
and PCA reaches 0.75, while SOM projections reach 0.61. Hence, the combination of VGG­16
and PCA was the method selected for extracting features from contact maps. Moreover, SOM
retrieves a weighted map where the data projections are overlapped and can be seen in Ap­
pendix C.1.
Figure 3.16: Dimensionality reduction of contact maps for a subset of 200 proteins. In the left
panel, first and second principal components are plotted against each other, result of contact
maps as an input to VGG­16 model and reduced its dimensionality with PCA. In the right panel,
x and y data projections result from training a self­organizing map (SOM) with the subset of
proteins.
28
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:37==
3.3.5
Model predictions and correlations.
Meant for evaluating feature importance and predicting MHC­I protein enrichment, random for­
est was the model of choice. This model is a tree­based ensemble machine learning algorithm
that can be applied for large data­sets and deals with correlation and interaction between vari­
ables [42]. This algorithm is highly used in bioinformatics, such us gene expression classifica­
tion, biomarker discovery, protein­protein interaction prediction among other applications given
its high predictive accuracy and feature importance measuring [43]. Furthermore, in this project,
random forest regressor has been used given its easy implementation and fast model training.
For the purpose of identifying the set of features that significantly contribute to the variability
of MHC­I protein enrichment, random forest model is trained with different combinations of the
collected features. Subsequently, Spearman correlation is calculated between MHC­I protein
enrichment predicted by the model and measured value. Furthermore, intended for selecting
the model with higher performance, bootstrapping hypothesis testing is carried out to determine
if there are significant differences between models as explained in materials and methods 2.6.
As a result, we have constructed a total of 12 random forest models and a baseline model (Ba)
as can be seen in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Spearman correlation of built models and their corresponding features to which they
have been trained with. Ba model corresponds with the baseline model based on blast.
The first set of features are gene expression in cell and tissue, which were used to trained Model
A. The resulting Spearman correlation value between prediction and measured MHCI­protein
enrichment, shows that gene expression highly contributes to MHC­I protein enrichment vari­
ability, but there are more factors that contribute. Thus, the second set of features are protein
abundance, length and localization, which were used to trained Model B. Similarly to Model
A, these set of features alone can not explain MHCI­protein enrichment variability. Given so,
Model G is trained with features corresponding with both above mentioned models, resulting in
a high performance model that archives a 0.812 Spearman correlation value between predic­
tions and measured MHC­I protein enrichment. After performing bootstrapping, Model G has a
significantly higher performance than Model A and B.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
29
==PAGE:38==
The increase in performance is translated into a better predictions as can be seen in Figure
3.17, where the addition of the protein features increases the number of values that follow the
diagonal line. This result suggest that the combination of gene expression and protein features
are relevant for the prediction of MHC­I protein enrichment.
Figure 3.17: Measured MHC­I protein enrichment values against predicted values by Model A
and Model G.
Given that the addition of above mentioned protein features increased model performance,
Model H is built by adding chemical protein features. As a result, isoelectric point and amino
acid composition increase significantly the performance, even though the increase is translated
in 0.007 Spearman correlation. Similarly, Model I is generated by adding the number of strong
and weak MHC­I binders, obtaining an increment in correlation of 0.003, resulting to being sig­
nificant increment in performance.
In order to shed light into to what extent each feature is relevant for explaining MHC­I protein
enrichment, feature importances are extracted from the model I. As can be seen in Figure 3.18,
gene expression in cell is the most important feature, followed by protein abundance and me­
thionine (M) content. Feature importance drops to 0.05 or below, and subcellular localization
has lower importance close to zero.
Protein structures predicted as 2D contact maps were reduced to the first 2 and 10 principal
components. In order to determine if these PCs can explain MHC­I protein enrichment, 10 and
2 PCs are used to trained Model D and E respectively, without including other gene or protein
features. The result is a low model performance based on Spearman correlation, significantly
lower than Model I. However, model D has a higher significant increase in performance than
the baseline model based on blast, whereas the model E has a significantly decrease in perfor­
mance compared with baseline model. Thus, this result suggests that contact maps reduced to
their principal components explain partially MHC­I protein enrichment.
Given that, first principal components were added to the set of features used for training Model
I: gene expression, protein abundance, localization, length, amino acid composition, isoelectric
point and number of strong and weak binders. In one hand, model J trained with the additional
10 PCs drops the performance significantly, as well as model K trained with additional 2 first
PCs. However, the addition of 10 PCs represents a higher drop than 2 first PCS.
With the aim of understanding which PCs are more important for the model J, feature impor­
tances are shown in Figure 3.18. PCs are more relevant than subcellular localization and the
composition of some amino acids. Moreover, PC7 and PC4 are the most relevant principal
30
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:39==
components included. Given the drop in performance, contact maps principal components are
not included in the next models built.
Figure 3.18: Feature importances of random forest Model I and J trained across training par­
titions. The localizations are cytoplasm (Cytopl.), nucleus, mitocondrion (Mitoc.), peroxisome
(Peroxi.), plastid, lysosome/vacuole (L/V), Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi apparatus (GA),
extracellular (Extrac.) and cell membrane (Cell.mem).
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
31
==PAGE:40==
Finally, last set of features corresponding with domains and pathways were used for training a
random forest model and evaluate feature importances. First, domains and pathways without
gene and other proteins features were incorporated to train model F, resulting in a model with
low performance, but higher than the baseline model. Thus, domains and pathways can explain
partially MHC­I protein enrichment, but they are not the only relevant factors.
Given that, Model L is trained including all gene and protein features with the exception of con­
tact maps principal components. The result is a model with higher performance than the model
without domains and pathways. The correlation between MHC­I protein enrichment measured
and predicted increases and can be seen in the upper panel of Figure 3.19, where plotted val­
ues tend to follow the diagonal and several outliers can be observed. This result suggests
that domains and pathways are relevant for predicting MHC­I protein enrichment. With the aim
of identifying which are the main domains and pathways relevant for the prediction of MHC­
I protein enrichment, the first fifty feature importance of Model L across the different training
partitions are plotted as can be seen in the bottom panel of Figure 3.19.
Figure 3.19: Random forest Model L results. In the upper panel, MHC­I protein enrichment
measured values against predicted values. In the bottom panel, first fifty feature importance
of the model across different training partitions. The localizations are cytoplasm (Cytopl.), nu­
cleus, mitocondrion (Mitoc.), peroxisome (Peroxi.), plastid, lysosome/vacuole (L/V), Endoplas­
mic reticulum (ER), Golgi apparatus (GA), extracellular (Extrac.) and cell membrane (Cell.mem)
32
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:41==
A closer look to these features sheds light into relevant protein domains and pathways for the
prediction of MHC­I protein enrichment.
The first more relevant features of domains and pathways are a collection of 11 Interpro and 3
Pfam domains and 8 KEGG and 14 Reactome pathways. These domains and pathways can
be classified by their common cellular processes in which they are involved as can be seen in
Figure 3.4.
Table 3.4: Interpro and Pfam domains, KEGG and Reactome pathways selected as relevant
features by Model L and classified by their general function classes obtained from databases
Interpro [36], Pfam [35], KEGG [37] and Reactome [38].
Other model results, such as feature importances and measured MHC­I protein enrichment
against predicted values can be seen in Appendix E.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:43==
4
Discussion
In this project, we have built the first­of­its­kind random forest regressor for the prediction of
MHC­I protein enrichment, which we have defined as the measurement of MHC­I binding pep­
tide counts per each protein across human cell lines.
With the use of immunopeptidomics data, we have observed a high percentage of the human
proteome sampled by MHC­I equivalent to 78,7%. Moreover, the number of proteins decreases
exponentially as the number of MHC­I binding peptides increases, meaning that the majority of
proteins are represented in the immunopeptidome by one peptide, less proteins would be rep­
resented by two peptides, etc. This goes in line with other studies conclusions where the same
peptide count distribution is obtained and the majority of source proteins are represented by only
one MHC­I binding peptide [15, 16, 18]. At the same time, we have observed that the number of
MHC­I binding peptides varies depending on the tumor cell lines, and they can be clustered by
their peptide count pattern across proteins. The fact that the immunopeptidome is different de­
pending on cell lines has been reported before, which has been linked with the metabolic status
of cells [44]. In this project, instead of focusing in certain cell lines, we have been able to cap­
ture differences in immunopeptidomes by integrating peptide counts of all cell lines into a single
value per each protein of the human proteome, which we have called MHC­I protein enrichment.
To date, logistic regression models have been applied in order to predict whether proteins are
source of MHC­I binding peptides [15, 18]. However, in this work we have applied random forest
model regressor to predict to what extent these source proteins are generating MHC­I binding
peptides, as well as a tool for evaluating feature importance. Furthermore, we generated a par­
titioned dataset based on sequence similarity, meaning that models are not trained with proteins
that are similar to those to be predicted in the test set. In this way, we can avoid knowledge
leakage problems related with the incorporation of test data when models are trained, which
can be translated to overfitting problems and inflated model performance.
Thus, in this work, we have built several models combining gene, protein and peptide features
obtained from different sources. Even though we have able to build high performance models in
terms of correlation between measured MHC­I protein enrichment and predictions, we consider
our models have limitations as predictors. First of all, in order to predict MHC­I protein enrich­
ment is necessary to collect a high amount of features, meaning that it is possible to lack crucial
information for predicting MHC­I protein enrichment for new proteins. However, we propose
that more simple models built in this project can be used, such us Model I or G which perfor­
mances in terms of Spearman correlation are still higher than 0.8 in both cases and require less
amount of features. Secondly, even using partitioned models and 5 K­fold cross­validation to
avoid overfitting, there is a risk of having the problem of poor generalization of the data for new
predictions. This is because we have predicted MHC­I protein enrichment directly on the test set
and without hyper­parameter tuning, as well as we have not used a validation or independent
dataset to further evaluate model fit given lack of time. Thirdly, there are limitations regarding
noise in features collected, such us gene expression obtained from different cells or protein
abundance as integration of different experimental data. As an ideal scenario, gene expression
levels in cell and tissue as well as protein abundance could be obtained simultaneously in order
to minimize this noise as discussed in similar studies [15].
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
35
==PAGE:44==
In this work, we have shown that gene expression in cell and protein abundance are highly rel­
evant and positively correlated with MHC­I protein enrichment, resulting in the two main driving
forces of MHC­I protein enrichment variability, in line with other studies [18, 15]. Protein and
peptide features as different amino acid compositions, followed by gene expression in tissue,
protein length, number of strong and weak binders, isoelectric point and subcellular localization
are relevant features for the prediction of MHC­I protein enrichment. Thus, we have observed
that we can achieve a high performance model with these set of features that reaches a 0.822
correlation between measured and predicted values.
Some of these features influencing sampling by MHC­I have been explored in previous studies.
First of all, it was suggested that cellular localization had an effect on MHC­I sampling, highlight­
ing the importance of cytoplasm and nucleus and the presence of proteasome activity in both
compartments [16, 17]. Even though we show that some subcellular localizations are correlated
with MHC­I protein enrichment, such as cytoplasm, nucleus, extracellular or cell membrane, our
final model gives relatively low importance to these collection of features. Surprisingly, mito­
chondria appears to be the most relevant subcellular component, followed by cytoplasm and
nucleus. However, it has been some evidence that mitochondrial function has an effect in anti­
gen processing and presentation, suggesting that there is an increase in the metabolic demands
on cells studied [45].
Later on more studies began to also include different combinations of gene expression, protein
abundance, protein length, chemical properties [17]. Similar to the incorporation of number of
strong and weak binders in our work, other studies have incorporated the total amount of pre­
dicted binders obtained with NetMHC [15]. Furthermore, other studies consider features not
included in this project that have shown impact on MHC­I protein enrichment, such us, internal
disorder of proteins and 5’ UTR secondary structures [17, 18].
To the best of our knowledge, this study has included protein domains and pathways related
with proteins highly enriched in MHC­I binding peptides to date. These domains and pathways,
included as features in our model, are relevant for predicting MHC­I protein enrichment, and we
have been able to classify the most relevant ones in common cellular processes. As a result,
the majority of domains and pathways are related with the immune system defense, cell cycle
and signal transduction, translation and protein transport. Together with the above mentioned
features, we have built our final model that reaches a 0.827 correlation between measured and
predicted. Some of these cellular processes have been highlighted by other studies that used
Gene Ontology (GO) to understand MHC­I antigen processing and presentation [16, 17].
Furthermore, we have incorporated for the first time the dimensionality reduction of predicted
2D protein contact maps for MHC­I protein enrichment prediction. In our first analysis carried
out with a subset of highly and lowly enriched proteins, we were able to explain 75,5% variance
in the dataset with the first 10 principal components. These promising results show that it is
possible to extract protein features from 2D contact maps. Interestingly, the addition of princi­
pal components to the model, results in a drop of performance in terms of correlation between
measured MHC­I protein enrichment and predictions.
We can see several reasons for this drop of performance. First of all contact maps represent the
distance between all amino acid residues of a protein in a matrix where main structural features
can be distinguish, such us helices or beta sheets. However, a contact map is a symmetric ma­
trix with respect to the diagonal, meaning that we are incorporating same information twice, for
instance distance between C1­C2 and C2­C1 are both in the contact map and we do not know its
implications for this problem. Secondly, contact maps are shaped into a predefined 68x68 pixels
to be used in VGG­16 model, which might have caused the lost of information given that all the
proteins with different length are shaped into the same image dimensions. Thirdly, we carried
out transfer learning by choosing a pre­trained VGG­16 model in order to extract features from
36
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:45==
the contact maps. We can see limitations with this way of extracting features regarding that
VGG­16 is trained for a classification problem while this is a regression problem. Thirdly, we
extracted features from last fully connected layer of VGG­16, however, we could have extract
more features from other layers, such us the final convolution layer.
Furthermore, we trained a self­organizing map with the same contact maps in order to ex­
plore other more complex machine learning algorithms for this clustering problem. Some of
the advantages are its easy implementation and its capacity of capture topological differences
between images for classification problems. Important limitations of this model are related with
how computationally expensive it is for training, and that SOM relies on predefined distance
in the feature space among others limitations. Moreover, SOM can be counter­intuitive for the
user, given that similar clusters can appear in opposite sides of the map. However, we consider
that in this study we have carried out an exploratory analysis with SOM applied to 2D contact
maps that require further analysis and tests to gather meaningful conclusions.
All in all, in this project we have shed light into which factors have an effect on the proteome
sampling by MHC­I with the intention of improving the understanding of MHC­I antigen pro­
cessing and presentation pathway. Thus, these results could be use to extend and improve
methods for predicting MHC binding antigens, having implications in the development of new
immunotherapies for viruses and cancer.
As a future work, we propose to firstly carry out a more accurate assessment of relevant features
obtained from the final model, focusing on domains and pathways and trying to understand their
relationship with MHC­I processing and presentation pathway. Furthermore, more efforts can
be carried out regarding feature extraction of predicted 2D contact maps. In this work, promising
results have been obtained with a subset of proteins, thus, further adjustments during feature
extraction can be key to successfully obtain relevant protein features. For instance with a better
resolution of images to begin with, followed by extraction with other VGG­16 layers, further anal­
ysis with SOM or other algorithms to extract meaningful information from images. Moreover,
we propose that other features can be extracted from contact maps. For instance, we could
get information about how compact a protein is by counting the number of interactions within
residues below a certain Angstrom resolution. We hypothesise that the degree of compactness
could have an effect in the degradation of proteins in MHC­I processing and presentation path­
way. In order to further improve the model several steps can be carried out. For instance, the
selection of features commented above that successfully have been related with MHC­I protein
enrichment and not included in this study, but also hyper­parameter tuning of random forest can
be carried out, as well as the use of a validation set to evaluate the final model fit. Moreover,
other models as artificial neural networks can be built for the prediction of MHC­I protein enrich­
ment and the evaluation of relevant features.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:47==
5
Conclusions
The results of this work contribute to the understanding of MHC­I processing and presentation
pathway which is fundamental in the adaptive immune system. In order to study this pathway,
immunopeptidomics data has been a relevant source of data.
In this project, we have found that 78,7% of the proteome is sampled by MHC­I and that high
amount of proteins are represented by one single MHC­I binding peptide. Moreover, we have
observed that some proteins have a higher generation of MHC­I binding peptides, meaning that
there is a MHC­I protein enrichment.
Through building random forest regressor model, we have found relevant gene, protein and
peptide features that can explain the variability of MHC­I protein enrichment. Gene expression
in cell and protein abundance are highly correlated with MHC­I protein enrichment and they are
the most relevant features for its prediction.
Furthermore, we have collected protein features focusing in secondary structure of proteins and
we have found that domains and pathways are relevant for the prediction of MHC­I protein en­
richment. Above all, several domains and pathways related with immune system defense, cell
cycle and signal transduction, translation and protein transport.
Moreover, we have explored the addition of tertiary structure of proteins as predicted 2D con­
tact maps. Even though we have found promising results in the classification of highly and lowly
MHC­I enriched proteins, the addition of features extracted from contact maps in the model re­
sults in a drop in performance. Thus, we propose to further explore the extraction of features
from predicted 2D contact maps.
Finally, the results of this project can improve other machine learning algorithms for the predic­
tion of MHC­I antigens, which is highly relevant for the development of immunotherapies against
virus and cancer.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
Marek Wieczorek et al. “Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) Class I and MHC Class
II Proteins: Conformational Plasticity in Antigen Presentation”. In: Frontiers in Immunology
8 (Mar. 2017). DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00292. URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.
2017.00292.
[2]
Jacques Neefjes et al. “Towards a systems understanding of MHC class I and MHC class
II antigen presentation”. In: Nature Reviews Immunology 11.12 (Nov. 2011), pp. 823–836.
DOI: 10.1038/nri3084. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nri3084.
[3]
P. Leone et al. “MHC Class I Antigen Processing and Presenting Machinery: Organization,
Function, and Defects in Tumor Cells”. In: JNCI Journal of the National Cancer Institute
105.16 (July 2013), pp. 1172–1187. DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djt184. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1093/jnci/djt184.
[4]
L. C. Anton and J. W. Yewdell. “Translating DRiPs: MHC class I immunosurveillance of
pathogens and tumors”. In: Journal of Leukocyte Biology 95.4 (Feb. 2014), pp. 551–562.
DOI: 10.1189/jlb.1113599. URL: https://doi.org/10.1189/jlb.1113599.
[5]
Annelisa M. Cornel, Iris L. Mimpen, and Stefan Nierkens. “MHC Class I Downregulation
in Cancer: Underlying Mechanisms and Potential Targets for Cancer Immunotherapy”. In:
Cancers 12.7 (July 2020), p. 1760. DOI: 10.3390/cancers12071760. URL: https://doi.org/
10.3390/cancers12071760.
[6]
Karthik Dhatchinamoorthy, Jeff D. Colbert, and Kenneth L. Rock. “Cancer Immune Eva­
sion Through Loss of MHC Class I Antigen Presentation”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 12
(Mar. 2021). DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.636568. URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.
636568.
[7]
Donald F. Hunt et al. “Characterization of Peptides Bound to the Class I MHC Molecule
HLA­A2.1 by Mass Spectrometry”. In: Science 255.5049 (Mar. 1992), pp. 1261–1263.
DOI: 10.1126/science.1546328. URL: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1546328.
[8]
Anthony W. Purcell, Sri H. Ramarathinam, and Nicola Ternette. “Mass spectrometry–
based identification of MHC­bound peptides for immunopeptidomics”. In: Nature Proto­
cols 14.6 (May 2019), pp. 1687–1707. DOI: 10.1038/s41596- 019- 0133- y. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41596-019-0133-y.
[9]
Gabor Mester, Vanessa Hoffmann, and Stefan Stevanović. “Insights into MHC class I
antigen processing gained from large­scale analysis of class I ligands”. In: Cellular and
Molecular Life Sciences 68.9 (Mar. 2011), pp. 1521–1532. DOI: 10.1007/s00018- 011-
0659-9. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-011-0659-9.
[10]
Birkir Reynisson et al. “NetMHCpan­4.1 and NetMHCIIpan­4.0: improved predictions of
MHC antigen presentation by concurrent motif deconvolution and integration of MS MHC
eluted ligand data”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 48.W1 (May 2020), W449–W454. DOI:
10.1093/nar/gkaa379. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa379.
[11]
Lena Katharina Freudenmann, Ana Marcu, and Stefan Stevanović. “Mapping the tumour
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) ligandome by mass spectrometry”. In: Immunology 154.3
(May 2018), pp. 331–345. DOI: 10.1111/imm.12936. URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/imm.
12936.
[12]
Annika Nelde et al. “Immunopeptidomics­Guided Warehouse Design for Peptide­Based
Immunotherapy in Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 12 (July
2021). DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.705974. URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.
705974.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
41
==PAGE:50==
[13]
Marion Draheim et al. “Profiling MHC II immunopeptidome of blood­stage malaria reveals
that cDC 1 control the functionality of parasite­specific CD 4 T cells”. In: EMBO Molecular
Medicine 9.11 (Sept. 2017), pp. 1605–1621. DOI: 10.15252/emmm.201708123. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.15252/emmm.201708123.
[14]
Jonathan Hare et al. “Direct identification of HLA­presented CD8 T cell epitopes from
transmitted founder HIV­1 variants”. In: PROTEOMICS 21.17­18 (Aug. 2021), p. 2100142.
DOI: 10.1002/pmic.202100142. URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.202100142.
[15]
Ilka Hoof et al. “Proteome Sampling by the HLA Class I Antigen Processing Pathway”.
In: PLoS Computational Biology 8.5 (May 2012). Ed. by Bjoern Peters, e1002517. DOI:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002517. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002517.
[16]
Heather D. Hickman et al. “Toward a Definition of Self: Proteomic Evaluation of the Class
I Peptide Repertoire”. In: The Journal of Immunology 172.5 (Feb. 2004), pp. 2944–2952.
DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.172.5.2944. URL: https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.172.5.2944.
[17]
Agnieszka S. Juncker et al. “Systematic Characterisation of Cellular Localisation and Ex­
pression Profiles of Proteins Containing MHC Ligands”. In: PLoS ONE 4.10 (Oct. 2009).
Ed. by Vladimir Brusic, e7448. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007448. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0007448.
[18]
Hillary Pearson et al. “MHC class I–associated peptides derive from selective regions of
the human genome”. In: Journal of Clinical Investigation 126.12 (Nov. 2016), pp. 4690–
4701. DOI: 10.1172/jci88590. URL: https://doi.org/10.1172/jci88590.
[19]
UniProt ConsortiumEuropean Bioinformatics InstituteProtein Information ResourceSIB Swiss
Institute of Bioinformatics. Available at https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640.
[20]
Index of /blast/executables/blast+/latest. URL: https : / / ftp . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / blast /
executables/blast+/LATEST/.
[21]
In: (1982).
[22]
J. A. Martı́n­Fernández. In: Mathematical Geology 35.3 (2003), pp. 253–278. DOI: 10.
1023/a:1023866030544. URL: https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1023866030544.
[23]
F. Pedregosa et al. “Scikit­learn: Machine Learning in Python”. In: Journal of Machine
Learning Research 12 (2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[24]
M. Uhlen et al. “Tissue­based map of the human proteome”. In: Science 347.6220 (Jan.
2015), pp. 1260419–1260419. DOI: 10.1126/science.1260419. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1126/science.1260419.
[25]
Brendan Bulik­Sullivan et al. “Deep learning using tumor HLA peptide mass spectrometry
datasets improves neoantigen identification”. In: Nature Biotechnology 37.1 (Dec. 2018),
pp. 55–63. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.4313. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.4313.
[26]
Mingcong Wang et al. “Version 4.0 of PaxDb: Protein abundance data, integrated across
model organisms, tissues, and cell­lines”. In: PROTEOMICS 15.18 (Mar. 2015), pp. 3163–
3168. DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201400441. URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201400441.
[27]
José Juan Almagro Armenteros et al. “DeepLoc: prediction of protein subcellular local­
ization using deep learning”. In: Bioinformatics 33.21 (July 2017). Ed. by John Hancock,
pp. 3387–3395. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btx431. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/btx431.
[28]
Da Wei Huang, Brad T. Sherman, and Richard A. Lempicki. “Bioinformatics enrichment
tools: paths toward the comprehensive functional analysis of large gene lists”. In: Nucleic
Acids Research 37.1 (Nov. 2008), pp. 1–13. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkn923. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1093/nar/gkn923.
[29]
Jacob Stern et al. “Evaluation of Deep Neural Network ProSPr for Accurate Protein Dis­
tance Predictions on CASP14 Targets”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences
22.23 (Nov. 2021), p. 12835. DOI: 10.3390/ijms222312835. URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms222312835.
42
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:51==
[30]
Michael Remmert et al. “HHblits: lightning­fast iterative protein sequence searching by
HMM­HMM alignment”. In: Nature Methods 9.2 (Dec. 2011), pp. 173–175. DOI: 10.1038/
nmeth.1818. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1818.
[31]
Francois Chollet et al. Keras. 2015. URL: https://github.com/fchollet/keras.
[32]
Federico Comitani. SimpSOM (v1.3.4). 2021. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.5788411. URL: https:
//github.com/fcomitani/simpsom.
[33]
Pauli Virtanen et al. “SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python”.
In: Nature Methods 17 (2020), pp. 261–272. DOI: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.
[34]
Peter Lynn. “The Advantage and Disadvantage of Implicitly Stratified Sampling”. en. In:
methods data (2019), No 2 (2019). DOI: 10.12758/MDA.2018.02. URL: https://mda.gesis.
org/index.php/mda/article/view/2018.02.
[35]
Jaina Mistry et al. “Pfam: The protein families database in 2021”. In: Nucleic Acids Re­
search 49.D1 (Oct. 2020), pp. D412–D419. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa913. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1093/nar/gkaa913.
[36]
Matthias Blum et al. “The InterPro protein families and domains database: 20 years on”. In:
Nucleic Acids Research 49.D1 (Nov. 2020), pp. D344–D354. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa977.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa977.
[37]
M. Kanehisa. “KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes”. In: Nucleic Acids
Research 28.1 (Jan. 2000), pp. 27–30. DOI: 10.1093/nar/28.1.27. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1093/nar/28.1.27.
[38]
Guanming Wu and Robin Haw. “Functional Interaction Network Construction and Analysis
for Disease Discovery”. In: Protein Bioinformatics. Springer New York, 2017, pp. 235–253.
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6783-4_11. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-6783-
4_11.
[39]
S. Dutta et al. Crystal structure of the N­terminal domain of the Human DEAD­BOX RNA
helicase DDX5 (P68). Aug. 2012. DOI: 10.2210/pdb4a4d/pdb. URL: https://doi.org/10.
2210/pdb4a4d/pdb.
[40]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large­
Scale Image Recognition. 2014. eprint: arXiv:1409.1556.
[41]
Teuvo Kohonen. “Self­organized formation of topologically correct feature maps”. In: Bi­
ological Cybernetics 43.1 (1982), pp. 59–69. DOI: 10.1007/bf00337288. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1007/bf00337288.
[42]
Xi Chen and Hemant Ishwaran. “Random forests for genomic data analysis”. In: Genomics
99.6 (June 2012), pp. 323–329. DOI: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2012.04.003. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ygeno.2012.04.003.
[43]
W. G. Touw et al. “Data mining in the Life Sciences with Random Forest: a walk in the
park or lost in the jungle?” In: Briefings in Bioinformatics 14.3 (July 2012), pp. 315–326.
DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbs034. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbs034.
[44]
Etienne Caron et al. “The MHC I immunopeptidome conveys to the cell surface an inte­
grative view of cellular regulation”. In: Molecular Systems Biology 7.1 (Jan. 2011), p. 533.
DOI: 10.1038/msb.2011.68. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/msb.2011.68.
[45]
Laura C. Bonifaz et al. “A role for mitochondria in antigen processing and presentation”.
In: Immunology 144.3 (Sept. 2014), pp. 461–471. DOI: 10.1111/imm.12392. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1111/imm.12392.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:53==
A
List of contaminant proteins
Uniprot ID | Entry name
P27216|ANX13_HUMAN
Q96PU9|ODF3A_HUMAN
O15218|GP182_HUMAN
P0CG35|TB15B_HUMAN
Q9NRM1|ENAM_HUMAN
Q8IWW8|HOT_HUMAN
B4DZS4|T11X1_HUMAN
Q68CK6|ACS2B_HUMAN
Q96M69|LRGUK_HUMAN
Q01955|CO4A3_HUMAN
P23515|OMGP_HUMAN
Q5JRS4|O10J3_HUMAN
Q9NQ76|MEPE_HUMAN
Q9HBV2|SACA1_HUMAN
P80511|S10AC_HUMAN
Q9H2J1|CI037_HUMAN
Q8WWU7|ITLN2_HUMAN
Q5SV17|TM240_HUMAN
O60431|OR1I1_HUMAN
Q8IY50|S35F3_HUMAN
Q96DR5|BPIA2_HUMAN
Q9UN88|GBRT_HUMAN
P49908|SEPP1_HUMAN
Q0VF49|K2012_HUMAN
Q13066|GAG2B_HUMAN
Q8NGS2|OR1J2_HUMAN
P0CG34|TB15A_HUMAN
Q14654|KCJ11_HUMAN
P46059|S15A1_HUMAN
Q04118|PRB3_HUMAN
P28069|PIT1_HUMAN
Q6IF63|O52W1_HUMAN
Q92858|ATOH1_HUMAN
P12724|ECP_HUMAN
Q9NYT0|PLEK2_HUMAN
A5PLL1|AN34B_HUMAN
O15263|DFB4A_HUMAN
O43283|M3K13_HUMAN
A6NMS7|L37A1_HUMAN
P0C2W7|CT47B_HUMAN
P16473|TSHR_HUMAN
Q6QNK2|AGRD1_HUMAN
Q96A32|MLRS_HUMAN
Q9ULB4|CADH9_HUMAN
Q8IZV2|CKLF8_HUMAN
Q9BQM9|CT144_HUMAN
A6NNS2|DRS7C_HUMAN
P31639|SC5A2_HUMAN
Q641Q3|METRL_HUMAN
Q9H5P4|PDZD7_HUMAN
Q9H255|O51E2_HUMAN
A0A075B6J9|LV218_HUMAN
Q96M83|CCDC7_HUMAN
P01588|EPO_HUMAN
P22735|TGM1_HUMAN
Q6Q0C1|S2547_HUMAN
Q8NA31|TERB1_HUMAN
Q13103|SPP24_HUMAN
Q9Y5C1|ANGL3_HUMAN
Q9GZV9|FGF23_HUMAN
P15516|HIS3_HUMAN
Q6ZRM9|YG024_HUMAN
Q8WZ84|OR8D1_HUMAN
A8MT70|ZBBX_HUMAN
Q7Z410|TMPS9_HUMAN
Q8N865|CG031_HUMAN
Q96PF1|TGM7_HUMAN
Q5VVM6|CCD30_HUMAN
Q8WXK1|ASB15_HUMAN
P56180|TPTE_HUMAN
Q8N6P7|I22R1_HUMAN
P49146|NPY2R_HUMAN
C9JJ37|BTBDJ_HUMAN
Q8TDV0|GP151_HUMAN
P35080|PROF2_HUMAN
A6NCF6|MA13P_HUMAN
Q08AH3|ACS2A_HUMAN
Q8NGK2|O52B4_HUMAN
Q15485|FCN2_HUMAN
Q66K80|RUAS1_HUMAN
Q9ULH4|LRFN2_HUMAN
P59022|DSC10_HUMAN
Q969T3|SNX21_HUMAN
Q15375|EPHA7_HUMAN
Q8N661|TM86B_HUMAN
P04278|SHBG_HUMAN
Q9HBX9|RXFP1_HUMAN
A0A0B4J2F0|PIOS1_HUMAN
Q8NGR4|OR5C1_HUMAN
Q86YT5|S13A5_HUMAN
Q6JVE6|LCN10_HUMAN
P63128|POK9_HUMAN
Q3KP44|ANR55_HUMAN
Q96T54|KCNKH_HUMAN
P20853|CP2A7_HUMAN
Q9UQF0|SYCY1_HUMAN
P02741|CRP_HUMAN
Q8TAT2|FGFP3_HUMAN
O43364|HXA2_HUMAN
Q9UGF7|O12D3_HUMAN
Q9UI38|TSP50_HUMAN
Q9H720|PG2IP_HUMAN
Q5VWW1|C1QL3_HUMAN
P13349|MYF5_HUMAN
Q5D862|FILA2_HUMAN
Q8NGF1|O52R1_HUMAN
Q9H0B8|CRLD2_HUMAN
I3L0S3|PYAS1_HUMAN
P04180|LCAT_HUMAN
Q6XPS3|TPTE2_HUMAN
Q8N808|S35G3_HUMAN
Q8IYU4|UBQLN_HUMAN
P47775|GPR12_HUMAN
O95670|VATG2_HUMAN
Q6NSI1|AR26L_HUMAN
O00755|WNT7A_HUMAN
P33032|MC5R_HUMAN
Q16517|NNAT_HUMAN
Q9NRR2|TRYG1_HUMAN
Q8NH72|OR4C6_HUMAN
P47929|LEG7_HUMAN
A6NCV1|O6C74_HUMAN
Q9C0H9|SRCN1_HUMAN
Q5W0Z9|ZDH20_HUMAN
Q9UBX7|KLK11_HUMAN
Q9UI40|NCKX2_HUMAN
Q14397|GCKR_HUMAN
Q15835|GRK1_HUMAN
Q9Y233|PDE10_HUMAN
Q7Z2V1|TNT_HUMAN
P24588|AKAP5_HUMAN
Q5TG30|RHG40_HUMAN
Q9BXJ0|C1QT5_HUMAN
Q9P2G3|KLH14_HUMAN
P0C7Q6|S35G6_HUMAN
Q6UX15|LAYN_HUMAN
Q9NXJ0|M4A12_HUMAN
Q8N4B1|SESQ1_HUMAN
A6NFT4|CFA73_HUMAN
Q8IVV8|NKAI4_HUMAN
Q9NZT1|CALL5_HUMAN
Q9NR23|GDF3_HUMAN
Q569K6|CC157_HUMAN
Q96DC8|ECHD3_HUMAN
Q9UJH8|METRN_HUMAN
P82251|BAT1_HUMAN
Q8NH76|O56B4_HUMAN
P47211|GALR1_HUMAN
Q86X51|EZHIP_HUMAN
P30039|PBLD_HUMAN
Q6P461|ACSM6_HUMAN
Q9NPJ1|MKKS_HUMAN
Q5JXA9|SIRB2_HUMAN
P04196|HRG_HUMAN
Q6J272|F166A_HUMAN
Q7Z443|PK1L3_HUMAN
Q13939|CALI_HUMAN
C9JR72|KBTBD_HUMAN
Q8NGS3|OR1J1_HUMAN
Q9ULB5|CADH7_HUMAN
P60409|KR107_HUMAN
Q86XM0|CTSRD_HUMAN
Q6IEE7|T132E_HUMAN
Q3MIW9|MUCL3_HUMAN
Q9UEU5|GGE2D_HUMAN
P80075|CCL8_HUMAN
Q9BZV3|IMPG2_HUMAN
Q86UF4|CC190_HUMAN
Q8WU43|CB015_HUMAN
A6NDB9|PALM3_HUMAN
P51513|NOVA1_HUMAN
P11678|PERE_HUMAN
P08686|CP21A_HUMAN
O75344|FKBP6_HUMAN
P56159|GFRA1_HUMAN
Q6NT46|GAG2A_HUMAN
Q6ZVT6|CF20D_HUMAN
B4E2M5|ANR66_HUMAN
P0C7Q5|S35G4_HUMAN
Q8N8D7|NKAI3_HUMAN
P14920|OXDA_HUMAN
Q8WTR4|GDPD5_HUMAN
Q96KK3|KCNS1_HUMAN
Q9GZZ6|ACH10_HUMAN
Q6ZST4|LCNL1_HUMAN
Table A.1: Source proteins of detected contaminant MHC­I binding peptides. Peptides are de­
tected as contaminants based on their %Rank during the filtering of immunpeptidomics dataset
and removed from the final dataset. The eliminated peptides were matched against protein
sequences in the human proteome and source proteins were obtained.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
45
==PAGE:54==
B
Cell lines and MHC­I binding peptides
Figure B.1: Total MHC­I binding peptide counts across different cell lines.
46
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:55==
C
Gene and numerical features
MHCI Prot.enrich
Gene exp.tissue
Gene exp.cell
Abundance
Prot.length
IP
Mol.weight
Str.binder
Weak binder
count
14311.0
14311.0
14311.0
14311.0
14311.0
14311.0
14311.0
14311.0
14311.0
mean
0.097
17.082
23.631
49.618
569.632
7.277
63463.148
0.021
0.065
std
0.128
199.0
172.812
453.071
478.467
1.698
53077
0.005
0.012
min
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
24.0
4.05
2647.207
0.0
0.0
25%
0.005
0.044
0.0
0.220
283.0
5.803
31499.472
0.018
0.057
50%
0.044
1.477
1.638
0.976
437.0
6.982
48766.250
0.022
0.065
75%
0.141
7.049
12.296
8.835
691.0
8.835
77146.935
0.025
0.073
max
1.0
11355.299
7973.959
30334.0
5478.0
11.999
558156.715
0.045
0.125
Table C.1: Numerical gene, protein and peptide features description. count refers to the total
number of values in the data frame for the variable, min and max refer to the minimum or
maximum value found in the corresponding variable, std refers to the standard deviation. 25%,
50% and 75% refers to first quantile, median and third quantile respectively.
D
Self organizing maps
Figure D.1: Self organizing maps output. In left panel, 40x40 map where nodes are repre­
sented and different colors depend on the weights. In right panel the 40x40 map has the data
projections of 100 highly MHC­I enriched proteins and 100 lowly enriched.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
47
==PAGE:56==
E
Additional models figures
Figure E.1: Feature importances of random forest Model A trained across training partitions and
measured MHC­I protein enrichment values against predicted values.
48
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:57==
Figure E.2: Feature importances of random forest Model B trained across training partitions
and measured MHC­I protein enrichment values against predicted values. The localizations are
cytoplasm (Cytopl.), nucleus, mitocondrion (Mitoc.), peroxisome (Peroxi.), plastid, lysosome/­
vacuole (L/V), Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi apparatus (GA), extracellular (Extrac.) and
cell membrane (Cell.mem).
Figure E.3: Feature importances of random forest Model C trained across training partitions
and measured MHC­I protein enrichment values against predicted values.
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure E.4: Feature importances of random forest Model D trained across training partitions
and measured MHC­I protein enrichment values against predicted values.
Figure E.5: Feature importances of random forest Model E trained across training partitions and
measured MHC­I protein enrichment values against predicted values.
50
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:59==
Figure E.6: Feature importances of random forest Model G trained across training partitions
and measured MHC­I protein enrichment values against predicted values. The localizations are
cytoplasm (Cytopl.), nucleus, mitocondrion (Mitoc.), peroxisome (Peroxi.), plastid, lysosome/­
vacuole (L/V), Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi apparatus (GA), extracellular (Extrac.) and
cell membrane (Cell.mem).
Figure E.7: Feature importances of random forest Model H trained across training partitions
and measured MHC­I protein enrichment values against predicted values. The localizations are
cytoplasm (Cytopl.), nucleus, mitocondrion (Mitoc.), peroxisome (Peroxi.), plastid, lysosome/­
vacuole (L/V), Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi apparatus (GA), extracellular (Extrac.) and
cell membrane (Cell.mem).
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure E.8: Feature importances of random forest Model K trained across training partitions
and measured MHC­I protein enrichment values against predicted values. The localizations are
cytoplasm (Cytopl.), nucleus, mitocondrion (Mitoc.), peroxisome (Peroxi.), plastid, lysosome/­
vacuole (L/V), Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi apparatus (GA), extracellular (Extrac.) and
cell membrane (Cell.mem).
52
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
==PAGE:61==
Prediction of enriched presented proteins on MHC­I pathways.
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Tlf. 4525 1700
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
