==PAGE:1==
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking:
Mining and Visualizing the Evolution of Online
Content
Master Thesis
Krystof Spiller
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
Mining and Visualizing the Evolution of Online Content
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By:
Krystof Spiller
Supervised by:
Andrea Burattin & Ekkart Kindler
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Freepik / lemonsoup14 https://bit.ly/3zqeEGA
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
False information is a pervasive problem which only becomes more serious with pass­
ing years. Being able to navigate the modern information landscape is imperative for
maintaining stable democratic society. There is currently no effective and widespread
technological solution addressing the issue. The thesis discusses the flaws of existing
non­technical solution and the immaturity of most technical solutions and argues for a
as­of­yet untried highly collaborative solution where the main goal is not prescribing truth
but informing and supporting individuals in critical thinking by considering credibility of the
entities involved in a narrative.
The thesis proposes a conceptual solution by considering what is needed for building a
technological solution to encourage critical thinking. It discusses considerations for collec­
tion of relevant data and proposes inclusion of some often disregarded metadata helpful
for credibility assessment. It proposes to communicate information about a narrative us­
ing visualization in form of a graph for a single narrative. This graph offers interactive
elements through which the user can approximately set their beliefs about importance of
different aspects affecting information credibility. The proposed solution is also designed
from the perspective of being highly collaborative which is considered and argumented
to be superior because of increased transparency as well as potential for fast growth and
improvement because of the community involved.
At the end, the proposed solution is largely positively evaluated by a set of interviews
which shows potential and encourages further work in this direction.
ii
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Narrative example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Background
7
2.1
Approaches for addressing false information
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.4
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.5
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Related work
17
3.1
Exploratory work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Aiding fact­checking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Automated fact­checking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4
Related journalistic work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.5
Active intervention via tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Conceptual solution
21
4.1
Domain model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Credibility graph
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.4
Addressing cognitive bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.5
Collaborative project organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.6
Proposed usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5
Implementation
56
5.1
Credibility graph visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
5.2
Configuration file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
5.3
User experience simplifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6
Evaluation
59
6.1
Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6.2
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6.3
Limitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
6.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
7
Conclusion
69
Bibliography
70
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The problem of false information is not a new one. It has been with us since language first
evolved but the scale of the problem has only become greater thanks to the internet and
related changes to, for example, digital journalism, as well as new technologies, prime
example of which is social media. Some false information is recurrent and so persistent
that it has been around even before the advent of internet and has only changed the media
through which it spreads1.
The interest around false information has risen especially in the last five years due to
massive disinformation campaigns for the political cause of Brexit [4] and 2016 US presi­
dential elections [5]. Nevertheless, political causes are not the only topic touched by false
information. There are also instances affecting areas of financial markets [6]–[8], natural
disasters [9], [10], specific individuals [11] or just common misconceptions [12].
The impact of false information can range from inconsequential to severe, both on the
personal and societal level. It can negatively affect the path through which one’s life or
the whole society proceeds. Let’s explore the impact spectrum with a few increasingly
more impactful examples:
• Being misconceived about how a microwave works, where the commonly­held mis­
conception is that microwave heats up the food by operating at a special resonance
frequency of water, does not affect anyone’s life in any meaningful way and is an
innocent belief2.
• Staying in the realm of microwaves, believing that looking into a microwave can
damage one’s eyes is also relatively innocent but it can be a source of anxiety, es­
pecially in the situation of a caring parent trying to protect their children. In some
cases, such a worry can outright prevent purchase and usage of microwave even
though it would otherwise be a net positive for the family or individual involved.
• Being confused about how tax brackets work and falsely believing that an increase
in gross income might reduce one’s post­tax earnings due to moving to a higher tax
brackets can re­enforce a belief that a different taxation policy, such as a flat tax
rate, is more favorable and can therefore affect for whom such an individual votes
in the elections, possibly choosing a candidate they would not choose otherwise
had they been well­informed about the workings of progressive taxation. Such a
belief might not be consequential in isolation but if a critical mass of people follow
the same misconception, it can result in affecting the policy and having an outcome
that the same group of people would consider as undesirable, i.e. higher taxation
rate with flat tax resulting in a reduced post­tax earnings compared to a progressive
tax.
• Having read controversial information about vaccine safety, side effects and effec­
tiveness can prevent people taking a vaccine. This increases a risk of severe illness
and mortality directly for the individual as well as indirectly for the community due to
decreased chance of achieving herd immunity.
• Believing in a conspiracy theory that a certain establishment is involved in human
1So­called zombie claims [1, p. 47], example of which is the cabbage law length myth [2], [3].
2Possible exception is if you are directly involved in designing microwaves.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
1
==PAGE:8==
trafficking and is a part of a child sex ring can result in an individual trying to rescue
the allegedly captive children by using excessive force, such as was the case in
the infamous Pizzagate incident [13], [14] where a man fired a rifle inside a pizzeria
allegedly involved in such illicit activities. The pizzeria staff also received death
threats. This is obviously an extreme example of the impact false information can
have on a behavior of an individual.
• The 2021 United State Capitol attack [15] is an instance of when such conspiracy
theories affect large group of people and an angry mob determined to address the
situation forms. In this instance, most members of the mob believed the false claims
of 2020 presidential election fraud and wanted to overturn the result of the election.
The attack resulted in multiple deaths and many more injuries, damages worth $30
million and is recognized as a historical event that garnered the attention of inter­
national press. It also has a significant political impact where the whole democratic
system is under large scale attack. The scale of this event showcases the impact
false information can have on a crowd.3
To relate the issue of false information to a topical matter that affects everyone’s life in
the last two years, consider the infodemic around COVID­19 [17], especially concerning
vaccinations:
Recent misinformation induced a decline in intent of 6.2 percentage points
(95th percentile interval 3.9 to 8.5) in the UK and 6.4 percentage points (95th
percentile interval 4.0 to 8.8) in the USA among those that who stated that
they would definitely accept a vaccine. ([18])
Another general effect of false information is lowered trust in democratic institutions [19]
disrupting the health of society.
If an individual is well­informed and thinks critically, the chance they will succumb to such
false information decreases [20]–[22]. The assumption here is that both informedness and
critical thinking are imperative to resist false information. Being only well­informed but not
thinking critically about an issue is not helpful since the information is not evaluated with
reason and any outcome of such reasoning is possible. Critically thinking without having
all the information means operating with limited information, where crucially important in­
formation that might change the result of such reasoning is missing, which might again
lead to an unreasonable conclusion. The goal should then be to both increase informed­
ness and promote critical thinking.
There are various strategies to address the false information in the contemporary dig­
ital information landscape among which are supporting investigative and fact­checking
journalism, reducing financial incentives for spreading false information, improving media
literacy of the general public, social media platforms attempting to reduce the spread of
false information or governments passing anti­disinformation laws and establishing task
forces to address such information.
All such strategies come with their pros and cons. Governmental action, especially one
that involves blocking and removing content, is problematic since it can often be viewed
as censorship limiting free speech [23]. Social media platforms face the same problem
where it becomes very difficult for them to be fair across the thematic spectrum and without
3Last example is (thankfully) fictional and has been brought up by the recent movie Don’t Look Up [16]
where a comet is on a collision course with Earth and no one seems to care. The movie brings about issues
of society distracted by social media, problems with the constant 24­hour news cycle but to a certain degree
the problem of false information as well.
2
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:9==
appearing as an arbitrary moderator of truth. Addressing financial incentives is a tall order
in a market where just two companies (Google and Facebook) take one third of the global
advertising spend [24] and which are also almost exclusively reliant on the revenue from
selling adds [25] forcing them to optimize for selling as much ads as possible creating
an environment ripe to be abused by creators of viral false information. In addition, both
governments and social media companies are seen as top­down entities which can often
be associated with some ulterior motives.
In journalism, the comparatively recent discipline of modern fact­checking4 attempts to
gather the facts, preferably from public disclosable sources, connect the dots and present
a neutral conclusion to a claim being checked. Such a presentation of a narrative can then
have a positively informative effect on an audience that is, briefly said, in constant search
and understanding of reality. Such a reality­based audience is generally open­minded,
does not have many dogmatic beliefs, has respect for the truth and mostly believes in
science and intuitively understands the scientific method. This is a requirement since if
a reader only selectively considers certain information it is easy to omit other important
information that can change the perspective. This therefore means it is problematic to
reach everyone, let alone equally. It is also more likely that the hard to reach audience is
affected more by information found further on the severe side of the impact spectrum.
However, when the audience meets such a requirement they are offered a holistic view
of the narrative involving the nuances of the often messy reality as well as a conclusion
for the narrative given by the fact­checker. While this is certainly helpful, two caveats can
be identified.
First, it might miss people with beliefs on the fringe of the impact spectrum whose beliefs
are often stubbornly held and hard to challenge, and thus remain largely unaffected by
such fact­checking venture. Only other interventions of a psychological kind can affect
these individuals and make them open and think critically from a different point of view [27],
[28]. The only hope fact­checking brings in this regard is that the way of thinking espoused
by the reality­based audience spreads also in the communities around the fringe of the
impact spectrum.
Second, not only do the fact­checking publications gather information that provides a more
comprehensive view of the narrative but they also largely assess the collected information
and evaluate it in form of some rating — ordinary true to false spectrum, PolitiFact’s Truth­
O­Meter spectrum with its notorious ”pants on fire” rating [29] or Washington Post’s zero
to four Pinocchios [30]. While it is understandable that these fact­checking publications
do this mainly to help their readers digest the information, it can also be argued that in
this way they stipulate what readers should think about the discussed narrative and are
therefore not much better than other more questionable sources that lay out what is truth
as they see fit. Even though it can be argued that such an approach is justifiable due to
the fact that fact checkers provide the sources they used to evaluate the narrative and
reach their claim, it is easy to see why some can see fact­checking organizations as yet
another entity imposing the truth based on some hidden agenda.
Another challenge in dealing with false information is presented by the myriad of cognitive
biases [31]. It is not desirable that all individuals in the society think homogeneously as
discussion of diverse ideas is vital to a healthy democracy and society, and difference
of opinion should therefore be encouraged. All human beings, however, are subject to
4That is organizations and projects either exclusively or largely focused on publishing fact checks. For
example, FactCheck.org which is credited with starting the modern fact­checking movement was founded in
2003 [26].
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
3
==PAGE:10==
various cognitive biases that affect how we approach different narratives. Even if an indi­
vidual approaches a certain topic with rational and clear thinking it is not guaranteed such
mode of thinking will be applied to other topics. There can therefore be a topic where a
conclusion drawn to many of its narratives is a non sequitur. Meaning, that if the identical
mode of thinking would be applied to such narratives as is applied to others, where one’s
thinking is clear and rational, it would lead to a different conclusion.
Since cognitive bias is often deeply ingrained and difficult to deal with as an individual,
such non sequiturs can be identified often only while discussing ideas with others who
know them and their way of thinking well and can identify holes and jumps in their reason­
ing. Not everyone might be fortunate to find themselves in such company or at least not
very often. Their way of thinking then does not get challenged often enough preventing
them to see such issues clearly.
In order to attempt to address this issue, let’s briefly introduce one way how to look at
reasoning, specifically forming conclusions to narratives. There are multiple entities in
the information landscape that all play their role in the reasoning process. Let’s first have
a look at these entities.
Major role plays the information itself which is most often in the form of text but could
be accompanied or outright replaced by other media like images, audio or video. This
information relates to a one or more stories, also often called narratives. At the center
of a narrative is a single unique statement identifying it. Although in reality a document
relating to a narrative might often have more than one statements, the assumption here is
that these can be separated into multiple narratives. Individually, the information appears
in documents that can be uniquely identified by a persistent identifier like a Digital Object
Identifier (DOI). These documents can support or oppose the central statement of a nar­
rative. They can also provide mix of the two or give a neutral account for the narrative.
The documents are authored and published by some entity. This can both be a physical
person or a group of them as well as an organization or a company. These entities and
the relation among them play a significant role to assess the credibility of a statement.
The way how the documents relate to the central statement of a narrative can also differ.
Consider a narrative started by one document such as a tweet. Other subsequent docu­
ments relating to the narrative might be a response to the first document. In such a way,
a chronological thread of documents can form. These documents can also build upon
the first document and use it for additional arguments. These are just two examples of a
more complex structure emerging.
These entities relating to a single narrative therefore form a graph where the entities rep­
resent the set of vertices and their relationships represent the set of edges. Each entity,
or a vertex, has a weight associated with it, representing how much a person trusts and
believes in it. The quality of trusting and believing is defined as credibility so this weight
will be from now on referred to as such. If we were to ask different people about their level
of trust and belief in different entities, each person would likely assign different credibility
to each entity. Once we have these initial credibilities assigned it is easy to see how they
can propagate and affect one another through the connections, i.e. edges, in the graph
as will be introduced next on two examples. Since the graph in question has a specific
use in regards to propagation of credibility among the interconnected entities, it can be
denoted as credibility graph.
The credibilities assigned by different entities might vary in scope. It can be fairly small
and specific, such as a high credibility for a certain favorite author and their blog, or rather
4
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:11==
large and generic, such as generally higher credibility towards one side of the political
spectrum. One can then imagine an example of a narrative where a document is written
by this favorite author and published on their blog and such document will therefore have
a higher credibility compared to others. In another example, for a person who might have
a preference for conservatively leaning sources, such authors and publishers would be
assigned higher probabilities and these probabilities would then propagate and affect the
resulting credibility of the documents they authored and published. The propagation of
credibilities does not stop there, after what can be called one iteration of credibility propa­
gation, and these documents might then affect credibilities of other connected documents
and crucially, the statement at the center of a narrative.
Once these credibilities converge, i.e. they remain approximately identical after another
iteration of credibility propagation, we are left with some credibility for the statement at
the center of a narrative. The higher the value, the more credible the statement is. If this
value is high enough, the statement can be considered credible and vice versa. In this
model, such a result represents the reached conclusion to a narrative. Importantly, such
a model can be used to address cognitive bias, a concept explored further in the thesis.
1.1
Narrative example
An example of a narrative that is used throughout the thesis to explain various concepts is
described next. It takes place in November 2016 in the midst of US presidential election
and it is a false claim first debunked by a fact­checking website Snopes [32] and later
covered by The New York Times as a case study for how fake news (their term) goes viral
[33].
It starts with a photograph being shared on Twitter by Eric Tucker, at the time an average
user with only few dozens of followers, on November 9 after 8 pm showing a group of
buses that were allegedly used to ship in paid anti­Trump protesters to Austin, Texas.
The tweet was then posted to Reddit on November 10 shortly after midnight and later in
the morning a link to the Reddit thread was posted on a conservative discussion forum
Free Republic. Various Facebook pages linked to the Free Republic thread and over
300,000 people have shared this link.
Later that day, some opposition to the prevailing narrative started to appear. Sean Hughes,
the director of corporate affairs for the bus company Coach USA North America whose
buses were on the shared photo, responded with a statement that “at no point were Coach
USA buses involved in the Austin protests”. Eric Tucker, the original poster of the photo­
graph, was replying to queries on Twitter and admitted further lack of evidence by stating
that he ”did not see loading or unloading”. Both of these statements, however, did little in
the way of stemming the online frenzy.
Still on November 10 at around 6 pm, the conservative blog Gateway Pundit posted a
story using the original shared image under the title ”Figures. Anti­Trump Protesters Were
Bussed in to Austin #FakeProtests”. The post added another conspiratorial claim men­
tioning involvement of George Soros’ money, a frequent trope of conservatively leaning
conspiracy theories. Other conservative blogs shared the same narrative, incorporating
Eric Tucker’s original tweet to posts about paid protesters.
Shortly after 9 pm, then­president Donald Trump sent a tweet referring to ”professional
protesters”. This emboldened Mr. Eric Tucker who considered removing the tweet at that
time.
On November 11, Doreen Jarman, a spokeswoman for a software company Tableau
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
5
==PAGE:12==
which was at the time organizing a conference in Austin, issued a statement to the lo­
cal television station KVUE and a major daily Austin newspaper The Austin American­
Statesman, saying that the buses were used for the company’s conference. The Ameri­
can­Statesman posted an article shortly after noon. Around 2 pm, Mr. Tucker tweeted a
link to to his blog where he acknowledged he could have been ”flat wrong”. This is also
the time when Snopes posted their rebuttal regarding the claim.
Snopes pointed out tweets by one Twitter user who reported helping load and unload
attendees for the Tableau conference. In an update to the original rebuttal, Snopes also
linked to a similar rumor posted on November 13 showing a large number of buses parked
on a street and explains that the street where the video was taken is one of the closest
spots to downtown that allows buses to park for free, which is supported by Google Street
screenshots from the same road in different years.
After midnight on Novemeber 12, Mr. Tucker deleted his original tweet and instead posted
an image with the word ”false” written over it. Compared to the original tweet which was
shared and liked over 10,000 times, it didn’t garner much attention as it wasn’t shared
and liked even 100 times.
The reason for choosing this narrative is its reasonable complexity (i.e. neither too simple
nor too comprehensive while offering many of the elements treated further in the thesis)
and availability of the case study analysis performed by The New York Times as well as
Snopes. The political topic of the narrative is not of any particular interest.
If we were to judge where on the impact spectrum this examples falls, it would probably
be between middle and high impact since at best, people affected by such narrative might
lean towards lending their support to and voting for Donald Trump, and at worst, such
narrative might compel people to organize a counter­protest that could result in clash and
possible injuries or even casualties.
Chapter 2 provides a more comprehensive and thorough background for the thesis, spec­
ifying the problem statement, research questions and the methodology used. Chapter 3
explores related work within the area of false information and relates the different tasks
to the various approaches for addressing the problem of false information. Chapter 4 ex­
plores the conceptual solution for the identified problem. It introduces a domain model
together with the assumptions applicable for the the task at hand. Chapter 5 focuses on
implementation of a solution for the credibility assessment task relying on the conceptual
solution identified in Chapter 4. It focuses on modeling the credibility propagation between
the different entities in the credibility graph. Chapter 6 evaluates the results of the thesis
by discussing verification, validation and limitations of the solution. Based on this, it also
considers the possible future work. Chapter 7 concludes the thesis.
6
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
A more detailed treatment of the introduced topic is given here together with context relat­
ing the selected approach in this thesis to other approaches. The terms developed in this
chapter are listed and explained in section 2.2. The problem statement is succinctly stated
in section 2.3. Research questions are given and their relevance explained in section 2.4.
Lastly, the chosen methodology is explained in section 2.5 together with reasoning for
why it was chosen.
2.1
Approaches for addressing false information
As illustrated with the examples for the impact spectrum in the introduction, it is well worth
addressing the problem of false information. However, instead of approaching the topic
from the perspective of decidedly determining what is true or false, this thesis makes the
assumption that approaching it by aiding people being well­informed and think critically is
a better goal to strive towards.
Let’s discuss the space of addressing false information more broadly at first. The follow­
ing is an attempt at a high­level categorization of approaches available for dealing with
and understanding false information or its specific sub­domains. As already suggested,
one dimension for this categorization is whether the goal is to understand, explore and
study false information, or whether the goal is e.g. to assess veracity of a given claim or
categorize claims and narratives. Another dimension in this categorization is whether the
approach is manual or automatic. Table 2.1 provides a single example for each combina­
tion but there can be other approach falling into the same combination. This categorization
also simplifies the fact that the two dimensions exist on a continuous spectrum instead
of being discrete as shown. For example, majority of manual approaches involves some
level of automation but not enough to be generally considered as automatic. In the fol­
lowing list, these examples are further explained and instances of research are given for
each.
Approach
Explore
Assess
Manual
Field experiments
Fact­checking
Automatic
Online content research
Automated fact­checking
Table 2.1: High­level categorization of approaches for addressing false information.
1. Field experiments ­ [34] is an example of a field experiment exploring the ability
of young people to judge credibility of online information. Generally, such a field
experiment involves gathering participants in the real world, testing them, observing
their behavior and analyzing their responses.
2. Fact­checking ­ Relatively recent journalistic discipline that is done either externally
often by dedicated non­profit organizations (e.g. FactCheck.org or PolitiFact in the
US, Full Fact in the UK or TjekDet in Denmark) or internally by the publisher1. This
process entails a person systematically exploring the claim and, preferably using
only publicly available information, neutrally describe the argument and draw a con­
clusion, establishing veracity of the claim.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
7
==PAGE:14==
3. Online content research ­ [35] is an example of a research analyzing spread of infor­
mation on Twitter, here specifically with the conclusion that false information spreads
more pervasively than the truth and that human behavior contributes more to the
spread than automated (bot) activity. Generally, such a research often involves per­
forming statistical analysis on data from an online platform and the amount of data is
usually of a size which would make it infeasible to gather and go through manually.
4. Automated fact­checking ­ Often abbreviated as AFC. This is most likely an area with
the biggest research interest and variety of solutions, some of which are explored in
chapter 3. The research community strives for an AFC solution that would mimic the
manual approach of fact­checking while avoiding the bias introduced by a human
being as well as being much more scalable than a team of fact­checkers. Creating
such a system is a tall order due to the number of complex sub­systems that need
to be involved and we are nowhere close to having such a system available. Much
of the research now focuses specifically on some of the necessary sub­systems or
problems closely related.
Each category contributes in a different way to address the problem of false information.
Exploratory approach studying for example how false information spreads and why do
people believe it often gives us insights for how to fight it but it does not directly move the
proverbial needle in the struggle against false information.
On the other hand, fact­checking addresses particular instances of false information and
its direct effect on reality­based audience is non­negligible although even more utility from
such fact­checking might be brought by holding other accountable and promoting good
journalistic practices. Since the modern fact­checking movement started with founding of
FactCheck.org in 2003, fact checkers have focused primarily on education of their read­
ers. While educating and informing readers remains an important part of work for fact
checkers, as argued in [36], the so­called second generation fact­checking generation
now also focuses on agitating their regular readers and organizing them to challenge
those promoting false information. But it also acknowledges the need for what it calls the
third generation of fact­checking that needs to work on an internet scale, be massively col­
laborative and work across international borders. This could be understood as only the
fact­checking organizations being more open and collaborative with each other but could
also include collaboration with their readers and anyone involved in consuming informa­
tion. Additionally, the fact checkers alone with their limited bandwidth and their manual,
i.e. non­automated, work are not enough to meet these challenges and they require addi­
tional help, part of which falls within automation.
What can then be said about the stated example falling into the assess and automatic
category from table 2.1, i.e. AFC? Since no clear and agreed­upon definition of AFC ex­
ists, most likely because a true AFC system does not currently exist, and different authors
think about it in different terms, it is first necessary to define the term. For our purposes it
will suffice that AFC denotes the computer science discipline imitating the journalistic dis­
cipline of fact­checking. Nevertheless, as can be seen from the previous paragraph, the
fact­checking discipline itself is evolving so even the understanding of what fact­checking
is, and consequently what AFC is by our definition, can vary. However, drawing on how
most people perceive fact­checking from the fact checks they have seen, it is usually a
1Many established publishers followed best practices and code of honor making them operate with the
same integrity that modern fact checkers do. However, the modern notion of fact­checking where a fact check
is published all by itself and especially organizations that are exclusively focused on publishing such content
is an innovation of the early 20th century.
8
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:15==
rather prescriptive practice in a sense where a conclusion about the truth value is given.
Such understanding can also be seen from the wealth of research that analyzes and
categorizes claims as true or false, and that incidentally often associates itself with the
discipline of automated fact­checking, subject that is more closely explored in chapter 3.
The following section 2.1.1 focuses directly on this issue of truth prescriptiveness and
emphasizing the different approach taken in this thesis. Section 2.1.2 discusses the issue
of a mode of organization or management of major fact checking organizations related to
how overbearing they can be and offering an alternative way. These two sections together
with the overarching goal to aid informed critical thinking provide a basis for the proposal
explored in this thesis. A great challenge that makes critical thinking difficult is presented
by cognitive bias, an issue explored in section 2.1.3. Since the ultimate goal is to actively
aid people in informed critical thinking, how the proposed solution can be used in people’s
daily life needs to be considered, an issue discussed in section 2.1.4. Lastly, a summary
of requirements for the proposed solution is given in section 2.1.5.
2.1.1
The issue of truth prescriptiveness
This prescriptive quality of fact­checking, where it collects relevant facts, analyzes the
soundness of reasoning and optionally does some of its own and draws a conclusion
about the truth value of a narrative, is, as already mentioned in the introduction, a double­
edged sword. On the one hand, it helps with the fact check being easy to digest as well as
lending itself to being easily shareable as a response or statement by others, assuming a
headline summarizing the reached conclusion is provided. On the other hand, the exact
same practice garners number of opponents precisely because of its prescriptiveness.
This thesis approaches the problem from the perspective that the goal is not to prescribe
a certain truth and with it ideally make everyone have the same beliefs and think alike.
Rather, the goal is to inform and encourage critical thinking. So while the goal of AFC is
to establish veracity of a certain claim, i.e. say whether something is true or false, this
thesis deals with a comparatively weaker relation, only saying whether a claim could be
trusted or not when critically thought through while establishing credibility for sources and
documents involved in a narrative. Considering the main goal of the proposed solution, it
will be from now on referred to as Critical Thinking Support System (CTSS for short).
AFC is, however, worth pursuing, especially since number of sub­tasks, described in more
detail in section 3.3.2, is relevant for CTSS as well. AFC tries to build upon and exploit the
gains the AI field has made in the last decade using deep learning and big data. Specifi­
cally, the sub­field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) is of special interest for process­
ing textual information and forms a backbone of many systems solving a sub­problem in
the topic of AFC. Other machine learning techniques can be involved when considering
other media like audio, images and video. NLP is then used to analyze content of the
document but it might also involve additional information such as title, number of authors,
date and time of posting, URL, alleged country of origin or users’ comments. This analysis
is then used for different purposes, such as evidence extraction, stance detection, bias
estimation or claim detection to name a few. It will become evident how some of these
sub­tasks are also relevant for CTSS in the subsequent chapter.
2.1.2
The issue of overbearing organizations
Another issue closely relating to the truth prescriptiveness relates to its source. If we were
to rate the general perception of how overbearing governments, social media platforms
and fact checkers are, arguably one of the most prominent bodies in the false information
discussion, they would come in the specified order with the governments on top and fact
checkers at the bottom. Both governments and social media are massive entities with
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
9
==PAGE:16==
a lot of power behind and they are generally perceived as not being afraid to (ab)use it
whereas fact checkers are relatively much less powerful which leads to the perception of
them not being able to act as overbearing as governments and social media platforms.
The mission and stemming practices of fact checkers also play its role when compared
to other traditional media and are trusted more as a result [37]. Nevertheless, even fact
checkers can be seen as overbearing, a feeling that everyone who has ever read a fact
check they at first did not agree with surely experienced, and a reality that fact checkers
themselves are well aware of [36].
The approach of CTSS, where the goal is not to prescribe the one and only truth helps in
this regard, but another element that can aid with this perception is the way it is organized.
As previously mentioned and supported by a group of fact­checking organizations [36],
there is a promise in the next chapter of addressing false information and fact­checking
(the so­called third generation) for the new solutions to be more collaborative. Imagine
then a crowd­sourced fact­checking where interested information consumers get involved.
Such an approach would therefore be more wiki­like. The collaborators could help with
identification of new narratives, collection and organization of relevant data. More tech­
nically savvy collaborators could help with development of the system. Lastly, everyone
would have access to see and analyze how the whole machinery works, improving its
transparency.
There are two main benefits to such an organization approach. First, it helps to curb the
issue of overbearingness where it is less valid to point at a community­run platform and
state that it operates with ulterior motives and a hidden agenda when the whole system is
open for everyone to examine and when that individual can become part of the community
and attempt to right the alleged wrongs they see. Second, community­run platforms have
an immense potential to grow and surprise in unexpected ways with its impact. Such a
community can identify and address current narratives and issues with great speed since
it is a much higher chance that some members of the community are close to the center
of events. It can also identify and explore various ways of platform­wide abuse and report
it such that it can be promptly addressed. Not to mention the technically­savvy members
might get directly involved in addressing the issue. The main disadvantage is that once
(and if) the community truly gets engaged, the platform suddenly has a life of its own, the
initial tight control is lost and the unexpected and abusive uses of the platform become
evident. However, Wikipedia has demonstrated that it is possible for such a community­
driven collaborative project to thrive and address issues caused by such organization as
they arise and although the challenge remains, it should not be seen as a roadblock for
such an approach.
2.1.3
The issue of cognitive bias
The problem of various cognitive biases as it relates to critical thinking can be summarized
by saying that a different mode of reasoning is applied to selected narratives. As this effect
is undesirable, it is relevant to come up with a solution addressing this issue. Intuitively,
if the problem is a different mode of reasoning for different narratives, the straightforward
solution is to identify when this different mode of reasoning is applied and instead apply
the standard mode not affected by cognitive biases. This is obviously more easily said
than done but certain strides towards such a solution can be made.
The proposed solution can be gradually built starting with the concept of credibility as­
cribed to the various entities in the information landscape. These entities have relations
to one another through which the credibilities can propagate. This propagation of credi­
bility is governed by various rules which strength can be adjusted and which are applied
10
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:17==
universally (in every relevant situation of a narrative) and uniformly (with the same strength
in every case). These entities together with the relations can be mapped to a graph where
nodes represent the entities and edges represent the relations between them. Since the
graph mainly relates to credibility and its propagation, it is accordingly called credibility
graph. The credibility graph can be understood as a simple model of the reasoning pro­
cess that leads to forming of conclusion to a narrative.
The proposed solution then builds on the concept of credibility graph presented in the
introduction which should be understood as a simple model of the reasoning process and
of how are conclusions to narratives formed. This credibility graph has adjustable rules
governing the propagation of credibilities. Before getting to the solution, let’s dig further
into credibility and credibility propagation rules.
Credibility itself can be split into an objective and a subjective part. For example, if we
have the same content in two documents, one with and the other without supporting and
meaningful sources, the former would generally be considered to have a higher credibility2.
Another example is relating to publisher entities, where certain initiatives to address false
information can be assessed as objectively positive, at least when compared to not having
any initiatives at all. The attempts by social media platforms to stymie spread of false
information by various measures can be generally seen as good and as inherent to these
publishers which should therefore to a small degree contribute to the overall credibility.
On the other hand, if a source, both an author and a publisher, historically supported
a significantly larger number of claims that were later debunked, this should lead to a
general decrease in the overall credibility.
As for the credibility propagation rules, the two examples given in the introduction show
the intuition behind how a rule in plain language (”I believe in my favorite author and their
blog” and ”I generally trust conservative sources more”) affects the credibility of docu­
ments these sources produce. Other rules affecting the propagation of credibilities can
be thought of and categorized by how they affect the propagation. This categorization is
shown in table 2.2.
In the implementation of such rules, various parameters affect their behavior — whether
they are enabled in the first place and how pronounced they are. The collection of these
parameters for all rules will be shortly denoted just as set of parameters.
Now onto the proposed solution. The idea is to use the same set of parameters across
various credibility graphs representing different narratives while ensuring the conclusion
to each of the narratives agrees with that of the individual. A parallel could be drawn from
this to software testing. The narratives represent unit tests where each is asserted on the
desired conclusion set by the user and only the set of parameters affect the outcome of
these unit tests. The more narratives we have in such a unit test, the more constrained
the space of acceptable model parameters becomes. The idea then is that when a non se­
quitur conclusion comes into picture, the space of acceptable model parameters attained
from previous narratives does not allow for this narrative to get to the intended conclusion
2A caveat to this has been demonstrated by a research discussed in section 3.1.2.
3Also, the credibility of the author and the publisher could be affected, although this is harder to judge
and depends on the context. Such a behavior could be a sign of undesirable haphazard attitude flipping and
could forecast occurrence of the same behavior in the future. In such a case, the author’s and/or publisher’s
credibility should decrease. On the other hand, it could be a sign of an intellectual honesty when an honest
mistake has been made and an attempt to right the past mistakes has been made in which case, the author’s
and/or publisher’s credibility should increase.
4This does not have to be necessarily direct reference and can go through other sources — the size of
the self­referential loop increases.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
11
==PAGE:18==
Credibility propagation
rule category
Explanation & example
Grouping
Affects credibility for entities fulfilling a specific condition, e.g.
”I believe in my favorite author and their blog” (small group) or
”I generally trust conservative sources more” (large group).
Aggregation
Aggregates, i.e. merges, entities based on some condition,
e.g. ”Similar tweets (a form of document) from non­verified
accounts do not add to the total credibility” or a more general
version ”Similar documents from low­quality sources do not
add to the total credibility”.
Exclusion
Excludes or ignores certain entities from contributing to the
credibility propagation, e.g. ”A document from a source sup­
porting a claim can be excluded if there is another later docu­
ment from the same source opposing the claim”3.
Miscellaneous
Any other rule not befitting other rule categories, e.g. ”Docu­
ments referencing each other have generally decreased cred­
ibility”4.
Table 2.2: Categorization of credibility propagation rules with an explanation and an ex­
ample for each rule.
and thus a non sequitur is found.
The identification of cognitive bias represents one use case for having the credibility graph
and all the credibiliy propagation rules. In general though, it might be interesting to see
the end result, i.e. credibility of the claim center to the narrative. Such information is
informative by itself, more so if the set of parameters has been constrained on other
narratives already. Outside of the use for an individual, it is also possible to imagine
using it on experimental base, seeing how different convictions (and with it the parameters
setting those convictions) affect the perceived credibility on different narratives.
2.1.4
The issue of usage
The last relevant issue has to do with how should the solution discussed so far be used.
The assumption here is that addressing the false information right at the time when an
individual is exposed to it is the best way to prevent such information taking root and
affecting the individual. When considering this, we have to keep in mind how is information
being consumed and build from there.
Major change in consumption of information has been caused by social media as well as
emergence and subsequent growth of podcasts and even more recently the success of
Substack offering independent individuals the ability to publish written content while mak­
ing a living through subscriptions. The underlying driver of these changes is without a
question rise of the now ubiquitous smartphone and fast wireless networking. This devel­
opment drives all kinds of factors such as the possibility to consume audio­visual media
everywhere and at any time. On the one hand, TikTok, Instagram Reels or YouTube Shorts
push short and easily digestible content which in the information landscape (i.e. ignoring
entertainment) leads to additional speedup of the 24/7 news cycle shorter attention spans
making it harder for the same audience to consume expansive content. On the other hand,
podcasts have conclusively demonstrated the thirst for long­form content where the most
popular podcast, The Joe Rogan Experience [38], has an average episode length of more
12
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:19==
than 2½ hours [39]. This shows that people are interested in extensive conversations be­
yond what traditional cable TV or even radio offers. Such long conversations offer plenty
of space for nuance.
Smartphones and the related technologies like podcasts and social media have caused a
massive shift in the way how information is being consumed. Especially the young gener­
ation relies on smartphones, and by extension on social media, much more than the older
generations who have a preference for television. In order to address false information
holistically, it is important to consider these different channels and what challenges do
they bring.
The most relevant challenge for the context of this thesis is the difference in applications
being used for the consumption of information on mobile and computer devices5.
Whereas computer operating systems and their applications are much more likely to pro­
vide a way to modify and extend their many functionalities, the situation on mobile devices
is more limited. Consider the situation for arguably the most used application on any
device, the internet browser. Apple only recently6 added web extensions for the Safari
browser that can be downloaded from the App Store [40]. On Android, more browsers
have some support of extensions, but it is generally not as rich as on computer browsers
and the possibilities are also more limited. This situation will no doubt improve and espe­
cially the recent changes make it possible to address the false information with the help
of a browser extension. Nevertheless, this represents only a small win in the context of
information consumption through mobile devices since most applications are not used
through the mobile browser but a dedicated application which is sandboxed from other
applications and therefore does not allow any modification or functionality extension. As
of now, there does not seem to be a way for external parties to address this issue and it
is only up to the application developer and not the user to choose how will they attempt to
address false information. It is the belief of the author that in the ideal case the end user
has more freedom to choose how they desire to deal with false information and it should
be possible for them to choose a third party solution to help them deal with it.
However, since browser extensions offer a meaningful way to deal with false information
and browsers are used for consumption of a lot of information, they offer the most relevant
solution. It is imagined the proposed solution that would address the problem of false
information could use these extensions to show the end users additional information to
aid them in the process of informed critical thinking across the web. The imagined usage
flow is presented in section 4.6.
As already mentioned, the web and social media consumed through internet are not the
only popular channels through which information, and with it false information, is con­
sumed. Other highly popular information channel is television. It is possible to imagine
here that in the case of a smart TV an application showing an overlay can be shown, again
for the purpose of encouraging critical thinking. Additionally or alternatively, there could
be a mobile application showing this information which could also show more information
relating to the content seen once it becomes available.
The last point from the previous paragraph is worth closer attention. A narrative evolves
over time. While at one point there might be information that is uncertain or that leads to
5Mobile meaning smartphones and tablets, generally devices running operating systems like Android and
iOS, and computer meaning desktops and laptops, generally devices running operating systems like Linux,
Mac OS and Windows.
6With the release of iOS 15 on September 20, 2021.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
13
==PAGE:20==
one conclusion, later on a new piece of information can appear that makes the previous
information more solid or that changes the perspective. By keeping track of narratives an
individual has seen it becomes possible to notify that individual when a narrative develops
and the conclusion changes or shifts significantly.
2.1.5
Summary
To summarize the observations and discussion above, CTSS needs to:
• be informative ­ i.e. be able to provide the relevant context to a narrative
• not be prescriptive
• be collaborative and open­source for transparency
• address cognitive bias
• present relevant information in an apt and timely manner
2.2
Glossary
Definitions for certain terms and abbreviations follows organized by category and ordered
alphabetically.
• Abbreviations
– AFC = Automated Fact­Checking. Denotes the computer science discipline
imitating the manual journalistic discipline of regular fact­checking. Introduced
in section 2.1 and further discussed in section 2.1.1.
– CTSS = Critical Thinking Support System. Represents the main contribution
of the thesis and denotes the conceptual solution developed throughout the
following pages. Reasoning for the naming is given in section 2.1.1.
– NLP = Natural Language Processing. Mostly relevant relevant for data collec­
tion and therefore described in section 4.2.
– PID = Persistent Identifier. Uniquely identifies a source for its reliable and effi­
cient retrieval.
• Attribute ­ associated to a node, describing some characteristic of it. Intentionally
flexible part of the domain model allowing for an ad hoc instantiation.
• Credibility ­ indicates the extent to which an individual believes a given entity. It can
be assigned a numerical value indicating the strength of the belief.
• Credibility graph ­ the nodes (see below) relating to a single narrative also relate to
one another in various ways and form a credibility graph. The nodes have credibility
assigned to them which can propagate through the graph according to credibility
propagation rules (see below).
• Credibility propagation rule ­ rules describing how can credibility between entities
propagate in a credibility graph. See table 2.2 for categorization of them including
an example for each.
• Edges ­ the nodes in the credibility graph relate to each other in various ways and
these relations are captured by edges in the credibility graph summarized in ta­
ble 4.3. There are edges representing relations that have a stable meaning and
one catch­all edge representing all other ad hoc relations.
14
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:21==
• Entity ­ the author, publisher and other nodes since they are instances of legal en­
tities, i.e. natural entities (also called natural or physical person) or juridical entities
(also called juridical or fictitious person).
• False information ­ relies on an intuitive understanding of what such a term means
and it encompasses misinformation, disinformation and other forms of spurious in­
formation like hoaxes, myths, fallacies and the nowadays popular term fake news.
Even though the intuition of different readers can diverge, it is the belief of the au­
thor that individuals from the targeted audience would in majority of cases agree on
which instances constitute false information which suffices for the purposes of this
thesis. There isn’t other uniformly agreed upon alternative term among researchers
or journalists. The term is chosen for its intuitiveness, brevity and lack of baggage
associated with terms such as fake news [41], [42].
• Impact spectrum ­ defines a continuous spectrum that a piece of information or nar­
rative has on one’s life and goes from inconsequential to severe affecting crowd of
people. For simplicity, only the single dimension is considered although an argu­
ment can be made for two­dimensional spectrum reconciling impact and reach.
• Narrative ­ mostly self­explanatory, synonym to story or account. It was chosen
because of its frequent use in the academic sphere. For the context of this thesis,
a narrative is uniquely identified by a single claim it relates to.
• Nodes ­ generally anything involved in a narrative. These nodes usually have a
distinctive role based on which it can be categorized. They also relate to other
nodes where some recognizable patterns can be observed. They also have various
attributes, often uniquely relevant only to that nodes. The nodes are elaborated in
section 4.1 where they are gradually developed in table 4.2.
• Reality­based audience ­ the audience which is uniquely predisposed to be posi­
tively affected by the proposed solution thanks to their open­mindedness and search
for the truth. This is the targeted audience for the proposed solution.
• Rule ­ captures the belief affecting credibility of nodes in a deterministic way and
has a parameter affecting the strength of its application on the credibility
2.3
Problem statement
Contemporary digital information landscape offers an exorbitant wealth of information
which is difficult to navigate and understand. This understanding is further complicated by
cognitive bias. The most controversial claims are dealt with by fact checkers who provide
more context and information based on which they draw their own conclusion. However,
although definitely useful, these fact­checks do not necessarily encourage critical thinking
and they also do not consider the problem of cognitive bias. It is important for people not
to have misconceptions and to think critically about issues in order to maintain stable and
healthy democratic society. This thesis therefore proposes a conceptual solution with the
main goal of promoting informed critical thinking while mitigating the effect of cognitive
bias on reasoning.
2.4
Research questions
RQ1 What components are necessary for a tool supporting critical thinking?
RQ2 What is relevant data for such a tool and which channels can be used to obtain it?
RQ3 What is an effective way to aid people in informed critical thinking?
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
15
==PAGE:22==
2.5
Methodology
Design science is the selected methodology for this thesis. Design science focuses on
development and subsequent evaluation of an effective artifact to solve a specific problem
within a certain context and provide utility. Design science can be used for addressing
unsolved problems [43]. The artifact of this thesis is a conceptual solution named Critical
Thinking Support System (CTSS) to aid in critical thinking in order to address the problem
of false information. The context is that of a digital information consumer using a personal
computer. The unsolved problem this thesis addresses is the lack of widely used system
to address the problem of false information.
The approach chosen for exploring the topic at hand is one not adopted before and itself
represents a contribution. The treatment of the topic cannot directly rely on existing work
and instead develops a new conceptual framework. Afterwards, a primitive prototype of
the proposed conceptual framework is implemented.
The evaluation of the result is twofold. First, the conceptual framework is verified, i.e.
whether fulfillment of requirements is met. This is done by ensuring that structurally differ­
ent narratives from the real world can be captured by the framework and different modes of
credibility propagation can capture various behaviors. Second, a small set of interviews
focused on qualitative evaluation of the utility of the proposed solution are conducted.
Given the time window available, conducting a more systematic evaluation with bigger
randomized sample size over longer period of time was not feasible.
16
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:23==
3
Related work
Considering the given background, there are a few areas of work related to the thesis
which relate to the categories identified in table 2.1.
3.1
Exploratory work
3.1.1
Civic online reasoning
[34] is a field experiment research exploring civic online reasoning, the ability to judge
the credibility of information on young people’s devices. Various tasks have been admin­
istered to middle school, high school and university students and 7804 responses were
gathered. The report goes into detail for three of its tasks, each for a different school
group.
The discussed task for middle schoolers is to identify an advertisement on a news website.
While some students show mastery of such recognition, others are less sure or wrong, e.g.
identifying a ”sponsored content” as not being an advertisement. It should be obvious how
this is a relatively straightforward problem to help address if given the ability to annotate
content on a website — sponsored content could be annotated or even replaced by the
word ”advertisement” together with a link to an in­depth explanation.
The next discussed task aimed at high schoolers shows an image on Imgur of an ill­formed
flower with the a title of ”Fukushima Nuclear Flowers” without any further context. Stu­
dents are asked whether the image provides a strong evidence about the conditions near
the Fukushima Power Plant and explain their reasoning. Given the context of a random
internet user (with a curious nickname in addition) posting an image without providing any
further context and evidence about its authenticity and location, it is to be judged as non­
credible. Students again demonstrate different levels of reasoning. This is much more
difficult task, especially considering its potential automation. There are many individual
subtasks to be carried out and make sense of which our current technological capabilities
are not able to do. It might, however, be possible to identify a claim is being made (as op­
posed to an image of a cat intended for entertainment) and annotating a general caution
in believing it.
The last closely discussed task aimed at college students concerns an reading a tweet and
evaluating whether it might or might not be a useful source of information. The presented
tweet is from a liberal advocacy organization MoveOn.org, reads ”New polling shows the
@NRA is out of touch with gun owners and their own members”1, includes a graphic with
a text ”Two out of three gun owners say they would be more likely to vote for a candidate
who supported background checks” and also contains a link to a press release by the
poll’s sponsor, the Center for American Progress, another liberal advocacy organization.
The graphic as well as the linked press release indicate the poll, which main finding is
presented in the graphic, was conducted on 816 gun owners by Public Policy Polling,
a U.S. private polling firm affiliated with the Democratic party. Mastery is shown by both
arguing for its usefulness since it is based on polling data, as well as on acknowledging the
bias introduced by affiliation of all three entities to liberal ideology and by extension to the
Democratic party and stronger gun control laws. While an end­to­end general evaluation
of such situations is difficult, it is at least comparatively straightforward to identify the
entities involved in such a claim and collect basic background information about them,
such as their political views and affiliations. It might also be possible to identify the topic
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
17
==PAGE:24==
of discussion and generalize that a certain political bias predicts a certain opinion on the
matter, i.e. liberals are generally against guns and for stricter gun control measures, which
is indeed the case in this scenario and makes the reached conclusion less important.
3.1.2
Importance of lateral reading
[45] studied how professional fact checkers, Ph.D. historians and Stanford University un­
dergraduates fare in three tasks evaluating credibility of information online. The main find­
ing was the difference in behavior of the fact checkers compared to both historians and
Stanford undergraduates. Official looking sites with well­crafted logos and official looking
domain names often tricked the latter group. Fact checkers, in contrast, employed lateral
reading, i.e. leaving a site after a quick scan and searching to judge credibility of the
original site. This was observed to be the crucial difference that allowed fact checkers to
arrive at warranted conclusions in a fraction of a time.
One of the tasks was to assess the reliability of information from two groups: the American
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), the largest professional organization of 67000 pediatricians
in the world, and the American College of Pediatricians (ACPeds), a socially conserva­
tive advocacy group of around 500 pediatricians splintered from AAP that is ideologically
opposed to LGBT. Both historians and students were deceived by, among others, the
sources used on ACPeds article and they cited ACPeds as more credible and reliable
compared to AAP. The fact checkers employed lateral reading and spent the least amount
of time on both the ACPeds and AAP websites and searched other information about the
sources which helped them figure out that AAP is the more reliable of the two.
This work points to an importance of lateral reading that is then to be encouraged, a fact
relied upon in the thesis.
3.2
Aiding fact-checking
There are a few approaches going in the direction of automated fact­checking while al­
ready being helpful to human fact checkers. Since fact checkers have limited bandwidth
and tackle the false information at a slower pace than at which it comes, anything that
makes fact checkers’ work more effective is a success. Let’s consider the fact­checking
process to be broadly composed of stages for (1.) monitoring news and other information,
(2.) detecting claims, (3.) checking these claims and (4.) finally creating and publish­
ing fact checks regarding these claims [46]. [47] focuses on aiding the second stage,
i.e. claim detection. Another fact checker, Africa Check, uses an automated video cre­
ation platform Lumen5 to create short clips for their fact checks and publish them on their
YouTube channel [48]. This approach and the chosen platform therefore aids in the fourth
stage of the fact­checking process.
This work has an implication for data collection as the task of claim detection is an im­
portant part of an automated solution. An automated video creation points out the reality
of today where video, especially short­form video, is a dominant media type, fact that is
important to consider for successful dissemination of correct information to counter the
false information.
3.3
Automated fact-checking
3.3.1
Surveys
Surveys on dealing with ”fake news” provide a good overview of the tasks that the re­
search community is interested in. They examine the area and the existing research
1NRA being the National Rifle Association, a major gun rights advocacy group of 5.5 million members
based in the United States [44].
18
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:25==
using different perspectives, most of which relates in one way or another to AFC. [49] sur­
veys the existing search using four perspectives to detect false information: by the false
knowledge it carries, by its writing style, by its propagation patterns, and by the credibility
of the source. [50] considers the core fact­checking tasks to be document retrieval, ev­
idence extraction, stance detection and claim validation. [51] approaches the area with
an interest in proactive intervention strategies and dynamic knowledge bases. As can be
seen from the these examples, the research approach can be quite varied.
It is important to keep in mind that AFC has a different goal than the one pursued within
this thesis, the disctinction that most closely related to the issue of truth prescriptiveness
described in section 2.1.1. However, the tasks studied in the broader research relate to
this thesis since some of them are useful for automating the data collection.
Datasets
These surveys also list the available datasets for the tasks studied. Different datasets
are applicable for different tasks, examples of which are fake news detection (mostly bi­
nary and in a few cases multiclass classification), rumor classification, fact extraction or
stance detection. [50] discusses the problems with available datasets regarding their size,
the relevant domain (often too narrow such as only sourced from Twitter or Wikipedia or
concerning only politics) and unavailability of relevant metadata such as the related doc­
uments, evidence and its source, stance of the documents and evidence, and lastly the
inter­annotator agreement.
3.3.2
Relevant tasks
The tasks, many of which rely on NLP, encountered in the existing research relevant to
this thesis are listed below. Some general grouping as to what the task is largely relevant
to is applied:
• Author (i.e. legal entity) verification
– Automation detection ­ distinguishing between a human, bot or cyborg (hybrid)
– Bias estimation ­ can be of different kinds, such as political or occupational,
found by association to other entities and relevant for identifying characteristics
of an entity
– Diffusion role categorization ­ distinguishes between intentional spreaders such
as spammers and trolls, unintentional spreaders, i.e. unaware victims, clarifiers
pointing out falsehoods and persuaders trying to change beliefs.
– Dubiousness detection ­ marking dubious entities by association with spread­
ing or creating false information
– Echo chamber and filter bubble effect estimation ­ measured by association
with other entities and representing an important characteristic of an entity
– Identity identification ­ simple such as verified vs. unverified social media ac­
count, or more complicated, multiple linked identities for a single person such
as mother on Facebook, entrepreneur on Twitter as well as a policewoman on
Twitter.
– Reliability estimation ­ e.g. a metric measuring an association with verifiably
true information
• Claim or statement
– Claim detection ­ important for monitoring and subsequent tasks of grouping
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
19
==PAGE:26==
– Claim similarity grouping ­ relating similar claims into one group
• Document
– Clickbait detection ­ especially those with misleading intent
– Document retrieval ­ provides implications for data collection
– Metadata retrieval ­ such as that of an author, publisher, time of creation, etc.
– Satire detection ­ a very distinct category of content important to be ignored
from serious consideration
– Stance detection ­ relevant for automatic detection of support or opposition
towards a statement as well as identification of bias
– Topic identification ­ useful for grouping, could be a subset of the more importat
claim similarity grouping task
– Virality detection ­ important for correct application of ”innoculation” measures
slowing down its virality and mitigating its negative consequences
3.4
Related journalistic work
Interesting and relevant work is also done in journalism outside of the fact­checking realm.
Organizations like AllSides and Ad Fontes Media rate media sources based on their po­
litical bias and in the latter case based on reliability as well. Such a work is useful, just
consider the task described in section 3.1.1 given to the college students which involved
consideration of bias of the involved entities. AllSides is also interesting from the perspec­
tive that it presents stories covering the same narrative from different sources with various
political bias. These stories give a different point of view on the matter, present different
arguments and as such can promote a more careful consideration, or in short, informed
critical thinking.
These ventures represent an interesting source of information affecting credibility of en­
tities as well as give an encouragement with their selected approach emphasizing being
informed from multiple differently biased sources.
3.5
Active intervention via tool
One of the most apt and popular means for an active intervention to aid the problem of
false information in one’s daily life is through a usage of browser extensions. Searching
Chrome Web Store for extensions relating to bias checking, ”fake news” detection or news
evaluation reveals a large number of such solutions. Probably the most popular one is
called NewsGuard created by NewsGuard Technologies founded recently in 2018 which
rates the credibility of news and information sources and provides this information in form
of a ”nutrition label” explaining the given rating [52]. It focuses on media sources in US,
Germany, France, Italy and the UK, allegedly covering 95% of the online engagement with
news. This solution also partially relies on their users flagging potentially false stories and
with it improving the service [53]. Their browser extensions are also available for Microsoft
Edge, Safari and Firefox. It is also included in the mobile version of Edge allowing users
to use it outside of desktops. There are also namesake mobile apps for iOS and Android.
This points out the possible approach to take for effective and active intervention in users’
everyday lives.
20
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:27==
4
Conceptual solution
Recall the summary in section 2.1.5 that serves as a useful guide for the development of
a conceptual solution in this chapter and it influences how it is structured.
The first point is for CTSS, the proposed conceptual solution, to be informative. Recall the
goal of aiding in informed critical thinking and the argument made earlier for why critical
thinking by itself is not enough without all of the relevant information. In order to represent
this information, a domain model needs to be developed (section 4.1). Afterwards, it is
important to consider how to get the real­world information into such a domain model to
use it (section 4.2).
Once the domain model is in place, attention can be given to credibility graph and con­
sideration of the different scenarios that can arise in the domain model and how do they
map onto and propagate in the credibility graph (section 4.3).
At this moment, with both the domain model and credibility graph, the scene has been set
up to look into addressing the problem of cognitive bias (section 4.4).
Although the preceding section reference some of the ideas from the collaborative nature
of CTSS, more ideas are further developed and summarized in section 4.5.
Lastly, the question of how could CTSS be used in the wild, considering the various real­
world constraints, is discussed in section 4.6.
4.1
Domain model
Some parts of the domain were outlined already in the previous chapters. The following
is a more systematic treatment of each part.
The only way, except for in­person conversation, how people get information is that they
consume it in some media form. This could be in a written form but also audio­visual
form1. These forms could be combined in various ways. There is a huge variety in terms
of specific media types these forms could take:
• written ­ e.g. a printed book, newspaper or a journal as well as electronic versions of
the former together with a blog article, social media post or a message from instant
messaging app
• audio ­ e.g. a radio, podcast, voicemail or an audio message2
• visual ­ e.g. a printed illustration or a photograph as well as digital image like com­
puter graphics, screenshot or a meme.
• audio­visual ­ e.g. a recorded or an animated video, a movie.
These forms when presented to a consumer come in some unified package that will be
denoted as a document. This is therefore not a document in the commonly used sense of
1Using the commonly cited (and misconceived) Aristotle’s categorization of senses, sight and hearing
are the most important senses for information consumption. However, blind people can learn Braille and use
their sense of touch to read which would therefore allow them to consume information in a written form as
well, apart from an audio. For simplicity’s sake though, such complications are omitted from consideration
here.
2Voicemail is specifically related to cell phone services while audio message is more diverse and nowa­
days mostly used through social media services like WhatsApp or Facebook.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
21
==PAGE:28==
the word and for example none of the definitions for ”document” given on Merriam Webster
truly fit [54]. The definition given on Lexico is more general and works well:
A piece of written, printed, or electronic matter that provides information or
evidence or that serves as an official record. ([55])
These documents make statements, which is:
A definite or clear expression of something in speech or writing. ([56])
Such a definition works well for explicitly articulated statement. Except not all statements
are that clearly and directly expressed, often making only an implicit statement. Phrases
such as ”we all know who’s behind it” are ambiguous but in a certain context can be un­
derstood as an implicit statement about specific entity and leave no doubt as to what was
meant. However, such a statement is enigmatic and difficult to parse for anyone not within
that context This makes the relationship between documents and certain statements often
unclear and while it is possible to say that a particular document exists in the objective
reality, which statements it makes can be more subjective.
The documents, and by extension statements as well, relate to certain topics as well. This
is an intuitive everyday abstraction that helps in communication and here it is helpful for
generalizations. For example, while one can be interested in the topic of celebrity gossip,
and even though an epitome of false information3 still putting a lot of trust in it, the same
person might not be interested in political topics, especially from the political party disliked
by them. Another person might be a polar opposite. In such a case, the generalization
through a topic can be useful since other generalization of the same broad extent through
an author or publisher might not be possible.
All these documents are also created by someone or something4 and published some­
where. For example, person writes an article, with it becomes its author, and publishes it
on Medium, an online publishing platform for social journalism [59]. There could be more
authors contributing to a document. A document can be published by multiple publishers.
The authors could be part of an organization or a company, in general a so­called juridical
person as opposed to a natural person. In some cases, the author and publisher can be
the same, such as when an organization publishes a document on their own site and no
other author is mentioned. [60] is an example of such a document.
The document serves as a record, as given in the definition above, and can therefore be
retrieved from one of its sources. This therefore limits the set of documents to be those for
which a source is available so an unrecorded phone call or private message that cannot
be retrieved and was not leaked does not count as documents. This source needs to be
referenced in order to be able to get the underlying document.
The best form of a reference is a persistent identifier (PID) since it allows for a reliable
and efficient retrieval of the referenced document [61]. Examples of such PIDs are Dig­
ital Object Identifiers (DOI) often used in academic sphere, International Standard Book
Number (ISBN) used for books or BitTorrent magnet links. An ordinary URL also identifies
a document but there are two problems associated with URLs that make them unreliable:
• Link rot ­ denotes the problem when a previously accessed web address goes dead
— the content has been moved and its address has changed, it has been removed
3Wikipedia concurs since the gossip magazine article contains a reference to an article on disinformation
[57].
4Automatic generation of certain articles is being done for at least the last 6 years. [58].
22
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:29==
or the whole website is no longer live.
• Content drift designates a problem when the document changes over time. So
while the URL still retrieves a document, it might be different and it is impossible
to state just how different it can be. The changes can be visual, such as in the
case of website redesign, supplemental, for example when an article gets updated
with further information, corrective, when a piece of information in the original arti­
cle is corrected (good practice is to leave note at the beginning or an end of such
article about the correction), but it can also be manipulative and deceptive and the
document can be changed to such a degree that it is unrecognizable to its original
form.
Some websites maintain themselves a permalink system intended for long­lasting refer­
ences, examples of which are Wikipedia or StackExchange. There are also web archiving
services that create a Persistent URL, or PURL, such as Internet Archive’s Wayback Ma­
chine, WebCite, archive.today or perma.cc.
These sources, which inherently relate to publishers, can be partially assessed objectively.
The practices and initiatives they undertake as well as historical accuracy all play a role.
For example, while Twitter and Facebook are two platforms and publishers (even though
they do not call themselves as such [62]) that are involved in a lot of false information
dissemination, they at least have initiatives to curb this problem [60], [63]. The same
cannot be said about other sources, such as Gab, the alternative social media platform
for the far­right [64]. Such initiatives make the former sources objectively better from
an editorial quality perspective. Another question is to what degree is this editorial quality
important which gives us another instance for generalization rule, i.e. ”I do (not) put weight
on editorial quality and do (not) consider sources with more practices and initiatives for
improving it as better”.
Intuitively speaking, authors, publishers and communities are at some point represented
by some people. These people could actual humans, or natural entities, but they could
also be part of an organization or a company, or juridical entities. Communities could
be a collection of both natural and juridical entities. In this domain, all of these are a
form of entity. This is useful, since these different entities can have various relations
between each other. For example, an author could be affiliated with an organization. This
organization is owned or controlled by someone. When this affiliated author writes about
the owner, this relationship gives us additional context to work with, namely there exists
some suspicion of bias and that the author did not give a fully independent account of the
owner.
Now we have in place the most important parts contributing to the dissemination of in­
formation that could be objectively assessed, given some caveats regarding ambiguity.
Everyone in the reality­based audience that this thesis works with can agree on these
parts: ”Yes, there is this document with this content, concerning these topics, from this
author, by this publisher, appearing on this source. It definitely makes these statements
and it is possibly making these other statements as well”. Let’s move onto a part of most
importance, the subjective credibility. Credibility means:
The quality of being trusted and believed in. ([65])
The credibility of a document and its statement is affected by credibility of the provided
evidence. This evidence can be both in support or in opposition to the statement. The
evidence also comes in a form of a document with all of its associations to sources, state­
ments, authors and publishers which have their own credibility. What represents suitable
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
23
==PAGE:30==
evidence is subjective, both (1) from the perspective of whether it is even relevant to the
statement in the first place and (2) whether it comes from a credible source. While the
second relation concerns credibility which is explicitly modelled and can therefore be di­
rectly expressed in the domain model, the first relation deals with an uncertainty as in the
case between documents and ambiguous statements.
To demonstrate on a simple example, let’s say we have a claim that COVID­19 vaccines
are deadly. While a numerical data point of significantly high value based on high enough
sample size stating how many people died in the following week after taking a vaccine
would be considered a suitable evidence, an anecdote about a senior dying after taking
a vaccine would not (1st relation). No matter what source the anecdote comes from, it is
statistically insignificant and no overarching conclusion can be drawn from it. The credi­
bility of evidence given by the numerical data point depends on what source does it come
from (2nd relation). The source might be relatively unknown or it could be an impostor of
an otherwise established and credible source and once assessed as so be deemed not
credible.
See the domain model in a simplified UML diagram in fig. 4.1 and the entity detail in
fig. 4.2.
Figure 4.1: Domain model using a UML class diagram. Note the legend in the bottom
left corner. For simplicity’s sake, complexity around the abstract Entity has been omitted
from this diagram and can be seen in fig. 4.2.
Notice that Entity, Publisher and Author are abstract, whereas NaturalEntity and Juridi­
24
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.2: Domain model ­ Entity detail.
calEntity are not. This allows for existence of an entity which is not necessarily an author
or a publisher, such as the aforementioned owner of an organization.
The individual classes in the domain model also have various attributes that are not shown
on the figures. In general, any attributes relevant to that class could be associated. From
the obvious, like author’s name, to the nonobvious, like author’s number of Twitter follow­
ers.
4.1.1
Domain model used on narrative
Let’s see how does the narrative example from section 1.1 fit in the domain model.
4.2
Data collection
Now that we have an idea about the domain model it is time to consider how could it be
filled with real­world data.
Since the number of narratives already out there and also of narratives started every day is
absurdly high and even teams of cumulatively hundreds of people, namely fact checkers,
struggle with making sense of it all, a different approach must be taken. Various parts of
the data collection pipeline can be automated to a different degree and the missing parts
can be aided by community contribution.
In the long run, the community contribution should be replaced by further automation ex­
cept in places where it is technically not feasible due to technical reasons. For example,
private chain messages on WhatsApp, Telegram or Facebook Groups are impossible to
monitor comprehensively — even the platforms themselves essentially have no remedy
that would not result in privacy violation or disabling a feature beneficial for other use
cases. Any attempt to tackle such an issue will by definition lead to an incomplete resolu­
tion.
It is also important to keep in mind that collection of data for addressing false information
is and forever will be constantly evolving process for at least these three reasons:
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
25
==PAGE:32==
1. False information itself will evolve and new approaches and information will be
needed to address this evolution.
2. Flaws and opportunities for improvement in the established data collection process
will be found and will need to be addressed.
3. New technologies and approaches for new and more accurate data will be imple­
mented.
With these caveats out of the way, let’s plunge into automated mining in section 4.2.1
and afterwards consider the contributions that could be made by the community in sec­
tion 4.2.2.
4.2.1
Automated mining
Let’s first consider what fact checkers do as part of the whole fact­checking process. This
serves as a useful guide for plenty of ideas for automation.
At first, a relevant narrative to focus on needs to be identified. The problem therefore
becomes to get a good, ideally complete, picture of current narratives by monitoring news
and other sources of information as well as choose the most relevant narrative to work on,
one that will possibly have the highest impact in terms of how many people it will affect
and by how much. This is the case for a human fact checker due to time constraints. An
automated system with a processing capacity much higher than that of a person is not
limited in such a way and does not need to select narratives based on relevancy. However,
the relevancy might still be useful to know about for the end user and the community.
Second, relevant information for the identified narrative needs to be found and retrieved.
One part of this is to find what is already out there as the narrative might have started
in one way and continued to evolve with more (false) information gradually accumulated.
The second part is to identify other sources of information to either support or oppose
the claims made in the narrative. The first part is only complicated by not being able to
access closed communities such as private Facebook or WhatsApp groups and therefore
not being able to see whether such a narrative is discussed there and in what way. How­
ever, just a simple keyword search, where keywords could be unique terms relating to the
narrative but also e.g. a URL of a tweet that started a particular narrative, can retrieve
plenty of context. The second part is arguably more difficult as different narratives re­
quire information to be retrieved from varying sources. The fact checker with their highly
flexible skills understands the narrative and is able to identify the claims that need to be
checked as well as the possible approaches for how to do so. This can take many forms
as demonstrated further.
Using the example from section 1.1, the most relevant information to be checked there is
about the buses. There are many questions from which the query could be started and
the following is just one example which closely mimics how the story actually developed:
• Q: Whose buses are they?
A: The bus company Coach USA North America.
• Q: What does the owner (Coach USA North America) of the buses state?
A: Sean Hughes, director of corporate affairs for Coach USA North America, states
that at no point were their buses involved in the Austin protests.
• Q: What were they then involved in?
A: A big software conference with attendance above 10000 people.
• Q: Can this be confirmed?
26
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:33==
A: Yes, the spokeswoman for the company organizing the conference issued a state­
ment confirming they hired the buses for transporting people to the conference.
• Q: Can the original claim be confirmed?
A: No concrete proof of evidence is apparent.
Whereas answering these questions required getting in touch with relevant entities or at
least monitoring whether these entities state anything related, a completely different ap­
proach might be necessary for a different narrative. Suppose a narrative revolves around
a numerical claim though, e.g. nowadays relevant COVID­19 related claims. Such claims
might be possible to be verified by checking against data from national and international
statistical services.
The third part has to do with compiling all the information and making sense of it in such a
way so that it is easily presentable and digestable for the general public. The role of pre­
sentation is taken by visualization using credibility graph that is discussed in section 4.3.
Let’s have a look at possibilities for data collection automation for the individual parts.
Get currently relevant narratives
Consider some of the most relevant sources of narratives5:
• Daily newspapers and online news ­ New York Times, USA Today, Breitbart
• Blogs ­ Crooks and Liars, The Gateway Pundit
• Social media itself ­ Twitter, Snapchat, Reddit
• TV ­ CNN, NBC, Fox News
• Radio, podcasts ­ New York Times’ The Daily, NPR’s Weekend Edition, The Ben
Shapiro Show
Since for start, we want to only recognize the themes and keywords of narratives, getting
the information from aforementioned sources in ordinary textual form is acceptable and
higher dimensional methods can be ignored. This self­imposed limitation also allows for
using more established methods working with text rather than relying on more experimen­
tal solutions. Let’s consider how can we get the mentioned sources into a textual form
using NLP techniques.
A lot of previously mentioned sources offer RSS feed (e.g. New York Times, Crooks and
Liars or The Gateway Pundit) or an API (e.g. Twitter or Reddit) for consumption. For other
websites, web scraping is a possibility. It might more efficient to use an aggregator which
might offer a more unified experience for data mining. These methods, especially web
scraping, generally cover textual publicly accessible sources. These sources as well as
purely image driven communities might have documents accompanied by images from
which a text can be extracted by optical character recognition, where the state of art is
represented by Google Tesseract [66], or the image can be summarized by automatic im­
age annotation [67], [68]. As for audio media like radio and podcasts, some transcripts of
varying quality exist and it is possible to apply general speech recognition itself for getting
more of such content [69]. As for the mixed media like TV, a simplification is afforded by
treating it as audio or image content only and subsequently applying the methods from
5An attempt has been made to order the examples for the different categories (except for social media
which vary by content creator) by their political bias by checking against AllSides and Ad Fontes Media bias
ratings pages. Political sources have been chosen as they are among the most popular but other non­political
sources could have been chosen to serve as an example as well.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
27
==PAGE:34==
above — such an approach, in the case of TV news, would be enough to identify the
spoken words of news presenters and news headlines.
Once we have these various documents identified, they need to be aggregated by a nar­
rative they relate to. There are many possible approaches but the general process would
include text vectorization with a subsequent grouping by nearest neighbor search. This
could be interlaced by text classification in order separate the content to a few broad cat­
egories. An example of this can be seen in [70]. Other approach more in line with our
definition of a narrative is to identify claim(s) being made as in [47] and aggregate based
on those. The aggregated sources could then be summarized into a single headline [71],
preferring a format of a claim.
As for measuring the aforementioned relevancy to a general populace, an engagement
on social media and the general interest through e.g. Google Trends could be measured
for the identified keywords and topics and serve as a proxy for the relevance.
A simple approach that is rather reactive and dependent on other credible sources (mainly
fact­checkers) is to collect data based on narratives covered by these sources.
Get relevant documents to an identified narrative
Although we might already have multiple documents identified from the previous step,
this step used some limited amount of sources to identify a narrative. Once we know
a narrative, we can use it to find other relevant sources. Specifically, we can use the
summarized name for the narrative, headlines from the already identified sources and
their URLs and query other sources through a search engine. A high­level overview of
this process can be seen in fig. 4.3.
This most likely results in an explosion of content found and some reasonable filtering
would need to be applied. On the other hand, it might be helpful to do such a query
recursively, that is to repeat the process once we have found new sources, since there
might be a thread of information that can be found only with this recursive search.
Get supporting and opposing evidence
Based on these relevant documents, a retrieval of evidence in both support and opposition
to the claim of a narrative can begin. As already mentioned, this is a difficult task since
different narratives require evidence from different sources. One issue is to know when to
use which source and the other is to actually use it. It might only be possible to identify po­
tentially relevant sources of evidence based on the already identified documents relating
to the narrative but this is a difficult problem to generalize and human assistance, such
as one from the community contribution, is needed. While some sources are amenable
for automation, e.g. the aforementioned data from statistical offices, others, like getting
in touch with a relevant person and asking for a statement relating to a narrative, are not.
However, automated systems can help with metadata retrieval that is comparatively easy
to do for computers and often not done by human fact checkers, possibly because of lack
of skills, knowledge or foresight.
Obvious metadata to retrieve are name of authors, publishers and timestamps for a doc­
ument. There might be a profile or an about page for authors and publishers within the
same page or social media page where especially LinkedIn should not be left out. Such
pages can provide various context including biography/lifetime details or self­proclaimed
opinions.
However, more interesting and often disregarded metadata can be identified by learning
from the evolving false information landscape and especially the past successes of false
information. The following lists first point out some past successes of false information
28
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.3: High­level overview for getting relevant docs. In the set of all the informa­
tion out there, part is inaccessible and from the accessible part, only certain subpart is
easily monitored using sensible amount of effort and the rest is searchable. First a set
of documents is gathered through the monitoring from the ”accessible & monitored” part,
narratives are identified from these and other relevant documents to these documents are
searched across all of the accessible documents. The individual parts are not necessarily
to scale.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
29
==PAGE:36==
spread and the other discusses various ideas to detect such abuse using automation that
would then decrease this site’s credibility:
1. Fraudulent website impersonating an established one:
(a) abcnews.com.co instead of abcnews.com [72]
(b) fraudulent polling website impersonating IPSOS [73]
2. Website taking on names that sound credible ­ National Report, World News Daily
[72].
3. Seemingly legitimate website judged by its design which however contained only a
single fraudulent article and everything else was a carefully designed facade leading
to nowhere.
• Domain name check ­ can be easily automated and one of the most used browser
extensions previously mentioned in chapter 3, NewsGuard, relies on this as it has
a database of the most popular sources representing majority of the traffic in the
information dissemination landscape. For the particular use case of abusing similar
domain names (item 1 above), an appropriate string similarity metric can be calcu­
lated against such a database and reported as abuse if under certain threshold.
• WHOIS query ­ helpful for understanding who is behind a site as well as the temporal
characteristics of the site. This particular strategy was used in investigation of the
IPSOS impersonation (item 1b above). The query might be blocked blocked by
WhoIsGuard in which case the most relevant piece of information still available is
the date of registration for such domain. If a domain has been registered recently,
the chance it is used for fraudulent purposes rises6. The maintained database of
news sources and other websites could be expanded with data about their date of
founding, place of origin and associated URLs and social media accounts that are
all potentially available from a WHOIS query and provide additional context when
estimating the objective measure of credibility.
• Checking Wikipedia ­ many major sources of information, as well as various fraudu­
lent and misinformation sources have their own page on Wikipedia. Checking for an
existence of a page on the site and potentially analyzing what it says and fetching
it in a structured format could provide some initial context. This could only be relied
upon as an additional check since such a strategy would otherwise be too vulner­
able for an abuse. However, it is a good cross­check and prevents too high of a
reliance on the ad hoc maintained database.
• Search engine query ­ could be performed with the site name and checked whether
it appears on other verified sites from the maintained database of sources and in
what context.
• Crawl site to estimate amount of content ­ A site could be crawled when encountered
for the first time to answer a question ”How many articles are on this site?”. The
answer would provide the necessary context to prevent single article site frauds
(item 3 above).
• Check the About page ­ also a very naive strategy that could not be exclusively relied
upon as the site creator is in control of it and can write whatever they want. However,
in some cases, About pages are surprisingly elucidating and reveal helpful context.
This should obviously still be verified against other sources.
30
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:37==
• Social media statistics ­ this encompasses statistics for a particular article (number
of engagements, e.g. on Facebook [74]) or entity. This provides information about
popularity which is relevant for assessing the potential for virality.
4.2.2
Community contribution
While automation can help with data ingress, making sense of all of this data is compara­
tively much more difficult and a task by and large still only suitable for human reasoning.
This is where a community, of both professional fact checkers as well an ordinary con­
sumer, steps in.
The automation with the currently available technology can monitor information sources,
aggregate information broadly by topic or less accurately by a narrow narrative and pro­
vide context not easily accessible for humans but fairly straightforward to obtain using
automation. The community can first of all discuss and suggest improvements to this pro­
cess, even directly as source code. They could also provide data that the current data
collection pipeline did not recognize. Such manual entries would be flagged as oppor­
tunities for improvements and should be gradually substituted by automated solutions.
However, applying their highly flexible human capability for reasoning to connect relevant
entities and make sense of the data is the more important part. It also provides the oppor­
tunity to audit this process and use the collected data as a basis for an automated system
that could gradually take over even from these community contributions.
4.3
Credibility graph
With the domain model in place, the credibility graph idea can be conceptually developed
to be more concrete. This section develops various ideas for credibility graph in two steps
and uses the narrative example from section 1.1. Section 4.3.1 introduces basic ideas for
structure of credibility graph, setting initial values for leaf nodes, propagation of credibilities
within and discusses some issues with it. This leads to section 4.3.2 which addresses the
identified issues in two subsections.
4.3.1
Credibility graph introduced
Figure 4.4 shows the first iteration of a credibility graph for our narrative. This iteration
considers publishers, authors, documents and statement. The only supported connec­
tions are from authors to documents, from publishers to documents and from documents
to a statement. Only the latter can take a form of either support or opposition. The former,
connecting both authors and publishers to documents, are neutral. This is summarized
in table 4.2 and table 4.3 which however already include more considerations considered
only later in section 4.3.2.
The following formalizes the calculation of credibilities for nodes in a credibility graph.
Refer to table 4.1 for an overview of used variables and their meaning.
Figure 4.4 shows a credibility value from 0 to 1 for every node. The value of most interest is
that of the statement. The way to obtain it is from its related documents. These documents
in turn obtain their credibility from their related entities, i.e. authors, publishers and other
legal entities. These entities have by default credibility Creddefault = 0.5, i.e. the middle
value from the interval [0, 1] which is the codomain of all credibilities. This default credibility
is further affected by its associated attributes and rules. These rules can be set by the
user. By clicking a node, the attributes and rules appear as additional nodes connected to
the node that was clicked as shown in fig. 4.5. The rule node represented by a diamond
shape has a slider next to it that allows user to change its strength.
6The same logic can be applied in other domains, such as for automated Twitter account detection.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.4: Simple credibility graph for a narrative described in section 1.1. Note the legend in the bottom left corner.
32
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:39==
d
A document
e
An author, publisher or other
legal entity
s
A statement
n
A node (strictly speaking, ex­
cluding statement node)
r
A rule
ar
An attribute associated to rule
r within an interval [0, armax]
armax
Maximum value an attribute can have. It is chosen based on the seemed
importance of an attribute.
The codomain of all Credibilities is [0, 1]
Credd
Document credibility
Crede
Entity credibility
Creds
Statement credibility
Creddefault =
0.5
Default credibility
Ds
Set of documents relating to
statement s
Ed
Set of entities related to docu­
ment d
R
Set of rules
A
Set of attributes
Tn
Set of tuples (r, ar, armax) for
node n
In the following, we can ignore rules where r = 0 since they do not have
an effect anyway.
Tnpositive ⊆Tn = {(r, ar, armax) | r > 0}
Only those tuples that have positive
rules
Tnnegative ⊆Tn = {(r, ar, armax) | r < 0}
Only those tuples that have negative
rules
Dopposings ⊆Ds
Set of opposing documents related to
statement s
Dsupportings ⊆Ds
Set of supporting documents related
to statement s
Table 4.1: Variables and their meaning needed for section 4.3.1
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.5: Node attributes and rules appearing when a node is clicked.
A rule r can be either of positive nature (R+), such as being a fact checker, or negative
nature (R­), such as being a false information source, as seen in fig. 4.5. A positive rule
is in the interval [0, 1] and negative rule in the interval [−1, 0] where 0 means it is disabled
in both cases. The basic interaction rule r and its associated attribute ar have is r ∗ar.
This product is added to Creddefault. This can, however, result in values > 0 or < 0 and
need to be normalized. In order to simplify the resulting formula, it is split in in three parts,
the default credibility Creddefault, credibility contributed by the positive rules CredR+ and
credibility contributed by the negative rules CredR−.
The credibility contributed from positive rules CredR+ is calculated by iterating through
the set Tnpositive where a sum of the products ar ∗r is calculated as well as a sum of the
maximum values the attributes can take. Assuming it is always the case that Creddefault =
0.5, then it is enough to divide the two sums and additionally divide by 2 so that the range
of possible values is halved to [0, 0.5] so that Creddefault + CredR+ ≤1. Therefore,
CredR+ =
∑
(r,ar)∈Tnpositive ar ∗r
2 ∗∑
armax∈Tnpositive armax
.
(4.1)
And similarly, for the credibility contributed from negative rules:
CredR−=
∑
(r,ar)∈Tnnegative ar ∗r
2 ∗∑
armax∈Tnnegative armax
.
(4.2)
The resulting normalized credibility for entity is then calculated like
34
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:41==
Crede = Creddefault + CredR+ + CredR−
(4.3)
Now that we have credibilities for entities, credibility of a document is calculated using a
mean average of related entities like
Credd =
∑
e∈Ed Crede
|Ed|
.
(4.4)
Finally, based on the credibility of documents the credibility of a statement can be calcu­
lated. The mean average is also used, but every supporting document adds 1 to the sum
and each document counts twice, i.e.
Creds =
∑
dopposing∈Dopposings
(
1 −Creddopposing
)
+ ∑
dsupporting∈Dsupportings
(
1 + Creddsupporting
)
2 ∗(|Dopposings| + |Dsupportings|)
.
(4.5)
To understand the idea behind making each document count twice and supporting docu­
ment adding 1 to the sum, consider what happens if a only a mean average is taken as in
eq. (4.4). Even if we would have only supporting documents and these documents would
in addition be of varied credibilities, let’s also assume normally distributed, the credibility
of the statement would tend to 0.5 as predicted by central limit theorem. This, however,
does not make a lot of sense intuitively speaking as we only have supporting documents
for the statement of interest and not a single opposing document. This should make the
statement more credible. With the modification made in eq. (4.5), each supporting doc­
ument makes the credibility tend to 1 and in contrast, each opposing document makes
the credibility tend to 0. This does not solve the general problem of the mean average
tending to 0.5 when a lot of documents split approximately equally between supporting
and opposing but rather only the specific problem when there is a predominant majority
of supporting or opposing documents.
A detail for how each credibility is set, including additional context of the node, is given in
an overlay that appears on hover over that node, see fig. 4.6.
Issues
Let’s discuss some of the issues with this iteration.
Using the mean average propagation rule has the issue that with rising number of nodes
involved in the calculation, the value tends to the middle value, i.e. 0.5. Such a result is
not of a great interest and does not provide much insight. Few approaches to mitigate
this problem which also expand the possibilities in terms what narratives can be modelled
are described. The first two are then more concretely conceptualized in section 4.3.2.
First, the simple and rigid propagation rules that do not take into consideration some of the
complexities occurring in the real world can be improved. For instance, a situation in the
narrative example occurs where two documents from the same author and publisher differ
in their stance towards the statement, see detail in fig. 4.7. This situation is exactly the
example given in table 2.2 for Exclusion propagation rule. By applying this rule it would
mean that in this narrative, the document starting the whole narrative would be removed.
This should, in turn, affect the credibility calculation directly as well as indirectly affect
credibility of other sources relying on it. This directly leads to another way of alleviating
the aforementioned problem.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.6: Node overlay appearing on hover giving context relevant for that node in­
cluding explanation of how that node’s credibility is calculated. The figure shows five
examples, all taken from fig. 4.4.
36
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:43==
Second, it should be possible to include other edges in the credibility graph capturing other
relations and dependencies from the domain model. For example, every other source sup­
porting the statement in the example narrative directly depends on the initial Eric Tucker’s
tweet. If it is affected in some way, for example by an activation of the Exclusion propa­
gation rule or by an actual removal of the original document in the real world (as indeed
happened [75]), this should affect credibility of other sources to such a degree as to com­
pletely discount the statement.
Third, the Aggregation rule from table 2.2 also helps with the issue since it reduces the
number of nodes involved in the calculation and therefore, by definition, mitigates the
problem. Looking at the type of sources and documents in the narrative example, there
are opportunities to (1) aggregate over documents essentially just repeating other docu­
ments (all supporting documents largely just repeat the original tweet from Eric Tucker)
and (2) aggregate over similar sources, such as social media (Facebook, Reddit and Twit­
ter), daily newspapers (The Austin American Statesman and Fox 5 New York), but also by
their political leaning (Free Republic is a forum for self­described US conservatives [76]
and The Gateway Pundit is a far­right news website recently known for spreading false
information about the 2020 U.S. presidential election [77]).
And lastly, it is not necessary to rely solely on mean average. Another simple function is
to take a maximum credibility of the incoming nodes, for example
Credd = max
e∈Ed
(e).
(4.6)
Figure 4.7: Detail of problematic situation in the narrative example suitable for application
of the Exclusion rule discussed in table 2.2. Notice that while the first document (tweet)
published on November 9 (can be seen in the overlay) is in support of the statement, the
second document published two days later is in opposition of it.
4.3.2
Credibility graph improved
Let’s see the improvements for the issues brought up in section 4.3.1 applied individually,
one by one. For reference, the nodes and edges are summarized in table 4.2 and table 4.3,
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
37
==PAGE:44==
Node
Description
Statement
At the center of a narrative which it uniquely identifies and which cred­
ibility is the most important.
Document
Uniquely identifiable object containing information in written but also
audio­visual form.
Author
A legal entity or collection of them that have composed a document
Publisher
Most likely a juridical person who published a document
Other legal entity
Legal entity somehow otherwise related to a narrative. Sean Hughes
from our narrative example is an instance of such entity since he is
not an author of an article but provided a highly relevant information
related to the buses.
Table 4.2: Credibility graph nodes and their descriptions
respectively.
Applying Exclusion rule
The Exclusion rule in table 2.2 suggests to ”exclude or ignore certain entities from con­
tributing to the credibility propagation” with the example of ”a document from a source sup­
porting a claim can be excluded if there is another later document from the same source
opposing the claim” that is directly applicable to the situation in fig. 4.7. See fig. 4.8 for
how this could look like.
Compared to rules discussed previously which were enabled on a continuous spectrum,
this particular Exclusion rule is discrete­binary since the situation either occurs or it does
not and the rule only decides whether to exclude or not exclude the document. It is difficult
to imagine how could this rule work otherwise on a continuous spectrum.
Capturing additional relations
Although the Exclusion rule helps to capture a very intuitive idea and indeed decreases
credibility of the statement, it is by itself not enough to significantly discredit it, since it
only works in isolation and does not affect other nodes. If additional relations between
the nodes are introduced, such as those of content dependency, and these in turn affect
the connected documents, effects such as those of the Exclusion rule can have a much
higher impact, see fig. 4.9.
This content dependency relation is shown with a gray dashed line starting with a semi­
circle and ending with a triangle arrow. A rule that affects how much are documents, that
depend on another document that is excluded, discredited (and their credibility lowered)
is enabled at exactly half its strength and the credibilities of the depending documents
are halved. This affects the credibility value for the statement and lowers it again from
the previous 0.458 in fig. 4.8 to the current 0.376. These calculations are formalized in
eq. (4.8) for documents and eq. (4.10) for statement. Only parts of interest are shown
clearly and not blurred.
Let rDED be a rule activation for the rule described in fig. 4.9 where DED is an abbreviation
for ”discredit excluded documents”. A document d has a set dDdependent of all documents
that d depends on via the content dependency relation indicated by the gray arrows on
fig. 4.9. dDexcluded denotes a set of excluded documents where dDexcluded ⊆dDdependent. Let
dDED be the discredit excluded documents factor for a document d defined as
38
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:45==
Edge kind
Source
Target
Meaning
Solid red  
Document
Statement
Document opposes a statement so
its higher credibility decreases state­
ment’s credibility
Solid blue  
Document
Statement
Document supports a statement so
its higher credibility increases state­
ment’s credibility
Solid black  
Entity (i.e. au­
thor, publisher
or other legal
entity)
Document
Marks the obvious relation of author­
ship, publication or direct mention of
other legal entity
Solid gray  
Either
doc­
ument
or
entity
Either
state­
ment
or
document
Relationship is excluded and has no
effect
Dashed
gray
 
All
All (except it­
self)
Captures
other
relationship
types
such as ownership or content depen­
dency (used in the example)
Table 4.3: Credibility graph edges, their kind, source, target and meaning
Figure 4.8: Applying Exclusion rule to the problematic situation. The excluded document
is grayed out together with the ingoing and outgoing edges. Its overlay, that would only
appear when hovering over it, has only grayed out background color to keep the legibility
high. Instead of explanation for how the credibility value is calculated, it now contains
a reason for excluding it. Notice also a change in the credibility value of the statement
which decreased from 0.489 to 0.458.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.9: Additional relations added for Exclusion
40
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:47==
dDED =





|dDexcluded| ∗rDED
|dDdependent|
if|dDdependent| > 0
0
otherwise
(4.7)
The credibility for a document d is then calculated as
Credd =
∑
e∈Ed Crede
|Ed|
∗(1 −dDED).
(4.8)
For example, see the credibility calculation for document ”Paid Agitators”:
Cred(Paid Agitators) = 0.45 + 0.3
1 + 1
∗
(
1 −1 ∗0.5
1
)
= 0.375 ∗0.5 = 0.1875 ≈0.188.
(4.9)
The credibility for a statement s considering excluded documents is calculated as
Creds =
∑
dopposing∈Dopposings
(
1 −Creddopposing
)
+ ∑
dsupporting∈Dsupportings
(
1 −dDED + Creddsupporting
)
2 ∗(|Dopposings| + |Dsupportings| −∑
d∈Ds dDED)
,
(4.10)
The credibility for the statement in the example is then calculated as
Cred(Anti­Trump Protesters Bused Into Austin, Chicago)
=
((1 −0.65) + (1 −0.575) + (1 −0.475) + (1 −0.6))
+ ((0.5 + 0.188) + (0.5 + 0.225) + (0.5 + 0.2) + (0.5 + 0.2))
2 ∗
(
4 + 4 −4 ∗0 −4 ∗
(1 ∗0.5
1
))
=
= 1.7 + 2.813
2 ∗6
≈0.376.
(4.11)
4.4
Addressing cognitive bias
Having the credibility graph in place, attention can be given to the idea of addressing
cognitive bias. This can be done using credibility graphs and rules affecting credibility
propagation within them.
Consider the associated credibility graphs for a set of narratives NAR the end user is in­
terested in. The user considers each narrative using the information the credibility graph
Gcred shows and through critical thinking reaches a conclusion to the statement s repre­
senting a narrative, either opposing or supporting it. Afterwards, they set the available rule
parameters for that particular credibility graph Gcred such that credibility of the statement
Creds leans towards their conclusion, i.e. Creds < 0.5 if they oppose the statement s and
Creds > 0.5 if they support the statement s. Not every rule has an effect on credibility
graph Gcred since it depends on what is included in Gcred. For example, a rule regarding
perceived trustworthiness of tabloid sources does not affect in any way every narrative
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
41
==PAGE:48==
that does not involve any tabloid source.
There is limited number of rules |R| with their associated parameters, creating a r­dimensional
space SR. Only a proper subset SRs ⊂SR produces a desired output Creds in a credibil­
ity graph Gcred. Since these subsets are different from one another, the more credibility
graphs there are, the smaller the intersection of all these subsets. Figure 4.10 shows this
on a simple example with just two rules and three narratives.
The assumption is that under coherent reasoning (and therefore setting of rule parame­
ters), there
∃Sapplicable |
((
Sapplicable =
∪
s∈Sets
SApplicable(s)
)
∧Sapplicable ̸= ∅
)
(4.12)
where Sets is a set of all narratives with their respective statements and
Applicable(s) =
{
Creds > 0.5
if user supports narrative with statement s
Creds < 0.5
otherwise
(4.13)
and SCreds>0.5 is then to be interpreted as a subset of SR where Creds > 0.5.
The condition of being under coherent reasoning is crucial here, since this is exactly what
can then be used to discover incoherent reasoning that, given the narrative has been
thoroughly thought through, indicates presence of cognitive bias, see fig. 4.11.
4.5
Collaborative project organization
This section serves as a single place for all the collaborative aspects of CTSS, summariz­
ing mentions from other sections as well as broaching some not mentioned before. The
reasoning for why collaborative approach seems as a promising approach is discussed
in section 2.1.1 and section 2.1.2.
• Data collection
– Manual contribution of data
– Cleaning automatically collected data
– Filtering collected data relevant to a narrative
– Discussing and suggesting improvements to a data collection pipeline
– Implementing said suggestions ↑
• Credibility graph
– Creating new credibility graphs
– Improving existing credibility graphs, e.g. by finding new connections in data
– Creating and tweaking behavior of credibility propagation rules
– Voting on arguments affecting objective credibility
– Discussing and suggesting improvements to credibility graphs, credibility prop­
83D is hard™
42
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.10:
Narratives constraining space of applicable rule parameters.
Only in­
volves two rules R = {rule Y, rule X} for legibility8 but the concept is generalizable to
r­dimensional space. There are three narratives with statements s1, s2 and s3. Let’s as­
sume that the desired outcome for each of these is ∀s∈{s1,s2,s3}Creds > 0.5. Where they
attain Creds > 0.5 is shown by red Sred, blue Sblue and green Sgreen blobs, respectively,
each subset of Sr. Sred shows the example where a rule has no effect since at any value
of rule Y, changing the rule X does not change Creds1 — rule X could therefore be omit­
ted when setting up credibility graph for narrative relating to statement s1. The black area
represents the space of applicable rule parameters Sapplicable = Sred ∩Sblue ∩Sgreen.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.11: Narratives not intersecting in any applicable rule parameters space. Com­
pared to fig. 4.10, this figure contains another narrative with statement s4 and the desired
outcome of Creds4 > 0.5 being represented by yellow blob Syellow = SCreds4>0.5. However,
Sred∩Sblue∩Sgreen∩Syellow = ∅which violates the assumption in eq. (4.12). This therefore
means that the addition of the narrative represented by statement s4 is incoherent with
the rest of the narratives. User’s desired outcome is for Creds4 > 0.5 which is not possi­
ble with constraints set by the other narratives and given the narrative has been carefully
thought through, it hints at cognitive bias being introduced.
44
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:51==
agation rules and objective credibility arguments
– Implementing said suggestions ↑
• Using CTSS ­ although principally helpful to the end user, the data on subjectively set
rule parameters could become a signal of its own and (1) affect setting of objective
attribute and (2) function as a social consensus signal.
• Open source ­ anyone can contribute, anyone can audit and verify functionality.
Makes it fully transparent. Also allows for the system to be installed and used by ev­
eryone locally or at least separately in a cloud sandbox environment. This is helpful
for development, small­scale experiments and academic research.
Proposing a solution through such a collaborative platform comes with all kinds of con­
siderations complicating matters. There is a problem of abuse discussed more closely in
section 4.5.1. There are also relevant considerations about how should versioning work.
For example, one user opens a credibility graph about some narrative and sets up the
rules such that they get the desired outcome. Other user modifies the credibility graph for
this narrative in some way, or credibility propagation rule used there is modified. One so­
lution is that the version of everything used is fixed to a version most up­to­date at the time
of credibility graph usage by the user. There could then be an option to update to most up­
to­date version when it becomes available, e.g. from within the narrative overview view
in fig. 4.21.
4.5.1
Abuse potential
As with any collaborative project where the original creator does not remain in full con­
trol and where anyone can contribute, there is a potential for abuse. The area of false
information is a sensitive topic and it is important to be careful and thoughtfully design in
checks and balances that would prevent such abuse. The following is an incomplete list
of potential abuse vectors and ideas on how to prevent them:
• Organized false information campaign ­ An organized group of professional false
information creators could as a part of their campaign create supporting material
on CTSS and if not only to circumvent the protection that CTSS should offer, they
could even directly use it as an additional support and proof that the information is
not false.
Multiple ideas arise for protection against such abuse:
– Warn about fresh and developing narratives ­ When a narrative is new, a gen­
eral warning about such fact could be presented to the users of CTSS with an
encouragement to wait for more information to come in and for the narrative
to be reviewed and confirmed. This would not need to be necessarily applied
to every narrative and some measure of its virality could be used for deciding
whether to show it or not.
– Institute a reputation or privilege system ­ Inspired by Stack Exchange or Wikipedia,
respectively. Certain actions would only be allowed with certain level of repu­
tation or privileges which would be relatively hard to obtain. It would then be
possible to identify actions prone for abuse, rank them by their product of likeli­
hood and severity of abuse, and use that for deciding the amount of reputation
needed to perform them.
– Establish a review process ­ Narratives and its nodes could be created by any­
one but would have to meet a certain level of peer review in order to be ap­
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
45
==PAGE:52==
proved for use. However, it is important to strike a balance between being
overly cautious having long, thorough review process and approving informa­
tion in a timely manner. Such a process could be sped along by users with
high reputation (see above).
• Denigration ­ An established node could be denigrated by modification of its at­
tributes, i.e. adding a negative one, removing a positive one or changing strength of
an existing one. This could be prevented by:
– Attribute elections ­ When an attribute is to be modified, especially one that
would have a meaningful impact (something that could be measured since it
would be possible to calculate the total change in outcome of narratives), short
elections in the community could be held to decide whether to modify it or not.
To prevent the simplest of election frauds when massive amount of accounts
is created for such purpose, certain reputation (see above) could be required.
4.6
Proposed usage
This section demonstrates an imagined usage of the proposed solution. It is also used
for evaluation of and serves as a basis for conducting qualitative interview as described
in section 6.2.
Let’s say an individual would encounter the example narrative from section 1.1 on Twitter
as seen in fig. 4.12 without CTSS browser extension installed. Compare that to fig. 4.13
that shows an overlay with links to related documents categorized by either their support
or opposition to the narrative.
Figure 4.12: Example narrative on Twitter without CTSS10
10The original tweet is no longer available as the tweet was later removed by Eric Tucker. This figure has
been obtained using Internet Archive.
46
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.13: Example narrative on Twitter with CTSS. As compared to fig. 4.12, there is
an icon next to the tweet. The little number in it indicates how many related documents are
available. After clicking the icon, an overlay appears containing links to these related doc­
uments categorized by either their support or opposition to the narrative. It also contains
a link to the CTSS website, particularly a credibility graph for this narrative.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
47
==PAGE:54==
Listing these related documents already sets a stage for encouraging critical thinking. By
following the ”See the full picture” link a new page would appear with a credibility graph
for this particular narrative as shown in fig. 4.14.
Figure 4.14: Credibility graph for example narrative (section 1.1) with credibility propaga­
tion turned off (note the switch in the top left corner).
At first a simplified view of the credibility graph is shown which does not involve the credi­
bilities. This view is useful for providing an overview of the narrative enhancing the mere
list of related documents from fig. 4.13 but without other unnecessary information. The
credibility propagation can be turned on and the view transforms to that of fig. 4.15.
This view causes the following changes:
• The credibility value is shown next to a node description.
• Statement credibility can change. Since statement is a node of the greatest interest,
it is suitable to highlight the changing credibility value, e.g. by changing its back­
ground color. A red to green color gradient is chosen since (1) it is big enough to
notice relatively small change in the value and (2) the statement denotes either the
opposition or the support for which the most suitable colors seem to be red and
green, respectively. Note that by default (i.e. using RGB color model) such a color
gradient would create a brown color as the middle value. On the other hand, HSL
color model creates a gradient going through a yellow color and is preferable choice.
See fig. 4.16 for comparison.
• The rules get activated and start to affect the calculation of the credibilities for all
of the nodes in the credibility graph as explained in section 4.3. This means that
the Exclusion rule comes into effect. A cyan­to­gray color gradient is applied to a
document background color based on whether it is excluded or not, or the amount
48
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.15: Credibility graph for example narrative with credibility propagation turned on
(note the change on the switch in the top left corner).
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
49
==PAGE:56==
by which it is affected by an excluded document. For example, fig. 4.15 shows a
fully excluded gray  document ”(Excluded) Anti­Trump protestors are not organic”,
four half­excluded half­gray­half­cyan  documents, one of which is ”(0.188) Paid
Agitators” and four cyan  unaffected documents, one of which is ”(0.475) I did not
see loading or unloading”.
• The excluded documents have the ingoing and outgoing edges also changed to a
gray color.
• All of the above is added for explanation to the legend.
• Finally, a desired outcome element with an associated interactive slider appears
in the bottom right corner. This can be used by the user to indicate their desired
outcome for this narrative which is then used in the consideration of cognitive bias
as explained in section 4.4. Until a user explicitly sets a desired outcome on the
slider for the narrative, the value follows that of the statement’s credibility.
(a) RGB red to green gradient
(b) HSL red to green gradient
Figure 4.16: RGB vs. HSL color gradients
In this view it also becomes possible to click on the individual nodes which makes them
active. Figure 4.17 shows an example where the publisher node ”Snopes” is clicked and
activated.
An active node becomes highlighted by a blue  outline and the associated attribute
and rule nodes affecting its credibility are shown. A legend is expanded to explain these
attribute and rule nodes. A strength of a rule can be changed by moving the knob on the
associated slider. An example of this is shown on fig. 4.18.
The value of the Reliable Fact Checker rule is changed from +0.6 to +0.2 which causes
the following:
• The proportion of background that is dark gray in the diamond shape used for the
Reliable Fact Checker rule is changed to the new proportion, i.e. in this case from
60% to 20%.
• Snopes’s credibility decreases according to eq. (4.3) from 0.65 to 0.55. All changes
to the credibility are temporarily highlighted by a bold font.
• Change to Snopes’s credibility affects the credibility of the connected document
which according to eq. (4.8) decreases from 0.575 to 0.525.
• This decrease of credibility of an opposing document positively affects the credibility
of the statement which according to eq. (4.10) increases from 0.376 to 0.38.
• The value of the desired outcome follows that of the statement’s credibility and there­
fore also changes to 0.38.
Let’s say that in this hypothetical usage scenario, the user really does not believe the
statement and wants to decrease its credibility a lot. This user is of the opinion that the
situation captured in fig. 4.8 should affect the credibility of the related documents much
more. They click on one of the documents having a relation to the excluded documented
50
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.17: Snopes publisher node is activated by a mouse click in the credibility graph
which activates the documents and results in fig. 4.19.
The document is highlighted as previously by a blue  outline and the associated rule
”Credit Excluded Documents” is shown. This document does not have any associated
attribute so none is shown. A strength of this rule is again changed on the associated
slider which is shown on fig. 4.20.
The value of the Credit Excluded Documents rule is changed from +0.5 to +0.2 which
causes the following:
• The proportion of background that is dark gray in the diamond shape used for the
Credit Excluded Documents rule is changed to the new proportion, i.e. in this case
from 50% to 20%.
• Credibility of all four documents decreases according to eq. (4.8) by a relative de­
crease of 60% in every case which corresponds to the 60% decrease in the rule
strength. All changes to the credibility are temporarily highlighted by a bold font.
• This decrease of credibility of the supporting documents negatively affects the cred­
ibility of the statement which according to eq. (4.10) decreases from 0.38 to 0.299.
This also affects the background color which changes from orange  to red  .
• The value of the desired outcome follows that of the statement’s credibility and there­
fore also changes to 0.299. The text also changes from just ”Oppose” to ”Strongly
oppose” and its color changes in accordance to the statement’s background color.
In such a way, the credibility of the statement was changed from the initial 0.376 to the
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
51
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.18: Reliable Fact Checker rule associated with Snopes is changed
current 0.299. It is assumed that these actions a user does are done with a serious intent
and represent how this user believes the rules should be set. As such, the credibility of a
statement is taken as the desired outcome for this narrative and is stored11 for the user.
Let’s now suppose that the same user would use CTSS for other narratives. It is then
meaningful to show an overview of narratives the user showed an interest in comparing
current and desired outcomes. An example of such an overview with six narratives is
shown in fig. 4.21. Each row has a narrative summarized by its statement, its desired out­
come which is the credibility value that has been stored after the user first encountered
the narrative in CTSS, its current outcome, i.e. the credibility of the statement calculated
based on the current settings of the rules, and finally a status based on comparing these
two values. Three of the narratives are reported with an ”OK” status having a green back­
ground which means that the desired and current outcome do not differ by much — these
narratives in the example differ by a maximum of 0.01 point. Two narratives have an
orange status, signifying a warning. The status message for these two narratives is differ­
ent, the first one reading ”Weaker Than Desired” and the second being ”Stronger Than
Desired”. Looking at the desired and current outcome columns, the first narratives has a
desired outcome that is smaller than the current outcome by 0.38 −0.3 = 0.08. So in this
case the current outcome is weaker than the desired outcome, therefore the status mes­
sage. The case is reversed for the second narrative where the desired outcome is bigger
than the current outcome by 0.4 −0.33 = 0.07 so the current outcome is stronger than
desired and thus the status message. Lastly, the third narrative from the top has a red
11A user account would be needed for a long­term storage which is omitted as an uninteresting aspect of
the system.
52
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.19: The document ”(0.2) They found the buses” related to the original tweet
document ”(Excluded) Anti­Trump protestors are not organic” is activated
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.20: Credit Excluded Documents rule is changed
status, indicating a problem. Even though the difference between the desired outcome
and current outcome in this case is just 0.51 −0.45 = 0.06 which is a lower value than for
the just discussed orange narratives, the crucial difference here is that while the desired
outcome is smaller than 0.5 and therefore means an opposition to the statement, the cur­
rent outcome is bigger than 0.5 which means a support towards the statement. Because
of this difference, the status message is ”Different Than Desired”.
Figure 4.21: User’s narratives overview comparing current vs. desired outcome
Such an overview then shows to the user where the initially set desired outcome differs
from the currently calculated calculated credibility. The user then has an option to revisit
the narrative and do either:
54
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:61==
1. Change the rules such that the current outcome is closer to the desired outcome.
Note than when revisiting, the desired outcome value does not change anymore
in accordance to the current outcome. This only happens when encountering the
narrative for the first time when it is assumed that the reached value of a statement
also represents the desired outcome for the narrative.
2. Change their opinion about the narrative and change the value of the desired out­
come accordingly such that it is closer to the current outcome which can be done
through the slider in the bottom right corner as shown in fig. 4.22.
Figure 4.22: Change of desired outcome
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
55
==PAGE:62==
5
Implementation
The implementation focuses on a visualization prototype of credibility graph from section
section 4.3. It is implemented as a web application using JavaScript framework React and
a visualization library for the credibility graph visualization. It uses the example narrative
from section 1.1 and encodes it in a configuration file.
5.1
Credibility graph visualization
A Network component from vis.js library is used for the credibility graph visualization. It
offers a simple interface for network (graph) configuration with a support for the necessary
entity shapes and colors.
By default, it positions the nodes randomly when initialized and uses physics simulation
to position the nodes and edges and afterwards allows for a manual movement of the
nodes. This has the following undesired effects:
• when loaded, there is a few seconds of wild and disruptive movement until the nodes
and edges stabilize
• when refreshed, since the initialization is random, a different result is obtained
• the stabilized results are of questionable legibility oftentimes requiring a lot of manual
adjustments.
For this reason, the positions of the individual nodes are hardcoded in the configuration
file.
Using the vis.js library provides a simple and efficient way to approximate the desired
solution presented in chapter 4. However, some things are clumsy and to satisfy certain
requirements it would require similarly clumsy and hacky solutions, if it would be possible
to satisfy them in some way in the first place. For this reason, an alternative and probably
highly customized solution for credibility graph visualization would be superior. Such a
solution should solve the general problem of positioning nodes to provide a compact yet
legible results.
5.2
Configuration file
The configuration file stores both the credibility graph of a narrative as well as the rules
affecting credibility propagation. A JSON5 format is used which is a more flexible and
forgiving format, as evidenced in [78], superior to JSON when it comes to the configuration
use case JSON is often used for.
The format of the file is shown in listing 5.1 with example values and clarifying comments.
Ellipsis (…) is used when the same key was already defined and its value is the same as
before or for next values in a list.
{
nodes: {
statement: { // there is only a single statement
summary: 'Anti-Trump Protesters Bused Into Austin',
id: 'statement node', // unique value across nodes
position: { // hardcodes the position on the vis.js canvas
x: 0,
y: 0,
56
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:63==
},
},
documents: [ // there can be multiple documents , authors and publishers
{
title: 'Protesters not as organic as they seem',
id: ...,
timestamp: '2022-01-21T12:47:02Z', // ISO 8601 date and time in UTC
position: ...,
deleted: true, // bool or timestamp of deletion if known
other: { // for other data, used only to show it in an overlay
sources: [ // for multiple links, e.g. the original and archived
'https://example.com/tweet',
'https://example.com/archived -tweet'
],
times-shared: {
facebook: 350000,
twitter: 16000,
},
followers -at-time: {
twitter: 40,
},
},
},
...
],
authors: [
{
name: 'Eric Tucker',
id: ...,
position: ...,
// names correspond to rules
// attributes seen in the rest of thesis used as example
// value in range [0,1], 0 value attributes can be omitted
attributes: {
relevance: 0,
reliable -fact-checker: 0,
false-information -source: 0,
initiatives -against -false-information: 0,
},
other: {
age: 35,
job: 'Co-founder of marketing company',
context: [ // any other relevant context
'I am just a private citizen with tiny Twitter following',
],
},
},
...
],
publishers: [
{
name: ...,
id: ...,
attributes: ...,
position: ...,
other: {
homepage: 'https://example.com/publisher -homepage',
context: ...,
},
},
...
],
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
57
==PAGE:64==
},
edges: [
{
from: 'node ID',
to: 'node ID',
type: 'neutral', // or 'oppose', 'support' or 'other'
},
...
],
rules: { // collection of all attributes used in nodes
relevance: {
type: 'positive' // or 'negative'
strength: 0.5 // value in range [0,1]
},
reliable -fact-checker: ...,
false-information -source: ...,
initiatives -against -false-information: ...,
}
}
Listing 5.1: Configuration file format
5.3
User experience simplifications
Certain simplifications affecting the user experience were made. Due to limitations and
unfamiliarity of the vis.js library, the interactivity and resulting user­friendliness envisioned
in chapter 4 is replaced by a workaround.
First, an editable text area containing the full configuration file is relied upon. Since the
configuration file contains the rules it is possible to edit the value there instead of interact­
ing with more user­friendly sliders.
Second, the interactive element where it is possible to click on a node and attributes and
rules affecting it appear is also not included. It is, however, quite easy to see the attributes
(and with it the namesake rules) in the aforementioned text area.
58
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:65==
6
Evaluation
6.1
Verification
The main components necessary to support critical thinking (RQ1) is a relevant domain
model having consequences for the data needed (RQ2) and the associated perspective
used for looking at the problem that has consequences for the way of communicating
and encouraging people in informed critical thinking (RQ3). These guide development of
components needed further. The domain model used for development of credibility graph
is derived from general observations of the information landscape from the perspective
of credibility which is just one of the possible perspectives to consider for the problem at
hand [79]. Still, the information landscape being as complex as it is where all kinds of
aspects can affect the perceived credibility, certain simplifications in the domain model
are in order. As such, the domain model attempts to capture the most relevant elements
affecting perception of credibility. At the same time, the domain model is intentionally
flexible by allowing addition of ad hoc relations and attributes to those elements.
The domain model provides basic guidance for development of the data collection pipeline
component and the credibility perspective leads to credibility graph component that can
show the domain model entities together with their credibility in a meaningful way.
The ideas proposed for the data collection pipeline are not verified neither for its utility nor
feasibility and only provide a rough outline for solving this major task which would itself
be deserving of a separate thesis. Through the encountered research a few unique ideas
for often disregarded metadata helpful in establishing credibility are given.
The amorphous context from the domain model affecting the credibility is realized through
attributes and rules which deterministically govern the credibility propagation in a credibil­
ity graph. The outlined mathematical modelling for this credibility propagation is limited by
considering only linear functions for the rule propagation and using average or maximum
aggregation functions. This could be expanded to other functions but this would at the
same time affect the user friendliness, both for the end users as well as the collaborators
contributing and maintaining such a system.
From the general observations made which derived the domain model it is not possible
to conclusively state that it would be possible to model any narrative, apply the relevant
beliefs in form of rules and see a reasonable and expected outcome while ensuring the
tool would not contradict itself at a certain point. A specific case proving such contradiction
and showing the possible workaround is overly elaborate would need to be shown which
would require further work. The functionality and the ad hoc rules and attributes derived
throughout the thesis were mainly thought of in the context of the narrative example from
section 1.1 that guided development of most of the ideas presented in the thesis. As
such, the proposed solution was shown to apply well to this situation, which is however
not generalizable to other narratives.
6.2
Validation
Fulfillment of the stated objective of the proposed solution was validated through qualita­
tive interviews.
The qualitative interview guided the interviewees and largely followed section 4.6, i.e.
the imagined usage flow, which itself relies yet again on the narrative example from sec­
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
59
==PAGE:66==
tion 1.1. The interview process is described in the following list, where each step explains
what was introduced and shown to the interviewee, what questions were asked (optionally
a reason is given for why the question is asked) and lastly, in the case the interviewee
missed something and it is important for the rest of the interview to proceed from a com­
mon point, further explanation filling in the missing information is provided.
1. Introduction
• Introduced: General introduction of the topic, the approach and intended audi­
ence with the following snippet: ”The topic of the thesis has to do with what you
might have heard being talked about as fake news, mis­ and dis­information,
propaganda, myths, urban legends and definitely many other similar terms. I
will refer to these as false information. It is a topic we have heard much more
about in the last 6 years, that is since the 2016 Brexit referendum and US
elections. It is also a topic that affects all of us personally to a different degree.
Nowadays, everyone gets subjected to false information and it is easy to not re­
alize this and believe it. It is neither a problem where smart people necessary
excel at avoiding believing false information. Nevertheless, there are many
people, for example on the political fringe, that maybe because of their identity,
maybe because of the people and community they associate with, hold some
extreme beliefs. These are people that are not considered and not the focus
of the proposed solution. The proposed solution for addressing the problem
of false information is intended to help reasonable open­minded people that
can be argued with, that respect the truth and that do not construct their own
alternative reality with informed critical thinking. I would like you to keep this in
mind while answering the questions and evaluating the proposed solution.”
2. Twitter post
• Introduced: Screenshot of the original tweet from Eric Tucker is shown (fig. 4.12.
It is explained that this tweet is from November 9, 2016, a day after the US elec­
tions between Trump and Clinton, when massive protests erupted across the
United States against the election of Trump.
• Questions: Can you give a basic summary of what you see? (Asked to estab­
lish a common understanding)
• Explanation: The tweet allegedly shows a photo of buses that transported paid
protesters to protest Trump being elected a president. That would mean the
protests are mainly artificially organized (paid for) and the general population
is not really upset as compared to the protests naturally (organically) occurring
and people being upset about the election.
3. Twitter post with CTSS browser extension
• Introduced: An edited version of the previous screenshot with the CTSS over­
lay is shown (fig. 4.13).
• Questions: What does it show? Does this help you to get a more accurate
picture of the situation? Why so or why not?
• Explanation: It shows related articles in two categories, one supporting the
statement and the other opposing it, and a ”See the full picture” link.
4. Credibility graph introduced
60
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:67==
• Introduced: ”See the full picture” link from the CTSS overlay is followed and a
credibility graph for that narrative, first without the credibility propagation turned
on, is shown (fig. 4.14).
• Questions: Can you have a look and explain what you see? Does this give
you any more information than the previous view? Is there anything interac­
tive? What do you think happens when the switch is flicked and credibility
propagation turned on?
• Explanation: The interviewee is made aware of a legend in the bottom left.
There is a statement at the center, documents, publishers and authors. The
statement is meant to summarize the narrative. These are connected with
arrows of different colors with different meanings: support, oppose, neutral
and other relations. The other relation dashed line in this case indicates a
dependency where the linked documents rely on the original tweet. There is
also a switch in the top left corner with a description credibility propagation.
5. Credibility propagation mode turned on
• Introduced: The credibility propagation mode is turned on through the switch
and the view changes (fig. 4.15).
• Questions: What has changed compared to the previous view? What do you
think the numbers mean? Which number is of the most interest? Is there
anything interactive (apart from the switch)?
• Explanation: Numbers to the left of all the descriptions are shown. These rep­
resent the credibility. These credibilities propagate from the author and pub­
lishers to the documents and to the statement. The most important number is
that of the statement. The statement changes color to orange. One of the doc­
uments and arrows going into it and out of it are gray. The reason for why the
document is grayed out is explained (exclusion rule). Finally, the desired out­
come in the bottom right appears that mimics the credibility of the statement.
The interviewee should wonder about how are these values calculated. An
example of this is shown next.
6. Snopes’ attributes and rules
• Introduced: The Snopes node is clicked on and activated (fig. 4.17). What is
Snopes is explained.
• Questions: What has changed compared to the previous view? Can you ex­
plain what you see? What do you think is the meaning of these attributes and
rules? Is there anything interactive? What do you think happens when we
change the value on the slider?
• Explanation: Two additional nodes connected to Snopes appear. The legend
is extended with explanations for these nodes. An attribute is something that
characterizes that particular node so the attribute here says that Snopes is a
fact checker and since the maximum value that can be possibly set for this
attribute is 0.5, indicated by the light gray color, the value 0.25 indicates we
consider Snopes to be a sort of reliable fact checker. This attribute is also
unchangeable and where does it come from will be discussed at the end. The
rule is interactive and you as a user can change it. It indicates how important for
you personally is the fact that a publisher in this case, is a fact checker. This
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
61
==PAGE:68==
allows you to modify the credibility of the different nodes that then spreads
through the rest of the structure as indicated by the arrows.
7. Changing a rule affecting single publisher
• Introduced: The slider value is changed from 0.6 to 0.2 (fig. 4.18).
• Questions: What has changed compared to the previous view? Do the changes
in the credibility values make sense to you? What do you think of the change in
the statement credibility (+0.004) based on the change of the rule (­0.4)? Is it
interesting and useful to you that you can change this value and see the result?
• Explanation: The credibility of Snopes decreased from 0.65 to 0.55, the credi­
bility of document ”Anti­Trump Protesters Bused Into Austin, Chicago (Snopes
­ False)” decreased from 0.575 to 0.525 and the credibility of the statement
increased from 0.376 to 0.38. With the last change, the value for the desired
outcome also changed. The basic idea about the calculations and why the
values changed in a way that they did is explained.
8. Document’s rules
• Introduced: The document ”They found the buses” related to ”Free Republic”
is clicked on fig. 4.19.
• Questions: What has changed compared to the previous view? What do you
think is the meaning of the rule? What is the rule connected to? Can you
identify why is it connected exactly to these four documents? Does it make
sense to you? What do you think happens when we change the value on the
slider?
• Explanation: A ”Credit Excluded Documents” rule appears. Since it is a rule,
it can be changed via the slider appearing next to it. It has four arrows pointing
to documents that are all connected with the dashed arrow to the ”(Excluded)
Anti­Trump protesters are not organic” original document. At different points
in the interview, but at latest in this step, an explanation was given as for the
reason why one of the documents (the original tweet) is excluded and grayed
out.
9. Changing a rule affecting multiple documents
• Introduced: The slider value is changed from 0.5 to 0.2 (fig. 4.20).
• Questions: What has changed compared to the previous view? Do the changes
in the credibility values make sense to you? What do you think of the change
in the statement credibility (­0.081) based on the changed of the rule (­0.3)?
Is it interesting and useful to you that you can change this value and see the
result?
• Explanation: Credibility of the four documents connected to the rule decreases
by 60%, which correspond to our change from 0.5 to 0.2. This also decreases
the credibility of the statement from 0.38 to 0.299 and changes the background
of the statement from orange to red. With the last change, the value for the de­
sired outcome also changed and the text changed from ”Oppose” to ”Strongly
oppose” and it also changed its color from orange to red.
10. Overview of narratives
62
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:69==
• Introduced: Describe the usage scenario where an interviewee uses this on
other narratives as well and can get an overview of the narratives they showed
an interest in (fig. 4.21).
• Questions: What do you think of such an overview? Do you understand the
difference between the current and desired outcome? Does the reported status
make sense to you? Is such an overview useful? Does it make sense that the
rules apply across other narratives with the same strength?
• Explanation: First of all, when setting rules, a rule applies with the same
strength in all other narratives where it fits the situation that it was made for.
For example, the reliable fact checker rule we have seen would apply with the
same strength in other narratives when a fact checker source, which could be
a different one than Snopes, is involved. So when a user encounters another
narrative and sets the rules in accordance to their own conclusion, some of
these rules might be present and apply in other narratives the user has already
gone through and therefore changing the outcome there as well.
The overview is an example where seven narratives are shown, each in its
own row. Each row then has the statement of the narrative, currently calcu­
lated credibility of the statement, the desired outcome which is the credibility
that the statement reached when encountered for the first time and which can
also be explicitly changed (fig. 4.22), and finally a status for the narrative com­
paring the current and the desired outcome. When the difference between the
two values is not too big, it is reported as ”OK” with green background. When
both of the values still lean towards the same conclusion, either support or op­
pose, and the difference between the two values is lower than 0.1, it is reported
as a warning with orange background and a relevant text. Finally, when the dif­
ference between the two values it bigger than 0.1 or when the two values differ
in the stance they lean towards, e.g. one leaning support and the other leaning
oppose, this is reported as a problem with a red background.
11. Collaborative aspect
• Introduced: It was previously mentioned that the attributes are set to some
value unchangeable by the user. The idea behind how all this works is that it is
a collaborative Wikipedia­like project where it is the collaborators that not only
create and assign the attributes to authors and publisher and who discuss and
decide what specific value it should take, but also contribute the narratives, with
their documents, authors and publishers, and with the different relationships
between them, as well as create the rules and program their behavior. It is
directly likened to how collaboration works on Wikipedia where Wikipedians
discuss articles and other contributions on Talk pages.
• Questions: What do you think of such a collaborative approach to solve this
problem? What are the pros and cons? Would you be comfortable using such
a system knowing it is maintained by a community of ordinary people or this a
problem requiring a different solution than that of Wikipedia?
12. General evaluation and grading
• Questions: In general, what do you think of the system? How useful would
it be in your everyday life? What do you like and dislike? What would be
your suggestions for improvement? Finally, how would you grade the proposed
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
63
==PAGE:70==
solution on a scale from 0 to 10, 10 being the best?
In total, five interviews were conducted and evaluated. The interviewees were author’s
friends and colleagues from work. Given the time window available, having a bigger and
randomized sample size was not feasible.
The interviews are discussed in the following list which references the interview steps from
above. The interviewee’s answers are summarized and commented.
2. Some interviewees had a problem understanding the tweet and the underlying claim
it makes. After clarification from the interviewer, everyone was able to summarize
the claim correctly. The degree of misunderstanding could have been decreased by
using a more recent topic which is also more close to European audience.
3. All except one interviewees were able to recognize what the overlay shows. All
agreed that having this additional contextual information is better than not having
it. Two specifically mentioned they would be curious to click and read the opposing
information.
4. Two interviewees had no problem recognizing what is shown and were able to de­
scribe everything of interest. Others described the credibility graph and rest of the
interface only partially. When asked about a possible improvement for better un­
derstanding, some stated they are ”just not used looking at such things” and that
it would be better if they ”could investigate it interactively” expecting additional ex­
planations provided when elements are clicked or hovered. Everyone recognized
more information is given than in the previous view but uncertainty was expressed
about its utility. Everyone also recognized the credibility propagation switch is an
interactive element (some needed to be nudged to pay attention to top left corner).
5. By having the two figures next to each other, everyone was able to tell the differ­
ences. As for the meaning of the numbers, one did not know at all and the rest
said ”it has something to do with credibility”. After encouraging everyone to have
a look at the legend, some intuitive explanations for what the number means were
given. One interviewee guessed the number ”measures the proportion of previous
articles that turned out to be correct”. Two interviewees did not have an idea about
how the number was reached but they expressed an interest to find out more, one
specifically mentioned ”by clicking or hovering it”. All except one recognized the
credibility value of statement is the most important. One stated that ”it is helpful to
see the conclusion by color” and that they ”immediately knew what to think of the
issue”. On the one hand, it is encouraging to see the interest to form an informed
conclusion, on the other hand, this is a sign of overconfidence in the tool itself which
goes against the main purpose of aiding informed critical thinking. As for interactive
elements, few guessed that interacting with the elements might give them additional
information about how was its credibility reached and everyone noticed the desired
outcome slider in the bottom right corner.
6. Almost everyone complained about the attribute and rule element to be overly com­
plicated with how it shows the value with the proportionate color fills. No one was
able to accurately explain the meaning of attributes and rules, although everyone
understood that attribute is immutable and rule is mutable through the slider. Only
two understood that rule could be positive or negative. Another interviewee thought
that one rule can be both positive and negative, depending on the value chosen on
the slider. After explaining the attributes and rules more thoroughly, three intervie­
wees got a good understanding of its meaning but said they would never be able
64
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:71==
to understand it just from the legend, two were still unsure, especially about the
meaning of a rule.
7. Everyone was able to find the differences by comparing the two figures, understood
why it changed all the values that it did and also why it increased the credibility of
the claim as a response to decreasing importance of fact checkers. No one men­
tioned anything about the magnitude of the change. Some interviewees stated it is
interesting to be able to change the value and see the response. Some started to
express a concern that this would lead to certain people setting the parameters such
that it shows what they want and disregarding any connection to how they actually
think about it.
8. All interviewees recognized the active document that was clicked and that a rule
appeared next to it. No one but one was able to express what it means except that
it would affect credibility of the documents when changed. One interviewee saw
a connection to the excluded document right away and was also able to connect
that the rule points to those documents which are related to the excluded document.
Others found the connection when more context was explained and when explicitly
asked about it. In the end everyone understood the meaning of the rule, correctly
predicted what would happen when the rule is changed and were also able to ex­
plain why it would happen. However, interviewees reiterated that only the additional
explanation made it clear to them and not anything from the figure itself.
9. As mentioned in the previous point, everyone already accurately predicted the be­
havior and the change made sense to them. Two noted a difference in what the
desired outcome said. Other two explicitly mentioned the difference in magnitude
of the change that it caused as compared to changing the first rule and were more
satisfied with a comparatively bigger change.
10. Two did not understand what the overview showed and what the outcome and sta­
tus columns meant. The remaining three made the connection and were able to
correctly describe what current and desired outcome referred to. Two of them also
guessed correctly that the status refers to the difference between the current and
desired outcome. Four interviewees said they understood the overview after the ex­
planation as well as its utility and agreed it is a good idea to have such an overview.
Although the last one understood what the overview showed, they did not see any
value in it. One interviewee also expressed confusion with the rules applying to
other narratives with the same strength stating that ”in different situations, different
context applies so I would expect to be able to change the rules individually”.
11. No one expressed any deep concern or that they would prefer a different approach.
Everyone agreed that ”two heads are better than one” as the proverb goes and that
such an approach is more in line with such thinking. Two expressed that ”if it works
for Wikipedia, why couldn’t it work for something else”. The fact that anyone can join
in was positively mentioned by one interviewee. The concerns that were expressed
had to do with potential abuse which go in line with the expectations outlined in
section 4.5.1.
12. Everyone expressed an interest in such a solution, notable quote is ”I’m surprised
such a thing doesn’t already exist and isn’t in wide use”. Two interviewees expressed
their frustration of not knowing what and who to trust and said they would welcome
such a solution that would help them in this. There was a split between the intervie­
wees in terms of appreciating the utility of being able to change the rules themselves.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
65
==PAGE:72==
One side said they would not use it and do not see any value in it and would rely
solely on the community setting the default outcome in such a way that represents
an average opinion on the narrative. The other side expressed an interest since
it would allow them to set their own preferences and also understand the thought
process of others assuming it would be possible to share a narrative with their set­
tings. At the same time, this side appreciated it would be of value to be able to
have access and link to the ”default” or ”average” evaluation of a narrative in the
case where one would try to disseminate neutral information. Everyone disliked the
view of credibility graph with credibility propagation mode disabled and said that ”it
doesn’t show anything interesting”.
As for the final question about grading, as previously mentioned, all of the intervie­
wees have a direct relationship with the interviewer and author of the thesis which
introduces bias. When the final question for grading the proposed solutions was
asked, interviewees were encouraged to judge it objectively and disregard the ex­
isting relationship. Even so, this intervention does not eliminate the bias. With that
said, based on a sample size of five interviewees, the proposed solution attained an
average rating of 7.8.
On balance, the interviewees liked the idea when they understood it. However, this un­
derstanding presents a challenge since the individual ideas and building blocks had to be
thoroughly explained before a satisfactory understanding was attained and the tool itself
was not intuitive and self­evident. The interviewees only had the patience to understand
the solution since they were in the artificial setting of an interview instead of in their ev­
eryday life. It remains an open question as to what would improve an understanding in a
natural setting.
Another major concern is that some interviewees thought of the proposed solution as a
shortcut to getting a quick conclusion instead of something that should encourage their
critical thinking. This goes against the fundamental objective of the solution. Thus, it
seems that while users of such system would end up being more accurately informed
about narratives, it would not necessarily increase the time and effort spent on critical
thinking for everyone.
As such, usage of the proposed solution as shown in section 4.6 involving a browser
extension and visualization of credibility graph offers only partial answer to RQ3 (”What
is an effective way to aid people in informed critical thinking?”). While the tool makes
it easier to start the process of critical thinking for those already inclined towards such
activity, it does not seem to encourage it for others.
6.3
Limitation
The proposed solution looks at the problem of false information from a standpoint of cred­
ibility only considering legal person entities and not considering the content. A document
could be anonymous, i.e. both author and publisher unknown, but contain good substan­
tiated arguments. Additionally, since the solution involves subjectivity, these arguments
would not necessarily have to be good and substantiated, and just play into biases of a
user who might like them and therefore consider such document highly impactful to their
perception of a narrative. Looking at the problem of subjectivity and false information
from a standpoint of logically sound argumentation is not considered and leaves many
narratives unresolved.
Even if the proposed solution is implemented as conceptualized it does not change the
fact that the task of aiding critical thinking remains difficult. Although the tool can certainly
66
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:73==
Criteria
Considered? Explanation
Social
consensus:
Do others believe it?
No
Not considered at any point directly.
Support:
Is
there
much supporting evi­
dence?
Partially
Considered through the relations possible in a
credibility graph. However, this relies on the cred­
ibility graph being accurate and the proposed so­
lution does not in any way propose how to ensure
this condition.
Consistency:
Is it
compatible with what
I believe?
Partially
Considered through the constraints put on the rule
parameter space which can then inform about in­
compatible beliefs.
However, it was not proved
that these rules can model compatibility flawlessly.
Coherence: Does it
tell a good story?
No
Not considered since, as mentioned previously, the
proposed solution does consider and analyze the
content itself for logical coherence.
Credibility:
Does it
come from a credible
source?
Yes
The proposed solution is built mainly around this
consideration and is its main focus.
Table 6.1: Consideration of five criteria people use for judging truth. Criteria names and
their descriptions are taken directly from [79, p. 87]. See section 6.4 for discussion of
future work to improve the coverage of these five criteria.
be helpful in explicitly showing refutation of certain evidence crucial to certain incoherent
beliefs, it is an open question whether this would help with belief revision:
“Once formed,” the researchers observed dryly, “impressions are remarkably
perseverant.”
…Even after the evidence “for their beliefs has been totally
refuted, people fail to make appropriate revisions in those beliefs,” the re­
searchers noted. ([27])
From a psychological standpoint, considering the five criteria people use for judging truth
identified in [79] the proposed solution only considers some as can be seen in table 6.1.
6.4
Future work
During the qualitative interviews, given the state of the implemented prototype, it was not
feasible to test the tool itself. It would be interesting to see whether the largely positive
evaluation of the solution persist while using the actual tool instead of partially imagining
its functionality from wireframes. A possible idea for future work is to implement a mature
prototype which could be used exactly as proposed in section 4.6 and subject it to a further
validation. It also turned out that the selection of a six year old American narrative for
European audience was not a great fit as European audience is not necessarily interested
in and aware of American issues. The solution should then be validated on a more relevant
narrative.
A few interesting ideas were brought up as part of the qualitative interviews. One intervie­
wee expressed an interest in being able to share their views (using their setting of rules)
on the narrative with others as well as being able to see the views of others. This social
aspect is no doubt interesting to consider as it directly relates to encouraging discussion
which by extension could lead to more critical thinking.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
67
==PAGE:74==
As summarized in table 6.1, since the proposed solution looked at the problem of false
information only from the perspective of credibility, other considerations were left intact
and in the best only accidentally partially addressed. It would be interesting to consider
further possibilities for improvements through the other considerations.
Let’s briefly consider what would a look from the coherence perspective mean. This would
involve analyzing the content through a formal logic which would bring with it many com­
plications. Nevertheless, even a partial chain of logically proved reasoning could be an
interesting addition. Considering such an addition from the perspective of the established
framework, such addition could contribute to its credibility through an attribute for its logi­
cal soundness.
Considering the consistency criteria which is considered in this thesis through the devel­
opment of an argument about rules constraining the space of acceptable parameters, it
would be interesting to go in more depth and see what improvements could be brought
by considering a more flexible non­linear functions for the rules.
68
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:75==
7
Conclusion
The complexity and the sheer magnitude of the researched problem offer various ap­
proaches for addressing it. After initial considerations of other approaches not discussed
in the thesis, the selected approach was chosen for its virtues of transparency, unassertive­
ness in stipulating truth and mass collaboration.
Based on the largely positive evaluation from the qualitative interviews, the approach
seems promising. The most worthwhile next step regarding future work seems to be fur­
ther validation of the solution on a mature prototype that would be in line with the proposed
design and user flow, which would model a more recent narrative more relevant for the
test audience (European audience is not as aware of American issues).
The thesis also develops an argument for addressing the interesting problem of cognitive
biases through technological solution whereby the more egregious of cognitive biases
that would often be associated with incoherent thinking could be uncovered.
Although imperfect in many aspects, this work represents a solid attempt to address the
problem of false information in a unique way. The most encouraging finding from the
interviewees worth wrapping up with is based on paraphrasing the unanimously asked
rhetorical question ”how does this not exist already?”.
.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
69
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
[1]
Full Fact. (Apr. 2020). “The Full Fact Report 2020 ­ Fighting the causes and conse­
quences of bad information.” From: https://web.archive.org/web/20210616040905/
https://fullfact.org/blog/2020/apr/full-fact-report-2020/.
[2]
——, (Aug. 2019). “The cabbage myth returns: EU cabbage regulations don’t have
26,911 words.”
[3]
Snopes. (Mar. 2001). “Are Government Regulations for Cabbage 27,000 Words
Long?”
[4]
M. T. Bastos and D. Mercea, “The Brexit Botnet and User­Generated Hyperpartisan
News,” Social Science Computer Review, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 38–54, 2019. DOI:
10.1177/0894439317734157.
[5]
H. Allcott and M. Gentzkow, “Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 211–36, May 2017. DOI: 10.
1257/jep.31.2.211.
[6]
S. Kogan, T. Moskowitz, and M. Niessner, “Fake News: Evidence from Financial
Markets,” SSRN Electronic Journal, Jan. 2018. DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.3237763.
[7]
C. Carvalho, N. Klagge, and E. Moench, “The persistent effects of a false news
shock,” Journal of Empirical Finance, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 597–615, 2011, ISSN: 0927­
5398. DOI: 10.1016/j.jempfin.2011.03.003.
[8]
S. Langlois, This day in history: Hacked AP tweet about White House explosions
triggers panic, https://www.marketwatch.com/story/this-day-in-history-hacked-ap-
tweet-about-white-house-explosions-triggers-panic-2018-04-23, Apr. 23, 2018.
[9]
M. Takayasu, K. Sato, Y. Sano, K. Yamada, W. Miura, and H. Takayasu, “Rumor Dif­
fusion and Convergence during the 3.11 Earthquake: A Twitter Case Study,” PLOS
ONE, vol. 10, pp. 1–18, Apr. 2015. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121443.
[10]
A. Gupta, H. Lamba, P. Kumaraguru, and A. Joshi, “Faking Sandy: Characterizing
and Identifying Fake Images on Twitter during Hurricane Sandy,” in Proceedings of
the 22nd International Conference on World Wide Web, ser. WWW ’13 Companion,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Association for Computing Machinery, 2013, pp. 729–736,
ISBN: 9781450320382. DOI: 10.1145/2487788.2488033.
[11]
A. Y. Chua, S.­M. Cheah, D. H.­L. Goh, and E.­P. Lim, Collective rumor correction
on the death hoax of a political figure in social media, https://aisel.aisnet.org/
pacis2016/178/, Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, 2016.
[12]
Wikipedia contributors, List of common misconceptions — Wikipedia, The Free
Encyclopedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_common_
misconceptions&oldid=1054322276, [Online; accessed 9­November­2021], 2021.
[13]
M. Fisher, J. W. Cox, and P. Hermann, Pizzagate: From rumor, to hashtag, to gunfire
in D.C. https://web.archive.org/web/20210405194518/https://www.washingtonpost.
com/local/pizzagate-from-rumor-to-hashtag-to-gunfire-in-dc/2016/12/06/4c7def50-
bbd4-11e6-94ac-3d324840106c_story.html, Dec. 6, 2016.
[14]
Wikipedia contributors, Pizzagate conspiracy theory — Wikipedia, The Free Ency­
clopedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pizzagate_conspiracy_theory&
oldid=1058537214, [Online; accessed 5­December­2021], 2021.
[15]
——, 2021 United States Capitol attack — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, https:
//en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=2021_United_States_Capitol_attack&oldid=
1058876651, [Online; accessed 6­December­2021], 2021.
70
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:77==
[16]
——, Don’t Look Up (2021 film) — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, https: //
en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Don%27t_Look_Up_(2021_film)&oldid=
1064842030, [Online; accessed 10­January­2022], 2022.
[17]
World Health Organization, Managing the COVID­19 infodemic: Promoting healthy
behaviours and mitigating the harm from misinformation and disinformation, https:
//www.who.int/news/item/23-09-2020-managing-the-covid-19-infodemic-promoting-
healthy-behaviours-and-mitigating-the-harm-from-misinformation-and-disinformation,
Sep. 23, 2020.
[18]
S. Loomba, A. de Figueiredo, S. J. Piatek, K. de Graaf, and H. J. Larson, “Measuring
the impact of COVID­19 vaccine misinformation on vaccination intent in the UK
and USA,” Nature Human Behaviour, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 337–348, Feb. 2021. DOI:
10.1038/s41562-021-01056-1. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-
021-01056-1.
[19]
K. Ognyanova, D. Lazer, R. E. Robertson, and C. Wilson, Misinformation in ac­
tion: Fake news exposure is linked to lower trust in media, higher trust in govern­
ment when your side is in power, https://misinforeview.hks.harvard.edu/article/
misinformation-in-action-fake-news-exposure-is-linked-to-lower-trust-in-media-higher-
trust-in-government-when-your-side-is-in-power/, Jun. 2, 2020.
[20]
G. Pennycook and D. G. Rand, “Lazy, not biased: Susceptibility to partisan fake
news is better explained by lack of reasoning than by motivated reasoning,” Cogni­
tion, vol. 188, pp. 39–50, 2019, The Cognitive Science of Political Thought, ISSN:
0010­0277. DOI: 10.1016/j.cognition.2018.06.011.
[21]
G. Pennycook, J. McPhetres, Y. Zhang, J. G. Lu, and D. G. Rand, “Fighting COVID­
19 Misinformation on Social Media: Experimental Evidence for a Scalable Accuracy­
Nudge Intervention,” Psychological Science, vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 770–780, 2020. DOI:
10.1177/0956797620939054.
[22]
J. Baldasty, Fake news and misinformation: Why teaching critical thinking is crucial
for democracy, https://www.washington.edu/provost/2018/04/23/fake-news-and-
misinformation- why- teaching- critical- thinking- is- crucial- for- democracy/, Apr. 23,
2018.
[23]
M. Ingram, Europe tries to fight hate, harassment, and fake news without killing free
speech, https://www.cjr.org/innovations/europe-youtube-facebook-free-speech.php,
2018.
[24]
W. Turvill, Quintopoly? Five tech companies now earn 46% of global ad revenues
as news media left behind, https://pressgazette.co.uk/global-advertising-spend-2020-
quintopoly/, 2021.
[25]
J. Dunn, The tech industry is dominated by 5 big companies — here’s how each
makes its money, https://www.businessinsider.com/how- google- apple- facebook-
amazon-microsoft-make-money-chart-2017-5, 2017.
[26]
B. Jackson, Is this a great job, or what? https://www.factcheck.org/2003/12/is-this-
a-great-job-or-what/, Dec. 5, 2003.
[27]
E. Kolbert, Why Facts Don’t Change Our Minds, https : / / www . newyorker . com /
magazine/2017/02/27/why-facts-dont-change-our-minds, Feb. 19, 2017.
[28]
E. Barker, This Is How To Change Someone’s Mind: 6 Secrets From Research,
https://www.bakadesuyo.com/2019/12/change-someones-mind/, Dec. 2019.
[29]
A. D. Holan, The Principles of the Truth­O­Meter: PolitiFact’s methodology for inde­
pendent fact­checking, https://www.politifact.com/article/2018/feb/12/principles-
truth-o-meter-politifacts-methodology-i/, 2018.
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
71
==PAGE:78==
[30]
G. Kessler, About The Fact Checker, https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/
2019/01/07/about-fact-checker/#:~:text=to%20the%20editors.-,The%20Pinocchio%
20Test,-Where%20possible%2C%20we, 2017.
[31]
C. Hallman, 50 Cognitive Biases to be Aware of so You Can be the Very Best Version
of You, https://www.titlemax.com/discovery-center/lifestyle/50-cognitive-biases-to-
be-aware-of-so-you-can-be-the-very-best-version-of-you/, 2020.
[32]
D. Evon, Anti­Trump Protesters Bused Into Austin, Chicago, https://www.snopes.
com/fact-check/anti-trump-protesters-bused-into-austin/, Nov. 11, 2016.
[33]
S. Maheshwari, How Fake News Goes Viral: A Case Study, https://www.nytimes.
com/2016/11/20/business/media/how-fake-news-spreads.html, Nov. 20, 2016.
[34]
S. Wineburg and S. McGrew, Evaluating information: The cornerstone of civic online
reasoning, https://purl.stanford.edu/fv751yt5934, 2016.
[35]
S. Vosoughi, D. Roy, and S. Aral, “The spread of true and false news online,” Sci­
ence, vol. 359, no. 6380, pp. 1146–1151, 2018. DOI: 10.1126/science.aap9559.
[36]
Full Fact, Africa Check, and Chequedo, Fact checking doesn’t work (the way you
think it does), https://fullfact.org/blog/2019/jun/how-fact-checking-works/, 2019.
[37]
D. Flamini, Most Republicans don’t trust fact­checkers, and most Americans don’t
trust the media, https://www.poynter.org/ifcn/2019/most-republicans-dont-trust-
fact-checkers-and-most-americans-dont-trust-the-media/, Jul. 3, 2019.
[38]
A. Tapia, The 20 Most Popular Podcasts in America Right Now, https : / / www .
newsweek.com/most- popular- podcasts- america- right- now- joe- rogan- daily- crime-
1650687, Nov. 28, 2021.
[39]
JRELibrary, Joe Rogan Experience Podcast Stats, https://jrelibrary.com/articles/
stats/, Dec. 31, 2021.
[40]
Wikipedia contributors, IOS version history — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=IOS_version_history&oldid=1062984387#
iOS_15_/_iPadOS_15, [Online; accessed 1­January­2022], 2021.
[41]
D. Funke, Should we stop saying ‘fake news’? https : / / www . poynter . org / fact -
checking/2017/should-we-stop-saying-fake-news/, Dec. 14, 2017.
[42]
European Commission and DG Connect, A multi­dimensional approach to disin­
formation : report of the independent High level Group on fake news and online
disinformation. Publications Office, 2018. DOI: doi/10.2759/0156.
[43]
A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design Science in Information Sys­
tems Research,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 75–105, 2004, ISSN: 02767783.
[Online]. Available: http://www.jstor.org/stable/25148625.
[44]
Wikipedia contributors, National Rifle Association — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclo­
pedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Rifle_Association&
oldid=1064542728, [Online; accessed 10­January­2022], 2022.
[45]
S. Wineburg and S. McGrew, “Lateral reading and the nature of expertise: Read­
ing less and learning more when evaluating digital information,” Teachers College
Record, vol. 121, no. 11, pp. 1–40, 2019. DOI: 10.1177/016146811912101102.
[46]
M. Babakar and W. Moy, The State of Automated Factchecking, https://fullfact.
org/media/uploads/full_fact-the_state_of_automated_factchecking_aug_2016.pdf,
From: https://fullfact.org/blog/2016/aug/automated-factchecking/, Aug. 17, 2016.
[47]
L. Konstantinovskiy, O. Price, M. Babakar, and A. Zubiaga, Towards Automated
Factchecking: Developing an Annotation Schema and Benchmark for Consistent
Automated Claim Detection, 2020. arXiv: 1809.08193 [cs.CL].
[48]
D. Flamini, 9 fact­checking lessons from Global Fact 6, https://www.poynter.org/
ifcn/2019/9-fact-checking-lessons-from-global-fact-6/, Jun. 21, 2019.
72
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:79==
[49]
X. Zhou and R. Zafarani, “A Survey of Fake News: Fundamental Theories, Detection
Methods, and Opportunities,” 2018. DOI: 10.1145/3395046. eprint: arXiv:1812.00315.
[50]
A. Hanselowski, C. Stab, C. Schulz, Z. Li, and I. Gurevych, A Richly Annotated
Corpus for Different Tasks in Automated Fact­Checking, https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.
01214, 2019.
[51]
K. Sharma, F. Qian, H. Jiang, N. Ruchansky, M. Zhang, and Y. Liu, “Combating Fake
News: A Survey on Identification and Mitigation Techniques,” CoRR, 2019. [Online].
Available: %5Curl%7Bhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1901.06437%7D.
[52]
Wikipedia contributors, NewsGuard — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, https:
//en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=NewsGuard&oldid=1064045102, [Online;
accessed 10­January­2022], 2022.
[53]
P. Mathur, Startups battle the spread of fake news surrounding the pandemic, https:
//pitchbook.com/news/articles/how-startups-are-battling-the-spread-of-fake-news-
during-the-pandemic, Apr. 6, 2020.
[54]
Merriam­Webster, Document, in Merriam­Webster.com dictionary. [Online]. Avail­
able: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/document (visited on 01/04/2022).
[55]
Lexico, Document, in Lexico.com dictionary, Oxford University Press. [Online]. Avail­
able: https://www.lexico.com/en/definition/document (visited on 01/04/2022).
[56]
——, Statement, in Lexico.com dictionary, Oxford University Press. [Online]. Avail­
able: https://www.lexico.com/en/definition/statement (visited on 01/04/2022).
[57]
Wikipedia contributors, Gossip magazine — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gossip_magazine&oldid=1059439233,
[Online; accessed 13­January­2022], 2021.
[58]
K. Finley, This News­Writing Bot Is Now Free for Everyone, https://www.wired.com/
2015/10/this-news-writing-bot-is-now-free-for-everyone/, 2015.
[59]
Wikipedia contributors, Medium (website) — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Medium_(website)&oldid=1062113822,
[Online; accessed 4­January­2022], 2021.
[60]
Twitter, COVID­19 misleading information policy, https://help.twitter.com/en/rules-
and-policies/medical-misinformation-policy, Dec. 2021.
[61]
Wikipedia contributors, Persistent identifier — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Persistent_identifier&oldid=1049039303,
[Online; accessed 4­January­2022], 2021.
[62]
S. Levin, Is Facebook a publisher? In public it says no, but in court it says yes,
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/jul/02/facebook-mark-zuckerberg-
platform-publisher-lawsuit, Jul. 3, 2018.
[63]
N. Clegg, Combating COVID­19 Misinformation Across Our Apps, https://about.fb.
com/news/2020/03/combating-covid-19-misinformation/, Mar. 25, 2020.
[64]
A. Selyukh, Feeling Sidelined By Mainstream Social Media, Far­Right Users Jump
To Gab, https://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2017/05/21/529005840/
feeling-sidelined-by-mainstream-social-media-far-right-users-jump-to-gab, May 21,
2017.
[65]
Lexico, Credibility, in Lexico.com dictionary, Oxford University Press. [Online]. Avail­
able: https://www.lexico.com/en/definition/credibility (visited on 01/04/2022).
[66]
E. Ferri, How to extract text from memes with Python, OpenCV and Tesseract OCR,
https://towardsdatascience.com/extract- text- from- memes- with- python- opencv-
tesseract-ocr-63c2ccd72b69, Dec. 9, 2020.
[67]
Q. Cheng, Q. Zhang, P. Fu, C. Tu, and S. Li, “A survey and analysis on automatic
image annotation,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 79, pp. 242–259, 2018, ISSN: 0031­
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
73
==PAGE:80==
3203. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2018.02.017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0031320318300670.
[68]
Wikipedia contributors, Automatic image annotation — Wikipedia, The Free Ency­
clopedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Automatic_image_annotation&
oldid=1022624316, [Online; accessed 8­January­2022], 2021.
[69]
D. Subramanian, Easy Speech­to­Text with Python, https : / / towardsdatascience .
com/easy-speech-to-text-with-python-3df0d973b426, Apr. 7, 2020.
[70]
I. Ilin, Building a news aggregator from scratch: news filtering, classification, group­
ing in threads and ranking, https : / / towardsdatascience . com / building - a - news -
aggregator - from - scratch - news - filtering - classification - grouping - in - threads - and -
7b0bbf619b68, Jan. 27, 2020.
[71]
J. Tan, X. Wan, and J. Xiao, “From Neural Sentence Summarization to Headline
Generation: A Coarse­to­Fine Approach,” in Proceedings of the Twenty­Sixth Inter­
national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI­17, 2017, pp. 4109–4115.
DOI: 10.24963/ijcai.2017/574. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.
2017/574.
[72]
J. Murtha, How fake news sites frequently trick big­time journalists, https://www.
cjr.org/analysis/how_fake_news_sites_frequently_trick_big-time_journalists.php,
May 26, 2016.
[73]
E. Mugendi, A Fake Poll Website Shows Just How Crafty Kenyan Fake News Is
Getting, https://pesacheck.org/a-fake-poll-website-shows-just-how-crafty-kenyan-
fake-news-is-getting-35cf90aeb64, Oct. 5, 2017.
[74]
Meta, URL ­ Graph API, https://developers.facebook.com/docs/graph-api/reference/
url/#fields. (visited on 01/14/2022).
[75]
E. Tucker, Why I’m removing the “Fake Protests” Twitter post, https://erictucker.
wordpress.com/2016/11/11/why-im-considering-to-remove-the-fake-protests-twitter-
post/, Nov. 11, 2016.
[76]
Wikipedia contributors, Free Republic — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, https:
//en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Free_Republic&oldid=1061471704, [Online;
accessed 15­January­2022], 2021.
[77]
——, The Gateway Pundit — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, https://en.wikipedia.
org/w/index.php?title=The_Gateway_Pundit&oldid=1064948391, [Online; accessed
15­January­2022], 2022.
[78]
A. Kishore, M. Bolin, D. Crockford, M. Nanasy, A. Eisenberg, and J. Tucker, Sum­
mary of features ­ JSON5 | JSON for Humans, https://json5.org/#summary-of-
features. (visited on 01/21/2021).
[79]
N. Schwarz, E. Newman, and W. Leach, Making the truth stick & the myths fade:
Lessons from cognitive psychology, https://behavioralpolicy.org/articles/making-
the-truth-stick-the-myths-fade-lessons-from-cognitive-psychology/, Feb. 17, 2017.
74
Aiding Informed Critical Thinking
==PAGE:81==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
