==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Winter 2022
Technical University of Denmark
Effects of seawater freezing on dissolved
organic matter characteristics and
degradation potential
Author:
Signe Melbye Andersen, s144164
Supervisor:
Colin A. Stedmon
Urban W¨unsch
January 20, 2022
==PAGE:2==
January 20, 2022
Abstract
The ocean represents a considerable carbon reservoir and takes up approximately one third of the
anthropogenic CO2 from atmosphere. Carbon enters the ocean as CO2 and is either retained as inorganic
carbon or converted into organic carbon by autotrophs. All trophic levels of the marine food web release
dissolved organic matter (DOM) and a reservoir of carbon similar in size to atmospheric CO2 persists in
the ocean as dissolved organic carbon (DOC).
Extracellular enzymes play an important role in the microbial degradation of DOM. Microbes use
these enzymes to obtain essential nutrients such as carbon, nitrogen and phosphorous. In this project,
an enzyme assay approach have been adopted to evaluate DOM degradation by dissolved extracellular
enzymes under different conditions. The approach, developed in this project, uses the advantages of Par-
allel Factor Analysis on entire excitation emission matrices (EEMs), to distinguish different components
with distinct excitation and emission spectra, expanding the current existing approach
This method can improve the detection limit by 10-100 compared to results using the existing ap-
proach. In 0.2 µm filtrated samples maximum reaction rates were measured just below 2 nM/h with
standard errors on 0.17 nM/h and incubation times around 5 hours. The technique have been improved
to allow us to better study the role of dissolved extracellular enzymes which the methodology could not
let us do before.
Addition of a background of tDOM was hypothesised to inhibit the naturally occurring extracellular
enzymes resulting in less enzymatic activity. In this study, rates containing a background of tDOM were
not significantly different from samples containing only oceanic DOM, hence the hypothesis could not be
verified by this experiment and needs further investigations. Independent of background concentrations
of tDOM, seawater freezing did not result in rates that were significantly different from the correspond-
ing controls as hypothesized. Substrates were added after seawater samples were exposed to freezing,
suggesting expected effects from freezing could more be due to changes in the bioavailability of DOM
than actual changes of dissolved extracellular enzymes ability to hydrolyze substrates.
Page 1 of 60
==PAGE:3==
January 20, 2022
1
Preface
This dissertation was completed at the DTU Aqua Department as part of a MSc in Aquatic Science and
Technology.
It has a focus on method development of a new approach for enzyme assays.
The aim of
this dissertation is to use a fundamental understanding of microbial degradation and existing approaches
for enzyme assays as a background for development of a new approach for enzymes assay using Parallel
Factor Analysis. This new method approach will be used to investigate the impact of brine exclusion during
freezing on enzymatic DOM degradation and how the presence of a ”background” of terrestrial DOM can
alter enzyme activity. Learning objectives can be found in Appendix A.
Page 2 of 60
==PAGE:4==
January 20, 2022
Contents
1
Preface
2
2
Introduction
5
2.1
Marine dissolved organic matter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The fate of DOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Marine microbial enzymes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Michaelis-Menten equation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Current approaches and findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Supply and removal of Arctic DOM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.7
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Method development
16
3.1
Equipment and chemical used/Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.1
Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.2
Preparation of substrates and fluorophores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Assessment of performance of plastic cuvettes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Spectral properties of substrates and their fluorophores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Inner filter effect correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Mass balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6
Incubation times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.7
Parallel Factor Analysis (PARAFAC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.8
Assessment of precision and reproducibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.9
Effects from filter size
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.10 Effects from freezing and background tDOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Discussion
33
4.1
Implications of method improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Implication of the result from manipulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Conclusion
36
A Appendix: Learning objectives
43
B Appendix: Additional figures
44
B.1
Molar fluorescence and IFE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
B.2
Initial velocity assays replicated for protease and glucosidase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
B.3
Initial velocity assays with tDOM and freezing effects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
C Appendix: Michaelis-Menten kinetics
49
C.1 Lineweaver-Burk plot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
C.2 Interpretation of the Michaelis constant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Page 3 of 60
==PAGE:5==
January 20, 2022
D Appendix: PARAFAC procedure in Matlab
53
D.1 MCA work up procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
D.2 MUF work up procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Page 4 of 60
==PAGE:6==
January 20, 2022
2
Introduction
2.1
Marine dissolved organic matter
Marine dissolved organic matter (DOM) is one of the largest reservoirs of organic carbon in the global carbon
cycle (Hedges 1992). All trophic levels of the marine food web release DOM and a reservoir of carbon similar
in size to atmospheric CO2 persists in the ocean as dissolved organic carbon (DOC) (Hansell et al. 2009)
(Siegenthaler & Sarmiento 1993). The pools of oceanic DOM and atmospheric carbon dioxide are similar so
changes in DOM mineralisation are important. An annual net oxidation of 1% of DOC would release a flux
of carbon dioxide larger than current annual anthropogenic CO2 emissions (Hedges 2002).
The oceans play an important role in the climate system by regulating the amount of atmosphereic carbon
dioxide and taking up approximately one third of the anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions (Gruber et al.
2019). Carbon enters the ocean as carbon dioxide and is either retained as inorganic carbon or converted
into organic carbon by autotrophs (Figure 1). In the eutrophic zone, autotrophs synthesize complex organic
biomolecules (e.g. fats, proteins or carbohydrates), from simple inorganic molecules (e.g. CO2, NH+
4 , NO−
3 ,
PO3−
4 , H2O), through photosynthesis. Primary production, carried out by planktonic organisms such as
phytoplankton, is a major source of both particulate and dissolved organic matter in the ocean. Planktonic
organisms have relatively short life spans and most of the carbon fixed in the eutrophic zone is rapidly
consumed, transformed and/or mineralised into nutrients (Benner & Amon 2015).
Microzooplankton feed on phytoplankton particulate organic matter (POC), producing carbon dioxide
through respiration and DOC through excretion (Figure 1). The excreted DOC is then used by phytoplank-
ton or bacteria to fuel the microbial loop. POC, both phytoplankton and other zooplankton, is consumed by
larger zooplankton termed mesozooplankton. Some of the carbon in the prey will be lost to the surrounding
water as DOC due to sloppy feeding, while the rest of the prey is ingested (Steinberg & Landry 2017). A
part of the carbon ingested will be absorbed and used for respiration, growth and reproduction, while the
rest of the carbon will be egested as fecal pellets. Leakage from the fecal pellets results in further formation
of DOC (Steinberg & Landry 2017).
The biological pump drives the sequestration of carbon from the surface euphotic zone into the deep ocean
and seafloor sediments. Once carbon dioxide is converted into organic matter in the euphopic zone it can
proceed downward in the water column either by settling (POM) or advection (DOM). Both mesozooplankton
and their predators egest fecal pellets, which can sink and flocculate with other organic detritus, producing
larger and more rapidly sinking aggregates, or simply just be ingested by larger organisms. As the organic
matter enters the deep ocean it will partially be consumed and respired by bacteria. These processes liberate
energy stored in organic matter, hence provide bacteria and zooplankton, which live off organic matter, with
essential energy and elements needed for their biochemistry and return organic carbon into inorganic carbon
and DOC (Sarmiento et al. 2007) (Ducklow et al. 2001).
Page 5 of 60
==PAGE:7==
January 20, 2022
Figure 1: The dissolved organic matter (DOM) cycle. The biological pump drives the sequestration of carbon
from the surface euphotic zone into the deep ocean and seafloor sediments. Carbon dioxide is converted into
organic matter in the euphopic zone and proceed downward in the water column either by settling or
advection. Microbial degradation alters the composition and size of DOM though processes mainly driven
by enzymes rather than photo-induced radicals. As the organic matter enters the deep ocean it will partially
be consumed and respired by bacteria. (Steinberg & Landry 2017)
Page 6 of 60
==PAGE:8==
January 20, 2022
2.2
The fate of DOM
Despite the importance of DOM in the carbon cycle, the biodegradability of DOM is poorly understood and
the majority (> 85%) of marine DOM still remains molecularly uncharacterized (Benner 2002). DOM is
comprised of a large pool of organic compounds with more than 200.000 different molecular formulae (Koch
et al. 2005), hence the variation in behaviour of these organic compounds can be expected to have a large
range. The complex mixture of compounds in marine DOM is simply a result of its many sources and the
continual modification carried out by photochemical and microbial degradation processes (Scully et al. 2004).
Different processes have been suggested to be important for the removal of DOM and shaping the size
continuum of DOM in the ocean: photochemical degradation, microbial degradation together with the
dynamics of particle aggregation and disaggregation.
Photochemical degradation can either cleave compounds in DOM into smaller molecules or directly mineralise
carbon. Irradiation from sunlight is absorbed by DOM. Photons at UV wavelengths have enough energy to
directly break bonds or form radicals (from water and oxygen or organic matter) which then go on to react
and mineralise organic compounds. As a result, the average molecular weight is reduced and a suite of small
molecules is formed, such as carbon monoxide, carbonyl compounds and carbon dioxide (Benner & Amon
2015). The bioavailability of the products have a large range: some are rapidly utilized by microbes while
others appear to persist in ocean for a longer time (Moran & Zepp 1997) (Obernosterer et al. 1999). Several
studies have also shown that photochemical oxidation is one of the predominant processes responsible for
removal of terrigenous DOM from surface waters (Kieber et al. 1990) (Miller & Zepp 1995) (Hernes & Benner
2002) (Benner et al. 2005)
Microbial degradation also alters the composition and size of DOM however the process is driven by enzymes
rather than photo-induced radicals. Biodegradation is defined as the biologically catalyzed reduction in
complexity of chemical compounds, where microbial organisms transform chemical compounds, the substrate,
through metabolic or enzymatic processes (Alexander 1994).
Overall, these mineralization process in aquatic systems must be extremely efficient, since only around 0.1%
of oceanic primary productivity ends up as burial in marine sediments (Hedges 1992), and little of the
terrestrial DOM brought in by rivers persists in marine waters. Radiocarbon measurements have shown that
the average age of dissolved organic carbon in the water column is on the order of 6000 years (Williams and
Druffel, 1987). Specific factors therefore must hinder a complete microbial use of this DOC. The molecular
structure and composition of DOC together with the activities of the organisms/microbes that initiate
(enzymatic) carbon turnover are for the most part unknown. These unknown factors are central limitations
in the understanding of carbon cycling (Arnosti 2003a)
2.3
Marine microbial enzymes
(Blanco & Blanco 2017) (Atkins & De Paula 2014)
UV light is rapidly absorbed by DOM and water, hence photochemical degradation of DOM is limited to the
very surface ocean. In contrast extracellular enzymes play an important role in the microbial degradation of
Page 7 of 60
==PAGE:9==
January 20, 2022
DOM throughout the entire water column. Their efficiency controls the fate of much of the organic matter
produced in marine systems (Arnosti 2011). Studies of the chemical composition and radiocarbon content
of marine organic matter indicates that complexity and age of organic matter increase with decreasing
molecular size (Amon & Benner 1994) (Amon & Benner 1996) (Hama et al. 2004). Amon & Benner (1994)
observed that high-molecular-weight (HMW) DOM was more bioavailable and therefore also more reactive
and rapidly remineralized than low-molecular-weight (LMW) DOM. This supports the idea that microbial
degradation processes are key factors shaping the size distribution and the overall distribution of organic
matter but also which molecules remains in the ocean (Benner & Amon 2015).
Dissolved organic matter is defined as the organic matter passing though a filter with a pore size of 0.7
µm, although some studies use filters with diameters as small as 0.2 µm.
Another way to characterize
DOM is dividing it into groups of its molecular weight: HMW DOM (>1 kDa) and LMW DOM (<1 kDa)
(Amon & Benner 1996). Microbes can only assimilate organic compounds smaller than 600 Da (Weiss et al.
1991), hence microbes will need to hydrolyze most of their preferential substrates, HMW DOM, into smaller
substrates. The conversion of larger substrates to substrates small enough to pass through cell membranes,
for further processing within the cell, is initially hydrolyzed by extracellular enzymes (Arnosti et al. 2005).
These enzymes are substrate selective and can only hydrolyze structures that correspond to the active site
of the enzyme (Warren 1996). This means that the fate of much of the organic matter produced in marine
systems is controlled by the structural specificities and activities of extracellular enzymes: the rates at which
extracellular enzymes function, factors controlling enzyme production, active lifetimes and distribution of
them. The combination of these factors are crucial for the cycling of elements in the sea (Arnosti 2011).
Enzymes are a specialized class of proteins or nucleic acids responsible for catalyzing chemical reactions and
typically act in the aqueous environment of cells. They primarily consist of proteins and some have special
features, organic or inorganic co-factors, in their active sites. The active site of an enzyme is responsible
for binding the reactants, termed substrates, and processing the substrates into products (see Figure 2
and 3). Conditions such as pH, temperature and pressure determine the rate at which enzymes catalyze
reactions. The interaction of substrate and enzyme is specific and they work either as a simple lock-and-key
model, as illustrated in Figure 2 or an induced fit model. Enzymes enhance the reaction rate by decreasing
the activation energy of the reactants. The enzyme (E) binds to the substrate (S) and form a temporal
enzyme-substrate complex (ES). The structure of the substrate is changed by the enzyme, and once the
reaction is completed the complex now consist of enzyme and product/products. The enzyme unbinds the
product/products (P) and because the enzyme remains unchanged it can now bind to another substrate.
Page 8 of 60
==PAGE:10==
January 20, 2022
Figure 2: Enzyme-substrate reaction. The enzyme (E) binds to the substrate (S) and form a temporal
enzyme-substrate complex (ES). The structure of the substrate is changed by the enzyme resulting in a
complex of enzyme and product/products. The enzyme unbinds the product/products (P) after the reaction
is completed. The enzyme remains unchanged and can now bind to another substrate.
Figure 3: Molar fluorescence of fluorophores, MCA and MUF, and their parent substrates, Leucine-MCA
and MUF-β-glucose respectively. Once the fluorophore is cleaved from the substrate the optical properties
changes and the product can be optically distinguished from the substrate.
Page 9 of 60
==PAGE:11==
January 20, 2022
Enzymes are classified according to the type reaction that is catalyzed e.g. hydrolases, lyases, isomerases
and transferases. Common for all names is that the suffix -ase is added to the type of reaction they catalyze
(Blanco & Blanco 2017). An example, hydrolases is the name of enzymes that break larger molecules into
smaller molecules by hydrolysis, where a water molecule breaks bonds in larger molecules (e.g. protons and
hydroxide) (Eljarrat 2012).
Furthermore enzymes can be categorized as either intracellular or extracellular. Intracellular enzymes are
important for cellular biochemical reactions, hence retained and function within the cell as the name indicates.
Extracellular enzymes are on the other hand secreted by the cell and function outside the cell. The main
function of extracellular enzymes is to break down complex molecules, such as organic matter, into smaller
molecules, small enough to be transported across cell membranes.
These extracellular enzymes can be
categorized into free extracellular enzymes dissolved in the seawater or tethered enzymes. The tethered
enzymes includes cell-associated ectoenzymes (enzymes attached to bacterial cell wall or present in the
periplasmic space between bacterial cell wall and cell membrane) and non-living particle-attached enzymes
(Liu & Liu 2018). Free dissolved enzymes is mainly defined as enzymes passing through a 0.2 µm filter and
are suggested to originate from diffusion of attached enzymes on aggregates, active release from microbial
cells, or liberation from viral lysis and protist grazing (Albertson et al. 1990, Kiørboe et al. 2001).
2.4
Michaelis-Menten equation
Many enzyme–substrate reactions follow a simple mechanism that consists of an initial formation of an
enzyme–substrate complex which decomposes to form a product and then release the enzyme to react again.
This is visualized by Figure 2. There are three principal features that are valid for most enzyme-catalysed
reactions (Atkins & De Paula 2014):
• For a given initial (high) concentration of substrate, [S]0, the initial rate of product formation is
proportional to the total concentration of enzyme, [E]0.
• For a given [E]0 and low values of [S]0, the rate of product formation is proportional to [S]0
• For a given [E]0 and high values of [S]0 the rate of product formation becomes independent of [S]0,
reaching a maximum value termed the maximum velocity, vmax.
These features are important to account for when describing the kinetics of enzyme reactions. The Michaelis-
Menten mechanism is a well described mechanism which account for the above mentioned features:
E + S
ka
⇄
k′
a
ES
ES
kb
→E + P
(1)
From this mechanism it is possible to derive the Michaelis-Menten equation:
v =
kb[E]0
1 + KM/[S]0
(2)
Page 10 of 60
==PAGE:12==
January 20, 2022
where KM = (k′
a + kb)/ka and is the Michaelis constant. For a full length of the derivation of the equation
look in Appendix C.
The Michaelis constant is specific for enzyme-substrate pairs and is the concentration of the substrate when
the reaction rate is equal to one half of the maximum rate for the reaction. In other words, KM is the amount
of substrate required to to induce/elicit half of enzymes maximum rate under the given conditions. This
means, that the smaller value of KM the more efficient is the enzymes or the easier it is for the enzymes to
catalyze the reaction. In terms of microbial extracellular enzymes, a larger KM will mean that the enzymes
have a lower affinity for the specific substrate relative to a given smaller KM value. The Michaelis constant
can to some degree help us describe the efficiency of a specific enzyme-substrate reaction.
2.5
Current approaches and findings
Most of the investigations of enzyme activities in marine systems have been carried out in the water column
and the enzyme activities have typically been found to be higher in surface waters than at depth but vary
between nearshore and offshore environments (Arnosti 2011) (Hoppe & Arnosti 2002).
In several studies, extracellular enzyme activities are measured using a general approach where potential
activities at saturated substrate concentrations are recorded (Hoppe 1983, Somville & Billen 1983, Chr´ost
et al. 1989). This ensures that the added substrate is in excess and out competes the naturally occurring
substrates, whose concentrations are often essentially unknown (Arnosti 2003a). The most commonly applied
method for measuring enzyme activities involves different small substrate proxies covalently linked to a mainly
two small fluorophores:
1. 4-methylumbelliferone (MUF) linked to monosaccharides (glycosidase assays) or phosphate groups
(phosphatase assays)
2. 7-amino-4-methylcoumarin (MCA) linked to amino acids (protease assay)
These small substrate proxies consist of a monomer that is linked to a fluorophore. Once the bond between the
monomer and the fluorophore is cleaved, the fluorescence of the fluorophore increases and spectral signature
changes. The increase in fluorescence with time is interpreted as the rate of the enzymatic hydrolysis (Arnosti
2003a).
More recent studies have applied these methods for measuring extracellular enzyme activities. The incubation
times typically range from 1-48 hours mostly under in situ temperatures. The increase in fluorescence, due
to the enzymatic hydrolysis, is measured with a fluorometer or spectrofluorometer at a single emission
wavelength (ranging from 445nm-460nm) under a single excitation wavelength (ranging from 365nm-380nm)
(Hoppe et al. 1988, Fukuda et al. 2000, Davey et al. 2001, Obayashi & Suzuki 2005, Baltar et al. 2010).
Some of the findings from these studies reports maximum hydrolysis rates for leucine-MCA in surface or
near-surface waters from a variety of oceanic province in range of 5 to 80 nM/h (Fukuda et al. 2000, Davey
et al. 2001, Obayashi & Suzuki 2005, Baltar et al. 2010). Across different ocean basins, decreasing activities
with depth have been reported together with similar relative activity ratios for leucine-MCA and MUF-β-
glucose (Hoppe & Ullrich 1999, Fukuda et al. 2000, Baltar et al. 2009, Arnosti 2011). Leucine-MCA has
Page 11 of 60
==PAGE:13==
January 20, 2022
been found to be faster relative to MUF-β-glucose by a factor of approximately 10-100. These patterns
indicate that microbial degradation rates decreases with depth, potentially due to decreased bioavailability
of the DOM remaining in the interior ocean. It is also interesting that the highest maximum hydrolysis rates
have been found for protease, as carbohydrates (glucose) are generally believed to be easier to break down
(glucosidase), compared to proteins that are more complex molecules, hence slower and and a longer lasting
source of energy. These relatively higher maximum rates for protease could also be a reflection on what
the microbial communities are lacking. The maximum hydrolysis rates can be interpreted as a potential for
how much a given microbial community can hydrolyze if there is substrate enough, and the concentrations
of enzymes in the microbial community carrying out the specific hydrolysis. So higher hydrolysis rates for
protease must mean higher concentrations of those specific enzymes hydrolysing leucine-MCA and maybe
an indication of that these enzymes are needed for bacterial growth in the water column. Proteins have high
nitrogen content and studies have shown that dissolved organic nitrogen is important for bacterial growth
(Cherrier et al. 1996), which supports the above considerations.
Different aspects of the approaches employed seem to have some implications. Varying methodology (for
estimation of microbial enzymatic activities) have been found in aquatic science literature (Urvoy et al.
2020). One of the key methodological implications is the potential occurrence of inner filter effect (IFE).
The inner filter effect is a common challenge in fluorescence spectroscopy, affecting spectral measurements
in particular. Due to absorption of the incident excitation or fluorescence-emitted light, the relationship
between fluorophore concentration and fluorescence intensity decrease with increasing concentration. The
excitation beam can be attenuated if the sample contains a highly concentrated solution, resulting in loss of
signal and underestimated enzymatic activities (Figure 4). Despite the significant affect IFE potentially has
on measured activities in substrate saturated samples, it has has received little attention in the context of
environmental water studies (Urvoy et al. 2020). IFE correction is also essential for accurate representation
and comparison of excitation emission matrices (EEMs) of humic substances at high concentrations (Mobed
et al. 1996), but has to my knowledge not been implemented in existing approaches.
Page 12 of 60
==PAGE:14==
January 20, 2022
Figure 4: Light comes in from the left and the excitation beam is absorbed/attenuated by the sample on its
journey to a hypothetical mid point where fluorescence occurs and is measured from. The more concentrated
the sample is, the more attenuated is the beam, resulting in lower fluorescence emission at the centre of the
cuvette.
This attenuation is not equal for different wavelengths and termed primary inner filter effects.
A similar situation occurs for the light emitted leaving the cuvette towards the detector. This is termed
secondary innner filter effects and happens if the if the excitation and emission spectra overlap. Then the
light emitted in the centre can be reabsorbed by the sample itself (Kothawala et al. 2013)
.
Another practical problem is the fact that MUF and MCA fluorophores have excitation and emission maxima
overlapping with natural DOC occuring in marine environments. This is especially occuring in high-DOC-
content pore waters of sediments and can be problematic when wanting to distinguish fluorescence due to
fluorophore increase from fluorescence due to DOC (Green & Blough 1994)(Arnosti 2011).
Furthermore there are a wide range in maximum substrate concentration used in studies of microbial enzy-
matic activities. Maximum substrate concentrations vary between 0.1 and 300 µM for phosphatase activities,
assayed with MUF-Phosphate, and between 8.5 and 1000 µM for protease activities assayed with Leucine-
MCA (Urvoy et al. 2020). This has implications for the estimation of both Michaelis–Menten kinetics and
and single point assays. Ideally the kinetic parameters should be determined before performing a single point
assay to ensure the chosen substrate concentration for the assay represents saturation of enzymatic active
sites. There are two major assays to estimate Michealis-Menten kinetics, vmax and KM, from measured
accumulation of product over time. The first one is the initial velocity assay (initial rate analysis) and the
other approach is the reaction progress curve assay (progress curve analysis) (Choi et al. 2017). The initial
rate of the reaction is measured for a range of substrate concentration and by using linear regression on
these data (e.g. Lineweaver-Burk plot, Appendix C), the two parameters can be estimated. In the reaction
progress curve assay, the entire progress curve is fitted to a solution of differential equations, hence the data
will be used more efficiently. The initial rates are the instantaneous rates at incubation time equal to zero
Page 13 of 60
==PAGE:15==
January 20, 2022
and measured at very short times before any significant changes in concentration of fluorophore occur:
r = ∆[fluorophore]
∆time
= [fluorophore]tX −[fluorophore]t0
tX −t0
(3)
The initial rate is simply measured by using linear regression on the part of the progress curve that is within
the linear range of the curve (Figure 11).
The progress curve assay are more technically challenging than the initial velocity assay and is measured
by using a suite of differential equations that requires computational tools for solving (Choi et al. 2017). In
aquatic DOM literature it seems to be the initial velocity assay that have been used for parameter estimation.
Finally, in addition to these considerations, one should be aware of the chosen incubation time for the initial
rate assay and what it represents. Measured (total) enzyme activity is a composite of several underlying
processes (Arnosti 2003a):
• total particle associated activity (activity removed by prefiltration with coarse pore size)
• activity associated with free-living bacteria (activity after removal of particles)
• dissolved activity (activity from extracellular enzymes passing through a 0.2 µm pore-sized filter)
Extracellular enzymes are not able to replicate themselves and only have living cells as a source. Therefore
measurements of free dissolved enzyme rates should be constant over time. The other groups of enzyme
activities are expected to change over time as microbial communities adapt to the new conditions in the
samples after introduction of substrate. It is therefore important to select the incubation time that suits the
goal. If synoptic rates are required incubation times should be very short (< 1-2 hour). If a measure of the
microbial community’s ability to adapt to changes in environment that is in focus incubation times should
be longer (days).
2.6
Supply and removal of Arctic DOM
A large amount of terrestrial DOM is supplied by rivers into the Arctic Ocean (Aagaard & Carmack 1989,
Opsahl et al. 1999). Terrestrial DOM is assumed to have a low bioavailability relative to that derived from
aquatic organisms (Cory & Kaplan 2012). Despite this, research shows that more than half of this is removed
on Arctic shelves before its passage through the Arctic Ocean (Opsahl et al. 1999).
According to Amon (2004) three aspects are of major importance for the biogeochemistry of DOM in the
Arctic Ocean. The first aspect is the large inflow of freshwater from rivers together with terrestrial DOM. The
second aspect is the characteristic vertical stratification of the Arctic Ocean, with bottom layer containing
warmer water supplied by the Atlantic Ocean below the top layer with cold and fresher surface water. This
results in the terrestrial DOM being retained in surface waters far out across the central Arctic. The third
aspect of importance is the the extended shelf areas on the Eurasian side of the Arctic Ocean, being the
areas of importance for production of DOM. DOM is released from sediments under productive shelf seas
like the Chukchi.
Page 14 of 60
==PAGE:16==
January 20, 2022
The surface waters of the Arctic Ocean have the highest concentration of DOC and terrigenous/terrestrial
DOM compared to all ocean basins (Benner et al. 2005). The continents surrounding the Arctic Ocean is
drained by rivers and approximately 11% of the global rivers discharge into the Arctic Ocean (Shiklomanov
et al. 2000)(Aagaard & Carmack 1989). As a result of the relatively high river input, terrigenous DOM from
Arctic rivers is responsible for the elevated concentrations of DOC in surface waters of the Arctic Ocean
(Amon 2004) (Anderson 2002) (Benner et al. 2005).
Even though the distribution of terrigenous DOM
in polar surface waters is very well mixed/heterogeneous, Benner et al. (2005) estimated that on average
14–24% of the DOC was of terrestrial origin.
Budget calculations indicate that a significant fraction of the terrestrial DOM is removed from Arctic Ocean
water masses before it is exported into the North Atlantic Deep Ocean to be distributed globally via the
thermohaline circulation. Opsahl et al. (1999) estimated that 12–41% of terrigenous DOM that was dis-
charged by the rivers to the Arctic Ocean was exported to the North Atlantic. Hansell et al. (2004) also
investigated the removal process and found that terrigenous dissolved organic carbon is mineralized with a
half-life of 7.1 ± 3.0 years resulting in 21 to 32% of it was not removed before export to the North Atlantic
Ocean. Other studies have also been conducted stating that 41–51% of colored dissolved organic matter
(CDOM) (Stedmon et al. 2011)(Granskog et al. 2012) and 50–80% of fluorescent dissolved organic matter
(FDOM) (Amon et al. 2003) was not removed prior to export into North Atlantic Ocean. Despite the long
distance of transport across ocean basin and export to another, a large fraction of the DOM in the Arctic
ocean is not mineralized and opens questions about sea ice formation and brine rejection impact on DOM
potentially alter the bioavailability of DOM making it more difficult to degrade.
Studies suggest that sea ice formation may play a role in the removal of DOM through physiochemical changes
during seawater freezing and brine rejection, leading to changes in composition and increased bioavailability
(Jørgensen et al. 2015, Granskog et al. 2004, 2012). In other ocean basins microbial and photochemical
degradation have been stated as a predominant mechanisms for removal of terrestrial DOM but in the
Arctic surface waters the significance of these processes is not yet certain (Benner et al. 2005). Other and
more recently explanations look into fractionation of DOM and retention of fractions of chemicals during sea
ice formation (Granskog et al. 2004, Stedmon et al. 2007, M¨uller et al. 2011, Granskog et al. 2012). Molecular
weight measurements of DOM were applied by M¨uller et al. (2011) to assess changes in the molecular size
distribution of DOM in new sea ice relative to parent sea water. They showed that both in the newly formed
artificial and the natural sea ice, CDOM was enriched by 34-39% relative to salinity. Furthermore the same
three identified DOM fluorophores were present both in sea water and ice but enriched by 15-54% relative
to salinity in ice.
2.7
Hypothesis
The above processes, responsible for removing DOM from the Arctic ocean, are being impacted by climate
change: The sea ice formation is reduced, and the amount and composition of DOM is altered, though much
of this effect is currently poorly understood.
In this project, an enzyme assay approach will be adopted and expanded to evaluate DOM degradation by free
Page 15 of 60
==PAGE:17==
January 20, 2022
dissolved enzymes under different conditions. An experiment assessing if the presence of a ”background” of
terrestrial DOM can alter enzyme activity/efficiency will then be performed. Finally the impact of seawater
freezing on enzymatic DOM degradation will be assessed. The hypotheses behind these experiments are:
• Addition of a background of terrestrial DOM will inhibit the naturally occurring extracellular enzymes
resulting in reduced activity, revealed as lower maximum velocity and a larger Michaelis constant
compared to the control.
• Sea ice formation and brine rejection alters DOMs physicochemical characteristics subsequently influ-
encing susceptibility to enzymatic degradation and hence resulting in a lower value of the Michaelis
constant.
Seawater freezing is also expected to affect the the free dissolved extracellular enzymes
leading to an decrease in maximum velocity.
3
Method development
Method development involved three stages: i) Characterisation of the fluorescence properties of the substrates
and their fluorophores; ii) development of a spectral fluorescence approach for high sensitivity measurements
of rates and iii) demonstration of application of the approach.
3.1
Equipment and chemical used/Methodology
All cuvette-based fluorescence and absorbance measurements were performed on the Aqualog fluorescence
spectrophotometer (HORIBA Scientific). The instrument measures fluorescence and absorption simultane-
ously in a 10 mm cuvette.
Data processing and analysis together with estimation of Michaelis-Menten parameters have been carried
out in Matlab R2020b (The MathWorks Inc.). Nonlinear regression was applied using the fitnlm function
to calculate the kinetic parameters using iterative procedure starting from initial values given in beta0.
Listing 1: Matlab implementation of the the model function and nonlinear regression
modelfun = @(b , x) beta (1) .∗substrate . / ( beta (2)+substrate ) ;
mdl = fitnlm ( substrate ,
vo ,
modelfun ,
beta0 ) ;
% substrate = substrate
added
[muM]
% vo = i n i t i a l
rates
measured
[muM/h ]
% beta (1) = v max
% beta (2) = K M
The function fits the model specified by modelfun to a column vector, vo, as a response variable with the a
column vector, substrate, as the predictor variable. The model used for fitting is based on the Michaelis
Menten kinetics described by Equation 19 in Appendix C.
Page 16 of 60
==PAGE:18==
January 20, 2022
3.1.1
Samples
For development of method oceanic deep sea water collected from the Norwegian Trench in 2015 was used
to represent low microbial activity deep-sea water (DSW) and a inoculum containing water from a plankton
culture to represent water from a sample with high microbial activity and therefore likely high concentrations
of free dissolved enzymes (INOC).
Natural/Oceanic seawater was collected during the Fram Strait Cruise 2021 at station 411 at 50 meters
depth. The station was conducted at 78.833oN,17oW and the water mass is categorized as Polar Water
(PW). On collection the water sample was 0.2 µm filtered.
Just before each incubation the samples were either filtered through 0.8 µm filters to remove larger cells
or 0.2 µm filters to ensure only free dissolved extracellular enzymes were left in the sample. Effects of the
addition of terrestrial DOM (tDOM) were tested using Suwannee River natural organic matter reference
material (2R101N, Green et al. (2015)).
To evaluate the effect of the presence of a ”background” of terrestrial DOM and the impact of seawater
freezing on enzymatic DOM degradation the water mass was treated in the following way:
• 375 mL of the oceanic water was filtered through a 0.2 µm filter and divided into two bottles, 187.5
mL in each. One bottle was stored in the fridge at 4oC as a control and the other bottle was stored
in the freezer at -5oC for 24 hours. Once the water was completely frozen, the bottle was placed in
the fridge to slowly thaw the sample. After another 24 hours the sample was thawed and ready for
measurements.
• 7.37 mg of Suwannee River natural organic matter reference material was added to 375 mL of the
oceanic water. 50.7% of the reference material is carbon resulting in a terrestrial DOC concentration
on 829.6 µmol/L C. For reference, Russian rivers entering the Arctic Ocean contain between 230 and
1006 µmol/L DOC (Lobbes et al. 2000). After addition of terrestrial DOC the sample was filtered
through a 0.2 µm filter and divided into two bottles, 187.5 mL in each. One bottle was stored in the
fridge at 4oC and the other bottle was stored in the freezer at -18oC for 24 hours. Once the water
was completely frozen, the bottle was placed in the fridge to slowly thaw the sample. After another
24 hours the sample was thawed and ready for measurements.
3.1.2
Preparation of substrates and fluorophores
All substrates and fluorophores were purchased from Merck KGaA. The substrate used for glycosidase assays
was 4-methylumbelliferyl-β- D-glucopyranoside (MUF-β-glucose) and the substrate used for protease assay
was L-leucine-7-amido-4-methylcoumarin hydrochloride (leucine-MCA). Stock solutions of 2890 µM MUF-β-
glucose and 247.5 µM leucine-MCA were prepared using ultrapure water and stored at -5oC. Stock solution
for MUF and MCA were prepared and dissolved in two different solutions, 100 % ultrapure water and 100
% methanol in the following way,
• MUF in ultrapure water, 21.8 mg in 500 mL ultrapure water resulting in a concentration on 247.5 µM.
Page 17 of 60
==PAGE:19==
January 20, 2022
• MUF in methanol, 14.3 mg in 25 mL ultrapure water resulting in a concentration on 3249.1 µM.
• MCA in ultrapure water, 13.3 mg in 500 mL ultrapure water resulting in a concentration on 151.8 µM.
• MCA in methanol, 5.1 mg in 25 mL ultrapure water resulting in a concentration on 1169.1 µM.
Several studies report that substrates and fluorophores are only soluble in organic solvent (Hoppe et al. 1988,
Urvoy et al. 2020) while others that report they are fully soluble in water (Chr´ost et al. 1989, Chr´ost 1992).
While the substrates were easily soluble in water, the less polar fluorophores did not readily dissolve (see
Figure 5 for structure of compounds). Aromatic hydrocarbons are in general hydrophobic and therefore not
soluble in water, but when other atoms are substituted on the benzene ring, the solubility of the compound
can change and may be soluble in water. The electronegativity difference between the carbon atoms in the
aromatic ring is zero and the electronegativity between the carbon and hydrogen atoms are relatively small
resulting in no polarity on the benzene ring and is the reason why they are non-polar.
Figure 5: Molecular structure of the four substances used. From left, Leucine-MCA, MCA, MUF−β−glucose
and MUF.
To check for complete fluorophore dissolution, each solution described above was quantified using a reverse-
phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with a gradient elution from 5 to 100 % acetonitrile.
Using this system, the fluorophores eluted between minute 10 and 16. The concentration-adjusted chro-
matogram areas were obtained at 250 nm absorbance. The results indicate that water-dissolved fluorophores
closely matched in concentration with the methanol-dissolved counterparts.
Compared to the methanol
solutions, 98.6 % of MUF and 99.4 %MCA was recovered in water-dissolved solutions.
3.2
Assessment of performance of plastic cuvettes
For UV visible spectroscopy quartz cuvettes are normally used due to the superior transparency at UV
wavelengths. Due to the nature of enzyme assay incubation it was relevant to investigate the suitability of
available plastic cuvettes which are much cheaper and provide the opportunity to run larger experiments,
measuring kinetic parameters of different water samples simultaneously, where each incubation is carried
out in individual/separate cuvettes. In this manner it is possible to measure the same cuvette several times
over a given time period without having to stop the incubation with chemicals and keep the sample stored
frozen until measurement. Another benefit from carrying out each incubation in individual cuvettes is that
the exact incubation time is known for each measurements optimizing the estimation of rates.
Figure 6 compares the absorbance spectrum of the fluorophore MUF measured in a plastic and quartz
cuvette. Transparency of the plastic cuvette is poor for wavelengths below 310 nm but above this there is no
major differences in the absorbance spectrum, and hence disposable plastic cuvettes (Frisenette 303100, UV
Page 18 of 60
==PAGE:20==
January 20, 2022
grade Polymethyl Methacrylate) have been used for all experiments. All four substances can be characterized
using excitation and emission wavelengths longer than 340 nm (Figure 7). The black dotted vertical lines in
Figure 7 shows the range of the most commonly used nm for excitation and emission in other studies, and
they are all also longer than 310 nm (Hoppe et al. 1988, Chr´ost et al. 1989, Davey et al. 2001, Baltar et al.
2010).
Figure 6: Comparison of absorbance spectra for MUF measured in quartz cuvette (black line) and plastic
cuvette (red line) with wavelengths (nm) on the x-axis and absorbance per cm on the y-axis.
Figure 7: Range for excitation and emission wavelength used in other studies plotted together with fluores-
cence spectra for all four substances used in this study: MUF, MUF-β-glucose, MCA, Leucine-MCA.
3.3
Spectral properties of substrates and their fluorophores
Serial dilutions of both substrates and fluorophores were made with the aim to characterize the molar
florescence and molar absorptivity. Fluorescence EEMs of all four substances are plotted in Figure 3 with
Page 19 of 60
==PAGE:21==
January 20, 2022
a colorbar showing the molar fluorescence.
Both fluorophores were more fluorescent than their parent
substrate. The molar fluorescence of Leucine-MCA was higher than for MUF-β-glucose, the same applies to
the fluorophores, MCA has a higher molar fluorescence than MUF. In Table 1 the molar absorptivity and the
molar fluorescence emission for excitation at excitation maximum for each substance are listed. The molar
absorptivity and molar fluorescence increases from substrates to fluorophores. Meaning the fluorophores are
both more colored and more fluorescent than their parent substrates.
Table 1: Table showing molar fluorescence and molar absorptivity for all four substances used. Wavelengths
for maximum absorbance, emission and excitation is denoted in the table together with Stokes shift.
Substance
Molar
Molar
Max. Abs
Max. Ex
Max. Em
Stokes
name
fluorescence
absorptivity
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
shift
(R.U. µmol−1 L)
(L µmol1 cm−1)
(eV)
Leucine-MCA
20.26
0.073
320
323
384
0.61
MCA
35.91
0.77
347
341
439
0.81
MUF-β-glucose
3.37
0.016
314
317
375
0.60
MUF
27.32
1.35
317
320
446
1.09
In Figure 8 the normalized fluorescence spectra are plotted for all four substances. Cleavage of leucine-MCA
leads to the formation of the MCA, while cleavage of MUF-β-glucose leads to the formation of MUF. Both
MUF and MCA consist primarily of aromatic rings, and the distinguishing character is that the amine on
MCA replaced with a hydroxyl group on MUF. Small changes in chemical structure influence the absorption
properties to a large extent whereas the fluorescence emission spectra are less variable, and the position and
peak width is particularly influenced by double-bond conjugation (W¨unsch et al. 2015). Organic compounds
with the highest degree of conjugation had the broadest emission peaks, compared to narrow emission peaks
of organic compounds with a lower degree of conjugation (W¨unsch et al. 2015).
A conjugated system is a system of connected p-orbitals with delocalized electrons in compounds with
alternating single and multiple bonds, where the p-orbital can also include an orbital containing a lone pair
(e.g. on nitrogen and oxygen). All p-orbitals have to overlap, meaning the p-orbitals have to be in the same
plane. A conjugated systems generally lower the overall energy of the compound and increase its stability.
The phenol on MUF and amine on MCA results in greater conjugation, due to the free lone pairs, and a
shift in peaks to higher wavelengths occurs compared to their parent substrates. The greater conjugation is
a result of the increased freedom of the lone pairs after hydrolysis. The phenol and amine can now rearrange
so they can conjugate with the double bonds of the aromatic rings, whereas they before were fixed in the
structure with substrate.
Page 20 of 60
==PAGE:22==
January 20, 2022
Figure 8: Excitation and emission spectra for leucine-MCA (A), MCA (B), MUF-β-glucose (C) and MUF
(D). The excitation and emission maxima are annotated for all four substances.
From Figure 3 and 8 it is clear that all four substances can be distinguished from each other using spectral
measurements, but measurements at fixed wavelengths will include interference. Lastly calibration curves
for molar fluorescence were carried out for all four substances using serial dilution in both plastic and quartz
cuvettes (Calibrations curves carried out in plastic cuvettes can be found in Appendix B).
3.4
Inner filter effect correction
The inner filter effect was corrected using the ABAife function in Matlab. This function is an absorbance-
based approach (ABA) method for correcting fluorescence inner filter effects by the use of Equation 4
(Lakowicz 2006):
Fcorr,λex,λem = Fobs,λex,λem × 100.5×A
(4)
where
A = Aλex + Aλem
(5)
The method uses the measured absorbance (A) at each pair of excitation (λex) and emission (λem) wave-
lengths across the entire EEM. The total absorbance at any point on the EEM is the sum of Aλex and Aλem
(Equation 5). The method assumes that EEMs and absorbance were measured in a square 1 cm cuvette
with standard right-angle geometry, hence it can be assumed that absorbance (excitation) and fluorescence
(emission) occurs at the midpoint of the cuvette and Aλex and Aλem is multiplied by 0.5 (Figure 4). The
Page 21 of 60
==PAGE:23==
January 20, 2022
observed fluorescence Fobs is then converted into the corrected fluorescence intensity Fcorr by the use of
Equation 4 (Kothawala et al. 2013, Ryder et al. 2017).
In Figure 9 fluorescence measurements from a specific excitation-emission wavelength pair compared to
corresponding absorption for a highly concentrated tDOM water samples and oceanic water samples with
low DOM concentrations was chosen to visualize the inner filter effect. The blue crosses show the fluorescence
intensity with no IFE correction whereas the red crosses show IFE corrected oceanic water samples and the
yellow crosses show corrected tDOM samples. The absorbance plot on the top indicates at which excitation
wavelength the fluorescence intensity was picked and the emission wavelength were 440 nm for all three
examples.
It is very clear that IFE effects the fluorescence intensity for excitation within the excitation wavelengths
where the substrate absorb (250nm to 365nm).
In the top plot in Figure 9 the fluorescence intensities
are clearly lower for the samples that have not been IFE corrected compared the sample that have been
IFE corrected. The fluorescence intensity does not increase linearly with increasing absorbance for samples
affected by IFE. At excitation wavelengths, outside the range where the substrate absorb (> 365 nm),
samples with high concentrations of tDOM still experience IFE. Fluorescence intensities measured with IFE
are lower than for intensities that have been IFE corrected, showing that IFE not only is substrate driven
but also can be driven by background DOM.
Enzymatic rates have often been measured in high-DOC-content pore waters of sediments without correction
for IFE (Arnosti 2000, 2003b). As seen from these results lack of correction of IFE due to background DOM
can have significant impacts on the results. IFE can cause lack of signal or complete loss of signal depending
on how concentrated the sample is. A lack of signal will result in underestimation of rates measured whereas
a complete loss of signal will result in no rates can be measured even though enzymatic activity actually
takes place in the sample. A similar figure for MUF can be found in Appendix B.
Page 22 of 60
==PAGE:24==
January 20, 2022
Figure 9: In the top, absorbance is plotted against excitation wavelengths. Vertical dotted lines show the
picked excitation wavelengths (255 nm and 440 nm) used in the plots in the bottom. In the two bottom
plots, blue crosses show the fluorescence intensity with no IFE correction and the red and yellow crosses
show IFE corrected fluorescence intensity for for oceanic DOM samples and tDOM samples, respectively.
In the bottom plot to the left, fluorescence intensity is plotted for all samples at 255nm excitation and 440
emission, showing IFE that is substrate driven. In the bottom plot to the right, fluorescence intensity is
plotted for all samples at 255nm excitation and 440 emission, showing IFE due to fluorescence of background
DOM.
3.5
Mass balance
The first approach was to estimate the substrate and fluorophore simultaneously, so that the increase in
fluorescence due to fluorophore production could be validated by the decrease in fluorescence of the substrate.
Both substrates and fluorophores are highly fluorescent making it very difficult to accurately measure both
simultaneously despite the fact that their fluorescence signals do not overlap considerably (Figure 3 and
8). This is mainly due to the relatively small linear range (105) of the AquaLog’s charge-coupled-device
(CCD) detector. Other detectors, such as photomultiplier tubes have far greater linear ranges, but lack the
ability to measure an entire emission spectrum at once. The AquaLog compensates for this linear range
issue by allowing adjustments of the integration time. However, when a large degree of variation between
fluorescence intensities in the same sample are encountered, this strategy fails to produce good results. Here,
shorter integration times were more appropriate for measuring substrates properly (concentrations ranging
Page 23 of 60
==PAGE:25==
January 20, 2022
from 10 to 350 µM) whereas longer integration times were better for detecting the fluorophores at very short
incubation times (rates ranging from 1.5 · 10−4 to 1.5 · 10−3µM/h).
Figure 10 shows an attempt of modelling both the increase in fluorescence of fluorophores and the decrease
in substrate simultaneously. The samples contained water from a plankton culture filtered with a 0.8 µm
filter and subsequently had high enzyme activity. The substrate used was MUF-β-glucose.
While there is a very clear signal for the fluorophore that shows a linear increase over time the signal is more
variable for the substrate. In the left plot 200 µM of substrate was added to the water sample, while in
the right plot 75 µM was added to the sample. For both incubations the fluorophore increased with around
2 µM after 100 minutes while the decrease in substrates were around 9 to 13 µM for both incubations,
meaning the method failed to measure both substances simultaneously. This implies that the method should
focus on determine just one of the substances. Since the fluorophore showed an increase with less variability
than the substrate decrease the focus was to find the most appropriate instrument settings for resolving
the development of the fluorophores released after enzyme cleavage, and minimising interference from the
fluorescence of the substrate.
Figure 10: In the right plot, the substrate concentration added to the sample is 200 µM MUF-β-glucose and
in the right plot the added substrate concentration is 75 µM. The red lines shows the decrease in substrate
concentrations while the blue line shows an increase in fluorophore concentrations. Both the right and left
y-axis show concentrations (µM). After 100 minutes an increase on 2.01 µM was measured for the 200 µM
substrate sample and for the 75 µM substrate sample the increase was measured to 1.83 µM. The decrease
for the substrates were measured to 13.3 µM and 9.1 respectively.
The second approach in the method development was to find the most appropriate instrument settings for
resolving the development of the fluorophores released after enzyme cleavage, and minimising interference
from the fluorescence of the substrate. This was done by conducting a series of incubation where integration
times, detector gain, and pixel binning were varied. The goal was to find the sweet spot where as much
as possible from the fluorophore signal was captured and measured without exceeding the linear range of
Page 24 of 60
==PAGE:26==
January 20, 2022
the instrument as the fluorescence from fluorophore increases over time and overlap with the signal from
substrates added in high concentrations.
3.6
Incubation times
Incubation time was determined from the incubation of INOC water samples in Figure 10 in order to ensure
the measured initial rates where measured during the initial linear phase of the progress curve. The slopes
used as initial rates are calculated from measurement within the first hour of incubation. For the substrate
concentration on 200 µM, the cleaved fluorophore concentration increases linearly with time during a time
period on 90 minutes (Figure 11). For a substrate concentration on 75 µM, the fluorophore concentrations
deviated from a linear increase with time (Figure 11). From around 90-100 minutes the rates started to
increase, an indication that the microbial community might have adapted to new environment. Another
aspect of importance is that the cuvette was left in the instrument for continuous measurement resulting in
a temperature increase which may have resulted in further increase of rates as increase in temperature tends
to have a positive affect on enzymatic rates. The findings show that initial rates should be measured within
100 minutes to ensure that they are representative of dissolved free enzyme activity. For the specific test
presented here it should be noted that the sample was not sterile filtered and represents both cell associate
enzymes as well as free enzymes. If the sample only contained extracellular enzymes, using a 0.2 µm filter,
the time range for a linearly increase in fluorophore concentrations is expected to be longer. But the finding
do also show how fast a community can adapt and begin to influence rates.
Figure 11: Increase in fluorescence of fluorophores over time. The samples contained water from a plankton
culture filtered with a 0.8 µm filter and subsequently had high enzyme activity. The blue and red lines
show increase in fluorophore fluorescence over time for samples added 200 µM and 75 µM MUF-β-glucose,
respectively. Linear regression was made for both incubations (black lines) using the concentrations measured
within the first hour of the incubation, with the aim to measure instantaneous rates as initial rates and
determine when fluorophore concentrations started to deviate from a linearly increase.
Page 25 of 60
==PAGE:27==
January 20, 2022
3.7
Parallel Factor Analysis (PARAFAC)
Fluorescence EEMs obtained by scanning across multiple wavelengths can be mathematically separated
into their underlying chemical components using parallel factor (PARAFAC) analysis. PARAFAC identifies
fluorophores using an iterative fitting algorithm (Bro 1997, Murphy et al. 2013).
When fluorescence conforms to Beers Law and Kasha’s rule, independently varying fluorophores can be
mathematically identified and quantified.Beers law specifies that the absorbance spectra of a chromophore
linearly scale with concentration by a factor known as molar absorbance.
This is especially important
for our ability to use optical properties to quantify compounds in solution.
According to Kasha’s rule,
fluorescence emission spectra are invariable in shape and essentially only scale by the molar absorbance
and the quantum yield since the emission always occurs from the lowest excited state. Both laws are key
to systematically describing fluorescence landscapes since they postulate that each fluorophore has a given
set of properties that only vary in abundance and not in spectral character. PARAFAC assumes that the
fluorescence signal is the sum of emission by a limited number of unique components with independent
spectral characteristics. When fluorescence spectra are corrected for optical artifacts, and the appropriate
number of components are assumed, then PARAFAC is capable of revealing the pure chemical spectra of the
major underlying fluorescent components in known mixtures, and their concentrations in each sample (Bro
1997, Murphy et al. 2013, 2018). This has for the most part been used to characterise DOM fluorescence
but is also applicable for enzyme assays.
Extracellular enzyme activities are measured using a general
approach where potential activities at saturated substrate concentrations are recorded (Hoppe 1983, Somville
& Billen 1983, Chr´ost et al. 1989). This approach traditionally measures the increase in fluorescence using
a single emission wavelength (ranging from 445nm-460nm) under a single excitation wavelength (ranging
from 365nm-380nm) (Hoppe et al. 1988, Fukuda et al. 2000, Davey et al. 2001, Obayashi & Suzuki 2005,
Baltar et al. 2010). Combining spectral measurements and PARAFAC analysis offers the opportunity to
quantify other contributions of the fluorescence signal that does not arrive from the cleaved fluorophore
and/or the substrate added while also removes interference from other fluorescence. Complications arriving
from background fluorescence due to naturally occurring DOM that overlap the fluorophores signal can be
modelled, quantified and subtracted from the mass balance. Another benefit of using PARAFAC is the
possibility to ensure that increase in signal, which is assumed to be production of fluorophore, actually is a
signal coming from the pure fluorophore since EEMs and spectra can be compared with known spectrum of
the fluorophore.
3.8
Assessment of precision and reproducibility
The precision of measurements and estimation of Michaelis-Menten parameters was calculated from an
initial velocity assay of the water mass collected in Fram Strait 2021 on two different days. On the first day
(2021.10.26), substrate solution was added to five samples in individual cuvettes resulting in a total volume
of 3 mL with final concentrations of substrate ranging from 10 to 200 µM for MUF-β-glucose and leucine-
MCA. On the second day (2021.11.02 and 2021.11.03), the same experiment, but with final concentrations
ranging from 20 to 250 µM for MUF-β-glucose and leucine-MCA, was carried out in triplicates. Initial rates
Page 26 of 60
==PAGE:28==
January 20, 2022
were calculated using linear regression on progress curves (Figure 30 and Figure 37 in Appendix D).
The ”work up” procedure in Matlab is described in detail in Appendix D. Assigning the appropriate number
of components for the PARAFAC model was found to be particularly challenging and required considerable
experimentation. The nature and intensity of background fluorescence (that not due to the substrate and
fluorophore) varied requiring a flexible approach, beyond just modelling two components. When matching a
two-component model with a model of the pure fluorophore often the excitation and emission peaks did not
match with the expected pure spectra. Adding a third component resulted in an component representing the
background DOM in the water sample. Despite this interference being accounted for, isolated MCA and MUF
spectra did not match the pure spectra: the emission peak was shifted slightly towards longer wavelengths
for MCA and shorter wavelengths for MUF (compare black and blue spectra in Figure 12).
Increasing
the complexity to four and five components for MUF and MCA, respectively resulted in the isolation of a
component with emission spectra nearly identical to the pure fluorophores (compare red and black spectra
in Figure 12). The additional interfering components for both substrate were shifted to longer wavelengths
(yellow spectra in Figure 12). The question remains as to what these shifted components represent. The
shifted MCA component had a linearly increasing production rate with substrate concentration (Figure
13) while the production rate of the shifted MUF component appeared to be independent of substrate
concentrations (Figure 13).
Figure 12: Emission spectra plotted for the pure fluorophores (black spectra) compared with components
describing flourophores from PARAFAC models from incubations. For MCA, the blue spectra show the MCA
component in the three-component model, the red line show the MCA component in the five-component
model while the yellow line represents the extra and very similar component discovered in the five-component
model. For MUF, the blue line show the MUF component in the three-component model, the red line show
the MUF component in the four-component model while the yellow line represents the extra and very similar
component discovered in the four-component model.
Page 27 of 60
==PAGE:29==
January 20, 2022
Figure 13: In the top, initial rates for the protease (MCA) assay are plotted. To the left, results from the
three-component model is plotted while the middle and right plot show results from the five-component
model: pure MCA and the extra component, respectively. In the bottom, initial rates for the glucosidase
(MUF) assay are plotted. To the left, results from the three-component model is plotted while the middle and
right plot show results from the four-component model: pure MUF and the extra component, respectively.
Errorbars show the initial rates measured while the blue lines show the non linear regression model for the
assay carried out the 26th October and the red lines show the the non linear regression models for assays
carried out in triplicates on 2nd november for glucosidase and 3rd November for protease.
Page 28 of 60
==PAGE:30==
January 20, 2022
In Figure 13 initial rates for both glucosidase (MUF) and protease (MCA) assays are plotted. To the left,
results from the three-component model is plotted while the middle and right plot show results from the
four/five-component model: pure fluorophore and the extra component, respectively. It is clear for protease,
that resolving this extra component, in the five-component model, results in a halving of the rates measured.
The initial rates measured on the two days were not significantly different from each other for both the
three-component model (2-sample t-test, p-value = 0.1575) and the five-component model (2-sample t-test,
p-value = 0.1843).
The same applied for glucosidase, the initial rates measured where not significantly different from each other
on the two days for both the three- and four-component PARAFAC model (2-sample t-test, p-values > 0.2).
The assay carried out the 26th October only had three significant slopes (from progress curves) resulting in
poor model describing the initial velocity assay.
For the protease assay, the lowest measured initial rate, that was significantly different from zero, was
measured at 10.26 µM Leucine-MCA added (p-value = 0.0007). The initial rate was 1 nM/h ± 0.027. For
glucosidase, the lowest measured initial rate was 0.84 nM/h ± 0.10 and measured at 14.45 µM MUF-β-glucose
added (p-value = 0.0199).
Figure 14: Maximum reaction rates estimated for MUF (left plot) and MCA (right plot). Blue errorbars are
vmax calculated using a three-component PARAFAC model while red errorbars show vmax from four/five-
component models.
For protease, all estimates of vmax were significantly different from zero.
In the five-component model,
initial rates from the 26th October are higher at low substrate concentration and lower at high substrate
concentrations compared to rates from the 3rd November, resulting in slightly distinct trends for the curves
Page 29 of 60
==PAGE:31==
January 20, 2022
(Figure 13). Even though the estimate of vmax on 26th October was below the confidence interval (95%CI,
6.5-9.9 nM/h) for estimates on the 3th November, the difference between estimates of vmax on two days
was not significant (2-sample t-test, p-value = 0.0876)(Figure 14). All estimates of vmax were significantly
different from zero for glucosidase assays carried out the 2nd November while the estimate of vmax on the
26th October was not (only three initial rates could be used in the nonlinear regression model). The estimates
of vmax on the 2nd November were not affected by number of components chosen in the PARAFAC model
(Figure 14).
Michaelis constants were more difficult to estimate with significance from zero compared to vmax.
For
protease, only two out of four were significantly different from zero, using the three-component PARAFAC
model and for the five-component PARAFAC model, 3 of the estimates were significantly different from zero.
For glucosidase, none of the estimates of KM were significantly different from zero regardless the of number
of components used in the PARAFAC model.
More initial rates measured at different substrate concentrations will result in a better the outcome for the
nonlinear regression models. Nonlinear regression models calculated from more than three initial rates had
p-values higher than 0.05. Although the models themselves were significantly different from zero not all
estimates of the kinetics parameters were, especially for KM. In this experiment five different substrate
concentrations were used, indicating future experiments should include more samples at different substrate
concentration to improve estimations of vmax and KM.
All initial velocity assays are plotted with estimates for vmax and KM in Figure 19 and Figure 20 and can
be found in Appendix B.
3.9
Effects from filter size
During the experiment to evaluate effects from seawater freezing and addition of a background tDOM it
was discovered that the control water samples had been filtered with 0.8 µm filters in previous experiments
instead of 0.2 µm as in this experiment. To evaluate the impact of this on derived rates, initial rates were
plotted against substrate concentrations for both incubations. The initial rates measured for protease in
water samples filtered with 0.8 µm filters were around 10 times higher than those measured in water samples
filtered with 0.2 µm filters (Figure 15). Rates for the 0.8 µm filtrate varied between 1 and 6 nM/h while
those for 0.2 µm filtrate were between 0.1 and 0.5 nM/h. The same measurements for MUF indicate that
rates for 0.8 µm filtrate were already very low, ranging up to 0.2 nM/h for the highest substrate addition
(Figure 15). Rates for 0.2 µm filtrate were undetectable (appear negative).
Page 30 of 60
==PAGE:32==
January 20, 2022
Figure 15: The initial rates measured for protease (MCA) and glucosidase (MUF) in water samples filtered
with 0.8 µm filters (light blue) and 0.2 µm filters (dark blue).
3.10
Effects from freezing and background tDOM
To test the hypothesis that addition of a background of tDOM will inhibit the naturally occurring extracel-
lular enzymes resulting in less enzymatic activity and that seawater freezing will affect enzymatic activities,
four different treatments of the water mass collected in Fram Strait 2021 were conducted with initial velocity
assays. Substrate solution was added to seven samples in individual cuvettes resulting in a total volume of
3 mL with final concentrations of substrate ranging from 20 to 350 µM. The four treatments are categorized
as ’Control’, ’tDOM’, ’tDOM + freezing’ and ’Freezing’.
For the protease assay an eight-component PARAFAC model was required in order to obtain a component
comparable with pure MCA. Increasing the model complexity to resolve the MCA signal resulted in much less
variability between replicate measurements (Compare yellow and blue in Figure 16). In Figure 16 the yellow
errorbars show initial rates measured from increase in bulk fluorescence, the combined fluorescence of the
pure fluorophore and the interfering component. It appears the treatments has an effect on the fluorescence
signal of an interfering components rather than on the production of MCA and none of the treatments could
be significantly distinguished from each other when comparing initial rates measured (See blue curves in
Figure 16). Estimates of vmax and KM can be found in Table 2. From the table it is clear that non of the
estimates were significantly different from each other.
For the glucosidase assay six components were needed in the PARAFAC model before the pure MUF signal
could be isolated. However glucosidase activity was too low to be modelled and characterised. It is clear
from the earlier experiment that 0.2 µm filtration removed all available glucosidase from the water.
Page 31 of 60
==PAGE:33==
January 20, 2022
Figure 16: Initial rates measured for protease from linear regression applied to the entire progress curve (0-5
hours). The blue errorbars show the initial rates for the pure MCA component while yellow errorbars show
the initial rates measured from the bulk fluorescence. The black lines show the non linear regression model
for each.
Table 2: Table showing modelled kinetic parameters of pure MCA from each treatment. (*The estimate of
KM was not significant different from zero.)
Control
Freezing
tDOM
tDOM + freezing
vmax (nM/h)
1.7
2.1
1.9
1.9
± 0.15
± 0.64
± 0.17
± 0.19
KM (µM)
168.2
223.3*
146.3
180.2
± 33.3
±131.5
±30.7
±38.6
Page 32 of 60
==PAGE:34==
January 20, 2022
4
Discussion
4.1
Implications of method improvements
The approach, developed in this project, uses the advantages of PARAFAC analysis on entire EEMs, to
distinguish different components with distinct excitation and emission spectra, expanding the current existing
approach. Combining spectral measurements and PARAFAC is beneficial for measuring kinetic parameters
at low substrate concentrations during short incubations (Figure 11).
Very low increases of fluorophore
concentration over time were detected with high accuracy, verified by the fact that progress curves could
be replicated (Figure 10). Initial velocity assays for protease and glucosidase were carried out with high
reproducibility. With the simple PARAFAC model (not capturing pure component), which is comparable
to the normal procedure with bulk fluorescence measurements, estimates of vmax for protease in 0.8 µm
filtrated samples were reproduced with standard errors on 2.7 nM/M. When PARAFAC was used to isolate
the pure fluorophore the standard error was reduced to 0.47 nM/h.
The new approach resolves that there is more than just cleavage of the fluorophore from the substrate occur-
ring. For both assays there is an extra component with fluorescence properties similar to the fluorophores
released (Figure 12). These extra components could potentially either be an intermediate in the substrate-
enzyme reaction or due interactions between fluorophore molecules released such as π −π stacking. π −π
stacking specifically refers to noncovalent interactions between aromatic groups containing π bonds (Wheeler
2013). The fluorophores both consist of aromatic rings, which are generally hydrophobic. As their concen-
tration increases it is likely that they would interact, since they have a higher affinity for each other than for
water. π −π stacking would effectively increase the conjugation of the compounds resulting in a slight shift
of the emission peak towards higher wavelengths. With the current results it cannot be concluded whether
additional fluorescence components detected are intermediates (ES) of the hydrolysis reaction (Equation
1), or resulting from molecular interactions, and this is worth further investigation.
It is however clear
that inclusion of this signal in the bulk fluorescence measurements for standard enzyme assays can increase
estimated rates by a factor of 2.
Existing approaches simplify the quantification of the emerging cleaved fluorophore by detecting emission
in a small waveband at a single excitation; the problem of background DOM is dealt with by subtracting a
sterilized control. Hence this approach assumes only three components of importance. In this project, when
the sample became more complex in regard to DOM composition (the addition of tDOM), six components
were needed to find a pure signal for MUF while eight components were needed for MCA. The most frequently
used emission wavelengths includes the emission area of interfering components, resulting in combined rates of
pure fluorophores and other components which is not accounted for in currently existing methods. PARAFAC
decomposition can attribute intensity changes in overlapping fluorophores to specific compounds via spectral
comparisons. The initial experiments presented here indicate a mass balance problem that deserves further
study. As seen from Figure 10, the decrease in fluorescence of substrate is more steep than the increases in
fluorophores. The expanded spectral measurement approach allows us to follow development in both, which
otherwise has gone unnoticed. Some loss in substrate fluorescence can assumed to be abiotic and corrected,
while the rest could be explained by the production of other intermediates or molecular interactions.
Page 33 of 60
==PAGE:35==
January 20, 2022
Other findings of interest in this project were centered around determination of methodological approaches:
incubation times and IFE. Short incubation times are preferable to eliminate microbial growth as a complicat-
ing factor. The goal with the measurements is to estimate synoptic enzyme hydrolysis rates and characterise
enzyme performance. But this presents the challenge of either measuring small increases in fluorescence or
increasing incubation times to periods where microbial growth can occur. Several studies opt for the latter.
High dissolved extracellular enzymatic activity (1-7nM/h, 65-100% of total enzyme activity) is reported from
the deep central Atlantic Ocean (Baltar et al. 2010). The method uses incubation times ranging from 24 to
48 hours for both unfiltered and 0.2 µm filtered samples. This is questionable as even sterile filtered samples
(0.2 µm) can be expected to experience microbial regrowth at longer incubation times. For studying the
rates and characteristics of free dissolved enzymes it is essential to have very short incubation times. The
enzymes are assumed to not self replicate and the vmax values calculated therefore are correlated to enzyme
concentration. Another study uses incubation times ranging from 3 to 26 hours on unfiltered samples where
background fluorescence was measured at the beginning of the incubation and subtracted from the incu-
bated samples (Fukuda et al. 2000). This opens another questionable aspects of relatively long incubation
times. If there are microbes in the sample and one incubates we can expect the fluorescence properties
of DOM to change as microbes take up specific components and produce others (Stedmon & Cory 2014).
These changes in DOM fluorescence will affect the bulk fluorescence measured in the existing approach and
cannot be corrected for when fluorescence of background DOM is measured in the beginning of incubation.
Potentially leading to either over- or underestimation of fluorophores, since emission spectra of DOM overlap
the spectra of both MUF and MCA. The current single-wavelength approach does not have a procedure for
IFE correction of samples. IFE can originate from both high substrate concentrations (Urvoy et al. 2020),
and from background fluorescence of DOM (Figure 9). Several studies uses the the existing approach on
highly concentrated DOM samples including sediment samples (Arnosti 2000, 2003b). These results are likely
underestimated due to IFE that has not been corrected. The spectral measurement approach derived here
is capable of taking IFE and changing fluorescence of DOM into account and results in more precise (less
variable) measurements.
In this study, vmax for 0.2 µm filtrated samples were on the order of 1.8 nM/h with standard errors on
0.17 nM/h and measured within 5 hours of incubation. Rates reported in other studies are typically 5-100
nM/h and are mainly for unfiltered or 1 µm filtered water samples, with incubation times often exceeding 3
hours depending on the enzymatic activity of the sample (Fukuda et al. 2000, Davey et al. 2001, Obayashi
& Suzuki 2005, Baltar et al. 2010). The technique have been improved to allow us to better study the role
of dissolved extracellular enzymes which the methodology could not let us do before. With the improvement
of the method other methodological aspect of interest can be investigated. One could be the relevance of the
very high substrate concentrations. They are useful for the determination of enzyme concentration but the
actual enzymatic rates will most likely be substrate limited in their natural environments. The approach
used in this project will give the opportunity to measure enzymatic rates at substrate concentrations closer
to concentrations matching natural environments.
Page 34 of 60
==PAGE:36==
January 20, 2022
4.2
Implication of the result from manipulations
Addition of a background of terrestrial DOM was hypothesised to inhibit the naturally occurring extracellular
enzymes resulting in less enzymatic activity. Terrestrial DOM consist of plant-based structural polymers that
are not easily degradable and considered more resistant to bacterial degradation. Amino acid–like FDOM
fractions have been considered as more labile, but a study investigating lability of streamwater FDOM found
that various amino acid–like FDOM fractions spanned the range from labile to more recalcitrant (Cory &
Kaplan 2012). A suggestion why a background of tDOM will result in less enzymatic activity, is that plant-
based structural polymers could contain active sites inhibiting dissolved extracellular enzymes originating
from oceanic microbes. In this study, rates containing a background of tDOM were not significantly different
for samples containing only oceanic DOM, hence the hypothesis could not be verified by this experiment.
The tDOM added to the oceanic DOM sample collected in Fram Strait, is an an isolate from Suwannee
River. It is essentially up concentrated organic matter and maybe it contains intact functional enzymes. An
addition of enzymes from the tDOM to the sample, can explain why an inhibition of extracellular enzymes
could not be detected. Autoclaving a water sample from the same water mass as used in this experiment,
before the addition of concentrated tDOM, could reveal if there is added dissolved extracellular enzymes to
the water mass along with the addition of tDOM.
Independent of the background concentrations of tDOM, freezing did not result in rates that were significantly
different from the corresponding controls as hypothesized. The substrate was not added until just before
incubation start, so effects from treatments would not change the availability of the substrate it self but only
affect the availability and function of free dissolved extracellular enzymes. These findings suggest that the
expected enzymatic effects from freezing could more be due to changes in the bioavailability of DOM during
freezing than actual effects on dissolved extracellular enzymes ability to hydrolyze the substrates. Further
studies of enzymatic activity effects from freezing, could include the addition of substrates at different times
during the brine exclusion to investigate the effects of freezing on bioavailability of substrates.
The results from the glucosidase assay where inconclusive as enzyme concentrations in the 0.2 µm filtered
water were likely too low. However MUF, is very sensitive to pH changes and other method approaches
adjust pH to 10 just before measurement (Chr´ost & Krambeck 1986, Urvoy et al. 2020), this was not an
option in this method as the incubation was carried out in individual cuvettes that was measured several
times during the incubation period. The pH in the water samples from the different treatments were not
tested prior to fluorescence measurements and can possibly be an explanation why the results for tDOM
generally are much more variable (Suwannee River pH = 3.3 (Green et al. 2015)). For future glucosidase
assays, the pH should be tested prior to measurements and a pH calibration curve can be implemented to
correct for lack of signal so that the assay can be compared between different water masses with different
values of pH.
Page 35 of 60
==PAGE:37==
January 20, 2022
5
Conclusion
A new approach for measuring enzyme activity was implemented. The approach gains the advantages of
using Parallel Factor Analysis on entire EEMs to distinguish different components and have been used to
expand the current existing approach. With the expansion of the existing method, an extra component
with measurable rates were found for both protease and glucosidase assays, especially affecting the rates
measured for protease. The method demonstrates that previously unidentified spectra can occur that cannot
be assigned to the molecules thought to be produced. Furthermore the method used in this study improve
the understanding of confounding factors commonly deemed insignificant (IFE and spectral overlap) and
leads to more precision going forward.
This method can improve the detection limit by 10-100 compared to results using the existing approach. In
0.2 µm filtrated samples maximum reaction rates were measured just below 2 nM/h with standard errors on
0.17 nM/h and incubation times around 5 hours. The technique have been improved to allow us to better
study the role of dissolved extracellular enzymes which the methodology could not let us do before.
Addition of a background of tDOM was hypothesised to inhibit the naturally occurring extracellular en-
zymes resulting in less enzymatic activity. In this study, rates containing a background of tDOM were not
significantly different from samples containing only oceanic DOM, hence the hypothesis could not be verified
by this experiment and needs further investigations. Independent of background concentrations of tDOM,
seawater freezing did not result in rates that were significantly different from the corresponding controls as
hypothesized. Substrates were added after seawater samples were exposed to freezing, suggesting expected
effects from freezing could more be due to changes in the bioavailability of DOM than actual effects on
dissolved extracellular enzymes ability to hydrolyze a given substrate.
Page 36 of 60
==PAGE:38==
January 20, 2022
References
Aagaard, K. & Carmack, E. (1989), ‘The role of sea ice and other fresh water in the arctic circulation’,
Journal of Geophysical Research-oceans 94(C10), 14485–14498.
Albertson, N. H., Nystr¨om, T. & Kjelleberg, S. (1990), ‘Exoprotease activity of two marine bacteria during
starvation’, Applied and Environmental Microbiology 56(1), 218–223.
URL: https://journals.asm.org/doi/abs/10.1128/aem.56.1.218-223.1990
Alexander, M. (1994), Biodegradation and bioremediation, Academic Press,.
Amon, R. (2004), The Organic Carbon Cycle in the Arctic Ocean, Edited by R. S. Stein and R. W. Mac-
Donald, Springer.
Amon, R. & Benner, R. (1994), ‘Rapid cycling of high-molecular-weight dissolved organic matter in the
ocean’, Nature 369(6481), 549–552.
Amon, R., Budeus, G. & Meon, B. (2003), ‘Dissolved organic carbon distribution and origin in the nordic
seas: Exchanges with the arctic ocean and the north atlantic’, Journal of Geophysical Research-oceans
108(C7), 14–1–17.
Amon, R. M. & Benner, R. (1996), ‘Bacterial utilization of different size classes of dissolved organic matter’,
Limnology and Oceanography 41(1), 41–51.
Anderson, L. (2002), ‘Chapter 14 - doc in the arctic ocean’, Biogeochemistry of Marine Dissolved Organic
Matter pp. 665–683.
Arnosti, C. (2000), ‘Substrate specificity in polysaccharide hydrolysis: Contrasts between bottom water and
sediments’, Limnology and Oceanography 45(5), 1112–1119.
Arnosti, C. (2003a), 13 - microbial extracellular enzymes and their role in dissolved organic matter cycling, in
S. E. Findlay & R. L. Sinsabaugh, eds, ‘Aquatic Ecosystems’, Aquatic Ecology, Academic Press, Burling-
ton, pp. 315–342.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780122563713500147
Arnosti, C. (2003b), ‘Fluorescent derivatization of polysaccharides and carbohydrate-containing biopoly-
mers for measurement of enzyme activities in complex media’, Journal of Chromatography B: Analytical
Technologies in the Biomedical and Life Sciences 793(1), 181–191.
Arnosti, C. (2011), ‘Microbial extracellular enzymes and the marine carbon cycle’, Annual Review of Marine
Science 3(1), 401–425.
Arnosti, C., Durkin, S. & Jeffrey, W. H. (2005), ‘Patterns of extracellular enzyme activities among pelagic
marine microbial communities: Implications for cycling of dissolved organic carbon’, Aquatic Microbial
Ecology 38(2), 135–145.
Atkins, P. & De Paula, J. (2006), Atkins’ physical chemistry, Oxford University Press,.
Atkins, P. & De Paula, J. (2014), Atkins’ physical chemistry, Oxford University Press,.
Page 37 of 60
==PAGE:39==
January 20, 2022
Baltar, F., Ar´ıstegui, J., Gasol, J. M., Sintes, E., Van Aken, H. M. & Herndl, G. J. (2010), ‘High dissolved
extracellular enzymatic activity in the deep central atlantic ocean’, Aquatic Microbial Ecology 58(3), 287–
302.
Baltar, F., Ar´ıstegui, J., Sintes, E., Van Aken, H. M., Gasol, J. M. & Herndl, G. J. (2009), ‘Prokaryotic extra-
cellular enzymatic activity in relation to biomass production and respiration in the meso- and bathypelagic
waters of the (sub)tropical atlantic’, Environmental Microbiology 11(8), 1998–2014.
Benner, R. (2002), ‘Chapter 3 - chemical composition and reactivity’, Biogeochemistry of Marine Dissolved
Organic Matter pp. 59–90.
Benner, R. & Amon, R. M. (2015), ‘The size-reactivity continuum of major bioelements in the ocean’, Annual
Review of Marine Science 7(1), 185–205.
Benner, R., Louchouarn, P. & Amon, R. M. (2005), ‘Terrigenous dissolved organic matter in the arctic
ocean and its transport to surface and deep waters of the north atlantic’, Global Biogeochemical Cycles
19(2), 1–11.
Blanco, A. & Blanco, G. (2017), ‘Chapter 8 - enzymes’, pp. 153–175.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128035504000082
Bro, R. (1997), ‘Parafac. tutorial and applications’, Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems
38(2), 149–171.
Cherrier, J., Bauer, J. E. & Druffel, E. R. (1996), ‘Utilization and turnover of labile dissolved organic
matter by bacterial heterotrophs in eastern north pacific surface waters’, Marine Ecology Progress Series
139(1-3), 267–279.
Choi, B., Rempala, G. A. & Kim, J. K. (2017), ‘Beyond the michaelis-menten equation: Accurate and
efficient estimation of enzyme kinetic parameters’, Scientific Reports 7(1), 17018.
Chr´ost, R. (1992), ‘Significance of bacterial ectoenzymes in aquatic environments’, Hydrobiologia 243(1), 61–
70.
Chr´ost, R. & Krambeck, H.-J. (1986), ‘Fluorescence correction for measurements of enzyme activity in
natural waters using methylumbelliferyl-substrates’, Archiv fur Hydrobiologie 106, 79–90.
Chr´ost, R., M¨unster, U., Rai, H., Albrecht, D., Witzel, P. & Overbeck, J. (1989), ‘Photosynthetic production
and exoenzymatic degradation of organic matter in the euphotic zone of a eutrophic lake’, Journal of
Plankton Research 11(2), 223–242.
Cory, R. M. & Kaplan, L. A. (2012), ‘Biological lability of streamwater fluorescent dissolved organic matter’,
Limnology and Oceanography 57(5), 1347–1360.
Davey, K. E., Kirby, R. R., Turley, C. M., Weightman, A. J. & Fry, J. C. (2001), ‘Depth variation of bacterial
extracellular enzyme activity and population diversity in the northeastern north atlantic ocean’, Deep-sea
Research Part Ii: Topical Studies in Oceanography 48(4-5), 1003–1017.
Page 38 of 60
==PAGE:40==
January 20, 2022
Ducklow, H. W., Steinberg, D. K. & Buesseler, K. O. (2001), ‘Upper ocean carbon export and the biological
pump’, Oceanography 14(4), 50–58.
Eljarrat, E. (2012), ‘1.02 - methodologies for sample preservation and stabilization’, pp. 31–49.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123813732000041
Fukuda, R., Sohrin, Y., Saotome, N., Fukuda, H., Nagata, T. & Koike, I. (2000), ‘East-west gradient in
ectoenzyme activities in the subarctic pacific: Possible regulation by zinc’, Limnology and Oceanography
45(4), 930–939.
Granskog, M. A., Virkkunen, K., Thomas, D. N., Ehn, J., Kola, H. & Martma, T. (2004), ‘Chemical
properties of brackish water ice in the bothnian bay, the baltic sea’, Journal of Glaciology 50(169), 292–
302.
Granskog, M., Stedmon, C., Dodd, P., Amon, R., Pavlov, A., de Steur, L. & Hansen, E. (2012), ‘Char-
acteristics of colored dissolved organic matter (cdom) in the arctic outflow in fram strait: assessing the
changes and fate of terrigenous cdom in the arctic ocean’, Journal of Geophysical Research - Oceans
117(C12), 1–13.
Green, N. W., McInnis, D., Hertkorn, N., Maurice, P. A. & Perdue, E. M. (2015), ‘Suwannee river natural
organic matter: Isolation of the 2r101n reference sample by reverse osmosis’, Environmental Engineering
Science 32(1), 38–44.
Green, S. & Blough, N. (1994), ‘Optical absorption and fluorescence properties of chromophoric dissolved
organic matter in natural waters’, Limnology and Oceanography 39(8), 1903–1916.
Gruber, N., Clement, D., Carter, B. R., Feely, R. A., van Heuven, S., Hoppema, M., Ishii, M., Key, R. M.,
Kozyr, A., Lauvset, S. K., Lo Monaco, C., Mathis, J. T., Murata, A., Olsen, A., Perez, F. F., Sabine,
C. L., Tanhua, T. & Wanninkhof, R. (2019), ‘The oceanic sink for anthropogenic co2 from 1994 to 2007’,
Science (washington D C) 363(6432, Sp. Iss. SI), 1193–1198.
Hama, T., Yanagi, K. & Hama, J. (2004), ‘Decrease in molecular weight of photosynthetic products of marine
phytoplankton during early diagenesis’, Limnology and Oceanography 49(2), 471–481.
Hansell, D. A., Carlson, C. A., Repeta, D. J. & Schlitze, R. (2009), ‘Dissolved organic matter in the ocean:
a controversy stimulates new insights’, Oceanography 22(4), 202–211.
Hansell, D. A., Kadko, D. & Bates, N. R. (2004), ‘Degradation of terrigenous dissolved organic carbon in
the western arctic ocean’, Science 304(5672), 858–861.
Hedges, J. I. (1992), ‘Global biogeochemical cycles: Progress and problems’, Marine Chemistry 39(1-3), 67–
93.
Hedges, J. I. (2002), ‘Chapter 1 - why dissolved organics matter’, Biogeochemistry of Marine Dissolved
Organic Matter pp. 1–33.
Hernes, P. J. & Benner, R. (2002), ‘Transport and diagenesis of dissolved and particulate terrigenous organic
matter in the north pacific ocean’.
Page 39 of 60
==PAGE:41==
January 20, 2022
Hoppe, H.-G. (1983), ‘Significance of exoenzymatic activities in the ecology of brackish water: measurements
by means of methylumbelliferyl-substrates’, Marine Ecology Progress Series 11(3), 299–308.
URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/44634717
Hoppe, H.-G. & Arnosti, C. (2002), Ecological significance of bacterial enzymes in the marine environment,
in R. Burns & R. Dick, eds, ‘Enzymes in the environment:’, Marcel Dekker, pp. 73 – 97.
Hoppe, H. G. & Ullrich, S. (1999), ‘Profiles of ectoenzymes in the indian ocean: Phenomena of phosphatase
activity in the mesopelagic zone’, Aquatic Microbial Ecology 19(2), 139–148.
Hoppe, H., Kim, S. & Gocke, K. (1988), ‘Microbial decomposition in aquatic environments: Combined
process of extracellular enzyme activity and substrate uptake’, Applied and Environmental Microbiology
54(3), 784–790.
Jørgensen, L., Stedmon, C. A., Kaartokallio, H., Middelboe, M. & Thomas, D. N. (2015), ‘Changes in
the composition and bioavailability of dissolved organic matter during sea ice formation’, Limnology and
Oceanography 60(3), 817–830.
Kieber, R., Zhou, X. & Mopper, K. (1990), ‘Formation of carbonyl compounds from uv-induced photodegra-
dation of humic substances in natural waters: Fate of riverine carbon in the sea microbial oxidation’,
Limnology and Oceanography 35(7), 1503–1515.
Kiørboe, T., Ploug, H. & Thygesen, U. H. (2001), ‘Fluid motion and solute distribution around sinking
aggregates i : Small-scale fluxes and heterogeneity of nutrients in the pelagic environment’, Marine Ecology
- Progress Series 211(211), 1–13.
Koch, B. P., Witt, M., Engbrodt, R., Dittmar, T. & Kattner, G. (2005), ‘Molecular formulae of marine and
terrigenous dissolved organic matter detected by electrospray ionization fourier transform ion cyclotron
resonance mass spectrometry’, Geochimica Et Cosmochimica Acta 69(13), 3299–3308.
Kothawala, D., Murphy, K., Stedmon, C., Weyhenmeyer, G. & Tranvik, l. (2013), ‘Inner filter correction of
dissolved organic matter fluorescence’, Limnology and Oceanography: Methods 11(December), 616–630.
Lakowicz, J. R. (2006), Principles of fluorescence spectroscopy, Springer.
Liu, S. & Liu, Z. (2018), ‘Free extracellular enzymes dominate initial peptide hydrolysis in coastal seawater’,
Marine Chemistry 199, 37–43.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304420317302694
Lobbes, J. M., Fitznar, H. P. & Kattner, G. (2000), ‘Biogeochemical characteristics of dissolved and par-
ticulate organic matter in russian rivers entering the arctic ocean’, Geochimica Et Cosmochimica Acta
64(17), 2973–2983.
Miller, W. & Zepp, R. (1995), ‘Photochemical production of dissolved inorganic carbon from terrestrial
organic matter: Significance to the oceanic organic carbon cycle’, Geophysical Research Letters 22(4), 417–
420.
Page 40 of 60
==PAGE:42==
January 20, 2022
Mobed, J. J., Hemmingsen, S. L., Autry, J. L. & Mcgown, L. B. (1996), ‘Fluorescence characterization of
ihss humic substances: Total luminescence spectra with absorbance correction’, Environmental Science
and Technology 30(10), 3061–3065.
Moran, M. A. & Zepp, R. G. (1997), ‘Role of photoreactions in the formation of biologically labile compounds
from dissolved organic matter’, Limnology and Oceanography 42(6), 1307–1316.
Murphy, K. R., Stedmon, C. A., Graeber, D. & Bro, R. (2013), ‘Fluorescence spectroscopy and multi-way
techniques. parafac’, Analytical Methods 5(23), 6557–6566.
Murphy, K., Timko, S. A., Gonsior, M., Powers, L., W¨unsch, U. & Stedmon, C. A. (2018), ‘Photochem-
istry illuminates ubiquitous organic matter fluorescence spectra’, Environmental Science and Technology
52(19), 11243–11250.
M¨uller, S., V¨ah¨atalo, A. V., Granskog, M. A., Autio, R. & Kaartokallio, H. (2011), ‘Behaviour of dissolved
organic matter during formation of natural and artificially grown baltic sea ice’, Annals of Glaciology
52(57), 233–241.
Obayashi, Y. & Suzuki, S. (2005), ‘Proteolytic enzymes in coastal surface seawater: Significant activity of
endopeptidases and exopeptidases’, Limnology and Oceanography 50(2), 722–726.
Obernosterer, I., Reitner, B. & Herndl, G. J. (1999), ‘Contrasting effects of solar radiation on dissolved or-
ganic matter and its bioavailability to marine bacterioplankton’, Limnology and Oceanography 44(7), 1645–
1654.
Opsahl, S., Benner, R. & Amon, R. M. (1999), ‘Major flux of terrigenous dissolved organic matter through
the arctic ocean’, Limnology and Oceanography 44(8), 2017–2023.
Ryder, A. G., Stedmon, C., Harrit, N. & Bro, R. (2017), ‘Calibration, standardization, and quantitative anal-
ysis of multidimensional fluorescence (mdf) measurements on complex mixtures (iupac technical report)’,
Pure and Applied Chemistry 89(12), 1849–1870.
Sarmiento, J., Gruber, N. & McElroy, M. (2007), ‘Ocean biogeochemical dynamics’, Physics Today 60, 65–.
Scully, N. M., Maie, N., Dailey, S. K., Boyer, J. N., Jones, R. D. & Jaff´e, R. (2004), ‘Early diagenesis
of plant-derived dissolved organic matter along a wetland, mangrove, estuary ecotone’, Limnology and
Oceanography 49(5), 1667–1678.
Shiklomanov, I., Shiklomanov, A., Lammers, R., Peterson, B. & Vorosmarty, C. (2000), ‘The dynamics of
river water inflow to the arctic ocean’, Na Sci Pt 2 70, 281–296.
Siegenthaler, U. & Sarmiento, J. (1993), ‘Atmospheric carbon dioxide and the ocean’, Nature 365(6442), 119–
125.
Somville, M. & Billen, G. (1983), ‘A method for determining exoproteolytic activity in natural waters’,
Limnology and Oceanography 28(1), 190–193.
URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2836162
Page 41 of 60
==PAGE:43==
January 20, 2022
Stedmon, C. A., Amon, R. M., Rinehart, A. J. & Walker, S. A. (2011), ‘The supply and characteristics of
colored dissolved organic matter (cdom) in the arctic ocean: Pan arctic trends and differences’, Marine
Chemistry 124(1-4), 108–118.
Stedmon, C. A. & Cory, R. M. (2014), Biological Origins and Fate of Fluorescent Dissolved Organic Mat-
ter in Aquatic Environments, Cambridge Environmental Chemistry Series, Cambridge University Press,
p. 278–300.
Stedmon, C. A., Thomas, D. N., Granskog, M., Kaartokallio, H., Papadimitriou, S. & Kuosa, H. (2007),
‘Characteristics of dissolved organic matter in baltic coastal sea ice: Allochthonous or autochthonous
origins?’, Environmental Science and Technology 41(21), 7273–7279.
Steinberg, D. K. & Landry, M. R. (2017), ‘Zooplankton and the ocean carbon cycle’, Annual Review of
Marine Science 9(1), 413–444.
Urvoy, M., Labry, C., Delmas, D., Creac’h, L. & L’Helguen, S. (2020), ‘Microbial enzymatic assays in
environmental water samples: Impact of inner filter effect and substrate concentrations’, Limnology and
Oceanography: Methods 18(12), 725–738.
Warren, R. A. (1996), ‘Microbial hydrolysis of polysaccharides’, Annual Review of Microbiology 50(1), 183–
212.
Weiss, M., Abele, U., Weckesser, J., Welte, W., Schiltz, E. & Schulz, G. (1991), ‘Molecular architecture and
electrostatic properties of a bacterial porin’, Science 254(5038), 1627–1630.
Wheeler, S. E. (2013), ‘Understanding substituent effects in noncovalent interactions involving aromatic
rings’, Accounts of Chemical Research 46(4), 1029–1038.
W¨unsch, U., Murphy, K. R. & Stedmon, C. (2015), ‘Fluorescence quantum yields of natural organic matter
and organic compounds: Implications for the fluorescence-based interpretation of organic matter compo-
sition’, Frontiers in Marine Science 2, 98.
Page 42 of 60
==PAGE:44==
January 20, 2022
A
Appendix: Learning objectives
1. Describe the role of DOM in the marine carbon cycle
2. Design and conduct experiments to investigate enzyme degradation of DOM and effects of sea ice
formation on DOM characteristics
3. Perform seawater analyses for dissolved organic carbon and optical characterisation of DOM
4. Conduct measurements of microbial enzyme activity
5. Interpret the results to evaluate the influence of DOM and brine exclusion on enzyme rates
6. Evaluate the findings within the perspective of the marine carbon cycle and climate change
7. Communicate the scientific and technological concepts and findings in scientific paper/written report
and oral presentation
Page 43 of 60
==PAGE:45==
January 20, 2022
B
Appendix: Additional figures
B.1
Molar fluorescence and IFE
Figure 17: Calibration curves of molar fluorescence for MUF, MUF-β-glucose, MCA and Leucine-MCA in
plastic cuvettes.
Figure 18: In the top, absorbance is plotted against excitation wavelengths. Vertical dotted lines show the
picked excitation wavelengths (255 nm and 440 nm) used in the plots in the bottom. In the two bottom
plots, blue crosses show the fluorescence intensity with no IFE correction and the red and yellow crosses
show IFE corrected fluorescence intensity for for oceanic DOM samples and tDOM samples, respectively. In
the bottom plot to the left, fluorescence intensity is plotted for all samples at 255 nm excitation and 440
nm emission, showing IFE that is substrate driven. In the bottom plot to the right, fluorescence intensity
is plotted for all samples at 440 nm excitation and 440 nm emission, showing IFE due to fluorescence of
background DOM.
Page 44 of 60
==PAGE:46==
January 20, 2022
B.2
Initial velocity assays replicated for protease and glucosidase
Figure 19: Initial velocity assays for protease with estimates for maximum reaction rates, vmax and Michaelis
constants, KM. The blue line is the initial velocity assay from the 26th October while the red, yellow and
purple lines show the initial velocity assay from the 3rd November. From the top, the initial rates of MCA
in the three-component model, MCA in the five-component model and the extra component in the five-
component model are plotted against substrate concentrations added.
Page 45 of 60
==PAGE:47==
January 20, 2022
Figure 20: Initial velocity assays for glucosidase with estimates for maximum reaction rates, vmax and
Michaelis constants, KM. The blue line is the initial velocity assay from the 26th October while the red,
yellow and purple lines show the initial velocity assay from the 2nd November. From the top, the initial
rates of MCA in the three-component model, MCA in the four-component model and the extra component
in the four-component model are plotted against substrate concentrations added.
Page 46 of 60
==PAGE:48==
January 20, 2022
B.3
Initial velocity assays with tDOM and freezing effects
Figure 21: Progress curves for all four treatments for the hydrolysis of leucine-MCA. From top the con-
centration of MCA, extra component and the combined concentration is plotted against time. From left,
progress curves for ’Control’, ’tDOM’, ’tDOM + freezing’ and ’freezing’ are plotted.
Page 47 of 60
==PAGE:49==
January 20, 2022
Figure 22: Progress curves for all four treatments for the hydrolysis of MUF-β-glucose.
From top the
concentration of MUF, the extra component and the combined concentration is plotted against time. From
left, progress curves for ’Control’, ’tDOM’, ’tDOM + freezing’ and ’freezing’ are plotted.
Page 48 of 60
==PAGE:50==
January 20, 2022
C
Appendix: Michaelis-Menten kinetics
The steady-state approximation is used to derive the Michaelis-Menten equation from the Michaelis-Menten
mechanism. Assuming steady-state and using the approximation it is possible to obtain/the change concen-
tration of the enzyme-substrate complex per time unit from equation 1
d[ES]
dt
= ka[E][S] −k′
a[ES] −kb[ES] ≈0
(6)
As seen from the above equation, the enzyme-substrate complex is produced from the reactants, enzyme and
substrate, with a constant on ka. At the same time, the enzyme-substrate complex, unbinds and produce the
the final product with a constant on −kb, which lowers the concentration of the enzyme-substrate complex.
Also important to note from equation 1 is that the formation from substrate and enzyme to enzyme-substrate
complex is an equilibrium which means that some of the enzyme-substrate can unbind and return to reactant
instead of product with a constant on −k′
a.
Isolation of [E] in equation 6 gives us
[E] = k′
a + kb
ka
[ES]
[S]
(7)
where [E] and [S] is the concentration of available/free enzyme and substrate. Now it is very suitable to
define the Michaelis constant
KM = k′
a + kb
ka
= [E][S]
[ES]
(8)
where the units of KM is molar concentration. Now we can reduce equation 7 to
[E] = KM[ES]
[S]
(9)
In the aim to describe the rate law in terms of initial concentration of substrate and enzyme, we note that
the initial concentration of enzyme must be equal to all free enzymes and enzyme-substrate complexes,
[E]0 = [E] + [ES] and when using the equation for [E] in equation 9 we get
[E]0 = KM[ES]
[S]
+ [ES]
(10)
and isolating [ES] in above equation gives us
[ES] =
[E]0
1 + KM/[S]
(11)
The free substrate concentration is assumed to be equal to the initial substrate concentration, since the
substrate is typically in large excess relative to enzyme. This means that [S] = [S]0 and we can now rewrite
the equation for [ES] to
[ES] =
[E]0
1 + KM/[S]0
(12)
Page 49 of 60
==PAGE:51==
January 20, 2022
The rate of product formation according to the Michaelis-Menten mechanism is
v = kb[ES]
(13)
and when substituting [ES] in equation 13 with the definition in 12 we will obtain the Michaelis-Menten
equation (equation 2)
v =
kb[E]0
1 + KM/[S]0
(14)
If we plot the rate of reaction, the Michaelis-Menten equation, equation against the amount of substrate
added we will achieve a plot as in figure 23. As seen in the figure, when [S]0 << KM the rate is proportional
to [S]0
v =
kb
KM
[S]0[E]0
(15)
and [S]0 >> KM the rate is independent of [S]0 and reaches a maximum value, vmax
v = vmax = kb[E]0
(16)
Figure 23: Illustration of the initial velocity assay: initial rates of the reaction plotted against substrate
concentrations (Atkins & De Paula 2006).
The Lineweaver-Burk plot is an easy tool for analysing an enzyme-catalyzed reaction that proceeds by a
Michaelis-Menten mechanism. The data analysis is done by linear regression by rearranging the Michalis-
Menten equation.
Page 50 of 60
==PAGE:52==
January 20, 2022
Using the definition of vmax in the Michaelis-Menten equation gives
v =
vmax
1 + KM/[S]0
(17)
and when taking the reciprocals on both sides the above equation can be rearranged into linear regression,
also termed the Lineweaver-Burk plot:
1
v =
1
vmax
+
 KM
vmax

1
[S]0
(18)
C.1
Lineweaver-Burk plot
As given from equation 18, the Lineweaver-Burk plot is a plot of 1/v against 1/[S]0. This results in a straigt
line with a slope on KM/vmax and a intercept on the y-axis on 1/vmax, as visualized in figure 24.
Figure 24: Illustration of the Lineweaver-Burk plot: inverse initial rates of the reaction plotted against
inverse substrate concentrations, resulting in a linear line (Atkins & De Paula 2006).
The disadvantages with Lineweaver-Burk plot is that this method distorts the error structure of the data,
and therefore it is unreliable for the determination of enzyme kinetic parameters.
Other plots such as
Hanes-Woolf plot or Eadie–Hofstee plot are more used for the calculation of parameters.
C.2
Interpretation of the Michaelis constant
The Michaelis constant, KM, is the characteristic of a given enzyme acting on a given substrate.
Page 51 of 60
==PAGE:53==
January 20, 2022
If we write out equation 17 into a more simple form of equation it is easier to visualize the interpretation of
KM
v =
vmax[S]0
KM + [S]0
(19)
We can now investigate the above equation when v = 1/2vmax and see that when the rate of the enzyme-
catalyzed reaction is equal to the half the maximum rate, vmax, it follows that the substrate concentration
is equal to Michaelis constant.
1
2vmax =
vmax[S]
KM + [S]
KM + [S] = 2[S]
KM = [S]
(20)
In other words, the Michaelis constant is the amount of substrate required to to induce/elicit half of enzymes
maximum rate under the given conditions. This means, that the smaller value of KM the more efficient is
the enzymes or the easier it is for the enzymes to catalyze the reaction. In terms of microbial extracellular
enzymes, a larger KM will mean that enzymes have a harder time hydrolyzing the specific substrate relative
to given smaller KM value. The Michaelis constant can to some degree help us describe the efficiency of
a specific enzyme-substrate reaction. Relative changes in the value of the constant can be an indication of
changes within environment.
Page 52 of 60
==PAGE:54==
January 20, 2022
D
Appendix: PARAFAC procedure in Matlab
First all data is imported and arranged into a struct and merged with metadata information. Then all data
is raman normalized and IFE corrected. All EEMs are reviewed for major optical disturbances from the
measurements and correctered (delete part of EEM that is not correctly measured).
After correction the PARAFAC model is performed, using randinitanal, with 2 to 8 components in models
to compare with number of components fits best for the specific experiment.
Listing 2: Matlab implementation of the PARAFAC model runned with 2 to 8 components
m mxxDOM = randinitanal ( scaleeem (mxxDOM, 1 . 2 ) ,2:8 , ’ s t a r t s ’ ,50 , ’ convgcrit ’
,1 e−6) ;
m mxxDOM=
scaleeem (m mxxDOM, ’ reverse ’ ) ;
viewmodels (m mxxDOM)
% randinitanal
i s
running
the PARAFAC models ,
with
2:8
components and 50
models have been run
fo r
each chosen number of
components .
% 1e−6 s e t s
the
c r i t e r i a
f o r when the models
are
converged .
% mxxDOM,
i s
a struct
containing
a l l
measured EEMs and metadata (mxx
r e f e r s
to
e i t h e r MUF or MCA)
D.1
MCA work up procedure
An overview of all the models is formed using viewmodels:
Figure 25: Overview of PARAFAC models performed with 2-6 components.
Page 53 of 60
==PAGE:55==
January 20, 2022
Then the 3 and 5 number of components models is matched with the model of the pure component using
matchmodels, so which ones have the best match. In figure 26 the three component models is matched with
pure MCA and in 27 the five component models is matched:
Figure 26: MCA - 2021.11.03: Match 3 component PARAFAC model with PARAFAC model of pure MCA.
Figure 27: MCA - 2021.11.03: Match 5 component PARAFAC model with PARAFAC model of pure MCA.
After selection of number of components to use in the model, the fingerprint plots of the chosen model is
checked, to see if the components makes sense. Here the five component model had the best match and was
selected (Figure 28). The fingerprint plot for the three component model is in figure 29, and it is very clear
that the ”C2” component in the three component model is split into two components in the five component
model, here ”C2” and ”C3”:
Page 54 of 60
==PAGE:56==
January 20, 2022
Figure 28: Fingerprint plots of components in 5 component PARAFAC model performed for detection of
MCA.
Figure 29: Fingerprint plots of components in 3 component PARAFAC model performed for detection of
MCA.
After selection of model, the component representing the fluorophore MCA is converted from fluorescence in-
Page 55 of 60
==PAGE:57==
January 20, 2022
tensity into concentrations with help from calibration curve of molar fluorescence. From these concentrations
progress curves are formed (Figure 30) and initial rates are calculated (Figure 30 and 31):
Figure 30: Progress curves and initial rates for MCA.
Figure 31: Initial rates for MCA.
D.2
MUF work up procedure
An overview of all the models is formed using viewmodels:
Page 56 of 60
==PAGE:58==
January 20, 2022
Figure 32: Overview of PARAFAC models performed with 2-6 components.
Then the 3 and 4 number of components models is matched with the model of the pure component using
matchmodels, to check which ones have the best match. In figure 33 the three component models is matched
with pure MUF and in 34 the five component models is matched:
Figure 33: MUF - 2021.11.02: Match 3 component PARAFAC model with PARAFAC model of pure MUF.
Figure 34: MUF - 2021.11.02: Match 4 component PARAFAC model with PARAFAC model of pure MUF.
Page 57 of 60
==PAGE:59==
January 20, 2022
After selection of number of components to use in the model, the fingerprint plots of the chosen model is
checked, to see if the components makes sense. Here the four component model had the best match and was
selected (Figure 36). The fingerprint plot for the three component model is in figure 35.The ”C3” component
in the three component (MUF) have almost identical emission spectra but very distinct excitation spectra
as ”C3” in the four component model (potential intermediate). ”C2” is MUF in the four component model:
Figure 35: Fingerprint plots of components in 3 component PARAFAC model performed for detection of
MUF.
Page 58 of 60
==PAGE:60==
January 20, 2022
Figure 36: Fingerprint plots of components in 4 component PARAFAC model performed for detection of
MUF.
After selection of model, the component representing the fluorophore MCA is converted from fluorescence in-
tensity into concentrations with help from calibration curve of molar fluorescence. From these concentrations
progress curves are formed (Figure 37) and initial rates are calculated (Figure 37 and 38):
Page 59 of 60
==PAGE:61==
January 20, 2022
Figure 37: Progress curves and initial rates for MUF.
Figure 38: Initial rates for MUF.
Page 60 of 60
