==PAGE:1==
Online process mining in video streams using
computer vision
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
Ragnar Sandberg Mikkelsen
Henrique Daniel de Oliveira Duarte
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
DTU Compute
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
rrrX+QKTmi2X/imX/F
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section of Software and Process
Engineering, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree of Master of Science in
Computer Science and Engineering.
Ragnar Sandberg Mikkelsen ­ s111975
Signature
Date
Henrique Daniel de Oliveira Duarte ­ s200241
Signature
Date
ii
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
23 / 01 / 2022
23 / 01 / 2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Processes are the backbone of services and products delivered in the business world.
A process consists of a series of steps or activities, with decisions made upon a gover­
nance scheme involved in the way of performing the work to achieve a final product or
service. The variability of processing times, flow interdependence between activities and
the assignment of resources take a relevant impact on the performance of processes.
These elements take a relevant field of analysis by measuring and understanding how
the processes are performing based on recorded data.
Most processes are measured and generate data using digital systems that register the
activities and store them in a database. Alternatively, manual workshops or studies of
cycle times (e.g. used in Lean methodology) are made by processes teams that recorded
manually the happening activities.
However, some of the most complex processes are made by people interacting with re­
sources or machinery in a non­technological environment. One example of this is the
turnaround process at an airport, which is dependent on a solid process orchestration,
having relevant activities needed to be performed following restricted guidelines, in the
most efficient way.
In this thesis the authors propose a solution for using video streams to enable online
process mining in environment where a central system does not record activities as they
are happening. The solution relies on object detection to describe objects in a video
stream and complex event processing to generate sophisticated activities based on these
detections, which can then be consumed by an online process mining algorithm.
The solution is implemented as a prof of concept (POC) and tested on a turnaround pro­
cess using real data from Copenhagen airport. The POC performs well and is able to
accurately describe the process. The POC shows some weakness when dealing with oc­
clusion but overall is able to generate an accurate model using online process discovery
algorithms.
Finally the solution is configurable, by re­configuring the object detection and writing suit­
able queries, the solution can be adapted to many processes.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We, the creators of this thesis, want to wish and express our sincere gratitude and warm
appreciation to the following persons who had contributed much to the development and
shape this piece of work.
Andrea Burattin, Associate Professor, Software and Process Engineering at DTU
our supervisor professor of the thesis that offers us his invaluable guidance, always giving
us necessary suggestions and conducting us to pursue a better study.
Henrik Naundrup Vester, Principal Consultant, Breakawai
for always giving his expertise insights and feedback during our development and writing
of thesis.
Line Bjelsdorf, Co­Founder and CEO, Breakawai
for supporting us during the agreements of collaboration with the Copenhagen airport.
Martin Oxager Bonefeld, Senior Process Manager, Copenhagen Airports A/S
for helping us during our tests and evaluation phases at the Copenhagen airport, offering
always supports for the multiple issues that we faced during the days at their offices. We
want to express our gratitude for spending countless hours helping us with the Copen­
hagen airport IT support.
Esben Kolind, Senior Lead Digitalization Consultant, Copenhagen Airports A/S
for always giving an external feedback and understanding of we could improve in our
prototype and in the presentation of the final result of the thesis.
Preben Ejlertsen, Video and Infrastructure specialist, Copenhagen Airports A/S
for helping us configuring the multiple cameras to test the prototype at Copenhagen air­
port.
iv
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Problem Domain
5
3
Related work
7
3.1
Computer Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
CEP in Process Mining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Online Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Online Process Mining of Video Streams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Problem statement & Proposal
11
4.1
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Methodology
13
5.1
Gantt chart and agile development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.2
Collaboration with Copenhagen airport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
6
Solution
15
6.1
Project domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
6.2
Computer vision component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
6.3
Complex event processing component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6.4
Online process mining component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
7
Implementation
31
7.1
Computer Vision Component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
7.2
Complex Event Processing Component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.3
Online Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
8
Evaluation
73
8.1
Computer Vision Component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
8.2
Complex Event Processing Component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
8.3
Online Process Mining Component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
8.4
End To End Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
8.5
Reflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
v
==PAGE:8==
8.6
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
8.7
Evaluation of Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
9
Conclusion and Future work
115
9.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
9.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
A Acronyms
123
B Siddhi Test Data
124
C Siddhi Queries
139
D Gantt chart
144
vi
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Process mining [1] is a useful technique to support analysis of business processes as they
are in reality, based on event logs. Process mining describes how processes are actually
performed by people, machines and organizations, not how they should be performed,
providing insights based on real event data. Additionally, process mining helps to trans­
form the existing data to identifiable execution paths of the process, where is possible to
analyse their performance and determine possible compliance issues on the tasks that
are not executed in accordance with the established specified process models. Lastly,
process mining can be used to enhance current processes. E.g. process mining can
give an overview of tasks that are taking a long time to execute. After the analysis of
this time execution issues, it’s possible to make a business decision to adjust the process
accordingly to overcome this inefficiency.
In traditional process mining, static data, in the form of XES event log files [1], is analyzed
based on fact­based insights of processes performed by people or machinery. This data
is generated by a process aware information system (PAIS), usually this is a system that
is central in performing a business process. An example could be an entity resource
planning system [2]. Later in this text the concept of non­technological environment is
used. Processes happening in a non­technological environment are processes that do
not interact with a central system, meaning that the data can’t be extracted from a PAIS.
Process mining provides fact­based insights, of historical data from process executions.
This serves as a great technique to document and analyze, why tasks and processes are
going down to a failure path, and measures can be taken to prevent future tasks from
going through this path. However traditional process mining can not prevent a task, that
is being executed, and perceive that this task is going down a bad path in real­time.
Online process mining [3] builds on traditional process mining by being able to consume
events as soon as they are being created. Because of this, preventative measures can be
taken when a task is moving down a bad path. In addition to this, because online process
mining algorithms work on live data, that is being generated, it is guaranteed to work on
valid data. In contrast, when working with event logs, there is a chance that the processes
have changed and that data has become stale.
Even though process mining has been shown to be a very useful technique, using process
mining in some areas is quite cumbersome. Traditional process mining requires a log of
tasks composed of events to be analysed by a process mining tool. These events are
typically extracted from PAIS systems. However not all processes leave a footprint, in the
form of an event in an IT system, that can later be extracted and analyzed. These can be
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
1
==PAGE:10==
processes that involve physical activities, such as a person performing a task, or an item
being moved. Generally these are processes that include tasks that are not recorded in a
centralized IT system. This could be solved by having a person timing each activity. One
structured way to do this is REFA 1. Having a person documenting the timing of a process,
is an expensive solution. Furthermore using online process mining in combination with
manually documented timings further complicates the process. Some research has been
done to use Predetermined motion time systems [4] in combination with visual sensor
data [5]. Predetermined motion time systems deal with worker movement and does not
offer a universal way to gather data from processes.
In this thesis, we present a framework for recording activities in processes, where it other­
wise would be infeasible. We use the term ”non­technological environments” to describe
this context. In more detail, these are environments where no data is being generated into
ERP systems or other organizational IT systems. We position the context of our thesis
in these environments where there are no data being collected, to research our thesis by
developing a framework that extracts events based on camera video streams.
The framework includes methods to specify activities of the real­world processes and to
detect objects, using environmental information. Mainly the thesis will focus on using
computer vision to extract these events, but other environmental information could also
be explored in the future. Information gathered will be converted to events using complex
event processing and fed to an online process mining system, which will consume the
events instantly and produce insight into the processes in real­time.
This thesis provides a proof of concept (POC) implementation of the defined solution with
three loosely connected components that each could be replaced by other alternatives on
the fly.
The POC is able to detect activities happening in an aircraft turnaround process with
good accuracy for most activities. The solution can be adapted to other environments
by training an appropriate object detection model, and defining suitable queries for the
process.
1.1
Goals
The main goals of this thesis is to validate a proposed solution that allows the extraction
of events from non­technological environments in order to visualize an online process
model from a specific process. The proposed solution needs be configurable, allowing
the production of events from different sources and create an online process model in
real­time that allows an posterior analysis.
1.2
Thesis Outline
Chapter 2: Problem Domain
This chapter presents and describes the problem that the thesis wants to solve.
Chapter 3: Related Work
This chapter approach some existing work for the different components of the thesis so­
lution.
Chapter 4: Problem statement & Proposal
This chapter defines the scope of the thesis and proposes a solution to overtake the
existing problem.
1?iiTb,ff`27@BMi2`MiBQMHX+QKf2Mf`27@H2tB+QMf`f`27@iBK2@bim/v
2
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 5: Methodology
This chapter mentions the adopted methodology during the development and evaluation
phase of the project.
Chapter 6: Solution
In this chapter, a presented solution is detailed to conceptualize the scope of our thesis.
Chapter 7: Implementation
In this chapter, our prototype implementation is described based on the solution proposed.
Chapter 8: Evaluation
This chapter tests and evaluates the implemented prototype providing insights of the pro­
cess, reflections and limitations of the implemented solution.
Chapter 9: Conclusion and Future work
This chapter discusses the achieve goals of the thesis by also providing a future work
analysis for what could be improved.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Problem Domain
Process mining bridges the gap between process science and data science [1]. Observed
behavior i.e. data is translated into explicit process models using process mining [1].
This is usually done by running a process mining algorithm over an event log containing
a large number of cases. An output of this algorithm could be a model of a discovered
process. The data source for the event log can be any process aware information system
[2], for example an enterprise resource planning system or a system built on top of a
current information storage system, e.g. a healthcare information system [6], to enable
the generation of event logs.
Online process mining [7] removes the need for a process log as a medium between the
generation of data and the processing of data as the online process mining algorithm will
consume the event as soon as it has been generated. In short, process mining and online
process mining is already applicable in any high technological environment.
An issue arises however when process mining is to be used in environments where the
performed activities are not recorded by a process aware information system (PAIS). Gen­
erating the data for processes in non­technological environments is challenging. One way
to generate this data is to manually record the time it takes to perform each activity e.g.
REFA1. This requires a person to be present at all times to record the duration of the
activities, making it a costly solution. The issue of data capture is not a new one. Pre­
determined motion time systems (PMTS) [4] is a method to estimate the time required
to complete a job. PMTS mainly deals with manual assembly by dividing it into basic
movements. The accuracy, delivered by PMTS, can however be negatively influenced
by many factors [8]. Six sigma requires individuals to either estimate or record the time it
takes them to complete a task [9]. Another approach, proposed by P. Agethen et al. [10],
is to use mobile sensors to capture the walk path of workers in manual processes.
Generating the right data for process mining, is a problem that has not been uniformly
solved yet. Either it requires manual recording, using a stopwatch, or a workers estimation
of the duration of a task. Further using online process mining in environments where
the timing of activities is done either by workers or estimated by management would be
challenging.
The turnaround process is in the center of the operations of an airport. It is the process of
unloading and loading of cargo and luggage, off­boarding and on­boarding of people and
preparing the aircraft for the next flight.
1https://refa­international.com/en/refa­lexicon/r/refa­time­study
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
5
==PAGE:14==
The turnaround process begins with the stop of the aircraft at the gate and terminates with
the tow tractor moving the aircraft back into the track to proceed with the lift­off. All the
tasks in between these two events are relevant to study in terms of performance and pro­
cess optimization. This means that process mining this use case turns into real business
value and process improvement. Based on the work by Hartmut Fricke et al. [11], some
reasons why the turnaround is uncertain, is mainly due to the share of responsibility for
the individual ground handling teams processes, deficient interfaces or correct position of
vehicles with the aircraft body and also a frequent distortion of gate occupancy schemes
at the airport. This could lead to a limiting predictability of the ”Earliest off Block Time”
and this is an important time to make predictions of the departure time but also impacts
the arrival times.
All these prediction times directly impacts the estimation of ground availability space of
the airport for aircraft and in consequence, affects the business negotiation between the
airport and the airlines for acquiring possible different routes and increasing the volume
of passengers per day.
Lufthansa CityLine, a subsidiary of the Lufthansa Group, estimates that each minute of
delay costs them 60­70€ on average [12]. Additionally the popularity of electric vehi­
cles is ever rising [13] and if this trend is to reach the apron, a deep understanding of
the processes would be critical to plan the future turnarounds to effectively use assets,
meanwhile allocating the necessary time to recharge. Analyzing the turnaround process
using online process mining would require data about the activities that take place. How­
ever since the activities are taking place in a non­technological environment, there is no
centralized system that can provide the required data. Talking with the process owners
at Copenhagen airport, the authors learned that there did exist a system where the ac­
tors in the turnaround could notify if they experienced any delay, but often failed to do so.
This corroborates the authors personal beliefs that having the actors register the timings
of the activities they are responsible for, would result in unreliable data. An alternative
could be to have a person with the single responsibility to deliver the timings as they take
place. The reported daily arrivals and departures before corona were at 613, and even
at the height of the pandemic the daily number was 167 2, spread across a large num­
ber of gates, it would require a significant amount of resources to keep track of all these
activities.
2?iiTb,ffrrrX+T?X/FfQK@+T?fT`2bb2fMv?2/2`fkykRfRfMvWkybB/2/W*jW8`HB;bi2WkyW*jW8`W
kybB/2MWkyRNdyWky+T?WkyKBbi2/2WkykkdWkyKBQXWkyTbb;2`2`
6
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 3
Related work
Because the goal of this thesis is an innovation that uses different technologies in captur­
ing events using object detection and combining this information to perform online process
mining, which is highly specific, and there is not a lot of literature that includes all topics
addressed here. Instead, an analysis of prior work will be done on three of the main topics
in the thesis. The major components that the solution will comprise have been grouped
into the following topics:
• Computer Vision
• CEP in Process Mining
• Online Process Mining
Each section will explain the topic in more detail and will discuss some important work
that has been done in this field.
3.1
Computer Vision
The goal of this thesis is to be able to perform process mining on processes in which
activities do not leave a footprint in some digital system. These activities need to be
documented in some other manner. This thesis explores how this can be done using
computer vision. In short, the system will recognize an activity happening in a video feed
and produce an event.
An area that has shown a lot of interest in extracting activities from video feeds, is the op­
timization of airline turnaround process, also called aircraft ground handling1, in airports.
Most notably the company Assaia2 has developed a product called Apron AI, which ana­
lyzes in­depth how the different activities in the turnaround process are performing. It is
apparent that Apron AI is using computer vision to recognize the different activities, how­
ever, since Apron AI is closed source, exactly how the models are trained and which algo­
rithms are being used is left to be guessed. Another example of optimizing the turnaround
process can be seen in a Microsoft story [14] about how the Lufthansa group has used
various Azure computer vision tools to build a system that helps turnaround managers
to have a precise overview of all the activities happening during the turnaround. The de­
veloped solution has been released as a SaaS product on the Azure marketplace3. The
1?iiTb,ff2MXrBFBT2/BXQ`;frBFBfB`+`7in;`QmM/n?M/HBM;
2?iiTb,ffbbBX+QKf
3?iiTb,ffxm`2K`F2iTH+2XKB+`QbQ7iX+QKfK`F2iTH+2fTTbfx2`Q;;K#?R8Njee3Nkj88dX/22Tim`M`QmM/
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
7
==PAGE:16==
Lufthansa solution shows how feature extraction can be done using off the shelf compo­
nents, from the Azure marketplace.
The medium.com article [15] written by a data scientist working for SAS4 in Germany, ex­
plains how to train a computer vision model to recognise different activities in a turnaround
process. The author has published its code on Github, which uses python and leverages
both commercial and open­source offerings from SAS.
The three projects described above, all use different strategies to extract the activities in
the turnaround process. However, they end up with a similar offering and emphasise the
same benefits of being able to use technologies, such as computer vision, to analyse the
activities. The main benefit is added visibility for turnaround managers and the ability to
make data­driven decisions that add value for the airport, airlines and passengers.
S. Knoch et al. [16] describe the problems of analysing workers activities in an assembly
process. The goal of the paper is to generate meaningful log data from a manual assembly
process. This is achieved by using data from various sensors such as RGB cameras and
RGB+D cameras. The information from different sensors is fused using CEP and an event
is generated in an event log. Using a simple setup and method for recognizing activities,
the study shows a decent accuracy for RGB cameras in recognizing certain activities,
with a F score of between 80­93%. The results for the RGB+D Camera were not as
impressive, with a F score ranging from 50­80%. The paper also notes other difficulties
with using RGB+D cameras. Jochen Deuse et al. [17] recognises the need for timing data
in order to optimize manual assembly processes. The paper proposes a proof of concept
to automatically generate Method Time Measurement (MTM­1) analyses, using a motion
capture system to capture movements of a worker, and using a graph convolutional neural
network (CNN) to classify the MTM­1 codes. The paper does not present any results of
how accurate the POC is. But does note that more work needs to be done to capture
complex movements.
P. Agethen et al. [10] also uses motion sensors in connection with a neural network to
determine work times in manual assemblies. Here the authors seek to capture the walk
path of workers to estimate a task duration. The paper shows promising results, where in
an experimental setup the system estimates match the manually produced estimates.
Patrick Rückert et al. [5] uses RGB, RGB­D and infrared cameras to capture hand move­
ment in an assembly setup. The hand movement is classified using a recurrent neural
network. They seek only to classify hand gestures and not to capture the execution time
of an assembly. However it is another example where computer vision is used to capture
the events in a process.
3.2
CEP in Process Mining
To define activities in a process, simple events are in many cases, not enough. Complex
Event Processing enables the possibility of defining more elaborate activities, such as
when events are happening in conjunction. In the thesis project, CEP will be used to
elicit activities. Some activities will be generated from different sources and others will
be generated by only one source. The important aspect of this is that the combination of
different sources will benefit the triggering of meaningful activities of the process.
In the article published by Rainer von Ammon et al. [18], CEP is leveraged together
with the large number of events generated by service­oriented architecture, to describe
complex business processes. The article uses fraud detection as a use case for how
4?iiTb,ffrrrXbbX+QKf
8
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:17==
CEP can be used in a business process setting. The idea is that if new patterns emerge,
or if the number of false positives is too great, the filtering mechanism can be adjusted
accordingly.
To derive the state of ambulances, R. Bruns et al. [19] combines complex event process­
ing and finite state machines (FSM). The ambulance is fitted with a tablet, which acts as
the source for a variety of events such as GPS and acceleration. These events combined
with rules for CEP and the current state of the ambulance can then infer when an ambu­
lance reaches a new state. The paper is a good example of the benefits CEP can provide
and a FSM is comparable to a transition system, which is much used in process mining.
In order to extract simple events from a video stream, and combine several events using
CEP to generate more sophisticated events, P. Yadav et al. [20] use computer vision and
deep learning techniques. The paper defines a query language, similar to the ones used
to query relational databases, and specifies 4 query dimensions:
• Object detection
• Object detection with Attributes
• Spatial Relationships between objects
• Temporal Relationships between objects
The paper mentions some difficulties when the method is used to correctly define cars in
a video. Notably, it mentions the impact partial occlusion of objects have on the accuracy,
this is however more an issue with the image capture rather than a problem with the CEP
method. Ultimately the paper is a good example of how computer vision and CEP can be
combined to extract meaningful events from video.
3.3
Online Process Mining
In online process mining, an event is consumed as soon as it is produced. It has several
benefits, especially in conformance checking, where a violating activity can be recognised
instantly and preventative measures can be taken. However, some challenges are also
present when using online process mining. In process discovery, a process model is
generated on the fly, without a full history of events, as opposed to when offline process
mining is used.
Online process mining is discussed by Andrea Burattin [7], where the author groups the
efforts into 4 groups where 3 are a window­based approach, a problem reduction ap­
proach and an offline approach. The fourth is a hybrid between the 3 aforementioned.
The author tests different ways to do process discovery and compares the result with an
annotated model, the author concludes the process discovery section by showing that the
task reduction methods perform much better than windowing methods. In a section about
conformance checking in online process mining, the author discusses a scoring based
method, where valid transitions are scored = 0 and invalid are scored > 0. The benefit of
scoring transition versus using alignment is that conformance checking does not require
past activities to calculate conformance.
Andrea Burattin et al. [21] describes a protocol called MQTT­XES, as the name suggests
the protocol is built on the MQTT protocol. The purpose of MQTT­XES is to log events
from distributed event sources and is to be used in process mining. Because MQTT
structures its events in hierarchical topics, there is no need for an actual payload in the
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
9
==PAGE:18==
event body, making it an appropriate choice for systems with limited resources, such as
IoT devices. The work of the authors is published in a Github project5.
3.4
Online Process Mining of Video Streams
As section 3.1 mentions, some work in using computer vision to get insights into processes
has already been done. The section mentions three solutions that have been developed
exclusively for analysing the turnaround process. Other work, by S. Knoch et al. [16],
mentions using RGB and RGB­D cameras, while others mention using motion sensors,
to analyse a manual assembly process. P. Yadav et al. [20] uses object detection in com­
bination with CEP to generate sophisticated events, the authors also proposes a query
language to create these sophisticated events. With the exception of the last example, all
solutions are made with the goal to analyze one specific process. None of the solutions
take advantage of the attractive features of online process mining, that allows immediate
insights into the analyzed process. The authors of this thesis wish to add to the literature,
a configurable and scalable solution that is able to extract activities from video streams,
developed to be used in combination with online process mining.
5?iiTb,ff;Bi?m#X+QKf#2KHBM2fK[ii@t2b
10
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 4
Problem statement & Proposal
Process mining makes processes visible to process stakeholders, allowing them to iden­
tify opportunities using actual data from the processes. Online process mining is an addi­
tion to the process mining field, that allows these insights in real time, making it a valuable
tool for process stakeholders.
It is, using solutions currently available, not possible to get real time insights, using online
process mining, into processes happening in a non­technological environment.
Lacking proper insights into their processes, process stakeholders are likely missing out
on opportunities, and might even be making decisions about these processes on a false
basis.
Video streams can serve as a good source of information about processes happening
in non­technological environments. Using state of the art object detection techniques in
combination with complex event processes, activities can be produced from these non­
technological environments and consumed by online process mining algorithms.
4.1
Research questions
In order to propose a solution that tackles the problem stated, we need to define some
research questions that must be considered in such way that we pursue the development
of our thesis, taking those in consideration. This research questions are:
RQ1: Is it possible to use online process mining, in a context of non­technological
environment, by using video streams as a data source?
RQ2: Can a process model accurately be discovered by using computer vision to
extract events in a scene?
RQ3: Is it possible to classify meaningful activities, collected from different object
detection event sources?
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 5
Methodology
5.1
Gantt chart and agile development
During the development of this thesis, an agile approach was considered to iterate be­
tween the different framework components and to discuss and document our work based
on our achievements. At the beginning of the project, was identified stages, associated
a due date and defined high­level tasks not affecting the research and granularity of the
project. To this, we have used a Project Manager tool 1 to create a Gantt chart in order to
not lose track of the project during the entire period. The Gantt chart diagram is presented
in Figure D.1, in the appendix section of this document.
Beyond this, intending the research and development of the prototypes, we used an ag­
ile methodology approach to pursue, validate new hypotheses and refine our framework.
Depending on the research of new literature and technologies we took iterative decisions,
fitting our needs at different phases of the project. In order to manage the state of the
prototypes and to help making decisions, we used Jira 2 to create tasks and assign re­
sponsibilities between the 2 students.
5.2
Collaboration with Copenhagen airport
Our thesis had a collaboration with the Copenhagen Airport A/S. At the beginning of the
project, we had a kick­off meeting with two members of the operations team from the
airport, our DTU supervisor and the Breakawai Principal Consultant. It was decided that
the relevant process to proceed with our thesis should be the turnaround process from
multiple airlines at the airport gates. Some practical details were shared, based on how
the ground handling companies proceed, depending on the aircraft, the area of the airport
and some security measures taken.
This collaboration involved some preventive measures between the Copenhagen Airport
A/S and the two students in terms of data leakage. Due to this, we signed NDA’s to ensure
that access and manipulation of sensible data were exclusively made inside the Copen­
hagen Airport offices, using their machines, internal accounts and passwords configured
for each of the students.
The IT department provided us two machines to proceed with the installation of the re­
quired software and to test and evaluate our solution. The video and infrastructure de­
partment granted us access to the video surveillance system of the airport, configuring
1?iiTb,ffbQ7ir`2XT`QD2+iKM;2`X+QKf
2?iiTb,ffrrrXiHbbBMX+QKfbQ7ir`2fDB`
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
13
==PAGE:22==
some camera gates where were possible to move back and forward in time and down­
load the specific videos of the corresponding time. This allow us to test and validate our
prototypes using different cameras, gates and aircraft’s.
5.3
Evaluation
The evaluation considering a real­life use case is based on our experiments in the Copen­
hagen airport. The turnaround process is one of the most studied processes in the world,
where airports and airlines try to perform all the mandatory tasks in the shortest time
possible.
The evaluation is done by testing each component in the implementation individually and
finally testing the implementation as a whole.
The computer vision component is tested by detecting objects in relevant videos and
comparing the time of the detections with when the objects where manually detected.
The complex event processing component is tested by running crafted data that should
produce an activities, and examining if the activity was produced as expected.
The online processing component is tested by running a developed model generator
script, that should produce a certain model with some defined timings and frequencies,
and examining if the resulting model is as expected.
The end to end tests are done by running the developed implementation on real videos
from a turnaround at Copenhagen airport. The resulting activities, that are automatically
extracted from the videos, are correlated with the activities found from manual observa­
tion. Further the process, discovered by the implementation, is examined.
14
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 6
Solution
This thesis aims to solve a real­world problem by creating an innovative solution. By com­
bining different existing techniques, the solution is able to extract events from a process
where data is not being generated.
A solution framework is suggested, that captures the events of a specific process, using
established computer vision techniques, enabling it to recognize multiple activities in video
streams. Based on this, the framework emits events in real­time, that will be used further
to generate a business process model.
The solution framework enables users to configure and define multiple activities of the
process. This is done by uploading a neural network model, that is trained for the specific
process use case, and defining the requisite complex event processing queries.
Furthermore, the creation of an event stream enables the integration with a process mining
system that generates a process model, using online process mining techniques, produc­
ing insights of the processes in real­time, leading to further data analysis of the process.
In this chapter a solution framework is presented to enable to perform online process
mining in an environment where recognition and identification of activities would normally
need to be done manually.
In the sections of this chapter, we propose a solution that tackles the problem stated by
giving an answer to the research questions enunciated, in section 4.1.
The proposed solution contains three separate components:
• Computer Vision Component
• Complex Event Processing Component
• Online Process Mining Component
First, the project domain is described, which gives a conceptual overview of the flow be­
tween the real­world environment and the different components involved. After this, each
of the components that make up the collective solution is described on a conceptual level.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
15
==PAGE:24==
6.1
Project domain
The purpose of the solution is to be able to describe processes happening in the real world.
A process consists in group of activities and governance steps necessary to achieve a
desired goal, on conceiving an product or delivering a service. The problems in describ­
ing the necessary actions are many, firstly how is an action performed in the real world
translated to something that can be understood by a digital media. How can data be ab­
stracted into something quantifiable without losing critical information about the world that
is being described. How can actions based solely on observations be explained without
the tacit knowledge that a human has.
Figure 6.1: Project domain diagram
Figure 6.1 attempts to capture what the problem domain contains. At the lowest level
of abstractions there are actions being performed in the real world. This information is
captured by cameras which produce several images per second of the actions being
performed. Already here we have the possibility of significant loss of information, since
cameras can only deliver partial information of a scene, given their angle perspective.
Imagining an object moving behind another object, from the perspective of the camera
this object no longer exists. This can be alleviated by having multiple cameras capturing
from different angles, but it will not match the freedom of a human moving around to get
a better perspective.
The frames produced by the camera are consumed by the first component in the pipeline,
the computer vision component. The computer vision component is responsible for de­
scribing the contents of the consumed images. Again here is a significant loss of infor­
mation since the world that is being described is being translated from images into text
format. The textual representation of the objects in the process being described, is sent
to the second component in the pipeline, the complex event processing component.
The complex event processing component continually receives events with objects that
where observed at a given time by the computer vision component. The responsibility
of the complex event processing component is to compare and aggregate the events
received with previous events and spot patterns that define a behaviour, furthering the
abstraction from the real world. Now it is no longer the objects that are being described
but the behaviours of objects and people. In the context of our solution we decided to
make two distinctions when talking about events and activities, to give a clear definition
of those, we defined:
• Event ­ we define as event the object detection information (object label name and
coordinates) received from the Computer Vision Component and that has been con­
sumed by the Complex Event Processing component.
• Activity ­ we define as activity the result of the generated information triggered
by the query rules using the events received, in the Complex Event Processing
16
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:25==
Component, and that gives a better translation of actions, behaviours or important
occurrences happening in the process scene.
When the complex event processing component spots an activity, it notifies the third and
final component in the pipeline, the online process mining component.
The online process mining component receives the activities produced by the complex
event processing component, and continuously builds a model that describes the process
that is being observed. The model built by the online process mining component repre­
sents the highest level of abstraction in the solution. From observing people and objects
in the real world, converting the information to a textual description, eliciting behaviours
from these description, the online process mining now aggregates all the received activ­
ities and creates a model representing the process. The model is not only a snapshot
picture of a process, but since it is generated from a high number of observation, it can
give valuable insights into the process and the activities being performed in it.
When capturing the objects, using the computer vision component, we can face the de­
tection of more objects than needed for the process involved, in this case, the loss of data
is not necessarily a bad thing. If a process is observed, chances that a lot of unnecessary
and distracting information can be detected. It is not necessary to capture all information
in a given scene. The goal is to only capture the information that is relevant, and can
increase our understanding of a given process.
The overarching problem in the solution is how do we go from the lowest level of abstrac­
tion to the highest with minimal loss of information, while still removing all unnecessary
information that will in the last step produce the most accurate and understandable model
of the observed process.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
17
==PAGE:26==
6.2
Computer vision component
The first step in the solution pipeline is to translate the scene that is being captured by
a camera into data that can be properly processed by a computer. What that means
is all relevant information, received by the camera, is extracted and formatted in a way
where the information in a scene can be compared the information from the same scene
extracted a another part in time.
Figure 6.2: Computer Vision Component
Figure 6.2 is an overview of the computer vision component domain. The input to the
computer vision component are the frames it receives from the camera. The component
detects if there are any relevant objects in latest received frame. If any objects are found,
they are correlated with the objects found in previous frames to determine they are the
same. The output of the computer vision component is a list of all tracked objects, which
is sent to the next component using an event stream.
The remainder of this sub chapter explains the core sub components of the computer
vision component, these are the object detection and object tracking components.
18
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:27==
6.2.1
Object detection
The object detection component will, for each new frame received from the camera, detect
the objects of interest in that frame. The result of the object detection is different on
the framework used for detection, however it describes the object with a label and some
positional information, usually a boundary surrounding the object.
Object detection is a sub field of computer vision that has been, and still is in rapid devel­
opment. In the start of the century, most new advances in object detection where inspired
by SIFT [22]. Written in 1999 the paper has been cited over 22.000 times according to
google scholar, and was the basis of most the work in object detection. In 2012 AlexNet
[23] competed in the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge, inspired by
the convolutional neural network (CNN) structure of LeNet­5 [24] AlexNet achieved very
good results and is cited over 90.000 times, according to google scholar. The paper be­
hind AlexNet is considered one of the most influential papers in the field of Object Recog­
nition. The majority of object detection frameworks today are based on some form of a
CNN.
One current approach to object detection is a two stage detector. The two stages are a
region of interest proposal stage, and a classification and region of interest refinement
stage. The second stage will create an optimal bounding box around the detected object,
and can combine multiple boxes from the previous stage. A popular two stage object
detection algorithm is the Faster R­CNN algorithm [25] which will output bounding boxes
containing the detected objects. Another algorithm that doesn’t output bounding boxes,
but segments the objects found is the Mask R­CNN [26] which is an extension to Faster
R­CNN.
Single stage detectors switch focus from being accuracy focused to be speed focused.
Single stage detectors use a single network to make detections and the bounding box. A
very popular single stage detection algorithm is YOLO [27]. YOLO outputs a bounding
box and can detect objects in videos with minimal delay.
Figure 6.3: Object detection
Figure 6.3 shows a possible outcome of YOLO detection. Where the solid boxes are the
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
19
==PAGE:28==
optimal boxes and the green dashed boxes are the boxes detected by YOLO.
6.2.2
Object tracking
When describing a scene it is not enough to just detect the objects in a scene, when
the objects are sent to the complex event processing engine, each objects needs to be
uniquely distinguishable from other objects of same class. At the same time the uniquely
distinguishable objects cannot change identity from one detection to another.
Figure 6.4 shows how object tracking works. Two persons are tracked over 3 frames,
while the object detection detects that the objects belong to the class ”Person”, the object
tracking firstly assigns an ID to the objects and secondly identifies that the detected objects
are the same that have been detected previously and therefore assigns them the same
ID.
Figure 6.4: Object tracking
A classical and simple tracking algorithm is SORT [28]. SORT uses the kalman filter
algorithm to estimate where an object will be located the next frame, and assigns the ID
of newly detected objects using the hungarian algorithm. DeepSORT expands on SORT
by extracting and saving features on the tracked object and using a two metric approach
to assign IDs, the distance from estimated object to the detected object and the similarity
of object features.
A tracking algorithm based on YOLO is ROLO [29] (Recurrant YOLO). It builds upon
YOLO with a LSTM [30] network to do object detection and tracking in one shot. Since
ROLO is highly coupled with the object detection part, it will not track objects that have
not been detected. For example it will not estimate the location of an object that has been
temporarily occluded.
SiamMask[31] is a very fast tracking algorithm based on siamese neural network. SiamMask
delivers rotating bounding boxes and even does segmentation of the tracked object in up
to 55 fps. SiamMask is however only able to detect a single object at a time.
20
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:29==
6.3
Complex event processing component
To be able to elicit activities from detections, this solution proposes the use of a com­
plex event processing component. The complex event processing component, will take
as input the list of detections, containing unique IDs, produced by the computer vision
component.
The complex event processing component relates the received objects with objects previ­
ously received and compares the positional information. From this information it produces
some basic events which then can be enhanced and ultimately a basic event or a combi­
nation of these events can form an activity. When an activity is produced it is pushed as
a message to the online process mining component.
Figure 6.5: Complex event processing component ­ Domain
Figure 6.5 shows the domain of the complex event processing component. Central to
the component is the generation of what we call basic process events, which are the
foundation of the activities that are produced.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 6.6: Complex event processing component ­ Conceptual
Figure 6.6 illustrates the concept of using process events to compose high level activities.
The input received will generate some basic process events, these events are then used
to describe some intermediate process event and lastly an activity can be based on one
or several different of these events. All the produced activities are collected in the activity
stream, which produces a message based on the activity.
6.3.1
Process Events
The word ”event” is used in many different aspects of computer science. Even in this
thesis the word event could be used throughout and would have very different meaning
depending on the context where it was used. We have event driven systems, events in
regard to MQTT messages, events in the complex event processing and events in regards
to process mining. To not further add to the ambiguity of the word event, the authors, when
seeking to describe the intermediate result from the complex event processing component
receiving events and producing activities, have chosen to label these results as process
events. A process event in this context refers to the events produced before the final
activity, that is based on these events, is produced.
This section will define the four basic process events that are the basis of all activities
generated.
The complex event processing component receives an object representation containing
a label, minimum x value, minimum y value, width and height.
Initial Definitions
An object O is a tuple with the following values:
• A label (L)
• The minimum x value of the bounding box (Min_X)
• The minimum y value of the bounding box (Min_Y )
• The width of the bounding box (W)
22
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:31==
• The height of the bounding box (H)
A detection d is a set of all objects O detected in a frame.
d ⊆P(O)
Two detections d1 and d2 relate to each other such that if d2 happened after d1 then d1 < d2
D is a sequence of detections (d) Each new detection is inserted into the back of D such
that the order is:
D(0) < D(1)...D(n) < D(n + 1)
Object Stopped
Let α be the maximum distance in pixels, the center point of O can move and still be
considered to be stopped.
An object is said to be stopped iff:
For D of size s
∀(d1, d2) ∈D · d1 < d2
o1 ∈d1 ∧o2 ∈d2 ∧o1(L) ≡o2(L)
The statement above states that there are two detections and two objects where o1 is in
d1 and o2 is in d2. Further the statements states that both object have the same label.
Let q be a tuple with two points q1, q2
q1 = o1(W)
2
+ o1(Min_X)
q2 = o1(H)
2
+ o1(Min_Y )
Let p be a tuple with two points p1, p2
p1 = o2(W)
2
+ o2(Min_X)
p2 = o2(H)
2
+ o2(Min_Y )
The statements above defines the tuple q as the center point of o1 and the tuple p as the
center point for o2
!
(q1 −p1)2 + (q2 −p2)2 < α
(6.1)
If the euclidean distance between o1 and o2 is less than α, the object is stopped.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
23
==PAGE:32==
Object Moving
Similar to the object stopped basic process event, a definition for when an object is moving
is presented.
Let α be the minimum distance in pixels, the center point of O can move before O is
considered to be moving.
An object is said to be moving iff:
For D of size s
∀(d1, d2) ∈D · d1 < d2
o1 ∈d1 ∧o2 ∈d2 ∧o1(L) ≡o2(L)
The statement above defines two objects o1, o2 and two detections d1 and d2, where o1 is
in d1 and o2 is in d2. Further both objects have the same label.
Let q be a tuple with two points q1, q2
q1 = o1(W)
2
+ o1(Min_X)
q2 = o1(H)
2
+ o1(Min_Y )
Let p be a tuple with two points p1, p2
p1 = o2(W)
2
+ o2(Min_X)
p2 = o2(H)
2
+ o2(Min_Y )
The statement above defines the tuple q as the center point of o1 and the tuple p as the
center point of o2
!
(q1 −p1)2 + (q2 −p2)2 > α
(6.2)
If the euclidean distance of center points q and p is larger than α for all pairs of d1 and d2
in D the object is moving.
Object Present
An object is said to be present iff:
For D of size s and object O with label l
∃O ∧O(L) ≡l
∀d ∈D O ∈d
(6.3)
The statement defines that there exists an object O with label l and this object is in d for
all d in D
24
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:33==
Object Not Present
Similarly to the object present definition, we also define when an object is not present.
For two sequences of detections, D1 of size s and D2 of size s, where dlast is the last
detection in D1
d1 ∈D2 ≡dlast + 1
Above two sequences of detections are defined. The first detection of D2 directly follows
the last detection of D1
An object is said to not be present iff:
∃O ∧O(L) ≡l
∀d ∈D1 O ∈d
For an object to not be present, it first needs to be present.
∀d ∈D2 O /∈d
(6.4)
If the object O is present in D1 but is not present in D2 the object is not present
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
25
==PAGE:34==
6.4
Online process mining component
The online process mining has the purpose of generating process models in real­time
that shapes activities and produces insights from the actual process, based on received
activities over time.
This component needs to have a channel of communication to able to receive input data
information. This data information, needs to contain an detailed label information that
describes the process event in analysis.
Figure 6.7: Online Process Mining component ­ Domain
The system must create it’s models based on the timestamps of the received events. This
means that timestamp information should not be given to shape the model over time, and
this happens using the internal clock of the online process mining system.
Different types of miners should be included to generate different perspectives and analy­
sis of the process involved. This miners are a set of algorithms that describes the causality
from a set of sequences of events received over time. Some could describe the workflow
of events and their relations, others could just describe the total number of events from the
different types received, or even the load of events over a timeline. The next subsections
describes some miners in more detail and their behaviour.
6.4.1
Discovery Miner
The discovery miner concept, in the context of online process mining, is to have a graph­
ical representation of the observed behaviour of the process, translating it to an process
model that must kept up­to­date based on a event source stream, receiving events over
time.
26
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:35==
Figure 6.8: Conceptual representation of streaming discovery miner, inspired in the paper
”Streaming process discovery and conformance checking” by Andrea Burattin
The figure 6.8 describes a general conceptualization of the discovery miner, in which a
stream of events are consumed by the discovery mining instance over time.
In the example, is possible to check that the instance starts to consume a few events in
the beginning, and creates a first model based on this consumed events, but as the time
passes, the others consumed events improves the model by reshaping it and creating
new direct­follows connections.
Depending on the type of events, the constructed model tackles the problem by using a
direct follows relationships for its variables, creating a dependency weights relations, for
its different relation arrows, by counting the consumed events over time and measuring
the importance of the events in the process.
Considering our solution, and focus on the turnaround process, the direct follows relation­
ships must also translates the process in the best possible way, to better describe what is
happening over time. In this way, two different types of measuring relationships between
activities should be considered:
• Ratio ­ describes the weight of the relations between the two activities by counting
the number of consumed events over time and creating a average percentage re­
lation based on the weights, giving an interpretation of the most common paths or
direct follows relations that happening over time, in the process.
• Time ­ describes the average time taken by direct follows relation to process the
next activity. This relation needs to maintained using an predominance over time
approach, which means that the duration timings presented between two activities
must describe and give more importance on the events received recently. This is an
important aspect because the time relation between two activities is described by
what is been happening in recent times of the process, discarding and not giving the
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
27
==PAGE:36==
same relevance by events that happened in the process a long time ago. This gives
a more consistent mechanism to describe time relations using a online discovery
miner, providing more reliable results when analysing the timing of the process.
6.4.2
Live Visualizer
The live visualizer allows to describe the multiple events received in a timeline and ag­
gregate them by time or by category. The next subsections describes these two different
concepts used to live visualize the events received in a event stream over time.
Events over time
In the events over time concept, the number of events consumed over time, by online
process mining component, are aggregated based on a short period of time and displayed
as a bulk of events to provide an understanding of the phases of the process when multiple
activities are triggered in a short period of time.
The figure 6.9 describes the concept by having a representation of a graph in a Cartesian
two­axis coordinate system, with the time (x­axis) and the number of events (y­axis). The
bulk of events for a short period is given by the dots in the graph, and this number needs
to be an integer, because we are describing the counting of events for that period. The
time duration is defined as the defined session of the process.
Figure 6.9: Conceptual representation of live visualizer ­ events over time, describing the
number of received events over time
Events per category
In the events per category concept, the visualization of the results are focus on consumed
events aggregated by the category, which means events representing the same activity
of the process. This are presented as a bar chart and updated over time, depending on
the event categories received.
28
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:37==
Figure 6.10: Conceptual representation of live visualizer ­ events per category, describing
the most received event categories over time
The figure 6.10 describes the graph based on a Cartesian two­axis coordinate system,
with the number of events (x­axis) and the category of events (y­axis). The sum of events,
consumed by the online process mining component, are described on the graph using
bars, which helps on the understanding of the categories with the most number of events
received over time. The longest bar describes the categories or activity that happens
more times in the process.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 7
Implementation
In this chapter, it’s discussed the implementation decisions adopted to solve the proposed
solution in our thesis, presented in the last chapter. The sections and subsections of this
chapter are followed by a top­down approach, where we use the C4 model 1 to guide,
giving a better understanding and visualization of the software architecture of our solution
and the relations of every piece of hardware, software and their actors. This model allows
the reader to understand what it’s being solved and the decision purpose at every time.
Our C4 model reflects the level of abstraction necessary to understand the architectural
and development decisions during our implementation phase, and for that, we opted to
use 3 levels of diagrams ­ context, containers and component diagrams.
The C4 Level 1, presents the System Context Diagram in which shows a big picture of
our system and interaction between the Process Mining System, the external systems
and actors involved.
Figure 7.1: Architecture ­ C4 Level 1 ­ Context Diagram
1?iiTb,ff+9KQ/2HX+QKf
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
31
==PAGE:40==
Detailing the elements in the C4 Level 1 diagram, from Figure 7.1 :
• Process Mining System ­ is the framework application developed with the purpose
of acquiring frames from a video source, translating the environmental information
using objection detection algorithms that identify relevant events, translating them
into meaningful activities and performing online process mining, to give an overall
understanding of the process by drawing and reshaping the process model in real­
time.
• Operator ­ is the actor responsible for configuring the developed Process Mining
System and parameterizing the framework to be able to capture and acquire mean­
ingful data depending on the process involved. The operator needs to have a basic
understanding of the process to be able to label the correct objects from images to
train the object detection model, configure the admitted regions of interest (ROI) for
capturing the objects in the developed framework tool, configure the different video
camera sources of the same process and having a technical background to extract
meaningful activities, developing specific queries on a Complex Event Processing
system.
• Camera ­ is the hardware responsible to capture a colour visual image of the process
and translate that information into a digital system.
• Broadcasting Service ­ is the middleware application in between the Camera and
the Process Mining system, in which is used as a server of streams that creates the
HTTP connection links, with an IP and Port for every camera. This broadcaster con­
verts the received frames into a specific video codec, maintaining the video quality
transmission depending on output purposes and also allowing the configuration of
the frame/rate of the connection.
• Message Broker ­ is an external application based on the Publish/Subscribe pro­
tocol in which has a server that receives messages from different clients and routes
the messages into an appropriate subscribing client, defined by a topic that must be
aligned with their clients
• Process Stakeholder ­ is the process owner and actor responsible for maintaining
and improving the process by providing the existent process model to the operator.
Usually, is the Senior Process Manager of a process department inside an orga­
nization that has the overall knowledge of the process and wants to improve it by
adopting the online process mining techniques.
Once describing the relations inside the context diagram, we are now able of going one
layer down in the C4 model, achieving level 2 in which it’s a zoomed diagram describing
the container elements present inside the Process Mining System.
The C4 level 2, gives a high­level shape of the software architecture and the assignment
of element responsibilities inside the Process Mining System and the container relations
between the external elements.
32
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:41==
Figure 7.2: Architecture ­ C4 Level 2 ­ Container Diagram
Detailing the containers in the C4 Level 2 diagram, from Figure 7.2 :
• Computer Vision Component ­ is a developed software framework responsible
for handling the acquisition of video frames, detecting and tracking objects on a
basis of training model, evaluating the objects that are in accordance with the es­
tablished Regions of Interest (ROI) and sending the detected event data information
via Publisher to a Message Broker. This framework also incorporates a GUI to easily
configure the ROI, camera sources and display of the real­time detected objects.
• Complex Event Processing Component ­ is a tool responsible to receive mes­
sages from the Message Broker with origin in events from the Computer Vision
Component, aggregating and manipulating the event data information events, com­
ing from different video sources, and translating them to produce meaningful pro­
cess activities in order to send them via Publisher to the Message Broker with the
objective to pass the activity information to the Online Process Mining Component.
The generation of different activities needs to be specific for the process involved.
• Online Process Mining Component ­ is the system responsible to receive the ac­
tivity messages that come from the Message Broker and with origin in the Complex
Event Processing System, building the process model in real­time in order to visu­
alize the performance of the process and give insights to the Process Stakeholder.
In the next sections and subsections, we are going one layer down in our C4 model to
present the zoomed diagrams for every component described above.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
33
==PAGE:42==
7.1
Computer Vision Component
In this section, the C4 level 3 of the Computer Vision Component is presented. All the im­
plemented considerations, details and technical aspects of this component are described
in the subsections below. The subsections are organized based on the elements shown
in Figure 7.3, where it’s presented the purpose and relations of each element.
Figure 7.3: Architecture of Computer Vision Component ­ C4 Level 3
Giving a brief explanation of elements of this component:
• GUI ­ Graphical User Interface ­ is the front­end of the developed framework,
where is possible to configure the video sources and specify rules to target ob­
jects based on the ROI ­ Regions of Interest. The graphical interface also allows
the visualization of the detection result.
• Persistent Storage ­ are the files responsible for running and saving the pre­defined
process rules parametrization and the object training models and configurations de­
pending on the number of trained objects of the model
• Video Player ­ is the element responsible for holding the latest frames from the
broadcast service by acquiring it via HTTP connection. The framework maintains
the frames for the use of the Activity Extraction, in order to process eventual object
detection data contained in the frames.
• Activity Extraction ­ is the resulting element on the combination of the Object De­
tection and Tracking of a single object. The object detected must be consistent
among the different frames.
34
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:43==
• Object Detection ­ is responsible for detecting the objects in every frame. This
detection is based on a trained model specific to the established process. A com­
puter vision algorithm is adopted to perform this detection in the most accurate and
efficient manner.
• Object Tracking ­ is responsible for guaranteeing the correct identification of the
same object among the different frames and detections. The tracking of the object
correctly identifies the object when this is moving or appear in a different position
in the next frames. This function validates the consistency of the detection and
ensures that is the same object that we are passing to the publisher when all the
conditions are met.
• Publisher ­ is the element responsible to send the acquired information of the de­
tected object and transmitting the message through the message broker.
This component and its programming elements were developed in Python. This decision
was made due to being more easy and quick to implement those, without a previous
analysis and consideration on end performance.
7.1.1
GUI ­ Graphical User Interface
The GUI of the framework was developed in Python using the Tkinter library 2. This
allows us to incorporate some elements that we found useful in configuring the tool for a
new process. The functionalities available in the developed graphical user interface are:
• Camera Display ­ maximum display of 3 camera sources with the presentation of
the detected objects at every moment by drawing rectangles for the multiple objects
detected, at every time.
• Toolbar ­ an integrated toolbar for easy access of the File, Edit, Configuration and
About toolbar options.
• Edit Rules Window ­ is a window where is possible to configure all the rules based
on the ROI ­ Regions of Interest ­ for every camera available.
• Camera Configuration Window ­ is a window that allows the input of the IP address
and Port to associate a maximum of 3 cameras sources.
• About Window ­ is a window of information about the developers and the aim of
the framework.
• File ­ is a toolbar option where is possible to open a configuration file from others
processes and load it into the application, avoiding the user to make a repetition of
work when configuring the rules and camera sources.
• Beamline Button ­ is a button configured to open the URL link of the Online Process
Mining Dashboard to provide quick access to the page.
• Start Siddhi Execution Button ­ is a button responsible to start a local execution
of Siddhi ­ Complex Event Processing Component application.
• Siddhi Application ­ is a button configured to open the local execution of the Siddhi
application running.
The main window of the developed application is presented in Figure 7.4, where is pos­
sible to see the Window with the Toolbar, Buttons and 3 Cameras Display. In the screen­
2?iiTb,ff/Q+bXTvi?QMXQ`;fjfHB#``vfiFBMi2`X?iKH
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
35
==PAGE:44==
shot, the 3 cameras are displaying an actual execution in a real­life environment of the
turnaround process in Copenhagen airport.
Figure 7.4: General framework
The screenshots shown are obtained on the Microsoft Windows operating system. The
GUI application is conceived to run in multiple operational systems, but in terms of coher­
ence of the presentation of the screenshots, we decided to only show screenshots of the
Microsoft Windows Environment.
36
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:45==
Camera Configuration Window
The camera configuration window has the purpose of adding the camera IDs and camera
sources. In this window, it’s possible to add a maximum of 3 camera configurations. The
cameras IDs must be inserted as intuitive values for describing the camera and must be
different between them. For the cameras sources, the user must add the HTTP connec­
tion of each camera connection by inserting the IP address and port number. The figure
7.5, shows the screenshot of the Camera Configuration Window, with some examples of
parameters used in the final tests of the application.
Figure 7.5: Camera Configuration Window ­ Screenshot
For updating the cameras IDs or camera sources one of the fields must be changed and
the press the Update button to save the new changes. The camera configuration infor­
mation is stored in the configuration file, described in section 7.1.2, which will be further
used by other elements of the Computer Vision Component.
Edit Rules Window
The edit rules window has been developed with some implicit considerations that we will
detail in this subsection. The main purpose of this window is to give a user­friendly way to
add, edit or delete the customizable parameters, by incorporating the following options.
Here we briefly describe the different options available on the window:
• Select camera ­ is a Listbox updated with the camera IDs previously configured in
the camera configuration window.
• Rule Type ­ is a Listbox where allows the user to specify the rule type that must
be inserted when adding the new rule. The rules types considered are ”Exists” and
”Contains”.
• Object ­ is a Listbox updated by the detection objects trained exclusively for the
corresponding process. Beyond this Listbox, we add an extra Listbox where is pos­
sible to specify the number ID of the corresponding object. This number is important
to align the desired object detection across the multiple cameras detections and is
going to be explained in more detail in the subsection 7.1.1
• Generic IoU ­ is the IoU ­ Intersection over Union ­ defined percentage value to be
evaluated between ROI rectangle and the detected object rectangle.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
37
==PAGE:46==
• Rules List ­ is the list of saved rules defined for every camera. The list contains the
Camera ID, Rule ID, Description/ Object, Type of rule, and the details of the ROI
coordinates.
• Add Rule Button ­ is the button responsible to open a new window, for drawing the
ROI ­ Region of Interest ­ in an interactive way by using the mouse.
• Delete Rule Button ­ is the button that allows the user to delete one rule of the list
of rules presented, by pressing/selecting the rule in the list and pressing the button
to delete from the configuration file.
• Update IoU Button ­ is the button responsible to update the Generic IoU value in
percentage by changing the value in the textbox and pressing the button to update
this value in the configuration file
Figure 7.6: Edit Rules Window ­ Screenshot
Implicit decisions of the Edit Rules Window
The message data information sent to the CEP component needs be to aligned between
the multiple cameras to avoid replication of data in the CEP component. In this way, we
opted to add an extra Listbox where we define a different rule ID for the multiple objects
with the same object name.
Giving an example based on the turnaround process, where we are creating the rules us­
ing the Edit Rule window. In figure 7.6, it’s possible to see this phenomenon with the rules
R080 and R081 of the catering truck. This happens because there are two ROI where
is expected to appear and be admitted a different catering truck in the image, different
image frame coordinates. In the case of the turnaround process exists a pre­definition of
a rule Id number for each object, where:
• R01 ­ airplane
• R02 ­ baggage ramp
• R03 ­ tow tractor
• R04 ­ bridge connected
• R05 ­ cargo ramp
• R06 ­ staircase
• R07 ­ airplane staircase
• R08 ­ catering truck
38
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:47==
On defining the rules, the object number needs to be aligned among the different cameras
with the extra object identifier number defined. In this way, its added the extra number to
the Rule ID. The final tag result for every ROI is
CCCCCRRRI
, where the five initial characters (CCCCC) correspond to the camera ID, three characters
for the rule ID (RRR) and one object identifier (I). Giving two examples of the catering
truck:
C01G41R080 ­ C01G41R081
Add Rule Window
For the purpose of adding a new rule, when the user presses the Add Rule button in
the Edit Rule Window, a new window is triggered to facilitate the drawing of the ROI.
Depending on the camera ID kept in the Edit Rule window, a temporary image frame is
taken from that camera source and is displayed in a newly enlarged window. Is possible
to select the ROI with the mouse by drawing a rectangle in this image. As shown in the
example in figure 7.7, a rule for the bridge connected object is being defined using the
mouse.
Figure 7.7: Edit Rules Window ­ Drawing image frame rule screenshot
After the confirmation of the new ROI, a new rule is added to the configuration file. In the
subsection 7.1.2, an example of a configuration file is shown.
The rule added, creates a new node in the XML configuration file. This is given by the
following example:
R
I_mH2 B/4]_y9R] /2b+`BTiBQM4]#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/]=
k
IJ2i?Q/ ivT24]*QMiBMb] tnKBM4]edR] tnKt4]kk8] vnKBM4]jkR] vnKt4]ke3] f=
j
If_mH2=
Listing 7.1: Rule bridge connected added row into configuration file
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
39
==PAGE:48==
Intersection algorithm
To acquire the correct detection of objects and accept them as events, in the context of a
process, we used 2 types of intersection to guarantee the correct evaluation of the regions
of interest. In our thesis, it’s defined as Rule types, depending on the best way considered
to evaluate such an object.
ROI
> IoU Threshold
Object Detected
(a) Rule Type: Contains
Object Detected
ROI
(b) Rule Type: Exists
Figure 7.8: Intersection algorithms: Definition of rules
Rule type ­ Contains
As a Contains rule type, it’s defined a region of interest (ROI) box in the image. When
the detection is performed, an object detection box is created for that frame. This rule
establishes a relation between the two boxes using the intersection algorithm (IoU). The
evaluation of the intersection is given by the generic threshold value defined for this pro­
cess.
An example of the ”Contains” rule, admitted as a possible intersection is described in
Figure 7.8a, where the event is accepted if the percentage area of overlap between the 2
boxes are greater than the IoU threshold defined.
Rule type ­ Exists
In the Exists rule type, a box with the region of interest is defined. In this case, the eval­
uation is based on the condition that at least one point of the object detected box, must
be inside the ROI. In this case, the IoU threshold is not relevant for evaluation, and the
event is admitted when at least one point is inside the ROI. This approach is described in
figure 7.8b.
Framework multi­threading execution
To introduce the purpose of multi­threading adoption in our framework, firstly we need
to explain its reason. The performance of video processing can be a computationally
intensive task, that could consume a lot of CPU power if the correct implementation is not
taken. In our case, processing a video stream by reading the video frames, performing
the activity extraction and showing the final result in a real­time processing environment,
can be a challenge. The decision of adopting a multi­thread strategy consists in alleviate
and splitting the computational load between multiple independent threads. Figure 7.9.
describes the multi­threading strategy when using a maximum of 3 cameras.
40
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:49==
Camera 3
Camera 2
Camera 1
Main GUI Thread
Show Frames
Thread
Semaphore
Activity Extraction
Thread
Show Frames
Thread
Activity Extraction
Thread
Show Frames
Thread
Activity Extraction
Thread
Semaphore
Semaphore
Figure 7.9: Multi­thread execution
The Main GUI Thread is responsible for processing the GUI window and all elements as­
sociated with mouse clicks to create a responsive/ interactive framework, without crashes.
This builds all the Tkinter elements and keeps them without any slow dragging windows
or temporary unclickable buttons. The goal of this thread is to maintain the main window
alive and responsive when the other threads are executing and consuming more CPU
power, in the background.
Every camera has two dedicated threads working separately with help of threads semaphores.
This allows both threads to work at the same time by waiting for permission to proceed
and then signals it, using the semaphore to proceed with the operation. This guarantees
the nonexistence of deadlocks when accessing the same memory resource.
The Activity Extraction Thread is responsible for reading the video stream and performing
detection and tracking of objects. This executes the following tasks: 1) gets the frame from
the video stream using the +pkXoB/2Q*Tim`2X`2/UV function; 2) performs the objects
detection and tracking; 3) uses a queue for putting the latest processed.
The Show Frames Thread is responsible for getting the latest image frame with all the
detected objects drawn and presenting it in the framework window without delays. The
thread is waiting for a non­empty queue to acquire the image frame. Then, resizes the
frame to fit on the window and adds it to the label responsible to present the image in the
GUI.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
41
==PAGE:50==
7.1.2
Persistent Storage
In this section, its detailed the most important files manipulated by the framework. One is
created exclusively for the configuration of the tool and the other three are in the context
of object detection. These files have the following characteristics:
• Configuration file ­ is the file responsible for saving the rules and configurations
of the framework. The camera ID and source for each camera, with their list of
rules. Each rule has a Rule ID and description, a method type associated and four
coordinates.
• Weights file ­ is the file responsible for the object detection. The YOLO weights file
with the pre­trained network of the process. This file is obtained after labelling im­
ages of process objects and then training the network using the Darknet repository.
• Classes configuration file ­ is the file where is configured the object detection
network. This contains the correct batch size parameters, depending on the number
of objects that the process has, for training the network and also for testing it in a
runnable environment.
• Classes names files ­ is the file where is specified the name of the objects that the
object detection needs to perform.
In the subsections below, it’s presented some examples of these files.
Configuration file
R
I\tKH p2`bBQM4^RXy^ 2M+Q/BM;4^lh6@3^\=
k
IS`Q+2bb B/4]yyR] MK24]hm`M`QmM/ S`Q+2bb] mQB4]3y]=
j
I*QM7B;m`iBQM=
9
I*K2` B/4]*yR:9R] /2b+`BTiBQM4]:i2 9R *K2` yR] bQm`+24]?iiT,ff
HQ+H?Qbi,3y3yf[Mib]=
8
I_mH2 B/4]_yjy] /2b+`BTiBQM4]iQrni`+iQ`]=
e
IJ2i?Q/ ivT24]*QMiBMb] tnKBM4]9dy] tnKt4]998] vnKBM4]9Rj] vnKt4]kd8] f=
d
If_mH2=
3
I_mH2 B/4]_yky] /2b+`BTiBQM4]#;;;2n`KT]=
N
IJ2i?Q/ ivT24]*QMiBMb] tnKBM4]RRj] tnKt4]keR] vnKBM4]8Ry] vnKt4]jkk] f=
Ry
If_mH2=
RR
I_mH2 B/4]_y3y] /2b+`BTiBQM4]+i2`BM;ni`m+F]=
Rk
IJ2i?Q/ ivT24]*QMiBMb] tnKBM4]Rj] tnKt4]kje] vnKBM4]eRy] vnKt4]j3N] f=
Rj
If_mH2=
R9
I_mH2 B/4]_y3R] /2b+`BTiBQM4]+i2`BM;ni`m+F]=
R8
IJ2i?Q/ ivT24]*QMiBMb] tnKBM4]k8y] tnKt4]R3k] vnKBM4]jey] vnKt4]Rd9] f=
Re
If_mH2=
Rd
I_mH2 B/4]_y9R] /2b+`BTiBQM4]#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/]=
R3
IJ2i?Q/ ivT24]*QMiBMb] tnKBM4]edR] tnKt4]kk8] vnKBM4]jkR] vnKt4]ke3] f=
RN
If_mH2=
ky
If*K2`=
kR
I*K2` B/4]*yR:9k] /2b+`BTiBQM4]:i2 9R *K2` yk] bQm`+24]?iiT,ff
HQ+H?Qbi,3y3RfFHK]=
kk
I_mH2 B/4]_yky] /2b+`BTiBQM4]#;;;2n`KT]=
kj
IJ2i?Q/ ivT24]*QMiBMb] tnKBM4]j9j] tnKt4]kN3] vnKBM4]jd8] vnKt4]k99] f=
k9
If_mH2=
k8
I_mH2 B/4]_yRy] /2b+`BTiBQM4]B`THM2]=
ke
IJ2i?Q/ ivT24]1tBbib] tnKBM4]dRj] tnKt4]kdk] vnKBM4]dR] vnKt4]Ry3] f=
kd
If_mH2=
k3
I_mH2 B/4]_yjy] /2b+`BTiBQM4]iQrni`+iQ`]=
kN
IJ2i?Q/ ivT24]*QMiBMb] tnKBM4]eRj] tnKt4]9ed] vnKBM4]9Rd] vnKt4]k8j] f=
jy
If_mH2=
jR
I_mH2 B/4]_ydy] /2b+`BTiBQM4]B`THM2nbiB`+b2]=
jk
IJ2i?Q/ ivT24]*QMiBMb] tnKBM4]y] tnKt4]y] vnKBM4]y] vnKt4]y] f=
jj
If_mH2=
j9
If*K2`=
42
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:51==
j8
If*QM7B;m`iBQM=
je
IfS`Q+2bb=
Listing 7.2: XML file with the configuration of the framework
Classes configuration file
For pursuing the training and testing of the network, a set­up of the configuration file has
to be made. We use the existing base configuration file and made some changes in some
of the values, considering our process and the number of classes.
In order to train the network we need to change the following parameters of the file:
1. Update batch and subdivisions parameters
Is possible to set different numbers of subdivisions, but only for training. The follow­
ing numbers could be set for the batch and subdivisions.
batch=
subdivisions=
64
8 or 16 or 32
32
8 or 16
16
8 or 4
8
4 or 2
Table 7.1: Batch and subdivisions parameters
If when training exists a memory overload error the number of batch needs to be
decreased and the number of subdivisions needs to be increased. In all this cases,
the subdivisions parameter has to be less than the batch number.
The listing 7.3 describes the snippet of the file affecting the parameters in the training
of our network.
R
(M2i)
k
O h`BMBM;
j
#i+?4e9
9
bm#/BpBbBQMb4jk
Listing 7.3: YOLO v3 training configuration file
2. Update number of iterations for training
The next step is to change the number of max_batches that is the total number of
iterations and steps of the training responsible for updating the learning rate.
For this, the max_batches is calculated based on the number of classes that exists
in the process. Given by the general equation:
max_batches = classes ∗2000
(7.1)
The max_batches cannot be less then 4000. The steps are calculated based on the
80% and 90% from the max_batches.
The listing 7.4 describes the calculation in the snippet of the file for the training of
our network.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
43
==PAGE:52==
R
Ktn#i+?2b 4 Reyyy
k
bi2Tb4 Rk3yy- R99yy
Listing 7.4: YOLO v3 training file parameters: max_batches and steps
3. Update number of classes in 3 [yolo] layers and filters in 3 [convolutional]
layers
The next changes need to be made for including the number of classes and filters
for the [yolo] and [convolutional] layers. The general equation to give the proper
number of filters for the [convolotional] layers, is described as follows:
filters = (classes + coordinates + 1) ∗masks
(7.2)
The number of masks is the same used in COCO file, from the Darknet repository.
In our case, because we are considering 8 classes for the training of the network,
the equation comes as follows:
filters = (8 + 5) ∗3 = 39
(7.3)
The listing 7.5 describes the snipped of code responsible for this changes in the
configuration file:
R
(+QMpQHmiBQMH)
k
bBx24R
j
bi`B/24R
9
T/4R
8
7BHi2`b4jN
e
+iBpiBQM4HBM2`
d
3
(vQHQ)
N
+Hbb2b43
Ry
XXX
RR
Rk
(+QMpQHmiBQMH)
Rj
bBx24R
R9
bi`B/24R
R8
T/4R
Re
7BHi2`b4jN
Rd
+iBpiBQM4HBM2`
R3
RN
(vQHQ)
ky
+Hbb2b43
kR
XXX
kk
kj
(+QMpQHmiBQMH)
k9
bBx24R
k8
bi`B/24R
ke
T/4R
kd
7BHi2`b4jN
k3
+iBpiBQM4HBM2`
kN
jy
(vQHQ)
jR
+Hbb2b43
Listing 7.5: YOLO v3 training configuration file parameters: classes and filters
44
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:53==
Classes names file
The classes names file includes all the selected classes names used for the object de­
tection. In our case, we have 8 classes trained. The listing 7.6 presents the entire file.
R
B`THM2
k
#;;;2n`KT
j
iQrni`+iQ`
9
#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/
8
+`;Qn`KT
e
biB`+b2
d
B`THM2nbiB`+b2
3
+i2`BM;ni`m+F
Listing 7.6: Classes names file
Weights file
The weights file is responsible for having the trained network model perform object detec­
tion using YOLO. Usually, this is a huge file depending on the number of objects trained
and the size of the network. The weights file is defined as a pre­trained speed optimised
file.
The file extension is described as a SAM [32] Sequence Weights specification developed
by Richard Hughey et al.. These files are supported by software applications available for
devices running Linux.
In the context of our solution, the weights file with all the trained network for the 8 classes
of objects, for the turnaround processes, has a size above 500MB.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
45
==PAGE:54==
7.1.3
Video Player
The video player is an element in our architecture and described in our C4 model by
the element where the entire flow starts and has a direct connection with the external
broadcasting service. In order to better understand how we handle the acquisition of
video in our solution, we will give a brief introduction of how we emulate the broadcasting
service to be possible to have a real stream of video to test and evaluate our solution,
using the VLC tool. After we explain how this acquisition of image frames is made using
the python computer vision library, OpenCV.
VLC stream (Broadcasting service)
The free open­source VLC media player has an option of creating a stream of video from
existing videos in our machines. By using this concept, we emulate the broadcasting
service of a real­world camera network system, for creating a connection link with IP and
Port number, in our local machine. For that, in the VLC media player we have to guarantee
the following conditions:
1. Create a new stream connection, by selecting the video file from our local machine
to initialize the stream
2. Creating a new HTTP new local connection by configuring a IP, Port number and
Path
3. Select the codecs to transcode the video file into the stream and configure bitrate
speed to guarantee a fast connection transmission.
After some testing of our solution, we found out that the enumerated step 3, has a lot of
impact on the performance of acquiring the frames. In this way, the type of codec selected
to convert the video in the transmission affects directly the speed of the transmission. The
higher resolution the slower the transmission. In this way, we need also to change the
bitrate configuration, which speeds up this transmission to a more efficient way.
In our final tests the unawareness of this configuration, affected a lot the performance of
the first tests, because we emulate 3 cameras at the same time of the same turnaround
process, starting the videos at the exact same time.
One problem that appear to be affecting our solution, that was the delay and inconsistent
transmission between the multiple cameras. Over time, some videos were ahead then
the others.
By changing the bitrate and codec configuration to a more efficient way, this problem
disappeared, and all videos were transmitted and captured with the exact same precision
in time.
OpenCV
OpenCV is the open­source real­time computer vision library used for capturing, manip­
ulating and presenting the video images frames.
In the context of the video player in our solution, we used the +pkXoB/2Q*Tim`2 class
where is possible to pass the HTTP connection source as an argument in order to obtain
the image frames in real­time of the transmitted broadcasting service.
After creating the connection, the +pkXoB/2Q*Tim`2 reads the frame and sends the frame
to the Activity Extraction, in which is going to read the latest frame captured.
The listing 7.7 has a snippet of the computer vision project where is possible to understand
what is happening for every camera source.
46
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:55==
R
/27 T`Q+2bbnQ#D2+in/2i2+iBQMn+KyRUb2H7- b2KT?Q`2V,
k
b2H7X+K2`R 4 oB/2Q*Tim`2Ub2H7XMK2RV
j
r?BH2 h`m2,
9
bi`ihBK2 4 iBK2XiBK2UV
8
7`K2R 4 b2H7X+K2`RX`2/UV
e
d
`2i7`K2 4 b2H7X+iBpBiv1ti`+iBQMX2ti`+iBQMn+K2`U7`K2RV
3
N
b2H7X[m2m2RXTmiU`2i7`K2V
Ry
b2KT?Q`2X`2H2b2UV
RR
b2H7X+K2`n7TbnQ#R 4 iBK2XiBK2UV@bi`ihBK2
Listing 7.7: Process object detection function
The connection is created with the HTTP source of the camera. Then the frames are read
and passed to the activity extraction class (responsible for manipulating the frame). After
the objects are detected and drawn in the image by the activity extraction, the resulting
frame is put in a queue to be presented to the user.
7.1.4
Activity Extraction
The activity extraction element of our C4 model is the central component responsible for
converting video frames into detected objects.
This element coordinates the object detection and the object tracking and then publishes
the result, in the case that there exist detected objects for that frame.
R
+Hbb +iBpBiv1ti`+iBQM6`K2rQ`F,
k
j
/27 nnBMBinnUb2H7- +K2`- +K2`A/ - /B+iBQM`vn`mH2bV,
9
H#2Hbn7BH2MK2 4 ^vQHQ@+Q+Q@/if+Hbb2bXMK2b^
8
+7;n7BH2MK2 4 ^vQHQ@+Q+Q@/ifvQHQpjnRyn+Hbb2bX+7;^
e
r2B;?ibn7BH2MK2 4 ^vQHQ@+Q+Q@/ifvQHQpjnRyn+Hbb2bn7BMHXr2B;?ib^
d
b2H7X+K2` 4 +K2`
3
b2H7X+K2`A/ 4 +K2`A/
N
Ry
XXX
RR
Rk
b2H7X[ 4 Zm2m2UV
Rj
b2H7XQ/ 4 P#D2+i.2i2+iBQMUH#2Hbn7BH2MK2 - +7;n7BH2MK2 - r2B;?ibn7BH2MK2 -
b2H7X+K2`A/ - /B+iBQM`vn`mH2bV
R9
b2H7XQ#D2+ib 4 P#D2+ibU8- Jsn.AahL*1V
R8
b2H7XbBKTH2ni`+F2`b 4 h`+F2`*QMiBM2`UV
Re
b2H7Xi`+F2` 4 h`+F2`UL2`2biL2B;?#Q`.BbiM+2J2i`B+U]+QbBM2]-Jsn.AahL*1VV
Rd
b2H7XTm#HBb?2` 4 JZhhnSm#HBb?2`U]#`QF2`X?Bp2K[X+QK]-R33j-]+pbB//?Bf2p2Mi]V
Listing 7.8: ActivityExtractionFramework class from the Computer Vision Component
In the listing 7.8, it’s possible to understand this coordination among the different elements
of the Computer Vision component, it begins by giving the location of the classes names,
classes configuration and weights files for use of the object detection element. After it calls
the classes responsible to initiate the object detection, object tracking and publishing the
result via MQTT.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
47
==PAGE:56==
7.1.5
Object Detection
Labeling of images
The training of the dataset needs to begin with a very important step. Labelling of images
that accurately describes the classes of the network.
For this, we utilized an open­source tool for making this process easier. This tool is pre­
pared for generating the files in a format admitted for the YOLO training model. The tool
allows the selection of a folder of images to label. Then is possible for each image to draw
an object and associate the correct class name of the object.
The labeling process included finding public videos of turnaround processes, extracting
images from the videos and labeling the appropriate objects in the images. Additionally
the images used to train airplane objects the COCO dataset have been relabeled so all
objects interesting for this project are also labeled in these. Ultimately over 10.000 images
have been labeled and used for training the final model.
The figure 7.10 shows a screenshot of the LabelImg 3 tool with one example of labelling
one turnaround process image. In this case, is possible to visualize the existence of three
objects in the image: bridge_connected, catering_truck, airplane.
Figure 7.10: LabelImg tool
At the end of the labelling, the tool produces a text file with the same name as the reference
image with:
• Class ID ­ number of the class that has to be consistent with the classes names file.
The number is given in accordance with the sequential position of the class name
inside the classes name file.
• Coordinates ­ are the coordinates (x, y, width, height) between 0 and 1, that pro­
vides the box relation inside the image for each class drawn.
The listing 7.9 describes the textual file generated by the tool for an image, where each
line has the following format: (+Hbb A.) (t) (v) (rB/i?) (?2B;?i)
3?iiTb,ff;Bi?m#X+QKfixmiHBMfH#2HAK;
48
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:57==
R
y yXj99yyy yXkN8yyy yXye3yyy yXRjeeed
k
R yXkedyyy yX8Nyyyy yXyNyyyy yXkyyyyy
j
k yX8edyyy yXkdeeed yXyeeyyy yXRdjjjj
Listing 7.9: LabelImg file for one labeled image
Object Detection with Yolo
YOLO algorithm was introduced by Joseph Redmon [33] in their paper, ”You Only Look
Once: Unified, Real­Time Object Detection”. This is a deep learning­based object de­
tection where a network must be trained to perform capable real­time object detection,
presented in the first paper to perform in video stream up to 45 FPS using a GPU.
There are many types of algorithms for object detection in images, but we proceed with
YOLO because it uses a single­stage detector rather than a two­stage detector, which
provides a less accurate detection sometimes, but it’s significantly faster than the other
algorithms available, at the time of developing this thesis.
The YOLO object detection pipeline uses a regression problem to spatially separate bound­
ing boxes and associated class probabilities. A single neural network predicts bounding
boxes and class probabilities directly from full images in one evaluation. Since the whole
detection pipeline is a single network, it can be optimized end­to­end directly on detection
performance.
The figure 7.11 illustrates the pipeline for the multiple objects detected in one image frame.
The image demonstrates how the detections are performed based on the subdivision of
the grid, allowing the creation of bounding boxes with a certain confidence level and map
this bounding boxes in association with a probability of the classes names objects trained
for this network. Is perceptible by the example shown, that the algorithm detects a dog, a
bicycle and a car, for just one image frame.
Figure 7.11: Ilustration of the YOLO object detection pipeline extracted from Redmon et
al. paper
In the context of our project, we tested the two most recent versions of the YOLO algo­
rithm:
• YOLOv3 ­ is an improvement in the YOLO family, introduced by Joseph Redmon
et al. [34], to be faster to detect objects than the previous one’s. This version is
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
49
==PAGE:58==
larger than the other models. In the paper version, a dataset of images is trained
using a COCO dataset with more than 80 classes categories and more than 330K
of trained images. This version also introduces a threshold value (50%) in order to
better predict or discard false positives in the model.
• YOLOv4 ­ this new version, was improved by Alexey Bochkovski et al. [35], and
was focused on the optimal speed and accuracy of object detection. The model
was improved to be more accurate than YOLOv3 when the video stream has speed
quality above 65 FPS.
Figure 7.12: Detection neural network architecture diagram extracted from Redmon et al.
paper ”You Only Look Once: Unified, Real­Time Object Detection”
The figure 7.12 shows the neural network of 24 convolutional layers followed by 2 fully
connected layers. Alternating 1 × 1 convolutional layers reduce the features space from
preceding layers. The researchers, pretrain the convolutional layers on the ImageNet
classification task at half the resolution (224 × 224 input image) and then double the
resolution for detection. This description is presented in the published paper by Joseph
Redmon [33], in the first version published of the YOLO algorithm.
In the YOLOv4 some of these layers were updated in order to improve the model com­
pared with YOLOv3 for an improvement on accuracy result on detection and FPS by 10%
and 12%, respectively, this values are given in the published paper ”YOLOv4: Optimal
Speed and Accuracy of Object Detection” by Alexey Bochkovski et al. [35].
We must state that we didn’t change the architecture of the YOLO neural network in the
context of our object detection development. We used and tested the different models
(YOLOv3 and YOLOv4), by re­adapting the training and testing of the network, by con­
figuring the parameters of the classes configuration and classes names files, to be able
to perform the training on our dataset images and the number of classes of the process
involved.
All the features and concepts of the YOLO algorithms are detailed and described in the
researcher page 4.
The source project of YOLO is englobed in a repository called Darknet5, which combines
the YOLO algorithm models, with OpenCV to manipulate the images and a pre­trained
network based on the COCO dataset.
4?iiTb,ffTD`2//B2X+QKf/`FM2ifvQHQf
5?iiTb,ff;Bi?m#X+QKfH2t2v"f/`FM2i
50
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:59==
Training the Model
The training of our network was made using the Darknet repository. Before the training
there were some steps that we need to have in consideration to train the network for our
specific process:
1. Labelling a high number of images for each object.
2. Attach the folder with labelled images and textual files with the YOLO representation
of the classes names into the Darknet repository.
3. Parametrize the Darknet files. This is configuration is explained in section 7.2. The
files that must be configured are the classes configuration and classes names files.
In the Darknet repository, this files appear with the name +Q+QX/i and vQHQX+7;.
It’s only necessary to make a copy of these files and change the values in accor­
dance with our process.
4. Train the model using the configured files and labelled images.
In order to have an effective training of our network model, we found out that is required
to have a machine with GPU to have decent timings on completion of the network. The
impact of training the model using GPU or a machine exclusively with CPU performance
as results on performance sometimes, 1000 times faster. The reason why this happens is
that the training of the network is totally focused on handling images of different objects,
which turns into more effective for the GPU to perform these tasks. This are some of
the differences that helps to understand why GPU performs better over CPU in this very
complex tasks.
GPU
CPU
Hundreds of simple cores
Few very complex cores
Thousands of concurrent hardware threads
Single­thread performance optimization
Table 7.2: GPU over CPU hardware comparison
The table 7.2 was inspired in the presentation from Pietro Piscione available in the fol­
lowing link online 6. It’s clear that for these two arguments comparison that GPU is more
suitable to perform more complex operations with thousands of operations, but CPU is
faster in making simple operations. In the case of our neural network training, a GPU per­
forms better over a CPU because this is a very complex operation with a lot of images in
the dataset and with intensive manipulation over the different layers of the neural network.
For the training, we had to decide on two approaches in order to not spend time and have
a model for the detection in a shorter time. The first strategy was to use the Google Colab
basic account to train our initial model because this service offers a cloud environment
with 12/16GB of GPU performance and 12 GB of RAM. This was beneficial in the first
stage because we could have access to a free and collaborative tool to train our model
using python executable code. This tool has some drawbacks regarding the amount of
RAM available and in the 12 hours of virtual machine sessions, available in the basic
account. Due to this reason, we decided to pursue the training in with Google Collab
Pro7, because our model is very heavy and took more than one/two days to train, using
a local GPU.
6?iiTb,ffrrrXbHB/2b?`2XM2ifH2bbBQoBHH`/Bif+@Rbi@T`2b2MiiBQM@7BMH@Tm#HBb?2/
7?iiTb,ff+QH#X`2b2`+?X;QQ;H2X+QKf
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
51
==PAGE:60==
Our model was trained using a few turnaround videos found on YouTube and some object
images found online in other repositories. The last trained model used in our prototype
and tested at Copenhagen airport has in consideration 10748 images from the different
classes for the object detection. The folder with all images used can be found in the link
from Google Drive 8.
Training at Copenhagen Airport
Regarding the training of our network, we also had to make some decisions on training for
the real world environment use case at the Copenhagen airport. The training at the airport
was conducted in the same way as we did in a ”research environment”. The labelling of
images was made based on multiple videos from different gates and cameras, but one
small aspect made it impossible to conclude the training of our model based on the images
of that specific object.
The machines available and offered by the Copenhagen airport to test and evaluate our
thesis project were not powerful enough to train the model in a decent time. The absence
of CUDA enabled GPUs in those machines, and because we were restricted to handling
video data exclusively at the Airport offices, turns out in an unfeasible possibility to have
a model trained specifically with airport objects.
To better understand this unfeasibility, the training had an expected conclusion time of
approximately 450 days. This, of course, was an impossible scenario due to the limitation
in time of our project, and in a practical manner, but made us realise the importance of
having GPU performance when training the model based on image frames.
Object Detection in turnaround process
The object detection performed in a turnaround process was based on our trained network
model made using the YOLO algorithm and an evaluation of the regions of interest (ROI).
Figure 7.13: Object detection frame image performed using Computer Vision Component
and trained network
8?iiTb,ff/`Bp2X;QQ;H2X+QKf/`Bp2f7QH/2`bfR#.BBv:ki_sFS8[dtD.+q.Tbiy8v8:
52
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:61==
For each camera, the regions of interest must be defined in order to trigger the events of
every object appearing in a zone of the image.
The figure 7.13 shows an example of an image frame from the turnaround process where
3 objects have been detected, based on the rules imposed. In this case, the objection
detection is detecting an airplane, a bridge connected and a baggage ramp for the same
image frame. In this image frame, 3 events have been triggered because there are rules
in the zones where the bounding boxes of objects appear, which allows validating the
correct detection of the object.
To better understand the decision of imposing regions of interest in every camera, it’s
possible to verify, by the example, that only one airplane it’s been detected because there
is a specific rule in that zone that is triggering this event. The other airplanes in the
background have not been triggered because there are no rules for airplanes in that zone
of the image.
This is a relevant condition in our Computer Vision Component because in this way we
tackle the problem of having false positives detections that could lead to untrusted data
and undesirable results, at the end of our process analysis.
7.1.6
Object Tracking
In scenarios where multiple objects of the same class are detected, the objects need to
be uniquely identifiable. Further, the unique identifier needs to be the same for an object
in every frame that it is being detected. This introduces the need for tracking objects
in applications where object detection is being used. In its most simple format, tracking
could be achieved by comparing a new list of detected objects with a certain class with a
list of previously detected objects and assigning the id of the previously detected object
to the object with the highest intersection over union containing the same label.
Objects move out of the frame and new objects appear in the frame, to accommodate for
new objects a distance threshold is set, such that if a detected object is not close to any
of the previously detected objects, a new unique identifier is associated with that object.
To remove the tracking for objects no longer appearing, a counter is associated with each
tracked object, the counter is set to 0 each time the position of the object is updated and
incremented each time the object has not been detected. When the counter reaches a
threshold value, it is removed from the list of tracked objects.
This simple form of tracking works well for well­separated objects where no occlusion
occurs, however when objects disappear for a short while and appear again in a different
part of the screen, the algorithm defined above will most likely define a new id for the
object.
SORT
Simple Online and Real­time Tracking (SORT) [36] is a simple multiple object tracking
algorithm. It is similar to the basic algorithm presented at the start of this section, addition­
ally, it estimates where the object is using a Kalman filter framework [37]. The association
between the predicted values and the new set of detections is handled by the Hungarian
algorithm. If the tracked object is not detected in a frame, SORT updates the position
based on the estimation made. When the object again becomes visible, and the path and
speed has not changed, SORT will in many cases be able to assign the correct id to the
object again.
SORT reports very good results, with a combination of good accuracy and high speed.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
53
==PAGE:62==
Object Tracking with DeepSORT
DeepSORT by Nicolai Wojke et al. [38] [39] is an extension of SORT. Instead of using the
Hungarian method to assign estimates to tracks, DeepSort uses a combination of distance
measure and appearance metric. This allows the algorithm to be more robust against
identity switches and tracking through oclusions. The distance measure is useful when
uncertainty is low, however, the appearance metric can recover lost identities, making it
very powerful.
The appearance features are generated by a CNN feature extractor. DeepSORT keeps
a gallery of appearance features and matches the features from a newly detected object
using the smallest cosine distance.
Feature Generation
For the feature extractor in our implementation, we use a TriNet model. To map the fea­
tures to an object a ResNet­50 model is used. Inspiration for training the feature model,
has been drawn from Alexander Hermans et al. [40] and the accompanying implementa­
tion9, the implementation also includes the code to train a new ResNet­50 model.
To train a new model the data used for training the YOLOv4 model can be reused, however
since the training data is structured differently, some modifications need to be made. The
training framework does not use a txt file with the bounding boxes of the objects in an
image like the framework used to train the YOLOv4 model. Instead, the framework takes
as input image files of cropped objects. Meaning to train a model using the framework
each object needs to be cropped out of its original image into its own image. Seeing as
the data is already available, and the bounding boxes of the relevant objects are noted in
a txt file, the training images were created using a small python script.
The files generated where:
Object
Image Count
Airplane
8933
Baggage Ramp
1535
Bridge Connected
1040
Cargo Ramp
582
Staircase
812
Tow Tractor
1120
Airplane Staircase
222
Table 7.3: Traning data created for ResNet­50 training
For each image an entry in a data file specifies the class and the location of the image:
+Hbb-`2HiBp2fTQbBiBQMfiQfBK;2
The file is then provided to the framework at the training start.
9https://github.com/VisualComputingInstitute/triplet­reid
54
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:63==
7.1.7
Publisher
The publisher element of the Computer Vision component is responsible for making the
bridge between the Complex Event Processing component. In this subsection, we dis­
cuss the adopted communication of our prototype, for passing the detected events of the
process and discussing the two approaches that we tested and the one that we decided
to focus on, based on the more reliable for our purpose.
In the first stage of the development, we started by choosing an HTTP connection to send
the events to the CEP component, by sinking the connection with the same IP and Port
number, and sending an XML message describing the label and information of events
detected.
With the further development of our prototype, we realize that adding an MQTT connec­
tion with an external message broker, will have some benefits in performance and the
possibility to integrate more devices to extract the events.
The next subsections, it described the details of the adopted implementation between the
Computer Vision component and the MQTT broker, allowing the integration of multiple
sources to extract meaningful activities.
HiveMQ Broker
The HiveMQ is an MQTT broker responsible for addressing some technical challenges
when building multiple devices communication or Internet of Things applications.
The HiveMQ Platform contains an MQTT Broker and a Control Center where is possible
to configure the MQTT connections using client­based interface platform.
Figure 7.14: HiveMQ Broker diagram in the context of our solution
The HiveMQ platform has some advantages in building applications for multiple connec­
tivity purposes and offers a scalable advantage in integrating new devices when needed.
In the case of our solution, this was one of the key advantages for selecting the MQTT
broker, rather than an HTTP connection. This architectural decision allows us to inte­
grate the number of cameras needed for capturing events without a major concern on the
configuration of a new connection for the new cameras.
In this way, every camera is sending the event information to the same MQTT topic, that
is a word topic configured in the broker to filter messages for each connected client.
Each topic consists of one or more topic levels. Each level is separated by a forward
slash (topic level separator). This way of organizing the topic is very lightweight because
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
55
==PAGE:64==
it’s possible to derive the topic by topic levels and filter or aggregate the received event
information based on the different levels.
To give a brief example of this, when publishing a message to the message broker we
used the topic described above in figure 7.15.
Figure 7.15: HiveMQ Broker topic
Publish MQTT message
To create a connection to the HiveMQ broker, we must initialize an MQTT client specifying
the broker, the port number and the topic.
The listing 7.10 contains the snippet of code responsible for initializing the connection to
the publisher. The JZhhnSm#HBb?2` class is implemented using the T?QXK[iiX+HB2Mi
library for python.
R
b2H7XTm#HBb?2` 4 JZhhnSm#HBb?2`U]#`QF2`X?Bp2K[X+QK]- R33j- ]+pbB//?Bf2p2Mi]V
Listing 7.10: MQTT Publisher python function
56
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:65==
7.2
Complex Event Processing Component
To translate the detected objects into activities, a system is needed that can relate objects
temporally and translate basic detections, which are just a bounding box and a label,
into activities that are ready to be ingested by a process mining component. For this
implementation, Siddhi is chosen as the complex event processing component.
Figure 7.16: Architecture Complex Event Processing Component ­ C4 Level 3
Figure 7.16 explains where Siddhi fits relative to the computer vision component and the
online process mining component.
Siddhi listens to a specified topic on the message broker, and the computer vision com­
ponent publishes detected object definitions. When received by Siddhi, these values flow
through the streams defined until finally an activity is generated and published to the mes­
sage broker on a different topic.
Two key terms when trying to understand how Siddhi works, are streams and queries.
To define a stream in Siddhi all that is needed is to define the values that will pass to
the stream. These are basic types such as string, int, double etc. A sample stream for
airplane objects could be:
R
B`THM2ai`2KUH#2H bi`BM;- KBMnt BMi- KBMnv BMi- r BMi- ? BMiV
Queries in Siddhi pick values from one or more streams and produce a value based on
this and put the result into another stream. Generally, the queries follow the structure:
R
6`QK (bQm`+2 bi`2K ;Q2b ?2`2)
k
a2H2+i (pHm2b ;Q ?2`2)
j
AMb2`i AMiQ (i`;2i bi`2K ;Q2b ?2`2)
More elaborate queries can employ filtering:
R
6`QK (bQm`+2 bi`2K ;Q2b ?2`2)(+QM/BiBQM ;Q2b ?2`2)
k
a2H2+i (pHm2b ;Q ?2`2)
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
57
==PAGE:66==
j
AMb2`i AMiQ (i`;2i bi`2K ;Q2b ?2`2)
And partitioning:
R
S`iBiBQM rBi? U(pHm2) 7`QK (bQm`+2 bi`2K)V
k
"2;BM
j
6`QK (bQm`+2 bi`2K ;Q2b ?2`2)(+QM/BiBQM ;Q2b ?2`2)
9
a2H2+i (pHm2b ;Q ?2`2)
8
AMb2`i AMiQ (i`;2i bi`2K ;Q2b ?2`2)
e
2M/c
A query could also have several source streams and produce a result from some relation
of the values from both streams:
R
6`QK 2R4(bQm`+2 bi`2K ;Q2b ?2`2) @=
k
6`QK 2k4(b2+QM/ bQm`+2 bi`2K)
j
a2H2+i (pHm2b ;Q ?2`2)
9
AMb2`i AMiQ (i`;2i bi`2K ;Q2b ?2`2)
Finally an example of a stream that selects 5 events from a stream:
R
6`QK (bQm`+2 bi`2K ;Q2b ?2`2)I8=
k
a2H2+i (pHm2b ;Q ?2`2)
j
AMb2`i AMiQ (i`;2i bi`2K ;Q2b ?2`2)
There are many more possible ways of defining streams, however the examples above
represent the most basic cases. And most of the queries, used in the implementation,
follow the examples above in some flavor or form.
This section will explain how each activity is produced from the detections provided by the
computer vision component. Furthermore the section explains how Siddhi can receive
detections from multiple sources and correlate them.
7.2.1
Input to Siddhi
Data enters the Siddhi component via the ComputerVisionStream defined below.
R
!bQm`+2U
k
ivT24^K[ii^-
j
m`H4 ^i+T,ff#`QF2`X?Bp2K[X+QK,R33j^-
9
iQTB+4^+pbB//?Bf2p2Mi^-
8
+H2MXb2bbBQM4^i`m2^-
e
[mHBivXQ7Xb2`pB+24 ^k^-
d
!KTUivT24^tKH^VV
3
/27BM2 bi`2K *QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K
N
UpHm2 bi`BM;- `2 HQM;- rB/i? BMi- ?2B;?i BMi- KBMnt BMi- KBMnv BMiVc
When Siddhi receives value from an external source, the stream is defined as a !bQm`+2,
the definition of the source varies depending on the type of source.
The *QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K is of type K[ii meaning the data is received from a mqtt
message broker. The m`H specifies the url of the message broker and which port is used.
58
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:67==
In this case i+T,ff#`QF2`X?Bp2K[X+QK,R33j is used. This is a public message broker
that is free to use for anyone. The iQTB+ attribute specifies the topic where Siddhi lis­
tens for new events, described in section 7.1.7. When the computer vision component
publishes a new event to the broker, it also specifies which topic the event is published
to, any application listening for events on the specified topic will then receive this event.
The !KTUivT24^tKH^V specifies that the body of the event is in xml format, Siddhi will
then extract the values in the body. The events received are the detected objects, in the
computer vision component, and they contain the following values:
• value, a string specifying what the object is
• area, a long integer specifying the area of the bounding box
• width, an int specifying the width of the bounding box
• height, an int specifying the height of the bounding box
• min_x, an int specifying the x coordinate of the upper left corner of the bounding box
• min_y, an int specifying the y coordinate of the upper left corner of the bounding box
7.2.2
Output from Siddhi
When the activities have been generated they are sent to the "2KHBM2ai`2K. The def­
inition for this stream is given below.
R
!bBMFUivT24^K[ii^-
k
m`H4^i+T,ff#`QF2`X?Bp2K[X+QK,R33j^-
j
iQTB+4]]]/imfB`TQ`ifim`M`QmM/f&&+b2A.''f&&+iBpBiv'']]]-
9
[mHBivXQ7Xb2`pB+2 4 ^k^-
8
!KTUivT2 4 ^i2ti^VV
e
/27BM2 bi`2K "2KHBM2ai`2K U+iBpBiv bi`BM; -Q#D2+iA. bi`BM; -+b2A. bi`BM;Vc
The message sent to the message broker does not contain a body. The specified activity is
the end of the topic that the event is published to. The online process mining component,
will listen to the base topic with a wildcard, and determine what the case id and activity is
based on the topic it receives the message on. This is based on the MQTT­XES protocol
explained in section 3.3.
The stream is a string with the activity, caseID, and a string with the objectID, this is based
on the value in the *QKTmi2`oBbBQM*QKTQM2Mi
7.2.3
Combining Information from Multiple Sources
The communication between the computer vision component and Siddhi is through the
MQTT protocol. This makes the communication asynchronous, which has the benefit
that as long as the messages sent to the message broker follows a specific structure, the
number of message sources doesn’t matter. However if messages are produced from
sources that capture the same turnaround process, some synchronization between the
sources is necessary.
It has been chosen to use the regions of interest (ROI) as a way to synchronize the dif­
ferent message sources. The ROI are defined so narrowly that only a single object can
fit within the ROI. This is important as if two objects of the same category are detected
within the same ROI, they are named the same and Siddhi will interpret this as being a
single object that moves rapidly between to positions.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
59
==PAGE:68==
The ROI are named after a specific format. First the camera ID *ttttt then the rule ID
_ttt. The *ttttt part will be different for each camera, however when a camera ROI
overlaps with another cameras ROI these are given the same rule ID.
When Siddhi is detecting whether an object is moving or an object is stopped, the entire ID
is used. The reason for this is obvious since the same object will be in different positions
of each camera. When Siddhi has detected that an object has stopped or that an object
is moving, the camera ID is stripped from the ID. If this is not done an object stopped will
ultimately generate two object stopped activities for the same object.
Similarly for activities that are based on the presence or absence of an object, the camera
id needs to be stripped before the event is further processed.
R
7`QK *QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K
k
b2H2+i bi`,bm#bi`UpHm2- eV b pHm2- `2 -rB/i? -?2B;?i -KBMnt -KBMnv-
+b2A.
j
BMb2`i BMiQ ai`BT*K2`A.c
The query above selects a substring from position 6 to the end of the string. Other queries
will then select events from the ai`BT*K2`A. stream when the events are processed.
An example query is a query used to produce the "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ activity:
R
7`QK 2p2`v 2R4ai`BT*K2`A.(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^X #`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/ ^- pHm2V)
k
b2H2+i 2RXpHm2- 2RX+b2A.
j
BMb2`i BMiQ "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2Kc
To produce the "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ activity, it is not important what the source of the de­
tection is, just that the specific bridge will not generate two seperate activities when it
connects to the airplane.
7.2.4
Object Stopped
Section 6.3.1 explains process events and that they are the basis of all activities. One of
these process events is P#D2+i aiQTT2/. The definition of the P#D2+i aiQTT2/ process
event is the Siddhi implementation is given below:
R
T`iBiBQM rBi? UpHm2 Q7 *QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2KV
k
#2;BM
j
9
7`QK 2p2`v 2R4*QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K @=
8
2k4*QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K(
e
B7h?2M1Hb2U2k(Hbi) Bb MmHH-
d
Ki?,#bU
3
U2RXKBMnt Y 2RXrB/i? f kV @ UKBMnt Y rB/i? f kV
N
V I 3y M/
Ry
Ki?,#bU
RR
U2RXKBMnv Y 2RX?2B;?i f kV @ UKBMnv Y ?2B;?i f kV
Rk
V I 3y-
Rj
Ki?,#bU
R9
U2k(Hbi)XKBMnt Y 2k(Hbi)XrB/i? f kV @ UKBMnt Y rB/i? f kV
R8
V I 3y M/
Re
Ki?,#bU
Rd
U2k(Hbi)XKBMnv Y 2k(Hbi)X?2B;?i f kV @ UKBMnv Y ?2B;?i f kV
R3
V I 3y V
RN
)Ik8=
ky
b2H2+i bi`,bm#bi`U2k(Hbi)XpHm2- eV b pHm2-
60
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:69==
kR
2k(Hbi)XrB/i? b rB/i?-
kk
2k(Hbi)X?2B;?i b ?2B;?i-
kj
2k(Hbi)XKBMnt b KBMnt-
k9
2k(Hbi)XKBMnv b KBMnv
k8
2k(Hbi)X+b2A. b +b2A.
ke
QmiTmi Hbi 2p2`v k8 2p2Mib
kd
BMb2`i
BMiQ P#D2+iaiQTT2/c
k3
2M/c
Firstly the query is partinioned with the value of the *QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K. This will
make sure that when comparing a series of events, only events with the same value
string are compared to each other, meaning e.g. that an airplane will not be compared to
a baggage ramp.
The next interesting part of the query is this section:
R
Ki?,#bU
k
U2RXKBMnt Y 2RXrB/i? f kV @ UKBMnt Y rB/i? f kV
j
V I 3y M/
9
Ki?,#bU
8
U2RXKBMnv Y 2RX?2B;?i f kV @ UKBMnv Y ?2B;?i f kV
e
V I 3y
This section checks that the center point of the latest object has not moved more than 80
pixels in either a horizontal direction or a vertical direction. The reason for checking the
center point and not simply min_x and min_y, is that, because YOLO does a best effort
estimation of the bounding box, the size can vary quite a bit from detection to detection,
so each corner of the bounding box moves as the box changes size. However the center
points stays relatively stable.
Another thing to note, is that only the vertical and horizontal direction is checked. In section
6.3.1 it is specified that the Pythagorean distance should be used. This would require a
square root operation for each object in each detection. Since calculating the square
root is a computationally heavy operation, it was decided that movement in the horizontal
and vertical direction only, would provide a good enough estimate of when objects are
stopped.
The query specifies that 25 events should be received before an P#D2+iaiQTT2/ event
is generated, in addition to this a rate limiter is specified such that only every 25th event
will be inserted into the P#D2+iaiQTT2/ stream. If there was no rate limiter, after an ob­
ject has not moved for 25 events, new events would be continuously generated for the
P#D2+iaiQTT2/ stream.
When an event is generated, it is inserted into the P#D2+iaiQTT2/ stream. The definition
of this stream is given below:
R
/27BM2 bi`2K P#D2+iaiQTT2/
k
UpHm2 bi`BM; -rB/i? BMi-?2B;?i BMi-KBMnt BMi-KBMnv BMi- +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
The P#D2+iaiQTT2/ stream has the same values that the *QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K has
with the exception of area.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
61
==PAGE:70==
Activities which are defined by an certain object stopping can now select the event with a
specified label from this stream. If the event exists, it means that the object has stopped.
7.2.5
Object Moving
A different process event mentioned in section 6.3.1, is the Object Moving event. The
implementation of the Object Moving query is shown below:
R
T`iBiBQM rBi? UpHm2 Q7 *QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2KV
k
#2;BM
j
9
7`QK 2p2`v 2R4*QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K @=
8
2k4*QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K(B7h?2M1Hb2U2k(Hbi) Bb MmHH-
e
Ki?,#bUU2RXKBMntY2RXrB/i?fkV@UKBMntYrB/i?fkVV I 3y M/
d
Ki?,#bUU2RXKBMnvY2RXrB/i?fkV@UKBMnvYrB/i?fkVV I 3y-
3
Ki?,#bUU2k(Hbi)XKBMntY2k(Hbi)XrB/i?fkV@UKBMntYrB/i?fkVV I 3y M/
N
Ki?,#bUU2k(Hbi)XKBMnvY2k(Hbi)X?2B;?ifkV@UKBMnvY?2B;?ifkVV I 3yV) I8=
@=
Ry
2j4*QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K(B7h?2M1Hb2U2j(Hbi) Bb MmHH-
RR
Ki?,#bUU2k(Hbi)XKBMntY2k(Hbi)XrB/i?fkV@UKBMntYrB/i?fkVV =4 8y Q`
Rk
Ki?,#bUU2k(Hbi)XKBMnvY2k(Hbi)X?2B;?ifkV@UKBMnvY?2B;?ifkVV =4 8y-
Rj
Ki?,#bUU2j(Hbi)XKBMntY2j(Hbi)XrB/i?fkV@UKBMntYrB/i?fkVV =4 8y Q`
R9
Ki?,#bUU2j(Hbi)XKBMnvY2j(Hbi)X?2B;?ifkV@UKBMnvY?2B;?ifkVV =4 8yV)I8=
R8
b2H2+i bi`,bm#bi`U2j(Hbi)XpHm2- eV b pHm2-
Re
2j(Hbi)XrB/i? b rB/i?-
Rd
2j(Hbi)X?2B;?i b ?2B;?i-
R3
2j(Hbi)XKBMnt b KBMnt-
RN
2j(Hbi)XKBMnv b KBMnv
ky
2j(Hbi)X+b2A. b +b2A.
kR
BMb2`i
BMiQ P#D2+iJQpBM;c
kk
kj
2M/c
The query is structured the same way the query checking for P#D2+iaiQTT2/ is structured.
It is however a bit longer.
The query checks if an object has moved less than 80 pixels for at least 5 subsequent
events, after this it checks if the object is moving more than 50 pixels in either the horizontal
or the vertical axis. An object moving is only interesting if it has been stopped before it
started moving. An example could be an airplane moving towards the gate is not valuable
information, but when the airplane has been stopped and then starts moving again, this
most likely indicates the end of the turnaround. Another example is a baggage ramp
moving towards an airplane is not very interesting, but when the baggage ramp has been
stopped next to the airplane and then starts moving again, this most likely signifies that
the baggage ramp is done either loading or unloading baggage from the airplane.
When an object matches the query, the values are put into the P#D2+iJQpBM; stream.
This stream is defined as shown below:
R
/27BM2 bi`2K P#D2+iJQpBM;
k
UpHm2 bi`BM;- rB/i? BMi- ?2B;?i BMi- KBMnt BMi- KBMnv BMi- +b2A. bi`BM;V
c
Other than the name this query is defined exactly like the P#D2+iaiQTT2/ query. When an
activity is based on an object moving, a simple query using values from the P#D2+iJQpBM;
stream and matching the value parameter to the object label, is made.
62
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:71==
7.2.6
Airplane Stopped Activity
The turnaround process starts when the airplane is stopped in its gate. When the airplane
stops an B`THM2aiQTT2/ activity should be fired.
The query that detects when an airplane has stopped is very simple:
R
7`QK P#D2+iaiQTT2/(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^X B`THM2 ^- pHm2V)
k
b2H2+i pHm2-rB/i?-?2B;?i-KBMnt-KBMnv-+b2A.
j
BMb2`i
BMiQ B`THM2aiQTT2/c
The query matches a regular expression with the pHm2 parameter from the P#D2+iaiQTT2/
stream ending with ”airplane”.
Objects matching the query are inserted into the B`THM2aiQTT2/ stream. The definition
for this stream is shown below:
R
/27BM2 bi`2K B`THM2aiQTT2/
k
UpHm2 bi`BM;-rB/i? BMi-?2B;?i BMi-KBMnt BMi-KBMnv BMi-+b2A. bi`BM;Vc
There should only be one B`THM2aiQTT2/ for each turnaround, this is achieved with the
query below:
R
T`iBiBQM rBi? UpHm2 Q7 B`THM2aiQTT2/V
k
#2;BM
j
7`QK B`THM2aiQTT2/OrBM/QrXmMB[m2,7B`biUpHm2 -k ?Qm`V
9
b2H2+i pHm2- +b2A.
8
BMb2`i BMiQ B`THM2aiQTT2/+iBpBiv
e
2M/c
The query selects the first airplane object from the B`THM2aiQTT2/ stream in a time
window of 2 hours, and inserts it into the B`THM2aiQTT2/+iBpBiv this value is then
captured by the query below:
R
7`QK B`THM2aiQTT2/+iBpBiv
k
b2H2+i ^B`THM2aiQTT2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - pHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - +b2A.
j
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
Finally this query inserts a ”AirplaneStopped” string into the BeamlineStream, which then
sends the value to the message broker.
7.2.7
Baggage Ramp Stopped Activity
The ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ activity is generated in a similar way as the B`THM2aiQTT2/
activity. The query below matches the value of the P#D2+iaiQTT2/ stream with a regular
expression ending with #;;;2n`KT. This value is inserted into the ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/
stream.
R
7`QK P#D2+iaiQTT2/(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^X #;;;2n`KT ^- pHm2V)
k
b2H2+i pHm2- rB/i?- ?2B;?i- KBMnt- KBMnv- +b2A.
j
BMb2`i BMiQ ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/c
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
63
==PAGE:72==
The query below takes an event from the ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ stream and inserts a string
with ”BaggageRampStopped” as the value into the "2KHBM2ai`2K which then sends an
activity to the message broker.
R
7`QK ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/OrBM/QrXmMB[m2,7B`biUpHm2 -k ?Qm`V
k
b2H2+i ^";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - pHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - +b2A.
j
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
Siddhi should also be able to generate a ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ activity, if a baggage ramp
leaves and then returns. However since the query above only selects the first unique value
from the ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ activity, and given that the baggage ramp object is named
after the ROI it was detected in, a second baggage ramp connecting to the same position
of the airplane will not have a unique label, and thus not produce a ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/
activity.
The query below is defined to be able to register recurring baggage ramps with the same
label:
R
7`QK 2p2`v
k
2R 4 "2KHBM2ai`2K(
j
`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^";;;2_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/ ^- +iBpBivV
9
) @=
8
2k4";;;2_KTaiQTT2/(
e
U2RXQ#D2+iA. 44 pHm2V
d
)IR8=
3
b2H2+i ^";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - 2k(Hbi)XpHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - 2k(Hbi)X
+b2A.
N
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
If a ";;;2_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/ activity, observed in the "2KHBM2ai`2K, is followed by
15 events from the ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ stream.
The pHm2 parameter in the ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ stream matches the Q#D2+iA. in the
"2KHBM2ai`2K, a new ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ activity is produced.
7.2.8
Baggage Ramp Disconnected Activity
First step to detect if a baggage ramp is disconnecting from an airplane is to grab all
the events from the P#D2+iJQpBM; stream that end with the #;;;2n`KT string. these
events are then inserted into the ";;;2_KTJQpBM; stream.
R
7`QK P#D2+iJQpBM;(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^X #;;;2n`KT ^- pHm2V)
k
b2H2+i pHm2- rB/i?- ?2B;?i- KBMnt- KBMnv- +b2A.
j
BMb2`i BMiQ ";;;2_KTJQpBM;c
For a ";;;2_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/ activity to be produced, there should first have been
produced a ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ activity for the same object.
To make the query more robust, it makes sure that the baggage ramp has been stopped
for a while.
This is done to not generate multiple ";;;2_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/ and ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/
activities if a baggage ramp stops briefly while connecting to the airplane. Finally ”Bag­
gageRampDisconnected” is inserted to the "2KHBM2ai`2K
64
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:73==
R
7`QK 2p2`v
k
2R 4
j
"2KHBM2ai`2K(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ ^- +iBpBivV) @=
9
2k 4 ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ IR8= @=
8
2j 4 ";;;2_KTJQpBM;(2RXQ#D2+iA. 44 pHm2)IRy=
e
b2H2+i
d
^";;;2_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/ ^ b +iBpBiv -
3
2j(Hbi)XpHm2 b Q#D2+iA. -
N
2j(Hbi)X+b2A.
Ry
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
The ";;;2_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/ activity is another example how easy it is to construct
high level activities from the basic process events that have already been defined.
7.2.9
Cargo Ramp Stopped and Disconnected
In the turnaround process the cargo ramp behaves very similar to the baggage ramp. Thus
the queries defined to produce the *`;Q_KTaiQTT2/ and the *`;Q_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/
are defined exactly like the corresponding activities for baggage ramps. The only differ­
ence is that the regular expression matches ”cargo_ramp” instead of ”baggage_ramp”.
Because of this these queries will not be repeated here, the interested reader can find the
queries along with all other queries in appendix C.1.
7.2.10
Bridge Connected Activity
The "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ activity is based on the presence of an object. When a bridge
connects to an airplane, the computer vision component detects it. An object with the label
*ttttt_ttt#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/ is published to the message broker. When an event with
the ”bridge_connected” string is consumed, it inserted into the "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2K.
The query is shown below:
R
7`QK 2p2`v 2R4ai`BT*K2`A.(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^X #`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/ ^- pHm2V)
k
b2H2+i 2RXpHm2- 2RX+b2A.
j
BMb2`i BMiQ "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2Kc
To ensure that a new activity is generated for each bridge that connects to the airplane,
the "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2K is partitioned with the value parameter.
Only a single "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ activity should be generated for each bridge that connects
to the airplan, as with the B`THM2aiQTT2/ an activity is generated from the first unique
value from the "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2K
R
T`iBiBQM rBi? UpHm2 Q7 "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2KV
k
#2;BM
j
7`QK "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2KOrBM/QrXmMB[m2,7B`biUpHm2- k ?Qm`V
9
b2H2+i ^"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - pHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - +b2A.
8
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
e
2M/c
A string containing ”BridgeConnected” is inserted to the "2KHBM2ai`2K which publishes
the activity to the message broker.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
65
==PAGE:74==
7.2.11
Bridge Not Connected Activity
While the "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ activity is based on the presence of an object, the activity
"`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/ is based on the absence of an object.
R
T`iBiBQM rBi? UpHm2 Q7 "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2KV
k
#2;BM
j
7`QK 2p2`v 2R4"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2K @=
9
MQi "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2K 7Q` ky b2+
8
a2H2+i ^"`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - 2RXpHm2 b Q#D2+iA. -
e
2RX+b2A.
d
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
3
2M/c
The query states that for every event from the "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2K when that event
stops occurring for 20 seconds, a ”BridgeNotConnected” is inserted to the "2KHBM2ai`2K.
This does open up for the possibility of false activities being generated. An example could
be a short network outage which would result in a "`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/ activity being gen­
erated. However this has been found to be the best way to generate activities based on
the absent of an object.
7.2.12
Catering Truck Connected/Not Connected
Similarly to the "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ activity, the *i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/ is based on the
presence of an object. The queries, used to generate the activity, are identical to the ones
that produce the "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ activity.
The *i2`BM;h`m+FLQi*QMM2+i2/ activity is based on the absense of an object detection,
as was the case with the "`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/ activity. The queries are also very similar
to the queries that produce the "`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/ activity.
The interested reader can find all the queries in appendix C.1.
7.2.13
Airplane Moving Activity
The bounding box of the airplane is by far the largest box. This makes jitter in the bounding
box larger for the airplane. This can in some cases generate an object moving event for
the airplane.
However at the end of the turnaround the airplane cannot move on its own. A tow tractor
connects to the airplane and pushes it onto the runway.
Therefore to get a more accurate generation of the B`THM2JQpBM; activity, the object
moving event from the B`THM2JQpBM; stream, will only be considered if there has been
produced a hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/ activity.
The query is defined below:
R
7`QK 2p2`v 2R 4
k
"2KHBM2ai`2K(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/ ^- +iBpBivV) @=
j
2k4B`THM2JQpBM;
9
b2H2+i ^B`THM2JQpBM; ^ b +iBpBiv - 2k(Hbi)XpHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - 2k(Hbi)X
+b2A.
8
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
66
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:75==
7.3
Online Process Mining
The third and final component in the pipeline, is the online process mining component. The
process mining component ingests the data provided by the CEP in real time and presents
the data to users. This is usually a model that describes the mined process. Referring
back to figure 6.1 at the start of the Solution chapter. The insights provided by the online
process mining component represents activities happening in the real world at the most
abstracted level in our three­component pipeline. The results from the online process
mining component is also what will be analyzed by the project stakeholder, making it the
most important part of the pipeline, since data mined but not used, does not have any
value.
Figure 7.17: Architecture Beamline ­ C4 Level 3
Figure 7.17 shows the online process mining component and how it integrates with its
surroundings. The online process mining component is configured by an operator, it re­
ceives any new activities through a message broker and presents the processed data to
a process stakeholder.
In the remainder of this section Beamline is introduced. Beamline is the online process
mining tool used in this implementation. From Beamline three miners are discussed:
• Discovery Miner
• Average Miner
• Live Visualizer
7.3.1
Beamline
Beamline10 is a research project in process mining. The project is driven by Andrea Bu­
rattin, an associate professor at the Technical University of Denmark.
Beamline has some proof of concept miners implemented, for this project another simple
miner was implemented. To configure a new activity stream or set up one of the imple­
mented miners, an operator can simply use the Beamline dashboard.
10https://github.com/beamline
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
67
==PAGE:76==
Since Beamline consumes the activities through a protocol based on MQTT, a mining
instance can run on a local machine and be connected to the dashboard. From here the
stream and the process miner of choice can be configured and will be ready to receive
activities immediately.
The CEP component publishes activities to a message broker using the following format:
R
#b2fiQTB+fT`Q+2bbf+b2A.f+iBpBiv
The format is described by Andrea Burattin et al. [21] and is shared in a public repository
on Github11.
The messages are consumed by the Core service using the MQTT­XES library mentioned.
The Basic Miners service is a collection of miners implemented for Beamline. Activities are
received from the Core service and the Basic Miners produces a model of the consumed
activities. The miners are configured using the Dashboard, this is also where a process
stakeholder would examine the mined result.
7.3.2
Configuring a new Mining Host
Running a new mining host locally simplifies the development of new miners significantly.
Without it it would be necessary to create pull requests to the official Beamline project
and the code would need to be rebuilt and installed on the public server. To run the host
locally, one needs to clone the basic­miners repository12 and build it locally using maven.
When the code has been compiled, the resulting jar can be ran like in any normal java
project. The program starts up a Spring web server that listens on port 8080.
To connect the dashboard to the local host, open the miners menu from the tool bar, press
new miner host and input ?iiT,ffHQ+H?Qbi,3y3y as shown in figure 7.18
Figure 7.18: Configure a Local Mining Instance
When the new mining host is connected, all miners implemented in the local repository,
are available under the instance tab in the tool bar.
11https://github.com/beamline/mqtt­xes
12https://github.com/beamline/basic­miners
68
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:77==
7.3.3
Discovery Miner
The discovery miner produces a directed graph, where the nodes are activities and the
edges are a direct follows relationship between activities.
The discovery miner gives insights into how a process is structured. The graph gives a
clear picture of the order the activities are are happening. The frequency of an activity
happening is indicated by a number on the nodes and edges. Further to indicate a direct
follows relationship happens frequently, the edge is drawn thicker, than a relationship that
occurs less frequently.
Figure 7.19: Beamline Discovery Miner
Figure 7.19 shows an example of a graph produced by the discovery miner. Activity A
is the start activity and happens every time, this is indicated by the weight being 1.0 for
this activity. Activity A is directly followed by activities B and G. 79% of the time activity B
happens after A and 21% of the time G follows A. The edge connecting A to B is thick and
annotated by a 1.0 weight. This indicates that the direct follow relationship between A
and B is the most frequently occurring relationship. There are three two other relationship
that are equally frequently occurring, these are also annotated by a 1.0
7.3.4
Average Miner
The average miner is a miner that was developed for this project. It produces a graph
very similar to the one produced by the discovery miner.
The goal of the average miner is to complement the output of the discovery miner. The
discovery miner gives an insight into how the process is structured. It shows the sequence
that the activities are happening in, and shows which sequence occurs most often. How­
ever it does not provide insights into whether the process is handled efficiently. Here the
average miner can help. The average miner, given the same input as the discovery miner,
produces the same graph. However the weights in the graph indicate how long an activity
takes on average. Each node is annotated with a time unit indicating how long an activity
is the most recently received activity. The edges are also annotated by the time it takes
for the following activity to start. In the case where an activity only has a single activity
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
69
==PAGE:78==
directly following it, the edge weight will be the same as the node weight. When an activity
has more than one activity that directly follows it, the weight indicates the average time it
takes for the following activity. The node weight is then average time combined average
for all following edges.
Processes are not static, and the mined model should be able to reflect changes in the
process. If the miner has mined many cases in a process, and a simple average is gen­
erated from all cases, any new changes to the process would take a long time to have
any impact on the model generated. An example could be if A is followed by B after 10
time units for 1000 cases, the average will be 10. If this relationship changes and now A
is followed by B after 20 time units, a doubling of time spent before B starts. It would take
a long time before this change would be visible in the mined model.
The average miner has been developed with the goal to be able to quickly react to changes
in the process. This is quite simply by calculating the average using weights:
average = average ∗0.9 + new_time ∗0.1
(7.4)
In our previous example with an old timing of 10 time units and a new timing of 20 time
units, the new timings would be visible much faster, regardless of how long the previous
behavior has been observed.
Figure 7.20: Beamline Average Miner
Figure 7.20 shows the same process as shows in the discovery miner section, but with
the average times as weights. The longest running activity is D followed by F, the model
produced by the discovery miner in figure 7.19, shows that C is followed by D more often
that E, one action from investigating both graphs could be to influence the process such
that C will be followed by E more often. Another insight from examining both graphs is
70
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:79==
that the end to end time when A is followed by G is much shorter than when A is followed
by B, the possibilities of getting more cases to follow this path could also be investigated.
7.3.5
Live Visualizer
The live vizualizer miner, offers some basic visualizations that give insights into a running
process. The live visualizer is initialized with a time window, and shows and overview
based on the activities received withing the time window. If it is configured to be 60 min­
utes, then the live visualizer will show information based on the activities received the last
60 minutes.
Besides am instance summary window which gives a general overview of the instance,
the live visualizer has 4 windows.
List of Events
The List of Events window shows a list of all received activities within the
configured time window. Each row notes the case, the corresponding activity is a part of,
the activity and the time in which the activity was received. figure 7.21 shows the list of
events window in a live visualizer instance.
Figure 7.21: List of Events window in the Live Visualizer
Events Over Time
The events over time window, shows how many events are being
received in a time period. This can give an insight into the activity of a process, if the
event count increases in a time period. Figure 7.22 shows the Events over time window
in a live visualizer instance.
Figure 7.22: Events Over Time window in the Live Visualizer
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
71
==PAGE:80==
Events per Case
The events per case window shows how many activities are received
in each case in the configured time window. This can give an overview of how many
activities are being performed.
Figure 7.23: Events per Case window in the Live Visualizer
Activities
Finally the activities window shows a count of how often each activity is hap­
pening. Figure 7.24 shows the activities window in a live visualizer instance.
Figure 7.24: Activities window in the Live Visualizer
72
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 8
Evaluation
In the evaluation, each component is evaluated separately and finally the implementation
is evaluated as a whole. Each section describes how the evaluation is performed and
what the expected output from the evaluation is.
The data used in section 8.1 and section 8.4 is real life data from Copenhagen air­
port. These are videos from 3 turnaround processes captured by the security cameras of
Copenhagen airport.
8.1
Computer Vision Component
The role of the Computer Vision Component in the process mining system, is to correctly
describe objects in a scene. The most important factor is therefore, to correctly be able
to classify the objects of interest. This will also be the main focus of the evaluation.
For the evaluation of the classification, three videos from Copenhagen Airport are an­
alyzed and manually annotated, then the classification timings are compared with the
manually annotated ones.
During the evaluation at the Copenhagen airport, we faced some issues with the perfor­
mance of the available machines, due to this reason, we decided to disable the object
tracking feature of the Computer Vision component of our prototype. In this way, only the
condition rules of regions of interest defined for every camera were used.
It is important to note that the classification model in the Computer Vision Component has
been not been trained with footage from Copenhagen Airport as would be the most optimal
scenario. Instead the model has been trained with images and turnaround footage found
publicly around the internet. This will result in wrong classifications where the angle of the
camera is very different from the angles in the training images and where the background
and objects look different than the ones used while training.
The most of the videos used for the evaluation are taken from a similar angle as the
training videos, but it is important to note that for the process mining system to be useful,
the training images should be from the same environment as the one the system will be
used in.
Following is a description of each of the videos used in the evaluation. Each description
will contain the length of the video, when an object appears and when it leaves. An
objects appears when it becomes relevant for the process, meaning an airplane in the
background, will not count in the evaluation. Similarly a baggage cart parked somewhere
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
73
==PAGE:82==
in the scene will also not count. However when this baggage cart is started and moves
towards the airplane, it has become relevant and it is noted as having ”appeared”.
8.1.1
Video 1
Length: 1:25:00
Object
Start
End
Annotated Airplane
00:01:00
01:24:00
Annotated Bridge Connected
00:02:00
01:21:00
Annotated Baggage Ramp Back
00:04:30
00:22:10
Annotated 1st Baggage Ramp
00:03:00
00:19:00
Annotated 2nd Baggage Ramp
00:35:00
01:07:00
Annotated Catering Truck
00:45:00
00:54:00
Annotated Tow Tractor
01:05:00
01:24:00
Airplane
00:01:30
01:23:18
Bridge Connected
00:02:37
01:20:57
1st Baggage Ramp Front
00:03:05
00:18:40
2nd Baggage Ramp Front
00:35:46
00:44:30
2nd Baggage Ramp Front
00:54:35
01:06:27
Catering Truck Front
00:45:09
00:53:48
Tow Tractor
01:05:10
01:23:01
Table 8.1: Recorded timings for Video 1
As shown in table 8.1 there are 7 manually annotated object timings and 6 objects regis­
tered by the computer vision component. The computer vision component fails to detect
a baggage ramp that connects to the airplane behind the wing. This highlights one weak­
ness of the object detection, namely occlusion. In this case the object detection fails to
recognize the baggage ramp because it is partially occluded by the wing of the airplane.
In table 8.1 there are two entries for 2nd Baggage Ramp Front that the computer vision
component registers. This is because the baggage cart disappears for a while and then
reappears. What happens is that the Catering Truck connects to the airplane and occludes
the vision of the baggage ramp.
The data in table 8.1 are visualized in figure 8.1
Figure 8.1: Video 1 timing chart
Figure 8.1 shows very well that the 2nd baggage ramp gets occluded by the catering
74
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:83==
truck. Another big difference from the annotated objects is that the baggage ramp back
is missing. Other than that the automatically detected objects are very similar to the
manually detected objects.
From the graph depicted in Figure 8.1 the Jaccard similarity for each object and for the
total is calculated.
Object
Intersection over Union
Airplane
95 7%
Bridge Connected
99.2%
Baggage Ramp Back
0%
1st Baggage Ramp
97.4%
2nd Baggage Ramp
64.4%
Catering Truck
96.1%
Tow Tractor
93.9%
Total
86.2%
Table 8.2: Intersection over Union for objects in Video 1
Table 8.2 shows that for most objects the detection works very well. The exceptions are
the Baggage Ramp Back which is not detected at all, thus resulting in a Jaccard similarity
of 0% and the 2nd Baggage Ramp, which was occluded by the catering truck thus only
detected 64,4% of the time. The total Jaccard Similarity for the combined overlap is at
86,2%
8.1.2
Video 2
Length: 1:11:00
Object
Start
End
Annotated Airplane
00:00:55
01:08:30
Annotated Bridge Connected
00:04:25
01:02:01
Annotated Baggage Ramp Back
00:05:57
01:02:45
Annotated Baggage Ramp Front
00:06:10
00:51:15
Annotated Tow Tractor
00:49:30
01:10:30
Airplane
00:00:55
01:09:11
Bridge Connected
00:03:29
01:03:53
Baggage Ramp Front
00:05:36
00:51:19
Tow Tractor
00:49:48
01:09:06
Table 8.3: Recorded timings for Video 2
Table 8.3 shows that there are 5 manually annotated object timings and 4 objects regis­
tered by the computer vision component. This is the same issue as discussed in video
1 section. A baggage ramp connects to the back of the airplane, however since it is
occluded by the wing it is not detected by the computer vision component.
The data in table 8.3 are visualized in figure 8.2
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure 8.2: Video 2 timing chart
Figure 8.2, with the exception of the back baggage ramp, shows very decent accuracy in
detecting objects from the video stream.
Using the information from figure 8.2 the Jaccard similarity is calculated for each individual
object and the total.
Object
Intersection over Union
Airplane
99 0%
Bridge Connected
95.4%
Baggage Ramp Back
0%
Baggage Ramp Front
98.6%
Tow Tractor
91.9%
Total
75.2%
Table 8.4: Intersection over Union for objects in Video 2
Table 8.4 shows a detection accuracy of more than 90% for all object except the back
baggage ramp, which is at 0%. The total is negatively impacted by the back baggage
ramp and shows a 75% similarity.
8.1.3
Video 3
Length 45:44
Object
Start
End
Annotated Airplane
00:04:00
00:44:00
Annotated Bridge Connected
00:07:30
00:33:35
Annotated Baggage Ramp
00:06:00
00:34:00
Annotated Tow Tractor
00:33:00
00:44:00
Airplane
00:04:15
00:43:52
Bridge Connected
00:07:27
00:33:31
Baggage Ramp
00:06:57
00:33:27
Tow Tractor
00:33:06
00:43:34
Table 8.5: Recorded timings for Video 3
Video 3 is a short video and is very well suited for the computer vision component. There
76
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:85==
are few objects and none of the objects overlap other objects. This results in very good
detection accuracy.
The data in table 8.5 in visualized in figure 8.3
Figure 8.3: Video 3 timing chart
Figure 8.3 shows that the detections correspond very well to the manual annotations.
None of the objects get occluded during the video resulting in very accurate detections.
From the information in figure 8.3 the Jaccard similarity is calculated. The results are
shown in table 8.6.
Object
Intersection over Union
Airplane
99.0%
Bridge Connected
99.6%
Baggage Ramp
94.6%
Tow Tractor
95.2%
Total
97.6%
Table 8.6: Intersection over Union for objects in Video 3
As table 8.6 shows, the computer vision component is very good at detecting the objects in
video 3. All objects are detected with over 90% accuracy when comparing with manually
annotated data.
8.2
Complex Event Processing Component
The component will be evaluated by defining the desired behaviour of the component.
The component should be able, given the right data, produce the following activities:
• Airplane Stopped
• Tow Tractor Connected
• Airplane Moving
• Bridge Connected
• Bridge Not Connected
• Baggage Ramp Stopped
• Baggage Ramp Disconnected
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
77
==PAGE:86==
• Cargo Ramp Stopped
• Cargo Ramp Disconnected
• Catering Truck Connected
• Catering Truck Not Connected
To simplify the data for the tests, the queries are simplified a bit.
The scene is only
220 px in height and width so the movement necessary to produce P#D2+iJQp2/ and
P#D2+iaiQTT2/ is reduced to 10 px.
The scenarios that produce the specified events are written out in a :Bp2M- q?2M- h?2M
style, a style often used when writing software tests. Martin Fowler describes the :Bp2M-
q?2M- h?2M style of specifying tests1.
Test data is formulated to represent a plausible scenario containing the objects that are
the subjects for the tests. The data is structured in csv file. A simulation is created in
Siddhi for each test scenario. Each line in the test data csv will fire as an event with 1
second between each event.
If the test succeeds an event is produced. To validate that the correct event has been
produced, each message sent to Beamline is recorded in a log. If the correct event shows
in the log, the test is deemed successful.
8.2.1
Airplane Stopped
:Bp2M, M B`THM2 Bb KQpBM;
q?2M, h?2 B`THM2 biQTb
h?2M, M ]B`THM2 aiQTT2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
Data
The data inputted to Siddhi represents an airplane object moving from one position for 11
frames, followed by not moving for 5 frames.
Figure 8.4: Airplane Stopped Test
Results
A successful result will be a ”AirplaneStopped” event sent to the ”BeamlineStream”.
Using the data in table B.1 Siddhi produces the output shown in 8.1:
1https://martinfowler.com/bliki/GivenWhenThen.html
78
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:87==
R
B`THM2aiQTT2/ bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnRR@kN@RRnddN) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
8
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]B`THM2aiQTT2/]X
Listing 8.1: AirplaneStopped test case Siddhi output
The first and last line is the simulation starting and stopping. In between we have the
event generated. A single event was generated. The program is evaluation_queries,
the stream is BeamlineStream, and the activity generated values are ”AirplaneStopped”
because the object that causes this is ”R0001airplane”.
The event has ”AirplaneStopped” as its value, thus the test is a success.
8.2.2
Tow Tractor Connected
:Bp2M, M B`THM2 Bb biQTT2/
q?2M, h?2  iQr i`+iQ` +QMM2+ib iQ i?2 THM2
h?2M, M ]hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
Data
The ”TowTractorConnected” activity is generated when a tow tractor appears in the scene
for more than 5 events. The region of interest for the tow tractor in the computer vision
component, is defined to be in front of the airplane, and as soon as a tow tractor appears,
an activity is produced.
The data used for generating the ”TowTractorConnected” activity can be examined in table
B.3 and is illustrated in figure 8.5
Figure 8.5: Tow Tractor Connected Test
Result
A successful result will be the ”AirplaneStopped” activity and the ”TowTractorConnected”
activity being generated. The data in table B.3 produces the Siddhi log shown in
R
hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/ bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@9k@kRnRj8) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
79
==PAGE:88==
8
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@9k@kkn8k3) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/]-
e
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRiQrni`+iQ`]-
d
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
3
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/]X
Listing 8.2: TowTractorConnected test case Siddhi output
The test generates two activities. First the ”AirplaneStopped” activity is generated, then,
when the tow tractor appears, the ”TowTractorConnected” activity is generated
8.2.3
Airplane Moving
:Bp2M, M B`THM2 Bb biQTT2/ M/
M ]B`THM2aiQTT2/] +iBpBiv ?b #22M T`Q/m+2/ M/
M ]hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/] +iBpBiv ?b #22M T`Q/m+2/
q?2M, h?2 B`THM2 bi`ib KQpBM;
h?2M, M ]B`THM2 JQpBM;] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
Data
The ”AirplaneMoving” activity can only be generated when the airplane has stopped and
when a tow tractor is connected to the airplane. Therefore both the ”AirplaneStopped” and
the ”TowTractorConnected” activity need to have been produced before the ”AirplaneMov­
ing” activity can be produced. Figure 8.6 illustrates the data in table B.2
Figure 8.6: Airplane Moving Test
Result
A successful result will be an ”AirplaneMoving” event sent to the ”BeamlineStream”.
Using the data in table B.2 produces the log shown in 8.3:
R
B`THM2JQpBM; bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnRR@9k@99neN3) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
8
(kykk@yR@kRnRR@9k@9eny39) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/]-
e
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRiQrni`+iQ`]-
d
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
80
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:89==
3
(kykk@yR@kRnRR@9k@9en9jN) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2JQpBM;]-
N
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
Ry
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
RR
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]B`THM2JQpBM;]X
Listing 8.3: AirplaneMoving test case Siddhi output
The test generated three events. First an ”AirplaneStopped” event is generated then a
”TowTractorConnected”. Finally an ”AirplaneMoving” event was generated. Thus the test
was successful.
8.2.4
Bridge Connected
:Bp2M,  #`B/;2 Bb MQi +QMM2+i2/
q?2M, h?2 #`B/;2 +QMM2+ib
h?2M,  ]"`B/;2 *QMM2+i2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
:Bp2M, PM2 #`B/;2 Bb +QMM2+i2/ M/ MQi?2` Bb MQi
q?2M, h?2 b2+QM/ #`B/;2 +QMM2+ib
h?2M,  M2r ]"`B/;2 *QMM2+i2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
Data
The ”BridgeConnected” activity is generated based on the presence of a bridge connected
to an airplane. When a bridge connects to an airplane, an event with a ”BridgeConnected”
object in it is received.
Figure 8.7: Bridge Connected Test
Events with a ”BridgeConnected” object in it are continually received until the bridge stops
being connected to the airplane. Only one activity should however be produced. If a
second bridge connects, Siddhi should be able to generate a new ”BridgeConnected”
activity for that bridge.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure 8.8: Two Bridges Connected Test
Results
First case is testing that Siddhi is able to detect when one bridge has connected. To test
this the data from table B.4 is used. A successful test will show that a ”BridgeConnected”
event has been produced for the ”BeamlineStream”
R
"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnRR@9N@9dnky3) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
8
(kykk@yR@kRnRR@9N@9dn8Nd) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/]-
e
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/]-
d
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
3
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/]X
Listing 8.4: One BridgeConnected test case Siddhi output
The log output in 8.4 shows that the test generates two events, the first event is the
”AirplaneStopped” event and the second is the ”BridgeConnected” event. Thus the test
was successful
The second case is when two bridges connect, thus the queries in Siddhi will need to
seperate the events as two different bridges connecting to the airplane.
A successful outcome is two ”BridgeConnected” events produced.
Given the data in table B.5 Siddhi produces the events shown in 8.5:
R
hrQ"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnRR@8R@kdnd9y) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
8
(kykk@yR@kRnRR@8R@k3nyNR) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/]-
e
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/]-
d
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
3
(kykk@yR@kRnRR@8R@k3n3d8) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/]-
N
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyk#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/]-
Ry
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
RR
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]hrQ"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/]X
Listing 8.5: Two BridgeConnected events Siddhi output
82
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:91==
The simulation produced 3 events. First is the ”AirplaneStopped” event. Second and
third are the ”BridgeConnected” events. On inspection of the objectID value sent to the
”BeamlineStream”, it is clear that the events have been generated for two different bridges
connected. The test is considered successful.
8.2.5
Bridge Not Connected
The ”BridgeNotConnected” activity is based on the absence of events with a ”BridgeCon­
nected” object in it.
:Bp2M,  #`B/;2 Bb +QMM2+i2/
q?2M, h?2 #`B/;2 biQTb #2BM; +QMM2+i2/
h?2M,  ]"`B;/2 LQi *QMM2+i2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
:Bp2M, hrQ #`B/;2b `2 +QMM2+i2/
q?2M, PM2 #`B/;2 biQTb #2BM; +QMM2+i2/
h?2M,  ]"`B;/2 LQi *QMM2+i2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
q?2M, h?2 Qi?2` #`B/;2 biQTb #2BM; +QMM2+i2/
h?2M,  M2r ]"`B/;2 LQi *QMM2+i2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
Data
When Siddhi stops receiving events with a ”BridgeConnected” object in it a ”BridgeNot­
Connected” activity should be produced.
Figure 8.9: Bridge Not Connected Test
Similarly when two bridges are connecte, Siddhi needs to be able to generate a ”BridgeNot­
Connected” activity for each bridge that stop being connected to an airplane.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure 8.10: Bridge Not Connected Test, two bridges
Results
The first test case tests whether an ”BridgeNotConnected” event is generated for the
”BeamlineStream” when the ”bridge_connected” event stops happening.
The expected result from a simulation based on the data from the data in table B.6 is that
first a ”BridgeConnected” event is generated followed by a ”BridgeNotConnected”:
R
"`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/ bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@je@yjn88N) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
8
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@je@yjnN89) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/]-
e
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/]-
d
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
3
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]"`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/]X
N
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@je@j3nekj) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]"`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/]-
Ry
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/]-
RR
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
Listing 8.6: BridgeNotConnected event test case Siddhi output
The log output in listing 8.6 shows that three events are generated for the ”BeamlineStream”,
first ”AirplaneStopped” is generated followed by ”BridgeConnected”, finally the ”BridgeNot­
Connected” is generated as expected.
The ”BridgeNotConnected” is generated based on a non­occurrence event pattern. In
this case a ”BridgeNotConnected event is generated when the ”bridge_connected” has
not occurred for 20 seconds. This is also the reason that the event is generated after the
simulation has finished.
In the second test case, there are two bridges connected. The expected output, based
on the data from table B.7, is that two ”BridgeConnected” events are generated, followed
by two ”BridgeNotConnected”.
R
hrQ"`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/ bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@jd@8jn39N) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
8
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@jd@89nky9) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/]-
e
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/]-
d
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
84
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:93==
3
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@jd@89nj9N) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/]-
N
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyk#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/]-
Ry
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
RR
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]hrQ"`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/]X
Rk
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@j3@jRnNyN) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]"`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/]-
Rj
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyk#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/]-
R9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
R8
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@j3@jdnNRj) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]"`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/]-
Re
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/]-
Rd
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
Listing 8.7: Two BridgeNotConnected events Siddhi output
The log output in listing 8.7 shows that are 5 events created for the ”BeamlineStream”,
2 ”BridgeConnected” and 2 corresponding ”BridgeNotConnected”. The ”objectID” reveals
that ”_yyyR#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/” event happens before the ”_yyyk#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/”. The
corresponding ”BridgeNotConnected” for ”_yyyR#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/” happens after the
”BridgeNotConnected” for ”_yyyk#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/”. This indicates that the ”_yyyk#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/”
stops happening before ”_yyyR#`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/”, the data in table B.7 indicates that this
is indeed the case.
8.2.6
Baggage Ramp Stopped
:Bp2M, M B`THM2 Bb biQTT2/
q?2M,  #;;;2 `KT biQTb M2ti iQ Bi
h?2M,  ]";;;2 _KT aiQTT2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
Data
The data for this test case can be seen in appendix B.8 and is illustrated in figure 8.11.
A baggage ramp approaching an airplane and stopping next to it should produce a ”Bag­
gageRampStopped” activity.
Figure 8.11: Baggage Ramp Stopped Test
Result
Given the data in table B.8 a simulation should produce a ”BaggageRampStopped” event
for the ”BeamlineStream”
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
85
==PAGE:94==
R
";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@9k@Rkn9RN) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
8
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@9k@R9n3ee) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]";;;2_KTaiQTT2/]-
e
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR#;;;2n`KT]-
d
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
3
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]";;;2_KTaiQTT2/]X
Listing 8.8: BaggageRampStopped event test case Siddhi output
The log produced, shown in listing 8.8, shows that there are 2 events produced for the
”BeamlineStream”, first the ”AirplaneStopped” event, second the ”BaggageRampStopped”
event is produced as expected.
8.2.7
Baggage Ramp Disconnected
:Bp2M,  #;;;2 `KT Bb biQTT2/ M2ti iQ M B`THM2 M/
i?2 ]";;;2 _KT aiQTT2/] +iBpBiv ?b #22M T`Q/m+2/
q?2M, h?2 #;;;2 `KT KQp2b rv 7`QK i?2 B`THM2
h?2M,  ]";;;2 _KT .Bb+QMM2+i2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
Data
The data that should produce the ”BaggageRampDisconnected” activity is shown in ap­
pendix B.9 and is illustrated in figure 8.12.
A baggage ramp stopping next to an airplane, as described in the previous section, and
moving away from the airplane, should produce a baggage ramp disconnected activity.
Figure 8.12: Baggage Ramp Disconnected Test
Result
Based on the data in table B.9 an ”BaggageRampDisconnected” event should ultimately
be produced for the ”BeamlineStream”.
R
";;;2_KTJQpBM; bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@93@93n9jN) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
86
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:95==
8
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@93@8yn3dy) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]";;;2_KTaiQTT2/]-
e
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR#;;;2n`KT]-
d
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
3
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@93@8jnedj) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]";;;2_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/]-
N
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR#;;;2n`KT]-
Ry
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
RR
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]";;;2_KTJQpBM;]X
Listing 8.9: BaggageRampDisconnected event test case Siddhi output
Listing 8.9 shows the Siddhi log output. First a ”BaggageRampStopped” is produced and
later a ”BaggageRampDisconnected” activity is produced as expected.
8.2.8
Cargo Ramp Stopped
:Bp2M, M B`THM2 Bb biQTT2/
q?2M,  +`;Q `KT biQTb M2ti iQ Bi
h?2M,  ]*`;Q _KT aiQTT2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
The ”CargoRampStopped” activity is produced in the same way as the ”BaggageRamp­
Stopped”. The data which should produce the activity is shown in appendix B.10 and is
illustrated in figure 8.13.
A cargo ramp approaches and stops next to an airplane.
Data
Figure 8.13: Cargo Ramp Stopped Test
Result
The expected result of a simulation, based on the data from table B.10 is a ”CargoRamp­
Stopped” event sent to the ”BeamlineStream”.
R
*`;Q_KTaiQTT2/ bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@8e@kyneR3) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
8
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@8e@kknekj) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]*`;Q_KTaiQTT2/]-
e
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR+`;Qn`KT]-
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
87
==PAGE:96==
d
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
3
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]*`;Q_KTaiQTT2/]X
Listing 8.10: CargoRampStopped event test case Siddhi output
Listing 8.10 shows the output from Siddhi. Two events are generated for the ”Beam­
lineStream”, the ”AirplaneStopped” and ”CargoRampStopped” as expected
8.2.9
Cargo Ramp Disconnected
:Bp2M,  +`;Q `KT Bb biQTT2/ M2ti iQ M B`THM2 M/
i?2 ]*`;Q _KT aiQTT2/] +iBpBiv ?b #22M T`Q/m+2/
q?2M, h?2 +`;Q `KT KQp2b rv 7`QK i?2 B`THM2
h?2M,  ]*`;Q _KT .Bb+QMM2+i2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
Data
The ”CargoRampDisconnected” activity is produced in a similar way as the ”BaggageR­
ampDisconnected” activity. The data can be examined in appendix B.11 and is illustrated
in figure 8.14
Figure 8.14: Cargo Ramp Disconnected Test
Result
The expected result, based on the test data presented in table B.11 is after a ”Cargo­
RampStopped” event a ”CargoRampDisconnected” event is generated for the ”Beam­
lineStream”.
R
*`;Q_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/ bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@8d@jkn9yd) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
8
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@8d@j9n9jk) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]*`;Q_KTaiQTT2/]-
e
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR+`;Qn`KT]-
d
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
3
(kykk@yR@kRnRj@8d@j8nNRd) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]*`;Q_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/]-
N
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR+`;Qn`KT]-
Ry
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
RR
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]*`;Q_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/]X
Listing 8.11: CargoRampDisconnected event test case Siddhi output
88
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:97==
Listing 8.11 shows the log generated by Siddhi. As expected, the simulation first generates
a ”CargoRampStopped” event, then a ”CargoRampDisconnected”.
8.2.10
Catering Truck Connected
:Bp2M,  +i2`BM; i`m+F Bb MQi +QMM2+i2/
q?2M, h?2 +i2`BM; i`m+F +QMM2+ib
h?2M,  ]*i2`BM; h`m+F *QMM2+i2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
:Bp2M, PM2 +i2`BM; i`m+F Bb +QMM2+i2/ M/ MQi?2` Bb MQi
q?2M, h?2 b2+QM/ +i2`BM; i`m+F +QMM2+ib
h?2M,  M2r ]*i2`BM; h`m+F *QMM2+i2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
Data
The ”CateringTruckConnected” is produced on basis of the presence of a ”CateringTruck”
object in the received events. The data is shown in appendix B.12 and illustrated in figure
8.15.
Figure 8.15: Catering Truck Connected Test
When multiple catering trucks connect to an airplane, Siddhi should be able to generate
a ”CateringTruckConnected” event for each of the catering trucks.
The data in appendix B.13 contains two catering trucks connecting to an airplane. The
data is illustrated in figure 8.16.
Figure 8.16: Catering Truck Connected Test, two catering trucks
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
89
==PAGE:98==
Result
The first simulation has one catering truck connected to an airplane. This should be visible
in the simulation log by one ”CateringTruckConnected” event being generated for the
”BeamlineStream”.
R
*i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/ bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@yN@R8njkk) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
8
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@yN@R8ned3) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]*i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/]-
e
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR+i2`BM;ni`m+F]-
d
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
3
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]*i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/]X
Listing 8.12: CateringTruckConnected event test case Siddhi output
Listing 8.12 shows the output generated by Siddhi. As expected a ”CateringTruckCon­
nected” event is generated for the ”BeamlineStream”.
The second simulation has 2 catering trucks connecting to an airplane. Here the expected
result of a simulation, using data in table B.13 will result in two different ”CateringTruck­
Connected” events being generated for the ”BeamlineStream”.
R
hrQ*i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/ bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@Ry@jknkye) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
8
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@Ry@jkn883) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]*i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/]-
e
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR+i2`BM;ni`m+F]-
d
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
3
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@Ry@jjnjjk) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]*i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/]-
N
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyk+i2`BM;ni`m+F]-
Ry
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
RR
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]hrQ*i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/]X
Listing 8.13: Two CateringTruckConnected events test case Siddhi output
Listing 8.13 shows two ”CateringTruckConnected” activities being generated one with ob­
jectID ”R0001” and the other with objectID ”R0002”. This shows that the ”CateringTruck­
Connected” activities have been generated for two different catering trucks.
8.2.11
Catering Truck Not Connected
:Bp2M,  +i2`BM; i`m+F Bb +QMM2+i2/
q?2M, h?2 +i2`BM; i`m+F biQTb #2BM; +QMM2+i2/
h?2M,  ]*i2`BM; h`m+F LQi *QMM2+i2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
:Bp2M, hrQ +i2`BM; i`m+Fb `2 +QMM2+i2/
q?2M, PM2 +i2`BM; i`m+F biQTb #2BM; +QMM2+i2/
h?2M,  ]*i2`BM; h`m+F LQi *QMM2+i2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
q?2M, h?2 Qi?2` +i2`BM; i`m+F biQTb #2BM; +QMM2+i2/
h?2M,  M2r ]*i2`BM; h`m+F LQi *QMM2+i2/] +iBpBiv Bb T`Q/m+2/
90
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:99==
Data
The ”CateringTruckConnected” activity is based on the non occurrence of a ”catering_truck”
in the events received from the computer vision component.
In the data in appendix B.14 a catering truck is present and then not present. This should
produce a ”CateringTruckNotConnected” activity. The data in appendix B.14 is illustrated
in figure 8.17
Figure 8.17: Catering Truck Not Connected Test
Similarly to Siddhi being able to generate two ”CateringTruckConnected” activities for two
different catering trucks connecting, it should also be able to generate a ”CateringTruc­
kNotConnected” activity when these are no longer connected.
The table provided to Siddhi is shown in appendix B.15 and illustrated in figure 8.18
Figure 8.18: Catering Truck Not Connected Test, two catering trucks
Results
For the first simulation, the expected result is that one ”CateringTruckNotConnected”
event is generated for the ”BeamlineStream”
R
*i2`BM;h`m+FLQi*QMM2+i2/ bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@Rj@Rkn9e8) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
8
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@Rj@Rkn3kd) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]*i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/]-
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
91
==PAGE:100==
e
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR+i2`BM;ni`m+F]-
d
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
3
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]*i2`BM;h`m+FLQi*QMM2+i2/]X
N
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@Rj@9dn8j3) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]*i2`BM;h`m+FLQi*QMM2+i2/
]-
Ry
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR+i2`BM;ni`m+F]-
RR
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
Listing 8.14: CateringTruckNotConnected event test case Siddhi output
Listing 8.14 shows the output generated by Siddhi. As expected a ”CateringTruckNotCon­
nected” event is produced. Similarly to the ”BridgeNotConnected”, this event is produced
based on the non occurrence of a ]+i2`BM;ni`m+F], therefore the ”CateringTruckNot­
Connected” event does not happen until after the simulation has ended.
For the simulation based on the data in table B.15 the expected result is that a ”Cater­
ingTruckNotConnected” is produced for two corresponding ”CateringTruckConnected” events.
R
hrQ*i2`BM;h`m+FLQi*QMM2+i2/ bBKmHiBQM bi`i2/ am++2bb7mHHv5
k
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@Re@jyn38k) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]B`THM2aiQTT2/]-
j
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyRB`THM2]-
9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
8
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@Re@jRnkye) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]*i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/]-
e
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR+i2`BM;ni`m+F]-
d
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
3
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@Re@jRnj93) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]*i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/]-
N
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyk+i2`BM;ni`m+F]-
Ry
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
RR
1p2Mi aBKmHiBQM 7BMBb?2/ 7Q` ]hrQ*i2`BM;h`m+FLQi*QMM2+i2/]X
Rk
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@Rd@y3nNRe) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]*i2`BM;h`m+FLQi*QMM2+i2/
]-
Rj
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyk+i2`BM;ni`m+F]-
R9
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
R8
(kykk@yR@kRnR9@Rd@R9nNkR) AL6P &BQXbB//?BX+Q`2Xbi`2KXQmiTmiXbBMFXGQ;aBMF' @
2pHmiBQMn[m2`B2b , "2KHBM2ai`2K , +iBpBiv,]*i2`BM;h`m+FLQi*QMM2+i2/
]-
Re
Q#D2+iA.,]_yyyR+i2`BM;ni`m+F]-
Rd
+b2A.,]2R] U1M+Q/2/V
Listing 8.15: Two CateringTruckNotConnected events test case Siddhi output
Listing 8.15 shows the output generated by Siddhi. As expected two ”CateringTruckNot­
Connected” events are generated for the ”BeamlineStream”.
8.3
Online Process Mining Component
For online process mining, the platform Beamline is used2. For this project Beamline
has been extended with a miner that displays the averages of the processes mined. For
the evaluation of Beamline, a process model generator has been developed. The script
will produce events with some configured timings, frequency and in specified sequences.
When a sufficient amount of events have been generated, the models Beamline has gen­
erated will be evaluated.
2https://github.com/beamline
92
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:101==
The following acceptance criteria will be expected to be met:
• The correct model has been derived
• The timings shown are within the configured bounds
• The frequencies correspond to the ones configured
As processes could change, an online process mining tool should be able to adapt the
mined model to reflect these changes. To test if Beamline correctly adapts to a change in
the mined process, the process model generator will be rerun with reconfigured timings.
After the process model generator has run for a second time. The following things will be
evaluated:
• The model is still correct
• How much the timings from the first run affect the values shown
• How much the frequencies from the first run affect the the values shown
8.3.1
Live Visualizer
The live visualizer miner documents all events that Beamline receives through the con­
figured stream in the given time window. It has 5 different views:
• Instance Summary this view shows some key figures in the miner, such as how
many events have been observed and what the configured time window is.
• List of events a list of received events within a given time window
• Events over Time shows a graph over how many events are received and when
they are received.
• Events per case show how many events are received per case
• Activities shows which activities have been received and how many
8.3.2
Discovery Miner
The discovery miner receives events and generates a directed graph of the mined model,
where each node is an activity and each edge indicates that a activity with the ingress
edge happens after the node with the egress edge. The graph also gives an indication of
which events are the most frequent. It does this for activity nodes by colouring the more
frequent activities in a darker shade, and the less frequent activities in a lighter shade.
For the edges it indicates a more frequent relation between nodes by using a thicker line
for frequent relations, and thinner for less frequent relations.
8.3.3
Average Miner
The average miner is similar to the discovery miner, however instead of indicating how
frequent each activity and relation has happened, it shows the average duration of an
activity. In a similar fashion as The discovery miner, the activities with a higher average
duration are colored in a darker shade and the activities with a lower average duration are
colored in a lighter shade.
8.3.4
Evaluation
Figure 8.19 show the model that should be generated after the model generator has run.
Activity A is the start activity and activity I is the last activity.
The model is a directed multigraph where the nodes are activities and the directed edges
signify which order the activities happen where the head of the directed edge happens
after the tail of the directed edge.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
93
==PAGE:102==
The model will be generated by running the following sequence of activities:
• ”A­>B­>C­>D­>F­>I”
• ”A­>B­>C­>E­>F­>I”
• ”A­>G­>H­>I”
Figure 8.19: The Model Generated by the Model Generator
First Run Data
To run the first evaluation of the Beamline process miners, the following data is used.
The model will be generated by running the following sequence of activities:
• ”A­>B­>C­>D­>F­>I” is run 35 times
• ”A­>B­>C­>E­>F­>I” is run 20 times
• ”A­>G­>H­>I” is run 15 times
Table 8.7 gives an overview of how often each relation appears. The minimum time of
the relation i.e. the minimum amount of time before the following activity is sent. And the
maximum time i.e. the maximum duration before the following activity is sent.
Relation
Minimum Time
Maximum Time
Frequency
A­>B
10
25
55
B­>C
15
35
55
C­>D
20
30
35
C­>E
10
15
20
D­>F
30
40
35
E­>F
10
15
20
F­>I
10
20
55
A­>G
10
25
15
G­>H
10
40
15
H­>I
5
20
15
Table 8.7: Test Data for first Beamline evaluation
94
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:103==
Second Run Data
A second evaluation is run to evaluate how the models in Beamline adapt to changes.
For the second run the same sequences are run with the following frequencies:
• ”A­>B­>C­>D­>F­>I” is run 15 times
• ”A­>B­>C­>E­>F­>I” is run 20 times
• ”A­>G­>H­>I” is run 35 times
Similarly as table 8.7, table 8.8 describes the minimum time, maximum time and frequency
of each of the relation in the sequences.
Relation
Minimum Time
Maximum Time
Frequency
A­>B
20
35
35
B­>C
15
35
35
C­>D
10
20
15
C­>E
20
30
20
D­>F
15
25
15
E­>F
20
35
20
F­>I
10
20
35
A­>G
10
25
35
G­>H
10
40
35
H­>I
30
45
35
Table 8.8: Test Data for second Beamline evaluation
Table 8.8 shows the data used for the second run of the model generator.
Some changes have been made to the timings, A­>B now takes between 20 and 35
seconds, D­F takes between 15 and 25 seconds, E­>F takes between 20 and 35 seconds,
H­>I now takes between 30 and 45 seconds. After model generator has run for a while
the generated model should have changed to reflect the changes. The discovery miner
does not put added significance to newer events. The average miner however, should
after a while correspond only to the updated values.
Results
Figure 8.20 shows the instance summary view from the first run data in the Live Visualizer.
It shows when the miner was started and how many events have been received. The most
interesting number is the observed events number, this shows that 390 events have been
received, this is all the relation frequencies with the addition of activity I, which happens
70 times.
Figure 8.20: Instance summary from the live visualizer in Beamline
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
95
==PAGE:104==
Figure 8.21 displays how often each activity has occurred in the set time window. Corre­
lating this with table 8.7 shows that each activity happens the correct amount of times.
Figure 8.21: Activity frequencies using the first run data. Generated by the Live Visualizer
in Beamline
Figure 8.22: Instance summary from the second run in the Beamline live visualizer
Figure 8.22 shows the summary for the second run of test data. The correct amount of
observed events is 350, which means that Beamline has received one event more than
has been sent. How this happens is unclear. However this error does not change the
mined models significantly.
96
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:105==
Figure 8.23: Activity frequencies using the second run data. Generated by the Live Visu­
alizer in Beamline
From the diagram in figure 8.23 produced by the Beamline Live Visualizer miner, it is clear
that activity A happens one time to many.
(a) First run data
(b) Second run data
(c) Combined run data
Figure 8.24: Models generated from the Beamline Discovery Miner
The three models shown in figure 8.24 are the models mined with the test data. The first
two are from the first and second run while the third is the combined result. First note is
that the model corresponds with the intended model in figure 8.19. It is clear that the data
from the second run has affected the model generated in the first run in figure 8.24c.
In the first run the A­>B relation is used 55 times, while A­>G happens 15 times, this is
depicted in model in figure 8.24a with A­>B having a very thick arrow, and A­>G having
a very thin line. In the second run both relations happen 35 times, this is shown in figure
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
97
==PAGE:106==
8.24b with both having the thick line. In the combined model A­>B happens 90 times and
A­>G happens 50 times. This results in A­>B still having a thick arrow, and A­>G having
a thinner arrow, though not as thin as in the first model.
(a) First run data
(b) Second run data
(c) Combined run data
Figure 8.25: Models generated from the Beamline Average Miner
The figures in 8.25 show the results of the first and second run of the test data, and the
model generated when the second run was completed after the first run. The values in
the activities, are the average times spent in the corresponding activity. The values on
the relations show the average time of an activity when followed with the second activity
in the relation.
Figure 8.25a shows the model mined by the average miner in Beamline using data from
the first run. The model shows that the activity that takes the longest time to complete
is D. It also shows that if activity C takes a long time to complete, it will be followed by
activity D.
The intention of the average miner is that it is able to adapt to changes in processes by
weighting new events higher than historic events. How well the average miner succeeds
in this, can be evaluated by comparing figure 8.25b with figure 8.25c. These should be
very similar if the miner works as intended. This seems to work well for values with a
significant change. Examples are activity D which changes from being an activity that
takes a long time, to an activity with medium time consumption. Also activity H goes from
being a fast activity to a time consuming activity, this is also reflected in the combined
model. However the miner does not capture small changes well, apparent with activity G
which stays at 26 in the combined model.
8.4
End To End Tests
In the previous evaluation chapters each individual component has been tested and eval­
uated. However the goal of the project is to combine each of the component and create
an abstraction of events taking place in the real world. This is done by the computer vision
98
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:107==
component documenting the objects that are present in a scene captured by one or sev­
eral cameras, the complex event processing component relating the objects temporally
and eliciting different activities, finally the online process mining component creates a pro­
cess model based on the activities received. This end to end process will be evaluated in
this section.
Since the object detection was run on classified videos, the hardware that could be used
to run computer vision component was restricted to a Dell Lattitude 5320 laptop. YOLOv4
on the right hardware can run object detection at around 65 fps [35]. The Dell Latitude
was able to run the detection at around 1­2 fps. Because of this the authors decided to
disable the tracking feature of the computer vision component. With tracking enabled, the
detection ran at less than 1 fps.
Instead, for the performing the end­to­end test with the machines at Copenhagen airport,
the regions of interest were defined for every camera and those are made so narrow such
that only one object could be in them at a time. The objects detected are then named after
the camera/roi­rule, and the label with the rules for every object in the camera were defined
in the same way as presented in section 7.2.3. e.g. *ttttt_tttt where t represents
digits. Using several cameras, e.g. *yR:R3 and *yk:R3, a sample rule could be:
*yR:R3_yyR
*yk:R3_yyR
This would refer to Camera 1 and rule 001. Since both cameras use the same rule name,
_yyR, they are capturing the same object. When an object detected using this rule, this
could be an airplane, the object is named:
*yR:R3_yyRB`THM2
*yk:R3_yyRB`THM2
When the complex event processing component, receives this information with the corre­
sponding positional values, they are at first considered to be two different object because
of the difference in camera name. This makes it possible to detect basic events, as if the
airplane is stopped, regardless of which camera captures this event. However since it is
not desirable to capture multiple identical events, e.g. if both Camera 1 and Camera 2
detect that the airplane has stopped, the camera portion of the name is stripped before
the object is ingested by the next query.
_yyRB`THM2
_yyRB`THM2
The objects are now identified as being identical and only a single activity will be produced
by them.
8.4.1
Defining Regions of Interest
For the computer vision component to register the detected object, appropriate regions
of interest (ROI) need to be defined. Fig 8.26 shows an approximation of the defined
ROI. Defined are two ROI for baggage ramp, one for the front of the airplane, and one
for the back. One ROI is defined catering truck in the front of the airplane. One ROI is
defined for the tow tractor and one for the bridge connected activity. Finally a small box is
defined for the airplane, this box is different than the other ROI since the computer vision
component will register a detected airplane only if the ROI is fully contained inside the
airplane bounding box. For all the other ROI, the detected objects need to be contained
withing the ROI with a given threshold. This is explained in section 7.1.1.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
99
==PAGE:108==
Figure 8.26: Defined rules for camera 1
8.4.2
Data
The data used for the evaluation is the same as what was used in the evaluation of the
computer vision component, section 8.1. The videos are analyzed by the computer vision
component, which sends the detected objects to the complex event processing compo­
nent which sends the activities to the online process mining component. All communi­
cation between the components is done using message queues, a public broker called
HiveMQ is used in this case.
The model produced by the online process mining component, is compared to what the
expected model would look like. Additionally the timings of the activities are compared to
the timings of observed activities.
Event
Activity
Time
Airplane Stops
AirplaneStopped
00:00:00
Bridge Connects
BridgeConnected
00:01:55
Baggage Ramp Front
BaggageRampStopped
00:02:40
Baggage Ramp Back connected
BaggageRampStopped
00:03:05
Baggage Ramp Front Disconnected
BaggageRampMoving
00:15:50
Baggage Ramp Back Disconnected
BaggageRampMoving
00:19:40
Baggage Ramp Front Connected
BaggageRampStopped
00:35:55
Catering Truck Front Left Connected
CateringTruckConnected
00:44:45
Catering Truck Front Left Disconnected
CateringTruckNotConnected
00:52:55
Baggage Ramp Front Disconnected
BaggageRampMoving
01:05:40
Tow Tractor Connected
TowTractorConnected
01:19:15
Bridge Disconnected
BridgeNotConnected
01:20:10
Airplane Moving
AirplaneMoving
1:22:10
Table 8.9: Manually noted timings for video 1
Table 8.9 show all the manually noted timings for activities in video 1. The ”AirplaneStopped”
activitiy is the first activity and the following activities are timed based on the time elapsed
since the airplane stopped.
100
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:109==
Event
Activity
Time
Airplane Stopped
AirplaneStopped
00:00:00
Bridge Connected
BridgeConnected
00:02:30
Baggage Ramp Front Connected
BaggageRampStopped
00:05:15
Baggage Ramp Back Connected
BaggageRampStopped
00:05:02
Baggage Ramp Front Disconneted
BaggageRampMoving
00:48:20
Tow Tractor
TowTractorConnected
00:48:55
Baggae Ramp Back Disconneted
BaggageRampMoving
00:59:50
Bridge Disconnected
BridgeNotConnected
01:00:06
Airplane Moving
AirplaneMoving
01:04:19
Table 8.10: Manually noted timings for video 2
Table 8.10 shows the timings of the activities in video 2. The ”AirplaneStopped” activity
happens at time 00:00:00, and the activities that follow are noted with the time elapsed
since the ”AirplaneStopped” activity was generated.
Event
Activity
Time
Airplane Stops
AirplaneStopped
00:00:00
Bridge Connected
BridgeConnected
00:03:00
Baggage Ramp Connected
BaggageRampStopped
00:03:40
Baggage Ramp Disconnected
BaggageRampMoving
00:18:30
Bridge Disconnected
BridgeNotConnected
00:29:05
Tow tractor Connected
TowTractorConnected
00:29:50
Airplane Moving
AirplaneMoving
00:39:00
Table 8.11: Manually noted timings for video 3
Table 8.11 shows timing when each activity happens.
The manually annotated activities from video 1, shown in table 8.9, video 2, shown in
table 8.10 and video 3, shown in table 8.11 yield the following relations:
B`THM2aiQTT2/ @= "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/
"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ @= ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/
";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ @= ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/
";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ @= ";;;2_KTJQpBM;
";;;2_KTJQpBM; @= ";;;2_KTJQpBM;
";;;2_KTJQpBM; @= ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/
";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ @= *i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/
*i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/ @= *i2`BM;h`m+FLQi*QMM2+i2/
*i2`BM;h`m+FLQi*QMM2+i2/ @= ";;;2_KTJQpBM;
";;;2_KTJQpBM; @= hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/
";;;2_KTJQpBM; @= "`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/
"`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/ @= hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/
hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/ @= B`THM2JQpBM;
hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/ @= ";;;2_KTJQpBM;
hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/ @= "`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/
"`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/ @= B`THM2JQpBM;
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
101
==PAGE:110==
Figure 8.27: Model from annotated activities
The activities annotated from the videos, give the graph presented in figure 8.27. Table
8.12 shows an overview of the activities. The table shows how many edges are going into
each node, and how many edges are going out of each node.
Activity
In Degree
Out Degree
AirplaneStopped
0
1
BridgeConnected
1
1
BaggageRampStopped
3
2
BaggageRampMoving
4
5
CateringTruckConnected
1
1
CateringTruckNotConnected
1
1
BridgeNotConnected
2
2
TowTractorConnected
2
3
AirplaneMoving
2
0
Table 8.12: Overview of Graph of Manually Annotated Activities
102
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:111==
8.4.3
Results
The activities produced are captured by the live visualizer in Beamline, the values are
shown in figure 8.28. The notable differences in the detected activities from the manually
detected activities, is that the activity produced by a baggage ramp that connects to the
back of the airplane in video 1 and video 2 is completely missing. As mentioned in section
8.1 the baggage ramp is heavily occluded by wing of the airplane, and the computer vision
component fails to detect the baggage cart because of it. With a system that relies on
cameras to describe a scene, problems like these are to be expected. A solution is to
add more cameras such that all angles are covered. However this is not always feasible,
as in this case where the videos are captured using security cameras that are already in
place.
(a) Activities in video 1
(b) Activities in video 2
(c) Activities in video 3
Figure 8.28: Activities captured from the videos
Figure 8.28 shows the activities from each video captured by the live visualizer instance.
The live visualizer gives a nice overview of the activities in each case. A discovery model
produced by the discovery miner and the average miner gives an overview of the process
as a whole.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
103
==PAGE:112==
(a) Average Miner Graph produced by mining the evaluation videos
(b) Discovery Miner Graph produced by mining the evaluation videos
Figure 8.29a and 8.29b show the graph produced in Beamline by the average miner and
the discovering miner. From inspecting the graph one can get a sense of the flow of activi­
ties from the turnaround processes that where mined. As expected the B`THM2aiQTT2/
and the B`THM2JQpBM; are the first and last activities.
Also not surprising the the
"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ is the first thing to happen when the airplane has stopped. Another
thing that is clear from the graphs is that the activities associated with the baggage ramps
are very central in the process. It is the most frequent activity, as can be seen in the
graph produced by the discovery miner, and both activities are also where the most time
is spent before a succeeding activity happens. Also these activities have the most number
104
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:113==
of ingoing and outgoing edges.
The mined graphs are only based on three videos, so no real conclusion can be made
about the turnaround process. However the graphs show that the solution provides a
good model of the mined process.
Comparing the mined graphs to the expected graph in figure 8.27, one big difference is
that there are no self loops from the ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ and ";;;2_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/.
This is because these activities, that where produced by the baggage ramp that connects
to the back of the airplane, where not recorded. This gives a slightly simpler graph, ad­
ditionally the "`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/ activity is always the second to last activity. In figure
8.27 both the "`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/ and the hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/ had an edge directed
to the B`THM2JQpBM; activity. Table 8.13 summarizes the graph in figure 8.29a.
Activity
In Degree
Out Degree
AirplaneStopped
0
1
BridgeConnected
1
1
BaggageRampStopped
2
2
BaggageRampDisconnected
2
3
CateringTruckConnected
1
1
CateringTruckNotConnected
1
1
TowTractorConnected
2
2
BridgeNotConnected
2
1
AirplaneMoving
1
0
Table 8.13: Overview of Graph of Detected Activities
Comparing table 8.13 to table 8.12 which summarizes the expected graph shows that the
graph generated from the detected activities is much simpler than the expected graph.
The expected graph has 16 edges and the detected graph has 12. While some of the miss­
ing edges can be explained by, not being able to detect a baggage ramp, this is not the en­
tire explanation. Upon examining the graph it can be seen that the hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/
activity is detected earlier than in manually annotated data. The hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/
activity fired as soon as a tow tractor is detected in its region of interest. One possible
explanation for the activity being produced early is that the activity is produced as soon
as the tow tractor arrives, when it doesn’t actually connect until a while after it has arrived.
The of graph constructed from the manually noted activities, presented in figure 8.27,
and the edges from the automatically generated graph have 11 relationships in common
and a total of 17 relationships. This gives a Jaccard aimilarity of 64,7%. However, the
Jaccard similarity of the nodes in both graphs is 100%. Drawing some conclusion from
this. The generated model does describe the turnaround reasonably, it is able to detect
the expected activities in the process. However, due to the problem of occlusion in the
image capture phase, it does not describe the relationships completely.
Activity Timings
The values in figure 8.28 are presented in tables 8.14, 8.16 and 8.18. All times are pre­
sented as time elapsed since the B`THM2aiQTT2/ activity fired. To comment on how the
detected values compare to the manually noted values, a graph is constructed for each
video showing the duration of each activity. The duration is based on following intervals:
• AirplaneStopped ­ AirplaneMoving
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
105
==PAGE:114==
• BridgeConnected ­ BridgeNotConnected
• BaggageRampStopped ­ Corresponding BaggageRampDisconnected
• CateringTruckConnected ­ CateringTruckNotConnected
• TowTracktorConnected ­ Last Activity
Since the hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/ does not have a terminating activity, the last noted time
is set as the end of the interval, this also simplifies calculating the intersection over union.
Video 1
Event
Activity
Time
Airplane Stops
AirplaneStopped
00:00
Bridge Connects
BridgeConnected
01:00
Baggage Ramp Front
BaggageRampStopped
02:39
Baggage Ramp Front Disconnected
BaggageRampMoving
15:11
Baggage Ramp Front Connected
BaggageRampStopped
35:45
Catering Truck Front Left Connected
CateringTruckConnected
44:29
Catering Truck Front Left Disconnected
CateringTruckNotConnected
53:42
Baggage Ramp Front Disconnected
BaggageRampMoving
1:05:57
Tow Tractor Connected
TowTractorConnected
1:04:49
Bridge Disconnected
BridgeNotConnected
1:21:03
Airplane Moving
AirplaneMoving
1:22:41
Table 8.14: Detected timings for video 1
Figure 8.30 depicts the timings in video 1. The manually annotated activities and the
automatically detected activities are mapped into the graph shown in figure 8.30
Figure 8.30: Overlap between manually noted timings and detected timings of activities
in video 1
Apart from the missing baggage ramp and the very early detected tow tractor, the detected
values match well the manually noted times. It seems that the detected activities start a
bit sooner than the manually noted times. Table 8.15 show how the Jaccard similarity
between the manually annotated activities and the detected activities.
106
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:115==
Object
Intersection over Union
Airplane
99.4%
Bridge Connected
97.8%
Baggage Ramp F
97.4%
Baggage Ramp B
0%
Catering Truck
88.6%
Tow Tractor
19.2%
Total
85.8%
Table 8.15: Intersection over Union for activities in Video 1
The Jaccard similarity in table 8.15 shows good detection results for most activities. Tow
Tractor scores very low because it is detected as being connected as soon as it arrives.
The problem is that is arrives early and is parked next to the airplane before finally con­
necting. It therefore scores very low in the Jaccard similarity. Experimenting with the
regions of interest, making it more narrow in front of the plane for the tow tractor, could
lead to better results.
The baggage ramp in the back is, as mentioned before, occluded by the airplane wing,
and thus the detection fails to recognize it.
The total score for the Jaccard similarity, is quite good at above 85%
Video 2
Event
Activity
Time
Airplane Stopped
AirplaneStopped
00:00
Bridge Connected
BridgeConnected
01:12
Baggage Ramp Front Connected
BaggageRampStopped
04:55
Baggage Ramp Front Disconneted
BaggageRampMoving
47:01
Tow Tractor
TowTractorConnected
48:25
Bridge Disconnected
BridgeNotConnected
1:02:53
Airplane Moving
AirplaneMoving
1:07:41
Table 8.16: Detected timings for video 2
The activity timings are noted in table 8.16. Compared against the manually noted timings
in table 8.10 and visualized in figure 8.31
Figure 8.31: Overlap between manually noted timings and detected timings of activities
in video 2
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
107
==PAGE:116==
Figure 8.31 shows a bigger difference between the manually annotated timings and the
timings from the detected activity. However the accuracy is still quite good. Table 8.17
shows the calculated Jaccard similarities. With the exception of the back baggage ramp,
the similarities are all above 90%. The total Jaccard similarity at 74,5%. This is caused
by the big negative contribution of the back baggage ramp. In figure 8.31 it shows that
the baggage ramp is connected the majority of the time the airplane is stopped.
Object
Intersection over Union
Airplane
95.0%
Bridge Connected
93.4%
Baggage Ramp F
96.2%
Baggage Ramp B
0%
Tow Tractor
97.4%
Total
74.5%
Table 8.17: Intersection over Union for objects in Video 2
Video 3
Table 8.18 shows the detected timings in video 1. Timings starts from the AirplaneStopped
activity, and the subsequent activity timings are elapsed time since the AirplaneStopped
activity happened.
Event
Activity
Time
Airplane Stops
AirplaneStopped
00:00
Bridge Connected
BridgeConnected
02:18
Baggage Ramp Connected
BaggageRampStopped
03:11
Baggage Ramp Disconnected
BaggageRampMoving
18:15
Bridge Disconnected
BridgeNotConnected
29:03
Tow tractor Connected
TowTractorConnected
19:46
Airplane Moving
AirplaneMoving
38:50
Table 8.18: Detected timings for video 3
The timings in table 8.18 and the manually annotated timings in table 8.11 are visualized
in figure 8.32.
Figure 8.32: Overlap between manually noted timings and detected timings of activities
in video 3
108
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:117==
With the exception of the tow tractor, figure 8.32 shows that the detected activities and the
manually annotated activities are very similar. This indicates that the system is accurately
detecting when the activities are happening. The Jaccard similarity is calculated and
shown in table 8.19
Object
Intersection over Union
Airplane
99.6%
Bridge Connected
97.3%
Baggage Ramp
95.2%
Tow Tractor
47.7%
Total
88.3%
Table 8.19: Intersection over Union for objects in Video 3
Table 8.19 shows very good results for the detection. With the exception of the Tow
Tractor, all the activities are above 95% with the airplane being almost 100% accurate.
The total is also high at 88,3%, even though the tow tractor pulls it down slightly. It needs
to be said, that this video in many cases suits a system based on computer vision very
well. All detected objects are plainly visible and well separated.
Overall the solution functions well, overall the detected activities correspond very well
with the manually annotated activities. And as a whole the solution recognizes relevant
activities and generates a good model representation of the process.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
109
==PAGE:118==
8.5
Reflection
In this reflection section, we discuss how much our initial goals stated in section 1.1, have
been met by proving it with our final evaluation of the solution.
The extraction of events from a non­technological environment goal was met by creating
the computer vision component where the YOLO algorithm performs the recognition of
objects where there is registration of data recorded for the events of the process involved.
The customizable features of our Computer Vision Component, allows the tool to be con­
figurable to different processes, where it’s possible to change the camera sources, define
regions of interest and submit a network model to detect objects.
The production of events using the computer vision component and further, the extraction
of meaningful activities from those events, helps to create a more robust model to be
analysed in the online process system component.
Regarding, the results of the evaluation chapter, in the first meetings with the Copenhagen
airport, was stated that the most relevant activity to be triggered was to be able to detect
the timings when the airplane stopped at the gate, to perform the turnaround process, and
also the timings of the airplane moving again from the gate and prepared to take off.
The timings of the airplane and also some others events, as a bridge connected, baggage
ramp, tow tractor and catering truck were captured and considered during the evaluation
phase.
This production of events allowed us to have a better understanding when analysing the
results of the turnaround process, using the online process mining component.
Given these reasons, we could conclude that the goals stated at the beginning of the
project were met.
8.6
Limitations
In this section, we discuss the limitations that we found during our development, testing
and evaluation phases. These limitations are described in the next subsections and are
aggregated by 3 different components of the solution. All the limitations are sourced in
technical aspects that we faced and could be explored, re­adapted and re­implemented
in the future.
8.6.1
Limitations in computer vision component
The computer vision component is the piece of software where all the translation from the
events happening in a process must be captured. Here, we detail some of the limitations
that we faced on the acquisition of data. The problems with object detection and the
developed computer vision component issues faced during the testing and evaluation
phases are discussed below:
The YOLO algorithm accuracy for object detection could lead to some unexpected re­
sults. In most of the cases, the detection is consistently based on the training of the
model, and have a higher confidence level on the accuracy of the detection, but because
YOLO is an algorithm to perform a real­time detection using higher FPS levels than more
conservative models, this could lead to inaccuracies on detecting objects in some frames.
In our solution, we workaround this fact by adding an ROI concept, where for each area
in the image, we restrict the objects that we want to detect. In most cases, this concept
solves the problem, but during our evaluation, we found out that if there is an existence
110
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:119==
of an object in the scene, but the object detection doesn’t capture this for a certain pe­
riod of time, this could lead to an issue in generating activities because some rules in the
complex event processing component have time conditions, which means that sending
wrong information or absence of detected objects for a certain period of time, could trig­
ger activities in the wrong way. This propagation effect can lead to generating a wrong
representative model of the process involved by not having an accurate object detection
of objects in the Computer Vision component.
Another limitation that is beyond the technological aspect, is the occluded objects ap­
pearing in the image. In the case of turnaround, we found some problems for some
cameras when the baggage ramp is below the wing of the airplane and the occlusion oc­
curs. We also prototyped our solution in a way to avoid some of these possibilities. By
creating a scalable solution, where is possible to configure multiple cameras for the same
process. This is helpful for detecting occluded objects because in one of the cameras
the object could be occluded, but in another camera from a different angle, the object
is unobstructed. This problem could be solved by having a large number of cameras for
detecting the objects, but also the correct placement of the cameras is a crucial aspect. In
the case of the cameras in the airport gates, the placement of cameras for giving at least
a 180­degree perspective angle of the airplane and all the sides for correctly detecting
the object of the ground handling teams could solve part of this problem.
An issue that we faced around camera placement was when the angle of certain cameras
are not helpful to detect certain objects. This problem is due to the labelling and bad
training of objects for the network. If the network has a restricted number of trained images
for a certain object, this could lead to an imprecision in the network model, because the
variety of different images is not considered in the training, and a simple rotation of the
object when capturing it could lead to a bad detection or a non­detection of the object.
Regarding the training of the network model, we faced big issues with the performance
of the machines provided by the Copenhagen airport. The fact that machines don’t have
GPU and a not powerful CPU to train our network model, based on the labelling of Copen­
hagen airport objects, turns into the impossibility to create a more robust model for better
capturing the events in the turnaround. The training expected time on those machines
was around 450 days of completion, which turns into an unpractical situation that leads
us to work around this by using our trained model based on a few Youtube videos and
some datasets of airplanes and objects for the turnaround. Despite this fact, the results
obtained during the evaluation phase in the Copenhagen airport were good, but it would
be possible to train the model using airport objects, the model could be more robust and
the detection of objects more accurate.
One issue that we found when testing our computer vision component, was the multi­
ple cameras performance when having a not powerful CPU and GPU for displaying the
results on the screen. We prototyped the solution in order to avoid this fact, by creating
independent threads to perform separated object detection and display for each config­
ured camera. In the machines at Copenhagen airport, we noticed that this problem was
impactfull when a machine doesn’t have enough memory capacity and the CPU cores are
not enough to perform a fluid detection without delays. To avoid this fact, and because our
solution is scalable, we decided to make a coordination among our available machines
in the Copenhagen airport, which means that we perform the same turnaround process
using 2 camera sources in one machine and another camera source in another machine.
This as a workaround, works well and we avoid the delays of the cameras to have trusted
data for every evaluated turnaround.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
111
==PAGE:120==
One last issue that we faced during the implementation, and that led us to discard this
approach was the detection of small events, which means detecting small objects to
give a better understanding of some events in the process. Giving a better explanation
on this, one possible feature that we tried to brainstorm and develop was the detection
of loading and unloading of baggage from the airplane. These events could be captured
by detecting the moving direction of the bags in the baggage ramp, but because YOLO is
inconsistent when detecting such small objects, in an image frame, we discarded this extra
feature approach to integrate as the scope of our computer vision component solution.
8.6.2
Limitations in complex event processing component
In the complex event processing component, we used Siddhi to extract meaningful activi­
ties that translate the process in a more effective way. Here a list of queries was produced
in order to trigger different activities from the consumed events sent by the computer vi­
sion component. These rule queries are written using some static definition based on
bounding boxes area or number of events received in a period of time.
In this component, some activities could be triggered in a wrong way not because the rule
queries are not well formulated, but due to the unawareness if the received events in this
component are correct. As stated in 8.6.1 where we described the propagation effect that
can be caused by bad accuracy on the object detection. The Complex Event Processing
component is prepared to receive multiple events, but in our prototype, we don’t validate
if these received events coming from the Computer Vision component are false­positive
events. This fact is not a complex event processing issue itself but could generate wrong
activities when receiving some untrusted event data or the absence of data for a certain
period.
Giving an example to explain this situation, based on the turnaround process: If in the
CVC we are detecting a bridge connection of the turnaround process, this event is sent
to CEP and activity of the BridgeConnected is created and sent to the online process
mining component. But if for some reason, a bad detection of the bridge connected occurs
during a certain period of time, the rule query will understand that the bridge is no anymore
connected and generates an activity of BridgeNotConnected.
This BridgeNotConnected is generated in a wrong way, not because the rule is wrong,
but because the non­detection of the bridge in CVC generated this bad interpretation of
the model.
This fact made us be very aware of the importance of having a robust trained network
model for the process, in this case, the turnaround process.
8.6.3
Limitations in online process mining component
The average miner is a naive implementation. It could be improved to better adapt to new
process change. One possible improvement could be to use a windowing approach. That
is basing the model on the past x cases. Or basing the model on the cases in a specified
time window.
112
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:121==
8.7
Evaluation of Research Questions
In this section, we answer the research questions defined in section 4.1 of the Problem
Statement. The questions will be answered based on the evaluation of our prototype.
RQ1: Is it possible to use online process mining, in a context of non­technological
environment, by using video streams as a data source?
A1: The end to end tests performed in section 8.4 are done using real videos from a
turnaround process. The tests show that it is indeed possible to extract activities from
a non­technological environment using computer vision, most activity are detected with
very high accuracy. Additionally the solution generates models that explain the mined
process well.
Section 8.1 does however reveal, that an object detection approach, to describe the
events happening, is vulnerable to occlusion. A solution to this it either to add more cam­
eras to cover all possible angles or to accept that some activities might not be detected.
RQ2: Can a process model accurately be discovered by using computer vision to
extract events in a scene?
A2: The automatically discovered models, are quite similar to the expected model. Since
the solution fails to recognize the back baggage ramps, there are some edges missing in
the graph. Additionally, because the tow tractor connected activity is produced too soon,
there is no edge from the “TowTractorConnected” node to the “AirplaneMoving” node.
These difficulties leads to a Jaccard similarity of 64,7% between the relationships of the
expected model and the automatically generated model. However the Jaccard similarity
of the nodes in the models is at 100% showing that even though some activities are not
detected, the solution generates a fair representation of the mined process.
RQ3: Is it possible to classify meaningful activities, collected from different object
detection event sources?
A3: The end to end tests are performed with data from two different cameras. Because of
the way rules are defined in the computer vision component, the complex event process­
ing component is able to produce unique events from either of the cameras, and does not
produce duplicate events when the same activity appears in both cameras.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
113
==PAGE:122==
114
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:123==
Chapter 9
Conclusion and Future work
9.1
Conclusion
The purpose of this project was to design a proof of concept, that enables process mining,
without human interference, of processes where timings are not recorded by an IT system.
The validation of a conceptual prototype that enables the acquisition of data in environ­
ments where it’s difficult to register event data, was the main focus of the research and
development of our thesis.
Our development phase was divided by the 3 components that we found essential to
produce an decent result with a final goal of being to process mine that events captured
by the computer vision component.
Part of our big effort on research, test and improve the concept was made in the computer
vision component, where we found out that this was a crucial phase in the flow of transla­
tions events from the real world. The selection of the most efficient and accurate computer
vision algorithm (YOLO) that will fit our needs was important, but also understanding the
limitations of this object detection technique and re­adapt the developed framework to
better capture correct events and design a solution scalable that could be integrated into
multiple real­world scenes took also a positive impact to overcome some fragility’s when
detecting objects using cameras (e.g. occlusion of objects).
The second crucial development phase was to use this scalable decision on acquiring the
data, by the computer vision component, and create an efficient way to translate those
events and produce meaningful activities that define the process, using the Complex
Event Processing component. We also spend most of our time on the development of
queries of this component, that has some meaning to the process involved and could ag­
gregate the received event information into a descriptive way of interpreting actions in the
process. This component doesn’t make any distinction between the consumed sources,
which means that this could be important in integrating different types of IoT devices or
even API data that help in translating the different phases of the process, in the future.
Because our thesis was developed with the focus on the turnaround process, we found
out that the timings between initial and end activities were crucial to measure the issues
of this process. In this way, we decided to extend the existing process mining framework
(Beamline) to include an Average Miner that creates the direct­follows relations based on
time, that continually updating the generated model from the tested and real turnaround
process in Copenhagen airport.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
115
==PAGE:124==
Based on the end to end evaluations, presented in section 8.4.3, the solution performs
very well in most cases, with a reported accuracy above 90% when compared to hu­
manly annotated data. The implementation also delivered quite decent overall results.
However, the evaluation also shows that occlusion plays a big role in detection accuracy.
Heavily occluded objects are not detected and no activity is generated for these objects.
A solution, as the one presented, could run unsupervised for a long duration, while also
analysing several similar processes simultaneously and instantaneously updating gen­
erated models. A process stakeholder should, therefore, weigh the pros of the process
model being based on more current data, with the cons of possibly not being able to detect
all activities in a process.
Overall video streams serve as a viable data source when analyzing processes where
activities can not be extracted from a process aware information system. In combination
with online process mining, video streams can give real time insights into processes and
is an opportunity that should be pursued further.
The GitHub repository with the prototypes code developed is available in the following link
with the name ”Online­process­mining­in­video­streams­using­computer­vision”1.
9.2
Future Work
The achieved results during our development and evaluation phase were beyond the
expected for our prototype, achieving as a first goal the correct timings to analyse in a
context of online process mining. Apart from this fact, there is still some work in the
prototype, that we think could be improved to have a more robust solution when extracting
and analysing events in a process without human interference.
In consideration of our prototype limitations, in the case of our computer vision component,
one important aspect that should be improved is to create a lightweight tool that the impact
of adding multiple cameras to the solution, doesn’t cause major problems, such as delays
or lag between cameras, in the performance of the object detection and in the display of
the resulted frames after detection.
Creating an emulator of stream connections inside the prototype could also have some
benefits for testing purposes. In this case, we avoid having an external tool, such as
VLC, to emulate the streams and better understand the speed rate in each moment of the
transmitted video.
The possibility to create an extra feature where we could label the images, similar to the
used LabelImg tool, and train the model using only the prototype, could be beneficial to a
user that doesn’t have capable programming skills.
The upgrade of the object detection algorithm could also be continuous research and
development. During the development of our thesis, we used YOLO because is one
of the most powerful algorithms to perform object detection in real­time, but this field of
computer vision still needs a lot of improvement in detection. Upgrading the tool with the
most recent could have a relevant impact on the detection accuracy.
To be able to detect more sophisticated activities, more process events could be defined.
Possible basic process events that could be interesting are movement direction, and also
spatial relationship between objects.
Regarding the complex event processing component, one great improvement could be
to define the rule queries in a more dynamic way. This means that could be used a
1?iiTb,ff;Bi?m#X+QKf>2M`B[.m`i2fPMHBM2@T`Q+2bb@KBMBM;@BM@pB/2Q@bi`2Kb@mbBM;@+QKTmi2`@pBbBQM
116
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:125==
configurable option to create rules that extract meaningful events without a need of a
software developer to fix these queries every time a new process is involved. This could
be made inside the customizable framework, using simple rule type definition and then
converting and deploying it into Siddhi.
For the online process mining, some new miners could be considered to give more detail
in the analyse of the process. Also, a great feature that could be considered in the future,
is adding the conformance checking to Beamline. In the case of the turnaround process,
the conformance checking could determine discrepancies of delayed timings and issues
with the incorrect starting of events, in real­time.
In the case of the turnaround process, an extra feature that could be considered to incorpo­
rate in the online process mining system is the predictive model where a real­time activity
time prediction is enhanced and gives valuable live feedback to the airline turnaround
owners. One useful piece of feedback given by the Copenhagen airport team would be
the possibility to predict live off­block timings of active turnarounds.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
117
==PAGE:126==
118
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
[1]
Wil Van Der Aalst. “Data science in action”. In: Process mining. Springer, 2016,
pp. 3–23.
[2]
Marlon Dumas, Wil M Van der Aalst, and Arthur H Ter Hofstede. Process­aware in­
formation systems: bridging people and software through process technology. John
Wiley & Sons, 2005.
[3]
Andrea Burattin. “Streaming Process Discovery and Conformance Checking”. In:
Encyclopedia of Big Data Technologies. Ed. by Sherif Sakr and Albert Zomaya.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018, pp. 1–8. ISBN: 978­3­319­63962­8.
DOI: RyXRyydfNd3@j@jRN@ejNek@3nRyj@R. URL: ?iiTb,ff/QBXQ`;fRyXRyydfNd3@j@jRN@
WkyejNek@3nRyj@R.
[4]
“Predetermined motion time systems”. In: Applied Ergonomics 7.4 (1976), pp. 248–
249. ISSN: 0003­6870. DOI: ?iiTb,ff/QBXQ`;fRyXRyRefyyyj@e3dyUdeVNyRjN@j. URL:
?iiTb,ffrrrXb+B2M+2/B`2+iX+QKfb+B2M+2f`iB+H2fTBBfyyyje3dydeNyRjNj.
[5]
Patrick Rückert, Björn Papenberg, and Kirsten Tracht. “Classification of assembly
operations using machine learning algorithms based on visual sensor data”. In: Pro­
cedia CIRP 97 (2021). 8th CIRP Conference of Assembly Technology and Systems,
pp. 110–116. ISSN: 2212­8271. DOI: ?iiTb,ff/QBXQ`;fRyXRyRefDXT`Q+B`XkykyXy8XkRR.
URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrXb+B2M+2/B`2+iX+QKfb+B2M+2f`iB+H2fTBBfakkRk3kdRkyjR9jRR.
[6]
Mahdi Ghasemi and Daniel Amyot. “Process mining in healthcare: a systematised
literature review”. In: International Journal of Electronic Healthcare 9.1 (2016), pp. 60–
88.
[7]
Andrea Burattin. “Streaming Process Discovery and Conformance Checking”. En­
glish. In: Encyclopedia of Big Data Technologies. Ed. by Sherif Sakr and Albert
Zomaya. Springer, 2018. ISBN: 978­3­319­63962­8. DOI: Ry X Ryyd f Nd3 @ j @ jRN @
ejNek@3nRyj@R.
[8]
A.M. Genaidy, A. Mital, and M. Obeidat. “The validity of predetermined motion time
systems in setting production standards for industrial tasks”. In: International Jour­
nal of Industrial Ergonomics 3.3 (1989), pp. 249–263. ISSN: 0169­8141. DOI: ?iiTb,
ff/QBXQ`;fRyXRyRefyReN@3R9RU3NVNyyk8@8. URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrXb+B2M+2/B`2+iX+QKf
b+B2M+2f`iB+H2fTBBfyReN3R9R3NNyyk88.
[9]
Harry Rever. “Six Sigma can help project managers improve results”. In: Interna­
tional Institute for Learning, Inc (2010), pp. 1–5.
[10]
P. Agethen et al. “Presenting a Novel Motion Capture­based Approach for Walk
Path Segmentation and Drift Analysis in Manual Assembly”. In: vol. 52. cited By 14.
2016, pp. 286–291. DOI: RyXRyRefDXT`Q+B`XkyReXydXy93. URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrXb+QTmbX
+QKfBMr`/f`2+Q`/Xm`B\2B/4k@bkXy@39NNk8dN9dR/QB4RyXRyReW8*Wk7DXT`Q+B`XkyReX
ydXy93T`iM2`A.49yK/84e#Rkd3dke/2R229jN7#y82NRNy+/3y27.
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
119
==PAGE:128==
[11]
Hartmut Fricke and Michael Schultz. “Improving aircraft turn around reliability”. In:
Third International Conference on Research in Air Transportation. 2008, pp. 335–
343.
[12]
Markus Böhm et al. “Process mining at Lufthansa CityLine: The path to process ex­
cellence”. In: Journal of Information Technology Teaching Cases 0.0 (0), p. 20438869211022369.
DOI: RyXRRddfky9j33eNkRRykkjeN. eprint: ?iiTb,ff/QBXQ`;fRyXRRddfky9j33eNkRRykkjeN.
URL: ?iiTb,ff/QBXQ`;fRyXRRddfky9j33eNkRRykkjeN.
[13]
Matteo Muratori et al. “The rise of electric vehicles—2020 status and future ex­
pectations”. In: Progress in Energy 3.2 (2021), p. 022002. DOI: Ry X Ry33 f k8Re @
Ry3jf#2y/. URL: ?iiTb,ff/QBXQ`;fRyXRy33fk8Re@Ry3jf#2y/.
[14]
Microsoft. Lufthansa CityLine streamlines aircraft turnaround, reduces flight delays
with Azure Video Analyzer. 2021. accessed 25.08.2021.
[15]
Michael Gorkow. Aircraft Turnaround Management Using Computer Vision. 2020.
URL: ?iiTb,ffK2/BmKX+QKf!KB+?2H;Q`FQrfB`+`7i@im`M`QmM/@KM;2K2Mi@mbBM;@
+QKTmi2`@pBbBQM@9#2+kN3j3+y3. accessed 25.08.2021.
[16]
S. Knoch et al. Technology­enhanced process elicitation of worker activities in man­
ufacturing. English. Vol. 308. Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing.
Cited By :6. 2018, pp. 273–284. URL: rrrXb+QTmbX+QK.
[17]
Jochen Deuse et al. “Automatic Generation of Methods­Time Measurement Anal­
yses for Assembly Tasks from Motion Capture Data Using Convolutional Neuronal
Networks ­ A Proof of Concept”. In: Advances in Human Factors and Systems In­
teraction. Ed. by Isabel L. Nunes. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020,
pp. 141–150. ISBN: 978­3­030­20040­4.
[18]
Rainer von Ammon et al. “Integrating Complex Events for Collaborating and Dy­
namically Changing Business Processes”. In: SERVICE­ORIENTED COMPUTING:
ICSOC/SERVICE WAVE 2009 WORKSHOPS. Ed. by Dan, A and Gittler, F and
Toumani, F. Vol. 6275. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. International Work­
shops Service­Oriented Computing/Service Wave, Stockholm, SWEDEN, NOV 23­
27, 2009. 2010, pp. 370+. ISBN: 978­3­642­16131­5.
[19]
R. Bruns et al. “Using Complex Event Processing to support data fusion for ambu­
lance coordination”. In: cited By 8. 2014. URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrXb+QTmbX+QKfBMr`/f
`2+Q`/Xm`B\2B/4k@bkXy@39NRyey3dejT`iM2`A.49yK/84jRe7jNe2#+2#kN3#9/dy9jNjdN+jR7d2.
[20]
P. Yadav and E. Curry. “VidCEP: Complex Event Processing Framework to Detect
Spatiotemporal Patterns in Video Streams”. In: cited By 15. 2019, pp. 2513–2522.
DOI: RyXRRyNf"B;.i9dyNyXkyRNXNyyeyR3.
[21]
A. Burattin et al. “MQTT­XES: Real­time telemetry for process event data”. In: vol. 2673.
cited By 0. 2020, pp. 97–101. URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrXb+QTmbX+QKfBMr`/f`2+Q`/Xm`B\2B/4
k@bkXy@38yNke99d8NT`iM2`A.49yK/848N#2879yRjR889y/9/7NN3+jy9k8e#2.
[22]
David G Lowe. “Object recognition from local scale­invariant features”. In: Proceed­
ings of the seventh IEEE international conference on computer vision. Vol. 2. Ieee.
1999, pp. 1150–1157.
[23]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks”. In: Advances in neural information pro­
cessing systems 25 (2012), pp. 1097–1105.
[24]
Y. LeCun et al. “Backpropagation Applied to Handwritten Zip Code Recognition”.
In: Neural Computation 1.4 (Dec. 1989), pp. 541–551. ISSN: 0899­7667. DOI: RyX
RRekfM2+QXRN3NXRX9X89R. eprint: ?iiTb,ff/B`2+iXKBiX2/mfM2+Qf`iB+H2@T/7fRf9f89Rf
3RRN9RfM2+QXRN3NXRX9X89RXT/7. URL: ?iiTb,ff/QBXQ`;fRyXRRekfM2+QXRN3NXRX9X89R.
120
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:129==
[25]
Shaoqing Ren et al. “Faster R­CNN: Towards Real­Time Object Detection with Re­
gion Proposal Networks”. In: CoRR abs/1506.01497 (2015). arXiv: R8ye X yR9Nd.
URL: ?iiT,ff`tBpXQ`;f#bfR8yeXyR9Nd.
[26]
Kaiming He et al. “Mask R­CNN”. In: CoRR abs/1703.06870 (2017). arXiv: RdyjX
ye3dy. URL: ?iiT,ff`tBpXQ`;f#bfRdyjXye3dy.
[27]
Joseph Redmon et al. “You Only Look Once: Unified, Real­Time Object Detection”.
In: CoRR abs/1506.02640 (2015). arXiv: R8yeXyke9y. URL: ?iiT,ff`tBpXQ`;f#bf
R8yeXyke9y.
[28]
Alex Bewley et al. “Simple Online and Realtime Tracking”. In: CoRR abs/1602.00763
(2016). arXiv: ReykXyydej. URL: ?iiT,ff`tBpXQ`;f#bfReykXyydej.
[29]
Guanghan Ning et al. “Spatially Supervised Recurrent Convolutional Neural Net­
works for Visual Object Tracking”. In: CoRR abs/1607.05781 (2016). arXiv: ReydX
y8d3R. URL: ?iiT,ff`tBpXQ`;f#bfReydXy8d3R.
[30]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long Short­term Memory”. In: Neural
computation 9 (Dec. 1997), pp. 1735–80. DOI: RyXRRekfM2+QXRNNdXNX3XRdj8.
[31]
Qiang Wang et al. “Fast Online Object Tracking and Segmentation: A Unifying Ap­
proach”. In: CoRR abs/1812.05050 (2018). arXiv: R3RkXy8y8y. URL: ?iiT,ff`tBpX
Q`;f#bfR3RkXy8y8y.
[32]
Richard Hughey and Anders Krogh. SAM: Sequence alignment and modeling soft­
ware system. University of California at Santa Cruz, 1995.
[33]
Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, Ali Farhadi. You Only Look Once:
Unified, Real­Time Object Detection. 2016. URL: ?iiTb,ffTD`2//B2X+QKfvQHQf. ac­
cessed 25.08.2021.
[34]
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. “Yolov3: An incremental improvement”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.02767 (2018).
[35]
Alexey Bochkovskiy, Chien­Yao Wang, and Hong­Yuan Mark Liao. “Yolov4: Optimal
speed and accuracy of object detection”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10934 (2020).
[36]
Alex Bewley et al. “Simple online and realtime tracking”. In: 2016 IEEE international
conference on image processing (ICIP). IEEE. 2016, pp. 3464–3468.
[37]
Rudolph Emil Kalman. “A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems”.
In: (1960).
[38]
Nicolai Wojke, Alex Bewley, and Dietrich Paulus. “Simple Online and Realtime Track­
ing with a Deep Association Metric”. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Image Processing (ICIP). IEEE. 2017, pp. 3645–3649. DOI: RyXRRyNfA*ASXkyRdX
3kNeNek.
[39]
Nicolai Wojke and Alex Bewley. “Deep Cosine Metric Learning for Person Re­identification”.
In: 2018 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV).
IEEE. 2018, pp. 748–756. DOI: RyXRRyNfq*oXkyR3Xyyy3d.
[40]
Alexander Hermans*, Lucas Beyer*, and Bastian Leibe. “In Defense of the Triplet
Loss for Person Re­Identification”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.07737 (2017).
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
121
==PAGE:130==
122
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:131==
Appendix A
Acronyms
AI
Artificial intelligence
CEP
Complex Event Processing
CEPC
Complex Event Processing Component
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
CPU
Central Processing Unit
CVC
Computer Vision Component
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
ERP
Enterprise Resource Planning
FSM
Finite State Machines
GPS
Global Positioning System
GPU
Graphics Processing Unit
GUI
Graphical User Interface
HTTP
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
ID
Identification
IoT
Internet of Things
IoU
Intersection over Union
IP
Internet Protocol
IT
Information Technology
LSTM
Long Short­Term Memory
MQTT
Message Queue Telemetry Transport
OPMC
Online Process Mining Component
PAIS
Process Aware Information System
PMTS
Predetermined Motion Time Systems
POC
Proof of Concept
RGB
Red Green Blue
RGB­D
Red Green Blue Depth
ROI
Region of Interest
SAS
Scandinavian Airlines System
SIFT
Scale­Invariant Feature Transform
URL
Uniform Resource Locator
XES
Extensible Event Stream
XML
Extensible Markup Language
YOLO
You Only Look Once
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
123
==PAGE:132==
Appendix B
Siddhi Test Data
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case ID
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
10
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
20
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
30
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
40
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
50
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
60
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
70
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
80
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
Table B.1: Test Data for Airplane Stopped Test
124
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:133==
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
120
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
120
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
120
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
100
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
90
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
80
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
70
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
80
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
60
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
70
e1
Table B.2: Test Data for Airplane Moving Test
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
125
==PAGE:134==
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
170
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
170
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
170
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
170
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
170
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
170
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
71
110
e1
C01G19R0001tow_tractor
1400
70
20
29
170
e1
Table B.3: Test Data for Tow Tractor Connected Test
126
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:135==
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
Table B.4: Test Data for Bridge Connected Test
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
127
==PAGE:136==
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0002bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
70
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0002bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
70
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0002bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
70
e1
Table B.5: Test Data for Two Bridges Connected Test
128
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:137==
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
Table B.6: Bridge Not Connected Test
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
129
==PAGE:138==
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0002bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
70
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0002bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
70
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0002bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
70
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001bridge_connected
400
20
20
120
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
Table B.7: Bridge Not Connected Test, two bridges
130
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:139==
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
10
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
20
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
30
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
40
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
50
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
60
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
70
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
80
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
90
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
100
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
110
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
Table B.8: Test Data for Baggage Ramp Stopped Test
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
131
==PAGE:140==
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
10
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
20
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
30
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
40
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
50
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
60
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
70
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
80
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
90
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
100
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
110
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
120
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
110
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
105
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
100
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
95
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
90
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
85
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
80
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
75
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
70
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
65
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
60
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
55
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
50
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001baggage_ramp
792
33
24
45
90
e1
Table B.9: Test Data for Baggage Ramp Disconnected Test
132
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:141==
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
10
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
20
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
30
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
40
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
50
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
60
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
70
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
80
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
90
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
Table B.10: Test Data for Cargo Ramp Stopped Test
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
133
==PAGE:142==
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
10
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
20
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
30
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
40
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
50
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
60
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
70
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
80
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
90
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
102
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
90
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
80
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
70
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
60
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
50
90
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
120
68
e1
C01G19R0001cargo_ramp
1200
50
24
40
90
e1
Table B.11: Test Data for Cargo Ramp Disconnected Test
134
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:143==
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
Table B.12: Test Data for Catering Truck Connected Test
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
135
==PAGE:144==
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0002catering_truck
1400
70
20
119
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0002catering_truck
1400
70
20
119
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0002catering_truck
1400
70
20
119
100
e1
Table B.13: Test Data for Catering Truck Connected Test, two catering trucks
136
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:145==
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
Table B.14: Test Data for Catering Truck Not Connected Test
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
137
==PAGE:146==
Object
Area
Width
Height
Min X
Min Y
Case
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0002catering_truck
1400
70
20
119
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0002catering_truck
1400
70
20
119
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0002catering_truck
1400
70
20
119
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001catering_truck
1400
70
20
29
100
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
C01G19R0001airplane
3500
70
50
75
75
e1
Table B.15: Test Data for Catering Truck Not Connected Test, two catering trucks
138
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:147==
Appendix C
Siddhi Queries
R
!TT,MK2U^P#D2+iaiQTT2/ ^V
k
j
!TT,/2b+`BTiBQMU^Zm2`B2b 7Q` +iBpBiv ;2M2`iBQM ^V
9
8
!bBMFUivT24^K[ii^-
e
m`H4^i+T,ff#`QF2`X?Bp2K[X+QK,R33j^-
d
iQTB+4]]]/imfB`TQ`ifim`M`QmM/f&&+b2A.''f&&+iBpBiv'']]]-
3
[mHBivXQ7Xb2`pB+2 4 ^k^-
N
!KTUivT2 4 ^i2ti^VV
Ry
/27BM2 bi`2K "2KHBM2ai`2K U+iBpBiv bi`BM; - Q#D2+iA. bi`BM; - +b2A. bi`BM;V
c
RR
Rk
!bQm`+2U
Rj
ivT24^K[ii^-
R9
m`H4 ^i+T,ff#`QF2`X?Bp2K[X+QK,R33j^-
R8
iQTB+4^+pbB//?Bf2p2Mi^-
Re
+H2MXb2bbBQM4^i`m2^-
Rd
[mHBivXQ7Xb2`pB+24 ^y^-
R3
!KTUivT24^tKH^VV
RN
/27BM2 bi`2K *QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K
ky
UpHm2 bi`BM; -`2 HQM;-rB/i? BMi-?2B;?i BMi-KBMnt BMi-KBMnv BMi- +b2A.
bi`BM;Vc
kR
/27BM2 bi`2K ai`BT*K2`A.
kk
UpHm2 bi`BM; -`2 HQM;-rB/i? BMi-?2B;?i BMi-KBMnt BMi-KBMnv BMi- +b2A.
bi`BM;Vc
kj
k9
/27BM2 bi`2K P#D2+iaiQTT2/
k8
UpHm2 bi`BM; -rB/i? BMi-?2B;?i BMi-KBMnt BMi-KBMnv BMi- +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
ke
/27BM2 bi`2K P#D2+iJQpBM;
kd
UpHm2 bi`BM; -rB/i? BMi-?2B;?i BMi-KBMnt BMi-KBMnv BMi- +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
k3
kN
@@`BTHM2 ai`2Kb
jy
/27BM2 bi`2K B`THM2aiQTT2/
jR
UpHm2 bi`BM; -rB/i? BMi-?2B;?i BMi-KBMnt BMi-KBMnv BMi- +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
jk
/27BM2 bi`2K B`THM2aiQTT2/+iBpBiv
jj
UpHm2 bi`BM; - +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
j9
/27BM2 bi`2K B`THM2JQpBM;
j8
UpHm2 bi`BM; -rB/i? BMi-?2B;?i BMi-KBMnt BMi-KBMnv BMi- +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
je
/27BM2 bi`2K B`THM2JQpBM;+iBpBiv
jd
UpHm2 bi`BM; - +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
j3
jN
@@";;;2 _KT ai`2Kb
9y
/27BM2 bi`2K ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/
9R
U pHm2 bi`BM;-rB/i? BMi-?2B;?i BMi-KBMnt BMi-KBMnv BMi- +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
139
==PAGE:148==
9k
/27BM2 bi`2K ";;;2_KTJQpBM;
9j
U pHm2 bi`BM; -rB/i? BMi-?2B;?i BMi-KBMnt BMi-KBMnv BMi- +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
99
/27BM2 bi`2K ";;;2_KTJQpBM;+iBpBiv
98
UpHm2 bi`BM;- +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
9e
9d
@@*`;Q _KT ai`2Kb
93
/27BM2 bi`2K *`;Q_KTaiQTT2/
9N
U pHm2 bi`BM; -rB/i? BMi-?2B;?i BMi-KBMnt BMi-KBMnv BMi- +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
8y
/27BM2 bi`2K *`;Q_KTJQpBM;
8R
U pHm2 bi`BM; -rB/i? BMi-?2B;?i BMi-KBMnt BMi-KBMnv BMi- +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
8k
/27BM2 bi`2K *`;Q_KTJQpBM;+iBpBiv
8j
UpHm2 bi`BM;- +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
89
88
@@"`B/;2 ai`2Kb
8e
/27BM2 bi`2K "`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/U+iBpBiv bi`BM; - +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
8d
/27BM2 bi`2K "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2KUpHm2 bi`BM; - +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
83
8N
@@*i2`BM; h`m+F ai`2Kb
ey
/27BM2 bi`2K *i2`BM;h`m+FLQi*QMM2+i2/U+iBpBiv bi`BM; - +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
eR
/27BM2 bi`2K *i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/ai`2KUpHm2 bi`BM; - +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
ek
/27BM2 bi`2K *i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/U+iBpBiv bi`BM; - +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
ej
e9
@@hQr h`+iQ` ai`2K
e8
/27BM2 bi`2K hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/U+iBpBiv bi`BM; - +b2A. bi`BM;Vc
ee
ed
@@Zm2`B2b
e3
7`QK *QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K
eN
b2H2+i bi`,bm#bi`UpHm2- eV b pHm2- `2 -rB/i? -?2B;?i -KBMnt -KBMnv-
+b2A.
dy
BMb2`i BMiQ ai`BT*K2`A.c
dR
@@S`Q+2bb 1p2Mi Zm2`B2b
dk
T`iBiBQM rBi? Ubi`,+QM+iU+b2A.-pHm2V Q7 *QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2KV
dj
#2;BM
d9
7`QK 2p2`v 2R4*QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K @= 2k4*QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K(B7h?2M1Hb2U2k(
Hbi) Bb MmHH-
d8
Ki?,#bUU2RXKBMntY2RXrB/i?fkV@UKBMntYrB/i?fkVV I 3y M/
de
Ki?,#bUU2RXKBMnvY2RX?2B;?ifkV@UKBMnvY?2B;?ifkVV I 3y-
dd
Ki?,#bUU2k(Hbi)XKBMntY2k(Hbi)XrB/i?fkV@UKBMntYrB/i?fkVV I 3y
M/
d3
Ki?,#bUU2k(Hbi)XKBMnvY2k(Hbi)X?2B;?ifkV@UKBMnvY?2B;?ifkVV I 3y
V)Ik8=
dN
b2H2+i bi`,bm#bi`U2k(Hbi)XpHm2- eV b pHm2-
3y
2k(Hbi)XrB/i? b rB/i?-
3R
2k(Hbi)X?2B;?i b ?2B;?i-
3k
2k(Hbi)XKBMnt b KBMnt-
3j
2k(Hbi)XKBMnv b KBMnv-
39
2k(Hbi)X+b2A. b +b2A.
38
QmiTmi Hbi 2p2`v k8 2p2Mib
3e
BMb2`i
BMiQ P#D2+iaiQTT2/c
3d
2M/c
33
3N
T`iBiBQM rBi? Ubi`,+QM+iU+b2A.-pHm2V Q7 *QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2KV
Ny
#2;BM
NR
7`QK 2p2`v 2R4*QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K @= 2k4*QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K(B7h?2M1Hb2U2k(
Hbi) Bb MmHH-
Nk
Ki?,#bUU2RXKBMntY2RXrB/i?fkV@UKBMntYrB/i?fkVV I 3y M/
Nj
Ki?,#bUU2RXKBMnvY2RXrB/i?fkV@UKBMnvYrB/i?fkVV I 3y-
N9
Ki?,#bUU2k(Hbi)XKBMntY2k(Hbi)XrB/i?fkV@UKBMntYrB/i?fkVV I 3y
M/
N8
Ki?,#bUU2k(Hbi)XKBMnvY2k(Hbi)X?2B;?ifkV@UKBMnvY?2B;?ifkVV I 3yV
) I8= @=
Ne
2j4*QKTmi2`oBbBQMai`2K(B7h?2M1Hb2U2j(Hbi) Bb MmHH-
140
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:149==
Nd
Ki?,#bUU2k(Hbi)XKBMntY2k(Hbi)XrB/i?fkV@UKBMntYrB/i?fkVV =4 8y
Q`
N3
Ki?,#bUU2k(Hbi)XKBMnvY2k(Hbi)X?2B;?ifkV@UKBMnvY?2B;?ifkVV =4
8y-
NN
Ki?,#bUU2j(Hbi)XKBMntY2j(Hbi)XrB/i?fkV@UKBMntYrB/i?fkVV =4 8y
Q`
Ryy
Ki?,#bUU2j(Hbi)XKBMnvY2j(Hbi)X?2B;?ifkV@UKBMnvY?2B;?ifkVV =4
8yV)I8=
RyR
b2H2+i bi`,bm#bi`U2j(Hbi)XpHm2- eV b pHm2-
Ryk
2j(Hbi)XrB/i? b rB/i?-
Ryj
2j(Hbi)X?2B;?i b ?2B;?i -
Ry9
2j(Hbi)XKBMnt b KBMnt-
Ry8
2j(Hbi)XKBMnv b KBMnv-
Rye
2j(Hbi)X+b2A. b +b2A.
Ryd
BMb2`i
BMiQ P#D2+iJQpBM;c
Ry3
2M/c
RyN
RRy
@@"`B/;2 Zm2`B2b
RRR
7`QK 2p2`v 2R4ai`BT*K2`A.(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^X #`B/;2n+QMM2+i2/ ^- pHm2V)
RRk
b2H2+i 2RXpHm2- 2RX+b2A.
RRj
BMb2`i BMiQ "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2Kc
RR9
RR8
T`iBiBQM rBi? UpHm2 Q7 "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2KV
RRe
#2;BM
RRd
7`QK "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2KOrBM/QrXmMB[m2,7B`biUbi`,+QM+iU+b2A.-pHm2V- k
?Qm`V
RR3
b2H2+i ^"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - pHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - +b2A.
RRN
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
Rky
2M/c
RkR
Rkk
T`iBiBQM rBi? Ubi`,+QM+iU+b2A. -pHm2V Q7 "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2KV
Rkj
#2;BM
Rk9
7`QK 2p2`v 2R4"`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2K @=
Rk8
MQi "`B/;2*QMM2+i2/ai`2K 7Q` ky b2+
Rke
a2H2+i ^"`B/;2LQi*QMM2+i2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - 2RXpHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - 2RX+b2A.
b +b2A.
Rkd
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
Rk3
2M/c
RkN
Rjy
@@*i2`BM; h`m+F ai`2Kb
RjR
7`QK 2p2`v ai`BT*K2`A.(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^X +i2`BM;ni`m+F ^- pHm2V)
Rjk
b2H2+i pHm2- +b2A.
Rjj
BMb2`i BMiQ *i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/ai`2Kc
Rj9
Rj8
T`iBiBQM rBi? Ubi`,+QM+iU+b2A. -pHm2V Q7 *i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/ai`2KV
Rje
#2;BM
Rjd
7`QK *i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/ai`2KOrBM/QrXmMB[m2,7B`biUbi`,+QM+iU+b2A.-
pHm2V- k ?Qm`V
Rj3
b2H2+i ^*i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - pHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - +b2A.
RjN
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2K
R9y
2M/c
R9R
R9k
T`iBiBQM rBi? Ubi`,+QM+iU+b2A. -pHm2V Q7 *i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/ai`2KV
R9j
#2;BM
R99
7`QK 2p2`v 2R4*i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/ai`2K @=
R98
MQi *i2`BM;h`m+F*QMM2+i2/ai`2K 7Q` ky b2+
R9e
b2H2+i 2RXpHm2 b +iBpBiv - 2RX+b2A. b +b2A.
R9d
BMb2`i BMiQ *i2`BM;h`m+FLQi*QMM2+i2/c
R93
2M/c
R9N
R8y
7`QK *i2`BM;h`m+FLQi*QMM2+i2/OrBM/QrXmMB[m2,7B`biUbi`,+QM+iU+b2A. -+iBpBivV
- k ?Qm`V
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
141
==PAGE:150==
R8R
b2H2+i ^*i2`BM;h`m+FLQi*QMM2+i2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - +iBpBiv b Q#D2+iA. - +b2A.
R8k
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
R8j
R89
@@B`THM2 Zm2`B2b
R88
7`QK P#D2+iaiQTT2/(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^X B`THM2 ^- pHm2V)
R8e
b2H2+i pHm2-rB/i?-?2B;?i-KBMnt-KBMnv-+b2A.
R8d
BMb2`i
BMiQ B`THM2aiQTT2/c
R83
R8N
7`QK P#D2+iJQpBM;(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^X B`THM2 ^- pHm2V)
Rey
b2H2+i pHm2-rB/i?-?2B;?i-KBMnt-KBMnv-+b2A.
ReR
BMb2`i
BMiQ B`THM2JQpBM;c
Rek
Rej
T`iBiBQM rBi? Ubi`,+QM+iU+b2A.-pHm2V Q7 B`THM2aiQTT2/V
Re9
#2;BM
Re8
7`QK B`THM2aiQTT2/OrBM/QrXmMB[m2,7B`biUpHm2 -k ?Qm`V
Ree
b2H2+i pHm2- +b2A.
Red
BMb2`i BMiQ B`THM2aiQTT2/+iBpBiv
Re3
2M/c
ReN
Rdy
7`QK B`THM2aiQTT2/+iBpBiv
RdR
b2H2+i ^B`THM2aiQTT2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - pHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - +b2A.
Rdk
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
Rdj
Rd9
7`QK B`THM2JQpBM;+iBpBiv
Rd8
b2H2+i ^B`THM2JQpBM; ^ b +iBpBiv - pHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - +b2A.
Rde
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
Rdd
Rd3
@@B7 B`THM2 KQp2b i?2M biQTb `2/Q M B`THM2 biQTT2/ +iBpBiv
RdN
7`QK 2p2`v 2R 4 "2KHBM2ai`2K(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^B`THM2JQpBM; ^- +iBpBivV) @=
R3y
2k4B`THM2aiQTT2/(2RXQ#D2+iA. 44 pHm2 M/ 2RX+b2A. 44 +b2A.)
R3R
b2H2+i ^B`THM2aiQTT2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - 2k(Hbi)XpHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - 2k(Hbi
)X+b2A.
R3k
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
R3j
R39
@@B7 B`THM2 biQTb i?2M KQp2b `2/Q M B`THM2 KQpBM; +iBpBiv
R38
7`QK 2p2`v 2R 4 "2KHBM2ai`2K(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/ ^- +iBpBivV)
@=
R3e
2k4B`THM2JQpBM;
R3d
b2H2+i ^B`THM2JQpBM; ^ b +iBpBiv - 2k(Hbi)XpHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - 2k(Hbi)X
+b2A.
R33
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
R3N
RNy
@@";;;2 _KT Zm2`B2b
RNR
7`QK P#D2+iaiQTT2/(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^X #;;;2n`KT ^- pHm2V)
RNk
b2H2+i pHm2- rB/i?- ?2B;?i- KBMnt- KBMnv-+b2A.
RNj
BMb2`i BMiQ ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/c
RN9
RN8
7`QK P#D2+iJQpBM;(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^X #;;;2n`KT ^- pHm2V)
RNe
b2H2+i pHm2- rB/i?- ?2B;?i- KBMnt- KBMnv- +b2A.
RNd
BMb2`i BMiQ ";;;2_KTJQpBM;c
RN3
RNN
@@B7 #;;;2 `KT KQp2b i?2M biQTb `2/Q M #;;;2 `KT biQTT2/ +iBpBiv
kyy
7`QK 2p2`v 2R 4 "2KHBM2ai`2K(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^";;;2_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/ ^-
+iBpBivV) @=
kyR
2k4";;;2_KTaiQTT2/(U2RXQ#D2+iA. 44 pHm2 M/ 2RX+b2A. 44 +b2A.V)
kyk
b2H2+i ^";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - 2k(Hbi)XpHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - 2k(
Hbi)X+b2A.
kyj
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
ky9
ky8
@@B7 #;;;2 `KT KQp2b i?2M biQTb `2/Q M #;;;2 `KT biQTT2/ +iBpBiv
kye
7`QK 2p2`v 2R 4 "2KHBM2ai`2K(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ ^- +iBpBivV)
@=
142
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:151==
kyd
2k4";;;2_KTaiQTT2/(2RXQ#D2+iA. 44 pHm2 M/ 2RX+b2A. 44 +b2A.)IR8= @=
ky3
2j4";;;2_KTJQpBM;(2RXQ#D2+iA. 44 pHm2 M/ 2RX+b2A. 44 +b2A.)IRy=
kyN
b2H2+i ^";;;2_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - 2j(Hbi)XpHm2 b Q#D2+iA. -
2j(Hbi)X+b2A.
kRy
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
kRR
kRk
7`QK ";;;2_KTaiQTT2/OrBM/QrXmMB[m2,7B`biUbi`,+QM+iU+b2A. - pHm2V -k ?Qm`V
kRj
b2H2+i ^";;;2_KTaiQTT2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - pHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - +b2A.
kR9
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
kR8
kRe
@@*`;Q _KT Zm2`B2b
kRd
7`QK P#D2+iaiQTT2/(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^X +`;Qn`KT ^- pHm2V)
kR3
b2H2+i pHm2- rB/i?- ?2B;?i- KBMnt- KBMnv- +b2A.
kRN
BMb2`i BMiQ *`;Q_KTaiQTT2/c
kky
kkR
7`QK P#D2+iJQpBM;(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^X +`;Qn`KT ^- pHm2V)
kkk
b2H2+i pHm2- rB/i?- ?2B;?i- KBMnt- KBMnv- +b2A.
kkj
BMb2`i BMiQ *`;Q_KTJQpBM;c
kk9
kk8
7`QK *`;Q_KTaiQTT2/OrBM/QrXmMB[m2,7B`biUbi`,+QM+iU+b2A. -pHm2V-k ?Qm`V
kke
b2H2+i ^*`;Q_KTaiQTT2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - pHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - +b2A.
kkd
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
kk3
kkN
7`QK *`;Q_KTJQpBM;+iBpBivOrBM/QrXmMB[m2,7B`biUbi`,+QM+iU+b2A. -pHm2V- k
?Qm`V
kjy
b2H2+i ^*`;Q_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - pHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - +b2A.
kjR
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
kjk
kjj
@@B7 #;;;2 `KT KQp2b i?2M biQTb `2/Q M #;;;2 `KT biQTT2/ +iBpBiv
kj9
7`QK 2p2`v 2R 4 "2KHBM2ai`2K(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^*`;Q_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/ ^- +iBpBiv
V) @=
kj8
2k4*`;Q_KTaiQTT2/(U2RXQ#D2+iA. 44 pHm2 M/ 2RX+b2A. 44 +b2A.V)IR8=
kje
b2H2+i ^*`;Q_KTaiQTT2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - 2k(Hbi)XpHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - 2k(Hbi
)X+b2A.
kjd
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
kj3
kjN
@@B7 #;;;2 `KT KQp2b i?2M biQTb `2/Q M #;;;2 `KT biQTT2/ +iBpBiv
k9y
7`QK 2p2`v 2R 4 "2KHBM2ai`2K(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^*`;Q_KTaiQTT2/ ^- +iBpBivV) @=
k9R
2k4*`;Q_KTaiQTT2/(2RXQ#D2+iA. 44 pHm2 M/ 2RX+b2A. 44 +b2A.)IR8= @=
k9k
2j4*`;Q_KTJQpBM;(2RXQ#D2+iA. 44 pHm2 M/ 2RX+b2A. 44 +b2A.)IRy=
k9j
b2H2+i ^*`;Q_KT.Bb+QMM2+i2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - 2j(Hbi)XpHm2 b Q#D2+iA. - 2j
(Hbi)X+b2A.
k99
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
k98
k9e
@@hQr h`+iQ` Zm2`B2b
k9d
7`QK ai`BT*K2`A.(`2;2t,Ki+?2bU^X iQrni`+iQ` ^- pHm2V M/ +QmMiUV = 8)O
rBM/QrXiBK2URy b2+QM/bV
k93
a2H2+i pHm2 b +iBpBiv - +b2A.
k9N
BMb2`i BMiQ hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/c
k8y
k8R
T`iBiBQM rBi? Ubi`,+QM+iU+b2A. -+iBpBivV Q7 hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/V
k8k
#2;BM
k8j
7`QK hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/OrBM/QrXmMB[m2,7B`biUbi`,+QM+iU+b2A. -+iBpBivV-
R ?Qm`V
k89
b2H2+i ^hQrh`+iQ`*QMM2+i2/ ^ b +iBpBiv - +iBpBiv b Q#D2+iA. - +b2A.
k88
BMb2`i BMiQ "2KHBM2ai`2Kc
k8e
2M/c
Listing C.1: Siddhi Queries
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
143
==PAGE:152==
144
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
==PAGE:153==
Appendix D
Gantt chart
Figure D.1: Project Gantt chart
Online process mining in video streams using computer vision
145
==PAGE:154==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
rrrX+QKTmi2X/imX/F
