==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Entity-guided Supervision for OpenQA in
Medicine
Made in Cooperation with FindZebra
Andreas Geert Motzfeldt (s154097)
& Ida Riis Jensen (s161777)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Open-Domain Question Answering (OpenQA) techniques have mainly been inves-
tigated in general domains.
Typically, a BERT model is adopted to learn dense
representations of questions and documents for semantic matching. Extending recent
state-of-the-art approaches to medical professions confronts many profound diﬃcul-
ties. Previous work mainly focuses on short factoid questions, to which the answers
are concise, which is rarely the case in medicine. Another hurdle is for systems to deal
with disambiguate medical terminology. Moreover, it is challenging to train BERT
eﬀectively due to limited training data. This thesis addresses these challenges by
proposing an entity-guided supervision framework, called EWQA, improving current
weak-supervision strategies using entity recognition models. When evaluated on a
medical OpenQA task, our results indicate that (1) weak-supervision strategies are
ineﬀective, (2) a simple sampling technique improves baseline results by 2%-7% abso-
lute in terms of end-to-end QA accuracy, and (3) our procedure of building a corpus
of biomedical Wikipedia articles helps establish new state-of-the-art performance on
the multiple-choice MedQA task1.
1The code and trained models will be released at https://github.com/vlievin/fz-openqa later
this year.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis is a 30 ECTS points Master Thesis written at the Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark to fulﬁll
the requirements for acquiring a Master’s degree in Mathematical Modeling and Com-
puting and Business Analytics, respectively. The work has been a joint project with
Ph.D. student Valentin Liévin and was conducted under the supervision of Professor
Ole Winther and at Cognitive Systems.
Kongens Lyngby, January 22, 2022
Andreas Geert Motzfeldt (s154097) & Ida Riis Jensen (s161777)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
First, we would like to thank our supervisor, Ole Winther, for allowing us to par-
ticipate in a research project within the ﬁeld of open-domain question answering.
It has been much fun and has sparked an eternal interest in natural language pro-
cessing. Second, his Ph.D. student, Valentin Liévin, has been the man of the hour,
giving us invaluable insight into deploying and publishing machine learning projects
for research. Without Valentin, we would not have accomplished what we did in this
project. We want to express our gratitude towards Valentin, who has helped with any
issue within a day’s notice. Lastly, we want to thank friends and family for accept-
ing our absence and supporting us in our immersion to bridge modern open-domain
question answering to medical professions.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgments
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Deep Learning
6
2.1
Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Learning in Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Seq2Seq Learning, Attention, and Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Deep Natural Language Processing
14
3.1
BERT: Bidirectional Encoder Representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Open-Domain Question Answering (OpenQA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.1
Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC)
. . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
Information Retrieval (IR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.3
End-to-end Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Related Work
20
4.1
DrQA: Reading Wikipedia to Answer Open-Domain Questions . . . .
20
4.2
ORQA: Latent Retrieval for Weakly Supervised Open Domain Question
Answering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
DPR: Dense Passage Retrieval for Open-Domain Question Answering
22
4.4
RocketQA: An Optimized Training Approach to Dense Passage Re-
trieval for Open-Domain Question Answering . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
REALM: Retrieval-Augmented Language Model Pre-Training . . . . .
24
4.6
ColBERT: Eﬃcient and Eﬀective Passage Search via Contextualized
Late Interaction over BERT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.7
ColBERT-QA: Relevance-guided Supervision for OpenQA with ColBERT 26
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
5
Entity-guided Weak-supervision QA
28
5.1
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1.1
Question, Answer and Document Encoders
. . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.2
Reader Component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.3
Retriever Component
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Learning to Retrieve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.1
Generating Noisy Targets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.2
Relevance Classiﬁers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Additional Components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3.1
ElasticSearch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3.2
FAISS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Data
37
6.1
Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.1.1
MedQA Task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.1.2
PubMedQA Task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Medical Corpora . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2.1
MedQA Corpus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2.2
FindZebra Corpus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2.3
MedxWiki Corpus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Results
41
7.1
Main Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
8
Discussion
46
9
Conclusion
50
Bibliography
52
A
MedQA Data
55
B
Relevance Classifiers
56
C
Choice of Length
59
D
False Positives
60
E
Overfitting
62
F
Corpora Examination
63
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In the past decades, the ﬁeld of machine learning has ﬂourished. Supervised learning
has been the key driver for training specialist models that achieve excellent perfor-
mance trained on a speciﬁc task.
Unfortunately, it has become a bottleneck for
building multifunctional intelligent models qualiﬁed to acquire new skills without
massive amounts of labeled data. Orders of magnitude more data are necessary to
push machine learning to higher abilities, and labeling such data will be costly.
Francois Chollet, a French engineer, deﬁnes intelligence as the eﬃciency to transform
new data into new skills [Cho19]. This common-sense ability is taken for granted by
humans but has remained an open challenge in the research ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence. Common sense enables humans to transfer learning from one skill to another,
which self-supervised learning (SSL) reﬂects. Here a model is ﬁrst pre-trained on large
unlabeled data over diﬀerent SSL techniques. For then to be further ﬁne-tuned on
a smaller labeled dataset over some downstream task [BERT]. A standard learning
technique of SSL is to hide parts of a sentence and then predict the hidden words from
the remaining words. Subsequently, the model learns a language representation that
entails the meaning of words, their syntactic role, and the context of the sentence.
This learning technique has proved to capture a signiﬁcant amount of world knowl-
edge. For example, the pre-trained language model BERT solves the missing word in
the following sentence: "The
is the currency of the United Kingdom"
(answer: "pound") [REALM]. SSL has shown great success in advancing the ﬁeld
of natural language processing (NLP), yielding models such as [BERT], [RoBERTa],
and [DistilBERT].
Nevertheless, how can one evaluate a machine’s ability to capture common sense?
A popular method to measure a model’s ability to store common sense is Open-
Domain Question Answering (OpenQA). OpenQA combines information retrieval
(IR) and machine reading comprehension (MRC) in a single task. Ultimately, it allows
answering factual questions given a vast unstructured collection of textual evidence1.
Over the past few years, there has been a surge in the number of released datasets ap-
plicable for developing OpenQA systems [Zhu21]. Recent breakthroughs in training
1We use the term "evidence" interchangeable with the words "document" or "passage" to refer to
some span of text from a knowledge corpus, not necessarily a whole article.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
such systems often rely on the SSL technique, weak-supervision. The general approach
generates noisy targets to provide supervisory signals for the training data in a su-
pervised setting by a hard-coded heuristic. For the OpenQA task, datasets revolve
around trivia-knowledge, where answer strings are concise (e.g., "Barack Obama",
"Tokyo"). Here weak-supervision often operates by (1) retrieving textual evidence for
each question and (2) labeling each evidence as relevant to the answer (e.g., positive
or negative) based on, for example, whether the answer is found in the evidence (ex-
act match). For the medical domain, such a strategy is bound to fail caused by the
length of answer strings being in conjunction with the ambiguousness of the medical
language. For instance, in [MedQA], the ﬁrst published OpenQA dataset for medical
problems (MedQA task), the term Post polio syndrome (PPS) may be expressed in
the corpus as post poliomyelitis muscular atrophies, post-poliomyelitis syndrome or
post poliomyelitis syndrome.
This thesis will focus on deep learning techniques for the OpenQA task within the
medical domain (MedOpenQA). The objective is to develop a system to solve the
presumably real-world scenario of the MedQA task, used to evaluate a model’s ability
to make patient-centered clinical decisions. Thousands of patients get poor treatment
based on their symptoms because doctors overlook or take too long to determine the
diagnosis. In the last ten years, 7,600 patients got compensation from the Danish
healthcare system for complications caused by a diagnostic error. Over 600 of those
cases led to the death of the patient, which has cost the taxpayers dearly, besides the
patient who pays the absolute highest price [PS19].
We attempt to (1) improve upon current weak-supervision strategies using entity
recognition models, (2) show that supervised ﬁne-tuning of the retriever component
is beneﬁcial, and (3) demonstrate that coupling both strategies allows us to challenge
state-of-the-art (SOTA) results in the MedQA task. In the following, we list a set of
sub-goals that are needed to realize to obtain the main objectives:
1. Get familiarized with the research literature on OpenQA and the codebase of
those systems achieving SOTA performance.
2. Deﬁne and improve weak-supervision techniques to generate training data for
ﬁne-tuning a BERT model into a retriever component.
3. Implement the retriever-reader architecture of existing OpenQA literature built
upon the usage of BERT models.
The main focus will be on the retriever
component, while the reader component will follow [MoP].
4. Evaluate the architecture concerning the end-to-end QA accuracy based on the
MedQA task.
5. Based on the obtained results, present an insightful analysis that can become
useful as a potential future reference for similar projects.
==PAGE:11==
1 Introduction
3
Outline
This thesis consists of 9 chapters:
Chapter 2
Presents the theory on deep learning focusing on neural networks
and the Transformer model.
Chapter 3
Explains current cutting-edge deep learning techniques in the ﬁeld
of natural language processing.
Chapter 4
Outlines the state-of-the-art approaches to OpenQA chronological.
Chapter 5
Describes our proposed entity-guided weak-supervision framework
for OpenQA in medicine.
Chapter 6
Introduces the benchmarks and corpora used to evaluate our frame-
work.
Chapter 7
Summarizes the experiment results.
Chapter 8
Discusses the insights obtained from Chapter 7.
Chapter 9
Concludes on the results and presents ideas for future work.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
List of Abbreviations
Due to frequent use of the following abbreviations, this list can be used as clariﬁcation
of concepts. The abbreviations will always be explained at their ﬁrst mention.
BERT
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers, a general-purpose lan-
guage model to solve varieties of NLP tasks
BM25
Okapi BM25 (best matching 25) is a bag-of-words retrieval function ranking a set of
documents based on the query terms appearing in each document.
Corpus
A vast collection of unstructured documents.
ES
ElasticSearch is a search engine based on the Lucene library.
Evidence
We use the term evidence interchangeable with the terms document or passage to
refer to some span of text from a knowledge corpus, not necessarily a whole article.
FAISS
A library for eﬃcient similarity search.
IR
Information retrieval.
LSTM
Long short-term memory, a type of RNN, capable of learning long-term dependencies.
MedOpenQA
Medical Open-Domain Question Answering.
MedQA
A task to evaluate a models ability to make patient-centered clinical decisions.
MIPS
Maximum Inner Product Search, an algorithm to search pre encoded corpus.
MLM
Masked language model, a learning technique of SSL.
MRC
Machine Reading Comprehension, a method to scan document and extract meaning
from the text.
NLP
Natural language processing, a branch of computer science that focuses on bridging
natural language and computers.
NSP
Next sentence prediction, a learning technique of SSL.
OpenQA
Open-Domain Question Answering, task of answering questions given a wide unstruc-
tured collection of documents.
RNN
Recurrent neural network, a class of neural networks that allows to model sequences.
SOTA
State-of-the-art results, used to benchmark machine learning tasks.
SSL
Self-Supervised Learning, a learning method of machine learning.
TF-
IDF
Term frequency-inverse document frequency.
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
5
Mathematical Notation
Due to frequent use of the following mathematical notations, this list can be used
as clariﬁcation of notations. The notations will always be explained at their ﬁrst
mention.
• Vectors are indicated by bold lowercase letters e.g. x
• Matrices by bold uppercase letters e.g. X
• q: a question
• d: an evidence document from the corpus
• d` : a positive evidence document from the corpus
• d´ : a negative evidence document from the corpus
• a: an answer
• a‹: the most appropriate answer
• A “ ra1, . . . , aP s: a set of P answers in a multiple choice setup
• x “ pq, d, aq: a triplet of query, evidence and answer
• y1:N: batch of N vectors
• yi: target
• C “ td1, . . . , dNu: corpus of documents
• X: the embedded corpus of documents
• RT ˆh: vector space with dimension T ˆ h
• r¨ ; ¨s: concatenation operator
• hy “ BERTpyq: encoding of the variable y
• hi: the i-th component of the vector h.
• pθpa|q, dq: Reader component of the OpenQA system
• pϕpd|qq: Retriever component of the OpenQA system
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2
Deep Learning
Deep learning is a subset of machine learning referring to training neural networks,
sometimes extensive (deep) neural networks. Recent breakthroughs in training sys-
tems mimicking human behavior are a result of deep learning techniques ([Lil20]).
To a large extent, these breakthroughs are attributable to the architecture of neural
networks that learns features directly from the structure of input data without the
need for hand-engineer features. For example, in the use case of facial recognition, the
neural network perceives low-level features such as textures and edges in the picture,
then projects this information into higher-level features such as nose or mouth, then
onto a complete representation of a face solely processing the pixels. This chapter
will introduce the Transformer model in detail by ﬁrst elucidating a neural network
and explaining how it evolved into the current state-of-the-art transformer-based so-
lutions.
2.1
Neural Networks
A neural network takes a sequence of inputs and predicts outputs. The name neural
networks and their structure are inspired by how, we believe, the human brain learns.
The brain learns by reﬁning the synaptic connections between neurons. In Figure 2.1
(b), we depict the architecture of a neural network where neurons are nodes and edges
are the synaptic connections, also referred to as weights. Note that nodes and weights
are real numbers, where we call the number of a node its activation. So to say, the
node is turned on for high activations and turned oﬀfor low activations.
A network comprises numerous nodes in diﬀerent layers connected by weights, where
input data go through the input layer, hidden layer(s), and output layer. The way the
network operates activations in one layer impacts the activations of the next layer. A
particular pattern of activations in the input layer causes some speciﬁc pattern in the
hidden layer, producing a pattern in the output layer. Learning works by processing
input data updating the activations each time. Nodes, except input nodes, have an
associated error term, and updates drive towards a smaller error.
Perceptrons are central to neural networks. In Figure 2.1 (a), we depict a perceptron
where input nodes represent feature values, edges are weights, and the output node
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Neural Networks
7
produces an activation.
Here we have three binary input features x1, x2 and x3.
Then, training methods assign a real numbered weight w1, w2 or w3 to input features,
related to their importance in contributing to a better output value y1. The output,
0 or 1, depends on the weighted sum ř
j xjwj is less or greater than some threshold.
Figure 2.1: A perceptron and a simple feed-forward neural network.
Neural networks modify perceptrons in two important ways: (1) by introducing non-
linearity and (2) using multiple layers.
Non-linearity is achieved by a function ϕ
accepting any input value and maps it to a ﬁxed range (e.g., 0 and 1), which allows
the network to learn more complex relationships between the nodes. We call this an
activation function and alter the perceptron, though following the same structure. In
Figure 2.1 (b), instead of computing the output value directly from the input values,
a hidden layer is introduced. Each activation of a hidden note hi is the combination
of weighted input nodes following (2.1), and computing the combination of weighted
hidden nodes produces the output activation yi following (2.2). Note that we use wij
to present weights connecting input nodes with hidden nodes, ukj to present weights
connecting hidden nodes with output nodes, and b as the bias of a speciﬁc layer. The
bias is added to allow non-input nodes to shift the activation function.
hj “ ϕp
ÿ
i
xiwij ` bhq
(2.1)
yk “ ϕp
ÿ
j
hjukj ` byq
(2.2)
Commonly used activation functions are Sigmoid, Rectiﬁed Linear (ReLU), and Soft-
max. Sigmoid is a S-shaped function ensuring that a small change to the input value
will only cause a small change to the output. ReLU is a piece-wise linear function
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Deep Learning
outputting the input if it is positive and otherwise output zero, and Softmax is a non-
linear function that normalizes the network’s output to a probability distribution.
Sigmoidpxq “
1
1 ` e´x ,
ReLUpxq “ maxp0, xq,
Softmaxpxq “
exi
řK
j“1 exj for 1, . . . , K
Note that computation throughout a neural network is optimized by combining
weighted nodes into vectors and matrices.
Equation (2.3) shows a more eloquent
notation for the activation of a given hidden node h in layer l:
hplq
j
“ ϕ
¨
˚
˚
˚
˚
˝
»
———–
w11
w12
x13
. . .
w1n
w21
w22
x23
. . .
w2n
...
...
...
...
...
wk1
wk2
xk3
. . .
wkn
ﬁ
ﬃﬃﬃﬂ
»
————–
hpl´1q
1
hpl´1q
2...
hpl´1q
n
ﬁ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬂ
»
———–
b1
b2
...
bn
ﬁ
ﬃﬃﬃﬂ
˛
‹‹‹‹‚
“ ϕ
´
Whpl´1q
j
` b
¯
.
(2.3)
The combination of hidden layers and activation functions reduces the need for hand-
engineer features. Instead of manually deﬁning useful input features, updating the
activation value discovers them during training. Conceptually, weights are initialized
randomly, thus, yielding a random pattern of activations. The process of passing
data through a neural network is called a forward pass.
After each forward pass,
the predicted output is compared to the target output, and the network’s error is
logged to update weights and biases, yielding a new pattern. Deﬁning a function that
broadcasts a global scalar representing the network’s overall performance will help
ﬁnd the proper weights and biases.
2.1.1
Learning in Neural Networks
The neural network is nothing but a function given activation functions, weights, and
biases. Learning uses a cost function and the backpropagation algorithm to update
weights and biases. The choice of cost function depends on the speciﬁc modeling task
and, hence, the output layer conﬁguration. A loss function captures the performance
of a single input sample, while the cost function is the average of the loss functions
of the entire input sample.
2.1.1.1
Loss/Cost Function
We assume the training data to be D “ tX, yu and constitutes of N identical indepen-
dent distributed (i.i.d.) input pairs pxi, yiq. The object is to ﬁnd a set of weights and
biases θ that maximizes the likelihood of the observed training data, PpX|y, θq also
referred to as the maximum likelihood estimate. Since the observed training samples
are i.i.d., the likelihood can be calculated as the product of the likelihoods:
PpX|y, θq “
N
ź
i“1
ppyi|xi, θq.
(2.4)
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Neural Networks
9
For the maximum likelihood function, the probabilities tend to be very small, why
the logarithmic scale is applied to improve numerical stability and turn the product
into a summation:
log PpX|y, θq “ log
N
ź
i“1
ppyi|xi, θq
(2.5)
“ N
N
N
ÿ
i“1
log ppyi|xi, θq.
(2.6)
The aim is to achieve an expectation of the maximum likelihood why (2.5) is multiplied
by 1 (N{N). The probability of sampling xi is deﬁned as ppxiq “ 1{N leading to:
log PpX|y, θq “ N
N
ÿ
i“1
ppxiq log ppyi|xi, θq
(2.7)
“ NEppxq rlog ppy|x, θqs .
(2.8)
Since (2.8) 9 Eppxq rlog ppy|x, θqs, an unbiased estimate of log PpX|y, θq can be deﬁned
using M ! N data points:
l :“ N
M
ÿ
i“1
ppxiq log ppyi|xi, θq
(2.9)
“ ´Hpppxq, ppyi|xi, θqq.
(2.10)
Thus, we can divide N into M mini-batches yielding a signiﬁcant computational
speed up leading to the deﬁnition of the Cross-Entropy in (2.10). The cross-entropy
requires a probability distribution from the output layer, which is why we, for this
thesis, apply the Softmax function in the last layer.
Cpy, ˆyq “ ´ 1
M
ÿ
M
ÿ
j
ryj logp ˆyjq ` p1 ´ yjq logp1 ´ ˆyjqs
(2.11)
Here, M is the total number of samples in a batch, j is the index of an output node
in a multi-class setting, yj is the desired output activation, and ˆyj is the outputted
probability.
2.1.1.2
Gradient Descent and Backpropagation
Learning in neural networks comes down to ﬁnding the minimum of the loss function,
which the algorithm gradient descent allows us to, also referred to as the optimizer.
The aim is to update the weights and biases given the cost function’s output. Recall
that (2.11) quantiﬁes how well we are achieving this goal, where C becomes small
(C « 0) when the outputted probabilities approximate the desired output. Hence,
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Deep Learning
reaching a minimum of C is crucial, and while a global minimum is ideal, most
attempts will end with a local minimum. Subsequently, knowing the direction of the
descent is a requirement for gradient descent to tell which direction will decrease C
most quickly.
Taking the derivative of (2.11) gives us the direction of the steepest ascent, in simple
terms, the change in cost ∆C. Introducing the change in the direction of two weights
written as ∆w for the step and w for the direction, let us change ∆C using the formula
of diﬀerentials as follows:
∆C « BC
Bw1
∆w1 ` BC
Bw2
∆w2
(2.12)
« ∇C ‚ ∆w,
(2.13)
where ∆w ” p∆w1, ∆w2qT is the position of the change, and ∇C ”
´
BC
Bw1 , BC
Bw2
¯T
denotes the gradient of the output with respect to the weights w. This means that
(2.13) reﬂects how the change in cost ∆C is deﬁned by a combination of directions
and positions. Note that this procedure is also applied to the biases of the network.
However, as mentioned earlier, the aim is to reach minima, why ∆C must be negative,
as moving downwards. Thus, we introduce ´η:
∆w “ ´η∇C,
(2.14)
where η deﬁnes the learning rate, i.e., the size of the step we want to go in the direction
of ´∇C. The rate is crucial to the learning setup and can save much computation
conﬁguring the appropriate rate. A too high rate can oscillate a step, i.e., too big steps
circumnavigate the minima. While a too small rate results in minor improvements,
i.e., slow learning. Note that for this thesis, the variant stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) is used. SGD computes the gradient of the cost (2.11), i.e., the gradient is
determined for each mini-batch instead of the sum of the gradients.
The network is then trained always to descend ever closer to minima. Though, recall
that gradient descent requires the gradients of the cost function. Thus, a backpropaga-
tion algorithm is often applied to compute vast amounts of gradients fast. Backprop-
agation is viewed as the most successful learning procedure and has been the main
driver of recent improvements in deep learning [Lil20]. As seen in [Agg18], backprop-
agation computes the loss function’s gradient layer by layer, where the computation
of gradients starts from the output layer and works it way back through the hidden
layer(s).
Vanilla neural networks have achieved excellent performance on challenging learning
tasks, especially when large labeled training sets are available. Despite their ﬂexibility,
the architecture cannot capture sequence to sequence learning. They can only be
applied to problems whose inputs and targets encode to vectors of ﬁxed dimensionality
[Sut14].
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Seq2Seq Learning, Attention, and Transformers
11
2.2
Seq2Seq Learning, Attention, and Transformers
Seq2Seq (sequence to sequence) learning comes from the ﬁeld of machine translation,
intending to transform an input sequence to a new one where both being of arbitrary
lengths [Sut14]. The commonplace of Seq2Seq learning is an encoder-decoder archi-
tecture as seen in Figure 2.2 (a). The encoder network (e.g., RNN, LSTM) reads
the input sequence, and the decoder network (e.g., RNN, LSTM) uses the output
activations of the encoder to extract an output sequence. The hope is that this ﬁxed-
length vector encodes all information about the input sequence for the decoder to
generate the target sentence. The left-to-right architecture works well with shorter
sequences, where the latest information is valued proportionally higher. However, it
can lead to limitations for tasks, where it is crucial to incorporate and retain informa-
tion from both directions. Moreover, it tends to forget the ﬁrst part once it completes
processing longer sequences, known as the long-dependency problem [Cho14].
Figure 2.2: Seq2Seq learning with an encoder-decoder architecture
Figure adapted from [Cha21]
[Bah16] mitigates this problem by introducing the Attention mechanism which is one
of the most inﬂuential ideas in deep learning. The Attention mechanism extends on
the encoder-decoder architecture, as shown in Figure 2.2 (b), by letting the decoder
search the input elements at every time step t to estimate their importance to a
prediction. This part-by-part processing of sequences is much more related to how
the human brain interprets a sequence. Attention computes a set of weights aij, one
for each input element, telling the decoder how much attention it should allocate to
an element when predicting the output element yt. The decoder is then trained to
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Deep Learning
predict yt given these weights, forming a context vector cj “ řt
i“1 aijhi, together
with all the previous hidden states of the decoder ts1, . . . , st´1u [Bah16]. The key
takeaway is that this mechanism allows the model to pay attention to diﬀerent local
windows of the input sequence when generating a speciﬁc output element.
The authors of [Vas17] have proposed a network architecture based solely on attention
mechanisms, namely the Transformer model, dispensing with the sequential way of
processing input samples. It employs an encoder-decoder architecture similar to the
ones in Figure 2.2. However, the diﬀerence is that the input sequence can be passed
in parallel, as seen in Figure 2.3, the Transformer model has no concept of time steps.
Instead, it employs a positional encoding to capture the position of an element in the
input sequence.
Figure 2.3: The model architecture of the Transformer.
Figure adapted from [Vas17].
Encoder The encoder is illustrated to the left in Figure 2.3, where an input sequence
goes through an embedding layer and a positional encoding before getting to the
encoding layer. It is a stack of multi-headed attention, followed by a fully connected
neural network. In Figure 2.4 (b), we depict multi-headed attention, which applies
a certain attention mechanism, namely self-attention, enabling each input element
to associate itself with other input elements.
Figure 2.5 exempliﬁes this where a
model can learn to associate the word "getting" with "is" and "food". Self-attention
also enables a model to learn when a speciﬁc input structure reﬂects, for example, a
question or a document.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Seq2Seq Learning, Attention, and Transformers
13
Figure 2.4: The attention mechanisms in the
Transformer model. Figure adapted from [Vas17].
Figure 2.5: An example of
self-attention.
Self-attention builds on: a query Q, a key K, and a value vector V .
The three
inputs are adopted from information retrieval (IR). One can view Q as a question
that a search engine queries against a set of documents K, and V represents the
most relevant documents. Using Q, K and V , self-attention is then computed as a
scaled-dot product depicted in Figure 2.4 (a):
AttentionpQ, K, V q “ softmax
ˆQ ‚ KT
?dk
˙
V,
(2.15)
where dk denotes the dimension of Q and K. As seen in Figure 2.4 (b), each input
element is represented by N vectors before applying self-attention, which is why we
call it multi-head attention. Using Q, K, and V , each input element outputs a set of
attention weights before a concatenation layer encompassing the information into a
single vector going through a ﬁnal linear layer.
Decoder The decoder illustrated to the right in Figure 2.3 follows a similar struc-
ture but modiﬁes the ﬁrst multi-headed attention layer by encompassing a masking
mechanism.
The decoder sequentially generates target element by target element.
Thus, masking restricts it to only attending to previous elements. The second multi-
headed attention, also called encoder-decoder attention, uses the encoder outputs Q
and K, and the decoder’s masked attention weights as values V . This mechanism
allows the decoder to compute the relationship between input elements and target
elements. The decoder creates a ﬁnal prediction using linear and softmax layers. This
prediction then acts as input to the decoder for the next prediction until the target
sequence ends.
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3
Deep Natural
Language Processing
Deep learning techniques have become an essential building block for solving NLP
tasks, such as machine translation, speech recognition, and question answering [Gra12].
Leading us to the OpenQA task, where the goal is to output the correct answer a to
an input question q given a large knowledge corpus C (e.g., Wikipedia). The purpose
of this chapter is to introduce relevant techniques within the ﬁeld of deep learning in
context to the OpenQA task substantial for our implementation presented in Chap-
ter 5.
This chapter introduces the transformer-based BERT model, a ubiquitous
baseline in NLP tasks, before outlining the OpenQA task in detail.
3.1
BERT: Bidirectional Encoder Representations
[BERT] introduces a new language representation model, obtaining state-of-the-art
results on eleven downstream tasks. BERT stands for Bidirectional Encoder Repre-
sentations from Transformers, employing only an encoder as seen in Figure 2.3. This
allows BERT to apply two distinct training schemes: (1) an unsupervised one for pre-
training, and (2) a supervised one for ﬁne-tuning on a downstream task. Pre-trained
BERT models are accessible out-of-the-box and can be applied on a supervised task
with minor modiﬁcations, which eliminates a need for the almost unattainable costly
pre-training resources.
BERT modiﬁes the embedding layer of the Transformer model using both token em-
beddings, segment embeddings, and positional embeddings. The segment embeddings
allow BERT to distinguish between a pair of input sequences. Given a sentence of
input tokens, a classiﬁcation token [CLS] and a special token [SEP] are added to the
front and end of the input examples, respectively. The output layer corresponding to
the [CLS] token intends to aggregate input tokens into a sentence representation ap-
plied for classiﬁcation tasks, while the [SEP] token is a separator token. Pre-training
a BERT model involves millions of words from books and articles applying two unsu-
pervised tasks:
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Open-Domain Question Answering (OpenQA)
15
1. Masked language modeling (MLM): A given percentage of the input sentence
is masked at random, for then, to predict those masked tokens. In practice,
masking replaces tokens with a [MASK] token. The predicted output of masked
tokens results from a softmax function over the vocabulary.
Note that the
[MASK] token is not part of the ﬁne-tuning scheme. Thus, MLM pre-training
starts by masking 15% of the tokens at random to allow BERT for ﬁne-tuning.
These masked tokens are either replaced with (1) a [MASK] token 80% of the
time, (2) a random token 10% of the time, or (3) the unchanged masked token
rest of the time.
2. Next Sentence Prediction (NSP): Many downstream tasks involve a relationship
between two sentences. BERT is pre-trained to classify whether sentence B
follows sentence A. Only the [CLS] token is used for this classiﬁcation task,
where 50% of the time B is the actual next sentence and 50% of the time B is
a random sentence. The model is then pre-trained on this binarized task.
Pre-trained BERT models are expensive, comprising at least a hundred million pa-
rameters and a dozen layers. However, BERT can seamlessly be further ﬁne-tuned
by adding an additional output layer. Fine-tuning has proven to perform well even
on a much smaller amount of training data by conﬁguring the input and output layer
to a downstream task concerning a supervised signal. For this thesis, we use [Pub-
MedBERT] sharing the same architecture as BERT but diﬀer by being pre-trained
on biomedical text. Thus, such a model can generate contextualized language repre-
sentation in a biomedical context.
3.2
Open-Domain Question Answering (OpenQA)
As mentioned, BERT can capture world knowledge [REALM]. Subsequently, OpenQA
has improved remarkably over the past years. We deﬁne OpenQA as the task: given
a large knowledge corpus C “ td1, . . . , dNu of documents and a question query q, to
output the correct short answer a. "Open-domain" refers to the condition of the corpus
being of indeﬁnite size, such as the world wide web. The ultimate goal of OpenQA is
to answer any given input question. This also makes OpenQA a crucial NLP task to
measure a pre-trained language model’s ability to capture world knowledge [REALM].
The traditional architecture of OpenQA systems, ﬁrst proposed by [DrQA], is illus-
trated in Figure 3.1, which mainly comprises two stages: information retrieval (IR)
and machine reading comprehension (MRC). Given a question, the IR stage searches
for evidence documents relevant to a question, while the machine reading comprehen-
sion stage scrutinizes the retrieved documents to infer the most appropriate answer.
Such system is called a "Retriever-Reader" architecture [Zhu21]. In the following, we
will elaborate on those two stages and how they can be trained.
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Deep Natural Language Processing
Figure 3.1: An illustration of the retriever-reader architecture in OpenQA systems.
3.2.1
Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC)
Machine reading comprehension aims at answering a question q based on a known
set D of evidence documents. One common approach to this is to apply a BERT-
based model with a linear layer added on top to extract language representations
that will be used in the reader model pθpa|q, Dq. However, the output layer of the
model depends on the formulation of the answering problem. Broadly, there exists
two types of answering problems: span-based and multiple-choice.
For span-based answering, the answer is a span of tokens within the set of documents.
Given D of length T tokens, the answer a is deﬁned as the set of indexes pstart, stopq
where start P r0, T ´ 1s and stop P rstart, T ´ 1s. Given the representations S P Rd
and E P Rd, the reader model for the span-based answering problem can be deﬁned
as:
pθpa|q, Dq :“ pθpstart|q, Dq pθpstop|start, q, Dq,
(3.1)
where
pθpstart|q, Dq “ eS¨hstart
ř
j eS¨hj ,
(3.2)
pθpend|start, q, Dq “
eS¨hstart`E¨hend
ř
jěstart eS¨hstart`E¨hj .
(3.3)
Here, for instance, h :“ BERTprq; Dsq is obtained by concatenating the question with
the evidence documents and feeding the resulting sequence into BERT to extract a
token representation.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Open-Domain Question Answering (OpenQA)
17
Contrary, in the case of multiple-choice answering, each (q, D) pair comes with a set of
P answer candidates A “ ta1, . . . , aP u. Given a fθpai, q, Dq : q, D, a P X 3 Ñ R, the
reader model for the multiple-choice answering problem can be deﬁned as a softmax
function over all answer options:
pθpa|q, D, Aq :“
efθpra‹;q;Dsq
ř
p efθprap;q;Dsq ,
(3.4)
where the answer a‹ is the index of the correct answer within a set A of P options, fθ
is a BERT model parameterized by θ, and rap; q; Ds is the concatenation operator.
3.2.2
Information Retrieval (IR)
In OpenQA, D is unknown, why a retriever is employed to obtain the small set of
relevant documents that potentially contains the correct answer given a question. All
IR models rely on a retrieval score Sim : X, X Ñ R to rank documents di P C, where
d and q are real-valued vectors linked to a predeﬁned vector space.
Broadly, IR can be divided into two categories: sparse retrieval and dense retrieval.
Retrieval based on corpus-wide statistics is sparse retrieval, which refers to methods
such as TF-IDF and BM25 being sensitive to term frequency and document length.
Contrary, dense retrieval can be achieved through a language model, such as BERT,
which encodes queries and documents into a vector space where text semantics beyond
term match can be measured. Using a retrieval score Sim, we deﬁne the retriever as:
pϕpd|qq :“
eSimpq,dq
ř
d1PC eSimpq,d1q ,
(3.5)
where the query q and the document d are encoded by either a sparse retrieval or
a dense retrieval method. The simplest similarity functions operate on a document-
level representation. Common choices are the dot-product, L2 distance, or cosine
similarity. More complex ones involves operating on a token-level y P X [ColBERT].
We distinguish:
document-level similarity metrics:
Sim : R ˆ R Ñ R
(3.6)
token-level similarity metrics:
Sim : X ˆ X Ñ R.
(3.7)
Unlike sparse retrieval, the encoding function of dense retrieval methods can learn to
encode questions and documents into a vector space such that relevant documents will
have more similar position than irrelevant ones. A standard procedure is to encode
question q and document d to extract BERT’s [CLS] output token respectively and
use the representation to rank documents given a similarity function. Then, the most
appropriate document is chosen based on the nearest neighbor search:
searchpq, Cq “ arg min
dPC
pϕpd|qq “ arg min
dPC
Simphq
CLS, hd
CLSq.
(3.8)
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Deep Natural Language Processing
3.2.3
End-to-end Training
Finding relevant documents remain the main challenge of the OpenQA task. Research
contributions have developed diﬀerent training schemes to model an OpenQA system
end-to-end to address this challenge. In general, there are three training schemes: (1)
retriever-only systems, (2) retriever-reader systems, and (3) systems able to answer
questions without the stage of retrieval, which is mainly pre-trained Generator models.
This project will only cover training schemes involving a retriever stage.
In the
following sections, we will introduce these two training schemes, which we categorize
as retriever-only and retriever-reader.
3.2.3.1
Retriever-only
Given a retriever, one can exploit weak-supervision strategies to learn a retriever
without using the signal from the reader component. Such a training scheme assumes
the answer appears in one or more sequences within the corpus and expects super-
visory signal to be triplets of x[question, answer, documents(positive + negative)]y,
which is rarely found explicitly in the training data. Thus, weak-supervision strategies
are applied to label documents as either "positive" or "negative" samples: Dpq, aq :“
td`, d´
1 , . . . , d´
K´1u, where d´ are in-batch negatives or sampled following a more ad-
vanced heuristic (hard negatives, described in Section 4.4). The retriever pϕpd|q, aq
can leverage BERT into an eﬀective ranking mechanism optimizing the following loss:
Lϕpqi, d`
i , d´
i,1, . . . , d´
i,nq :“ ´ log
eSimpq,d`q
eSimpq,d`q ` řn
j“1 eSimpq,d´q
(3.9)
where Sim is a similarity function presented in (3.5), and q, d is encoded by some
BERT model fϕ. The retriever-only scheme is a dual model architecture, and the
core thought is to build a ﬂexible OpenQA system in which any reader component
can be plugged in seamlessly.
3.2.3.2
Retriever-reader
The retriever-reader scheme, also referred to as a retrieve-then-predict generative
process, is a single model architecture. The goal is to optimize the parameters θ, ϕ
to maximize the joint probability:
ppa|qq “
ÿ
dPC
pθpa|q, dq pϕpd|qq.
(3.10)
The training procedure is to learn the retriever and reader components jointly from
pairs of (q, a). Estimating the marginal probability (3.10) is challenging because it
requires a summation over the entire knowledge corpus C. It is worth noticing that
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Open-Domain Question Answering (OpenQA)
19
such corpus can easily range from millions of evidence documents to billions, which
remain prohibitively expensive.
Conceptually, the reader asks the retriever before predicting to decide what evidence
to retrieve given a question. Retrieved evidence that improves the reader’s perplexity
should be rewarded while retrieving uninformative evidence should be penalized. Be-
cause the language representation of BERT-base is not ﬁt for purpose, the retrieved
documents will highly unlikely be related to the question initially. Thus, the retriever
gets penalized and does not receive a signiﬁcant gradient, making the learning mech-
anism go astray and eventually collapse. This is why pre-training the retriever is a
pre-requisite.
The goal of pre-training the retriever is to avoid this cold-start problem.
Several
techniques have been proposed to achieve this, for example, with the Inverse Cloze
Task (ICT), where, given a sentence, BERT is further pre-trained to retrieve the
article where that sentence originates. The sentence resembles a question, while the
article resembles the evidence document.
Thus, given a set of article candidates,
the task is to select the corresponding article to a sentence and is analogous to the
downstream retrieval task formulated in Section 3.2.2.
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 4
Related Work
In this chapter, we will review the research works given the introduced retriever-reader
architecture chronological to highlight the advancement of the OpenQA task and
outline the point of departure for our implementation. When analyzing the speciﬁc
techniques adopted in each work, we will resemble the theory and terminology of
Chapter 3.
4.1
DrQA: Reading Wikipedia to Answer
Open-Domain Questions
[DrQA] (Document retriever Question Answering) is viewed as the very ﬁrst con-
tribution to modern OpenQA. It inspired others to approach the OpenQA task by
incorporating deep learning techniques introducing the retriever-reader architecture.
Based on their experiments, this architecture was acknowledged as one of the most
promising ways of modeling the OpenQA task. They addressed the task with the work-
ing hypothesis that the answer to any factoid question is a text span in a Wikipedia
article. Their solution combines the TF-IDF-based retriever component and a reader
component to infer the answer of any factoid questions from Wikipedia, of which they
achieved impressive results.
When given a question q consisting of l tokens tq1, . . . , qlu, DrQA decomposes the
search space of Wikipedia with the purpose of ﬁnding a subset of n documents relevant
to the question, where each document d consists of m tokens td1, . . . , dmu. This
subset is achieved by comparing questions and articles by their TF-IDF weighted
bag-of-words vectors combined with a bigram count to account for local word order
[DrQA]. The retriever is conﬁgured to retrieve the top 5 Wikipedia articles before
the reader component scrutinizes those articles to infer the answer.
DrQA adopts two encoders fq and fd. For each document, all tokens di P d are
represented as a sequence of feature vectors. Each vector di constitutes a GloVe1
word representation and a few manual features. DrQA augments the word embeddings
with (1) an exact match method, a simple binary function telling whether token di
1GloVe is an unsupervised learning algorithm for obtaining vector representations for words.
==PAGE:29==
4.2 ORQA: Latent Retrieval for Weakly Supervised Open Domain Question Answering
21
can be found in question q, (2) the token features part-of-speech, named entity and
term-frequency to reﬂect the properties of token di, and (3) a summation of the dot
product between di and each token in q to leverage the exact match function adding
attention to similar but non-identical tokens. Questions are only encoded using the
GloVe word representations.
The answering problem of DrQA is formulated as a span-based answering, i.e., the
RNN takes the encoded documents td1, . . . , dnu and encoded question q as input
and trains two independent classiﬁers to predict the start token and end token of the
answering span.
4.2
ORQA: Latent Retrieval for Weakly Supervised
Open Domain Question Answering
As DrQA states in their conclusive thoughts, the introduction of deep learning tech-
niques enables the retriever-reader training scheme. [ORQA] (Open-Retrieval Ques-
tion Answering system) argues that it is suboptimal to train the reader and retriever
independently, as in the retriever-only training scheme, and introduces the retriever-
reader training scheme. ORQA was the ﬁrst to treat the retriever as a latent variable,
which showed to be a highly eﬀective approach.
The retriever adopts two independent BERT models to encode questions and docu-
ments. To make the retriever trainable, ORQA implements the dot product as the
similarity metric on a document-level between question q and document d. Akin
to [BERT], the reader is implemented as a span-based BERT model as presented in
Section 3.2.1, i.e., it takes as input the question, document, and a span, and scores
the span to accommodate the start/end interaction. An essential aspect of ORQA
is its ability to retrieve any document in a corpus instead of being restricted to a
smaller subset.
ORQA uses ICT to boost the BERT encoder into a powerful retriever. The key to the
learning mechanism adopted by ORQA is that end-to-end training is only possible
when a retriever is pre-trained with the unsupervised ICT mentioned in Section 3.2.3.2.
Recall that the retriever-reader training scheme is conceptually simple, but inference
and learning are challenging since it relies on the retriever to obtain suﬃcient evi-
dence during inference. In ORQA, the English Wikipedia is greedily chunked into 13
million evidence documents of at most 288 wordpieces based on BERT’s tokenizer,
introducing an enormous search space. As a result, the knowledge corpus is encoded
and pre-compiled into an index for fast maximum inner product search using Locality
Sensitive Hashing.
==PAGE:30==
22
4 Related Work
4.3
DPR: Dense Passage Retrieval for Open-Domain
Question Answering
[DPR] augments the approach of DrQA by introducing a retriever component that can
learn to retrieve. The work revolves around the question, is it possible to train a better
dense embedding model using only pairs of questions and passages, without additional
pre-training? The goal of the retriever component is to index M documents into a
vector space to eﬃciently retrieve top n documents when an input question is given
to the reader component during inference. Their contribution is two-fold. First, they
introduce the retriever-only training scheme (see Section 3.2.3.1) and demonstrate
that it outperforms the de facto retrieval methods of BM25 and TF-IDF. Second, they
verify that a better retriever component results in a higher end-to-end QA accuracy.
Akin to ORQA, DPR also adopts two independent BERT models for the retriever
component to encode question and document respectively but argues that the pre-
training step of the retriever can be discarded. The pre-training step is ignored by
exploiting supervisory signals of triplets xquery, positive document, answer)y. The
idea is essentially to ﬁne-tune the two BERT encoders so that a similarity metric be-
comes an eloquent ranking mechanism for retrieving relevant documents to a question.
Recall that the goal of ﬁne-tuning is to approximate a vector space where relevant
pairs of questions and positive documents will have similar vector representations.
Here DPR operates on document-level, and their experiments show the dot product
to be the most optimal similarity metric.
To achieve such training scheme, DPR lets D “ txqi, d`
i , d´
i , ¨ ¨ ¨ , d´
i,nyum
i“1 be the
training signal of m samples. Each sample constitute of a question qi, a single positive
document d` and n negative documents d´
i,j, where both q and d is represented by
a single vector h.CLS P Rd. By having triplets of question, relevant document and
a set of irrelevant documents, DPR reﬁnes the BERT encoder optimizing the loss
function as the negative log likelihood of the positive document. Given a batch of
triplets x1:N, the objective is:
Lpx1:Nq :“ ´ 1
N
N
ÿ
i“1
log
eSimph
qi
CLS,h
di
CLSq
eSimph
qi
CLS,h
di
CLSq ` řN
j“1 eSimph
qi
CLS,h
dj
CLSq .
(4.1)
DPR assumes evidence documents to be known, but when the documents are un-
known, BM25 is applied to rank documents given a question, where the best match,
which includes the answer span, is chosen to be the positive document. Furthermore,
DPR thoroughly experiments with diﬀerent strategies to select negative evidence, in-
cluding: (1) any random document from the knowledge corpus, (2) the highest-scoring
document based on BM25 that does not contain the answer span, and (3) in-batch
negatives, i.e., the positive evidence paired with other questions in the same batch.
==PAGE:31==
4.4 RocketQA: An Optimized Training Approach to Dense Passage Retrieval for Open-Domain Question
Answering
23
The encoded documents are indexed using [FAISS] for fast similarity search to retrieve
top n documents, which is described in Section 5.3. The answering problem of DRP is
formulated as a span-based answering (see Section 3.2.1). However, DPR augments
the reader component with a document selection score. Given a set of the top n
retrieved documents, the reader assigns a selection score to each document.
The
reader extracts an answer span for each document and gives a span score.
The
highest scoring span from the highest scoring document is chosen as the ﬁnal answer.
Note that DPR implements an end-to-end OpenQA system in which any retriever or
reader can be plugged in directly.
4.4
RocketQA: An Optimized Training Approach to
Dense Passage Retrieval for Open-Domain
Question Answering
[RocketQA] propose an optimized training approach for the retriever-only scheme.
They argue that a training scheme designed to meet the needs of the following three
challenges is a necessity to train a dense retriever eﬀectively: (1) discrepancy between
training and inference. During inference, a dense retriever search a large collection
of documents to identify a relevant subset. However, during training, the retriever
calculates the probabilities of positive documents over a restricted batch size due to
the memory of a single GPU. (2) the assumption of unknown evidence documents. It
is only commonplace to annotate a corpus subset concerning a speciﬁc top n retrieval
approach (e.g., BM25).
Thus, it is reasonable to assume the occurrence of false
negatives when sampling hard negatives for the training data. (3) limited training
data. It is expensive and complex to build large-scale datasets for OpenQA.
To achieve this, RocketQA follows the approach of DPR and augment the dense re-
triever by adding three contributions: (1) cross-batch negative. Given a batch of B
questions in a single GPU where each question has one positive document d` an-
notated. Then usually, for example in DPR, B ´ 1 negatives are sampled for each
question. Instead, RocketQA increases the number of negatives by sampling across
GPUs for each question when training on multiple GPUs. Thus, A ˆ B ´ 1 negatives
are sampled for each question. (2) de-noised negatives. RocketQA argues that most
negatives are easy, while hard negatives are crucial for the training scheme. To ensure
hard-negatives, RocketQA applies a trained cross-encoder to remove top-retrieved
documents surmised to be false negatives, where the top-retrieved documents are as-
sumed to be hard-negatives. The cross-encoder can capture rich semantic similarities
between question and document. (3) data augmentation. In the end, the trained
cross-encoder is used to annotate unlabeled questions with a positive document to
extend the training data.
==PAGE:32==
24
4 Related Work
RocketQA proves its optimization strategies eﬀectively and demonstrates that it
yields a higher end-to-end QA performance by outperforming DPR.
4.5
REALM: Retrieval-Augmented Language Model
Pre-Training
[REALM] can be viewed as a further development of ORQA. It follows the retriever-
reader training scheme by modeling the retriever as a latent variable.
However,
REALM modiﬁes the pre-training step by exploiting unsupervised learning applying
MLM as the learning signal while attending over relevant evidence when predicting
the hidden parts. REALM call it a retrieve-then-predict generative process.
Akin to BERT, there are two steps in the REALM training scheme: pre-training
and ﬁne-tuning. Both is subject to input x, intending to learn a distribution ppy|xq
over possible outputs y. The two steps diﬀer by their task, where MLM deﬁnes pre-
training, i.e., x is a sentence from some knowledge corpus X with some part hidden
y, and the model is imposed to predict the hidden part. For ﬁne-tuning, the task is
OpenQA where x is a question, and y is the answer; thus, the task follows:
ppy|xq “
ÿ
zPZ
ppy|z, xq ppz|xq.
(4.2)
The idea is to approximate a model capable of retrieving potentially helpful evidence
z from some knowledge corpus Z given x, and then predict an answer y conditioned
over both the retrieved evidence z and input x. When estimating the likelihood of
generating y, it is required to marginalize over all of the documents z in the knowledge
corpus Z. This means that REALM learns to predict which evidence is relevant in
a backpropagatable way, assigning each evidence a probability to be suitable for
answering a given question.
As in DPR, the retriever ppz|xq adopts two BERT encoders to embed the question
fq and evidence document fd, which gives the retriever one vector representation
for each. The document encoder diﬀers by concatenating the title and body of the
evidence document. The relevance between x and z operates on a document-level
deﬁned by the dot product. Given the input x and the retrieved documents z, the
reader ppy|z, xq introduces a third BERT encoder and takes input x and z as one
sequence. Thus, rich cross-attention is performed on x and z before predicting y.
To compute the ﬁnal probability y, REALM has to crawl every single document in
a corpus, potentially containing millions. REALM chooses to marginalize only over
top n documents to mitigate this computational challenge. This is accomplished by
employing the Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) algorithm to ﬁnd the top n
==PAGE:33==
4.6 ColBERT: Eﬀicient and Effective Passage Search via Contextualized Late Interaction over BERT
25
documents. Therefore, it must pre-compute and index the vector representations of
documents, imposing another challenge since the representation will go stale whenever
parameters are updated during inference. As depicted in Figure 4.1, the solution is to
"refresh" the vector representations of all documents every several hundred training
steps.
Along with ORQA, REALM uses ICT for pre-training but adds another three strate-
gies: (1) salient span masking, where parts of a sentence are hidden to construct
problems that require world knowledge.
For example, salient spans such as "The
United Kingdom" or "July 1969" is masked. (2) null documents, some questions are
possible to answer without adding any evidence document, for example, if the an-
swer is given within the question.
Thus, adding a null document ϕ to the top n
retrieved document allows the reader to ignore the latent retriever. (3) prohibiting
trivial searches, sentences used for pre-training must not occur in the knowledge cor-
pus Z. Otherwise, some sentences become too informative. Thus, a corpus X is
introduced for pre-training.
Figure 4.1: Visual explanation of MIPS refreshing mechanism during the pre-training.
Figure adapted from [REALM].
4.6
ColBERT: Eﬀicient and Effective Passage Search via
Contextualized Late Interaction over BERT
Whereas DrQA, ORQA, DPR, RocketQA and REALM relies on document-level rep-
resentations (hCLS P Rd), [ColBERT] exploits token-level representations. Following
the retriever-only training scheme, ColBERT aims to build an architecture utiliz-
ing the capabilities of BERT while reducing the computational expense. However,
token-level operations are often computationally prohibitive. To address this obsta-
cle, ColBERT introduces a late interaction mechanism that estimates the relevance
between a question q and document d.
This architecture allows ColBERT to be
applied for both top-k re-ranking and end-to-end top-k retrieval.
ColBERT applies a single BERT model for encoding to minimize the computational
footprint. Given a question encoder fq and a document encoder fd, q and d are
encoded into two sets of contextualized embeddings. fq prepend a [QUERY] token
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Related Work
to the question and pad the question with BERT’s [MASK] token if the question
is shorter than some predeﬁned length Nq. Otherwise, questions are truncated con-
cerning Nq. Akin to fq, fd prepend a [DOC] token to the documents but leaves the
[MASK] tokens out.
The late interaction mechanism aims to hold oﬀthe question-document interaction
to reduce the computational footprint once again.
It enables ranking without ex-
haustively evaluating every possible candidate, which is cheap and powerful. It is
the MaxSim operator that allows to compare documents and questions in a scalable
manner based on token-level representations and is deﬁned as:
MaxSim :“
ÿ
iPr|hq|s
max
jPr|hd|s sphq
i, hd
jq,
(4.3)
where the similarity metric s can be chosen as the dot-product, the cosine similarity,
or the L2 distance.
The representations h. are obtained using the two encoding
functions explained above. Given triplets, xq, d`, d´y, ColBERT is ﬁne-tuned by a
pairwise softmax cross-entropy loss over computed scores, where ColBERT produces
a score for each document individually.
Documents are indexed beforehand. As soon as all document embeddings are pre-
encoded and the currently processed input question is encoded, every single question
embedding interacts with all of the document’s embeddings through the MaxSim op-
erator. Thus, the late interaction mechanism is achieved thanks to pre-computed
document representations using oﬄine indexing, resulting in fast computations be-
tween questions and documents.
One of the advantages of ColBERT is that it enables the possibility of doing end-to-
end top-k retrieval from an extensive collection. In the end-to-end setup, [FAISS] are
applied to index all document embeddings. Then, a similarity metric is applied to
return top-n tokens before using the MaxSim operator between the question and all
the documents from where the tokens originate. Their results prove that ColBERT’s
eﬀectiveness competes with all BERT-based approaches and outperforms any non-
BERT method.
4.7
ColBERT-QA: Relevance-guided Supervision for
OpenQA with ColBERT
[ColBERT-QA] explores how to adapt ColBERT to the OpenQA task. The authors
follow the retriever-only training scheme but leverage the scheme introducing a weak-
supervision strategy to generate its training data iteratively. Figure 4.2 (a) depicts
the ColBERT retrieval model while the proposed ColBERT-QA weak-supervision
strategy is illustrated in Figure 4.2 (b).
ColBERT-QA addresses the challenge of
==PAGE:35==
4.7 ColBERT-QA: Relevance-guided Supervision for OpenQA with ColBERT
27
unknown evidence documents. Akin to [DPR], the idea is to use a retriever component
R for collecting top-k documents for each question and adopt a heuristic to label these
documents as either positive or negative documents. The labeled documents can then
be used to train a more eﬀective retriever.
Figure 4.2: (a):The ColBERT retriever, (b): the proposed ColBERT-QA training strategy.
Figure adapted from [ColBERT-QA]
This process is referred to as relevance-guided supervision (RGS). As Figure 4.2 (b)
depicts, R is ﬁxed for each iteration and used to learn a new ColBERT-QAi retriever.
For each question in the training data, R collects the t highest ranked documents
that contain the question’s answer string, restricted to the top-k retrieved document.
Every document within the top-k retrieved that does not contain the answer is treated
as a negative document. For evaluating ColBERT-guided supervision, the authors use
a sparse retrieval system as the ﬁxed retriever to sample documents and establish a
dense ColBERT retriever. Hence, we get ColBERT-QA0 and repeating this process
will yield ColBERT-QAi+1. Their results show that iterative reﬁnement of training
data improves retrieval eﬃciency, resulting in higher end-to-end QA accuracy.
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 5
Entity-guided
Weak-supervision QA
This project aims at bridging modern OpenQA learning techniques to medical profes-
sionals. The previous work presented in Chapter 4 mainly focuses on factoid questions,
to which the answer is concise. However, those work’s designed training schemes and
techniques have scarcely been used to non-factoid questions. Hence, deploying an
eﬀective retrieval stage for the OpenQA training scheme at hand is less challenging.
This diﬀerence between the common OpenQA task and the MedQA task narrows
the set of promising approaches for training a MedOpenQA system, making weak-
supervision strategies an encouraging factor. This chapter describes our proposed
Entity-guided Weak-supervision framework (EWQA) for MedOpenQA to improve
retrieval for the non-factoid questions of the MedQA task.
Contributions
As mentioned, this thesis is a joint project with the Ph.D. student Valentin Liévin.
The project has involved close collaboration on building a MedOpenQA system.
Valentin has mainly utilized the system unsupervised, while we have taken advantage
of the system in a supervised manner. Thus, our contributions have been diverse.
In Section 5.1, Valentin’s focus was on the retriever-reader training scheme, while
ours was on the retriever-only. Our main contributions include the integration of the
components presented in Section 5.3 and the weak-supervision strategies described
in Section 5.2. All contributions are independent building blocks and combinable
in nearly any sense. The codebase, established by Valentin, encompasses multiple
libraries enabling this, which we have added to.
5.1
Architecture
In the following, we describe the architecture of EWQA, which consists of two compo-
nents: (1) a retriever for ﬁnding documents and (2) a reader for choosing an answer
option reasoning over the retrieved evidence. With EWQA, we seek to address the
challenges mentioned above, improving the retrieval stage. Thus, we follow [MedQA],
==PAGE:37==
5.1 Architecture
29
using the retriever-only training scheme coupled with the multiple-choice answering
problem.
5.1.1
Question, Answer and Document Encoders
As in [ColBERT], we share a single BERT model across all encoders but distinguish
the inputted sequences by a specially added token; [QUERY] for the question en-
coder, [ANS] for the answer encoder, and [DOC] for the document encoder.
We
prepend these tokens to the input, inserting them at the index right after the [CLS]
token, allowing BERT to learn both query-based, answer-based, and document-based
embedding.
5.1.2
Reader Component
Let q be a question and a an answer. In the multiple-choice setting of the MedQA
task, a set of 4 answer options A “ taiu4
i“1 is provided for each question. We denote
‹ to identify the index of the correct answer in A. Thus, we follow the multiple-choice
answering problem deﬁned in Section 3.2.1, where the reader component reasons over
a set of evidence documents D :“ tdiuM
i“1. Each document d allows measuring the
relevance of the answer option a to the question q, for obtaining the predicted answer
option. We deﬁne the reader component as:
pθpa‹|q, D, Aq :“
ef 0
θ prq;a‹;d‹sq
ř4
j“1 ef 0
θ prq;aj;djsq ,
(5.1)
where fθ is a BERT-based encoder parameterized by θ and r¨; ¨; ¨s denotes the con-
catenation operator. The exponent 0 of the encoding function f indicates taking the
ﬁrst vector ([CLS] token) of the outputted BERT representation. The concatenation
operator takes q, aj and dj to construct the input sequence x[CLS] aj [SEP] q [SEP]
dj [SEP]y to then obtain the normalized log probability over the four answer options.
5.1.3
Retriever Component
The authors of [MedQA] identify the performance of the retriever component to be
the bottleneck of the end-to-end QA accuracy. As mentioned, the set of evidence
document D is unknown. Thus, we condition retrieval from corpus C :“ tdiuN
i“1 on
the question q and the answer option aj. We follow the work of [DPR], where given
a similarity metric Sim : X ˆ X Ñ R parameterized by ϕ, the retriever is deﬁned as:
pϕpD|q, a, Cq :“
eSimϕpd,rq;asq
ř
d1PC eSimϕpd1,rq;asq ,
(5.2)
==PAGE:38==
30
5 Entity-guided Weak-supervision QA
where C " D and the concatenation operator r¨; ¨s transform q and aj into one
sequence. This ensures the set D to be conditioned to both the question and the
answer option. Initially, we deﬁne retrieval to be the oﬀ-the-shelf ElasticSearch (ES)
retrieval system, as in [DrQA], where Simϕ is the BM25 scoring algorithm. Ultimately,
we want to couple a BERT-based encoder with a FAISS index, viewing Simϕ as the
MaxSim operator of [ColBERT] relying on BERT-based representations. Formally,
given an encoded question Eϕpqq with length n vectors, an encoded document Eϕpdq
with length m vectors, and ă ¨, ¨ ą a vector-wise similarity metric (e.g. dot-product,
L2), we deﬁne the MaxSim operator as:
Simϕpq, dq :“
n
ÿ
i“1
m
max
j“1 ă Eϕpqiq, Eϕpdjq ą .
(5.3)
5.2
Learning to Retrieve
[DPR] introduces a training setup to ﬁne-tune the encoder function of BERT such
that a similarity metric Simϕ becomes an eﬀective function for ranking relevance. We
follow this training scheme to yield BERT-based encoder for (5.2). Given training
data D “ txqi, d`
i , d´
i,1, . . . , d´
i,nyum
i“1, where d´ are in-batch negatives or sampled
following the proposed heuristic of [RocketQA].
Then, we can ﬁne-tune a BERT
model into an eﬀective encoder for the FAISS index to yield pϕpd|q, aq by optimizing
the loss function as the negative log-likelihood of the positive evidence document:
Lϕpqi, d`
i , d´
i,1, . . . , d´
i,nq :“ ´ log
eSimϕpq,d`q
eSimϕpq,d`q ` řn
j“1 eSimϕpq,d´q .
(5.4)
5.2.1
Generating Noisy Targets
To generate D, we follow [ColBERT-QA] and exploit weak-supervision strategies,
which allow us to learn a retriever without using the supervisory signals of the four
answer options. We adopt their heuristic referred to as retrieve-and-select and aug-
ment it using entity recognition models. We refer to such weak-supervision strategies
as a relevance classiﬁer (see: Section 5.2.2). So, given pairs of (q, a) and a corpus
C, we ﬁx a relevance classiﬁer and a retrieval component R, with the attempt to
generate noisy targets of x[question, answer, documents(positive + negative)]y. For
each question in a training set, we retrieve top-k documents ranked by R. Each doc-
ument d and answer a‹ is passed through a relevance classiﬁer to label a document
as positive or negative. More explicit, our weak-supervision strategy constitutes four
steps and is depicted in Figure 5.1.
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Learning to Retrieve
31
Figure 5.1: Illustration of the generation of noisy targets.
1. Given a corpus C of arbitrary size, C is chunked into M documents of equal length
deﬁned by a window size and stride value. Window size speciﬁes the length of a
chunk in terms of the number of tokens, while the stride value establishes the degree
of overlap between chunks. Note that M can be very large (e.g., 21 million passages
in the experiments of [DPR]).
2. We adopt a search index I, ElasticSearch1 or [FAISS] explained in Section 5.3, to
index all M passages. Once indexed, it is possible to query questions against the
chunked corpus and use I to rank all M documents, making it possible to retrieve a
relevant subset.
3. As seen in Figure 5.1, we query each pair of (q, a‹) against I to retrieve top-k (in our
setting, we use k “ 100), such that the whole corpus becomes searchable to a question
in near real-time. When querying, we introduce several text formatting options to
leverage the index.
4. At last, a relevance classiﬁer is added to select the supervisory signal for the training
data. For every question q, based on the retrieved documents, we collect the highest-
ranked t (e.g. t “ 3) documents - ranked by I - identiﬁed to be related to a‹ by the
relevance classiﬁer. These documents are treated as positives. All other documents
within the retrieved set identiﬁed to be related to a‹ are treated as negatives. If none
of the top-k retrieved documents is found relevant, the question is discarded.
1https://www.elastic.co
==PAGE:40==
32
5 Entity-guided Weak-supervision QA
5.2.1.1
Iterative Refinement of the Targets
When initializing the generation of the noisy targets, we use the retrieval system ES
using BM25 as the ﬁxed retriever to sample the documents d1, . . . dK „ RpD|q, a, Cq
and establish a dense retriever R0.
However, this retriever is not guaranteed to
retrieve relevant documents. Similarly to [ColBERT-QA], we enable iterative reﬁne-
ment to generate new targets with the expectation of yielding more accurate positive
documents and more challenging hard-negatives. Hence, we get R1 and repeat this
process with R1 as the ﬁxed retriever yields R2.
5.2.2
Relevance Classifiers
In this project, we compare the commonplace weak-supervision strategy exact match
with our developed ScispaCy match.
We augment the answer string using entity recognition models and the knowledge
base Uniﬁed Medical Language System (UMLS)2 to extract synonyms. We use the
ScispaCy library [neumann-etal-2019-scispacy] to couple a model with a Linker.
The Linker performs a string overlap search on entities, comparing them with UMLS
concepts using the nearest neighbors search. Thus, "Gallbladder cancer" is linked
to its concept "Malignant neoplasm of gallbladder", which holds a list of synonyms
("Malignant Neoplasm of Gallbladder", "Malignant Gallbladder Neoplasm", "Cancer
of the Gallbladder", . . . , "gallbladder tumor or cancer"). We expect this to help us
process longer answer strings when labeling documents and answer strings containing
multiple medical entities.
5.2.2.1
Exact Match
An exact match strategy is a simple method. It scans through a document looking for
an arbitrary literal string that may have the answer string in it and returns a list of
potential matches. Returning an empty list if no position in the document triggered
a match. The matching is performed case-insensitive using regex3. In Algorithm 1
the method is outlined as a pseudo-code based on our implementation.
Algorithm 1 Exact Match Classiﬁer
1: Match the answer string in the document.
2: Given: Pair of document d and answer string a.
3: Initialize M Ð FindAll(a, d): adds all matches found in d.
4: return M
Ź Return M if not null
2https://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/index.html
3https://pypi.org/project/regex/
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Learning to Retrieve
33
5.2.2.2
ScispaCy Match
Group
TUI
Type
Concepts & Ideas
T169
Functional Concept
Concepts & Ideas
T170
Intellectual Product
Concepts & Ideas
T080
Qualitative Concept
Concepts & Ideas
T077
Conceptual Entity
Concepts & Ideas
T082
Spatial Concept
Concepts & Ideas
T185
Classiﬁcation
Concepts & Ideas
T102
Group Attribute
Concepts & Ideas
T078
Idea or Concept
Concepts & Ideas
T171
Language
Concepts & Ideas
T081
Quantitative Concept
Concepts & Ideas
T089
Regulation or Law
Concepts & Ideas
T079
Temporal Concept
Activity & Behavior
T052
Activity
Activity & Behavior
T057
Occupational Activity
Living Beings
T101
Patient/Disabled Group
Table 5.1: List of TUIs used to discard irrelevant concepts.
ScispaCy match leverage ex-
act match by appending a
list of synonyms to the an-
swer string. ScispaCy match
applies
this
list
together
with the answer string when
matching questions and doc-
uments. It follows the struc-
ture
of
exact
match
but
uses [ScispaCy] to discover
UMLS
Metathesaurus
con-
cepts referred to in the an-
swer string, which yields a
set of Concept Unique Iden-
tiﬁers (CUIs).
Looking up
these CUIs with ScispaCy performs linking to a knowledge base, making it possi-
ble to extract a set of synonyms. In UMLS all concepts are assigned at least one
semantic type (TUI) (e.g., "Clinical Drug", "Disease or Syndrome"). Given the list of
TUIs in Table 5.1, irrelevant concepts are discarded before extracting the synonyms.
In Algorithm 2 the method is outlined as a pseudo-code based on our implementation.
Algorithm 2 ScispaCy Match
1: Match the answer string in the document.
2: Given: Pair of document d and answer string a.
3: Extract: C Ð ScispaCyras
4: Initialize: A Ð H, set of answer aliases related to a.
5: for cui in C do
6:
if cui not in DISCARD_TUIs then
7:
Update A Ð ScispaCyrcuis: adds synonyms from knowledge base
8:
end if
9: end for
10: Update: A Ð a Y A
11: Initialize: M Ð H, set of triggered matches
12: for alias in A do
13:
Update M Ð FindAll(alias, d), matches found in d.
14: end for
15: return M
Ź Return M if not null
We deﬁne and experiment with three versions of ScispaCy match, and their eﬀect on
the entity recognition is illustrated in Table 5.2 on a single answer string.
==PAGE:42==
34
5 Entity-guided Weak-supervision QA
ScispaCy match v0 : also referred to as the default version, where we load a
ScispaCy language model and return 1 concept for each entity without changing any
modiﬁcations when assigning a linker.
ScispaCy match v1 : also referred to as the brutal force version, where we force
the answer string into a single token and return 3 concepts. Thus, it is still possible
to address the challenge of multi-hop reasoning. Furthermore, we lower the linker
threshold that a concept candidate must reach to be accepted to 0.5. With this, we
expect to extract the three most relevant concepts to an answer string.
ScispaCy match v2 : also referred to as the merge entities version, where we merge
consecutive entities and return 1 concept each. With this we expect to eliminate noisy
entities (e.g., elevate, increase, decrease) recognized by v0 as a stand alone entity but
often adding meaning to another consecutive entity.
Answer string
ScispaCy v0
ScispaCy v2
The patient should receive both
tetanus toxoid-containing vaccine
and human tetanus immunoglob-
ulin
patient
tetanus
toxoid-containing vaccine
human
tetanus
immunoglobulin
patient
tetanus toxoid-containing vaccine
human tetanus immunoglobulin
Table 5.2: An example showing how diﬀerent the ScispaCy match versions aﬀect the entity recognition.
5.3
Additional Components
Equation (5.2) involves decomposing a considerable textual corpus to a relevant subset
of a size manageable to model. Thus, EWQA requires a fast and scalable similarity
search component such as ElasticSearch or FAISS. ElasticSearch can only handle
sparse retrieval, while FAISS can only handle dense retrieval. This section explains
the two components in more detail, pointing out their advantages.
5.3.1
ElasticSearch
ElasticSearch4 (ES) is an open-source search engine based on the Apache Lucene
library5. It provides REST APIs for conﬁguring and accessing several features. In
particular, the Index APIs have been used in this project for indexing a corpus. The
approach is to create a unique index for each dataset by initializing a ﬁngerprint.
Hereafter, the Search API performs a similarity search on the ES index for batches
of queries.
Before scoring documents within a corpus, ES ﬁrst identiﬁes a subset
4https://www.elastic.co
5https://github.com/apache/lucene
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Additional Components
35
of candidate documents by a boolean function that includes those documents that
match the words in a query. Then, a retrieval score is measured for each document
in this subset, which determines the order of the documents.
The default scoring algorithm of ES is BM25.
BM25 is a bag-of-words similarity
function that ranks a set of documents based on the query terms appearing in each
document. Three main factors determine a documents score:
• Term frequency (TF): the more times a search term appears in the document,
the more relevant that document is.
• Inverse document frequency (IDF): the more documents that contain a search
term, the less important that term is. The IDF weight of a query term qi is
computed as
IDFpqiq “ ln
ˆN ´ npqiq ` 0.5
npqiq ` 0.5
` 1
˙
,
(5.5)
where N is the total number of documents, and npqiq is the number of documents
containing qi.
• Field length: if a short document contains a search term, it is likely more
relevant than a longer document containing the same search term.
Given a query Q containing keywords q1, . . . , qn, the ﬁnal BM25 score for document
D is deﬁned as
scorepD, Qq “
n
ÿ
i“1
IDFpqiq ¨
fpqi, Dqpk1 ` 1q
fpqi, Dq ` k1
´
1 ´ b ` b ¨
|D|
avgdl
¯.
(5.6)
In equation (5.6) fpqi, Dq denotes qi’s TF in document D, |D| is the length of D in
number of tokens, and avgdl is the average document length over all documents. The
parameters k1 and b are free and often chosen without optimization.
5.3.2
FAISS
Facebook AI Similarity Search (FAISS) is a library for large-scale vector-similarity
search.
It is a highly scalable solution capable of indexing billions of documents
while preserving the high speed of search queries [FAISS]. Given an encoder such as
BERT, FAISS is used to index the content of a corpus by their vector representation,
allowing one to eﬃciently extract relevant documents to a question concerning a
similarity function.
As mentioned, FAISS performs dense index search, why we apply a BERT model to
embed documents and pairs of question and answers. The ﬂat indices of FAISS are
capable of storing all document embeddings entirely. However, this approach is often
==PAGE:44==
36
5 Entity-guided Weak-supervision QA
prohibitively expensive, resulting in an enormous strain on the used memory and
disk space. FAISS addresses this issue by allowing the creation of the indices that
compress the stored vectors based on the Product Quantizer compression [FAISS],
which compresses the input vectors from 32-bit ﬂoats to 8 bytes.
We conﬁgure a FAISS index to use an Inverted File with Product Quantization
(IFVPQ) index that partitions the embedding space into P (e.g., P “ 100) cells based
on k-means clustering. The index then assigns each vector to its nearest cell based
on a distance metric, typically chosen as the squared L2 vector-similarity metric.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Data
For QA, there is a vast amount of data accessible, and even in the medical do-
main, there are many datasets. However, few of these have been formulated as an
OpenQA task, and even fewer have been published [MedQA]. We need to encompass
a MedOpenQA task for evaluation and a medical corpus to source documents.
6.1
Benchmarks
Dataset
Train
Dev
Test
MedQA US
10,178
1,272
1,273
MedQA TW
11,298
1,412
1,413
PubMedQA
169,815
21,227
21,227
Table 6.1: The split of train-validation-test set for
the benchmarks.
The codebase is set up to eval-
uate EWQA on two downstream
tasks, including the already intro-
duced MedQA task.
This section
explains the tasks.
6.1.1
MedQA Task
The MedQA task is collected from medical board exams in the US, China, and Taiwan.
We focus on the US part containing 12,723 questions, and the Taiwanese part trans-
lated to English using machine translation containing 14,123 questions. Table 6.1
reports how the questions are split into a training, a validation, and a test dataset.
These questions aim to assess human doctors’ medical knowledge and demonstrate
patient-centered decision-making. The task is deﬁned by its two main features:
• Question: A string, structured as either a shorter sentence asking for some-
thing speciﬁc or a paragraph akin to a medical journal listing the health condi-
tion of a patient followed by a question.
• Options: A set of 4 answer candidates of which only one is highlighted as the
most appropriate answer.
Two examples are shown in Table 6.2.
Furthermore, each record holds a list of
identiﬁed relevant medical terms by MetaMap1 (e.g. pain, worse, isoniazid, rifampin).
In table 6.3 we provide an example of such list. A few more can be found in Table A.1.
1https://lhncbc.nlm.nih.gov/ii/tools/MetaMap.html
==PAGE:46==
38
6 Data
Question
A 67-year-old man who was diagnosed with arthritis 16 years ago presents with right knee swelling
and pain. His left knee was swollen a few weeks ago, but now with both joints aﬀected, he has
diﬃculty walking and feels frustrated. He also has back pain which makes it extremely diﬃcult
to move around and be active during the day. He says his pain signiﬁcantly improves with rest.
He also suﬀers from dandruﬀfor which he uses special shampoos. Physical examination is notable
for pitting of his nails. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
Options
A: Psoriatic arthritis, B: Arthritis mutilans, C: Rheumatoid arthritis, D: Tissue disease
Question
A 59-year-old overweight woman presents to the urgent care clinic with the complaint of severe
abdominal pain for the past 2 hours. She also complains of a dull pain in her back with nausea and
vomiting several times. Her pain has no relation with food. Her past medical history is signiﬁcant
for recurrent abdominal pain due to cholelithiasis. Her father died at the age of 60 with some form
of abdominal cancer. Her temperature is 37˘00b0C (98.6˘00b0F), respirations are 15/min, pulse is
67/min, and blood pressure is 122/98 mm Hg. Physical exam is unremarkable. However, a CT
scan of the abdomen shows a calciﬁed mass near her gallbladder. Which of the following diagnoses
should be excluded ﬁrst in this patient?
Options
A: Acute cholecystititis, B: Gallbladder cancer, C: Choledocholithiasis, D: Pancreatitis
Table 6.2: Two examples of the MedQA dataset. The most appropriate answer option is marked in bold.
Clinical medicine is extending far and wide. To that end, questions come in many
shapes. There are two types of questions: 1) questions asking for a speciﬁc piece of
knowledge, e.g., "Which of the following symptoms are associated with Parkinson’s?".
2) questions appended to a patient’s vital signs, clinical assessment, and other speciﬁc
analysis, e.g., "What is the diagnosis for the patient’s symptoms?". More examples
of the ending of type 2 questions can be found in Table 6.4.
Most often, type 1
requires one-hop reasoning, while type 2 requires multi-hop reasoning, making them
much more challenging. For example, to answer the questions in Table 6.2, one must
identify and understand each symptom linked to a patient holding a described set of
health conditions, then match these symptoms to a myriad of diseases and ﬁnd the
most relevant one concerning the information given.
In the US part, 98% of questions are of type 2, while for the Taiwanese part, it is
31%. The vocabulary size of all questions and answers is 63,317 tokens for the US
part and 3,588 for the Taiwanese part. The average question length is 116 tokens
and 61 tokens, respectively, while the max is 530 and 1,950. The average length is
3.5 tokens and 20,6 tokens for answer options, respectively, while the max is 45 and
210 [MedQA].
Question
A 4-year-old boy who recently emigrated from Ghana is brought to the physi-
cian because of a 5-day history of pain and swelling in his hands. He has had
similar episodes in the past. The patient appears distressed. His temperature
is 38.1C (100.5F). Physical examination shows pallor. The dorsum of his hands
and ﬁngers are swollen, warm, and tender to palpation. Which of the following
additional ﬁndings is most likely in this patient?
Options
A: Coronary artery aneurysm, B: Hyperuricemia, C: Thickened heart valves, D: Mi-
crohematuria
Table 6.3: One example showing the identiﬁcation of medical entities (highlighted in bold font).
==PAGE:47==
6.2 Medical Corpora
39
Examples
of
endings of type
2 questions
the most appropriate treatment / the mechanism of certain condi-
tions / the examination needed / the possible outcome for a cer-
tain treatment / which of the following is most likely cause / which
statement is true
Table 6.4: Examples of endings of type 2 questions.
6.1.2
PubMedQA Task
The [PubMedQA] is a closed QA task collected from PubMed abstracts and aims
at answering biomedical research questions with yes/no/maybe. PubMedQA is split
into three subsets: labeled (PQA-L), unlabeled (PQA-U), and artiﬁcially generated
(PQA-A). This thesis will focus on PQA-L and PQA-A since a ﬁnal answer acting
as the target is accessible in both datasets. The QA pairs are 1.0k and 211.3k for
PQA-L and PQA-A, respectively. In Table 6.1, we report how the questions are split
into a training, a validation, and a test dataset.
Each PubMedQA instance is composed of four features: (1) a question which is a
research article title, (2) a context which is the abstract except its conclusive part,
(3) a lengthy answer which is the conclusion of the abstract, and (4) a yes/no/maybe
answer. An example of a PubMedQa instance is shown in Table 6.5.
Question
Are depressive symptoms in climacteric women related to menopausal symptom intensity and
partner factors?
Context
(Objective) To determine the prevalence of depressive symptoms and associated risk factors
among climacteric women.
(Methods) In this cross-sectional study, women aged 40-59 years, visiting inpatients at the En-
rique C. Sotomayor Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Guayaquil, Ecuador, were surveyed with
the 17-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS), [. . . ]
(Results) [. . . ] Logistic regression analysis determined that the severity of the menopausal symp-
toms related to the somatic and psychological domains of the MRS and the partner proﬁle (low
education and alcohol abuse) were the main determinants for women having higher depressive
scores (total HDRS > or =8).
Long
Answer
(Conclusion) In this speciﬁc climacteric population, depressive symptoms were very prevalent
and were associated with the severity of menopausal symptoms (somatic and psychological) and
partner’s problems.
Answer
Yes
Table 6.5: An example of the PubMedQA dataset.
6.2
Medical Corpora
We supply the models with three corpora to source evidence documents for the down-
stream tasks. This section introduces the corpora used to form the knowledge corpus
for modeling.
==PAGE:48==
40
6 Data
6.2.1
MedQA Corpus
Metric
MedQA
# of paragraphs
857,202
# of tokens
13,355,485
Vocabulary size
215,129
Table 6.6: Overall statistics of the MedQA
corpus.
Paragraphs are sentences split by
dots, while tokens and vocabulary size are
counted in tokens.
The authors of MedQA provide a collection
of 18 textbooks, each representing its ﬁeld
within the domain of medicine. They cover
a myriad of patient-centered cases reﬂecting
the MedQA questions of type 2. Domain ex-
perts found the textbooks to cover enough ev-
idence to answer at least 88% of the questions
[MedQA]. All textbooks were initially in PDF
format but were converted into TXT format
using OCR software. Thus, the conversion of
some books is encumbered and inaccurate.
6.2.2
FindZebra Corpus
Metric
FindZebra
# of paragraphs
4,127,964
# of tokens
39,511,117
Vocabulary size
680,127
Table 6.7: Overall statistics of the FZ cor-
pus. Paragraphs are sentences split by dots,
while tokens and vocabulary size are counted
in tokens.
FindZebra (FZ) is a search engine for helping
diagnose rare diseases [FindZebra]. It utilizes
high-quality curated information on rare dis-
eases together with an IR system built upon
Apache Lucene Solr. The corpus in its present
state contains approximately 30K individual
disease descriptions.
FZ’s diagnosis tool re-
trieves the correct disease description based
on a free-text description of a patient. Thus,
FZ aims to solve a retrieval problem akin to
the retrieval task in OpenQA systems.
6.2.3
MedxWiki Corpus
Metric
MedxWiki
# of paragraphs
5,296,664
# of tokens
107,655,159
Vocabulary size
760,177
Table
6.8:
Overall
statistics
of
the
MedxWiki corpus. Paragraphs are sentences
split by dots, while tokens and vocabulary
size are counted in tokens.
The MedxWiki Corpus is a collection of
MedQA related Wikipedia articles. The cor-
pus is extracted by querying all answer op-
tions against the Wikipedia API2 to return
a list of related Wikipedia page titles. This
yields an extensive list of medical-related
Wikipedia pages.
Downloading the full En-
glish Wikipedia dump (all Wikipedia pages
written in English), it is possible to look up
every page title and extract the page content.
As a result, a corpus of approximately 56K
Wikipedia articles is built.
2https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/API:Main_page
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 7
Results
We now evaluate EWQA on the MedQA task presented in Section 6.1.1. Due to
this project’s restricted time frame and computational resources, we only experiment
on the MedQA task. However, our codebase allows us to test on the PubMedQA
task presented in Chapter 6. Our two primary questions are (1) whether a dense
retriever leads to better end-to-end QA accuracy and (2) how our various proposed
strategies for weak-supervision aﬀect the end-to-end QA. We will answer the questions
by demonstrating the eﬀectiveness of EWQA in the following ways:
1. By doing a thorough ablation study on the reader component, adding weak-
supervision strategies and corpora.
2. By employing a dense retriever component to augment retrieval and potentially
improve the end-to-end QA.
All experiments carried out in this project were performed on a GPU computer cluster
provided by DTU Compute. The cluster consists of 8 machines, each with 7-8 GPUs
with an average memory size of „12GB.
Intermediate Results
In this section, we use an ES index to investigate a classiﬁer’s ability to label doc-
uments. Table 7.1 shows the share of questions labeled with at least one positive
document given 1000 retrieved documents for the US data.
The ScispaCy match
strategy outperforms the exact match strategy by a signiﬁcant margin. We also see
how the ScispaCy versions aﬀect the labeling diﬀerently.
Classiﬁer
Corpus
Train
Val
Test
Avg.
score
Exact
MedQA
3,479
(34%)
468
(37%)
439
(35%)
72.2
ScispaCy v0
MedQA
7,455
(74%)
920
(73%)
927
(73%)
81.1
ScispaCy v1
MedQA
5,622
(56%)
732
(58%)
690
(55%)
77,4
ScispaCy v2
MedQA
6,780
(67%)
848
(67%)
851
(67%)
79,1
(a) query key : question.text
Train
Val
Test
Avg.
score
3,892
(38%)
517
(41%)
501
(40%)
48.5
7,944
(78%)
998
(78%)
985
(77%)
52.8
5,762
(58%)
935
(61%)
928
(56%)
49.2
7,388
(71%)
912
(72%)
927
(72%)
51.3
(b) query key : question.metamap
Table 7.1: Share of labeled questions with at least one positive document for diﬀerent relevance classiﬁers.
==PAGE:50==
42
7 Results
Additionally, Table 7.1 shows the average retrieval score of the positive documents
measured by the BM25 scoring algorithm. Moreover, we experimented with querying
the MetaMap identiﬁed medical terms against the index instead of the questions. This
yields a slightly higher share of labeled questions but decreases the retrieval score.
Figure 7.1 shows the overall distribution of the retrieval scores for the exact match
classiﬁer.
Negative documents have a lower average retrieval score than positive
documents. In Appendix B Table B.1, we show the top 100 match triggers concerning
positive documents for the diﬀerent classiﬁers. Here we see Staphylococcus aureus
being a frequent trigger for the exact match strategy, while the shortened synonym
S. aureus being for the ScispaCy match strategies. Moreover, we see how ScispaCy
match version 1 seem to trigger less general terms (e.g., history, activity, mother)
than ScispaCy match version 0 and 2. Therefore, we only use version 1 in further
experimentation as there seems to be less risk of retrieving false positives.
Figure 7.1: Distribution of retrieval scores for the exact match classiﬁer.
7.1
Main Results
This section investigates how the diﬀerent relevance classiﬁers and corpora aﬀect
the ﬁnal QA accuracy.
We follow [MedQA], using a search index to retrieve the
top n documents for each pair q, ai as the evidence for each answer option, and
concatenate q, ai, d into one sequence to obtain the normalized log probability over
the four options.
Then, we add a relevance classiﬁer to prepend a positive document, if one exists, to d
for each pair (q, ai). The relevance classiﬁers don’t apply well with short documents.
So, instead of splitting up a corpus into sentences based on punctuation, we follow
==PAGE:51==
7.1 Main Results
43
[DPR] and chunk the corpus into M documents of 200 tokens. In Appendix C we
present the data showing the document length of 200 to be the most eﬀective. Due to
the size of memory, we restrict n retrieved documents to 3 and truncate sequences to
512 tokens, which is BERT’s maximum length [BERT]. We conduct all experiments
using a batch size of 16, set the learning rate to 1e ´ 5, and employ [PubMedBERT],
which has shown to be the most eﬀective [MoP], running all experiments three times
for 30 epochs.
Baseline Results
The ablation study on the reader component is carried out by ﬁrst investigating how
distinct relevance classiﬁers aﬀect the QA accuracy. Given 100 retrieved documents
using an ES index, the relevance classiﬁer prepends a positive document to D, if one
exists, taking the highest scoring if multiple exist. We experiment only with exact
match and ScispaCy match v1 as they have shown to extract the most promising
positive documents (see Appendix B). The best scoring model of [MoP] is chosen as
the baseline for US comparison, while the best scoring model of [MedQA] is chosen
for Taiwain (TW).
Table 7.2 presents the results.
The baseline reader without a relevance classiﬁer
obtains a slightly better test accuracy (36.0%) for US than its direct comparison,
the baseline presented in [MoP] (35.08%), indicating that longer documents are more
eﬀective. However, for TW the baseline reader performs poorly. Adding a relevance
classiﬁer shows decreased performance on the US data, so we have only performed a
baseline experiment on the TW data. Our results indicate that positive documents
increase the risk of overﬁtting. Furthermore, the utilization provided for performing
experiments has been limited regarding computation time; thus, experiments for the
US part have been prioritized over the TW part.
Model
US
TW
Dev
Test
Dev
Test
PubMedBERT
34.6% ˘ 0.5
36.0% ˘ 0.3
32.5% ˘ 0.4
31.4% ˘ 0.4
+ Exact
33.8% ˘ 0.7
34.5% ˘ 0.8
-
-
+ ScispaCy v1
33.9% ˘ 0.7
32.7% ˘ 0.9
-
-
SOTA
38.02% [MoP]
42% [MedQA]
Table 7.2: Baseline accuracy for the reader component and in combination with a relevance classiﬁer.
Sampling Results
The amount of training samples in the MedQA task makes it challenging to train
the reader component as it is vulnerable to overﬁtting. Instead of deﬁning D as the
==PAGE:52==
44
7 Results
highest-scoring documents, we introduce a sampling method to alleviate the overﬁt-
ting originating from the lack of training data. Given the 100 retrieved documents by
the ES index, we view the retrieval score as logits and apply a softmax function to get
a probability distribution. Then we can sample documents concerning the retrieval
score, i.e., a high retrieval score is more likely to get sampled. Adding a relevance
classiﬁer applies to the same sampling technique regarding only positive documents.
As Table 7.3 shows sampling improves both the US and TW baselines with 2.1% and
7% percentage points respectively. For US the sampling method exceeds SOTA with
an accuracy of 38.1%. The results indicate that EWQA tends to overﬁt and that
sampling helps it generalize better. However, the same trend doesn’t apply when
adding a relevance classiﬁer. Results do not improve the accuracy even though a
sampling method is used.
We speculate that the 100 retrieved documents hardly
contain more than one positive document, making sampling pointless. We ﬁnd that
increasing n retrieved documents to 1000 yields marginally better results (35.3%).
Model
US
TW
Dev
Test
Dev
Test
PubMedBERT
37.2% ˘0.2
38.1% ˘ 0.1
38.2% ˘ 0.4
38.4% ˘ 0.1
+ Exact
33.6% ˘ 0.2
34.7% ˘ 0.5
-
-
+ ScispaCy v1
-
-
-
-
SOTA
38.02% [MoP]
42% [MedQA]
Table 7.3: QA accuracy for the reader component using sampling and in combination with a relevance
classiﬁer.
Corpora Results
The second part of the ablation study includes experimentation with distinct and
larger corpora. We replace the MedQA corpus with the MedxWiki before investigat-
ing how combining the two corpora aﬀects the QA accuracy. This analysis builds
upon the assumption that eﬀective retrieval increases QA accuracy, and retrieval is
conditioned to the corpus. Thus, the corpus can be more critical than the retriever
component itself. Previous experiments have shown the eﬀectiveness of sampling doc-
uments while relevance classiﬁers have no positive eﬀect. Thus, we sample from the
n “ 100 retrieved documents, adding no relevance classiﬁer to see if the supplemental
knowledge improves the performance.
Table 7.4 summarizes the performance on diﬀerent combination of corpora. We see
that our collected MedxWiki corpus leads to better QA performance by 0.4% ´ 1.4%
absolute. Compared with related work, we ﬁnd a novelty in the exercise of building or
enhancing a corpus, yet to be further investigated. Results indicate the eﬀectiveness
==PAGE:53==
7.1 Main Results
45
of our approach to collecting medical-related knowledge, establishing new state-of-the-
art on the US part. We observe that combining all corpora increases the performance
for TW, while the performance decreases for the US. We surmise that increasing the
corpus size will likely bring more noise within the 100 retrieved documents when using
sparse retrieval. However, the TW questions are generally shorter, providing more
space for evidence in the concatenation operator, making it less aﬀected by the added
noise.
Model
Corpus
US
TW
Dev
Test
Dev
Test
PubMedBERT
MedQA
37.2% ˘ 0.6
38.1% ˘ 0.3
38.% ˘ 0.7
38.4% ˘ 0.4
PubMedBERT
MedxWiki
37.3% ˘ 0.6
38.5% ˘ 0.4
38.1% ˘ 0.5
39.8% ˘ 0.5
PubMedBERT
All
38.5% ˘ 0.3
38.0% ˘0.5
40.5% ˘ 0.4
41.3% ˘ 0.4
SOTA
38.02% [MoP]
42% [MedQA]
Table 7.4:
QA accuracy for the reader component using sampling and in combination with diﬀerent
corpora.
Learned Retriever
As seen in Table 7.1, our generation of noisy targets yields 7,455 training samples at
max. This amount of training data was found insuﬃcient for training the retriever
component presented in Section 5.1.3, resulting in overﬁtting. Our results showed the
learned retriever not being ﬁt for purpose. Thus, we have unfortunately omitted the
employment of a dense retriever in EWQA and are leaving out the results.
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
No matter what approach or experimentation, criticism is always beneﬁcial.
The
beneﬁts derive as outcomes of a thorough assessment. Therefore, this chapter will
scrutinize our approach and discuss the results of our experimentation.
Retrieving false positives. Retrieval eﬀectiveness means the ability of the system
to separate relevant documents from irrelevant ones. As mentioned in Section 6.1.1,
the length and the complexity of questions in MedQA pose challenges to the retrieval
stage that modern OpenQA endeavors have not entirely addressed. Recall that ques-
tions of type 2 follow the same structure; ﬁrst introducing the patient’s background
story, followed by vital signs (e.g., blood pressure, temperature), possibly a speciﬁc
analysis (e.g., CT-scan, blood gas analysis), and ends with a question. What infor-
mation to attend to mostly depends on the ending of the question.
Weak supervision inevitably suﬀers from false positives making up a considerable
amount of noisy targets, signiﬁcantly increasing the diﬃculty of training. After con-
sulting with a medical doctor, we managed to clarify the quality of retrieval for three
questions. In Table 8.1, we present one and the rest in Appendix D.
In Table 8.1, the patient suﬀer from diabetic ketoacidosis.
The decision on what
treatment to administer ﬁrst depends on the most life-threatening condition for the
patient. Both the blood pressure (80/55 mm Hg), pH level (7.1), and potassium level
(4.1 mEq/L) are low, and all need to be treated. The low blood pressure points toward
hypoperfusion, the pH level metabolic acidosis, and the potassium level hypokalemia,
while the glucose level is associated with hyperglycemia. In this case, the patient has
a circulatory shock, which tells that hypoperfusion needs to be treated ﬁrst. However,
all answer options are valid treatments.
As for retrieving evidence, a model beneﬁts from understanding levels and units. The
retrieved evidence correctly revolves around blood pressure, though it describes how
to treat high blood pressure (hypertension). The relevant evidence should instead
describe how to treat low blood pressure or review the approach for prioritizing treat-
ment of a critically ill patient.
==PAGE:55==
8 Discussion
47
Question
A 19-year-old boy presents with confusion and the inability to speak properly.
The patient’s
mother says that, a few hours ago, she noticed a change in the way he talked and that he appeared
to be in a daze.
He then lost consciousness, and she managed to get him to the hospital.
She
is also concerned about the weight he has lost over the past few months. His blood pressure is
80/55 mm Hg, pulse is 115/min, temperature is 37.2 C (98.9 F), and respiratory rate is 18/min.
On physical examination, the patient is taking rapid, deep breaths, and his breath has a fruity
odor. Dry mucous membranes and dry skin are noticeable. He is unable to cooperate for a mental
status examination. Results of his arterial blood gas analysis are shown.
•
Pco2 16 mm Hg
•
HCO3 10 mEq/L
•
Po2 91 mm Hg
•
pH 7.1
His glucose level is 450 mg/dL, and his potassium level is 4.1 mEq/L. Which of the following
should be treated ﬁrst in this patient?
Options
A: Hypoperfusion, B: Hyperglycemia, C: Metabolic acidosis, D: Hypokalemia
BM25
+
exact
match
To lower blood pressure rapidly (within a few hours); as soon as reasonable blood pressure con-
trol is achieved, oral antihypertensive therapy should be substituted because this allows smoother
long-term management of hypertension.
the goal of treatment in the ﬁrst few hours or days is
not complete normalization of blood pressure because chronic hypertension is associated with
autoregulatory changes in cerebral blood ﬂow. thus, rapid normalization of blood pressure may
lead to cerebral hypoperfusion and brain injury. rather, blood pressure should be lowered by
about 25%, maintaining diastolic blood pressure at no less than 100110 mm hg. subsequently,
blood pressure can be reduced to normal levels using oral medications over several weeks. the
parenteral drugs used to treat hypertensive emergencies include sodium sympathoplegics, centrally
acting nitroprusside, nitroglycerin, labetalol, calcium channel blockers, fenoldopam, and
Table 8.1: An example of the MedQA dataset illustrating the quality of retrieval.
Some speciﬁc information is critical to answering the question, while others are irrel-
evant and act as misleading information for the examiners. Thus, the many diﬀerent
endings to type 2 questions (see Table 6.4) impose the retriever to use speciﬁc parts
of the question while ignoring other aspects. We see to a large extent that sparse
retrieval, as expected, results in keyword matching (e.g., blood pressure marked as
bold in Table 8.1). Instead, we need a more complex retriever to understand the
semantic relationship between documents and parts of the question.
Regularization techniques. BERT models are highly expressive, comprising at
least a hundred million parameters and a dozen layers. Although BERT-based ap-
proaches dominate leaderboards in various NLP tasks, it often overﬁts when there
are only a small number of training samples available [Lee16], as in the MedQA task.
Regularization is a technique for addressing this problem to reduce overﬁtting and im-
prove generalization. In Table 7.3, we show how a simple sample technique mitigates
overﬁtting and yield better generalization.
Regularization is also achievable by modifying the training algorithm. Dropout does
this by randomly ignoring nodes (along with their weights) from the neural network
during training [Sri14]. This prevents nodes from creating coherent relationships. In
eﬀect, each weight between the nodes of consecutive layers is randomly dropped based
on a dropout ratio, and the remaining network is trained akin to the process described
in Section 2.1. One can view each update to concern a diﬀerent architecture of the
conﬁgured network. Appendix E shows how EWQA can preserve performance even
though dropping 30% of the weights, hence reducing training accuracy.
However,
there are many other eﬀective methods to regularize BERT that might lead to even
==PAGE:56==
48
8 Discussion
better performance [Lee16].
Corpora aspect. OpenQA systems, regardless of the training scheme, depends on
a retriever for ﬁnding relevant documents in a corpus, and a reader for inferring
answers from those documents. Thus, retriever quality is crucial, making the corpus
an indispensable factor. A vast range of extensive corpora has proven to be eﬀective in
a general domain. However, in speciﬁc domains, such as the medical, the collection is
often sparse and can impede bridging modern OpenQA techniques to speciﬁc domains.
With the MedxWiki corpus, we enlighten the process of sieving the full Wikipedia
corpus to the needs of a speciﬁc domain using the answer strings of a QA dataset.
Question
a 5 year old girl is brought to the emergency department by her mother because of multiple
episodes of nausea and vomiting that last about 2 hours.
during this period she has had 6 8
episodes of bilious vomiting and abdominal pain. the vomiting was preceded by fatigue. the girl
feels well between these episodes. she has missed several days of school and has been hospitalized
2 times during the past 6 months for dehydration due to similar episodes of vomiting and nausea.
the patient has lived with her mother since her parents divorced 8 months ago. her immunizations
are up to date. she is at the 60th percentile for height and 30th percentile for weight. she appears
emaciated. her temperature is 36. 8 c 98. 8 f pulse is 99 min and blood pressure is 82 52 mm
hg. examination shows dry mucous membranes. the lungs are clear to auscultation. abdominal
examination shows a soft abdomen with mild diﬀuse tenderness with no guarding or rebound. the
remainder of the physical examination shows no abnormalities. which of the following is the most
likely diagnosis?
Options
A: cyclic vomiting syndrome, B: gastroenteritis, C: hypertrophic pyloric stenosis, D: gastroe-
sophageal reﬂux disease
Document
from
MedQA
headache, and sweating patient presentation : be is a 45 - year - old woman who presents with
concerns about sudden ( paroxysmal ), intense, brief episodes of headache, sweating (diaphoresis),
and a racing heart (palpitations). focused history : be reports that the attacks started
3 weeks
ago. they last from 2 to 10 minutes, during which time she feels quite anxious. during the attacks,
it feels as though her heart is skipping beats (arrhythmia). at ﬁrst, she thought the attacks were
related to recent stress at work and maybe even menopause. the last time it happened, she was
in a pharmacy and had her blood pressure taken. she was told it was 165 / 110 mm hg. be notes
that she has lost weight („8 lbs) in this period even though her appetite has been good. pertinent
ﬁndings : the physical examination was remarkable for be
s thin, pale
Document
from
MedxWiki
pital, or calcarine sulci. follow - up meg demonstrated shifting localization or disappearance of
meg spikes.
illustrative cases in a typical presentation of panayiotopoulos syndrome, the child
looks pale, vomits, and is fully conscious, able to speak, and understand but complains of feeling
sick.
two thirds of the seizures start in sleep ; the child may wake up with similar complaints
while still conscious or else may be found vomiting, conscious, confused, or unresponsive. case 1.
a girl had 2 seizures in sleep at 6 years of age. in the ﬁrst ﬁt she was found vomiting vigorously,
eyes turned to one side, pale, and unresponsive. her condition remained unchanged for 3 hours
before she developed generalized tonic - clonic convulsions. she gradually improved, and by the
next morning was normal. the second seizure occurred 4 months later. she awoke and told her
mother that she wanted to vomit,
Table 8.2: An example of the retrieved documents from the MedQA and MedxWiki corpus respectively.
We compare the retrieved documents of the MedxWiki to the ones of MedQA to clarify
their distinctions. In Table 8.2 we present one example and a few more in Appendix F.
In general, our analysis reveals that documents retrieved from the MedQA corpus tend
to revolve around case studies written similar to the question, as seen in Table 8.2,
but does not necessarily concern the same symptoms. In contrast to the MedxWiki
corpus that retrieves fewer case-based documents. However, our approach in querying
against the Wikipedia API results in many noisy articles. For example, Table F.1 in
Appendix F illustrates how a document retrieved from the MedxWiki corpus clearly
originates from a non-medical article. The analysis also indicates that the MedxWiki
==PAGE:57==
8 Discussion
49
corpus tends to extract a more diverse set of documents D for each answer option. In
contrast, the MedQA corpus often extracts the same D for all answer options. Overall,
both corpora distinctly yield adequate evidence and seem to supplement each other
well as seen in Table 7.4, indicating that further reﬁnements to the corpora might
enhance the end-to-end QA accuracy.
Augmenting ScispaCy match with dependency parsing. The words of a sen-
tence and their associated set of directed grammatical relations describe the syntactic
structure [Jur19]. In Figure 8.1, we illustrate such ties between the words of a ran-
dom answer string within MedQA. These relations are directed labeled arcs going
from heads to dependents. The ScispaCy match only takes word-order into account
when arranging the entities. Thus, ScispaCy match v2 will process the answer string
presented in Figure 8.1 into the set of entities (Increase, heart rate decrease, diastole
duration), though, increase clearly is an attribute to heart rate. A dependency gram-
mar approach abstracts away from word-order information, where the head-dependent
relations discovered by a dependency-based approach provide an approximation to
the semantic relationship between words. Augmenting ScispaCy match with a depen-
dency grammar approach will help merge entities only when related semantically to
other entities.
Figure 8.1: The typed dependency structure of a random answer string within MedQA.
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
This thesis has focused on bridging modern OpenQA techniques to medical profession-
als and has provided further insight into challenges when extending state-of-the-art
approaches to medicine. We have studied the task of building an OpenQA system to
make patient-centered clinical decisions. As a means to this, we proposed an entity-
guided supervision framework which turned out to be ineﬀective, even though it has
proven to yield good performance in a general domain. Nevertheless, it led us to a
better understanding of what eﬀective retrieval in medicine implies. We also devel-
oped a simple yet eﬀective sampling technique concerning the retrieval scores as a
probability to alleviate overﬁtting, and cover as many relevant documents as possi-
ble during training. Results show that sampling is highly eﬀective and can improve
the end-to-end QA accuracy by 2%-7% absolute. Moreover, we are particularly opti-
mistic about our proposed procedure of building the MedxWiki corpus, helping our
end-to-end QA system establish new state-of-the-art on the US MedQA task. We
believe such a procedure can help overcome a cold start problem for domains where
the collection of published corpora are sparse or even transform closed QA datasets
into OpenQA datasets.
Future Work
Given what we have learned throughout the thesis, this section elaborates on what
experiments we would like to conduct in our future work to improve on the MedQA
task:
Iterative attention for answering complex questions. We consider the men-
tioned problem of answering the complex questions of type 2. This type of question
requires a standard machine reading comprehension model and a multi-hop mech-
anism to retrieve relevant evidence and attend to questions based on the retrieved
evidence. Moreover, it is critical to allow the model to navigate through a document
by understanding the relationship between documents and parts of the question. The
authors of [Sun21] demonstrates how hierarchical attention improves performance on
several multi-hop OpenQA tasks.
YONO (You Only Need One model). Despite performing related tasks, the
retriever-reader architecture is not sharing parameters, despite the training scheme,
==PAGE:59==
9 Conclusion
51
and is weakly coupled in an end-to-end manner. [YONO] propose a singular model
architecture for OpenQA, embedding the retriever component and the re-ranking
mechanism as hard-attention mechanisms, leading to better gradient ﬂow during in-
ference. Their novel model architecture outperforms the conventional state-of-the-art
models.
Transform answering problem to span-based.
The retrieval stage for the
MedQA task extracts a similar set of documents D for each answer option. Modifying
the multiple-choice answering setting to a span-based will ease the job of reasoning
over evidence documents. However, the object of inferring an answer string from
medical documents is not trivial when the answers are not concise. Moreover, it will
still be a hurdle to handle multiple entities and disambiguate medical terminology.
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
[Agg18]
Charu C. Aggarwal. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Springer
International Publishing, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-94463-
0.
[Bah16]
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural
Machine Translation by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate.
2016. arXiv: 1409.0473 [cs.CL].
[Cha21]
Sneha Chaudhari et al. An Attentive Survey of Attention Models.
2021. arXiv: 1904.02874 [cs.LG].
[DrQA]
Danqi Chen et al. “Reading Wikipedia to Answer Open-Domain
Questions.” In: (2017). arXiv: 1704.00051 [cs.CL].
[Cho14]
Kyunghyun Cho et al. On the Properties of Neural Machine Trans-
lation: Encoder-Decoder Approaches. 2014. arXiv: 1409.1259 [cs.CL].
[Cho19]
François Chollet. “On the Measure of Intelligence.” In: (2019). arXiv:
1911.01547 [cs.AI].
[BERT]
Jacob Devlin et al. “BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional
Transformers for Language Understanding.” In: (2019). arXiv: 1810.
04805 [cs.CL].
[FindZebra]
Radu Dragusin et al. “FindZebra: A search engine for rare diseases.”
In: International Journal of Medical Informatics 82.6 (March 2013),
pages 528–538. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2013.01.005. arXiv:
1303.3229.
[Gra12]
Alex Graves. Sequence Transduction with Recurrent Neural Net-
works. 2012. arXiv: 1211.3711 [cs.NE].
[PubMedBERT]
Yu Gu et al. Domain-Speciﬁc Language Model Pretraining for Biomed-
ical Natural Language Processing. 2020. eprint: arXiv:2007.15779.
[REALM]
Kelvin Guu et al. “REALM: Retrieval-Augmented Language Model
Pre-Training.” In: 37th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, ICML 2020 PartF16814 (February 2020), pages 3887–3896.
arXiv: 2002.08909.
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
53
[MedQA]
Di Jin et al. “What Disease does this Patient Have? A Large-scale
Open Domain Question Answering Dataset from Medical Exams.”
In: (September 2020). arXiv: 2009.13081.
[PubMedQA]
Qiao Jin et al. “PubMedQA: A Dataset for Biomedical Research
Question Answering.” In: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP). 2019, pages 2567–2577.
[FAISS]
JeﬀJohnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billion-scale sim-
ilarity search with GPUs. 2017. arXiv: 1702.08734 [cs.CV].
[DPR]
Vladimir Karpukhin et al. “Dense Passage Retrieval for Open-
Domain Question Answering.” In: (2020). arXiv: 2004.04906 [cs.CL].
[ColBERT-QA]
Omar Khattab, Christopher Potts, and Matei Zaharia. “Relevance-
guided Supervision for OpenQA with ColBERT.” In: (July 2020).
arXiv: 2007.00814.
[ColBERT]
Omar Khattab and Matei Zaharia. “ColBERT: Eﬃcient and Ef-
fective Passage Search via Contextualized Late Interaction over
BERT.” In: (2020). arXiv: 2004.12832 [cs.IR].
[YONO]
Haejun Lee et al. You Only Need One Model for Open-domain
Question Answering. 2021. arXiv: 2112.07381 [cs.CL].
[Lee16]
Hyun Dong Lee, Seongmin Lee, and U. Kang. “AUBER: Auto-
mated BERT regularization.” In: PLOS ONE 16.6 (June 2021).
Edited by Khanh N.Q.Editor Le, e0253241. issn: 1932-6203. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0253241.
[ORQA]
Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, and Kristina Toutanova. “Latent
Retrieval for Weakly Supervised Open Domain Question Answer-
ing.” In: (2019). arXiv: 1906.00300 [cs.CL].
[Lil20]
Timothy P. Lillicrap et al. “Backpropagation and the brain.” In:
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 21 (2020), pages 335–346.
[RoBERTa]
Yinhan Liu et al. “RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pre-
training Approach.” In: (2019). arXiv: 1907.11692 [cs.CL].
[Jur19]
Daniel Jurafsky James H. Martin. “Dependency Parsing.” In: Speech
and Language Processing (3rd ed.) 2019. Chapter 14.
[MoP]
Zaiqiao Meng et al. Mixture-of-Partitions: Infusing Large Biomedi-
cal Knowledge Graphs into BERT. 2021. arXiv: 2109.04810 [cs.CL].
[PS19]
Patienterstatningen Dansk Selskab for Patientsikkerhed. Veje til
bedre diagnoser. 2019. url: https : / / patientsikkerhed . dk /
content / uploads / 2019 / 12 / vejetilbedrediagnoserdec2019 .
pdf.
==PAGE:62==
54
Bibliography
[RocketQA]
Yingqi Qu et al. “RocketQA: An Optimized Training Approach to
Dense Passage Retrieval for Open-Domain Question Answering.”
In: (2021). arXiv: 2010.08191 [cs.CL].
[DistilBERT]
Victor Sanh et al. “DistilBERT, a distilled version of BERT: smaller,
faster, cheaper and lighter.” In: (2020). arXiv: 1910.01108 [cs.CL].
[ScispaCy]
“ScispaCy: Fast and Robust Models for Biomedical Natural Lan-
guage Processing.” In: (2019), pages 319–327. url: https://github.
com/allenai/.
[Sri14]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neu-
ral Networks from Overﬁtting.” In: Journal of Machine Learning
Research 15 (June 2014), pages 1929–1958.
[Sun21]
Haitian Sun, William W. Cohen, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Itera-
tive Hierarchical Attention for Answering Complex Questions over
Long Documents. 2021. arXiv: 2106.00200 [cs.CL].
[Sut14]
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. “Sequence to Se-
quence Learning with Neural Networks.” In: Proceedings of the
27th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems - Volume 2. NIPS’14. Montreal, Canada: MIT Press, 2014,
pages 3104–3112.
[Vas17]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention Is All You Need.” In: (2017).
arXiv: 1706.03762 [cs.CL].
[Zhu21]
Fengbin Zhu et al. “Retrieving and Reading: A Comprehensive
Survey on Open-domain Question Answering.” In: (2021). arXiv:
2101.00774 [cs.AI].
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX A
MedQA Data
Table A.1: Three examples of the MetaMap recognized medical entities within a question.
Question
A 42-year-old woman comes to the physician because of an episode of coughing with
bloody sputum. Over the past 5 months, she has had a persistent nonproductive cough,
excessive fatigue, and a 5.6-kg (12.3-lb) weight loss. She does not smoke. Physical
examination shows no abnormalities. An x-ray of the chest shows a 2.0-cm nodule with
irregular borders at the upper lobe of the left lung. A CT-guided biopsy of the lung
nodule is performed. Pathologic examination of the biopsy specimen is most likely to
show which of the following?
Answer options
A: Small cell lung carcinoma, B: Large cell lung carcinoma, C: Bronchial carcinoid tumor,
D: Adenocarcinoma
Base entities
year old woman, physician, of, episode, coughing, bloody sputum, past, months,
persistent nonproductive cough, excessive fatigue, 5.6 kg, weight loss, not smoke,
abnormalities, x-ray of, chest, 2.0, nodule, irregular borders, the upper lobe of, left lung,
CT-guided biopsy of, lung nodule, performed, Pathologic examination, biopsy specimen,
to, following
Question
A 19-year-old female college student comes to the physician for a sudden loss of visual
acuity of her right eye. She noticed that she was unable to read the time on the alarm
clock when she woke up in the morning. When she closes her right eye, she is able to see
sharply. When she closes her left eye, she has blurry double vision. She does not recall
trauma to her eye but has been working long nights on her honors thesis. She has a
history of occasional shoulder luxation. She is 180 cm (5 ft 11 in) tall, and weighs 62 kg
(136 lbs); her BMI is 19.1 kg/m2. Her vital signs are within normal limits. On physical
examination, slender and long ﬁngers are noted. She has several ﬂat, demarcated
brownish nevi on her left cheek. Ocular examination shows upward temporal subluxation
of her right lens. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis in this patient?
Answer options
A: Joint hypermobility syndrome, B: Sturge-Weber syndrome, C: Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome, D: Marfan syndrome
Base entities
year old female, physician, sudden loss of visual acuity, right eye, unable to, time, alarm
clock, woke up, morning, closes, right eye, able to see, closes, left eye, blurry double
vision, not, trauma, eye, long nights, history, occasional shoulder luxation, 5 ft, tall, 62
kg, lbs, BMI, kg/m2, vital signs, normal limits, long ﬁngers, noted, several ﬂat, nevi, left
cheek, Ocular, upward temporal subluxation of, right lens, following, diagnosis, patient
Question
A 64-year-old woman comes to the physician because of several episodes of dizziness
during the last month. The episodes last between 30-40 seconds and during the episodes
she feels as though she is spinning. Episodes usually occur immediately after lying down
or suddenly sitting up from a reclined position. They also sometimes happen when she
suddenly turns her head to look at something. She has no nausea. Last month, she had
an upper respiratory tract infection that resolved spontaneously. She has hypertension
treated with hydrochlorothiazide. Otoscopic examination shows no abnormalities. There
is no lateralization when a vibrating 512 Hz tuning fork is placed in the middle of the
forehead. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
Answer options
A: Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo , B: Persistent postural-perceptual
dizziness, C: Meniere disease, D: Acoustic neuroma
Base entities
64 year old woman, physician, of several episodes, dizziness, last month, episodes last,
seconds, episodes, spinning, Episodes usually occur immediately, lying, sitting up,
position, sometimes, turns, head to look, nausea, month, upper respiratory tract
infection, resolved, hypertension treated with hydrochlorothiazide, Otoscopic,
abnormalities, Hz tuning fork, middle, forehead, following, diagnosis
==PAGE:64==
APPENDIX B
Relevance Classifiers
Table B.1: Top 100 match triggers concerning positive documents for the diﬀerent relevance
classiﬁers.
Exact Match
ScispaCy Match
v0
v1
v2
1
Reassurance
Inhibition
Personality disorder
Inhibition
2
Aspirin
Serum
Ultrasound
Prednisone
3
Haloperidol
Insulin
Prednisone
Reassurance
4
Indomethacin
Activity
Schizophrenia
Propranolol
5
Propranolol
Mother
Reassurance
Ultrasound
6
Prednisone
Reassurance
Propranolol
Insulin
7
Adenovirus
Synthesis
Aspirin
Aspirin
8
Methotrexate
Prednisone
Hypertension
Fluoxetine
9
Staphylococcus
aureus
Antibody
Indomethacin
Mother
10
Fluoxetine
Propranolol
Haloperidol
Adrenal
11
Schizophrenia
Aspirin
Personality disorders
History
12
Vancomycin
Medications
S. aureus
Lung
13
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
Infection
Ultrasound
Antibody
14
Enalapril
Concentration
Adrenal
Drug
15
Naloxone
Adrenal
Thiamine
Rifampin
16
Colonoscopy
Lung
Echocardiogram
Amoxicillin
17
Observation
Ultrasound
Hepatitis
Ultrasound
18
Persistent depressive
disorder
Mutations
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
Test
19
Lisinopril
Rifampin
Deﬁency
Indomethacin
20
Echocardiography
Amoxicillin
Vancomycin
Infection
21
Lumbar puncture
Ultrasound
Hepatitis B
Azithromycin
22
Hyperkalemia
History
Fluoxetine
Glucose
23
Chlamydia trachomatis
Drug
Normal
Medications
24
Hypertension
Test
Adenovirus
Ceftriaxone
25
Fibroadenoma
Fluoxetine
Methotrexate
Haloperidol
26
Pyridoxine
Abdominal
Azithromycin
Observation
27
Amoxicillin
Azithromycin
B-cell CLL
Hepatitis B
28
Squamous cell
carcinoma
Glucose
ERCP
Abdominal
29
Sodium Bicarbonate
Positive
Placental abruption
Methotrexate
30
Finasteride
Discharge
Hemophilia
Thiamine
31
Magnesium sulfate
Fluid
Mass
Vancomycin
32
Hypokalemia
Ceftriaxone
Observation
Trimethoprim-
Sulfamethoxazole
33
Epinephrine
Vancomycin
Calcium
Hypertension
34
Allopurinol
Urine
Heparin
Heart failure
35
Trastuzumab
Hypertension
Magnesium sulfate
S. aureus
==PAGE:65==
B Relevance Classifiers
57
Table B.1: Top 100 match triggers concerning positive documents for the diﬀerent relevance
classiﬁers.
Exact Match
ScispaCy Match
v0
v1
v2
36
Ventricular septal defect
Vaccines
Hypokalemia
Magnetic resonance
imaging
37
Furosmide
Methotrexate
Supplementation
Magnesium sulfate
38
Fomepizole
Haloperidol
Heart failure
Colonoscopy
39
Acalculous cholecystitis
Pregnancy
Enalapril
Schizophrenia
40
Epstein-Barr virus
Heparin
Naloxone
Pregnancy
41
Smoking
Thiamine
Glucagon
Warfarin
42
Asthma
Mutation
Pericarditis
Antibiotics
43
Leiomyoma
Disease
Epsterin-Barr virus
Adenovirus
44
Conversion disorder
Accumulation
Lumbar puncture
Surgery
45
Smoking cessation
Magnetic resonance
imaging
Development
Hemophilia
46
Trimethoprim-
sufamethoxazole
Surgery
Warfarin
B-cell CLL
47
Lithium
Colonoscopy
Transfusion
Mutations
48
Doxycline
Hepatitis
Ventricular septal defect
Positive
49
Warfarin
Bladder
Amoxicillin
Murmur
50
Methormin
Hepatitis B
Lisinopril
Calcium
51
Liver
Heart failure
Acalculous cholecystitis
Drugs
52
Prolactin
Indomethacin
Erythromycin
Colonoscopy
53
Autosomal dominant
S. aureus
Asthma
Liver
54
Penicillin
Enalapril
Colonoscopy
Parents
55
Osteosarcoma
Red blood cells
Erythropoietin
Heparin
56
Bone marrow biopsy
Magnesium sulfate
Chorionic gonadtropin
Lisinopril
57
Vitamin B1
Hemoglobin
Oral contraceptives
Acidosis
58
Ureter
Cells
TSH level
Ceserean delivery
59
Hemodialysis
Schizophrenia
Laparotomy
Levothyroxine
60
Generalised anxiety
disorder
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
Cesarean delivery
Rupture
61
Inﬂuenza vaccine
Murmur
Pneumococcal
Lumbar puncture
62
Phenylanine
Warfarin
Regurgitation
Intubation
63
Glucagon
Antibiotics
Methylprednisolone
Hypokalamia
64
Digoxin
Adenovirus
Treatment
T cells
65
IL-6
Cesarean delivery
Hyperkalemia
Doxycycline
66
Aldolase B
Hemophilia
Human chorionic
gonadotropin
Macrophages
67
Surgery
Follow-up
Tubercolosis
Enalapril
68
Erythromycin
B-cell CLL
Follow-up
Disease
69
Hydroxyurea
Calcium
Colonoscopy
Skin
70
Breast cancer
Supplementation
Liver
Naloxone
71
Adenosine
Doxycycline
Insulin
Glucagon
72
Adenovirus
Macrophages
Chromosomes
Oral contraceptives
73
Bromocriptine
Metoprolol
PCOS
Epstein-Barr virus
74
Labetalol
Liver
Sodium bicarbonate
Tumor
75
Hydrochlorothiazide
Formation
Rubella
Echocardiogram
76
CT scan
Parents
Hydrochorothiazide
Methylprednisolone
77
Colonoscopy
Placental
Finasteride
Hyperkalemia
78
Flutamide
Plasma
Smoking
ERCP
79
Heparin
Acidosis
Ceftriaxone
Blood pressure
80
Hypercalcemia
Levothyroxine
Diabetes
Pain
81
Carbamazepine
Oral
Allopurinol
Placental abruption
82
Exploratory laparotomy
Drugs
Doxycycline
Child
==PAGE:66==
58
B Relevance Classifiers
Table B.1: Top 100 match triggers concerning positive documents for the diﬀerent relevance
classiﬁers.
Exact Match
ScispaCy Match
v0
v1
v2
83
Optic nerve
Rupture
Transvaginal ultrasound
Biopsy
84
Clozapine
Tumor
X-linked
Phenylalanine
85
Rifampin
Smoking
Corticosteroid
Debridement
86
Autism spectrum
disorder
Intubation
Magnetic resonance
imaging
Fluid
87
Tyrosine
Anemia
Atorvastatin
Erythropoietin
88
Gastrin
Examination
Human papillomavirus
Red blood cells
89
Duodenum
Colonoscopy
Overdose
Hemoglobin
90
Neuroblastoma
Chest
P. aeruginosa
Urinalysis
91
Amiodarone
Dopamine
Hypercalcemia
Diabetes
92
Uterine artery
Skin
Iron
Breast cancer
93
Displacement
Glucagon
Prolactin
CT scan
94
Pioglitazone
Vaginal
Carbamazepine
Corticosteroid
95
Metoprolol
Lisinopril
Albuterol
Abdomen
96
Emphysema
Concentrations
Trastuzumab
Bleeding
97
Historic personality
disorder
Antibodies
Rifampin
Labetalol
98
Rubella
Positive for
Thyroiditis
Pco2
99
Leukemoid reaction
Lumbar puncture
Anxiety
Follow-up
100
DiGeorge syndrome
Chest
Acetaminophen
Chest
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX C
Choice of Length
Figure C.1: Reader test accuracy with diﬀerent passage length based on 5 runs over 30 epochs.
Figure C.2: Reader validation accuracy with diﬀerent passage length based on 5 runs over 30 epochs.
==PAGE:68==
APPENDIX D
False Positives
In Table D.1, the information on the patient being a 5-year-old is essential, ruling out
the Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (HPS) and Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease (GRD)
as the diagnosis.
HPS only occurs in infants immediately after birth while GRD
rarely occurs in children after 18 months of age. It leaves us with 2 options: Cyclic
vomiting syndrome and Gastroenteritis. To distinguish between these, the duration
of symptoms (6 months) is essential since Gastroenteritis mostly lasts only a few days.
By the exclusion method, we can thus conclude that the diagnosis is Cyclic vomiting
syndrome which also ﬁts the patient’s described condition.
The retrieved evidence correctly revolves around cyclic vomiting syndrome. However,
in order to diagnose correctly, we need evidence that tells how functional vomiting
(i.e., cyclinc vomiting syndrome) diﬀers from the three other diagnosis, e.g., typically
age range or symptom duration as described above.
Question
A 5-year-old girl is brought to the emergency department by her mother because of multiple
episodes of nausea and vomiting that last about 2 hours.
During this period, she has had 6
episodes of bilious vomiting and abdominal pain. The vomiting was preceded by fatigue. The girl
feels well between these episodes. She has missed several days of school and has been hospitalized
2 times during the past 6 months for dehydration due to similar episodes of vomiting and nausea.
The patient has lived with her mother since her parents divorced 8 months ago. Her immunizations
are up-to-date. She is at the 60th percentile for height and 30th percentile for weight. She appears
emaciated. Her temperature is 36.8C (98.8F), pulse is 99/min, and blood pressure is 82/52 mm
Hg. Examination shows dry mucous membranes. The lungs are clear to auscultation. Abdominal
examination shows a soft abdomen with mild diﬀuse tenderness with no guarding or rebound. The
remainder of the physical examination shows no abnormalities. Which of the following is the most
likely diagnosis?
Options
A: Cyclic vomiting syndrome, B: Gastroenteritis, C: Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis, D: Gas-
troesophageal reﬂux disease
BM25
+
exact
match
functional vomiting is deﬁned as one or more vomiting episodes weekly in the absence of an eating
disorder or psychiatric disease. cyclic vomiting syndrome presents with periodic discrete episodes
of relentless nausea and vomiting in children and adults and shows an association with migraine
headaches, suggesting that some cases may be migraine variants. some adult cases have been de-
scribed in association with rapid gastric emptying. a related condition, cannabinoid hyperemesis
syndrome, presents with cyclical vomiting with intervening well periods in individuals (mostly
men) who use large quantities of cannabis over many years and resolves with its discontinuation.
pathologic behaviors such as taking prolonged hot baths or showers are associated with the syn-
drome. rumination syndrome, characterized by repetitive regurgitation of recently ingested food,
is often misdiagnosed as refractory vomiting. extraperitoneal disorders myocardial infarction and
congestive heart failure may cause nausea and vomiting. postoperative emesis occurs
Table D.1: An example of a false positive labeled document using BM25 and Exact match.
==PAGE:69==
D False Positives
61
In Table D.2 the diagnosis is neisseria gonorrhoeae septicemia with urethritis and
septic arthritis.
The question is shorter than the average, and we only need the
information blocks cell wall synthesis to deduce which of the antibiotics was given.
Ceftriaxone is the only antibiotic that meets this criterion. So in principle all other
information in the question is irrelevant.
The retrieved evidence is correctly labeled as a positive document since it presents 3
diﬀerent antibiotics for the treatment of septic arthritis (ceftriaxone, cefotaxime og
vancomycin), where ceftriaxone is the only one part of the answer options.
Question
A 21-year-old sexually active male complains of fever, pain during urination, and inﬂammation
and pain in the right knee.
a culture of the joint ﬂuid shows a bacteria that does not ferment
maltose and has no polysaccharide capsule. the physician orders antibiotic therapy for the patient.
the mechanism of action of action of the medication given blocks cell wall synthesis, which of the
following was given?
Options
A: Gentamicin, B: Ciproﬂoxacin, C: Ceftriaxone, D: Trimethoprim
BM25
+
exact
match
joint can prevent destruction of cartilage, post infectious degenerative arthritis, joint instability,
or deformity.
once samples of blood and synovial ﬂuid have been obtained for culture, empiri-
cal antibiotics should be given that are directed against the bacteria visualized on smears or the
pathogens that are likely in light of the patient s age and risk factors.
initial therapy should
consist of iv administration of bactericidal agents ; direct instillation of antibiotics into the joint
is not necessary to achieve adequate levels in synovial ﬂuid and tissue. an iv third - generation
cephalosporin such as cefotaxime (1g every 8h) or ceftriaxone (12g every 24h) provides adequate
empirical coverage for most community - acquired infections in adults when smears show no or-
ganisms. iv vancomycin (1g every 12h) is used if there are gram - positive cocci on the sm
Table D.2: An example of a true positive labeled document using BM25 and Exact match.
==PAGE:70==
APPENDIX E
Overfitting
Figure E.1: Train accuracy. for the best performing model and with added dropout based on 3 runs over
30 epochs.
Figure E.2: Test accuracy for the best performing model and with added dropout based on 3 runs over
30 epochs.
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX F
Corpora Examination
Question
a 40 year old woman presents with diﬃculty falling asleep diminished appetite and tiredness for
the past 6 weeks. she says that despite going to bed early at night she is unable to fall asleep.
she denies feeling anxious or having disturbing thoughts while in bed. even when she manages to
fall asleep she wakes up early in the morning and is unable to fall back asleep. she says she has
grown increasingly irritable and feels increasingly hopeless and her concentration and interest at
work have diminished. the patient denies thoughts of suicide or death. because of her diminished
appetite she has lost 4 kg 8. 8 lb in the last few weeks and has started drinking a glass of wine
every night instead of eating dinner. she has no signiﬁcant past medical history and is not on any
medications. which of the following is the best course of treatment in this patient?
Options
A: diazepam, B: paroxetine, C: zolpidem, D: trazodone
Document
from
MedQA
headache, and sweating patient presentation : be is a 45 - year - old woman who presents with
concerns about sudden ( paroxysmal ), intense, brief episodes of headache, sweating (diaphoresis),
and a racing heart (palpitations). focused history : be reports that the attacks started
3 weeks
ago. they last from 2 to 10 minutes, during which time she feels quite anxious. during the attacks,
it feels as though her heart is skipping beats (arrhythmia). at ﬁrst, she thought the attacks were
related to recent stress at work and maybe even menopause. the last time it happened, she was
in a pharmacy and had her blood pressure taken. she was told it was 165 / 110 mm hg. be notes
that she has lost weight („8 lbs) in this period even though her appetite has been good. pertinent
ﬁndings : the physical examination was remarkable for be
s thin, pale
Document
from
MedxWiki
hillary to the middle east to talk about how these countries can transition to new leaders though,
i’ve got to be honest, she’s gotten a little passionate about the subject. these past few weeks it’s
been tough falling asleep with hillary out there on pennsylvania avenue shouting, throwing rocks
at the window. " in any case, obama’s reference to clinton travelling a lot was true enough ; by now
she had logged in her boeing 757, more than any other secretary of state for a comparable period
of time, and had visited 79 countries while in the oﬃce.
time magazine wrote that " clinton’s
endurance is legendary " and that she would still be going at the end of long work days even as
her staﬀmembers were glazing out. the key was her ability to fall asleep on demand, at any time
and place, for power naps. clinton also saw the potential political changes in the mideast as an
opportunity for an even more fundamental change
Table F.1: An example of the two diﬀerent retrieved documents from the MedQA and MedxWiki corpus.
==PAGE:72==
64
F Corpora Examination
Question
a 37 year old female with a history of type ii diabetes mellitus presents to the emergency depart-
ment complaining of blood in her urine left sided ﬂank pain nausea and fever.
she also states
that she has pain with urination. vital signs include temperature is 102 deg f 39. 4 deg c blood
pressure is 114 82 mmhg pulse is 96 min respirations are 18 and oxygen saturation of 97 on room
air.
on physical examination the patient appears uncomfortable and has tenderness on the left
ﬂank and left costovertebral angle. which of the following is the next best step in management?
Options
A: obtain an abdominal ct scan, B: obtain a urine analysis and urine culture, C: begin
intravenous treatment with ceftazidime, D: no treatment is necessary
Document
from
MedQA
rim, & quinolones camille e. beauduy, pharmd, & lisa g. winston, md ‹ a 59 - year - old woman
presents to an urgent care clinic with a 4 - day history of frequent and painful urination.
she
has had fevers, chills, and ﬂank pain for the past 2 days.
her physician advised her to come
immediately to the clinic for evaluation.
in the clinic she is febrile (38.
5˝c [ 101.
3˝f ]) but
otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting.
her urine dipstick
test is positive for leukocyte esterase. urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. her past medical
history is signiﬁcant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. each episode was uncom
- plicated, treated with trimethoprim - sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved.
she also has
osteoporosis
Document
from
MedxWiki
hydronephrosis describes dilation of the renal pelvis and calyces as a result of obstruction to urine
ﬂow. signs and symptoms the signs and symptoms of hydronephrosis depend upon whether the
obstruction is acute or chronic, partial or complete, unilateral or bilateral. hydronephrosis that
occurs acutely with sudden onset (as caused by a kidney stone) can cause intense pain in the ﬂank
area (between the hips and ribs). historically, this type of pain has been described as "dietl’s crisis".
conversely, hydronephrosis that develops gradually will generally cause either a dull discomfort
or no pain. nausea and vomiting may also occur. an obstruction that occurs at the urethra or
bladder outlet can cause pain and pressure resulting from distension of the bladder. blocking the
ﬂow of urine will commonly result in urinary tract infections which can lead to the development
of stones, fever, and blood or pus in the urine
Table F.2: An example of the two diﬀerent retrieved documents from the MedQA and MedxWiki corpus.
==PAGE:73==
==PAGE:74==
