==PAGE:1==
DTU - Denmarks Technical University
A semiglobal model for
ammonia/heptane ignition
Master thesis
Author - Emil Rasmussen
Supervisors - Peter Glarborg, Hamid Hashemi, Lauge Thorsen
Department of chemical and biochemical engineering - DTU
January 14, 2022
==PAGE:2==
1
Acknowledgements
This project would not have been possible without my supervisors Peter Glarborg, Hamid
Hashemi and Lauge Thorsen. I am grateful for their inspiration, help and their willingness to
answer any and all of my questions. Many thanks speciﬁcally to Peter Glarborg and Lauge
Thorsen who read through and commented on my drafts signiﬁcantly improving the thesis. In
addition a thank you to Lauge and Hamid for their help with Chemkin.
1
==PAGE:3==
2
Abstract
Ammonia is of interest as a green house gas neutral fuel to combat emissions from the shipping
sector. However several issues persist with this use, one being diﬃculties in igniting ammonia.
In this thesis the focus is on examining the proposal of mixing ammonia with diesel to promote
the ignition. To develop engines capable of using this fuel mixture, modelling ignition of the
mixture is crucial. This thesis sets out to develop a semiglobal model, capable of describing this
ignition, simple enough to be used for CFD simulations, thereby facilitating engine development.
When modelling ignition of diesel the surrogate fuel n-heptane is used. The semiglobal model
is developed by validating and combining models for ammonia and n-heptane.
First the models in literature describing the ignition of pure ammonia and pure n-heptane is
examined. Following this the models describing the ignition of ammonia/n-heptane mixtures is
covered. From the literature examination one model to describe ammonia ignition was chosen
while two were chosen for n-heptane ignition. One global model for n-heptane ignition and
one detailed. These models were then validated against experimental results from literature
using Chemkin, to ensure the validity of the base models. After the validation the models
are combined, and the detailed combined model is validated against experimental results from
literature. The semiglobal model is then compared to the detailed combined model. For a
90/10% ammonia/n-heptane mixture, the two combined models did not agree well. One issue
was ignition inhibition by ammonia in the detailed model, therefore inhibiting reactions based
on ammonia was added to the semiglobal model. The reaction parameters for these reactions
were then optimized, with the goal of the semiglobal model predicting the same ignition delay
time as the detailed. The reaction parameters could be tuned for the speciﬁc mixture of 90/10%
ammonia/n-heptane. The optimized semiglobal model with inhibiting reactions could therefore
accurately imitate the detailed model.
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Acknowledgements
1
2
Abstract
2
3
Ammonia and the green transition
5
3.1
Alternative energy carriers for shipping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Production of ammonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Power-to-X - GHG neutral ammonia? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Chemical characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5
Ammonia as a fuel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Model for IDT prediction in ammonia and n-heptane fuel blends
12
4.1
Basics of developing a chemical kinetics model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Experimental data for ignition experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2.1
Shock tube experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2.2
Rapid compression machine experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Modeling ignition of ammonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4
Models describing combustion of n-heptane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.5
Experimental data and models for ammonia/n-heptane ignition in literature
. .
21
5
Modelling work
26
5.1
Chemkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.1
Reactor models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.2
Reaction mechanism and thermodynamic properties . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.3
Reactor conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.4
Reactant species
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.5
Miscellaneous settings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.6
Chemkin outputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Validation of base models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.1
Validation of ammonia model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.2
Validation of n-heptane model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Development of a detailed model for validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Testing detailed model on experimental data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5
Analysis of model assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.6
Development of the semiglobal model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.7
Comparison of semiglobal model to detailed model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3
==PAGE:5==
6
Modiﬁcation and optimization of semiglobal model
42
6.1
Manual optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2
Mechanism optimization by using reaction workbench in Chemkin . . . . . . . .
45
7
Discussion
50
7.1
Model validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.2
Modelling approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8
Conclusion
51
9
Future work
51
10 Appendix
54
10.1 Comparison of semiglobal and detailed model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
10.2 Inhibiting reaction with EA0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
10.3 Arrhenius plot for inhibiting reactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
10.4 Matlab scripts used for plotting and examples of Chemkinﬁles . . . . . . . . . .
57
4
==PAGE:6==
3
Ammonia and the green transition
A recent United Nations report [1], estimated that the global surface temperature had in-
creased 1.07 degrees celsius since 1850. The main driver behind this increase in temperature is
the emissions of green house gasses (GHG). Further several projections of future emissions is
modelled making it clear that to avoid an even higher increase in global surface temperature
GHG emissions must be signiﬁcantly reduced.
To limit the impact of climate change, net-zero GHG emissions must be achieved. One source of
GHG emissions is the combustion of fossil fuels, releasing CO2. In addition to CO2, combustion
processes can also release methane (CH4), Nitrous oxide (N2O), other higher hydrocarbons and
NOx. These other emissions are dependent on the fossil fuel combusted and the completeness
of the combustion.
To decrease the emissions of GHG, alternatives to fossil fuels are therefore needed. Combustion
of fossil fuels are used in a variety of industries and for many diﬀerent purposes including power
generation, heating, transport etc. Some industries can switch from using fossil fuels as the
energy source to using electricity, and thereby reduce their GHG emissions.
One industry where this is not possible is the shipping industry, where requirements to the
energy carrier limits electriﬁcation. One proposed solution to the electriﬁcation of the shipping
industry, is converting excess power to fuels/energy carriers that the shipping industry is able
to utilize.
A suggested alternative energy carrier for the shipping industry is ammonia.
Ammonia is
interesting as it releases no CO2 during combustion. However ammonia is in itself a GHG.
Further, the production of ammonia need to be sustainable and green. In addition ammonia
is not an optimal fuel, it is comparatively harder to ignite and burn than current fossil fuels.
The focus of this thesis is the ignition of ammonia.
In the following section I ﬁrst go through how ammonia can be an alternative to fossil fuels,
afterwards the production of ammonia and the GHG emissions from the current production
method is covered. Here special attention is paid to a future low GHG emission process utilizing
power-to-X. Finally the chemical characteristics of ammonia and its properties as a fuel is
described.
3.1
Alternative energy carriers for shipping
Currently fossil fuels are used to deliver the energy needed for propulsion of ships. To reduce
GHG emissions alternatives to fossil fuels are needed. Because of the size of the ships and the
distances covered, both the energy density (energy per volume) and the speciﬁc energy (energy
per mass) of the alternative energy carrier must be high. A low energy density would increase
the storage requirements for the energy source and thereby decrease the cargo load. A low
speciﬁc energy would increase the weight of fuel that needs to be carried, increasing the weight
increases the fuel needed. The three requirements of an alternative energy carrier is therefore
clear: high volumetric energy density, high speciﬁc energy and stability over time.
Currently the energy carriers with the highest volumetric energy density and speciﬁc energy is
chemical energy carriers (excluding nuclear energy). Because of the long time the ships are at
sea, the energy carrier needs to be stable for extended amounts of time. A comparison on the
5
==PAGE:7==
amount of energy stored and the storage time of diﬀerent energy storage solutions can be seen
in ﬁgure 1. Note that this is a comparison of energy storage, and not energy carriers.
Figure 1: Comparison between diﬀerent energy storage solutions, based on how much it can
store and for how long. From Valera et al. [2]
From ﬁgure 1 it is clear that for long term storage of energy, chemical storage is the solution.
One chemical considered to have potential is ammonia. In the following pages I will focus on
the beneﬁts and problems facing the use of ammonia as an energy carrier.
The main focus for alternative fuels is to have lower GHG emissions than fossil fuels. Over time
this lower GHG emission should be changed to a net zero GHG emission. This is a challenge for
chemical energy carriers (fuels), as the way to extract the energy from the chemicals is through
combustion or oxidation in a fuel cell. For carbon based fuels, the product of these oxidation
reactions is CO2. The most interesting fuels would be those not containing carbon, and if
they contain carbon it has to be produced in a green way. Those that do not contain carbon
have a distinct advantage, because no CO2 is then emitted during the combustion. Note that
because emissions of NOx from combustion processes occur even from carbon free fuels, these
are not necessarily neutral with respect to GHG. Emissions of NOx in combustion processes
is dependent both on the temperature during the combustion and the nitrogen content of the
fuel [3]. The three most notable fuels that do not contain carbon are: hydrogen (H2), ammonia
(NH3) and hydrazine (N2H4). Of these three, hydrazine has issues related to its toxicity and
reactivity that means it is only used under very speciﬁc circumstances [2]. The choice in carbon
free fuels therefore stands between hydrogen and ammonia. A table comparing hydrogen and
ammonia to other chemical energy carriers can be seen in table 1.
6
==PAGE:8==
Table 1: Main characteristics of some chemical energy carriers. From [4]
Of these two ammonia has several signiﬁcant advantages: ease of storage, commercialization
and higher volumetric energy density [5]. The storage of both hydrogen and ammonia can be
done both as a gas and as a liquid. The diﬀerence between the two is the normal boiling point,
ammonia can be liqueﬁed at -33 °C while hydrogen requires -253 °C. In addition liquid ammo-
nia can be stored at ambient temperatures while pressurized. This means that there are fewer
requirements to store ammonia. Another factor is the current commercialization of ammonia.
With a global production of 180 million tonnes produced worldwide annually it is the second
most commercialized chemical. The infrastructure needed to use ammonia as a fuel is therefore
already in place [2].
Another important metric is the amount of GHG emitted during the production of the fuel.
To reach a net zero GHG emission fuel, the emissions during production must also be zero.
Based on the requirements of the shipping industry, the goal of GHG neutrality and the cur-
rent commercialization the energy carrier of most interest is ammonia. In the next section the
production of ammonia, detailing both GHG emissions from both current and future possible
production processes will be described.
3.2
Production of ammonia
To synthesise ammonia, two components are needed; hydrogen (H2) and nitrogen (N2). The
current commercial way to produce ammonia from hydrogen and nitrogen is the Haber-Bosch
process. The Haber-Bosch process is based on the reversible exothermic reaction:
N2(g) + 3H2(g) ⇀
↽2NH3(g)
(1)
Thermodynamicly low temperatures should favor this reaction, but based on kinetics, high tem-
peratures are needed for reasonable productivity[2]. The reaction only occurs in the presence
of a catalyst. The catalysts used in the industry are based on iron. Because the reaction is
exothermic, the gasses in the reactor increase in temperature through the reactor bed, which
in turn limits the conversion. Thus temperature management of the reactor setup is crucial.
One common way to do this is to use multiple reactors and quench the reactors by addition of
colder non reacted feed streams. In addition to the temperature requirements the reaction is
also carried out under high pressure to increase conversion.
This increases the energy requirements for the process because of increased compressor duty
to get the feed stocks of hydrogen and nitrogen to the pressures needed. After the reactors,
ammonia is separated from the unreacted hydrogen and nitrogen, and the feed stream is then
recycled. During this process GHG emissions arises from the power needed to run the com-
pressors and pumps.
7
==PAGE:9==
The catalysts used in the Haber-Bosch process are very sensitive to oxygen, therefore the
nitrogen in the process cannot be fed as air. First the nitrogen has to be separated from air,
this is done either cryogenically or through pressure swing adsorption. Because the feed to pro-
duce nitrogen in either way is air, the main requirement for nitrogen production is the power
used in the processes. Therefore this process can be transformed to be sustainable by using
power from renewable sources.
The hydrogen needed for the Haber-Bosch process can be produced in several ways, with a
large diﬀerence in the amount of GHG produced. The traditional/commercial way to produce
the hydrogen needed for ammonia production is steam methane reforming using methane as a
hydrogen source through the following two reactions:
CH4 + H2O ⇀
↽CO + 3H2
(2)
CO + H2O ⇀
↽CO2 + H2
(3)
Other reactions used for producing hydrogen include autothermal reforming, partial oxidation
of methane, heavy coal or oil gasiﬁcation and partial oxidation. From any of these reactions
based on a fossil fuel feed stock either CO or CO2 are products. It is therefore clear that this
cannot be used for GHG neutral production of ammonia. Current estimates of CO2 produced
per kg of ammonia is between 0.5 kg to 14 kg, based on life cycle assessments and dependent
on which production route is chosen for the production of ammonia [2].
Because the main source of GHG emissions from the production of ammonia is from the on-
site production of hydrogen, this is also the most interesting step to analyze for low GHG
alternatives. One technology of interest is power-to-X, where excess power is converted into
chemical energy carriers.
3.3
Power-to-X - GHG neutral ammonia?
Renewable energy sources such as solar and wind power generation is undergoing a rapid de-
velopment and commercialization these years. However one problem these technologies face is
the intermittent nature of the power generation. Solar can only produce while the sun shines,
while wind is dependant on suﬃcient wind. Hence, to utilise solar and wind power fully, energy
storage technologies are needed. During times of excess power, the energy can then be stored
for later use in periods of low power generation.
Current energy storage technologies include batteries, pumped hydro, compressed gas and
chemical energy storage. However, batteries are unlikely to provide the required capacity for
grid scale energy storage [6]. Both pumped hydro and compressed gas energy storage is de-
pendant on speciﬁc geological features, implying they are not available in all places that need
energy storage. Therefore, chemical energy storage is needed to utilize fully the renewable
energy sources.
Chemical energy storage also has another upside: the energy can be moved and used out-
side of the power sector; in this case the shipping industry. Chemical energy storage is based
on using excess energy to produce chemical compounds that can in turn later release the energy.
The concept can be demonstrated through the hydrolysis of water:
2H2O
electricity
−−−−−→2H2 + O2
(4)
The hydrogen produced in the reaction is then stored until energy is needed. Then to extract
the energy from the hydrogen it is either combusted and the heat used to drive a power pro-
ducing turbine or used in a fuel cell to produce electricity. As described earlier one issue with
8
==PAGE:10==
using ammonia as a GHG neutral fuel for shipping was the source of hydrogen, with current
production methods emitting large amounts of GHG. Hydrogen produced through hydrolysis
using excess power from renewable sources would eliminate these GHG emissions.
MacFarlane et al. [7] describes the technological development of producing GHG neutral am-
monia from renewable sources. Their approach is to separate diﬀerent ammonia producing
technologies into generations. A timeline of their projections of the diﬀerent generations can
be seen in ﬁgure 2, compared to projections of global fuel consumption and shipping fuel use.
Figure 2: Roadmap of ammonia production from diﬀerent generations of ammonia producing
technologies. CRI is an index of commercial readiness by the Australian Renewable Energy
Agancy. From [7].
The ﬁrst generation of GHG neutral ammonia would be produced in the traditional way as
described above, but the GHG byproducts would be sequestered or in other ways oﬀset. The
process would still utilize the Haber-Bosch process. Second generation ammonia would then
be ammonia produced in the same way, but with renewable sources of hydrogen instead. The
source of hydrogen could be electrolysis based on renewable energy. The biggest roadblocks for
second generation ammonia is the price and availability of the electrolysis equipment needed
for large scale operation. Based on numbers by MacFarlane et al. [7] the capital requirements
for ammonia production would increase between 50%-80% per tonne of annual production ca-
pacity. Third generation ammonia production would then be based on reducing nitrogen (N2)
to ammonia electrochemicly and thereby avoid the use of the Haber-Bosch process. This type
of technology is still in a proof of concept stage [7].
In addition to a sustainable way to produce ammonia, another issue is safe use of ammo-
nia. For safe use of ammonia the chemical characteristics needs to be understood in order for
the necessary precautions to be taken.
9
==PAGE:11==
3.4
Chemical characteristics
The ammonia molecule consists of 3 hydrogen atoms and 1 nitrogen atom, with the 3 hydrogen
atoms arranged in a trigonal pyramidal shape around the nitrogen atom. Ammonia is an al-
kaline gas, which poses some challenges with respect to safety. The freezing point of ammonia
is 195.5 K, and the boiling point 240 K [4]. Ammonia can therefore be liqueﬁed comparatively
easier than other gases.
As mentioned earlier the annual production of ammonia is 180 million tons, around 80% of
this is used as fertilizer while the remaining 20% is used in the production of various products
and refrigeration. Because ammonia is already a commercial product, safe storage and handling
of ammonia is already developed.
One issue in the storage of ammonia is corrosion, the corrosion risk of ammonia is highly
dependant on storage conditions and the material used for storage. The presence of contam-
inants such as CO2, O2 or HCl can greatly increase the corrosiveness of ammonia [2]. Water
is added to ammonia in concentrations of 0.2-0.5 %, this reduces the corrosion from oxygen
contamination.
Another issue with using ammonia as a fuel is the toxicity of inhaling ammonia. Ammonia
in high concentrations can be deadly to humans, the exact concentrations are not well known
and Valera et al. [2] concludes further studies is needed on the subject. Even though speciﬁc
data is not available on the subject, legal limits for working with ammonia are in eﬀect in the
US. The safe handling of ammonia is therefore already explored. For use in the shipping sector,
the impact of ammonia spills on water life also needs to be evaluated.
When these things have been considered, ammonia is safe to be used as a fuel in the ship-
ping industry. The next thing to consider is its properties as a fuel and how easy it is ignite.
3.5
Ammonia as a fuel
Research into using ammonia as fuel is split in two time periods. Research during the 1960s
funded by the US military focused on using ammonia as an alternative fuel for vehicles in times
of fuel logistic problems [4] and more recent studies focused on using it as a carbon neutral fuel.
When examining ammonia as a potential fuel chemical characteristics with respect to com-
bustion should be evaluated. Table 1 compares storage and combustion characteristics for am-
monia and other common fuels. One notable diﬀerence between ammonia and gasoline/diesel
is the diﬀerence in auto ignition temperature. A higher auto ignition temperature means that
ammonia is substantially more diﬃcult to ignite in compression ignition engines. One focus
area of current research is the ignition of ammonia. Here a suggested way to solve the problem,
is by using a pilot fuel to promote the ignition. In this thesis the focus will be on modelling
the addition of diesel to ammonia for ignition promotion.
An important parameter for fuel ignition is the ignition delay time (IDT), it can be used for
engine development. In compression ignition engines, the IDT is the time between the start of
injection of fuel and the beginning of the combustion. The start of combustion is distinguished
by an increase in pressure [8]. The IDT is highly dependant on the conditions under which the
fuel is ignited. As a rule of thumb the IDT decreases with increasing temperature and pressure.
Some fuels exhibit exceptions to this. One example is diesel which has a negative temperature
10
==PAGE:12==
coeﬃcient (NTC) range, in which increasing temperature increases the IDT. N-heptane is used
as a surrogate fuel for diesel for modelling purposes. This eﬀect can be seen in ﬁgure 3 which
shows an increase in IDT in the range between 750-900K. This is contrary to the expectation
that the IDT decreases with increasing temperature.
Figure 3: IDT as a function of temperature for ignition of n-heptane/air at diﬀerent pressures
and equivalence ratios. Lines are a detailed model from Zhang et al. [9], while symbols are the
experimental data.
It is clear that for n-heptane the relation between increasing temperature and decreasing IDT
is not straight forward. Models that can predict IDT under various conditions are therefore
essential to engine development.
11
==PAGE:13==
4
Model for IDT prediction in ammonia and n-heptane
fuel blends
Simple chemical kinetic models with suﬃcient accuracy is important to develop to facilitate
engine development. These models would be a trade-oﬀbetween accuracy and computational
time. For the development of a combined ammonia and n-heptane IDT model, models for
combustion of ammonia and n-heptane are needed. Therefore in this section the latest research
into chemical kinetic models of ammonia and n-heptane are reviewed.
First the development of chemical kinetic models is examined. Next the background for com-
bining two separate models and the experimental data available for both a combined model
and a model for each specie is described. Lastly, current models for ammonia and n-heptane is
examined to ﬁnd relevant base models for the combined model.
4.1
Basics of developing a chemical kinetics model
A model of chemical kinetics is based on a number of species and reactions. These reactions
can be either global or elementary. A global reaction is an approximation of several elementary
reactions combined into one overall reaction. An elementary reaction describes one speciﬁc
reaction step. Models consisting of only global reactions are called global models, models con-
sisting of both global and elementary reactions are called semiglobal models. Chemical kinetic
models consist of only elementary reactions.
The following will describe models based on elementary reactions. The rate of reaction for
elementary reactions is dependent on the number of molecules in the reaction. Most combus-
tion reactions of interest are bimolecular (2 molecules) [8], but unimolecular (1 molecule) and
termolecular (3 molecules) reactions are also possible. An example of a bimolecular reaction is:
A + B →C + D
(5)
Where the reaction rate is proportional to the concentration of A and B:
d[A]
dt
= −k1[A][B]
(6)
Here the overall reaction order is two, and it is of ﬁrst order with respect to each species.
The rate coeﬃcient k1 can be described both through a theoretical basis or through empirical
methods. The methods used in the models in this thesis will be based on the empirical Arrhenius
form. Here k is described as:
k(T) = A · T n · exp
 −EA
R · T

(7)
Where A is the pre-exponential factor, EA is the activation energy, T the temperature and R
the gas constant.
To setup a model the elementary reactions for each species is used to describe the change in
concentration for the species. Adding two additional elementary reactions to the system and
describing their inﬂuence on the concentration of A the following is obtained:
E + F →A
d[A]
dt
= k2[E][F]
(8)
G →2A
d[A]
dt
= 2k3[G]
(9)
12
==PAGE:14==
Using reactions 5, 8 and 9 involving A to setup a diﬀerential equation describing the total
change in concentration of A, the change in each individual reaction is summed. The diﬀerential
equation describing the change in A is thus:
d[A]
dt
= k2[E][F] + 2k3[G] −k1[A][B]
(10)
These diﬀerential equations are then set up for each species. In addition to the changes in con-
centrations, the thermodynamics of the system also need to be described. Therefore an energy
balance for the system is set up. It is based on the initial conditions of the system and the
thermodynamic properties of each of the species in the system. The data needed for modelling
purposes is the pre-exponential factor, the activation energy for each elementary reaction and
thermodynamic data for each species. The setup of these energy balances will not be described
in detail, but they are dependent on the reactor type one wishes to model.
One way to work with and develop these kinds of models is Chemkin, a program developed to
simulate chemical reactions. Chemkin can be used to setup and solve chemical kinetic models.
The goal is to develop models which produces results as close to experimental values as possi-
ble. This is an iterative process where the theoretical models is adapted to ﬁt experimental data.
One use for this type of models are in the design of new engines, where chemical kinetic
models combined with computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) can be used to predict the per-
formance of the diﬀerent designs. For use in CFD simulations this type of model can become
too complex and therefore too computationally taxing, as chemical kinetic models with a high
amount of species and reactions vastly increases the computation time of these simulations.
High computational time increases the requirements of the systems used for the simulation and
increases the price of the development of the engines. There is therefore a trade-oﬀbetween
the accuracy and the computational time, which means models may need simpliﬁcation.
4.2
Experimental data for ignition experiments
Experimental results are used to ensure the validity of developed ignition models. The exper-
imental data for IDT models is based on two types of experiments. Shock tube experiments
and rapid compression machine experiments (RCM). These two types will be described in de-
tail below. The biggest factors inﬂuencing IDT, are the temperature, pressure and equivalence
ratio. These are the conditions varied between experimental runs.
4.2.1
Shock tube experiments
A shock tube is a cylinder with a high pressure chamber and a low pressure chamber inside,
separated by a diaphragm. The low pressure gas is to be examined in shock tube experiments.
When the diaphragm is ruptured a shock wave is sent through the low pressure gas, which
instantly increases the temperature and pressure of the low pressure gas. The pressure and
temperature in the shock tube is then recorded as a function of time, and the time between the
passing of the shock wave and a large increase in pressure is the IDT. One way to measure this
is at the end wall as done by Zhang et al. [10]. In ﬁgure 4 an example of a shocktube pressure
trace is presented.
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 4: Pressure trace at the endwall of a shock tube. [10]
In ﬁgure 4 the ignition delay is the time between the initial pressure increase to 16 bars, and the
subsequent pressure increase to above 40, which in this case is approximately 1 ms (1000 µs).
When modelling results from shock tube experiments, a premixed batch reactor with constant
volume is used. This is because the volume of the shock tube is ﬁxed.
4.2.2
Rapid compression machine experiments
A RCM is a machine in which a piston is used to rapidly decrease the volume of a gas, and
thereby increase the pressure and temperature of the gas. At the end of the compression stroke,
the temperature and pressure should correspond to the conditions that are to be examined.
One weakness with RCM is that the increase in pressure and temperature is not instantaneous,
therefore some pre-ignition can happen. Pre-ignition is if the compressed gas starts to react
before the compression is ﬁnished. The pressure and temperature in the RCM is recorded from
the start of the compression stroke, and the IDT is the time between the end of the compression
stroke and a sharp increase in pressure in the container. In ﬁgure 5 an example of a pressure
trace from a RCM experiment can be seen.
14
==PAGE:16==
Figure 5: Pressure trace in a RCM. [10]
In ﬁgure 5 three lines are plotted: reactive, non-reactive and reactive dp/dt. The reactive is
the pressure as a function of time in the actual experiment, while the non-reactive is a pressure
trace for a similar experiment with a non-reactive gas. The non-reactive pressure trace exper-
iment is carried out to have a baseline for how the pressure should behave prior to ignition.
The reactive dp/dt describes the change in pressure relative to the change in time. This has
two peaks; one at the end of compression and one at the start of ignition. The time between
these two peaks is the IDT, as seen in the ﬁgure. When modelling results from RCM, premixed
batch reactors with variable volumes is used. This is to capture the volume changes from the
piston compressing the gas, but also the gas expanding the container by pushing the piston
during ignition.
The main diﬀerence between using data from RCM and data from shock tube experiments
is in the ease of modelling. Because of the volume changes in RCM it has to be modelled using
volume proﬁles. This is not needed for shock tube data which is therefore easier to work with.
4.3
Modeling ignition of ammonia
Research into using ammonia as a fuel has expanded recently, therefore several models for
combustion of ammonia has been developed. Yu et al. [11] made a summary of modelling
studies on ammonia combustion which can be seen in table 2.
15
==PAGE:17==
Table 2: Summary of modeling on ammonia combustion [11]
The most relevant for this thesis are the models developed to predict the IDT. These are ex-
amined to ﬁnd a base model for describing ignition of ammonia.
Mathieu and Petersen [12] carry out shock tube experiments over a range of temperatures (1560-
2455 K), pressures (1.4, 11, 30 atm) and equivalence ratios (0.5, 1, 2). All their experimental
work was carried out in dilute atmosphere of either 99 or 98 % argon. Using their experimental
results they compare existing models from literature describing ammonia ignition.
Here, a
variety of models are tested. Their prediction results compared to the experimental data can
be seen in ﬁgure 6.
Figure 6: Comparison between models from literature and experimental results for ammonia
ignition in shock tube, at various pressures and equivalence ratios. [12]
16
==PAGE:18==
Generally the models from literature is found to underpredict the IDT of pure ammonia, cf.
ﬁgure 6. They chose to use the Dagaut et al. model as a base, as this provided the best ﬁt
to their experimental data. The model by Mathieu et al. predicted the ignition of ammonia
at high temperature reasonably well (within a factor of 2), but the temperature range is above
initial ignition in engines (600-900K) and it is therefore not considered relevant as a base model.
Another model that describes the ammonia kinetics is the model by Glarborg et al. [3] (Glarborg
model), which focuses on the modelling of nitrogen chemistry.
The ammonia modelling is
therefore only a subset of the entire model. An overview of the reaction path for ammonia
oxidation in this model can be seen in ﬁgure 7.
Figure 7: Diagram describing the reaction paths for ammonia oxidation. [3]
The reaction path for oxidizing ammonia is highly dependant on radicals. The ﬁrst step is
ammonia being converted to NH2 by reacting with a radical. The NH2 radical can then be
converted to NH and then N by another reaction with radicals. The NHi radicals can also react
with NO producing N2 or with O, OH or O2 creating NO [3].
In addition the two end products are N2 and NO, with N2 being the most produced product.
Glarborg et al. apply their model to the experimental data obtained by Mathieu et al. [12].
The results can be seen in ﬁgure 8.
17
==PAGE:19==
Figure 8: Model prediction results by Glarborg et al. [3] against experimental values from
Mathieu et al. [12] for ignition of NH3/O2 mixtures in shock tubes and diluted by 99 % argon.
Lean is equivalence ratio of 0.5, while rich is 2.
The model by Glarborg et al. [3] is within a factor of 2 of the experimental results. This model
has since been updated by Dai et al. [13] (Dai model). It is the updated version of this model
that will be used to describe the ignition of ammonia in this thesis, because of its accuracy at
describing ignition of ammonia.
Another paper of interest when modelling the ignition of pure ammonia is Shu et al. [14].
They performed shock tube experiments on ammonia/air mixtures at temperatures between
1100-1600K and pressures of 20 and 40 bars and for equivalance ratios of 0.5, 1 and 2. They
did not develop their own model, but tested the model of Mathieu et al. [12]. They found
reasonable agreement between the model and their experimental results.
The experimental results from Shu et al.
[14] are of interest for validating the Dai model
chosen to describe the ammonia subset of the ignition of ammonia/n-heptane mixtures. This
validation is carried out in section 5.2.1.
4.4
Models describing combustion of n-heptane
The modelling approach in this thesis is to combine both a chemical kinetic model and a global
model for describing the ignition of n-heptane with the same model for ammonia. This is to
develop both a detailed model and a semiglobal model describing the ignition of ammonia/n-
heptane mixtures. The goal is that the semiglobal model is simple enough to be used in CFD
18
==PAGE:20==
simulations. The detailed model is used to validate the semiglobal model. For the detailed
model the accuracy of the model is the main goal, while for the semiglobal model the size, i.e,
the number of reactions is also important.
For the detailed model, Zhang et al. [9] (Zhang model) developed and compared n-heptane
models to experimental data. The model they developed consists of 1268 species and 5336
reactions, which they found to be the most accurate against others from literature. The reaction
paths modelled can be seen in ﬁgure 9.
Figure 9: Reaction pathways described by Zhang model. [9]
As is clear from ﬁgure 9, describing the oxidation of n-heptane takes a large reaction mechanism
with many pathways. Zhang et al. splits the reaction pathway into two sections, a high tem-
perature and a low temperature. The most important reactions in the high temperature region
is the fuel and fuel derived radicals decomposition reactions and the hydrogen abstraction from
the fuels by reaction with the radical pool. The low temperature pathway is the upper part of
ﬁgure 9. First the fuel derived radical (R) reacts with molecular oxygen and form alkylperox-
yradicals (RO2). These have several reaction paths, where one is through isomerization where
they are converted to hydroxyperoxy-alkyl radicals (QOOH). An important reaction for QOOH
is the addition to molecular oxygen creating peroxy alkylhydroperoxide radicals, with this re-
action sequence being a major chain branching process at low temperatures [9].
This reaction mechanism is used to model the ignition in Chemkin. A comparison between
their model and experimental data can be seen in ﬁgure 10.
19
==PAGE:21==
Figure 10: Comparison of model prediction and experimental results for n-heptane ignition.
Various experimental conditions. [9]
On ﬁgure 10 it is clear that the model developed by Zhang et al. [9] is accurate at predicting
the IDT for n-heptane/air mixtures at various conditions. It is therefore suitable as the base
for making a detailed model for n-heptane/ammonia mixtures.
The global model chosen was developed by M¨uller et al. [15] (MPL model), where they reduced
a kinetic model of 1011 reactions and 171 species down to 4 global steps. It was developed for
pressures of around 40 bars. The resulting model compared to the kinetic model can be seen
in ﬁgure 11.
20
==PAGE:22==
Figure 11: Comparison of full kinetic mechanism to 4 step mechanism by Muller at al. [15].
Simulation at 40 bars and stoichiometric amount of n-heptane and air.
The global model agrees well with the model used to develop it, with the IDT being close for
the two models as seen in ﬁgure 11.
The reactions used in the 4 step model are the following:
F −−→X
(11)
X + 11 O2 −−→P
(12)
F + 2 O2 −−⇀
↽−−I
(13)
I + 9 O2 −−→P
(14)
Where F is the fuel n-C7H16, X is intermediates H + 3 C2H4 + CH3, I is HOOPO + H2O and P
is 7 CO2 and 8 H2O. The reaction involving X is the high temperature pathway, while I is the
low temperature pathway.
Based on the examination of n-heptane models, the model by Zhang et al.
[10] is chosen
for the detailed model, while for the semiglobal model the model by Muller et al. [15] was
chosen.
4.5
Experimental data and models for ammonia/n-heptane ignition
in literature
Previously I have covered literature modelling ammonia and n-heptane ignition separately. Now
the focus is how to model ammonia/n-heptane mixtures.
21
==PAGE:23==
A study performed at DTU by Thorsen et al. [16] combined a model for methane with a global
model for n-heptane, without accounting for direct chemical interactions between the fuels.
The accuracy of the model was found to be satisfactory. The hypothesis is thus that a similar
solution can be obtained for the modelling of ammonia/n-heptane, which can then be used in
CFD modelling for engine development.
Experimental data available for ammonia and diesel/n-heptane blends in literature are lim-
ited. Yu et al. [11] investigated the low temperature auto ignition of n-heptane blended with
ammonia. They tested 5 diﬀerent mixtures of ammonia/n-heptane, which can be seen in table
3.
Table 3: Ammonia/n-heptane mixtures used by Yu et al. [11].
These mixtures were tested at pressures of 10 and 15 bar and in a temperature range between
635 and 945 K. The experiments were carried out in an RCM. They reported data on IDT and
the corresponding volume proﬁles used in the experimental runs.
Using the results from the experimental work, Yu et al.
developed a detailed combined
ammonia/n-heptane model in Chemkin. The model is based on the Zhang et al. [9] model
for n-heptane and Glarborg et al. [3] model for ammonia. In ﬁgure 12, a comparison between
the experimental IDT and the simulated IDT for the model can be seen for mixture 1, 2 and 3.
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 12: Comparison of ﬁrst stage and total IDT for mixtures 1,2 and 3 from table 3. Lines are
modelling results, dots are experimental values. Experiments carried out in RCM at pressures
of 10 and 15 bars, temperatures between 650-950K. [11]
On ﬁgure 12 it can be seen that the model is best at predicting mixture 1. The reason for
this is that mixture 1 is pure n-heptane. For mixture 2 and 3 at both pressures, the modelling
results does not accurately predict the experimental results. At low temperatures the IDT
is predicted to be longer than it actually is by a factor of more than 2, while in the NTC
region it is predicted to be shorter by a factor of around 2. Based on these graphs Yu et
al. [11] concludes that the model captures the inhibition eﬀect of ammonia on the ignition of
ammonia/n-heptane blends, but that it cannot be used for quantitative predictions of total IDT.
Yu et al. ﬁnd that the main cause of this inaccuracy is the model overpredicting the ﬁrst
stage IDT. This poor agreement between ﬁrst stage IDT of the model and the experimental
data can be seen in the two plots on the right in ﬁgure 12. The ﬁrst stage IDT is dependent on
the low temperature performance of the model, which depends on three factors: the n-heptane
mechanism, the ammonia mechanism and the interaction between these two. Of these the two
problematic ones are the ammonia mechanism at low temperatures and the reactions between
nitrogen and carbon chemistry [11]. To examine these problems a kinetic analysis was carried
out by simulating the ignition of mixture 2. The species of interest were the reactants, ammonia
and n-heptane, and the OH radical. From the kinetic analysis they found that ammonia and
n-heptane are not consumed at the same time. Instead the reactivity of the mixture is driven
by n-heptane, and most of the n-heptane is consumed during the ﬁrst stage ignition. But they
23
==PAGE:25==
also found that a signiﬁcant amount of ammonia reacts with OH radicals during the ﬁrst stage
ignition, thereby inhibiting the ignition of n-heptane. Yu et al. ﬁnd that prior to the ﬁnal
ignition the n-heptane is almost depleted, while there is still 80% of the ammonia left.
Lastly, they carried out a rate of production analysis for the OH radicals at the time of the
ﬁrst stage ignition. From this analysis Yu et al. ﬁnd that the ammonia reaction that slows the
ignition the most is:
NH3 + OH −−⇀
↽−−NH2 + H2O
(15)
In addition it is also the reaction through which ammonia aﬀects the ignition of n-heptane.
They conclude this reaction needs special attention in the low temperature region in an up-
dated mechanism.
The reaction between OH radicals and ammonia aﬀecting the IDT of the blended mixture, can
cause trouble to the chosen modelling approach. As discussed earlier, the modelling approach
is to combine two models, and ignore the chemical interactions between the two fuels. The
results from Yu et al. [11], show that this is can be a problematic approach for the modelling
of ammonia/n-heptane blends.
Feng et al. [17] also did IDT experiments and modelling of ammonia/diesel mixtures. The
mixtures and experimental conditions used in the experiments can be seen in table 4. In addi-
tion to the experimental conditions reported in the table, the temperature was varied between
670 and 910 K.
Table 4: Ammonia/diesel mixtures and experimental conditions in experiments by [17].
The model developed to describe the results was based on a POLIMI diesel mechanism and the
ammonia mechanism from Glarborg et al. [3]. The most notable results from the modelling work
is that the ignition is inhibited by the addition of ammonia and that the inhibition is a result of
competition for the OH radicals. Here it was found that ammonia plays a signiﬁcant role in the
(production and) consumption of OH radicals even at low temperatures. The consequence of
this is an inhibition of diesel chain branching sequences at low temperatures, thereby lowering
the reactivity of the entire system. These results were based on a kinetic analysis. In addition
to the reaction found by Yu et al. they also found reaction 16 to be crucial in the prediction of
IDT.
NH2 + NO −−⇀
↽−−N2 + H2O
(16)
These results are consistent with the results by Yu et al. [11], and further challenge the mod-
elling approach of blending the mechanisms of ammonia and n-heptane combustion without
24
==PAGE:26==
modelling the interaction in detail.
In this section the models needed for the development of a semiglobal model were chosen
based on an examination of the models in litterature. In addition to the models, the experi-
mental data needed for validation was also found. Lastly, the basics of chemical models based
on kinetics was covered. The next step is to work towards the semiglobal model.
25
==PAGE:27==
5
Modelling work
In this section the detailed and semiglobal model describing ignition of ammonia/n-heptane
mixtures is developed. First, Chemkin 18.1, the program chosen for the modelling, will be
covered. Second the model development is described, starting with validation of the individual
models for n-heptane and ammonia. They are then combined in both a detailed and a semiglobal
model. The detailed model is validated against experimental data. Using the detailed model,
the ignition of ammonia/n-heptane fuel blends is examined to asses whether the assumption of
no interactions between the fuels is acceptable. Finally comparisons between the detailed and
the semiglobal model is carried out.
5.1
Chemkin
In this section using Chemkin Pro to model combustion processes will be described.
The
following steps when working in Chemkin will be covered: Choice of reactor model, reaction
mechanisms and thermodynamic data, reactor conditions, reactants and combustion products,
settings and outputs.
5.1.1
Reactor models
Chemkin Pro has a variety of reactor models available when setting up the model diagram.
These include all the basic reactor models: closed homogeneous batch reactor (batch reactor),
perfectly stirred reactor (CSTR) and plug ﬂow reactor (PFR). The type of reactor used for
modelling of IDT is a batch reactor. This is because the experimental data modelled is from
shock tube and RCM experiments. For both shock tube and RCM experiments the fuel and
oxidiser is premixed, and there is no ﬂow into or out of the reaction chamber.
After selecting the reactor model, the next step is to deﬁne the reaction mechanism and the
thermodynamic properties of the system.
5.1.2
Reaction mechanism and thermodynamic properties
The bulk of the model in Chemkin-Pro is the reaction mechanism and the thermodynamic
properties of the various species modelled. The way to input these to Chemkin-pro is through
input ﬁles. These ﬁles need to contain the data on reactions and thermodynamics in a very
speciﬁc way. Changing these ﬁles is the way to update and improve models in Chemkin. The
general layout and information in these ﬁles will be described in the following.
The layout of an input ﬁle is split in four parts. The ﬁrst part is a short list of the elements
used in the model. In combustion models these often include: C (carbon), H (hydrogen), N
(nitrogen), O (oxygen) and Ar (argon). The second part is a list of all the species in the model.
This includes all molecules and radicals that is to be modelled. These are various combinations
of the elements deﬁned in the ﬁrst list. The third part is the thermodynamic properties for each
of the species listed in the second part. The thermodynamic data is described by using NASA
polynomials. The thermodynamic data can also be input separately as a .dat ﬁle. The fourth
part then describes the reaction mechanism. This is a list of all the reactions. The species in
the reactions needs to be consistent with those from the second part of the input ﬁle. The rate
constants for the reactions are described by the modiﬁed Arrhenius:
k(t) = A · T n · exp
−EA
RT

(17)
26
==PAGE:28==
Which implies Chemkin needs three inputs per reaction: A, n and EA.
5.1.3
Reactor conditions
The next part is to set up the reactor conditions, which are the physical conditions deﬁned for
the simulation and the type of problem Chemkin has to solve. The physical conditions are:
time, temperature, pressure and volume. These values are chosen based on the conditions that
are to be examined. To do several simulations simultaneously, parameter studies can be used.
In a parameter study a condition is varied between the model runs. This is used when multiple
data points for IDT at diﬀerent temperatures is needed. One example of a parameter study is
to run the model at temperatures between 650-1100 K with a data point at every 25 K.
The problem type has 4 diﬀerent options: ”Constrain pressure and solve energy equation”, ”con-
strain pressure and temperature”, ”constrain volume and solve energy equation” and ”constrain
volume and temperature”. For both RCM and shock tube experiments the problem type is
”constrain volume and solve energy equation”. For RCM experiments a volume proﬁle needs
to be input, while for shock tube experiments the volume is constant. A volume proﬁle has
data on the volume of a experimental reactor and how it varies with time during the RCM
experiment.
5.1.4
Reactant species
The reactant species used in the simulations can be chosen in two ways: the composition of
the gas mixture consisting of both fuel and oxidizer can be deﬁned or an equivalence ratio
and separate compositions of the fuel and the oxidizer can be deﬁned. In addition to these
inputs, Chemkin also needs the complete-combustion products, these are the end products of
the reactions. These are normally water, nitrogen and carbon dioxide. If argon is used to
dilute, it also needs to be added to the complete-combustion products.
5.1.5
Miscellaneous settings
For IDT calculations, Chemkin can calculate a ”temperature inﬂection point”, this is a way
to make Chemkin ﬁnd the ignition times. Chemkin does this by ﬁnding the biggest tempera-
ture gradient in the temperature proﬁle. This output will be discussed in the output section.
Chemkin has two inbuilt solvers, a standard and a legacy solver. The legacy solver is more
robust, but also slower. It can therefore be used for convergence problems where the standard
solver does not work.
5.1.6
Chemkin outputs
At the end of a Chemkin simulation, several outputs are generated. To ﬁnd the IDT based on
simulations, the needed data is the time and temperature. As discussed earlier Chemkin can
also ﬁnd the IDT based on the temperature inﬂection point. The way to ﬁnd the IDT based
on simulations is to use the inbuilt graphing tool to plot the temperature against time and ﬁnd
the largest increase in temperature (ignition). This time is then compared to the temperature
inﬂection point Chemkin found. If they are consistent, the IDT has been found. Generally to
ﬁnd the correct IDT from the built-in function in Chemkin, the slowest of the IDT should be
used, as this was consistently found to be the right IDT. Other IDT’s found by Chemkin can
be due to compression in an RCM machine or pre-ignition.
27
==PAGE:29==
5.2
Validation of base models
The modelling approach takes two separate models for the ignition of ammonia and n-heptane
and combines them.
The ﬁrst step in the development of a combined ammonia/n-heptane
model is to choose and validate the base models for each specie separately. The models were
examined and chosen in section 4. The validation is done to investigate the accuracy of the
chosen models.
5.2.1
Validation of ammonia model
The model chosen in section 4 to describe the ammonia chemistry is the model developed by Dai
et al. [13]. It is validated against experimental data for ignition of pure ammonia from Shu et
al. [14]. This data is chosen because it is shock tube data and has the lowest temperature range
found in literature. The temperature range is 1100-1500 K. However one issue with using these
experimental data is that the temperature is higher than the 650-1100 K range that is the goal
of the model to be developed. The reason for data not being available in the 650-1100 K range,
is because pure ammonia does not ignite in the lower part of the range. The validation consists
of simulating the IDT using Chemkin and then comparing it to the experimental results. The
results can be seen in ﬁgure 13.
Figure 13: Comparison of NH3 model prediction versus experimental data. Simulation carried
out at 20 bars, equivalance ratios of 0.5, 1 and 2 and temperatures in the range between
1100-1500K. Pure ammonia and air mixture. Experimental data from Shu et al. [14]
From ﬁgure 13 it is clear that the agreement between experimental values and the model is best
at high temperatures. For the lower temperatures the diﬀerence between the prediction and
the experimental values is up to an order of magnitude. In addition, because the lines from the
28
==PAGE:30==
modelling are close, and the only diﬀerence is the equivalence ratio, the equivalence ratio has
a limited eﬀect on the modelling results. This is not consistent with the experimental results,
where the IDT of the experiments with an equivalence ratio of 0.5 is higher. One thing to note
is that although Shu et al. aimed to have a pressure of 20 bar for each individual experiment,
the actual pressure varied quite a bit. Therefore, the same simulation was carried out, but with
single points with actual experimental pressures from Shu et al. The pressures varied most for
the experiments with equivalence ratio of 2. The results of this simulation can be seen in ﬁgure
14.
Figure 14: Comparison of NH3 model prediction versus experimental data for equivalence ratio
of 2. In addition points were added where the simulation used actual experimental pressure
instead of constant 20 bar. Pure ammonia and air mixture. Experimental data from Shu et
al.[14]
Using the actual experimental pressures, the result show only minor changes as seen in ﬁgure
14. These results also show the pressure dependency of the IDT, which for ammonia is minor.
The Dai 2021 model from Dai et al. [13] was shown to be accurate at temperature above
approximately 1300 K, while at lower temperature the IDT is over-predicted. This will need
to be considered when validating the combined model.
5.2.2
Validation of n-heptane model
Two models were chosen in section 4 to describe the ignition of n-heptane. A global model by
Muller et al. [15], and a model by Zhang et al. [9]. These models have already been validated
against experimental data for the ignition of n-heptane by Thorsen et al. in [16]. Therefore
only a limited validation is carried out, on a single experimental data set from Fieweger et al.
[18]. The data set was chosen because the pressure is close to the pressure which the MPL
29
==PAGE:31==
model was developed to cover. In addition the temperature range being between 700-1200K is
close to the range of interest. The results of this validation can be seen in ﬁgure 15.
Figure 15: Comparison of model predictions from Zhang and MPL model to experimental data
from Fieweger and Zhang. Pressures of 20 and 42 bars, equivalence ratio of 1. Stochiometric
n-heptane/air mixtures. Experimental data from Zhang et al. [9] and Fieweger et al. [18]
From the ﬁgure it can be seen that both Zhang and MPL predict the IDT reasonably well,
being within a factor of 2 of the experimental IDT. Zhang has a better prediction and also pre-
dicts the negative temperature coeﬃcient region, while MPL does not predict a NTC region.
This also corresponds with the complexity of the models, with the Zhang model being far more
detailed than the global MPL model.
Further the Zhang model is validated for a range of conditions (temperatures between 600-
1300K and pressures between 13.5-55 bars) by Zhang et al. [9] using experimental data from
literature.
The Zhang and MPL model is a good basis for predicting the IDT in the wanted tempera-
ture range and pressures, which is between 650-1100 K and pressures around 40 bars.
The next step is to combine the n-heptane model with the ammonia model.
This is done
even though the ammonia model did not accurately predict the IDT below 1300 K. The hy-
pothesis is that n-heptane being more reactive, reacts ﬁrst and is ignited which increases the
temperature before the ammonia reacts.
5.3
Development of a detailed model for validation
To test the accuracy and validity of current models for describing the ignition of ammonia/n-
heptane mixtures, a detailed model consisting of the Zhang model for n-heptane and the Dai
30
==PAGE:32==
2021 model for ammonia is developed. In addition this model can also be used to validate the
semiglobal model.
The combination of the Zhang model and an earlier version of the Dai model by Glarborg et al.
[3], has already been done by Yu et al. [11]. The approach is therefore to take the Yu model
from Yu et al. [11], and update it to be based on the Dai model. This is done by updating the
hydrogen, ammonia and amine subsets. These subsets are updated based on likely diﬀerences
between the model by Glarborg et al. [3] and the Dai et al. [13] model. When changing the
subsets, both the thermodynamics of the species in the subset and the reactions are updated.
The way the species are split in subsets is based on the split of the original authors in the
notepad ﬁle, which is the reason for two separate subsets for ammonia and amine. The ammo-
nia subset is reactions involving NH3, while the amine subset is reactions involving NH2.
The process of updating the Glarborg model to the Dai model in the Yu model, is done in
a step wise manner. Where the change in predicted IDT is examined, at every step. This is
done by simulating the IDT with every change for three fuels: pure n-heptane, pure ammonia
and a ammonia/n-heptane mixture. Simulations are carried out for all subsets for every fuel.
This is to ensure nothing breaks during the process. The update of subsets and thermody-
namics is done by copying the relevant subset and thermodynamics from the Dai 2021 model
into the Yu model replacing the old ones. The mixture simulated for the fuel containing both
ammonia/n-heptane is based on a composition used in experiments by Yu et al. [11]. This
is a diluted mixture with 8.52 times as much argon as oxygen, an equivalance ratio of 1 and
mole fractions of 5.18% for ammonia and 0.55% for n-heptane. The results is seen in the three
ﬁgures 16-18.
31
==PAGE:33==
Figure 16: Comparison of IDT predictions for pure n-heptane, Yu model [11] with updated
subsets and thermodynamics. Simulated with an equivalence ratio of 1 and a pressure of 20
bars.
For pure n-heptane seen in ﬁgure 16, the prediction of the IDT only changes when the hydro-
gen subset is updated, since a change in ammonia and amine subsets changes nothing in the
prediction of IDT. No obvious problems are observed with these changes. The changes by the
updated hydrogen subset is minor.
32
==PAGE:34==
Figure 17: Comparison of IDT predictions for pure ammonia, Yu model [11] with updated
subsets and thermodynamics. Simulated with an equivalence ratio of 1 and a pressure of 20
bars.
For pure ammonia seen in ﬁgure 17, there is a very slight change in IDT predictions after
updating the hydrogen subset. After updating the ammonia subset the IDT is signiﬁcantly
increased, the diﬀerence in IDT increases with decreasing temperature. Finally no changes are
observed after changing the amine subset. Based on these results the amine subset has not
been changed between the model by Glarborg and the model by Dai.
33
==PAGE:35==
Figure 18: Comparison of IDT predictions simulated for mixture 2 in table 3, Yu model [11]
with updated subsets and thermodynamics.
Mixture 2 composition based on molefraction:
2.64% NH3, 0.74% C7H16 and 10.15% O2 and 86.47% Ar. Simulated with an equivalence ratio
of 1 and a pressure of 20 bars.
The mixture of ammonia/n-heptane shown in ﬁgure 18 shows only a negligible change in IDT
when updating the hydrogen subset. Updating the ammonia subset signiﬁcantly increases the
prediction of IDT. Once again no change is seen when updating the amine subset.
The detailed model was updated with the new hydrogen, ammonia and amine subsets. This
was done to have the newest version of the ammonia model, which was from Dai et al. [13].
After having successfully updated the subsets in the detailed model, the next step is to validate
the model against experimental data.
5.4
Testing detailed model on experimental data
As described earlier the experimental data available for IDT of ammonia/n-heptane fuel are
limited to RCM data from Feng et al. [17] and Yu et al. [11]. To account for changes in volume
during the experiments a volume proﬁle is recorded and afterwards added to Chemkin. The
experimental volume proﬁles changes between experiments.
The addition of a volume proﬁle to Chemkin increases the computation time, and makes the
ordinary solver in Chemkin unable to always solve the problem. Using the legacy solver the
RCM data could be used for some simulations. It was found that only experiments with initial
pressures of above 1 atmosphere could be simulated in Chemkin with the corresponding volume
proﬁles. Thus, the amount of data points is limited.
For selected data points the results from Yu et al [11] were reproduced.
The results were
compared by reading the simulation data from ﬁgure 12 (which is from the paper), using an
34
==PAGE:36==
online tool called plot digitizer. The results for mixture 2 from table 3 at 15 bars can be seen
in ﬁgure 19.
Figure 19: Model predictions of Yu model and detailed compared to experimental results.
Mixture composition based on molefraction: 2.64% NH3, 0.74% C7H16 and 10.15% O2 and
86.47% Ar. Pressure of 15 Bar, experimental results from RCM by Yu et al. [11]
Figure 19 shows that the detailed model predicts a higher IDT than the original model from
Yu et al. [11]. This does not increase the accuracy, because the Yu model was already slow
compared to the experimental results.
Both models captures the trend of the IDT of the
experiments, but cannot predict the actual IDT. The accuracy decreases with decreasing tem-
peratures for both models.
These results are consistent with the results from Yu et al. [11]. They found that their model
was not accurate at predicting the IDT of the experimental data. Further they concluded that
their model could not accurately describe the IDT of the ammonia/n-heptane mixture. The
diﬀerence between their work and this work is the updated ammonia and hydrogen subsets in
the ammonia model. The updated subsets did not increase the accuracy.
The next thing to examine is what causes the inaccuracy in the prediction of IDT. Yu et
al. [11] found that in the model ammonia started reacting with the OH radicals thereby slow-
ing the ignition. This slowed the chain propagating reactions of OH radicals with n-heptane and
n-heptane derivatives. This challenges the assumption made of no direct interactions between
the fuels during the initial steps of the modelling.
5.5
Analysis of model assumptions
The detailed model for mixtures of ammonia and heptane was developed (both in Yu et al.
[11] and in this study) without direct interaction between the ammonia and heptane oxidation.
35
==PAGE:37==
This is based on the assumption that most of the n-heptane has reacted before the ammonia
starts reacting, and that interactions can therefore be neglected. The n-heptane then promotes
the ignition of ammonia through heat release and through production of radicals that interact
with the ammonia oxidation. One way to examine this assumption is to simulate the ignition
and examine the change in mole fractions of the mixed fuel with time. If the mole fraction of
n-heptane drops rapidly towards zero before a drop in the ammonia mole fraction is observed
it is a sign of the ignition happening sequentially starting with the n-heptane.
This analysis was carried out in the following way: The detailed Chemkin model was used to
simulate the combustion of mixed ammonia/n-heptane fuels with varying initial molefractions
(from 10-90%). The simulations were carried out in a non dilute stoichiometric atmosphere.
Because the ignition time varies with the composition of the fuel, three graphs were made with
diﬀering time scale, see ﬁgures 20, 21 and 22.
Figure 20: Mole fraction of ammonia and n-heptane as a function of time for diﬀering initial
mole fractions. Initial temperature of 900 K and constant pressure of 40 bar.
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 21: Mole fraction of ammonia and n-heptane as a function of time for diﬀering initial
mole fractions. Initial temperature of 900 K and constant pressure of 40 bar.
Figure 22: Mole fraction of ammonia and n-heptane as a function of time for diﬀering initial
mole fractions. Initial temperature of 900 K and constant pressure of 40 bar.
For all the mixtures the initial mole fraction of n-heptane is almost constant. This is because
37
==PAGE:39==
the simulation was carried out in a stoichiometric atmosphere, therefore adding n-heptane also
adds oxygen and nitrogen, which then reduces the increase in n-heptane mole fraction. For
all the mixtures the mole fraction of n-heptane goes towards zero before the mole fraction of
ammonia. In addition it seems there is a slow decline in the n-heptane mole fraction followed by
a quick drop in the ammonia mole fraction once the n-heptane has reacted. This makes sense
for combustion processes, with slower reaction speeds initially because of lower temperatures
and then increasingly faster reactions. For the mixtures with higher initial mole fraction of
n-heptane it is clear that the n-heptane mole fraction drops towards zero before any signiﬁcant
change is observed in the ammonia mole fraction. This supports the assumption that the mod-
els can be combined, and that the assumption of no interactions is justiﬁed.
For the higher initial ammonia concentrations a small change can be observed before all the n-
heptane is combusted. This is most clear for the mixtures with lower than 10% initial n-heptane
and higher than 90% ammonia. Another way of seeing this inhibition from the ammonia, is by
substituting the ammonia for a non reactive gas. This approach was done by substituting the
ammonia in the fuel with nitrogen. The result from this simulation can be seen in ﬁgure 23
compared to the simulations with ammonia.
Figure 23: Mole fraction of n-heptane as a function of time. Initial temperature of 900 K and
constant pressure of 40 bar. One mixture of 90/10 % NH3/n-heptane and one with N2 instead
of ammonia.
On ﬁgure 23 it can be seen that the drop to 0 for the mole fraction of n-heptane, is slowed by
more than a factor of 5, compared to the 90/10% NH3/n-heptane mixture. For higher initial
n-heptane mole fractions this diﬀerence was smaller, while for lower than 10% it was larger.
Based on an analysis of the change in mole fraction with time for the combustion of ammonia/n-
heptane mixtures simulated with Chemkin, the neglect of interactions between fuels is justiﬁed
at high n-heptane mole fractions as n-heptane is consumed before signiﬁcant change in the am-
monia mole fraction. For the mixture with 10% n-heptane and 90 % ammonia, the assumption
38
==PAGE:40==
is challenged. This mixture is also the mixture closest to the mixtures used in Yu et al. [11].
This could explain some of the inaccuracy of the modelling results of the detailed models when
comparing to their experimental data. The 90/10% mixture based on molefraction is close to
the 40/60% mixture, based on share of energy, Yu et al. uses. For engine usage the ammonia
should deliver the majority of the energy, and have as high an ammonia content as possible.
A signiﬁcant inhibition of ignition with an ammonia energy share of 40% could therefore be
problematic.
The results for the detailed model was oﬀby at least a factor of 2 in predicting the IDT of exper-
iments. In addition ammonia was found to inhibit the ignition of ammonia/n-heptane mixtures.
Regardless of this the concept of a semiglobal model, not accounting for this interaction will
be examined in the following. This is based on the hypothesis that if a semiglobal model with
acceptable agreement compared to the detailed model can be developed, the approach can be
iterated upon when an accurate detailed model is found.
5.6
Development of the semiglobal model
The goal for the semiglobal model is to develop a model simple enough to be used in CFD
simulations. The model is based on the same ammonia mechanism as the detailed model, but
with a simpler model for describing the n-heptane part of the ignition. The chosen model was
the MPL model from Muller et al. [15]. This four step model, is signiﬁcantly simpler than the
large Zhang model with 5,336 reactions. There is a signiﬁcant decrease in computational time
if this model is used instead of the Zhang model.
The semiglobal model is developed by copying the input ﬁles for the MPL model into the
Dai 2021 model. After this was done, the next step is to validate the semiglobal model. The
ﬁrst step is to compare it to the detailed model.
5.7
Comparison of semiglobal model to detailed model
To validate the semiglobal model, the detailed model and the semiglobal are compared. This is
done by running simulations on the same mixtures for both models in a range of temperatures.
The mixtures were varied from almost pure n-heptane to pure ammonia. This was to examine
how the composition of the mixture aﬀected the agreement of the two models. The ﬁgures 24
to 26, show the comparison for selected mixtures. The rest of the comparisons can be found in
appendix 10.1.
39
==PAGE:41==
Figure 24: Comparison of IDT prediction between detailed and semiglobal model for mixture
of 90% n-heptane and 10% ammonia. Simulated at pressures of 40 bars and stoichiometric
amounts of air.
At high initial n-heptane mole fractions the models agree well. Here, the big diﬀerence between
the two is the inability of the semiglobal model in capturing the NTC region of n-heptane
ignition. The diﬀerence in predicted IDT between the two is less than a factor of 2. This
diﬀerence is consistent with results by Thorsen et al. [16] for pure heptane. This reasonable
agreement continues until the initial molefraction of n-heptane drops to 10%. The results for
this mixture can be seen in ﬁgure 25.
Figure 25: Comparison of IDT prediction between detailed and semiglobal model for mixture
of 10% n-heptane and 90% ammonia. Simulated at pressures of 40 bars and stoichiometric
amounts of air.
40
==PAGE:42==
For this mixture it is clear that the simple model predicts a lower IDT than the detailed model.
The diﬀerence in predicted IDT between the two is larger than a factor of 2, and worse in the
NTC region. In addition the semiglobal model went from overpredicting the IDT compared to
the detailed model to now underpredicting between ﬁgure 24 to ﬁgure 25. This disagreement
between the two models is noteworthy because the two subsets describing the ammonia ignition
(which is the majority of the mixture) is the same. Better agreement between the models at
higher ammonia mole fractions could be expected.
This is not the case.
This is because
of a diﬀerence in how the detailed model and the simple model handles high ammonia mole
fractions. The diﬀerence between the semiglobal model and the detailed model further increases
with increasing ammonia mole fraction as seen in ﬁgure 26.
Figure 26: Comparison of IDT prediction between detailed and semiglobal model for mixture of
1% n-heptane and 99% ammonia. Simulated at pressures of 40 bars and stoichiometric amounts
of air.
The increase in diﬀerence between the models based on increasing ammonia mole fraction is
limited at 100% ammonia, the two models should behave the same as the ammonia subsets are
the same. This can be seen in appendix on ﬁgure 35.
A diﬀerence in the prediction of IDT between the semiglobal and the detailed model is observed.
The diﬀerence between the two models is the n-heptane subsets, one being the detailed Zhang
model and the other the global MPL model. As discussed earlier, Yu et al. [11] found that
ammonia had a signiﬁcant inhibiting eﬀect through the reacting between OH radicals and
ammonia. This inhibiting eﬀect is not active for the MPL model for n-heptane, as no OH
radicals are involved in the 4 step reaction mechanism. This correlates well with the detailed
and the semiglobal model predicting IDT further and further apart with increasing ammonia
mole fractions.
41
==PAGE:43==
6
Modiﬁcation and optimization of semiglobal model
To improve the accuracy of the semiglobal model and to test whether it can be optimized to
yield results close to the detailed model, several optimization routines will be attempted. These
include both manual optimization and optimization using Chemkin. These attempts will be
covered in detail in the following.
6.1
Manual optimization
To capture the inhibiting eﬀects of ammonia on the ignition of n-heptane in the semiglobal
model, an inhibiting reaction was added to the model. The MPL model consists of the 4 reac-
tions (11)-(14). Of these reactions, (11) and (13) is a conversion of the fuel into an intermediate.
One way to inhibit the conversion of n-heptane with ammonia is to add a reverse reaction for
one of these, where the reverse reaction being dependant on the ammonia concentration. The
low temperature reaction of the MPL model was slowed to increase IDT by adding the following
reaction:
NH3 + I −−→NH3 + F + 2 O2
(18)
The reaction parameters were initially set at the same as the forward reaction. Through trial
and error, the semiglobal model was optimized towards having the same result as the detailed
model at a fuel composition of 90% ammonia and 10% n-heptane. With rate parameters of
A = 4.0 · 1027 and Ea = 74092 the results for the detailed and the semiglobal model can be
seen in ﬁgure 27.
Figure 27: Comparison of detailed model, semiglobal model and semiglobal model with inhibi-
tion. Simulated at pressures of 40 bars and stoichiometric amounts of air.
On ﬁgure 27 it is clear that the agreement between the semiglobal and the detailed model
is better after adding the inhibiting reaction. One issue however, is the very high A value
42
==PAGE:44==
for the inhibiting reaction could cause numerical problems at high temperatures during CFD
simulations. This can happen if k is larger than the collision frequency. To combat this the A
value is decreased and the activation energy is set to 0 (Ea). Again through trial and error a
A value was found, the results for A = 5.4 · 107 can be seen in ﬁgure 28.
Figure 28: Comparison of detailed model to diﬀerent semiglobal models. Simulated at pressures
of 40 bars and stoichiometric amounts of air.
This approach of changing the activation energy for the inhibiting reaction to zero, was not able
to accurately reproduce the detailed model. A ﬁgure with more A values can be seen in appendix
10.2. The approach only changed the IDT in the low temperature area. At higher temperatures,
the model seemed to converge towards the semiglobal model without inhibition. This is caused
by the zero activation energy which makes the inhibiting reaction not depend on temperature,
combined with the increase in the forward reaction with temperature. To improve the accuracy
at higher temperatures a reaction inhibiting the high temperature conversion of n-heptane was
added. The reaction added was once again dependant on the ammonia concentration to capture
the inhibition of ammonia on ignition of n-heptane:
NH3 + X −−→NH3 + F
(19)
Following the addition of the inhibiting reaction in the high temperature range, the activation
energy for reaction (18) was changed to be non-zero again. Through a trial and error process of
changing the A and Ea values for the two reactions, a ﬁt of the semiglobal model to the detailed
model was achieved. The ﬁnal values for reaction (18) was A = 2 · 1014, Ea = 23000 cal
mol, while
for reaction (19) the values were A = 2 · 1018 and Ea = 32000 cal
mol. Using these rate parameters
the predictions can be seen in ﬁgure 29.
43
==PAGE:45==
Figure 29: Comparison of semiglobal models to detailed model. Simulated at pressures of 40
bars and stoichiometric amounts of air.
As seen in ﬁgure 29, the IDT in the low temperature area is closer for the model with two
inhibiting reactions than the one with just one. The diﬀerence is both in the slope of the model
prediction and in the actual ignition delays. If this model was to be used, it is important to test
it outside of the immediate temperature range in which it was developed. Thus, a simulation
with an extended temperature range was conducted, see ﬁgure 30.
44
==PAGE:46==
Figure 30: Comparison of semiglobal models to detailed model in extended temperature range.
Simulated at pressures of 40 bars and stoichiometric amounts of air.
It it clear that while the ﬁt was somewhat better at low temperatures, the inhibited semiglobal
model does not predict the same IDT as the detailed model at high temperatures. For high
temperatures the semiglobal model is signiﬁcantly slower.
The results of the manual optimization show that it is possible to improve the agreement
between the two models.
6.2
Mechanism optimization by using reaction workbench in Chemkin
Optimizing the simple model to be closer to the detailed model can also be done automatically
in Chemkin, using the reaction workbench feature. First step is to deﬁne which results are the
goal and which model should be changed. The results come from the detailed model, while the
model being changed was the simple model. The IDT is chosen as the goal parameter. IDT is
ﬁrst calculated at several temperatures using the detailed model. Afterwards the same is done
with the simple model, and the results are compared.
Changes are then made to the simple model and the same procedure is carried out. These
changes is the next thing to deﬁne. First the reactions that one wishes to optimize is chosen.
In this case the two inhibiting reactions with ammonia was chosen. Then a maximum range
for the changes in reaction parameters is chosen. A maximum change of 10 was chosen for A,
0.5 for n and 10000 for Ea. The starting values were the ﬁnal values used earlier: A = 2 · 1014,
Ea = 23000 cal
mol, while for reaction 19 A = 2 · 1018, Ea = 32000 cal
mol. Finally the maximum
amount of runs was set to 100. The conditions were 40 bars, stoichiometric amounts of air
45
==PAGE:47==
and in a temperature range between 650-1100 K. Using the resulting optimized mechanism a
simulation was carried out, the results can be seen in ﬁgure 31.
Figure 31: Comparison of semiglobal models to detailed model. Simulated at pressures of 40
bars and stoichiometric amounts of air. Fuel composition of 90% NH3 and 10% n-heptane.
The model with the two inhibiting reactions optimized predicts the same IDT as the detailed
model at low temperatures. When the detailed model enters the NTC region the agreement
worsens, as the simple model cannot reproduce the NTC behaviour. The ﬁnal reaction pa-
rameters for the optimized inhibiting reactions are: A = 1.024 · 1015, n = −0.3729 and
Ea = 2.284·104 cal
mol , while for reaction (19): A = 1.985·1019, n = 0.499 and Ea = 4.208·104 cal
mol.
These reaction parameters only give an optimal ﬁt for the 90/10 % ammonia/n-heptane mix-
ture. For mixtures of diﬀering compositions the agreement will be worse. Results from using
the same reaction parameters for a 70/30% ammonia/n-heptane mixture can be seen in ﬁgure
32.
46
==PAGE:48==
Figure 32: Comparison of semiglobal models to detailed model. Simulated at pressures of 40
bars and stoichiometric amounts of air. Fuel composition of 70% NH3 and 30% n-heptane.
It is clear that the optimized reaction is far from the detailed model for the 70/30% composition,
and that the ﬁt is worse than before any inhibiting reactions. A ﬁgure of a simulation with a
95/5% ammonia/n-heptane mix can be seen in ﬁgure 33.
47
==PAGE:49==
Figure 33: Comparison of semiglobal models to detailed model. Simulated at pressures of 40
bars and stoichiometric amounts of air. Fuel composition of 95% NH3 and 5% n-heptane.
From ﬁgure 33 it can be seen that the optimized inhibited model is closer to the detailed model.
One thing to note is that the temperature interval is smaller compared to the 70/30% mixture.
The optimized inhibited model is within a factor of 2 of the detailed model in the range, while
the semiglobal model is oﬀby more than a factor of 2 in the entire interval. The issue for
the semiglobal model, before any modiﬁcations, was that the model was too fast compared
to the detailed model. Adding inhibiting reactions therefore increases the accuracy for these
compositions.
An Arrhenius plot using these reaction parameters was made, this can be seen in ﬁgure 34.
48
==PAGE:50==
Figure 34: Arrhenius plot of the two inhibiting reactions in the temperature range of 600-2500
K.
On the Arrhenius plot it can be seen that reaction (18) is faster than reaction (19). It can
also be seen that the rate of reaction (19) increases faster with temperature than (18). The
calculation used for the plot can be seen in appendix 10.3.
Overall it can be concluded that it is possible to optimize the semiglobal model to be within a
factor of two in the prediction of IDT compared to the detailed model in a certain temperature
range and for a speciﬁc fuel composition. However the NTC region remains a problem, where
the semiglobal model cannot predict the IDT accurately.
49
==PAGE:51==
7
Discussion
In this section the conclusions from the modelling work will be discussed. First the validation
of the models used in the combined models will be covered. Then the results from both the
detailed combined model and semiglobal model will be described. Based on these results the
validity of the modelling approach will be examined.
7.1
Model validation
The ﬁrst part of the modelling work was to validate the chosen models, before combining them.
The Dai model from [13] was compared against experimental data from Shu et al. [14]. The
model was accurate in predicting the IDT of ammonia mixtures at temperatures above 1300 K,
below this temperature the model was oﬀby a factor of 2 to 8. The model accuracy decreased
with decreasing temperature. This result is problematic for the combined model, since the
temperature range in which it was accurate was above 1300 K, while the aim was to model
ignition between 650-1100 K. Better models for ignition of ammonia is therefore needed.
The validation of the n-heptane models (Zhang and MPL) was carried out by validating against
experimental data from Fieweger et al [18]. The Zhang model was accurate at predicting the
IDT, being within a factor of 2 or less compared to the experimental results. The MPL model
was unable to capture the NTC behaviour of the n-heptane, but was within a factor of 2 for
predictions of the IDT.
7.2
Modelling approach
The modelling approach of combining two separate models describing the two parts of a two
component fuel was used successfully to describe the ignition of methane and n-heptane by
Thorsen et al. [16]. In addition they also got good results using a semiglobal global model for
the modelling of the n-heptane part (the model by Muller et al [15]). The modelling work in
this thesis encountered trouble in both of these aspects. The detailed model consisting of the
Dai model and the Zhang model, could not accurately predict the IDT of ammonia/n-heptane
blends when compared to experimental data. The agreement between the predictions and the
experimental results were worse than what was obtained by Yu et al. [11] who followed a similar
approach, but without the updated parts from the Dai model. The results by Yu et al. could
be reproduced for certain values, limited by problems with using volume proﬁles in Chemkin.
The overall agreement between the models and the experimental results were not satisfactory,
the IDT was of by a factor of between 2 and 10 depending on the temperature.
To examine why the model predictions were so far oﬀcompared to the experimental results,
simulations with varying ammonia and n-heptane mole fractions were carried out. The aim
was to examine how the ignition behaved, whether the n-heptane reacts ﬁrst as assumed dur-
ing the modelling or ammonia starts reacting prior to all n-heptane being converted. From this
analysis it was found that the addition of ammonia inhibited the ignition of n-heptane, most no-
tably at high initial ammonia concentrations and low n-heptane concentrations. This was also
tested by simulating a mixed fuel with the ammonia replaced by nitrogen, which did not show
the same inhibiting eﬀect on the oxidation of n-heptane. This agrees with the results by Yu
et al. [11] who found that the ignition was inhibited by the reaction between ammonia and OH.
50
==PAGE:52==
A semiglobal model for describing the ignition of ammonia/n-heptane mixtures was then devel-
oped by combining the MPL model by Muller et al. [15] and the Dai model by Dai et al. [13].
This was then validated by comparing it to the detailed model. This validation was carried out
by simulating the IDT for the same mixture under the same conditions using both models, and
then comparing the resulting IDT. The initial results were mixed for the agreement between
the two models, highly dependant on the composition of the fuel mixture. Because the focus
for developing the model is for use in CFD with the aim of developing engines capable of using
an ammonia/n-heptane fuel a composition of 90% ammonia and 10% n-heptane was chosen as
the used composition. For this composition the semiglobal model under predicted the IDT by
a factor between 2 and 5.
To inhibit the ignition and thereby increase the predicted IDT inhibiting reactions based on
ammonia was added to the semiglobal model. Several approaches at optimizing the rate con-
stants for these inhibiting reactions were attempted. The best was to use the inbuilt reaction
workbench in Chemkin, to optimize the semiglobal model, using the detailed model as the tar-
get. Using this approach a reasonable agreement (within a factor of 2) between the two models
could be simulated for a temperature range of 650-1100 K for a 90% ammonia 10% n-heptane
mixture. The shortcoming of the semiglobal model is describing the NTC region of n-heptane
ignition, both for the base model and any optimized semiglobal models.
8
Conclusion
In this thesis the approach of combining two models for diﬀerent fuels without accounting
for direct interactions was attempted for ammonia/n-heptane mixtures.
This was done by
ﬁrst validating the individual models, before combining them and validating them against ex-
perimental data.
The validation of the ammonia model showed a lack of accuracy for low
temperature (below 1300 K), where the IDT prediction was oﬀby a factor of up to 10. The
n-heptane model chosen was accurate in predicting the ignition of n-heptane. The two models
were then combined and examined. The combined model was not accurate at predicting the
experimental IDT. One reason for this was ammonia inhibiting the oxidization of n-heptane
by reacting with OH radicals. The inhibition increased with increasing ammonia concentration.
A semiglobal model was developed consisting of the MPL global model for n-heptane and
the Dai 2021 model for ammonia. This model was then validated against the combined model.
The agreement between the two was examined with a focus on a mixture consisting of 90%
ammonia and 10% n-heptane. For this mixture two inhibiting reactions dependant on the am-
monia concentration was added to the global model, the reaction parameters for these reactions
were then optimized with the goal of replicating the detailed combined model. A semiglobal
model describing the ignition of a speciﬁc ammonia/n-heptane mixture could be developed
using this approach.
9
Future work
One of the issues encountered in this work is the lack of an accurate model for describing
ignition of ammonia at low temperatures. An improvement in the accuracy of the ammonia
model could increase the accuracy of both the semiglobal model and the detailed model.
For the aim of engine development, the semiglobal model developed was most accurate for
mixtures with a high mole fraction of n-heptane.
Engines are not necessarily modelled by
51
==PAGE:53==
premixed batch reactors, and fuel injection techniques aﬀects the composition of a mixed fuel.
Therefore it could be used for engine development if the initial ignition happens in a mixture
with a high n-heptane molefraction.
Another thing to consider is the global model used to describe n-heptane ignition. Other global
models including reactions with OH radicals could improve the accuracy of the semiglobal
model, by modelling the radical interactions.
52
==PAGE:54==
References
(1)
MassonDelmotte V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. P´ean, S. Berger, N. Caud,
Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews,
T.K. Maycock, T. Waterﬁeld, O. Yelek¸ci, R. Yu and B. Zhou (eds.), The Physical Science
Basis Summary for Policymakers Working Group I contribution to the Sixth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, tech. rep., 2021.
(2)
A. Valera-Medina, F. Amer-Hatem, A. K. Azad, I. C. Dedoussi, M. De Joannon, R. X.
Fernandes, P. Glarborg, H. Hashemi, X. He, S. Mashruk, J. McGowan, C. Mounaim-
Rouselle, A. Ortiz-Prado, A. Ortiz-Valera, I. Rossetti, B. Shu, M. Yehia, H. Xiao and
M. Costa, Energy and Fuels, 2021, 35, 6964–7029.
(3)
P. Glarborg, J. A. Miller, B. Ruscic and S. J. Klippenstein, Progress in Energy and
Combustion Science, 2018, 67, 31–68.
(4)
P. Dimitriou and R. Javaid, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 7098–
7118.
(5)
Alfa Laval, Hafnia, Haldor topsøe, Vestas and Siemens Gamesa, Ammonfuel-an industrial
view of ammonia as a marine fuel, tech. rep., 2020.
(6)
A. Valera-Medina, H. Xiao, M. Owen-Jones, W. I. David and P. J. Bowen, Progress in
Energy and Combustion Science, 2018, 69, 63–102.
(7)
D. R. MacFarlane, P. V. Cherepanov, J. Choi, B. H. Suryanto, R. Y. Hodgetts, J. M.
Bakker, F. M. Ferrero Vallana and A. N. Simonov, Joule, 2020, 4, 1186–1205.
(8)
S. R. Turns, An introduction to combustion : concepts and applications, McGraw-Hill Co,
3rd edn., 2012, pp. 107–115.
(9)
K. Zhang, C. Banyon, J. Bugler, H. J. Curran, A. Rodriguez, O. Herbinet, F. Battin-
Leclerc, C. B’Chir and K. A. Heufer, Combustion and Flame, 2016, 172, 116–135.
(10)
K. Zhang, C. Banyon, C. Togb´e, P. Dagaut, J. Bugler and H. J. Curran, Combustion and
Flame, 2015, 162, 4194–4207.
(11)
L. Yu, W. Zhou, Y. Feng, W. Wang, J. Zhu, Y. Qian and X. Lu, Combustion and Flame,
2020, 217, 4–11.
(12)
O. Mathieu and E. L. Petersen, Combustion and Flame, 2015, 162, 554–570.
(13)
L. Dai, H. Hashemi, P. Glarborg, S. Gersen, P. Marshall, A. Mokhov and H. Levinsky,
Combustion and Flame, 2021, 227, 120–134.
(14)
B. Shu, S. K. Vallabhuni, X. He, G. Issayev, K. Moshammer, A. Farooq and R. X.
Fernandes, Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, 2019, 37, 205–211.
(15)
C. Muller, N. Peters and A. Liiqjtn, Twenty-Fourth Sumposium on Combustion/The
Combustion Institute, 1992, pp. 777–784.
(16)
L. Thorsen, L. C. N. Mjølna, H. Hashemi, K. M. Pang and P. Glarborg, “Evaluation of
a Semi-Global Approach for Modeling Methane/Heptane Dual Fuel Ignition”.
(17)
Y. Feng, J. Zhu, Y. Mao, M. Raza, Y. Qian, L. Yu and X. Lu, Fuel, 2020, 281, DOI:
10.1016/j.fuel.2020.118761.
(18)
K. Fieweger, R. Blumenthal and G. Adomeit, Combustion and Flame, 1997, 109, 599–
619.
53
==PAGE:55==
10
Appendix
10.1
Comparison of semiglobal and detailed model
54
==PAGE:56==
55
==PAGE:57==
Figure 35: Comparison of IDT prediction between detailed and semiglobal model for pure
ammonia. Simulated at pressures of 40 bars and stoichiometric amounts of air.
56
==PAGE:58==
10.2
Inhibiting reaction with EA0
10.3
Arrhenius plot for inhibiting reactions
In addition to the rate parameters given, an R value of: R = 1.987
Cal
K·mol. Then it was plotted
using following equation:
log(k) = log(A) + log(T n) −(Ea
R )( 1
T )
(20)
For the calculation of k for reaction 18:
log(k) = log(1.0242538·1015)+log(2500−0.37297151)−(4.20850528 · 1014
R
)(
1
2500) = 32.8819 (21)
exp(log(k)) = k = exp(32.8819) = 1.9073 · 1014
(22)
10.4
Matlab scripts used for plotting and examples of Chemkinﬁles
57
==PAGE:59==
1/13/22 8:53 AM
C:\Users\s164078\Documents\M...\nytnavn2.m
1 of 1
%MPL + Inhib EA =0
%Inputs for the Complex model, MPL model and changed MPL (EA of reverse
%reaction not 0
Complex90NH3=table2array(readtable('90NH3Complex.csv')); %Complex_extended.csv
MPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('90NH3MPL.csv'));
UMPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('90NH3Ændret.csv'));
Test=table2array(readtable('5.4e7EA0.csv')); %2e14EA230002Rev2e18EA32000extended.csv
%Inputs for EA=0 for everase reaction and differing A values.
Ae2MPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('5.4e2EA0.csv'));
Ae5MPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('5.4e5EA0.csv'));
Ae7MPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('5.4e7EA0.csv'));
Ae9MPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('5.4e9EA0.csv'));
 
figure(2)
semilogy(Complex90NH3(:,1),Complex90NH3(:,2),MPL90NH3(:,1),MPL90NH3(:,2),UMPL90NH3(:,1),
UMPL90NH3(:,2),Test(:,1),Test(:,2))
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title({'Semiglobal model with and without inhibition, compared to detailed model.',' 
Mixture of 90% NH3 and 10% N-heptane in stoichiometric amounts of air.'})
legend({'Detailed model' 'Semiglobal model' 'Inhibited semiglobal model' 'Inhibited 
semiglobal model Ea=0'}, 'Location','southeast')
grid on
 
figure(3)
semilogy(Ae2MPL90NH3(:,1),Ae2MPL90NH3(:,2),Ae5MPL90NH3(:,1),Ae5MPL90NH3(:,2),Ae7MPL90NH3
(:,1),Ae7MPL90NH3(:,2),Ae9MPL90NH3(:,1),Ae9MPL90NH3(:,2))
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title({'Comparison between inhibited semiglobal models, with EA =0 on inhibiting 
reaction',' Mixture of 90% NH3 and 10% N-heptane in stoichiometric amounts of air.'})
legend({'A=5.4e2 ' 'A=5.4e5' 'A=5.4e7' 'A=5.4e9'}, 'Location','southeast')
grid on
 
==PAGE:60==
1/13/22 8:58 AM
C:\Users\s164078\Docume...\Arrheniusplot.m
1 of 1
%Used for arrhenius plot 
%reaction parameters for reaction 18.
A1=1.0242538*10^15; 
n1=-0.37297151; 
Ea1=2.28456065*10^4; %Cal/mol
%reaction parameters for reaction 19.
A2=1.98535253*10^19;
n2=0.49970379;
Ea2=4.20850528*10^4; %Cal/mol
R=1.987;%Cal/(K*mol)
 
%k1=@(T) log10(A1*(T^n1)*exp(-Ea1/(R*T)));
%k2=@(T) log10(A2*(T^n2)*exp(-Ea2/(R*T)));
k1=@(T) log(A1)+log(T^n1)-(Ea1/R)*(T);
k2=@(T) log(A2)+log(T^n2)-(Ea2/R)*(T);
 
 
figure(1)
hold on
fplot(k1,[0.0004 0.0017]);
fplot(k2,[0.0004 0.0017]);
xlabel('1/T (K)')
ylabel('log(k)')
title({'Arrhenius plot of inhibiting reactions'})
legend({'Reaction 18' 'Reaction 19'}, 'Location','southwest')
grid on
hold off
 
==PAGE:61==
1/13/22 8:58 AM
C:\Users\s164078\Documents\MATLAB\Compa...
1 of 3
%Loading of data from chemkin. Chemkin data is exported as .csv files.
%The names of the chemkin files corresponds to the conditions simulated at.
% The data in the chemkin files is 1000/T and the IDT in that order. 
%Complex model with 50, 70 and 90 % NH3 and rest n-heptane, stoichiometric calculations.
Complex10NH3=table2array(readtable('10NH3Complex.csv'));
Complex30NH3=table2array(readtable('30NH3Complex.csv'));
Complex50NH3=table2array(readtable('50NH3Complex.csv'));
Complex70NH3=table2array(readtable('70NH3Complex.csv'));
Complex90NH3=table2array(readtable('90NH3Complex.csv'));
Complex95NH3=table2array(readtable('95NH3Complex.csv'));
Complex98NH3=table2array(readtable('98NH3Complex.csv'));
Complex99NH3=table2array(readtable('99NH3Complex.csv'));
Complex100NH3=table2array(readtable('100NH3Complex.csv'));
%MPL + DTU model with 50, 70 and 90 % NH3 and rest n-heptane, stoichiometric 
calculations.
MPL10NH3=table2array(readtable('10NH3MPL.csv'));
MPL30NH3=table2array(readtable('30NH3MPL.csv'));
MPL50NH3=table2array(readtable('50NH3MPL.csv'));
MPL70NH3=table2array(readtable('70NH3MPL.csv'));
MPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('90NH3MPL.csv'));
MPL95NH3=table2array(readtable('95NH3MPL.csv'));
MPL98NH3=table2array(readtable('98NH3MPL.csv'));
MPL99NH3=table2array(readtable('99NH3MPL.csv'));
MPL100NH3=table2array(readtable('100NH3MPL.csv'));
%For comparison of optimized model:
OPT2inhib70NH3=table2array(readtable('70NH3Opt2inhib.csv'));
OPT2inhib90NH3=table2array(readtable('90NH3Opt2inhib2.csv'));
OPT2inhib95NH3=table2array(readtable('95NH3Opt2inhib.csv'));
%Hard to read plot. Shows that equivalance ratio has a limited effect on
%IDT 
figure(1)
semilogy(Complex50NH3(:,1),Complex50NH3(:,2),MPL50NH3(:,1),MPL50NH3(:,2))
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title({'Semiglobal model compared to detailed combined model.',' Mixture of 50% NH3 and 
50% N-heptane in stoichiometric amounts of air.'})
legend({'Detailed model' 'Semiglobal model'}, 'Location','southeast')
grid on
 
figure(2)
semilogy(Complex70NH3(:,1),Complex70NH3(:,2),MPL70NH3(:,1),MPL70NH3(:,2))
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title({'Semiglobal model compared to detailed combined model.',' Mixture of 70% NH3 and 
30% N-heptane in stoichiometric amounts of air.'})
legend({'Detailed model' 'Semiglobal model'}, 'Location','southeast')
grid on
 
%For optimized comparison at 70/30:
figure(10)
semilogy(Complex70NH3(:,1),Complex70NH3(:,2),MPL70NH3(:,1),MPL70NH3(:,2),OPT2inhib70NH3
==PAGE:62==
1/13/22 8:59 AM
C:\Users\s164078\Docu...\EA0_Differing_A.m
1 of 2
%MPL + Inhib EA =0
%Inputs for the Complex model, MPL model and changed MPL (EA of reverse
%reaction not 0
Complex90NH3=table2array(readtable('90NH3Complex.csv')); %Complex_extended.csv
MPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('90NH3MPL.csv'));
UMPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('90NH3Ændret.csv'));
Test=table2array(readtable('2e14EA230002Rev2e18EA32000.csv')); %
2e14EA230002Rev2e18EA32000extended.csv
%Inputs for EA=0 for everase reaction and differing A values.
Ae2MPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('5.4e2EA0.csv'));
Ae5MPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('5.4e5EA0.csv'));
Ae7MPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('5.4e7EA0.csv'));
Ae9MPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('5.4e9EA0.csv'));
 
OPT2inhib90NH3=table2array(readtable('90NH3Opt2inhib.csv'));
 
%for extended plot
%EComplex90NH3=table2array(readtable('Complex_extended.csv')); %Complex_extended.csv
%ETest=table2array(readtable('2e14EA230002Rev2e18EA32000extended.csv')); %
2e14EA230002Rev2e18EA32000extended.csv
 
EComplex90NH3=table2array(readtable('Complex_extended.csv')); %Complex_extended.csv
ETest=table2array(readtable('2e14EA230002Rev2e18EA32000extended.csv')); %
2e14EA230002Rev2e18EA32000extended.csv
 
figure(2)
semilogy(Complex90NH3(:,1),Complex90NH3(:,2),MPL90NH3(:,1),MPL90NH3(:,2),UMPL90NH3(:,1),
UMPL90NH3(:,2),Test(:,1),Test(:,2))
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title({'Semiglobal model and inhibited models, compared to detailed model.',' Mixture of 
90% NH3 and 10% N-heptane in stoichiometric amounts of air.'})
legend({'Detailed model' 'Semiglobal model' 'Inhibited semiglobal model' 'Semiglobal 
model with 2 inhibiting reactions'}, 'Location','southeast')
grid on
 
figure(3)
semilogy(Ae2MPL90NH3(:,1),Ae2MPL90NH3(:,2),Ae5MPL90NH3(:,1),Ae5MPL90NH3(:,2),Ae7MPL90NH3
(:,1),Ae7MPL90NH3(:,2),Ae9MPL90NH3(:,1),Ae9MPL90NH3(:,2))
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title({'Comparison between inhibited MPL models, with EA =0 on inhibiting reaction',' 
Mixture of 90% NH3 and 10% N-heptane in stoichiometric amounts of air.'})
legend({'A=5.4e2 ' 'A=5.4e5' 'A=5.4e7' 'A=5.4e9'}, 'Location','southeast')
grid on
 
figure(4)
semilogy(EComplex90NH3(:,1),EComplex90NH3(:,2),ETest(:,1),ETest(:,2))
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title({'2 inhibiting reactions semiglobal model, compared to detailed model. Extended 
==PAGE:63==
1/13/22 8:58 AM
C:\Users\s164078\Docume...\Fieweger_data.m
1 of 1
%Plots of different heptane models 
%Includes Mueller and Zhang so far. 
 
%Fieweger data (Shock tube heptane spreadsheet)
%Temp 1/1000K
%IDT ms
T1000Fieweger=
[0.878158756,0.940771335,1.019739183,1.059628742,1.090092694,1.136889418,1.15359448,1.228
642314,1.271051921,1.334081784];
IDTFieweger=
[0.093884285,0.271444369,0.577949281,0.586064547,0.578295119,0.508384558,0.417428364,0.49
5124405,0.587119069,1.0688811];
 
%Zhang data 20 bar (Shock tube heptane spreadsheet)
%Temp unit: 1/1000K
%IDT unit: ms
T1000ZhangP20=[1.38,1.29,1.21,1.17,1.11,1.06,1,0.94,0.87,0.81,0.71];
IDTZhangP20=[2,1.27,1.09,1.29,1.7,1.48,1.05,0.58,0.25,0.1,0.02];
 
ZhangP20bar=table2array(readtable('ZhangP20BarEQ1Air.csv'));
ZhangP42bar=table2array(readtable('ZhangP42BarEQ1Air.csv'));
MPLP20bar=table2array(readtable('MPLP20BarEq1.csv'));
MPLP42bar=table2array(readtable('MPLP42Bar.csv'));
%(MPLP20bar(:,1),MPLP20bar(:,3),'r',ZhangP20bar(:,1),ZhangP20bar(:,3),'r --',
T1000ZhangP20,IDTZhangP20,'< r')
 
semilogy(MPLP42bar(:,1),MPLP42bar(:,3),'b',ZhangP42bar(:,1),ZhangP42bar(:,3),'b --',
T1000Fieweger,IDTFieweger,'+ b',MPLP20bar(:,1),MPLP20bar(:,3),'r',ZhangP20bar(:,1),
ZhangP20bar(:,4),'r --',T1000ZhangP20,IDTZhangP20,'+ r')
legend({'MPL 42 bar','Zhang 42 bar', 'Fieweger data 42 bar','MPL 20 bar','Zhang 20 bar', 
'Zhang data 20 bar'}, 'Location','southeast')
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title('Validation of n-heptane models')
grid on
 
%semilogy(MPLP20bar(:,1),MPLP20bar(:,3),'r',ZhangP20bar(:,1),ZhangP20bar(:,4),'r --',
T1000ZhangP20,IDTZhangP20,'< r')
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
1/13/22 8:57 AM
C:\Users\s164078\...\Modeludviklingplots.m
1 of 2
%This script is used to compare the combined model of Zhang 2016
% And Glarborg 2018.
clear
 
%Load the data from emilmodel results:
EmodelBaseFNH3=table2array(readtable('Emodel_Base_Fuel_NH3.csv'));
EmodelH2FNH3=table2array(readtable('Emodel_H2_Fuel_NH3_therm.csv'));
EmodelH2NH3FNH3=table2array(readtable('Emodel_H2_NH3_Fuel_NH3_therm.csv'));
EmodelH2NH3NH2FNH3=table2array(readtable('Emodel_H2_NH3_NH2_Fuel_NH3_therm.csv'));
 
IDTdataEmodelNH3=[EmodelBaseFNH3(:,2),EmodelH2FNH3(:,2),EmodelH2NH3FNH3(:,2),
EmodelH2NH3NH2FNH3(:,2)];
 
EmodelBaseFNhept=table2array(readtable('Emodel_Base_Fuel_nheptane.csv'));
EmodelH2FNhept=table2array(readtable('Emodel_H2_Fuel_nheptane_therm.csv'));
EmodelH2NH3FNhept=table2array(readtable('Emodel_H2_NH3_Fuel_nheptane_therm.csv'));
EmodelH2NH3NH2FNhept=table2array(readtable('Emodel_H2_NH3_NH2_Fuel_nheptane_therm.csv'));
 
IDTdataEmodelnhept=[EmodelBaseFNhept(:,2),EmodelH2FNhept(:,2),EmodelH2NH3FNhept(:,2),
EmodelH2NH3NH2FNhept(:,2)];
 
EmodelBaseFMix3Yu=table2array(readtable('Emodel_Base_Fuel_Mix3Yu.csv'));
EmodelH2FMix3Yu=table2array(readtable('Emodel_H2_Fuel_Mix3Yu_therm.csv'));
EmodelH2NH3FMix3Yu=table2array(readtable('Emodel_H2_NH3_Fuel_Mix3Yu_therm.csv'));
EmodelH2NH3NH2FMix3Yu=table2array(readtable('Emodel_H2_NH3_NH2_Fuel_Mix3Yu_therm.csv'));
 
IDTdataEmodelMix3Yu=[EmodelBaseFMix3Yu(:,2),EmodelH2FMix3Yu(:,2),EmodelH2NH3FMix3Yu(:,2),
EmodelH2NH3NH2FMix3Yu(:,2)];
 
%Plots of nhept comparisons (not readable because of very low differences.
figure(1)
semilogy(EmodelBaseFNhept(:,1),EmodelBaseFNhept(:,2),'b ',EmodelH2FNhept(:,1),
EmodelH2FNhept(:,2),'r -.',EmodelH2NH3FNhept(:,1),EmodelH2NH3FNhept(:,2),'c --',
EmodelH2NH3NH2FNhept(:,1),EmodelH2NH3NH2FNhept(:,2),'k *')
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title({'Comparison of results for different models',' IDT for pure n-heptane'})
legend({'Base Yu model','Model with H2 subset updated','Model with H2 and NH3 subsets 
updated','Model with H2, NH3 and NH2 subsets updated'},'Location','southeast')
figure(2)
semilogy(EmodelBaseFNH3(:,1),EmodelBaseFNH3(:,2),'b',EmodelH2FNH3(:,1),EmodelH2FNH3(:,
2),'r -.',EmodelH2NH3FNH3(:,1),EmodelH2NH3FNH3(:,2),'c --',EmodelH2NH3NH2FNH3(:,1),
EmodelH2NH3NH2FNH3(:,2),'k *')
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title({'Comparison of results for different models',' IDT for pure ammonia'})
legend({'Base Yu model','Model with H2 subset updated','Model with H2 and NH3 subsets 
updated','Model with H2, NH3 and NH2 subsets updated'},'Location','southeast')
figure(3)
semilogy(EmodelBaseFMix3Yu(:,1),EmodelBaseFMix3Yu(:,2),'b',EmodelH2FMix3Yu(:,1),
EmodelH2FMix3Yu(:,2),'r -.',EmodelH2NH3FMix3Yu(:,1),EmodelH2NH3FMix3Yu(:,2),'c --',
==PAGE:65==
1/13/22 8:58 AM
C:\Users\s16407...\MPLNH3inhibition_plot.m
1 of 2
%Changed MPL model with deactivating reaction with NH3
Complex70NH3=table2array(readtable('70NH3Complex.csv'));
Complex90NH3=table2array(readtable('90NH3Complex.csv'));
Complex95NH3=table2array(readtable('95NH3Complex.csv'));
Complex98NH3=table2array(readtable('98NH3Complex.csv'));
 
MPL70NH3=table2array(readtable('70NH3MPL.csv'));
MPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('90NH3MPL.csv'));
MPL95NH3=table2array(readtable('95NH3MPL.csv'));
MPL98NH3=table2array(readtable('98NH3MPL.csv'));
 
UMPL70NH3=table2array(readtable('70NH3Ændret.csv'));
UMPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('90NH3Ændret.csv'));
UMPL95NH3=table2array(readtable('95NH3Ændret.csv'));
UMPL98NH3=table2array(readtable('98NH3Ændret.csv'));
 
EA0MPL90NH3=table2array(readtable('5.4e9EA0.csv'));
 
 
figure(1)
semilogy(Complex95NH3(:,1),Complex95NH3(:,2),MPL95NH3(:,1),MPL95NH3(:,2),UMPL95NH3(14:
20,1),UMPL95NH3(14:20,2))
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title({'MPL + DTU NH3 model and MPL with NH3 inhibition, compared to complex combined 
model.',' Mixture of 95% NH3 and 5% N-heptane in stoichiometric amounts of air.'})
legend({'Complex model' 'MPL + DTU model' 'MPL + DTU with inhibition'}, 
'Location','southeast')
grid on
 
figure(2)
semilogy(Complex70NH3(:,1),Complex70NH3(:,2),MPL70NH3(:,1),MPL70NH3(:,2),UMPL70NH3(:,1),
UMPL70NH3(:,2))
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title({'MPL + DTU NH3 model and MPL with NH3 inhibition, compared to complex combined 
model.',' Mixture of 70% NH3 and 30% N-heptane in stoichiometric amounts of air.'})
legend({'Complex model' 'MPL + DTU model' 'MPL + DTU with inhibition'}, 
'Location','southeast')
grid on
 
figure(3)
semilogy(Complex90NH3(:,1),Complex90NH3(:,2),MPL90NH3(:,1),MPL90NH3(:,2),UMPL90NH3(:,1),
UMPL90NH3(:,2))%,EA0MPL90NH3(:,1),EA0MPL90NH3(:,2))
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title({'Semiglobal model with and without inhibition, compared to detailed model.',' 
Mixture of 90% NH3 and 10% N-heptane in stoichiometric amounts of air.'})
legend({'Detailed model' 'Semiglobal model' 'Semiglobal model with inhibition'}, 
'Location','southeast')
grid on
==PAGE:66==
1/13/22 8:56 AM
C:\User...\NH3_comparison_model_plotting.m
1 of 2
%Comparison through plotting of NH3 models and experimental data
%Experimental data is from ShuNH3_Data.m (see source there)
clear
%Runs the ShuNH3_Data.m script, adding the needed data to the workspace.
ShuNH3_Data;
 
%Loading of data from chemkin. Chemkin data is exporeted as .csv files.
%The names of the chemkin files corresponds to the conditions simulated at.
% The data in the chemkin files is 1000/T and the IDT in that order. 
%For p=20 bar and Eq= 0.5, 1, 2:
NH3_DMEP20BarEq5=table2array(readtable('NH3_DMEP20Eq5.csv'));
NH3_DMEP20BarEq1=table2array(readtable('NH3_DMEP20Eq1.csv'));
NH3_DMEP20BarEq2=table2array(readtable('NH3_DMEP20Eq2.csv'));
%For p=40 bar and Eq = 0.5, 1, 2:
NH3_DMEP40BarEq5=table2array(readtable('NH3_DMEP40Eq5.csv'));
NH3_DMEP40BarEq1=table2array(readtable('NH3_DMEP40Eq1.csv'));
NH3_DMEP40BarEq2=table2array(readtable('NH3_DMEP40Eq2.csv'));
 
%Hard to read plot. Shows that equivalance ratio has a limited effect on
%IDT 
semilogy(NH3_DMEP20BarEq5(:,1),NH3_DMEP20BarEq5(:,2),'b',NH3_DMEP20BarEq1(:,1),
NH3_DMEP20BarEq1(:,2),'g',NH3_DMEP20BarEq2(:,1),NH3_DMEP20BarEq2(:,2),'r',1000.
/ShuP20Eq5TK,ShuP20Eq5IDTmuS./1000,'+ b',1000./ShuP20Eq1TK,ShuP20Eq1IDTmuS./1000,'+ g',
1000./ShuP20Eq2TK,ShuP20Eq2IDTmuS./1000,'+ r')
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title('Dai model compared to Shu et al. experimental data')
legend({'Dai model 20 bar Eq=0.5','Dai model 20 bar Eq=1','Dai model 20 bar Eq=2','Shu 
data, P=20 Eq=0.5','Shu data, P=20 Eq=1','Shu data, P=20 Eq=2'}, 'Location','southeast')
grid on
 
Chemkindata=[NH3_DMEP20BarEq5, NH3_DMEP20BarEq1,NH3_DMEP20BarEq2,NH3_DMEP40BarEq5, 
NH3_DMEP40BarEq1,NH3_DMEP40BarEq2];
ShuIDTmS=[ShuP20Eq5IDTmuS;ShuP20Eq1IDTmuS;ShuP20Eq2IDTmuS;ShuP40Eq5IDTmuS;
ShuP40Eq1IDTmuS;ShuP40Eq2IDTmuS]./1000;
Shu1000T=1000./[ShuP20Eq5TK;ShuP20Eq1TK;ShuP20Eq2TK;ShuP40Eq5TK;ShuP40Eq1TK;ShuP40Eq2TK];
Legendstring=({'NH3/DME model 20 bar Eq=0.5','Shu. data 20 bar Eq=0.5','NH3/DME model 20 
bar Eq=1','Shu. data 20 bar Eq=1','NH3/DME model 20 bar Eq=2','Shu. data 20 bar 
Eq=2','NH3/DME model 40 bar Eq=0.5','Shu. data 40 bar Eq=0.5','NH3/DME model 40 bar 
Eq=1','Shu. data 40 bar Eq=1','NH3/DME model 40 bar Eq=2','Shu. data 40 bar Eq=2'});
%Plots for pressures of 20/40 and equivalance ratios of 0.5, 1, 2.
for i=1:6
    figure(i+1)
    semilogy(Chemkindata(:,2*i-1),Chemkindata(:,2*i),'r',Shu1000T(i,:),ShuIDTmS(i,:),'+ 
r')
    xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
    ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
    title('Dai model compared to Shu et al. experimental data') 
    legend(Legendstring(1,2*i-1:2*i), 'Location','southeast')
    grid on
end
==PAGE:67==
1/13/22 8:57 AM
C:\Users\s16...\Plo1_af_molbroek_mod_tid.m
1 of 2
%Script plotting x as a function of time for NH3 and NC7H16. non diluted
clear
 
Run1=table2array(readtable('Run1.csv')); 
Run2=table2array(readtable('Run2.csv')); 
Run3=table2array(readtable('Run3.csv')); 
Run4=table2array(readtable('Run4.csv')); 
Run5=table2array(readtable('Run5.csv')); 
Run6=table2array(readtable('Run6.csv')); 
Run7=table2array(readtable('Run7.csv')); 
Run8=table2array(readtable('Run8.csv')); 
Run9=table2array(readtable('Run9.csv')); 
Run9N2=table2array(readtable('Run9N2try2.csv')); 
Run10=table2array(readtable('Run10.csv')); 
Run11=table2array(readtable('Run11.csv'));
%figure(1)
%hold on
%plot(Run1(:,1),Run1(:,2),'-.',Run2(:,1),Run2(:,2),'-.',Run3(:,1),Run3(:,2),'-.',Run4(:,
1),Run4(:,2),'-.',Run5(:,1),Run5(:,2),'-.',Run6(:,1),Run6(:,2),'-.',Run7(:,1),Run7(:,
2),'-.',Run8(:,1),Run8(:,2),'-.',Run9(:,1),Run9(:,2),'-.');
%plot(Run1(:,1),Run1(:,3),Run2(:,1),Run2(:,3),Run3(:,1),Run3(:,3),Run4(:,1),Run4(:,3),
Run5(:,1),Run5(:,3),Run6(:,1),Run6(:,3),Run7(:,1),Run7(:,3),Run8(:,1),Run8(:,3),Run9(:,
1),Run9(:,3));
%axis([0 4 0 0.1])
%hold off
 
figure(2)
plot(Run1(:,1),Run1(:,2),'r -.',Run1(:,1),Run1(:,3),'r',Run2(:,1),Run2(:,2),'b -.',Run2
(:,1),Run2(:,3),'b',Run3(:,1),Run3(:,2),'g -.',Run3(:,1),Run3(:,3),'g',Run4(:,1),Run4(:,
2),'k -.',Run4(:,1),Run4(:,3),'k',Run5(:,1),Run5(:,2),'c -.',Run5(:,1),Run5(:,3),'c',Run6
(:,1),Run6(:,2),'m -.',Run6(:,1),Run6(:,3),'m');
axis([0 1.2 0 0.04])
title('Mole fraction as a function of time, comparing different fuel compositions. 
Stoichimetric')
legend({'x NC_7H_{16} 90/10%','x NH_3 90/10%','x NC_7H_{16} 80/20%','x NH_3 80/20%','x 
NC_7H_{16} 70/30%','x NH_3 70/30%','x NC_7H_{16} 60/40%','x NH_3 60/40%','x NC_7H_{16} 
50/50%','x NH_3 50/50%','x NC_7H_{16} 40/60%','x NH_3 40/60%'})
xlabel('Time (ms)')
ylabel('Mole fraction')
figure(3)
plot(Run7(:,1),Run7(:,2),'r -.',Run7(:,1),Run7(:,3),'r',Run8(:,1),Run8(:,2),'b -.',Run8
(:,1),Run8(:,3),'b',Run9(:,1),Run9(:,2),'g -.',Run9(:,1),Run9(:,3),'g');
axis([0 10 0 0.1])
title('Mole fraction as a function of time, comparing different fuel compositions. 
Stoichimetric')
legend({'x NC_7H_{16} 30/70%','x NH_3 30/70%','x NC_7H_{16} 20/80%','x NH_3 20/80%','x 
NC_7H_{16} 10/90%','x NH_3 10/90%'})
xlabel('Time (ms)')
ylabel('Mole fraction')
 
figure(4)
==PAGE:68==
1/13/22 8:58 AM
C:\Users\s164078\Documen...\Yureproduced.m
1 of 1
%Plotting Yu model, experimental results and emil model:
clear
clc
 
%mix2p15:
Mix2IDTModelEmil=[261,76,35,26,24,28.7];
Mix2IDTModelYu=[201,62,25.6,15.9,11,10.9];
Mix2IDTExperimental=[47.3,24.3,13.4,10.7,11.5,16.1];
T=[656.8,677.8,700.1,721.5,746.9,771.5];
%T=[635.5,656.8,677.8,700.1,721.5,746.9,771.5,801.1,832.2,857.2, 888.2,915.5];
T1000=1000./T;
figure(1)
semilogy(T1000,Mix2IDTModelEmil,'g',T1000,Mix2IDTModelYu,'r',T1000,
Mix2IDTExperimental,'o');
legend({'Detailed model','Yu model', 'Experimental results'}, 'Location','northwest')
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title({'Comparison of updated model,',' Yu model and experimental results. Mixture 2 at 
15 bar'})
 
%Mix 2 p=10 sim vs exp values:
Texp=[634.8,655.7,675.9,698.7,718.7,745.3,762.6,790.8,819.8,848.2,882.3,910.9];
Mix2p10expIDT=[185.7,67.5,37.3,25,26.3,35.4,46.8,81.7,116.2,148,163.4,144.5];
Temil=[718.7,745.3,762.6,790.8,819.8,848.2,882.3,910.9];
Mix2p10emilIDT=[130,34,31,21,18,16.5,15,13];
T1000exp=1000./Texp;
T1000emil=1000./Temil;
figure(2)
semilogy(T1000exp,Mix2p10expIDT,'b',T1000emil,Mix2p10emilIDT,'r');
legend({'Experimental results', 'Updated model'}, 'Location','northwest')
xlabel('1000/T (1/K)')
ylabel('Ignition delay time (ms)')
title({'Comparison of updated model to experimental results. Mixture 2 at 10 bar'})
 
==PAGE:69==
C:\Users\s164078\chemkin\Emilmodel\Emilmodel_H2_NH3_NH2.inp
Thursday, January 13, 2022 9:04 AM
! 
! problem type definition
! 
CONV   ! Constrain Volume And Solve Energy Equation
ENRG   ! Solve Gas Energy Equation
TRAN   ! Transient Solver
! 
! physical property
! 
!Surface_Temperature   ! Surface Temperature Same as Gas Temperature
IFAC 0.1   ! Ignition Noise Filtering Factor
PRES 39.4769306686405   ! Pressure (atm)
QLOS 0.0   ! Heat Loss (cal/sec)
TEMP 900.0   ! Temperature (K)
TIFP   ! Temperature Inflection Point
! 
! species property
! 
REAC N2 0.8015603120624   ! Reactant Fraction (mole fraction)
REAC NC7H16 0.0106021204241   ! Reactant Fraction (mole fraction)
REAC O2 0.1878375675135   ! Reactant Fraction (mole fraction)
! 
! solver control
! 
ADAP   ! Save Additional Adaptive Points
ASTEPS 20   ! Use Solver Integration Steps
ATLS 1.0E-6   ! Sensitivity Absolute Tolerance
ATOL 1.0E-12   ! Absolute Tolerance
MAXIT 4   ! Maximum Number of Iterations
RTLS 0.0001   ! Sensitivity Relative Tolerance
RTOL 1.0E-6   ! Relative Tolerance
TIME 0.37   ! End Time (sec)
! 
! output control and other misc. property
! 
EPSR 0.01   ! Threshold for Rate of Production
EPSS 0.001   ! Threshold for Species Sensitivity
EPST 0.001   ! Threshold for Temperature Sensitivity
GFAC 1.0   ! Gas Reaction Rate Multiplier
IEEE_CHECK_USUAL 0   ! Disable Over/Underflow Check
PRNT 1   ! Print Level Control
SDOUTPUT_WRITE   ! Write Standard Diagnostic Output
SIZE 10000000   ! Solution Data Block Size (bytes)
XMLOUTPUT_WRITE   ! Write XML Solution File
END
-1-
==PAGE:70==
C:\Users\s164078\chemkin\Models\MPL_Mech_CO2H2O.inp
Thursday, January 13, 2022 9:07 AM
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
!                                                                                     !
!                      This is the CHEMKIN mechanism file for:                        !
!                                                                                     !
!      
    Muller et al, 
      !
!   Twenty-Fourth Symposium (International) on Combustion/The Combustion Institute    !
! 
 pp. 777-784 (1992)   
      !
!                                                                                     !
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
!
!++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
ELEMENTS
!++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
AR
N
HE
C
H
O
END
!++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
SPECIES
!++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
!\SPECIES_MODULE: DILUENTS                   
AR N2 HE   
!\END_SPECIES_MODULE: DILUENTS   
!\SPECIES_MODULE: MULLER SPECIES                   
FFF 
!Heptane
XXX 
!3C2H4 + CH3 + H
O2 
III 
!OQOOH aka C7H13(O)OOH
PPP    
!7CO2 + 8H2O
PPPP
!Same product but formed from XXX
H2O
CO2
!\END_SPECIES_MODULE: MULLER SPECIES          
END
!++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
REACTIONS
!++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
!________________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
!\REACTIONCLASS: \UNIMOL                     
\A 
\N 
\Ea (cal/mol)
\Ea/R (K)
\Reference
!________________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
FFF => XXX
1.0E+010 
0 
43022.64818 !(21650)
!\AUTHOR:LAUTHO! \REF: Muller et al, Twenty-Fourth Symposium (International) on Combustion/The 
Combustion Institute, pp. 777-784 (1992) 
III => FFF+2O2
4.0E+022 
0 
74092.35277 !(37285)
!\AUTHOR:LAUTHO! 
\REF: Muller et al, Twenty-Fourth Symposium (International) on Combustion/The Combustion 
Institute, pp. 777-784 (1992) 
!
!________________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
!\REACTIONCLASS: \BIMOL                     
\A 
\N 
\EA (cal/mol)
\EA/R (K)
\Reference
!________________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
XXX + 11O2 => 7CO2 + 8H2O
2.0E+012 
0 
14340.88273 !(21650/3)
-1-
