==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Prediction of Vacancy Times in Shared
Mobility using Graph Neural Networks
Made with data from ShareNow Copenhagen
Toke Bøgelund-Andersen (s164202)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This master thesis investigates the problem of predicting vacancy times in free-float
car-sharing using data from Copenhagen from the fall of 2019 provided by ShareNow.
This thesis approaches the problem by modeling it as a graph and uses graph neural
networks to predict vacancy times. The thesis explains the theoretical background for
graph neural networks and the necessary prerequisites.
To assess the performance of the graph neural networks for this problem, the thesis
compares the results to statistical learning methods and feed-forward neural networks in
different cases with different combinations of predictors. It also presents the methodology
of applying graph neural networks. The thesis finds that graph neural networks are
superior to feed-forward neural networks for this problem. However, in the cases where
the random forest has geographical information available, it is the method with the
strongest predictive power.
Lastly, the thesis discusses the limitations of the current approaches with graph
neural networks, the business case of the results, and provides ideas for further work
within the field.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This 32.5 ECTS Master thesis was prepared at the Department of Technology, Man-
agement and Economics at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the
requirements for acquiring a degree in Master of Science in Engineering (Business Ana-
lytics). The project period started on August 2nd 2021, and the project was handed in
on January 14th 2022.
The thesis assumes that the reader has a solid mathematical background - especially
within statistics and machine learning. Prerequisites for graph neural networks is given,
but they might be too brief. Suggested literature is provided for readers needing to catch
up. Other interested readers can, of course, read the thesis by their own abilities, and
the results and takeaways should still be understandable most of the way.
Python has been used for all the coding in this project. The corresponding GitHub
repository is found at https://github.com/Bogeluno/GNN_Thesis with all the code.
Please note that not all data files are included in the GitHub repository.
I would like to gratefully thank Associate Professor Filipe Rodrigues and Ph.D. Stu-
dent Mathias Niemann Tygesen for their support and supervision throughout the project
phase. Additionally, I would like to acknowledge ShareNow Copenhagen for providing
the data used in the project.
Kongens Lyngby, January 14, 2022
Toke Bøgelund-Andersen (s164202)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Structure of This Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
The Car Vacancy Time Problem
3
2.1
Free-Float Car-Sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Current Solutions and Related Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Theory
7
3.1
Prerequisites for Graph Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Graph Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Statistical Learning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Data
31
4.1
Data Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
External Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
Graph Creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5
Proof of Concept Data Cut
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.6
Explorative Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Applications
59
5.1
Overall Goal and Common Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Statistical Learning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3
Feed-forward Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.4
Graph Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6
Results
71
6.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.2
Statistical Learning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.3
Feed-Forward Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
6.4
Graph Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
7
Discussion
81
7.1
Business Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
7.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
8
Conclusion
85
A
All Results
87
A.1 Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.2 Feed-forward Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
A.3 Graph Convolution Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
A.4 Graph Attention Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
A.5 MLP Convolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
B
Convergence of GNN
91
B.1 Graph Convolution Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
B.2 Graph Attention Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
B.3 MLP Convolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
C
Project Plan Reflections
97
C.1 Original Project Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
C.2 Brief Reflections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In recent years the research area of graph neural networks has received greater attention,
which is another newcomer to the world and topics of machine learning and big data.
Due to graphs’ expressive power, a great potential exists in doing machine learning on
them. This is what graph neural networks do, where the concept of neural networks is
extended to work on graph structures. The irregularity of graphs does, though, introduce
challenges regarding defining it most suitably mathematically, and many approaches
have been proposed recently. This thesis will introduce the theoretical background for
graph neural networks with necessary prerequisites and present some of the suggested
approaches.
The use-cases of graph neural networks are many, but this thesis will center around
the problem of predicting car vacancy times in free-float car-sharing, which is elaborated
in Section 2.1. This particular use-case comes from the free-float car-sharing operator
ShareNow, who also has provided the data foundation upon which the graph neural
networks are built.
This thesis will also present how the theoretical background of graph neural networks
is applied in the practical setting of the real-world problem stated above and what
considerations must be made.
When using the graph neural networks for this real-world problem, it is interesting
to assess their performance to better quantify their actual performance. To allow for
better assessment, their performance will be compared with statistical learning methods
and more classic feed-forward neural networks, where all methods have been applied to
the same cases.
1.1
Structure of This Thesis
This thesis is designed to be read chronologically, but parts can be skipped based on the
reader’s interest. The thesis can be summarized as follows:
• Chapter 2 introduces the real-world problem of this thesis in more depth and why
it is relevant. Moreover, it will present the current solutions to the problem and
relevant related work.
• Chapter 3 gives the theoretical background needed in this thesis. The prerequisites
for graph neural networks will be given, and three different types of graph neural
networks will be presented.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
• Chapter 4 describes the data used in this thesis and how it is processed to be
suitable for the problem of this thesis. Furthermore, an explorative analysis of the
data is carried out.
• Chapter 5 consolidates the three previous chapters by stating how the theory is
applied to the available data for the problem at hand.
• Chapter 6 presents the results obtained from the applications. Moreover, appendix
A and appendix B relates to this chapter, where they include further results.
• Chapter 7 discusses the implications of the results and what they mean and pro-
vides ideas for future work within the field.
• Chapter 8 concludes on all the findings of the thesis.
• Appendix C presents the original project plan and relates it to how it actually
turned out.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
The Car Vacancy Time
Problem
This chapter will provide an overview of the problem at hand. Throughout this thesis,
it will be referred to as the car vacancy time problem even though other names exist.
The chapter will first present the operating model of ShareNow - this thesis’ corporate
partner - then the specific problem will be elaborated upon before an overview of the
current solutions will be given.
2.1
Free-Float Car-Sharing
Free-float car-sharing is a specific type of car-sharing that has increased in popularity
throughout the last years. For an extensive overview of car-sharing [Mac+18], for ex-
ample, gives a broader introduction as well as explanations of the different types of
car-sharing there exists.
The concept of car-sharing is not particularly new, and the idea of having a car
shared by multiple owners has its apparent advantages - primarily on the cost-side for
drivers who do not drive a lot. On the other hand, a key challenge for car-sharing users
is actually having a car available when needed.
The free-float concept is one of the potential solutions to this problem.
This is
referred to as one-way free-float car-sharing in [Mac+18], but the prefix of one-way will
be suppressed in this thesis. In free-float car-sharing, all users of a given service provider
share all the cars in the fleet. The cars float freely around the city, and the users can
rent them on-demand using a smartphone app from the provider. With the app, a user
can see all available cars and find the nearest suitable car, that they then can reserve
(to allow for walking time to the car). The car is unlocked with the phone, and it can
then be driven and dropped off at, almost, any other location in the city. The car rental
is paid by the minute (but packages exist for longer multiple hour trips), so a user only
pays for the particular ride. By having more users share multiple cars, an operator can
provide better service than having few users share a single car.
ShareNow is an example of such an operator, and the explanation above is based on
the service they provide. Competitors exist, and their business model can diverge slightly
with e.g. their pricing model. ShareNow is a European free-float car-sharing operator
that operates in 16 cities in eight countries at the moment of writing. This thesis will,
though, only be based on the operations in Copenhagen, where the data comes from.
==PAGE:12==
4
2 The Car Vacancy Time Problem
To learn more about ShareNow and the concept, it is worth studying ShareNow’s own
frequently asked questions found at [Sha]. It is also worth mentioning that ShareNow
is formed from the merger of DriveNow and Car2Go, where some readers potentially
recognize one of the former names.
2.1.1
Minimizing Car Vacancy Times
As it should be apparent from the explanation above, the cars must be driving for
ShareNow to make revenue. Therefore, it is vital for ShareNow that cars are available
where users demand them, so they can be driven and make money. However, it is also
key to have cars available, as a user who experiences no available cars when desired
will consider competitors or an alternative way of transport. This leads to lost revenue
for ShareNow, and thus the problem amplifies. Without any quantitative measures, it
should still be apparent that it holds massive value for ShareNow to have an accurate
model for the demand at a given location at a given time based on internal and external
factors.
With this knowledge, they would be able to relocate cars to serve demand
with their entire fleet best and minimize their cars’ expected vacancy time. Naturally,
demand has a stochastic element, but a more accurate model should utilize the current
fleet better in the long run.
The geographical element is not the only one to consider as the cars also need bat-
tery/fuel before users consider picking them up. Therefore, a movement of 100 meters
can make sense to move an almost empty electric car to a charger. An almost empty car
is naturally not very attractive for a customer as the fear of running out is not pleasant,
and it can make destinations unreachable. To combat this, ShareNow also rewards the
user with credits if they refill or recharge a car, so fewer resources have to be used on
relocating for this purpose.
ShareNow has people employed to do these movements mentioned above amongst
other tasks. Therefore, it is important to utilize their resources in the best way possible
to reduce vacancy times of cars.
2.2
Current Solutions and Related Work
Without any mathematical model, the best solution would be to use gut feeling and
experience. This is what ShareNow does today, and even though it does not seem very
scientific, it can still work great based on experience. Most commuters would probably
say they, with great accuracy, know how long their usual commute takes based on when
they leave home and other factors such as weather or day of the week. With suﬀicient
experience, it should be doable to give rough estimates of where in Copenhagen higher
demand is expected at a given time.
From an academic standpoint, the problem has gotten increased attention within the
last years due to the increasing impact that car-sharing has had on the transport and
mobility of cities. The research includes both how free-float car-sharing as a general
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Current Solutions and Related Work
5
concept impacts transport systems and the research on the operators themselves, where
demand modeling will be relevant in this thesis.
Looking at the general impact, [LP19] found that in London, 37% of users indicate
that free-floating car-sharing has impacted their ownership of private cars. Along the
same lines, [Joc+20] estimated through a survey that a single DriveNow (ShareNow’s
former name in Copenhagen) in an optimistic case can replace 19 private cars for Copen-
hagen. [Bec+20] did a mobility as a service (MaaS) simulation study including car-
sharing based on Zürich and found potential transport-related energy savings while also
slightly increasing eﬀiciency. Another relevant perspective regarding the impact on mo-
bility is what modes of transport that is substituted with free-float car-sharing - or if
the number of trips changes. Here, [Fro+19] found that in Copenhagen it has led to
a decreased use of public transport and especially taxi trips, and as such, it can be
discussed how the effect is on the overall mobility of a city.
Moving the perspective onto demand modeling for free-float car-sharing, [Vos+17]
provides an overview of the methods, platforms, and toolkits used to estimate demand
from 2017. At that point, the primary approach was to use activity-based multi-agent
simulation. An example of this can be found in e.g., [CBB14]. An alternative approach
has been carried out in [MB15] where time series analysis is used for forecasting in every
zip code area. They attempt two types: A seasonal ARIMA model and exponential
smoothing with Holt-Winters-Filter. Another example of a non-AI approach is found
in [WCL10], where they present a logistical inventory management model using focus
forecasting, inventory replenishment, and microscopic traﬀic simulation. Stated Prefer-
ence modeling has also been used in [Yoo+19] to explore Beijing’s potential car-sharing
demands and fleet size.
Recently, deep learning algorithms have become more utilized to solve the problem.
In [Zha+19] time-series methods based on deep learning theory are attempted on Seattle
data. They found that long-short-term memory recurrent neural networks performed
better than support vector regression, ARIMA models, and single and second exponen-
tial smoothing. [XL07] uses evolutionary neural networks for predicting the net flow
of a car-sharing system, where it showed superior performance when compared with
classical time series forecasting approaches. For the very similar field of bike-sharing,
[Ai+19] employed a deep learning approach, named the convolutional long short-term
memory network (conv-LSTM), to take spatial dependencies and temporal dependencies
into account. It outperformed a classic LSTM. Similarly, [Ke+17] proposed the usage
of FCL-Net, which is a fusion of convolutional LSTM layers, standard LSTM layers
and convolutional layers used to better capture spatio-temporal correlations of explana-
tory variables. Another deep learning method is found in [Kos+20] where deep survival
modeling with a disaggregated approach is attempted. Here, a two-step approach using
DeepSurv was found to perform the best.
Of alternative procedures to solve the problem, [Fri+21] can be mentioned who uses
stochastic modeling through two analytical approaches on data from Montreal. [Sch+21]
uses operational research and introduces an integer program approach that optimizes
the assignment of relocation strategies.
==PAGE:14==
6
2 The Car Vacancy Time Problem
2.2.1
Graph Neural Networks for the Problem
This thesis will try another deep learning approach to the problem of modeling demand
for free-float car-sharing in the form of graph neural networks. To the author’s knowledge,
graph neural networks have not been attempted at this problem before, but a potential is
seen in the method. This is because it can model the relationship between nodes, which
will be cars in this case. It is hypothesized that nearby cars will affect the demand of
each-other, which can be modeled with graphs.
Graph neural networks has seen many applications in recent years spanning many
areas. An overview is shown in [Zho+21, table 3] which spans physics (with physical
systems modeling), biology (with e.g., protein interface prediction), knowledge graph
alignment, recommender systems, and stock markets. Relevant to the subject of this
thesis, graph neural networks have also been used for traﬀic state prediction, where the
focus has been on traﬀic flow as in [Zhe+20]. Maybe even more interesting graph neural
networks have also been used for demand prediction on station-based car-sharing (see
[Mac+18] for an explanation of the difference). This can be found in [Zhu+19] and
[Luo+20].
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
This chapter will present the theoretical background for the project in the form of graph
neural networks. The chapter is split into three sections. Firstly, a brief overview of
graph theory and neural networks will be presented as the combination of these form the
basis of graph neural networks. Following this overview, the graph neural networks will
be introduced. Lastly, a short overview of some classical statistical learning methods is
presented.
3.1
Prerequisites for Graph Neural Networks
As mentioned above, this section gives a brief overview of graph theory and an introduc-
tion to neural networks. The section should be seen as an easy way to verify that the
prerequisites for the graph neural network are understood. For readers with no prior
knowledge of the fields (or one of them), they might feel a bit too brief. In that case,
suggested literature is provided that can be studied for a more tangible introduction to
the subjects.
3.1.1
Graph Theory
A graph is a triplet G = (V, E, W), which consists of a set of nodes (or vertices) denoted
V , a set of edges (or links) denoted E and a set of weights denoted W. The set V contains
all the node labels, which can be V = {1, 2, . . . , n}, but also something different if it
makes sense in the domain. Nodes can also have attributes which are values associated
with the nodes. When drawing a graph, the nodes will often be drawn as circles. The
set of edges is ordered pairs of node labels (i, j), which means that E ∈V × V . The
element (i, j) is interpreted as an edge going from node i to node j meaning that node
i influences node j. In a drawing of a graph, this is in most cases indicated with an
arrow going from i to j. Lastly, the set W is associated with the set E, where the weight
wi,j ∈R denotes the strength of the influence of i on j. If both (i, j) ∈E and (j, i) ∈E
it is possible for the weights to be difference, i.e. wi,j ̸= wj,i. In drawings, the weights
will be written next to their corresponding edges.
An alternative way of representing a graph is with an adjacency matrix A ∈R|V |×|V |.
Here, |V | is the cardinality of the set of nodes, i.e. the total number of nodes. For a
==PAGE:16==
8
3 Theory
graph, each element of the adjacency matrix is defined as
ai,j =



wi,j,
if (i, j) ∈E,
0,
otherwise.
(3.1)
Depending on the number of nodes and edges in the graph, the preferred representation
can be either the set form or the adjacency matrix. The set form can be seen as a way
to represent a sparse matrix easily, and it is thus appropriate for sparse graphs.
Multiple simplifications of graphs exist.
A graph is said to be unweighted if the
weights are irrelevant, e.g. all weights are units, which can be written as
wi,j = 1, ∀(i, j) ∈E.
(3.2)
Additionally, a graph can also be undirected meaning that edges comes in pairs, and
thus (i, j) ∈E if and only if (j, i) ∈E. From this, it also follows that
wi,j = wj,i, ∀(i, j) ∈E.
(3.3)
These types of graphs can also be called symmetric, as the adjacency matrix is symmetric,
i.e. A = A⊤. A line between the two connected nodes will often be used in such graphs
instead of an arrow, even though two opposite arrows have the same effect. The two
mentioned simplifications can also be combined to obtain undirected unweighted graphs.
For this thesis, it is also important to introduce the term node degree, which denotes
how many connections a given node has. In an unweighted graph, it is simply the number
of neighbors of the particular node. For a weighted graph The number is instead the
sum of all weights of edges connecting to the given node. If the graph is directed, the
terms in-degree and out-degree are used to differentiate between edges going to and from
a node.
Along the same lines, the term ith-hop neighbor of a node denotes all the nodes that
can be reached within i hops/steps away from a given node. So all one-hop neighbors
of a node are the direct neighbors, while the two-hop are the neighbors’ neighbors. In
this thesis, the notation of Ni will be used to denote to neighbors of node i including
the central node i itself.
A more in-depth introduction to graphs can be found in e.g. part VI of [Cor+09] or
in chapter 2 of [Bar16].
3.1.1.1
Spectral Graph Theory
Spectral graph theory studies a graph’s properties based on the eigenvalues and eigen-
vectors of matrices based on the graph, such as the adjacency matrix or the Laplacian
Matrix. It makes sense to touch upon this here, as it will be relevant for the graph
neural networks. The adjacency matrix was introduced above, and from this, the degree
matrix, D, can be defined as
D = diag(A1),
(3.4)
==PAGE:17==
3.1 Prerequisites for Graph Neural Networks
9
meaning it is a matrix with the degree of all nodes in its diagonal.
From this the
Laplacian Matrix L can be defined as
L = D −A.
(3.5)
If it is a directed graph, either the in-degree or out-degree can be used. The Laplacian
can also be normalized - based on degree - by multiplying with the inverse degree matrix,
where the subscript n will be used to denote the normalization. This then becomes
Ln = D−1
2LD−1
2 = I −D−1
2AD−1
2
(3.6)
The second equality is true as L = I −A in the normalized case. The normalized lapla-
cian for an undirected graph is a real symmetric positive semidefinite matrix [Zho+21]1.
Therefore, an eigendecomposition can be carried out:
Ln = UΛU ⊤,
(3.7)
where U is the matrix containing the eigenvectors of Ln, and Λ is a diagonal matrix
containing the corresponding eigenvalues. Additionally, ui and λi are used to denote
the ith eigenvector and eigenvalue respectively.
Graph Fourier Transformation
The graph Fourier transformation is an essential
tool in spectral graph theory based on the eigendecomposition of the Laplacian. First,
a graph signal x is a way to map nodes to a real number x : V →RN (where N
is the number of nodes), which can be attributes of the nodes.
The graph Fourier
transformation of a signal x is its projection on the eigenvector basis of the Laplacian,
which can be written as
F(x) = U ⊤x.
(3.8)
The inverse graph Fourier transformation can then be used to transform the signal back
as
F−1(x) = Ux,
(3.9)
since U is an orthogonal matrix meaning UU ⊤= I.
3.1.2
Neural Networks
Neural networks (sometimes also called artificial neural networks) is a field that has seen
rapid development during the last decade. This section will capture the most relevant
groundwork of neural networks and deep learning2 necessary for defining graph neural
1A proof of this can be found on the Wikipedia entry on Diagonally dominant matrix
2The two terms are often used interchangeably, but to put it shortly, deep learning is a subfield of
neural networks. The depth, or the number of layers, distinguishes a single simple neural network from
a deep learning algorithm.
==PAGE:18==
10
3 Theory
networks. For a reader with no prior knowledge of deep learning, this section might
be overwhelming and too brief. In that case, either [Nie15] or [GBC16] provides more
in-depth introduction to the fundamentals of neural networks.
Additionally, [3Bl17]
provides an excellent visual explanation of the basics of neural networks as well as how
they learn.
3.1.2.1
Neurons and Activations Functions
The core part of a neural network is the individual (artificial) neurons. A toy example of
a neural network is found in Figure 3.1 with three input neurons denoted xi, i ∈{1, 2, 3}
and the single output neuron, y1. To compute the value for the output neurons weights,
wi, i ∈{1, 2, 3} are added to each link, which are numbers representing the importance of
the given input-output relation. Now, ∑
i xiwi can be calculated, but this is not enough
to determine the value for y1. Additionally, an activation function σ(·) is needed that the
output is passed through and as such, the output can be written as y1 = σ(
∑
i xiwi + b)
(where b represents an optional bias). This function should be a differentiable non-linear
function, where the non-linearity allows the neural network to learn non-linear relations.
A selection of popular activation functions are shown below, where z = ∑
i xiwi + b.
• Step-function: This has a binary outcome based on a threshold that can be ad-
justed using the bias term, and it is defined as: σ(z) =



0
if z ≤0
1
if z > 0. A neuron
with the step function is also called a perceptron.
• Sigmoid: It is usually also denoted by a σ (not to be confused with the general
symbol for activation functions) and is given as σ(z) =
1
1+e−z .
• Hyperbolic Tangent: This is defined precisely as a hyperbolic tangent, which is
σ(z) = tanh(z) = ez−e−z
ez+e−z .
• Rectified Linear Unit: This is given as σ(z) = z+ = max(0, z) meaning that it is
the positive part of the argument. This is often abbreviated ReLU.
• Leaky Rectified Linear Unit: This extends the ReLU by adding a small slope, α,
in the negative domain, i.e. σ(z) = max(0, z) + α · min(0, x).
3.1.2.2
Network Architecture
The example in Figure 3.1 is a tiny illustrative one. To train actual applicable models,
much more complex network structures are required. An illustrative example is found in
Figure 3.2, where a hidden layer is added between the input- and output layer. Despite
its fancy name, a hidden layer is just a way to say that it is neither input nor output.
In the figure, the input, hidden, and output layers are denoted by I, H, and O. The
subscript n represents the number of neurons in a given layer. Based on the problem, it
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Prerequisites for Graph Neural Networks
11
x1
x2
x3
y1
Input layer
Output layer
Figure 3.1: A small toy example of a neural network with four neurons.
is given explicitly for the input- and output-layer. The number of hidden neurons is a
hyperparameter that the modeler can play around with to get the best results.
In this network architecture with a single hidden layer, the information flows from
the input layer through the hidden layer to the output layer. Here, different layers can
have different activation functions based on what the modeler is trying to achieve. As the
network is dense, in the sense that all neurons in two neighboring layers are connected,
it should become clear that the number of weights to be trained quickly grows. In the
example, in Figure 3.2 an arbitrary number of output neurons are shown. If it is a
regression problem, there would often only be one output neuron representing a single
scalar. On the other hand, if the goal is to recognize digits, ten output neurons should
be used - each one representing the probability for a given digit.
As it easily can be imagined from the figure, the number of hidden layers can be
adjusted and how many neurons they each have. The data will then flow through all
the hidden layers before reaching the output layer.
Weight Initialization
Different schemes for setting the initial weights before training
exist. That is because initializing all weights to 0, the optimization discussed below can
behave sub-optimal. Weights can be initialized randomly in different ways as selecting
random values in some given interval of some distributions. Other slightly more struc-
tured solutions exist based on the network architecture as the Xavier-Glorot Uniform
weight initialization, where the weights are randomly sampled from
U
[
−
√
6
√ni + ni+1
;
√
6
√ni + ni+1
]
,
(3.10)
where U is a uniform distribution, ni is the number of neurons in the incoming layer,
and ni+1 is the number in the outgoing layer. This means that the range depends on
the network architecture. A version based on the normal distribution also exists, which
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Theory
...
...
...
I1
I2
I3
In
H1
Hn
O1
On
Input
layer
Hidden
layer
Output
layer
Figure 3.2: A more extensive example of a neural network with one hidden layer. The
dots refer to an arbitrary number of neurons in the given layer.
is given as
N

0;
(
√
2
√ni + ni+1
)2
.
(3.11)
The deeper reasons why these initializations make sense are not in the scope of this
thesis, but an interested reader can study [GB10].
3.1.2.3
Training a Neural Network
So far the weights that connects the neurons in the neural network have been shortly
touched upon.
But the question then naturally becomes what values these weights
should have to optimize the predictive ability of the network. As explained above, the
number of weights grows very quickly, and values have to be assigned to all weights to
get the best possible model. Thus, an algorithm is needed to optimize the network based
on a data set, which is discussed here. Firstly, a quantitative measure of how good a set
of weights is needed, which is explained just below.
Loss Function
During training, a quantitative measure is needed to quantify how
well a set of particular weights and biases are doing - this is called a loss function3. An
3It is also often referred to as cost function or objective function.
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Prerequisites for Graph Neural Networks
13
example of a standard loss function for a regression problem is the mean squared error
(often abbreviated MSE) which is calculated as follows:
C(w, b) = 1
n
∑
x
(y(x) −a(x, w, b))2 ,
(3.12)
where w and b are the weights and biases, respectively - thus C(w, b) is the loss as a
function of the weights and biases. Moreover, x is all the training observations, where
y(x) is the true label/value of the given training point. a(x, w, b) is then the network’s
prediction for a given observation given w and b. Summing over all training observations
yields the sum of squared errors, and by dividing with n, which is the number of training
observations, the mean squared error is obtained. As all the differences are squared, it
quickly becomes apparent that the goal is to find the weights and biases that minimize
this difference, which minimizes the loss.
Another measure that can be used as a loss function is the negative coeﬀicient of
determination - often denoted as r2. It is calculated as
C(w, b) =
∑
x (y(x) −a(x, w, b))2
∑
x (y(x) −¯y)2
.
(3.13)
Since the negative r2 is used, the fraction is positive. If it should be the exact negative
r2 there should also be a −1 in the formula, but this is unnecessary as it is independent
of w and b. Furthermore, the loss function is only used to evaluate how good a set of
weights and biases is.
The reason for using the negative version of the r2 is to ensure a lower loss will lead
to a better model. A loss function is just a way for an optimizer to evaluate a given
model, so it knows which direction to go during optimization. These optimizers try to
minimize the loss, why the standard r2 can not be used.
The two loss functions presented above are used for models with a continuous re-
sponse variable, but naturally, equivalent functions exist for classification problems. An
example of this could be the Cross Entropy Loss, which is given as
C(w, b) =
∑
x
(−(y(x) log(a(x, w, b)) + (1 −y(x)) log(1 −a(x, w, b)))) ,
(3.14)
where y(x) is a binary indicator. In this case, a sigmoid function - or another function
with a domain of [0, 1] - has to be used in the output layer to convert the prediction
into a probability. The function above is for binary classification, but to scale it to
more classes, the loss can be calculated for each class and then summed or averaged.
In that case, a softmax function is used to get probabilities, which can be seen as a
generalization of the sigmoid function for multiple classes.
Optimization Algorithms
Above, the concept of optimizers was shortly mentioned,
and this will now be explained a bit more in-depth. This is because finding extremums of
C, and finding a minimum from that, becomes infeasible in practice due to vast number
of parameters. Therefore, alternative methods of finding local minima exist. All the
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Theory
theory of optimization of functions (as the loss function) is an entire topic on its’ own,
but this part will try to outline the key ideas.
The algorithms that will be touched upon here are based on what is called gradient
decent, and it exploits the fact that the loss function is a smooth function of the weights
and biases. From this point θ will be used to denote all the parameters, which is the
combination of w and b.
From basic calculus, it is known that
∆C ≈
∑
n
∂C
∂θn
∆θn,
(3.15)
where the approximation becomes an equality in the limit.
The algorithm needs to
change the variables to minimize the loss, so it finds the values that make ∆C negative.
Now let ∇C denote the gradient vector of C, which is given by
∇C ≡
(∂C
∂θ1
, . . . , ∂C
∂θn
)⊤
.
(3.16)
Additionally, all changes in variables can be collected in a vector as ∆θ ≡(∆θ1, . . . , ∆θn)⊤.
Then (3.15) can be written as
∆C ≈∇C⊤∆θ.
(3.17)
Now the question becomes, what the vector ∆θ should be to ensure that ∆C becomes
negative. By choosing
∆θ = −η∇C⊤
(3.18)
this property is obtained when η is a positive parameter. This scalar value is known as
the learning rate, and it will be touched upon later. To verify the claim in (3.18) it can
be inserted in (3.17) to obtain
∆C = −η∇C⊤∇C = −η ∥∇C∥2 ,
(3.19)
where this will always be negative if η is suﬀiciently small since ∥∇C∥2 is positive as the
gradient vector is real. So by using the expression in (3.19) the loss function will decrease
within the approximation from (3.17). To summarize, then one update iteration of θ is
given by
θ′ = θ −η∇C,
(3.20)
where θ′ is the update of θ. Notice that this is in vector representation, so it has to
be done for all variables. The process can be repeated iteratively until a minimum is
reached within a given threshold.
Now the question remains of what value η should have. There is no true best value,
but should be suﬀiciently small and large. What that means is that it should be large
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Prerequisites for Graph Neural Networks
15
enough to ensure that ∆θ actually changes, so convergence is reached. On the other
hand, it should be small enough to minimize the risk of ∆C > 0. This relates to (3.19),
where the risk is that a too large step will cross the local minima, and thus it can increase
the loss.
The formula in (3.20) is what is called gradient descent, where the step can be re-
peated a set number of times until convergence is reached. The gap in this explanation
is though how to compute the gradient in practise, and this is usually done the backprop-
agation algorithm. This will not be covered in this thesis, but a thorough explanation
is given in [Nie15, Chapter 2].
Stochastic Gradient Descent
As seen in (3.12), (3.13) and (3.14) the loss func-
tion is an average over all the training data. So for each iteration of (3.20) losses for
all training observations have to be calculated, which can be expensive computationally
depending on the number of data points. This is where Stochastic Gradient Descent
comes into play. The stochastic part is that a random subset of the training data called
a mini-batch (often just referred to as a batch) is used to estimate the gradient. If this
subset has m observations, where m < n, then if m is large enough, it can be assumed
that
∇C ≈1
m
m
∑
j=1
∇Cxj,
(3.21)
where xj is a single training observation. If a given dataset has 100, 000 observations
and m = 100 is used, then 1, 000 approximations using mini-batches can be carried
out for the same price as one with all the data. Naturally, the individual estimates of
the gradient will not be as good due to statistical fluctuations, but it is still expected
that the movement, in general, helps decrease the loss. With 1, 000 more updates, it is
expected to be worth it to reach convergence faster. As a small note, the word epoch is
used to denote one run through all of the training data. Naturally, if the batch size does
not divide the training size, a choice must be made if the remaining data also should be
used for an update.
A pseudocode version of stochastic gradient descent is found in Algorithm 1. Two
elements are found in this algorithm which has not been touched upon above. The first
of these is weight decay which works as L2-regularization of the parameters. This works
similarly to Ridge Regression for a reader familiar with this method. Additionally, the
algorithm also presents the concept of momentum, which is introduced in [RHW86]. The
momentum remembers the update at each iteration and then calculates the next update
as a linear combination of the previous update and the calculated gradient.
Adaptive Moment Estimation
Another stochastic optimization algorithm is the
Adaptive Moment Estimation, which is abbreviated Adam, and it was introduced in
[KB17]. It has many advantages for optimizations of neural networks, but the more
in-depth reasons for this will not be the focus of this thesis, so the interested reader is
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Theory
Algorithm 1 Stochastic Gradient Descent
Given: Objective, f(θ),Number of Epochs E, data, D, batch size, B, learning rate, η,
weight decay, λ, momentum, µ, dampening, τ
Initialize all parameters θ
▷Either zeros or from initilaztion
for epoch e ∈[1, . . . , E]: do
Optionally shuffle D
▷Shuffle to prevent cycles
for Batch ⟨xi, yi⟩∈D do
▷xi and yi has size B
Calculate gi = ∇Ci according to (3.16)
gi = gi + λθi−1
▷Regularization with weight decay
if µ ̸= 0 then
▷Optionally apply momentum
if i>1 then
hi = µhi−1 + (1 −τ)gi
else
hi = gi
end if
gi = hi
end if
θi = θi−1 −ηgi
▷Update parameters
end for
end for
return θi
advised to study the paper introducing the algorithm. Pseudocode of the ADAM algo-
rithm is found in Algorithm 2, and the core idea is that the method utilizes ”individual
adaptive learning rates for different parameters from estimates of first and second mo-
ments of the gradients.” Here, m and v denote the first and second moment. The authors
found good default settings of exponential decay parameters and epsilon to β1 = 0.9,
β2 = 0.999, ϵ = 10−8.
3.1.2.4
Avoiding Overfitting in Neural Networks
A classic challenge in machine learning is overfitting, which is also relevant in neural
networks. This is especially the case for larger networks with millions of parameters
and magnitudes more than the number of training observations. In this part, a handful
of techniques will be presented that are used to avoid overfitting. The list here is not
exhaustive but only a selection that has been used in this thesis.
Usage of Validation Data
Instead of using all the data for optimizing the network
weights, as discussed in Section 3.1.2.3, a sub-part of it is put aside, which is called a
validation data set. When evaluating the current weights, the loss on the validation
data can also be evaluated instead of only evaluating the loss on the training data. This
data will better represent how the network will perform on new unseen data, which is
desirable. When the network grows more complex, the risk of overfitting to the training
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Prerequisites for Graph Neural Networks
17
Algorithm 2 Adaptive Moment Estimation
Given: Objective, f(θ), Number of Epochs E, data, D, batch size, B, learning rate,
η, weight decay, λ, Betas, β1, β2
Initialize m0 = 0 (first moment), v0 = 0 (second moment)
Initialize all parameters θ
▷Either zeros or from initilaztion
for epoch e ∈[1, . . . , E]: do
Optionally shuffle D
▷Shuffle to prevent cycles
for Batch ⟨xi, yi⟩∈D do
▷xi and yi has size B
Calculate gi = ∇Ci according to (3.16)
gi = gi + λθi−1
▷Regularization with weight decay
mi = β1mi−1 + (1 −β1)gi
vi = β2vi−1 + (1 −β2)g2
i
▷g2
i is elemenwise square
ˆ
mi = mi/(1 −βi
1)
▷Compute first moment estimate
ˆvi = vi/(1 −βi
2)
▷Compute second moment estimate
θi = θi−1 −η ˆ
mi/(√ˆvi + ϵ)
▷Update parameters
end for
end for
return θi
data increases, and as such, the validation data can be used to validate when the network
does not improve more on general data and starts to overfit on the training data.
Early Stopping
Combined with the validation data, early stopping can avoid wasting
time overfitting more to the training data. At each epoch, the validation loss is evaluated.
If the validation loss is the best yet during training, the given model is saved, and a
counter is set to 0. If not, the same counter is incremented by 1. When the counter
reaches a specific value - called patience - the optimization terminates, and the best model
is used as the final model. The level of patience is a trade-off between ensuring that
the optimizer can explore potential better solutions and avoiding too much meaningless
training. Variations also exist that require the validation loss to drop by a delta at each
epoch to avoid accepting insignificant improvements in the validation loss.
Dropout
The idea of dropout is presented in [Hin+12] as a method to reduce overfit-
ting by randomly omitting neurons in a layer with a given probability p during training.
The smaller the training data size is, the greater impact this will have in theory, as
complex neural networks can model training data almost perfect4. A hidden neuron
cannot rely on other neurons being present when using dropout. Instead, it should learn
to detect relevant features to produce better answers on more general data, which is
desired. For each optimization step, the omitted neurons are determined with Bernoulli
4This relates to the Universal approximation theorem that states ”A feed-forward network with a
single layer is suﬀicient to represent any function, but the layer may be infeasibly large and may fail to
learn and generalize correctly.” See more at [For17].
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Theory
processes, and as such, this can also be seen as model averaging in neural networks. Nat-
urally, dropout should only be used during training and not evaluation. As the training
data will have some neurons omitted, a modeler can observe that the validation loss
outperforms the training loss.
Weight Decay
Weight Decay - which is also referred to as L2 penalty - has already
been presented in the optimization algorithms in the lines with the comment ”Regular-
ization with weight decay”. What can be seen from the algorithms is that the sum of
the parameters - with a constant factor multiplied - is added to the loss. This is a way
to avoid models being too complex as extreme values of parameters are penalized, which
often corresponds to overfitting to the training data. As discussed in [KH92], weight
decay can improve generalization, which is equivalent to avoiding overfitting. By using
weight decay, a model will, in theory, choose the most simple solution to the problem
as it leads to a lower loss, and it can also suppress overfitting effects. The second gain
is though subject to choosing a correct size of the penalty, which can be diﬀicult. When
using weight decay, it is essential that the input features are scaled to the same size. If
input features vary with different magnitudes, the weights from the input layer will vary
correspondingly to mitigate this. Weight decay will then penalize this very differently.
3.1.2.5
Convolutional Neural Networks
The type of networks described above is called feed-forward neural networks (often
abbreviated FFNN). This is though only one type of neural network, albeit the most
simple. Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are another popular type, and knowing
the underlying idea will also be relevant when explaining the graph neural networks.
Therefore, a brief introduction will be given here. Again, a source like [Nie15, Chapter
6] provides a more in-depth introduction with illustrations, which can be helpful for a
reader who has never heard the term convolution before.
Convolutional neural networks in their modern form were introduced in [Lec+98], and
it is a popular technique for image classification and computer vision. This is because
they take advantage of the actual underlying spatial structure seen in e.g. an image.
Staying in the setting of an image, a feed-forward neural network will treat the relations
between pixels equally, with each pixel being an input neuron. A convolutional neural
network will try to exploit the structures in the data, which in an image will be the
relation of neighboring pixels. By looking at a group of neighboring pixels, additional
structures can become apparent for the network, that the individual pixels cannot reveal.
Considering a greyscale image (thus with only one input channel per pixel, so it has
a 2D structure), the convolution operator works as follows, where wl,m is a weight matrix
of size n × n (the math also works in a non-square case), xξ,υ is the input activation at
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Graph Neural Networks
19
position ξ, υ5 and b is a bias:
yj,k = σ
( n
∑
l=0
n
∑
m=0
wl,mxj+l,k+m + b
)
.
(3.22)
Here, σ is an activation function as discussed in Section 3.1.2.1. Note that this element-
wise multiplication could also be written with the Hadamard product ⊙. This convolu-
tion operator is moved across the full image to create a new image, where the weight
matrix stays constant as the operator moves. Each step corresponds to creating one
hidden neuron. Multiple new images can then be created with different weight matrices,
which adds a dimension to y in (3.22). Additional choices like padding the image or
how large the step size should be when moving the convolution operator around (called
stride) are also relevant in image classification tasks. This will not be discussed further
here, and instead, the previously mentioned references can be studied by an interested
reader. What is important from this part is how the convolution operator works, as
parallels to this will be seen from the graph neural networks.
3.2
Graph Neural Networks
With the prerequisites from the graph theory and neural networks - including convolu-
tional neural networks - above, these fields can now be combined to introduce graph
neural networks. As the field of graph neural networks is very young, it is important
to state that there are no ground through to the correct way of defining a graph neural
network. The methodology explained in this section focuses primarily on the approach
that the coding later used will be based on. This is due to the fact, so many approaches
exist for different types of graphs and problems. For a broad overview, [Zho+21] is
worth studying.
3.2.1
Design of Graph Neural Network
Before a graph neural network can be implemented, the graph must be in place and
designed along with other decisions, which will be presented now. This pipeline is one
of the things that makes a graph neural network model what it is, though parallels can
be drawn to the design of other types of neural networks.
3.2.1.1
Graph Structure
In order to use a graph neural network, a graph is naturally needed. It is very problem-
dependent if this graph structure is given explicit from data or more implicit, where the
5The greek notation is used to avoid reusing letters for multiple purposes even though x, y would
be the usual notation.
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Theory
graph must be modeled for the purpose6. An example of an explicit graph in this context
could be a molecule, where the atoms are nodes, and the covalent bonds are edges. On
the other side of the spectrum, a scene graph from an image (see e.g. [JGF18] for a
background on scene graphs) is an example of an implicit graph. A word graph from
a text built by connecting words that occur back-to-back can be seen as somewhere in
between.
3.2.1.2
Graph Type
Following the graph structure above, a graph should be at hand. In Section 3.1.1 different
types of graphs were discussed, and the complexity of the graphs are often relevant as
more complex graphs hold more information. Edges in a directed graph provide more
information than edges in an undirected graph. In a homogeneous graph the nodes and
edges are of the same type, while they can be of different types in heterogeneous graph,
which also adds complexity. A graph can also be dynamic, where the graph structure or
its features can vary over time, which is not the case in the more simple static graph.
3.2.1.3
Problem Type
In the graph neural network setting, three different types of tasks can be considered:
• Node-level where the tasks focus on some node attribute. It can be node classi-
fication where nodes need to be assigned a class. Another type is node regression,
where the model assigns a continuous value to each node. There is also node clus-
tering, where the goal is to partition the nodes into smaller disjoint groups, where
some similarity measure is used to split them.
• Edge-level where the model focuses on the edges. It can be edge classification
where the model should predict if an edge belongs to a certain class or determine
if an edge exists between two nodes.
• Graph-level which includes graph classification and regression (now only one
class/value for the entire graph), and thus the model needs to learn the full graph
representation. In this setting, a collection of graphs is naturally required.
Additionally, different levels of supervision are also used for different problems. The
three settings are the same known from classical machine learning which are
• Supervised learning where labeled data is provided for the training.
• Semi-supervised learning where labels are given for a strict subset of the full
data. The model should then predict the classes of the unlabeled nodes.
6Please note that this should not be confused with the definition of implicit and explicit graphs
from computer science relating to if the nodes and edges are stored as explicit objects in a computer’s
memory.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Graph Neural Networks
21
• Unsupervised learning where no labels at all are given. This is typically the
case for clustering problems.
Based on the problem at hand, a loss function is also needed, like in feed-forward neural
networks. The loss functions can be one of those that were mentioned in Section 3.1.2.3.
The cross-entropy can be used in a node classification problem, while the mean-squared-
error can be used for a graph regression setting. The choice is dependent on the problem
and the modeler.
3.2.2
Propagation in Graph Neural Networks
With the foundation above established, it is now possible to discuss how information is
propagated in graph neural networks, which is done with convolution operators. The
idea is to generalize the convolution operator to irregular domains as graphs in this case.
The challenge is to use the same weight matrix (filter) for all nodes analogously to the
convolutional neural networks. Due to the irregularity, this is though not straightfor-
ward. Multiple approaches to convolution operators in graphs exist, and there are many
modules within these. In this part, three types of networks will be derived. The graph
convolution operator (GCN), which is a spectral approach, the graph attentional net-
work (GAT), which is a spatial method, and a self-implemented one which will be called
MLP Convolution. The methods presented here can easily be combined with simple
feed-forward neural networks, where the outputs of the graph neural networks can be
passed through linear feed-forward layers to yield the output.
3.2.2.1
Spectral Approach
The spectral approach has its foundation in spectral graph theory, which was covered in
Section 3.1.1.1. This will now be built upon to reach a method of propagating informa-
tion in a graph for a graph neural network, where the similarities to the convolutional
neural networks should be seen.
A filter g is considered, which can be transformed to the spectral domain with the
matrix U ⊤multiplied upon it. The convolutional operator ∗of the filter on the node
attributes is defined as
g ∗x = F−1 (F(g)F(x)) = U
(
U ⊤g ⊙U ⊤x
)
.
(3.23)
Here, the inverse graph Fourier transformation is used to transform back from the spec-
tral domain. As with the convolutional neural networks it is this filter, that is interesting
to learn, which was denoted by w in (3.22). The methodology of this section will follow
[KW17] to find a layer-wise propagation rule for a graph convolutional neural network.
The filter gw will be considered, which is a diagonal matrix parameterized by w ∈RN
(N is the number of nodes) in the Fourier domain. As the parameters have to be esti-
mated it can be done in the Fourier domain directly. By having the filter in a diagonal
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Theory
matrix, the Hadamard product becomes normal matrix multiplication. By also utilizing
that matrix multiplication is associative, (3.23) can be written as
gw ∗x = UgwU ⊤x.
(3.24)
The computation of (3.24) can be very expensive for large graphs, and therefore it has
been suggested in [HVG11] that gw(Λ) can be approximated by a truncated expansion
of Chebyshev Polynomials Tk(x) up to Kth order.
Chebyshev Polynomials will not
be covered here besides noting that they are important in approximation theory. The
recursive definition of them is given as
Tk(x) = 2xTk−1(x) −Tk−2(x),
T0(x) = 1,
T1(x) = x.
(3.25)
The truncation - denoted by adding an apostrophe - is then given as
g′
w(Λ) ≈
K
∑
k=0
w′
kTk(˜Λ).
(3.26)
As a short side comment
˜
Ln =
2
λmaxLn −I is introduced, where λmax is the largest
eigenvalue of L. By doing this scaling, all eigenvalues will be in the domain [−1, 1],
which will help on numerical stability. The eigenvectors will naturally not change but
the corresponding eigenvalues will be ˜Λ, which is seen in (3.26). Substituting (3.26) into
(3.24) yields:
gw ∗x ≈U
K
∑
k=0
w′
kTk(˜Λ)U ⊤x =
K
∑
k=0
w′
kTk( ˜
Ln)x.
(3.27)
Above, the unitary property of U is utilized. This is now a Kth order polynomial in ˜
Ln
as can be verified by looking at the definition in (3.25). This means that the Kth-hop
neighbors of a node can affect it. If K is set to 1 the function is linear in ˜
Ln and only
the 1-hop neighbors can impact a node in a given step. If λmax ≈2 (this sacrifices a
bit of stability, but the parameters of the neural network should be able to adjust to it)
(3.27) can be simplified to
gw ∗x ≈w′
0x + w′
1(Ln −I)x = w′
0x −w′
1(D−1
2AD−1
2)x.
(3.28)
The second equality comes from rearranging (3.6). There are now two free parameters
in the form of w′
0 and w′
1, which is shared across the full graph (as in the convolutional
neural network). By repetitively applying the filter, it is possible for nodes not directly
connected to still impact each other. If it is further restricted to a single parameter by
setting w = w′
0 = −w′
1, (3.28) can be simplified to
gw ∗x ≈w(I + D−1
2AD−1
2)x.
(3.29)
By adding self-loops to the adjacency matrix and denoting it ˜
A = A + I with corre-
sponding degree matrix ˜
D the term in the parenthesis becomes ˜
D−1
2 ˜
A ˜
D−1
2.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Graph Neural Networks
23
The calculations above are done with only one feature per node, but this can easily be
expanded to multiple, and the feature matrix is denoted by X, while the corresponding
expanded weights matrix will be W . A signal can now be convoluted and updated as
X′ = σ
( ˜
D−1
2 ˜
A ˜
D−1
2XW
)
,
(3.30)
where X′ is the updated node features, and σ is an activation function. The matrix
W ’s second dimension is equivalent to the number of output features. The node wise
formulation of (3.30) will then be
x′
i = σ

W ⊤∑
j∈Ni
ej,i
√
ˆdj ˆdi
xj

,
(3.31)
where ˆdi = 1 + di = 1 + ∑
j∈Ni ei,j, where the 1 comes from the self-loops as explained
just above.
3.2.2.2
Spatial Approach
Spatial approaches define the convolution operators directly on the graph structure.
Here, the challenge of the irregularity of the graphs is still important to consider. One
solution is given in [Duv+15], where a separate weight matrix is used for all nodes with
a given degree. This will require as many matrices as there are unique degrees, and
thus this scales badly for larger graphs or if the degree domain is non-integer. Another
approach is GraphSAGE from [HYL17] which computes node representation in an in-
ductive manner. This method uniformly samples a neighborhood of a fixed size for each
node and then aggregates information with a specific aggregator. This aggregator can
be the mean of the sample’s neighbors’ features or the obtained result from feeding
them through another neural network. More approaches are presented in Section 3.1.2
of [Zho+21].
The focus in this part will be Attention-based spatial approaches. As the name implies,
they use attention mechanisms to deal with inputs of varying sizes by focusing on the
most relevant parts by assigning different weights for neighbors. This should - in theory
- lead to better results as noise can be alleviated. Here, the graph attentional operator
will be presented, which was initially proposed in [Vel+18], which is used in the graph
attention network (GAT). The idea is to compute hidden representations of the nodes
in the graph using self-attention. Self-attention is when an attention mechanism is used
to compute a representation of a single sequence. As stated in [Vel+18] advantageous
properties include
1. It is parallelizable across node-neighbor pairs, meaning it is eﬀicient.
2. It can be applied to graph nodes with inconsistent degree by specifying weights to
neighbors.
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Theory
3. It is directly applicable to inductive learning problems7 - also when it has to
generalize to completely unseen graphs.
Architecture
The input to a single graph attentional layer is a set of node fea-
tures X = {x1, x2, . . . , xn}, xi ∈RF, where N is the number of nodes, and as such
X is just a matrix of all nodes’ features.
As output the layer will produce X′ =
{x′
1, x′
2, . . . , x′
n}, x′
i ∈RF ′, where F and F ′ can be different. Firstly, a learnable linear
transformation is applied to all nodes with the weight matrix W ∈RF ′×F. Following
this, self-attention, a, is carried out on all the node pairs i, j as follows
εi,j = a(W xi, W xj), εi,j ∈R.
(3.32)
Here, εi,j is the attention coeﬀicients that indicates the importance of node j’s features
on node i. Note that the calculations are only carried out for neighbors of i, i.e. j ∈Ni
to keep the structural information. To allow for comparison across different nodes, all
choices of j are normalized using a softmax function so the attention coeﬀicients of each
node sum to 1:
αi,j = softmaxj(εi,j) =
exp(εi,j)
∑
k∈Ni exp(εi,k)
(3.33)
In the implementation of GAT that will be used for this thesis, the attention mechanism
a is a feed-forward neural network parameterized by the weight vector a ∈R2F ′. Ad-
ditionally, the activation function will be LeakyReLU, covered in Section 3.1.2.1, with
α = 0.2. This means that (3.33) can be expressed as
αi,j =
exp
(
LeakyReLU
(
a⊤[W xi ∥W xj]
))
∑
k∈Ni exp (LeakyReLU (a⊤[W xi ∥W xk])),
(3.34)
where ∥is the concatenation operation. In Figure 3.3 an illustration of the attention
mechanism is found where F ′ = 3. In the case that the edges also have features (as
weights), denoted by ei,j, a separate weight matrix We will be used, and the attention
coeﬀicients will be calculated as
αi,j =
exp
(
LeakyReLU
(
a⊤[W xi ∥W xj ∥Weei,j]
))
∑
k∈Ni exp (LeakyReLU (a⊤[W xi ∥W xk ∥Weei,k])).
(3.35)
With all the normalized attention coeﬀicients computed, a linear combination of
them and their features is passed through an activation function, σ, will be the output
for node x′
i will be
x′
i = σ

∑
j∈Ni
αi,jW xj

.
(3.36)
7Learning a function f from input x and output f(x).
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Graph Neural Networks
25
LeakyReLU
a
W xi
W xj
αi,j
Softmaxj
Figure 3.3: Illustration of the attention mechanism in the case where F ′ = 3.
Stabilizing learning with multi-head attention
In [Vel+18] they present the con-
cept of using K independent attention mechanisms for the process explained above,
which is called multi-head attention. This should, in theory, stabilize the learning pro-
cess. Now a superscript k will be used to index the independent attention mechanisms,
and the output from (3.36) will instead be
x′
i = ∥K
k=1σ

∑
j∈Ni
αk
i,jW kxj

,
(3.37)
where ∥K
k=1 denotes the concatenation of all the outputs. This means that the output
will be of size K · F ′. (3.37) also simplifies to (3.36) for K = 1. If this is done in the
output layer, the different attention mechanisms are averaged instead of concatenated.
An illustration of multi-head attention for K = 3 is found in Figure 3.4.
x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
x6
α16
α11
α12
α13
α14
α15
x′
1
concat/mean
Figure 3.4: Illustration of multi-head attention with K = 3 on node 1 with differ-
ent arrows representing independent attention computations. Each color
corresponds to one attention mechanism. (Tikz-code directly copied from
[Vel+18]).
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Theory
3.2.2.3
MLP Convolution Network
This method share similarities to edge convolution, which is presented in [Wan+19] and
can also be seen as a spatial method. It uses a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to embed
the node features. Multilayer perceptron is in this thesis used as a synonym for feed-
forward neural network. A perceptron is actually a neuron using a threshold function as
activation, but ”MLP” is used for distinguishability reasons. This ambiguity is neither
uncommon in the literature. This is done limit mixups between this method and simple
feed-forward neural networks. The MLP convolution network layer is mathematically
defined as
x′
i = σ

∑
j∈Ni
ei,jhW (xi ∥xj)

,
(3.38)
where hW is a multilayer perceptron (synonym for feed-forward neural network), ei,j is
the edge weights and σ is an activation function. Since the target node’s features are
concatenated with each neighbor, the MLP will have 2F input neurons, where F is the
number of node features. In the implementation, the ReLU activation function is used.
The actual implementation in Python is presented later in Listing 5.1.
3.2.2.4
Aggregations Functions
The concept of aggregation function is important in graph neural networks and is also
relevant in this thesis. Referring back to the node wise updating of the graph neural
networks as seen in (3.31), (3.36) and (3.38) a summation was used to aggregate all the
messages from neighboring nodes. This is called ’addition’ and is only one choice of
aggregation function. Alternatives include using a ’max’ function or the ’mean’.
3.2.2.5
Applications for Problems
As a final note, it makes sense to relate the propagation methods discussed above to
the different types as presented in Section 3.2.1.3. To start from behind with the graph-
level some pooling mechanism/module has to be used on the graph to aggregate the
nodes’ information into a global graph representation. In general, pooling modules are
used to get more general features than just at node level in a graph. Pooling methods
are though not of relevance for the problem in this thesis, and as such, they will not
be discussed further, but in [Zho+21, Section 3.5] an introduction to different pooling
modules can be found. The methods discussed above are node-based, but aggregation
between neighboring nodes can be used to predict edges, if edges have features that are
the target of the model.
Lastly are the node-based methods, where methods from feed-forward neural net-
works can be applied. IF the last layer is a graph layer, and it is a node regression
problem, the activation function in (3.31), (3.36) and (3.38) should be removed. A soft-
max can be used to get probabilities for the different classes a node can belong to if it
is a classification problem.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Statistical Learning Methods
27
3.3
Statistical Learning Methods
In order to assess whether the neural networks perform well, some classical statistical
learning methods will be used as comparison. The methods will briefly be presented
in this section, but for a more in-depth overview, the reader is advised to study e.g.
[HTF17], where all the methods are found. In this section, the explanation will be split
into linear and non-linear methods, and all the methods are - of course - regression
methods.
3.3.1
Linear Regression Methods
The simplest method that will be used is a simple (multiple) linear regression, where the
output is given as
f(x) = β0 +
p
∑
j=1
xjβj,
(3.39)
where p denotes the number of parameters. The βs are the parameters to determine,
and a single observation is given as x = x1, . . . , xp. With optimal β’s, it is possible to
predict a value for the dependent variable.
Probably the most popular method of estimating the βs is least squares, where the
sum of squares are minimized as
RSS(β) =
n
∑
i=1
(yi −f(xi))2 =
n
∑
i=1
(yi −β0 −
p
∑
j=1
xjβj)2.
(3.40)
In order to minimize overfitting, different shrinkage/regualarization methods have been
proposed. This is done by imposing a penalty on the size of the coeﬀicients. There is
ridge regression which penalizes the squared coeﬀicients, and then the lasso penalizes
the absolute value of the coeﬀicients. These two can be combined into the elastic net,
where the following penalization term is added to optimization
λ
p
∑
j=1
(
αβ2
j + (1 −α)|βj|
)
.
(3.41)
Setting α = 0 will make a Lasso while setting it to 1 will make a ridge regression. So
the elastic net contains both methods. Setting λ = 0, the elastic net will simplify to a
simple linear regression.
3.3.2
Non-linear Regression Methods
Two different non-linear regression methods will also be used, which will be outlined
below.
==PAGE:36==
28
3 Theory
Random forest
The first one is the random forest, which is a bootstrap aggregation for
decision trees, which in this case is used for regression. In a decision tree, an observation
is predicted by passing it through several binary decisions based on the values of the
independent variables. An example could be x1 > 10, and if it is true, one branch is
chosen, and if it is false, the other is chosen. This process is then repeated a number
of times (the same independent variable can be used multiple times) until a leaf node
is reached, where that leaf is associated with a prediction. The predicted value comes
from the training, where it is the average of the training nodes. From this, it should
be apparent that a critical hyperparameter is how deep to make a tree as this weights
between over- and underfitting.
A random forest is - as the name suggests - a collection of trees, which are individual
estimators. By using multiple estimators, the variance of the model can be lowered. The
algorithm works as follows:
1. Define a number of tree (estimators), B
2. For all b in B:
a) Take a random sample of size N (with replacement) from the data
b) Repeat until minimum node size is reached:
i. Take a random sample without replacement of the predictors
ii. Construct a tree partition (split) of the data from the sample of predictors
3. Output: B trees
By doing this, B decorrelated trees are obtained, where each tree prediction of a given
observation will be TB(x). As this is a regression problem, the prediction of the random
forest will be
f(x) = 1
B
B
∑
i=1
TB(x).
(3.42)
It can be seen that a prediction can not be made outside the training domain as the
prediction is based on an average of the averages.
K Nearest Neighbors
The second method is K Nearest Neighbors - abbreviated
KNN - and here, an observation is predicted by the following steps
1. Compute the distance (using a fitting distance measure as Euclidean) from the
observation to be predicted to all available training observations
2. Order the training observation by distance
3. Find the K nearest neighbors to the query observation
4. The predicted value is the average of the K nearest neighbors. This can also be a
weighted average according to their distance
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Statistical Learning Methods
29
This means that finding the best K is the primary task as it weights between over- and
underfitting, assuming there is a pattern in the data. As this model predicts based on
an average of training nodes, it can neither predict outside the training domain. It is
also heavily hit by the curse of the dimensionality as the space to find neighbors grows
exponentially (when using Euclidean distances).
==PAGE:38==
30
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Data
In this chapter, the data that is used and processed will be covered. First, a description
of the available data will be given with an overview of the available columns. Then the
preprocessing steps taken to modify the dataset into a valuable format for analysis will be
explained. Following that, an overview of external data used will be given before a short
explaining on how the data was cut for computational reasons. Lastly, an explorative
analysis will be carried out on the data that is used for modeling.
4.1
Data Description
In this section, an overview of the available raw data from ShareNow is found. The only
manipulations that have been carried out at this point are to rename columns to more
meaningful or iconic names.
The data is structured as .csv files that individually contain the data from one month
ranging from August 2015 through December 2019 for a total of 53 files. Collectively
they take up 423 MB ranging from a few MB up to 16 MB as the frequency of trips has
increased during the time period. All files follow the same format, so they can easily
be stacked to create a full combined dataset. This combined dataset contains a total of
2,633,985 observations, and one observation corresponds to a single trip.
4.1.1
Available Columns
The dataset has a total of 19 columns available. In addition to this, an index column was
added after combining all 53 .csv files. An overview of 16 of those is found in Table 4.1
with their name and a short description. Additionally, the rightmost column shows an
example of an observation from the dataset. The last three have been omitted from the
table as they are irrelevant - or the purpose of them is unknown (as no documentation
was provided with the data). These columns are Rental_flag, Drives and Revenue.
The column Rental_flag is a yes/no column with 99% of the observations being ”no”.
The purpose of the columns is not known, and of that reason, it is omitted. Drives is
a 1/0 columns which has 99.9% ”1”. The observations with 0 are only in those that are
broken somehow - as a lacking ID of the car. The actual purpose is not known, and as
such, it is also omitted. Lastly, the purpose of Revenue is known, but it is not relevant
for this thesis in any way. Moreover, the shown values are not ”true”, which can be
verified by ascertaining, that they do not fit with the pricing scheme of ShareNow.
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Data
Name
Description
Example
Customer_Group
Indication of the trip is made
by a customer or non-customer
(internal movement)
Customer
CustomerID
Unique customer ID of the cus-
tomer making the given trip
2764774
CarID
Unique ID of the car making
the given trip
WMWXU7101KTM90599
Engine
The type of engine in the car
used
COOPER
RentalID
ID column with a unique entry
for each trip
9402323330
Rental_Usage_Type
Is the trip made with a private
of business account
Private
Reservation_Time
Reservation time of the given
trip down to the second. Cars
can be reserved before starting
the trip
2019-04-23 16:47:55
End_Time
End time of the given trip
down to the second
2019-04-23 17:16:19
Distance
Length of the trip rounded to
the nearest kilometer
11
Reservation_Minutes Number of minutes from reser-
vation to start of trip
5
Fuel_Start
Fuel/Battery level of the car at
the start of the trip in percent-
age
87
Fuel_End
Fuel/Battery level of the car at
the end of the trip in percent-
age
85
Start_Lat
Latitude position in decimal
format of starting position of
the trip
55.789271
Start_Long
Longitude position in decimal
format of starting position of
the trip
12.521229
End_Lat
Latitude position in decimal
format of end position of the
trip
55.711171
End_Long
Longitude position in decimal
format of end position of the
trip
12.572562
Table 4.1: Overview of the columns available in the dataset with an example of an
observation provided.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Preprocessing
33
4.2
Preprocessing
In this section, an explanation of all the preprocessing is given. For a complete overview
of what is done line by line, the reader is advised to study the script in the Github
repository. This part more presents the ideas instead of the technical work done. To
give a better reading flow, subsections are used for the different preprocessing parts. In
general, a large effort, and much time has been spent avoiding removing rows and finding
meaningful replacements or other fixes. The reason for this is that the available data
contains trips but what is needed for the analysis is the vacancy time - i.e., the time
between trips. If a row with a missing value is removed, it will introduce artificially longer
vacancy time between the trip before and after manipulating the response variable.
4.2.1
Initial Preprocessing
First, some basic preprocessing is done, which is explained in bullet form below.
• Each of the 53 monthly datasets contained a row aggregating the month’s data.
This row is unnecessary for this purpose and frankly in just noise, so those 53 rows
are removed.
• A total of 3455 rows has a lot of missing values (as 0), including the CarID, meaning
that these rows are useless and are therefore removed.
• Some cars had their CarID change during the time period to have a ’DK’ appended.
All these DKs are removed from the CarID so a car does not change CarID.
• Naturally, it also ensured that data types are indicated probably - i.e. that the
Reservation_Time and End_Time are actually date times.
4.2.2
Engine and Consolidation
20713 observations have their Engine missing (indicated by 0). In most cases - on a
car-to-car basis - it can be seen that for some other observations for the same car, the
Engine is available. This is used to populate the missing values as a car does not change
engine. This can not be done for five cars as all their observations are missing the engine.
By manually looking at their CarID, they are populated as the same pattern for a part
of the ID is used for cars with the same engine. An example of this is ”1R510” from
character 4 in the carID indicates a 118I.
Additionally, the engines are consolidated into four major classes. This means that
’I3’, ’I3 120’ and ’I3 94’ are all converted to ’I3’. The same is the case for ’X1 SDRIVE18I’
and ’X2 SDRIVE18I’ which is renamed ’X1’. The reason for this is that the car itself
is still the same type - there is just something else under the hood. A user can not see
what kind of ’I3’ engine is in a car, so it should not impact a choice of car. As such, this
can merge some columns without removing meaningful information.
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Data
4.2.3
Merging Back-To-Back Observations
In the data, it was found that there were cases where the same customer (indicated by
CustomerID) used the same car with very little time in between two trips with no other
trips in between from other customers. This is interpreted as the Park & Save feature
where a customer parks the car but keeps the trip going, so another user can not book
the car. When this is the case, the car is not available, and thus it should not be a part
of the supply for other users. Additionally, if it is parked for 5-10 minutes while the
customer might be picking up groceries before continuing, it will introduce artificially
low vacancy time. Therefore, trips where the same user uses a car in the back-to-back
trips (from the car’s perspective) and there is no more than one hour between the trips
they are merged to one single trip. The one-hour cutoff is chosen reasonably arbitrarily,
but it is believed that a user will rarely pay for a parked car for an hour.
The same approach is taken with trips made by non-costumers (which is indicated
by the Customer_Group column).
ShareNow makes these trips for some reason (as
maintenance). There are cases where a trip is made by a non-customer and then nothing
happens for a week before another non-customer makes a trip. It is not believed that
the car is actually available during this time. Again, as it is the vacancy time that is
important, it is not a problem to have week-long trips by a non-customer, and this is
believed to be a better representation of the actual supply. Non-customer trips cost
ShareNow money, and as such, it is also believed that there is a reason for them to have
those and that cars are not publicly available in the meantime.
4.2.4
Fixing Times
Overall there are two main problems with the time columns. Firstly, a trip can have
a negative duration if the End_Time is before the Reservation_Time. Secondly, trips
can also be overlapping if the End_Time is later than the Reservation_Time of the next
trip, which will lead to negative vacancy times. How these cases are solved are explained
below.
4.2.4.1
Trips With Negative Duration
There are only very few cases where the trip duration is negative. One of them occurs
during the night when the clock is set back from daylight savings in late October. These
cases are fixed by either moving the Reservation_Time one hour prior or the End_Time
one hour later based on which one will change the vacancy time to the previous/next
trip the least. As it happens at 3 in the night, it is not when most driving activity occurs.
Moreover, there are also 50 other cases where it happens. These cases are removed as
they will not introduce more vacancy time since the trip has a negative duration.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Preprocessing
35
4.2.4.2
Trips With Overlapping Times
The other possible error of overlapping trips was handled in some different ways based
on different cases - primarily based on the Customer_Group. They will be outlined in
the bullets below.
• For some observations of customer trips something seems to be wrong with the log
at the end of the trip, as no end location is given, and some trips span multiple
days. For these, the end-time is set to one minute after the start time (calculated
by adding the Reservation_Minutes to Reservation_Time as it will still be better
than just removing them.
• In the other cases where two trips by customers overlap, the end-time is set to the
average time between the two reservation times. Again, this is a rough estimate
but better than removing observations.
• In cases where a non-customer trip follows a customer trip, the end location, time
and fuel of the non-customer trip is added to the customer trip, and then the
non-customer trip is removed. This will, in some cases, give very long trips, but
this is not a problem as it is the vacancy time that is relevant. This is done as
it is suspected that ShareNow ”reserves” a car as it needs maintenance or similar
while a trip is still going, so another user can not book the car.
• The last case that is handled is when a trip made by a non-customer has a miss-
ing end location. This was done in two ways. Firstly it seemed like some trips
were registered twice. Therefore, if two back-to-back trips left the same location
(which is impossible in practice), one of them was removed. The others were fixed
by letting the End_Time be the Reservation_Minutes after Reservation_Time.
This was done as some Reservation_Minutes for non-customer trips is in the
hundreds if not thousands. Again, this is not perfect, but better than removing
the observations.
By carrying out the above operations, no trips overlapped, and as such no negative
vacancy time will be observed.
4.2.4.3
Prioritizing Reservation Time over Start Time
At this point, it makes sense to reason why the Reservation_Time is prioritized starting
time of the trip, which can be calculated from the Reservation_Minutes. Primarily, this
would introduce even more fixes as those mentioned above, as the Reservation_Minutes
did not seem to be completely error-free.
It is also believed that using the time of
reservation would be more accurate, as the car, at that moment, is not available in the
car supply for other users looking for a car.
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Data
4.2.5
Excluding Observations Prior to 2018
Here, it was also decided to only keep data from 2018 and 2019 and discard previous
data, which was done for a few reasons. Of the problems that are fixed in the following
parts, way more issues were found in the data from 2015-2017 than 2018-2019.
As
mentioned before, it was desired to have as clean data as possible to avoid introducing
artificial vacancy, and thus this was greatly valued.
Additionally, even though this is less than half of the complete time interval, it still
contains 70% of the total observations, so data will not be lacking. Moreover, a lot has
happened in the free-flowing car-sharing market just through the few years of data. As
a concrete example, only 412 different cars are in the data prior to 2018, where there are
927 in 2018 and 2019. So demand has increased a lot, and shared mobility has changed
its impact on the complete transit offering. Data from late 2015 is not very comparable
to data just three years later. For these reasons it is deemed the best decision to keep
two years of data.
4.2.6
Fuel Issues
The fuel columns also had issues with missing values indicated by either a 0 or -1.
According to ShareNow the Fuel_Start is more reliable than Fuel_End, so the focus
has been on ensuring that Fuel_Start is correct. If the end fuel is available at the
previous trip of a given car, that is used for the next trip’s starting fuel. Additionally,
there also seemed to be a few duplicate trips (as was also explained with the overlapping
times) with the same starting location. Here, the starting value from one of them was
missing, which was taken care of by ”merging” them into one trip. Lastly, 12 cases
could not be fixed by the above. Those was done manually using the Distance column
to interpolate fuel levels.
It should also be stated here that the fueling of cars happens differently based on if it
is electric or conventional (combustion engine). An electric car is charged between trips,
and therefore the available fuel changes throughout the vacancy time (if it is charging).
A conventional car is fueled during a trip. This does introduce some uncertainty, but it
has been decided that it is acceptable.
4.2.7
Location Issues
For some observations, either the start- or end location was missing and registered as a
0,0 coordinate pair. This is fixed by simply assuming that a car is not moved between
two trips, which is true in the far majority of cases. So, either the end-location of the
previous trip or the start-location of the following trip is mapped to the missing values.
Here, it is impossible to fix start locations in the first observation of a car or end location
of the last. This is though not an issue as it is the vacancy between observations there
will be in focus.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Preprocessing
37
4.2.8
Adding Zones
As mentioned above, the start and end location of a trip is known as indicated by coor-
dinates, which in most cases is given to the sixth decimal. This roughly corresponds to
a precision of 10 cm. However, it does not make sense to consider coordinates as interval
data (or even ratio data). There is much more to describe a location as demographics,
geographies, and land usage. To combat this a zone-system is used. The zones used
in this project are based on the Danish National Transport Model[RH16]1. The zone
system is defined hierarchically, where merging smaller zones creates larger zones, which
can be merged again. There are a total of four levels ranging from municipality level
to regional level. Notice that the naming refers to what they are modeling, so regional
refers to regional trips, and here the zones are tiny, containing around 650 addresses.
In Table 4.2 an overview of the number of zones is provided. In the total column, the
total number of zones across all of Denmark is given as well as the number of zones
available in the data (both considering start and end zone). Additionally, it is provided
how many zones are represented at least 30 times in the data as there are sometimes
some unusual start/end locations in the data. An example of this is Bornholm, where
ShareNow had a few cars for Folkemødet for promotion reasons.
Level
Description
Example
Total
In Data
In Data ≥30
L0
Municipality level
102
98
44
14
L1
Strategic level
1028
106
56
25
L2
National level
10285
377
108
114
L3
Regional level
102851
3670
490
278
Table 4.2: Overview of the number of zones for different aggregation levels. Addition-
ally, the number of total Zones, the zones in the ShareNow data, and zones
represented more than 30 times are given.
The design of the zones has taken demographics into account, as mentioned. This
means that the zones are approximately homogenous in terms of population and work-
places, and urban areas should are distinguished from rural areas. Islands are typically
defined as separated zones, and major transport hubs also have their own individual
zones. The zones are also classified according to land use purpose on the most granular
level. In Figure 4.1 an overview of the zones in central Copenhagen is given. Here, it
can also be seen how ”removing” the last digits merges neighboring zones.
4.2.8.1
Mapping of Zones to the Data
In order to add the zones to the observations of the dataset, the GIS-shapefiles mapping
them out are used. After ensuring that the projection is aligned, most observations
can be mapped by assigning them the zone (both start and end) based on which zone-
polygon are within. As it can be seen in Figure 4.1 the zone system does though not
1This is referred to as ”Landstrafikmodellen” in Danish.
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Data
Figure 4.1: Overview of the zones in central Copenhagen.
include water as Copenhagen Harbor and the water around Slotsholmen (zone 102111).
This means that some observations are missed as cars are sometimes parked very close
to the water and are not registered in a zone. The remaining ones are therefore assigned
the zone that they are closets to, and in that way, all observations have a Start_Zone
and End_Zone associated with it.
4.2.9
Create Vacancy Dataset
At this point, the dataset of observations is processed containing 1,702,109 observations
from 2018 and 2019. This is, though, insuﬀicient for the model purposes of this thesis
as it is the vacancy times should be predicted which is what is between the lines - on a
car to car basis - that is interesting. All back-to-back observations are considered for all
cars, where row1 and row2 will be used to denote two trips following each other. The
vacancy dataset will get the following rows
• Park_Time defined as the End_Time from row1
• Reservation_Time defined as the Reservation_Time from row2
• Time_To_Reservation which is the difference (in hours) between the two above.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 External Data
39
• Park_Location_Lat and Park_Location_Long which is the end location of row1
• Leave_Location_Lat and Leave_Location_Long which is the start location of
row2
• Park_Zone and Leave_Zone which is the End_Zone and Start_Zone of row1 and
row2 respectively
• Park_Fuel and Leave_Fuel which is the End_Fuel and Start_Fuel of row1 and
row2 respectively
• Engine which just comes from row1 as it does not change
• Prev_Customer and Next_Customer which is the customer group of row1 and row
2 respectively
By carrying out the above operations, the obtained data frame includes 1,701,182 obser-
vations of vacancy time that can be used for modeling.
4.2.10
Feature Engineering of Time Variable
Time is often a complex variable in its raw format, so it was also handled to make it more
useful for later analysis. Firstly, regarding days, a binary variable was encoded based
on whether it was a weekend or not. One could discuss if it had made sense to encode
each day, but it was presumed that the weekdays and weekends were similar enough
when looking at it from a transport perspective. For the time of day, a trigonometric
encoding was used to ensure the cyclic property that the time of day has. Two columns
were created from each time stamp as follows:
Cos_Time = cos
(
2π ·
T
24 · 3600
)
Sin_Time = sin
(
2π ·
T
24 · 3600
)
(4.1)
Here T is the time in seconds since midnight. The denominator in both cases is equal
to the number of seconds in a day (86,400). This ensures that the fraction goes from
0 to 1 during a day. With the 2π factor, the complete domain of the cosine and sine
will be used, and this can be seen as a 24-hour clock - it is just starting at 3, and goes
counterclockwise from midnight.
4.3
External Data
As mentioned, additional data will be gathered to - hopefully - increase the predictive
power of the models that will be trained. For this project, weather data and data on train
stations will be used, and this section will explain how it was gathered and processed.
==PAGE:48==
40
4 Data
4.3.1
Weather Data
Historical weather data was deemed valuable for the problem at hand as the weather is
presumed to impact the mode of transport an individual will choose. If the weather is
bad, an individual is probably more likely to take a ShareNow than the bike or walk to
the nearest train station to grab a train. Furthermore, these effects would be interesting
to include in the model.
As a source of weather data, the climate data archive from The Danish Meteorological
Institute2 (DMI) was used. In 2021 an available public API was released, which can
fetch the data needed data - see more at [Ins21]. With the climateData API quality-
controlled meteorological observation data can be collected. On the time dimension,
data is available on an hourly basis, while it is possible to get the geographical precision
done to municipality level. Copenhagen Municipality was used for this case even though
some surrounding municipalities are also part of the ShareNow zone. This is deemed
to be an insignificant generalization since the difference in the weather across the full
ShareNow zone will often not vary a lot.
Many climate variables are available with the API, but seven were chosen to be
fetched. They are
• Mean temperature
• Mean wind speed
• Precipitation
• Sunshine brightness
• Mean pressure
• Mean relative humidity
• Mean cloud cover
With the API, these variables in Copenhagen municipality could be collected on an
hourly level throughout the time period and then be stored as a dataset. Later this data
can then be mapped onto the Vacancy dataset (with the time of parking rounded to the
nearest hour for matching), so the weather data is included.
4.3.1.1
Potential Drawbacks
One potential drawback to be aware of is that the weather is dynamic. What is known is
the weather upon parking, but the weather at the time of pick-up will not be known as
the time until pick-up is unknown. Thus, some modeling would be needed to take this
into account. Additionally, if some future weather prediction is needed, the uncertainty
of the weather forecast is also something to be aware of, as this will also affect the
prediction accuracy.
2Called Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut in Danish
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Graph Creation
41
4.3.2
Nearest Train Station
The distance to the nearest train station was also deemed attractive as it was suspected
that this could affect on the vacancy times. To be more specific, the term train covers
all kinds of rail traﬀic, including S-trains, Metro and regional trains in Copenhagen.
Regarding this effect it is though not easy to assess if it is positive or negative for
vacancy times. In one way, a car parked near a station faces tougher competition as the
public transport alternative will be more attractive, lowering the demand for the car.
On the other hand, a car parked near a station will be more attractive in a multi-modal
travel setting, where the car can travel the last kilometers to the user’s final destination.
As data sources, Wikipedia’s lists of S-train stations and Metro stations are used.
The advantage of the Wikipedia lists is that they are nice HTML-tables, making them
easy to fetch. Additionally, train stations in service do not change very often, so it is
not an issue to use Wikipedia as a source. It was also verified that the newest stations
were in the tables. All relevant regional train stations are included in these two lists
except Tårnby Station, which is manually added as the last one. Other regional train
stations - that are not served by S-trains - are not relevant for the Copenhagen Area
that ShareNow serves. This results in a list of 120 stations. Some of these are way
out of the ShareNow area as the S-train network reaches far out into the suburbs of
Copenhagen, so not all will be relevant later - it is though not a problem to have them
in the database.
As the end goal is to have the distance to the nearest station, the coordinates of all
stations are needed. The is done with the API Positionstack3 as it is freely available.
By plotting the stations on a map, it was found that there were some mistakes with the
API calls. Around 20 stations were then manually updated with their correct location.
As such, a list of train stations and their respective coordinates could be collected. From
this, the distance from each car to a station can be calculated. The distance calculated
is as the crow flies and not the actual walking distance, which naturally introduces
uncertainty.
4.4
Graph Creation
The data now has to be modeled as graphs. The approach to generating observations
from the data is event-based. That is to say that a new observation is generated every
time an event happens and not with some constant time interval. In this case, an event
is defined as the case here either a car is parked or reserved. In that way, the dataset
is split such that for each vacant period for a car, there are two observations. One with
the action ”park” and one with ”reserved”. By sorting this data by action time, a data
frame is available that can be propagated through one action at a time to see how the
cars move and the supply change.
3https://positionstack.com
==PAGE:50==
42
4 Data
From a chosen start time, the last observation of each car is extracted. For all those
which the last action is park, they are collected in the stating data. The data itself
acts as a collection of node attributes as each car corresponds to a node. In order to
determine the adjacency matrix, the following function is used, where i and j are two
cars that are currently parked. This is done for all car pairs (i, j):
ai,j = max
(1500 −d(i, j)
1500
)
,
(4.2)
where d(i, j) is the distance between car i and car j in meters.
1500 is the chosen
maximum distance where two cars would influence each other. This value is chosen
from an estimate that a customer would walk no longer than 750 meters (as the crow
flies). As such, in the edge case, two cars within 1500 meters of each other can influence
the same customer. The function then ensures a reverse linear relation between the
distance and edge weight, going from 1 at a distance of 0 to 0 for two cars at least 1500
meters away from each other. This also naturally adds self-edges to the graph as a car
trivially has a distance of 0 to itself.
From this starting point, the data frame with actions can be propagated through,
where all observations have two possibilities based on the action:
• Park: Here, all the locations of the cars currently parked are collected. From this
all the weights from the newly parked car to all other cars can be calculated as
seen in (4.2). It is naturally only necessary to calculate this for the newly parked
cars as the others do not move. These weights can then be added to the adjacency
matrix as one new row and column. Then the just parked cars’ attributes are
appended to the data frame with node attributes. As such, the node attributes
and adjacency matrix are updated.
• Reserved: In this case the row in the node attributes that contains the current
car is removed, and the corresponding row and column in the adjacency matrix is
also removed.
Observation, as pairs of node attributes and adjacency matrices, are only recorded when
a car is parked. This is since the goal is to predict this particular car’s vacancy time,
and therefore there are no reasons to store observation pairs when a car is reserved
and leaves the data of available cars. All the adjacency matrices are handled as sparse
matrices to make the process less memory-heavy as a new graph is created every time a
car is parked. On a more practical note, individual files are saved for each day.
To summarize, a dataset is now obtained where each observation contains a data
frame of node attributes as well as an adjacency matrix containing all the relations,
based on distances, between the nodes.
4.4.1
Example of a Graph
To illustrate how the graphs relate to real life, a graph has been laid over a map of
Copenhagen, which is shown in Figure 4.2. This graph is from September 1st 2019 at
==PAGE:51==
4.5 Proof of Concept Data Cut
43
8:58:19 in the morning, where 378 cars are parked. All the nodes correspond to a parked
car, and they are colored based on the car type (engine variable). All the edges are
also shown, where the opacity is based on how strong the connection is. I.e., a shorter
distance leads to a stronger link and thus more opaque. This graph is then updated
each time an action occurs.
Figure 4.2: Map of Copenhagen with an example graph as overlay. Nodes are colored
according to car type.
4.5
Proof of Concept Data Cut
An additional cut of the data was made for computational reasons. As it was just stated,
each observation is a pair of a data frame with all parked cars and a corresponding
adjacency matrix. In most cases, the number of parked cars is around 400-500 meaning
each observation will contain a data frame of 400-500 rows of all the features.
The
adjacency matrix is (400 −500) × (400 −500). Thus, the amount of data to store one
observation is enormous. Therefore, it was decided to only use data from September
and October 2019. These 61 days of data contain 162,358 rows, so it is still a lot. It is
also important to reemphasize that the overall goal is to compare methods, which is still
possible. Of course, some models can take greater advantage of larger data amounts, but
to put it into perspective, these two months alone require around 100 GB of memory,
==PAGE:52==
44
4 Data
which roughly was what was available during writing and modeling. Therefore, this cut
to September and October 2019 is made, which will be used going forward.
Moreover, all observations (here just referring to the target node) with vacancy times
of more than 48 hours will also be discarded for the purpose of the proof of concept. This
is done because very long vacancy times will have a huge impact on the scoring measure
used for the model. Moreover, often there is nothing in the data to indicate that the
vacancy time will be more than, e.g. 100 hours. It is only 147 observations that are
larger than 48 hours, so they can be seen as noise and removed. The same is done
for trips where the next customer is a non-customer as this is not deemed an actual
observation as it is ShareNow picking up the car. Lastly, observations from zones with
less than 30 observations are removed. This is done as these are cars outside the main
ShareNow zone (as Bornholm discussed earlier) and this ensures that all zones have some
data support. With these measures, the total number of observations is brought down
to 155,842.
4.6
Explorative Data Analysis
With the dataset in place, as explained above (the data cut from the proof of concept),
an explorative analysis will now be carried out. This is done to partly get more insight
into the data and its distributions but also to get some general interesting takeaways
since an explorative analysis in itself can tell a lot about the data. This section will
go over the variables one by one and look at how it relates to the ”time to reservation”
(which is the same as vacancy time) and start with a short overview of the distribution
of the time to reservation.
4.6.1
Time to Reservation
Looking at the response variable, time to reservation, selected percentiles of the distri-
bution are presented in Table 4.3 below. Additionally, Table 4.4 shows the mean and
standard deviation of the variable.
Percentile
0
5
25
50
75
95
100
Time to Reservation (hours)
0.000833
0.0508
0.449
1.44
4.40
13.1
47.8
Table 4.3: Selected percentiles of the distribution of time to reservation.
Mean (µ)
3.40
Std. (σ)
4.69
Table 4.4: Mean and standard deviation in hours of the time to reservation.
Looking at the percentiles and comparing the median and mean, it becomes clear
that this is a very skewed distribution. More than half of the cars are reserved within
==PAGE:53==
4.6 Explorative Data Analysis
45
90 minutes, and a quarter is reserved within half an hour. The mean value is quite a
bit higher, but it is essential to remember that the mean value is affected more than
the median by cars parked for a long time, e.g., at night. This is an indication of the
skewness.
For a more in-depth view, three kernel density plots are shown in Figure 4.3 of the
time to reservation. The left is on the complete data, while the middle is cut off at
12 hours. Lastly, the rightmost has a logged x-axis. These plots also clearly reveal
the extreme skewness of the distribution, and even the log-transformed time is clearly
skewed. This is something to be aware of when doing the modeling as there is relatively
small support for longer vacancy times. As it was seen in Table 4.3 only 5% of the data
is longer than 13.1 hours.
Figure 4.3: Kernel density plot of the distribution of the time to reservation. (Left)
On the full data up to 48 hours. (Middle) Only done on the subset up to
12 hours. (Right) On the full data but with x-axis logged.
4.6.2
Time of the Day
The first variable that will be investigated is the hour of the day that the car is parked.
The parking time of all observations is rounded to the nearest hour, and a violin plot
for each hour of the day can be found in Figure 4.4. The plot is also split based on
weekends and weekdays in blue and orange respectively. Please note that the density
is standardized to each hour, so the volume can not be compared between hours, as it
is the same. The plot has also been cutoff at 18 hours of time to reservations to make
the most interesting takeaways clearer. Lastly, the quartile set is marked at each side of
each violin.
This single plot reveals a lot about when ShareNow cars are most in demand. Looking
at the cars parked from 20 to around 1 in the night, the distributions are bimodal.
Moreover, it can also be seen that the distance between the two peaks is getting closer.
This can be interpreted as the demand is lower in the night (around 2-6), and the cars
parked late in the evening are - in most cases picked up either before the late night or
==PAGE:54==
46
4 Data
in the morning. This effect is also more evident during the weekdays where more cars
are used during the night at weekends. However, the effect is swapped when looking at
the early morning where cars parked from 5-9 on weekdays are picked up very quickly,
where the vacancy time is quite a bit longer during the weekend. Lastly, it can also be
seen that from 12-17, the cars are driving a lot, where a large majority of the density is
below the 2.5-hour mark.
Figure 4.4: Violin plot of the time to reservation based on the hour, when the car is
parked. Plot split by weekday (blue) and weekend (orange). Quartile set
is marked as dashed lines.
4.6.2.1
Trigonometric Embedding
As mentioned earlier in Section 4.2.10 a trigonometric embedding of the time of day was
carried out, which introduced two new columns; the cosine and sine of the time of day.
In Table 4.5 a correlation table between the variables are found, while Figure 4.5 shows
the scatter plots - as a pair-plot - between the variables with regression lines.
Time to Reservation
Cos(time)
Sin(time)
Time to Reservation
1.000
0.272
0.035
Cos(time)
0.272
1.000
-0.236
Sine(time)
0.035
-0.236
1.000
Table 4.5: Correlation table between time to reservation and cosine and sine of time
of day.
From the table and the plot, it becomes apparent that these variables impact the
time to reservation - especially the cosine, which has a correlation of 0.272 with the
time to reservation. Looking at the plot, the drawbacks are though also apparent as the
variables are not very consistent. For the cosine there looks to be two groups in the data
==PAGE:55==
4.6 Explorative Data Analysis
47
- e.g. with a cosine values at 0.5 the time to reservation can both be around 0-5 hours
but also at around 10-14 hours. The distribution can be seen as bimodal at this point.
Figure 4.5: Pair-plot of the time to reservation together with the cosine and sine of
the time of day. The plot also includes regression lines.
4.6.3
Fuel
Moving onto the fuel status, a simple analysis will be carried out. Recall that ”fuel”
also covers battery for electric vehicles. The correlation between the fuel and time to
==PAGE:56==
48
4 Data
reservation is calculated to 0.0622, which is a minimal positive correlation. To get a
slightly more profound insight, a scatter plot of the time to reservation as a function
of the fuel upon parking can be found to the left in Figure 4.6. Moreover, to the right,
five box plots are shown based on different bins with different fuel levels - note that the
figure is cut off at 12 hours to make the central part of the data clear.
The slightly positive correlation can also be seen from the two figures, especially from
the box plot, where the mean time grows a bit. The positive correlation means that a
car with more fuel should be less in demand than a car with less fuel. This might seem
counterintuitive for some who do not know ShareNow, but there is a logical reason for
this. As mention in Section 2.1.1, ShareNow gives credit for charging and fueling cars
meaning that there is an economic incentive for a customer to choose a car with low
battery/gas if their end destination has a charger available or they pass a gas station. As
a concrete example charging a car with less n 15% fuel gives 60DKK worth of credits, so
some users will speculate on this, as one can make money on trips. Since the correlation
is so close to 0, it can be interpreted as a well-balanced scheme from ShareNow’s side as
the fuel status will not - on average - make some cars much less in demand.
What can also be seen from the scatter plot is that cars with 100% fuel seem to be
better represented at the longer vacancy times. A reason for this can be that an electric
car parked for charging in a low-demand area is less likely to be picked up before it
reaches full battery (this is though just a hypothesis). If the cars with full batteries are
excluded, the correlation drops to only 0.0154, so these cars have a pretty significant
impact on the correlation of the complete data.
Figure 4.6: (Left) Scatter plot of the time to reservation as a function of the fuel.
(Right) Box plot of fuel level in different bins limited to 12 hours time to
reservation with mean values marked as squares.
==PAGE:57==
4.6 Explorative Data Analysis
49
4.6.4
Engine
Next up is the engine variable, which - probably more importantly - represents the
type and size of car booked. In Figure 4.7 violin plots of the distributions of time to
reservation per engine type as well as weekday/weekend split are shown with a cut-off at
12 hours. The quartile set can also be seen as a dashed line. What primarily can be seen
using the quartile lines is that the times are slightly lower on the weekend. Moreover,
the distributions look very comparable for all four types.
Figure 4.7: Violin plot of the time to reservation based on the engine of the car-cut off
at 12 hours. Plot split by weekday (blue) and weekend (orange). Quartile
set is marked as dashed lines.
Additionally, Table 4.6 provides the mean values for each engine split on weekend
and weekday. From this table, it is fairly clear that the relation between weekend and
weekday is comparable, with average times being lower in the weekend across the board.
Nevertheless, there is quite a difference between the different types of engines, with the
X1 being more popular than the 118I, which in turn is more popular than the I3 and
Cooper. In 2019, where this data is from, the price for a car was independent of which
type of car it was. This is clearly seen in the results here, where the larger cars are more
popular. During 2020 ShareNow introduced price differentiation, so instead of all cars
costing the same, the X1 is e.g. 33% more expensive than the Cooper and I3. One could
imagine that this has more or less neutralized the effect of the engine type - as it was
seen with the fuel, where economic incentives are given - but the data at hand can not
tell this.
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Data
Engine
Weekday
Weekend
118I
3.31
3.20
Cooper
3.64
3.48
I3
3.47
3.42
X1
2.45
2.41
Table 4.6: Mean time to reservation for each type of car (based on engine) on weekdays
and weekends.
4.6.5
Zone
Here, the effect of the zones will be investigated. In the data, there are 256 zones present.
Firstly, the distribution of pick-ups per zone during the two months is calculated. The
distribution is shown in the top of Figure 4.8, where the number of pick-ups per zone
has been calculated and sorted. The plot also shows the average number of pick-ups per
zone, which is 609. In Table 4.7 the quartile set of the distribution is shown together
with the mean value. From both the table and plot, it is clear that some zones are way
more popular than others, and the distribution is very skewed.
Along the same lines, the average vacancy time per zone is investigated. This can
be seen at the bottom of Figure 4.8, where the average pick-up time of all cars in the
data is shown in red. The quartile set for this distribution is found in Table 4.8. Note
that the average value here is the average of all the zone averages, and it is not the same
as the average of the complete data. This distribution shows a similar pattern to the
total number of pick-ups, where significant differences are seen between the zone, but
the distribution is not as skewed.
Quartile
0
1
2 (Median)
Mean
3
4
No. of pick-ups
30
262
491
609
752
4915
Table 4.7: Quartile set and mean of the number of pick-ups per zone.
Quartile
0
1
2 (Median)
Mean
3
4
No. of pick-ups
0.835
2.82
3.71
4.02
4.88
9.82
Table 4.8: Quartile set and the mean of the average vacancy time per zone.
It is interesting to look into a possible correlation pattern between the number of
pick-ups and average vacancy time with this information. In Figure 4.9 the values have
been plotted against each other together with the regression line. The trend is negative,
and the correlation has been calculated to be -0.360. This negative correlation is not
surprising as this means that the more cars are picked up at a zone, the lower the vacancy
time is. Both these measures can be seen as popularity measures, and as such, it makes
sense that they are negatively correlated.
==PAGE:59==
4.6 Explorative Data Analysis
51
Figure 4.8: (Top) Distribution of the number of pick-ups in each zone sorted. The aver-
age value is shown as the red straight line. (Bottom) Average vacancy time
per zone sorted with the average of complete data shown as red straight
line.
==PAGE:60==
52
4 Data
Figure 4.9: (Top) Distribution of the number of pick-ups in each zone sorted. The
average value is shown as the red straight line. (Bottom) Average vacancy
time per zone sorted with average of full data shown as red straight line.
4.6.5.1
Geographical Overview of Zones
To stay within the trend of popular zones, it was desired to get a geographical overview
of where the zones with the lowest - and highest - vacancy times are located. This can
be found in Figure 4.10, where Greater Copenhagen is shown with all zones colored
according to their average vacancy time. Notice the color bar in the top right. Looking
at the center of Copenhagen, a nice pattern is seen, where the average vacancy time is
generally lowest in the center of the city. Then it drops gradually as one gets further away
from the city center - with exceptions, of course. Looking at the satellite hubs, they are
in general not as popular as inner Copenhagen, but some are still fairly popular, where
DTU and IKEA Gentofte4 deserves mention for a reader with knowledge of Copenhagen.
Some satellite hubs might see long average vacancy times because they are based at
locations with many oﬀices and more jobs than residential plots. This means that a car
that has not been picked up by late afternoon to early evening is almost guaranteed to
be parked until the next day, which greatly impacts the average time. This is to tell that
this map does not tell the whole story even though it is a clear indication that there is
potential for ShareNow to move cars into the center of Copenhagen if the supply is low
at a given point.
4It is the greenest zones in the northern part of the map.
==PAGE:61==
4.6 Explorative Data Analysis
53
Figure 4.10: Map of Copenhagen with zones colored according to their average vacancy
time (see top right for color bar).
4.6.6
Degree
Now, a short investigation of the impact of the node degree will be investigated. Recall
that this is based on the total degree of the weighted graph upon parking for a single
car with self-loops included. The plot of the time to reservations as a function of the
node degree is shown to the left Figure 4.11. A box plot with the degree values binned is
shown as with the fuel. The correlation is this time calculated to 0.104. It is important
to state that the degree is calculated upon parking and not updated at each movement
for simplicity and computational reasons. Thus, the degree is almost guaranteed to be
different at the actual time of pick-up.
The positive correlation that is found is probably not surprising as a higher degree
means more cars are parked nearby, and in turn, a longer time to reservation is observed.
This can be seen as an internal competition between the cars. Looking closer at the
scatter plot, an interesting trend can be observed - the cars with the largest degree
(36+) have much density in the lower part, and the box plot can also verify this. So it
seems like the relationship is not entirely linear. An interpretation of this is, that the
cars with the greatest degree are parked in the most popular areas, and the zone effect
kicks in. This is investigated further below.
==PAGE:62==
54
4 Data
Figure 4.11: (Left) Scatter plot of the time to reservation as a function of the degree
of the car upon parking. (Right) Box plot of fuel level in different bins
limited to 18 hours time to reservation with mean values marked as a
square.
4.6.6.1
Degree within Zones
As it was found in the analysis of the zones, and seen in Figure 4.10, the average vacancy
time varies a lot across zones. Combined with the analysis above, the correlation of
degree and vacancy time on a zone level is investigated. Here, the correlation between
the degree and vacancy time is calculated on a zone basis for all 256 zones. Doing this,
it is found that for 230 of the zones, the correlation with that zone is greater than the
overall average (and four has a greater negative correlation). The entire distribution is
shown in Figure 4.12 where it can be seen that the correlation in some zones reaches
above 0.5.
This trend is clear proof that a larger degree - i.e., more cars parked nearby - will lead
to longer vacancy times. By doing it on an individual zone level, the difference between
zones can be neglected, which is relevant as the zone analysis also found significant
differences. The takeaway from this is naturally clear: the better the cars are spread
out, the shorter vacancy times can be expected.
4.6.7
Weather
This part will include an overview of the included weather data as explained in Sec-
tion 4.3.1. First, the weather data on its own will be investigated before looking at it in
relation to the vacancy time of cars.
==PAGE:63==
4.6 Explorative Data Analysis
55
Figure 4.12: Correlation between degree and time to reservation for each zone sorted
from lowest to highest with the correlation across all zones showed in red.
4.6.7.1
Weather Variables
As it was mentioned in Section 4.3.1 the weather data is available on an hourly basis
throughout the two months. This leads to 1466 data points for each of the seven variables
(as one has to account for the switch to winter time). There are no missing values, and an
overview of the seven variables in the form of mean, standard deviation, and quartile set
is presented Table 4.9. The table reveals some information about the distributions in the
form of skewness and variation. As an example, it can be seen that the precipitation and
sunshine variables are highly skewed as their medians are 0 and the values from the 75th
percentile to max skyrockets. The difference in variation is also evident when looking at
the range of values and standard deviation. The pressure does not vary a lot comparing
the standard deviation to the mean compared to the other variables. However, this is
probably not a surprise for anyone who has looked at weather data before.
Variable
Temperature
Wind Speed
Precipitation
Sunshine
Pressure
Humidity
Clouds
mean
12.09
3.68
0.14
8.82
1012.87
82.78
61.15
std
3.63
1.92
0.60
17.60
8.33
11.85
37.34
min
-1.30
0.10
0.00
0.00
987.30
45.00
0.00
25%
10.40
2.30
0.00
0.00
1006.90
74.72
22.00
50%
12.60
3.60
0.00
0.00
1012.90
84.80
78.00
75%
14.30
4.90
0.00
4.70
1018.60
93.00
97.00
max
23.20
9.80
7.90
60.00
1031.70
99.40
100.00
Table 4.9: Mean, standard deviation and quartile set of the included weather variables.
An even more interesting metric to look at is the autocorrelation of the weather
==PAGE:64==
56
4 Data
variables. In an authentic setting - which will be replicated - one would only know the
weather at the current time with some forecast with unknown reliability. The greater the
autocorrelation is for a given variable, the more likely it is to stay constant and represent
the weather at pick-up time. The autocorrelation of the seven weather variables based
on one-hour lags is found in Table 4.10. It can be seen that the autocorrelation varies
a lot, and it is extremely strong for temperature and pressure while it is relatively low
for precipitation. Again, this does not come as a surprise as everyone has experienced
how precipitation can vary from hour to hour while the temperature rarely changes that
drastically. Regarding using these variables for predicting, there is a greater uncertainty
for the precipitation than the other variables.
Variable
Temperature
Wind Speed
Precipitation
Sunshine
Pressure
Humidity
Clouds
Autocorr.
0.9842
0.95534
0.5737
0.8047
0.9984
0.548
0.8195
Table 4.10: Auto correlation of weather variables based on one-hour lag.
4.6.7.2
Weather’s Impact on Vacancy Time
Looking at the weather variables’ relation to the vacancy time, the correlation matrix of
all eight variables is found in Table 4.11. The table does provide all the correlations, but
it is the first row/column that is the most interesting, as it contains the relation to the
vacancy time. It can quickly be noticed that no strong correlation appears in the data,
with the strongest correlation being -0.112 with the sunshine. Wind speed, humidity,
and temperature also look to have some effect. To get a slightly better overview of the
correlations, scatter plots between all the weather variables and time to reservation is
found in Figure 4.13. These plots verify that there is no strong correlation. However,
one can also suspect that there might be some stronger non-linear relations, though this
is not investigated further here.
Variable
Vacancy Time
Temperature
Wind Speed
Precipitation
Sunshine
Pressure
Humidity
Clouds
Vacancy Time
1.0000
-0.0989
-0.0807
-0.0065
-0.1119
0.0076
0.0793
-0.0102
Temperature
-0.0989
1.0000
0.3099
0.0312
0.1425
-0.1518
-0.1642
0.1414
Wind Speed
-0.0807
0.3099
1.0000
0.0629
0.1422
-0.2108
-0.3161
0.0467
Precipitation
-0.0065
0.0312
0.0629
1.0000
-0.1343
-0.2210
0.2529
0.2227
Sunshine
-0.1119
0.1425
0.1422
-0.1343
1.0000
0.2061
-0.4752
-0.5477
Pressure
0.0076
-0.1518
-0.2108
-0.2210
0.2061
1.0000
-0.3499
-0.2542
Humidity
0.0793
-0.1642
-0.3161
0.2529
-0.4752
-0.3499
1.0000
0.3807
Clouds
-0.0102
0.1414
0.0467
0.2227
-0.5477
-0.2542
0.3807
1.0000
Table 4.11: Correlation matrix between the weather variables and vacancy time.
==PAGE:65==
4.6 Explorative Data Analysis
57
Figure 4.13: Scatter plots of weather variables against time to reservation with regres-
sion line shown in red.
4.6.8
Distance to Station
As explained in Section 4.3.2 the distance to the nearest train station was calculated
for all parked cars. A short analysis of its effect on the vacancy time will be carried
out here. The correlation between the two variables is found to be 0.129, meaning that
the closer a car is to a station, the shorter vacancy time it is expected to have. As
it was discussed in Section 4.3.2 this can be interpreted as it is an advantage to be
close to a station as the car then can be used to drive the remaining part of a trip
that included a train beforehand. It is also important to consider where the density
of stations is closest, which is in the central part of Copenhagen due to the metro and
shorter distances between S-train stations. As it was seen in Figure 4.10 it is in general
in Inner Copenhagen that the average vacancy time is the lowest. The reason for this is
not known, but it is straightforward to suspect that it is not necessarily the distance to
the nearest station that is a key part of this.
To get a more in-depth view than just the correlation value, Figure 4.14 presents
the scatter plot between the distance to the nearest station and the vacancy time to the
left. The distance has been put into four different bins, and box plots are created to
the right. Especially from the box plot, it is easily seen that the expected vacancy time
grows as the distance from the nearest station grows. Again though, it is hard to know
what effects actually are causing this.
4.6.9
Sub Conclusion
At this point, it makes sense to do a quick summary of the explorative analysis. Even
though no machine learning has been carried out, the analysis above still gives great
insights into the data. Some key takeaways are that
• ShareNow’s credit for refueling program works, as cars with less fuel/battery are
slightly more popular.
• The introduction of differentiated prices on different cars makes sense - this data
does, though, not tell if the size of the differentiation is suﬀicient.
==PAGE:66==
58
4 Data
Figure 4.14: (Left) Scatter plot of the time to reservation as a function of the distance
to the nearest station. (Right) Box plot of distance to the nearest station
in different bins limited to 24 hours time to reservation with mean values
marked as squares.
• Geographic has a major impact on the popularity of cars, and ShareNow needs to
ensure a good supply in Inner Copenhagen as it is here, where the demand is the
greatest.
Naturally, this part has found more interesting insights from the data than the bullets
mentioned above, which is a relatively easy way to get information on the data. It is,
of course, also important to mention that these analyses almost only have looked at the
independent variables individually, but the hope is naturally that especially the neural
networks can find nested effects to help predict the time to reservation.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5
Applications
In Chapter 3 the theoretical background for graph neural networks was presented, in-
cluding feed-forward neural networks. Additionally, Section 3.3 presented some classic
statistical learning methods. Moreover, Chapter 4 presented all the available data and
how it was processed to obtain a dataset that can be used for modeling. This chapter
will outline how the theory will be applied to the data in practice. First, the overall goal
will be explained together with general information and common considerations that are
relevant across all methods. The methods will be split into three sections, where the
modeling for these will be presented individually. This is firstly the statistical learn-
ing methods, then simple feed-forward neural networks before lastly the graph neural
networks with all three modules from Section 3.2. It will be explained how they are
modeled and used in practice for all cases.
5.1
Overall Goal and Common
Considerations
In the section, the overall goal - from a result perspective - will be presented at first
together with the presentation of the scorings measures used. Following this, the consid-
erations of creating common training, validation, and test data will be presented before
the used hardware and software will be explained.
5.1.1
Problem Set-up
The reason for the multiple methods being mentioned above is to allow for benchmarking
the different graph neural networks against feed-forward neural networks and statistical
learning methods. A total of six different cases will be tried for all the methods, where
two of the pairs are on the same data. This means that the table found in Table 5.1
is what will be filled with results. The two scoring measures used will also be outlined
shortly, which will be the actual values that the table will be filled with. In the bullets
below the table, an explanation of the six different cases will be explained in the form
of which columns are included in each case. Please note that statistical is used as an
abbreviation of the statistical learning methods.
In all cases, multiple constructions will be explored as different kinds of statistical
learning methods and different complexity of the graph neural networks. From these
==PAGE:68==
60
5 Applications
initial investigations, the best models will be selected and run five times to minimize the
stochastic effect on the results. The r2 measure will define what model is the best. To
see how the models are programmed, the reader is advised to check out the GitHub.
Statistical
FFNN
GCN
GAT
MLPConv
No zones
Add zones
Add encoded zones
Add weather and dist. to station
All
All encoded zones
Table 5.1: Overview of result table to be filled out.
1. No Zones: Zones are excluded from the data as well as the external data. This
means that there are 9 available columns including fuel, weekend, the two trigono-
metric time variables, degree, and the four columns obtained by one-hot encoding
the engine variable.
2. Zones: Compared to above, the 256 zones are one-hot encoded and added for a
total of 265 columns.
3. Add encoded zones: Instead of adding all 256 zones individually, an encoding
of them is added in the form of one column containing the average pick-up time
in the training data (training data will be touched upon shortly) for a total of 10
columns.
4. Add weather and distance to station: Compared to the first case, the 7
weather variables as well as the distance to the nearest station are added, which
results in 17 columns.
5. All: Compared to the second case, the 7 weather variables as well as the distance
to the nearest station are added, which results in 273 columns.
6. All encoded zones: Compared to the third case, the 7 weather variables as well
as the distance to the nearest station are added, which results in 18 columns.
Using this palette of different cases, it becomes a bit easier to get an overview of where
models are strong and what predictors seem to be important for predictions.
5.1.1.1
Scoring Measures
To score the different models, two measures will be used. Primarily the coeﬀicient of
determination - also called r2 - will be used, which was presented as a loss function in
==PAGE:69==
5.1 Overall Goal and Common Considerations
61
(3.13). To reformulate it here and not as a loss function it is
r2 = 1 −SSres
SStot
= 1 −
∑
i(yi −fi)2
∑
i(yi −¯y)2 ,
(5.1)
where i is the index over observations. So r2 measures the amount of variance that the
model explains. Due to the squared part, very incorrect predictions will be penalized
harder. This is deemed desirable as the focus should be on the cars that in general has
very long vacancies. This can though also be too much in the sense that an error of 100 is
10,000 times worse than an error of 1. This is also the reason why extreme observations
were removed, as explained in Section 4.5, since these will have way too large impact on
the r2.
As an alternative measure, a classification measure was also set up. It was desired
to make a threshold to classify cars with long vacancy. This threshold was set based
on the hour of the day the car was parked as a constant time would not make sense
due to significant variations as seen in Figure 4.4. Therefore, the threshold is set to
twice the average vacancy time (in the training data, which will be touched upon in a
moment) of the hour that the car was parked. Of course, some randomness is introduced
when binarizing a regression problem, but this is an interesting secondary measure when
keeping the business case in mind as detecting cars with long vacancy is key.
The
F1-score will be used for this classification problem, which the harmonic mean of the
precision and recall. The precision is the positive predictive value, i.e. how many of the
predicted long vacancies are true long vacancies, which is given as
precision =
TP
TP + FP.
(5.2)
The recall, also called sensitivity, is the true positive rate, i.e. how many of the actual
long vacancies are found, and that is given as
recall =
TP
TP + FN.
(5.3)
The F1-score then becomes
F1-score = 2 · precision · recall
precision + recall =
TP
TP + 1
2(FP + FN).
(5.4)
So the F1-score is a way to measure if a model is good a detecting long vacancies without
missing too many nor misjudging too many.
5.1.2
Training, Validation and Test Data
The concept of training and test data has been mentioned a few times above.
The
procedure of splitting data for training and testing is very standard in machine learning,
which naturally also will be done here. In addition to these, a validation set will also be
==PAGE:70==
62
5 Applications
created, which is useful for the different neural networks as explained in Section 3.1.2.4.
The data will be randomly split with 60% for training, 20% for validation, and 20% for
testing stratified daily, meaning that the 60/20/20 split will be done on a daily level.
The remainder after splitting the daily data 3 : 1 : 1 will always be added to the training
data, so the validation and test data have the same size. The splits are sampled only
once, and this same split will then be used for all methods, so it is the same training,
validation, and test data that is used. This leads to less randomness compared to if the
test data was sampled individually, where one model could be unlucky and get more
diﬀicult observations. Doing the split at first can lead to a bias if the split should favor
a given method, but this is still deemed better than shuffling every time a model is run.
As a short note related to the F1-measure from above, the number of test observations
classified as long vacancy is 4,420.
In practice, this shuffling was done only on the indices and not the actual observations.
Following the procedure above, 61 splits were made as that was the number of available
days, where the indices for each day was collected. Another version was made that
contained the split for the complete data by adding the cumulative sum of observations
to the indices of the corresponding day to ensure it was shifted correctly.
5.1.3
Data Scaling
It was also desired to standardize the data in the same way for all methods as it is
generally a good idea, as mentioned in Chapter 3. As a standardization, it was attempted
to get all the domains to [0, 1]. For the one-hot encoded variables (and time variable),
this was already done, but for the remaining columns, the issue of using the complete
data itself to scale is that it will introduce a bias. It proved technically tricky for the
graph neural networks to use the training data for this due to how it was loaded in and
handled. Instead, it was used that approximate minimum and maximum values of the
remaining variables could be determined, which was done as follows.
• Fuel: Divide by 100 as it is known that the domain is [0, 100]
• Degree: Divide by 50 as this is known to be roughly the max value detected in
August 2019, and 0 has a natural meaning as a minimum.
• Distance to station: Divide by 5000 as this is known to be around the maximal
value based on the location on stations and the ShareNow zone.
0 also has a
natural meaning here as a minimum.
• Weather variables: The same time period from 2018 was extracted, and the
minimum and maximum value from the time period were used to scale. More
extreme values in 2019 will fall outside [0, 1], but it is not expected to be by a lot.
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Statistical Learning Methods
63
5.1.4
Hardware
At this point, it also makes sense to give a short overview of what kind of hardware
has been used as this is very central to reaching the overall goal of this thesis - and
set some limits. The preparatory work has been done on a MacBookPro with a 2 GHz
10th generation quad-core Intel i5 processor with 16 GB of LPDDR4X 3733 MHz RAM
available. For the more computational heave tasks as fitting the models, an external
Linux computer was used with a 2.2 GHz AMD Ryzen Threadripper 3960X 24 dual-
core processor with 128 GB of RAM available. Additionally, this machine had a GPU
available which is very advantageous for training neural networks as explained is [Sha20].
One NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3080 Ti with 12 GB of VRAM was used.
5.1.5
Software
All programming and experiments were carried out in Python 3 [VD09]. Different ex-
ternal libraries were used throughout the projects, which will be outlined below. The
entire purpose of them is not explained here, but most Python users should know these
libraries or at least heard of them.
• Pandas [tea20] was used for storing data sets and manipulating data.
• Numpy [Har+20] was used for many numerical computations.
• Matplotlib [Hun07] and Seaborn [Was21] has been used for data visualization.
• Scikit-learn [Ped+11] has been used for the statistical learning methods as well
as different scoring methods.
• Scipy [Vir+20] is used for scientific computing in the form of sparse matrices.
• Pytorch [Pas+19] was used for neural networks.
• Pytorch-geometric [FL19] was used for graph neural networks.
5.2
Statistical Learning Methods
In this thesis, four different statistical methods will be tried, which are the four methods
presented in Section 3.3. This section will first outline how the data was prepared for
these methods as well as how the modeling and optimization was carried out.
5.2.1
Sub-Data Creation
As mentioned in Section 4.4 each observation is a graph consisting of a dataset with
node attributes as well as an adjacency matrix. This graph structure is not used for the
statistical learning methods (nor the feed-forward neural networks). Therefore, the data
==PAGE:72==
64
5 Applications
can be scaled down massively by only extracting the target row of the dataset with node
attributes. Additionally, to allow for fairer comparison with the graph neural networks,
the degree of the target node is also added. That is simply calculated by summing the
row in the adjacency matrix corresponding to the target node. In that way, all the
needed data can be stored in one data frame.
5.2.2
Modeling
For this data, instead of using the training and validation sets presented in Section 5.1.2
directly for model selection, they will instead be merged, and 4-fold cross-validation will
be used on this combined data to find the best models. For info on cross-validation see
[HTF17, Chapter 7.10]. 4-fold cross-validation is used as it corresponds to the same size
of the validation data as for the neural networks.
The three methods bar the simple linear regression have hyperparameters to tune.
An overview of what parameters were tuned upon and what values were tried is given in
the list below. To see the default values of the parameters not optimized upon, see the
documentation of Scikit-learn at [Ped+11]. The same parameter set was tried for all six
cases. Ideally, more parameter tuning could have been done, but the fitting times grow
exponentially as all combinations are tried four times.
• Elastic Net: 10 values of α was tried at a log-spaced interval from 10−3 to 10−0.5,
while the L1 regularization rate was set at {0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 0.9, 1}.
• Random Forrest: The number of estimators tried was {100, 200, 300, 400, 500},
while the minimum number of samples in the leaf was {5, 10, 20, 30}.
• KNN: The attempted number of neighbors was {50, 100, 200, 300} while both
uniform and distance based weighting was also tried.
In the cross-validation, r2 was used as the model criterion. For each of six cases, the
best method will be extracted. With this method alone, the experiment will be repeated
five times to minimize stochastic impact.
5.3
Feed-forward Neural Networks
For the feed-forward neural networks, the data presented above in Section 5.2.1 could be
reused, as it is the same case as with the statistical learning methods, where it is only the
node’s own attributes that affect the prediction. Though compared with the statistical
learning methods, the hyperparameter tuning for neural networks can be an eternity
task. The network architecture can be tweaked by adding more layers and changing the
size of the layers. The parameters for the optimizer (as the learning rate) can be tweaked
to increase the chance of finding better weights and thus a better model. Introducing
regularization techniques as dropout adds additional hyperparameters to tweak upon.
Moreover, it is expensive to try stuff as it takes a significant amount of time to do one
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Feed-forward Neural Networks
65
run and evaluate that given architecture. Therefore, it has not been possible to do an
exhaustive exploration of all combinations for the six cases.
5.3.1
Methodology and Common Settings
Much experimentation has been done, and not all will be covered as it would be a mess
to structure, but the approach presented in the thesis will be based on all the initial
experimentation. This led to three different networks being tried in each of the six cases.
The best of these three models will be chosen for each case and then run five times. In
Table 5.2 the network structures for all cases are found, where the first number indicates
the number for nodes in the input layer, while the remaining corresponds to nodes in
hidden layers. The trivial ”1”, corresponding to the output node, is omitted in the table.
Dropout rates are also included in the networks varying between 0 and 0.3 primarily
based on the layer size, where larger dropouts rates are used for larger layers.
Large
Medium
Small
No zones
(9, 128, 64)
(9, 32, 16)
(9, 32)
Add zones
(265, 128, 64)
(265, 32, 16)
(265, 32)
Add encoded zones
(10, 128, 128, 64)
(10, 128, 64)
(10, 32, 16)
Add weather and dist. to station
(17, 128, 128, 64)
(17, 128, 64)
(17, 32, 32)
All
(273, 128, 64)
(273, 32, 16)
(273, 16, 16)
All encoded zones
(18, 128, 64)
(18, 32, 16)
(18, 16, 16)
Table 5.2: Overview of feed-forward neural network structures attempted. Note the
trivial 1 in the end for the output layer is omitted.
To return to the considerations relevant for neural networks, as presented in Sec-
tion 3.1.2, the thoughts and choices is presented below.
Activation Functions
In the end, the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) is the activation
function used in all cases. It did yield in general, the best results. Combinations of dif-
ferent activation functions for different layers was not really tried, but some combination
could possibly return better results in some cases.
Batch Size
Batch sizes of 512 were eventually used. Some experiments indicated that
larger batch sizes’ longer invested computing time could yield marginally better results.
The 512 was also the size used in most of the graph neural networks, where the available
VRAM was the limitation. So this allowed to mitigate this potential difference when
comparing the different networks.
Optimizer
The ADAM optimizer was used for all cases. A few different learning rates
were tried, but in the end, values between 0.0001 and 0.002 were used, where the smaller
networks had a greater learning rate. The values seemed to lead to a fair balance between
==PAGE:74==
66
5 Applications
actually improving without jumping too much. Weight Decay of 0.0001 was also used
for all cases with minimal exploration. The remaining parameters for the optimizer were
the default parameters.
Weight Initialization
In all cases, the weights were initialized with the Xavier-Glorot
Normal weights initialization as explained in Section 3.1.2.2. Additionally, all biases were
initialized with a value of 0.01.
Early Stopping
In all cases, early stopping was used with patience set at 20. This
value was based on a bit of experimentation, where it was found that often when 20
was hit, the probability of later improvements was very low. When early stopping is
included, the number of epochs should just be set at a suﬀiciently high level, so the early
stopping will terminate the optimization before reaching the number of epochs. A δ of
0 was also used, so all improvements are accepted.
Loss Function
As a loss function the r2-loss, which is shown in (3.13), is used for all
networks. This decision is made as that is the continuous criterion that will be used to
score the models.
5.4
Graph Neural Networks
Proceeding to the graph neural networks, a lot of the primary thoughts from the feed-
forward neural networks can be reapplied.
This also includes the discussion of the
eternity task even though adding the graph structure only gives even more tuning pos-
sibilities. The time of doing experiments is also much greater as the data preparation
mentioned below has to be carried out each time, and the number of calculations is
much greater, as they have to be calculated for all nodes in each graph (and remember
each observation corresponds to a graph).
The similarities to the feed-forward neural networks are intentional to ensure better
comparability. The ReLU activation function was the only one used, and the batch size
was also kept at 512 for 16 of the 18 cases (this will be elaborated upon). The ADAM
optimizer was also used in all cases, and all weights were initialized using Xavier-Glorot.
The same early stopping implementation was also used, and the r2 was used as loss
function.
5.4.1
Data Preparation
As the graph structure is now needed, the procedure explained in Section 5.2.1 cannot
be used. Instead, the processing is done for all observations in all graphs, including
calculating the degree. To minimize unnecessary calculations, the connected component
of the node in focus (the car that has just been parked) in the graph is extracted
as other nodes will never influence the node in focus.
The graph is then stored in
==PAGE:75==
5.4 Graph Neural Networks
67
pytorch-geometric data formats of quartets with the node attributes, edge indices,
edge weights, and response variable of the vacancy times. There are many graphs in
this problem and one prediction has to be made per graph, so there is such a quartet
for each observation. Using the data splits explained in Section 5.1.2 three lists of the
before mentioned quartets could be obtained. This was passed to pytorch-geometric’s
DataLoader which made it easy to use. This also merges all observations in a batch into
one graph in the following way:
A =


A1
...
An

,
X =


X1
...
Xn

,
Y =


Y1
...
Yn

.
(5.5)
By having the adjacency matrices in the diagonal, all nodes from different observa-
tions are unconnected. This ensures that they will have no impact on each-other, and
in this way, computations are way more effective.
To elaborate upon the statement of data preparation being carried out for each
experiment, it is because the prepared data is so heavy, as each observation includes the
before mention quartet. This means that it was not practically feasible to prepare the
data once, and then store it to be reloaded for later use as that includes loading it in
and out of memory. Multiple experiments on the same data (there is one type of data
for each of the six cases) can be carried out as the data is already stored in memory.
To put it into actual time, the data preparation alone takes 15-25 minutes based on the
case, so it is noticeable.
5.4.1.1
Masked Loss
One challenge with the graph neural networks concerning this problem is that the node
regression only should be carried out at one node per graph. Looking at (5.5) this means
that only one scalar per Y (remember it is a vector) should be included when calculating
the loss. With pytorch-geometric’s DataLoader this is though easily done as it returns
a vector indicating when a new observation starts. By subtracting 1 from all values in
this vector and adding the last element, it has a size equal to the batch size, and it can
extract all nodes that are in focus, and as such, the correct loss can be calculated.
5.4.2
Network architectures
For the architecture of the graph neural networks, some decisions were made before
starting experimenting to limit the possible models. The main choice was that there
should only be one layer of graph convolutions meaning that a node can only be affected
by its 1-hop neighbors.
Back in Section 4.4 the maximum distance of 1500 m was
decided of cars influencing each-other as the graphs are not explicit. Thus, only using
one graph layer ensures that only nodes within 1500 m affect each-other. This also limits
the number of possible network combinations. As discussed in Section 3.2.2.4 different
==PAGE:76==
68
5 Applications
aggregation schemes exist for the graph layers. Through initial experimentations, it
was found that both ’max’- and ’addition’ aggregation could learn valuable features.
With this information combined with more initial experimentations, a general pattern
was decided to be used for all graph neural networks. At first, there are three parallel
layers. One graph layer with ’max’ aggregation function, one graph layer with ’addition’
aggregation function and one local linear layer only on the node’s attribute.
These
outputs were then concatenated and passed through one additional hidden layer before
arriving at the output. This means that network architectures will be written as (I, 3 ·
Hg, Hl), where I in the number of input nodes, which is the same as in the feed-forward
networks.
Hg is the number of hidden neurons in each of the three parallel layers
(including the two graph layers), where the 3· ensures that the dimensions fit for the
hidden linear layer with Hl hidden neurons. This means that the three parallel layers
will have the same number of output neurons in all cases. As with the feed-forward
neural networks, the output dimension of 1 is omitted.
Below, elaborations of the specific architecture of the three different graph neural
networks will be given. Here, the same tactic as with the feed-forward network is applied,
where after initial experimentations (which is not covered here) three different network
sizes were chosen and attempted. Moreover, from the best of these, it was repeated five
times to account for statistical uncertainty of the results. Also, as in the feed-forward
neural networks, dropout rates are included to limit overfitting.
Graph Convolution Network
In Table 5.3 the network sizes of the graph convo-
lution networks are presented. For these networks, no additional decisions besides the
default settings were used.
Large
Medium
Small
No zones
(9, 3 · 64, 64)
(9, 3 · 32, 48)
(9, 3 · 16, 16)
Add zones
(265, 3 · 64, 64)
(265, 3 · 32, 48)
(265, 3 · 16, 16)
Add encoded zones
(10, 3 · 64, 64)
(10, 3 · 32, 48)
(10, 3 · 16, 16)
Add weather and dist. to station
(17, 3 · 64, 64)
(17, 3 · 32, 48)
(17, 3 · 16, 16)
All
(273, 3 · 64, 64)
(273, 3 · 32, 48)
(273, 3 · 16, 16)
All encoded zones
(18, 3 · 64, 64)
(18, 3 · 32, 48)
(17, 3 · 16, 16)
Table 5.3: Overview of graph convolution network structures attempted.
Note the
trivial 1 in the end for the output layer is omitted.
Graph Attention Network
In Table 5.4 the network sizes of the graph attention
networks are presented. Different head sizes were attempted but increasing it above 1
did not yield better results. One potential pitfall for the larger networks is that they
have to be scaled down, or the batch size has to be smaller to keep within the limits of
the hardware when increasing the number of heads.
==PAGE:77==
5.4 Graph Neural Networks
69
Large
Medium
Small
No zones
(9, 3 · 64, 64)
(9, 3 · 32, 48)
(9, 3 · 16, 16)
Add zones
(265, 3 · 64, 64)
(265, 3 · 32, 48)
(265, 3 · 16, 16)
Add encoded zones
(10, 3 · 64, 64)
(10, 3 · 32, 48)
(10, 3 · 16, 16)
Add weather and dist. to station
(17, 3 · 64, 64)
(17, 3 · 32, 48)
(17, 3 · 16, 16)
All
(273, 3 · 64, 64)
(273, 3 · 32, 48)
(273, 3 · 16, 16)
All encoded zones
(18, 3 · 64, 64)
(18, 3 · 32, 48)
(17, 3 · 16, 16)
Table 5.4: Overview of graph attention network structures attempted. Note the trivial
1 in the end for the output layer is omitted.
MLP Convolution Network
The mathematic foundation for the MLP Convolution
was presented in Section 3.2.2.3. This is not a part of pytorch-geometric why the
module had to be implemented. The Python implementation is shown in Listing 5.1.
1
import torch.nn as nn
2
from torch_geometric.nn import Sequential , MessagePassing , Linear
3
class MLPConv(MessagePassing):
4
def __init__(self, in_channels , out_channels , aggr):
5
super().__init__(aggr=aggr)
6
self.mlp = nn.Sequential(nn.Linear(2 * in_channels , out_channels
),
7
nn.ReLU(),
8
nn.Linear(out_channels , out_channels))
9
10
def forward(self, x, edge_index , edge_weight):
11
return self.propagate(edge_index , x=x, edge_weight=edge_weight)
12
13
def message(self, x_i, x_j, edge_weight):
14
tmp = torch.cat([x_i, x_j], dim=1)
15
return edge_weight.view(-1, 1) * self.mlp(tmp)
Listing 5.1: Python implementation of MLPConv built upon Pytorch-geometric.
In Table 5.5 the network sizes of the MLP convolution networks are presented. For
the large cases with the one-hot encoded zones, the network had to be scaled down to
ensure the model could fit in the GPU. Additionally, besides scaling down the model
the batch size was also reduced from 512 to 128 in these two cases.
==PAGE:78==
70
5 Applications
Large
Medium
Small
No zones
(9, 3 · 64, 64)
(9, 3 · 32, 48)
(9, 3 · 16, 16)
Add zones
(265, 3 · 16, 16)
(265, 3 · 12, 16)
(265, 3 · 8, 12)
Add encoded zones
(10, 3 · 64, 64)
(10, 3 · 32, 48)
(10, 3 · 16, 16)
Add weather and dist. to station
(17, 3 · 64, 64)
(17, 3 · 32, 48)
(17, 3 · 16, 16)
All
(273, 3 · 16, 16)
(273, 3 · 12, 12)
(273, 3 · 8, 12)
All encoded zones
(18, 3 · 64, 64)
(18, 3 · 32, 48)
(17, 3 · 16, 16)
Table 5.5: Overview of MLP convolution network structures attempted. Note the triv-
ial 1 in the end for the output layer is omitted.
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 6
Results
In this chapter, the results of the methods and applications explained in Chapter 5
will be presented. The chapter will follow a top-down structure, where a summary of
the results will be given at first. The discussion and implication of the results will be
presented in the next chapter, while this chapter only focuses on presenting the results.
After the summary, more in-depth results for the three types of models will be given.
This structure follows Chapter 5 in parallel, where the statistical learning methods will
be presented first before the feed-forward neural networks, and lastly, the three graph
neural networks.
6.1
Summary
As mentioned in Chapter 5 the five methods were first tried with different settings (or
different methods in the case of the statistical learning), and the best were selected and
repeated five times. The average coeﬀicient of determination, r2, in percent with stan-
dard deviation across these five runs is found in Table 6.1. Moreover, the corresponding
F1 scores are shown in Table 6.2. Random forest was the best statistical method, where
RF abbreviates it. The best model in each case has been highlighted with boldface for
both measurements. For layout purposes, these numbers have been rounded, but more
precision is shown in the following section, where there is a deep dive on the different
methods. Additionally, Appendix A shows all the five results - for all methods - that
have been used to obtain the average and standard deviation.
r2(%)
RF
FFNN
GCN
GAT
MLPConv
No zones
11.8 ± 0.02
11.6 ± 0.11
16.5 ± 0.16
16.4 ± 0.21
16.8 ± 0.06
Add zones
19.7 ± 0.03
23.8 ± 0.06
24.0 ± 0.19
23.8 ± 0.11
23.8 ± 0.26
Add encoded zones
23.5 ± 0.02
21.3 ± 0.36
22.5 ± 0.59
23.1 ± 0.29
23.1 ± 0.10
Add we. & dist. to st.
16.9 ± 0.04
14.5 ± 0.16
17.8 ± 0.14
17.7 ± 0.41
17.8 ± 0.16
All
22.0 ± 0.04
23.8 ± 0.10
24.4 ± 0.23
24.0 ± 0.08
24.0 ± 0.14
All encoded zones
24.9 ± 0.03
21.6 ± 0.32
23.2 ± 0.17
23.2 ± 0.23
23.1 ± 0.23
Table 6.1: Overview of the average r2 in percent score across five runs of the best
models in each case with ± indicating one standard deviation. Best model
is highlighted with boldface. The results with more decimal spots are found
later in the chapter under the specific methods. Weather is abbreviated
”we.” and station ”st.”.
==PAGE:80==
72
6 Results
F1
RF
FFNN
GCN
GAT
MLPConv
No zones
0.11 ± 0.001
0.09 ± 0.005
0.14 ± 0.011
0.13 ± 0.015
0.16 ± 0.016
Add zones
0.27 ± 0.001
0.29 ± 0.005
0.29 ± 0.008
0.29 ± 0.014
0.26 ± 0.012
Add encoded zones
0.29 ± 0.002
0.23 ± 0.008
0.24 ± 0.013
0.25 ± 0.009
0.25 ± 0.008
Add we. & dist. to st.
0.20 ± 0.005
0.09 ± 0.007
0.16 ± 0.010
0.18 ± 0.008
0.19 ± 0.014
All
0.30 ± 0.002
0.28 ± 0.002
0.30 ± 0.012
0.28 ± 0.008
0.28 ± 0.007
All encoded zones
0.31 ± 0.001
0.23 ± 0.006
0.26 ± 0.013
0.26 ± 0.011
0.28 ± 0.011
Table 6.2: Overview of the average F1 score across five runs of the best models in
each case with ± indicating one standard deviation. The results with more
decimal spots are found later in the chapter under the specific methods.
Best model is highlighted with boldface. Weather is abbreviated ”we.” and
station ”st.”.
Looking at the r2 scores from the top, it is apparent that the graph structure has
superior performance with no zones. All three graph neural networks have performances
in the mid 16, while both the random forest and the feed-forward neural network are
comparable in the mid to high 11. The story is the same in the F1 scores even though
some larger differences are seen between the graph neural networks, where the MLP-
Conv is even more superior than with r2. With the uncertainty, the numbers can not
be rejected to be that different. As there are no zones in the data, no geographical
information is available (besides the degree). In that case, it can be concluded that the
information of neighboring cars enhances the predictive performance.
This advantage is though neutralized when adding the zones. Recall that case 2 and
3 - as with case 5 and 6 - are with the same predictors, where the only difference is if
the zones are one-hot encoded or encoded with one variable containing the training zone
average. The predictive performance is enhanced remarkably by adding the zones alone,
especially for the random forest and feed-forward neural network that almost catches up
to the graph neural networks. Thus, by introducing the zone’s graphical information, a
lot of the information from the graph structures is neutralized. The discrepancy between
using the r2 and F1 as measure also becomes apparent here, but the numbers are also
very close.
Case 2 and 3 also reveal how neural networks prefer the sparse one-hot
encoding of the zones variables. The random forest obtains much better performance
with the mean-encoded zone variable, limiting the number of predictors.
The discrepancy between r1 and F1 is also apparent in the 4th case, where the weather
and distance to the nearest train station are added. The random forest obtains the best
F1 score even though the graph neural networks again perform the best based on r2.
The deltas compared to case 1 shows that the random forest has the most considerable
improvement by adding the weather and distance to the nearest station. The neural
networks also see improvements but not as much.
Comparing cases 5 and 6 with cases 2 and 3, respectively, much can be repeated from
above, where it again can be concluded that the random forest prefers fewer predictors
(This can be due to the sampling of predictors). Comparing the differences, it becomes
clear that the random forest utilizes the weather and distance to the nearest train station.
The four neural networks see improvement from case 2 to 5 of 0-0.4 percentage points
==PAGE:81==
6.2 Statistical Learning Methods
73
while the random forest increases by 1.4 percentage points. This also results in the
random forest being the best method obtaining an r2 of 24.9% in case 6 with an F1 of
0.31, while the best graph neural network is the graph convolution network with 24.4%.
Though the graph neural networks do outperform the more simple feed-forward neural
network, so some predictive performance is obtained by utilizing the graph structure.
As a short end-note, the random forest is also quite clearly the method with the least
uncertainty for both the r2 and F1, which also is advantageous. The standard deviations
of the neural networks seem more unstructured, but the feed-forward neural network has
a lower standard deviation for the F1 compared to the graph neural networks.
6.2
Statistical Learning Methods
For the statistical learning methods the obtained r2 scores of the test set can be found
in Table 6.3, while the F1 scores is presented in Table 6.4. For layout purposes, the
method names have been abbreviated. The best model in each has been highlighted in
boldface, and it quickly becomes apparent that the Random Forest is the superior of
these methods. Therefore, it is also this method that will be used as the benchmark
from the statistical learning methods. So, as mentioned earlier, it was run five times,
and those results are found in Table 6.5. The relevant comments to the method’s results
have already been made above, but it makes sense to note that the KNN is quite clearly
between the random forest and the linear model (even though there is no uncertainty
to confirm how clear this is.) This can be interpreted as the problem ha significant
non-linearities, since the non-linear methods are best.
LM
EN
RF
KNN
No zones
8.97%
8.97%
11.77%
10.77%
Add zones
19.16%
18.71%
19.71%
19.42%
Add encoded zones
18.44%
18.44%
23.41%
20.36%
Add weather and dist. to station
11.06%
11.06%
16.89%
11.89%
All
19.23%
18.75%
22.08%
19.83%
All encoded zones
18.53%
18.53%
24.86%
20.11%
Table 6.3: Overview of r2 results of the statistical learning methods. The best method
in each row has been boldfaced.
6.2.1
Preferred Hyperparameters
In Section 5.2.2 an overview of the attempted hyperparameters for each model was
presented. Naturally, there were no for linear regressions. The elastic net always wanted
to minimize α as much as possible except in case 4 when weather and distance to the
nearest station are added - here, the second lower is prepared. In all cases, l1-ratio= 1,
so it simplifies to a Lasso. With the low α, the effect of regualization is minimal. It
==PAGE:82==
74
6 Results
LM
EN
RF
KNN
No zones
0.00
0.00
0.11
0.01
Add zones
0.21
0.18
0.27
0.23
Add encoded zones
0.21
0.21
0.28
0.21
Add weather and dist. to station
0.05
0.04
0.20
0.01
All
0.22
0.18
0.30
0.22
All encoded zones
0.22
0.22
0.31
0.20
Table 6.4: Overview of F1-scores of the statistical learning methods.
r2
F1
No Zones
11.763% ± 0.015%
0.1114 ± 0.0006
Add zones
19.706% ± 0.027%
0.2739 ± 0.0005
Add encoded zones
23.450% ± 0.018%
0.2859 ± 0.0015
Add weather and dist. to station
16.852% ± 0.038%
0.1959 ± 0.0049
All
22.017% ± 0.039%
0.3016 ± 0.0019
All encoded zones
24.866% ± 0.026%
0.3118 ± 0.0013
Table 6.5: Overview of the average r2 and F1-score across five runs of the Random
Forrest with ± indicating one standard deviation. The best method in each
row has been boldfaced.
can also be seen from the results, where the linear regression actually outperforms the
elastic net on the test data, meaning regularization is hurting the model.
The K nearest neighbors prefer the distance-based weighting with 50 or 100 neighbors
in all cases except the first with no zones, where the best model used 300 neighbors for
estimations.
With the random forest, the range of hyperparameters across the five runs in all six
cases is found in Table 6.6. As a general pattern, it prefers many estimators. It could
be debated that even higher numbers should have been attempted. However, fitting
times also increased with more estimators, and the 6×5 fits already required more than
24 hours of parallelized computing. For the two cases with one-hot encoded zones, the
model also preferred having fewer minimum samples per leaf.
# Estimators
min. samples leaf
No Zones
500
30
Add zones
400-500
5
Add encoded zones
300-500
30
Add weather and dist. to station
400-500
20-30
All
300-500
5
All encoded zones
400-500
10
Table 6.6: Range of hyperparameters in the five runs of the six cases using the random
forest method.
==PAGE:83==
6.3 Feed-Forward Neural Networks
75
6.3
Feed-Forward Neural Networks
The r2 scores obtained using the feed-forward neural networks is found in Table 6.7,
and the F1 scores are in Table 6.8. The best model has been highlighted in boldface,
and it can be seen that either the large or medium network architecture is preferred -
no major differences are seen between the three sizes in any case. For the fourth case,
where weather and distance to the nearest station are added, there is a discrepancy
between the best model based on the scoring measure. As mentioned, the r2 is though
the decider. Interestingly enough, for the two cases without zones, the medium network
outperforms the large one, so an indication from this can be that the additional neurons
can be used to extract more information from the zones.
Large
Medium
Small
No zones
11.28%
11.47%
11.11%
Add zones
23.76%
23.63%
23.20%
Add encoded zones
22.04%
21.34%
20.67%
Add weather and dist. to station
13.99%
14.50%
14.25%
All
23.83%
23.71%
23.65%
All encoded zones
22.10%
21.22%
20.89%
Table 6.7: Overview of r2 results of the feed-forward neural networks.
Large
Medium
Small
No zones
0.06
0.08
0.04
Add zones
0.29
0.26
0.24
Add encoded zones
0.25
0.23
0.21
Add weather and dist. to station
0.11
0.09
0.08
All
0.30
0.28
0.26
All encoded zones
0.24
0.22
0.22
Table 6.8: Overview of F1-scores of the feed-forward neural networks.
The results of the five reruns of the best feed-forward neural networks are presented
in Table 6.9. From the F1 score of the fourth case, the standard deviation of 0.0066
indicates that it is relatively unlikely to reach the same F1 score that the large network
managed.
Comparing case 2 with 5 and 3 with 6 respectively (where weather and
distance to station are added), it can be seen that the gains in r2 are neglectable, and
the F1 scores actually drop slightly. When taking the standard deviation into account, it
is not possible to state that there is an improvement. Between cases 1 and 4 a difference
of almost 3 percentage points is seen for the r2, so the predictive ability is improved
with the weather and distance to the nearest station. This is though overwhelmed by
adding the zones. The F1 scores are practically the same, so the observations around
the threshold are not predicted better.
==PAGE:84==
76
6 Results
r2
F1
No Zones
11.608% ± 0.113%
0.0878 ± 0.0053
Add zones
23.795% ± 0.065%
0.2935 ± 0.0048
Add encoded zones
21.281% ± 0.358%
0.2320 ± 0.0079
Add weather and dist. to station
14.493% ± 0.159%
0.0872 ± 0.0066
All
23.826% ± 0.101%
0.2761 ± 0.0024
All encoded zones
21.463% ± 0.321%
0.2316 ± 0.0057
Table 6.9: Overview of the average r2 and F1-score across five runs of the best feed-
forward neural networks with ± indicating one standard deviation.
6.4
Graph Neural Networks
For the three graph neural networks, the results will be presented individually in the
order they were introduced in Section 5.4. As a common comment, no major differences
are seen between the three network sizes in any type of network and case, as it also was
the case for the feed-forward neural networks. The picks are more fine-tuning. The 54
convergence graphs (six cases with three network types and three network sizes) during
optimization are shown in Appendix B for the interested reader.
6.4.1
Graph Convolution Network
The results from the first three runs with different network sizes of the graph convolution
network are seen in Table 6.10 and Table 6.11. Some discrepancy is seen between the r2
and F1 scores but with the minor variations that are not totally unexpected. In cases
5 and 6, where all variables are used, the larger networks are preferred, which can be
interpreted as the larger network finding some intercorrelations between the zones and
the weather and distance to the nearest station, which is not possible for the smaller
networks.
It is also interesting that the medium network loses very little predictive
performance from cases 2 to 5 even though, in theory, this should not happen as the
two cases are nested. This can be a result of stochastic part of the optimization as the
difference is so tiny.
Large
Medium
Small
No zones
16.26%
16.06%
15.62%
Add zones
23.84%
24.08%
23.76%
Add encoded zones
22.69%
22.89%
22.94%
Add weather and dist. to station
17.80%
17.89%
16.89%
All
24.61%
23.91%
23.95%
All encoded zones
23.52%
23.21%
23.06%
Table 6.10: Overview of r2 results of the GCN graph neural networks.
==PAGE:85==
6.4 Graph Neural Networks
77
Large
Medium
Small
No zones
0.12
0.12
0.09
Add zones
0.31
0.30
0.27
Add encoded zones
0.23
0.24
0.26
Add weather and dist. to station
0.16
0.17
0.15
All
0.28
0.28
0.30
All encoded zones
0.26
0.26
0.25
Table 6.11: Overview of F1-scores of the GCN graph neural networks.
Regarding tiny differences, they are easier to assess with uncertainty. This is included
in Table 6.12 as explained previously. As it can be seen, the uncertainty is relatively
large in some cases - especially in the third for r2, where a larger network might have
been more consistent. The fluctuations in the F1 scores are also noticeable, but this is
to be expected due to the thresholding.
r2
F1
No Zones
16.514% ± 0.156%
0.1392 ± 0.0112
Add zones
24.039% ± 0.188%
0.2900 ± 0.0080
Add encoded zones
22.451% ± 0.594%
0.2389 ± 0.0130
Add weather and dist. to station
17.759% ± 0.143%
0.1579 ± 0.0097
All
24.393% ± 0.233%
0.2989 ± 0.0119
All encoded zones
23.216% ± 0.166%
0.2620 ± 0.0126
Table 6.12: Overview of the average r2 and F1-score across five runs of the best GCN
graph neural networks with ± indicating one standard deviation.
6.4.2
Graph Attention Network
Once again, the results of the three first runs in presented firstly, which is done in
Table 6.13 and Table 6.14. The graph attention networks do, in general, prefer the
larger networks, and in all cases, bar the fifth, the difference between the large and
medium is minimal for both the r2 and F1 score.
When looking at the uncertainty
across the five runs of the selected model in Table 6.15 the differences are confirmed to
be very small as they are less than one standard deviation in four of the cases. Also,
accounting for the uncertainty in the graph attention networks, the weather and distance
to the nearest station are neglectable when the zones are included using both scoring
measures. The improvement in F1 from cases 1 to 4 is though noticeable.
==PAGE:86==
78
6 Results
Large
Medium
Small
No zones
16.44%
16.48%
16.23%
Add zones
23.95%
23.73%
23.34%
Add encoded zones
23.38%
23.31%
22.56%
Add weather and dist. to station
18.18%
18.21%
17.13%
All
24.16%
23.58%
23.66%
All encoded zones
23.43%
23.26%
22.26%
Table 6.13: Overview of r2 results of the GAT graph neural networks.
Large
Medium
Small
No zones
0.14
0.13
0.13
Add zones
0.29
0.27
0.27
Add encoded zones
0.27
0.26
0.23
Add weather and dist. to station
0.16
0.18
0.15
All
0.30
0.27
0.26
All encoded zones
0.26
0.26
0.22
Table 6.14: Overview of F1-scores of the GAT graph neural networks.
r2
F1
No Zones
16.393% ± 0.214%
0.1288 ± 0.0151
Add zones
23.800% ± 0.113%
0.2855 ± 0.0144
Add encoded zones
23.102% ± 0.290%
0.2522 ± 0.0094
Add weather and dist. to station
17.696% ± 0.412%
0.1749 ± 0.0077
All
23.968% ± 0.081%
0.2831 ± 0.0080
All encoded zones
23.174% ± 0.226%
0.2616 ± 0.0114
Table 6.15: Overview of the average r2 and F1-score across five runs of the best GAT
graph neural networks with ± indicating one standard deviation.
6.4.3
MLP Convolution
The MLP convolution results of the networks with different sizes, seen in Table 6.16 and
Table 6.17, tell the same story that has been mentioned already for the graph convolution
networks and graph attention networks. The similarities between the r2 and F1 are not
very profound here. However, the uncertainties shown in Table 6.18 explain that this
is not unlikely to be due to the random fluctuations - especially of the F1 score. As
a common denominator for the three graph neural networks, they prefer the medium
network in the fourth case while cases 5 and 6 - will all variables - prefer the largest
network. Recall that for MLPConv, the largest network had to be scaled down due to
==PAGE:87==
6.4 Graph Neural Networks
79
hardware reasons. Again, the gains by adding the weather and distance to the nearest
station are unnoticeable when the zones are also included in the data.
Large
Medium
Small
No zones
17.00%
16.80%
16.79%
Add zones
23.78%
24.14%
24.10%
Add encoded zones
23.21%
23.30%
22.93%
Add weather and dist. to station
17.08%
17.32%
17.37%
All
24.57%
24.39%
23.78%
All encoded zones
23.05%
22.88%
22.49%
Table 6.16: Overview of r2 results of the MLPConv graph neural networks.
Large
Medium
Small
No zones
0.16
0.16
0.14
Add zones
0.25
0.28
0.29
Add encoded zones
0.26
0.26
0.25
Add weather and dist. to station
0.15
0.15
0.13
All
0.30
0.29
0.26
All encoded zones
0.27
0.28
0.24
Table 6.17: Overview of F1-scores of the MLPConv graph neural networks.
r2
F1
No Zones
16.811% ± 0.058%
0.1630 ± 0.0163
Add zones
23.790% ± 0.258%
0.2649 ± 0.0120
Add encoded zones
23.117% ± 0.102%
0.2465 ± 0.0080
Add weather and dist. to station
17.804% ± 0.163%
0.1849 ± 0.0143
All
24.030% ± 0.138%
0.2767 ± 0.0071
All encoded zones
23.045% ± 0.225%
0.2772 ± 0.0110
Table 6.18: Overview of the average r2 and F1-score across five runs of the best MLP-
Conv graph neural networks with ± indicating one standard deviation.
==PAGE:88==
80
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
The results obtained in this thesis have already been interpreted and initially discussed
in the previous chapter.
In this chapter, a step back will be taken, looking at the
implications and limitations of the used methodology in a bigger picture before finally
presenting an overview of possible future work.
This thesis has been carried out with two goals/contributions in mind. First, the
relatively new field of graph neural networks has been applied and tested in a new setting
in the form of demand prediction in free-float car-sharing, which has not been done
before. It is naturally always of interest from an academia point of view to investigate
the applications of new methods. As the thesis has been made using data from the
free-float car-sharing provider ShareNow, successful results can have business potential
for them. This is discussed later in a specific section on the business case.
Looking at the results, a test r2 of greater than 25% were not reached. The question
of what is a good r2 is, of course, very topic-dependent. In many cases, an r2 of only
24.9% (best results) is not very good, while in cases like financial markets prediction, it
could make you very rich. The problem of predicting car vacancy times is though also
challenging, as this problem can be seen as sharing the trait of constant hazard with
exponential decay. What is meant by that is that there are a lot of external factors -
that never can be modeled - influencing the actual pick-ups. For explanation reasons,
consider the case of the IKEA satellite zone in Gentofte, which was shortly mentioned in
Section 4.6.5.1. To predict accurate pick-up times, one would have to know how many
potential customers are shopping at the moment. However, for these shoppers, it is also
necessary to know their purpose in the sense of how much they are purchasing. This will
affect their possible transport options when leaving IKEA. Is it something small, public
transport is a viable option. If they have purchased a lot, they might be willing to pay
the premium of a larger ShareNow car, should multiple types be available. This story is
a way to illustrate the diﬀiculty of modeling on a very granular level, like a single car, in
transport compared to aggregating demand. Predicting the number of passengers in a
single bus will also be harder for high-frequency bus routes than predicting the aggregate
demand during the morning rush hour.
Another source of error - or lacking information - is that static graphs are used in
this project which is not a true representation of reality. In the IKEA problem above, it
is not unlikely that a car could be parked closer to the exit than other available cars. At
that point, the prediction for the other cars has already been made, but with the new
car, they are expected to become less popular. The graph setting should be dynamic in
an authentic setting, where updates are made every time an action occurs.
It is always also relevant to discuss data quality.
Defining good data is not uni-
==PAGE:90==
82
7 Discussion
versal and very case dependent, but as it was discussed throughout Chapter 4 issues
were detected. It would especially have been great to have more knowledge of what
happened when cars’ location changed between back-to-back trips. Moreover, a better
understanding of ”non-customer” cases could have improved the filtering. As discussed
in Section 4.2 this problem had a specific challenge as removing observations affected
other observations due to the graph structure. Therefore, other fixes were used that
undoubtedly were very approximate in many cases.
Looking more specifically at the results, the random forest ended up with the best
performance, which is a bit boring. It should, though, not be forgotten that random
forest also is a very powerful and complex method. It also proved to outperform the other
statistical learning methods quite significantly. See e.g. [Kho18] for a more thorough
discussion of why random forest is an excellent method. It should also be stated, that if
the mean encoding of the zone had not been tried, then the results would have led to a
different conclusion. Moreover, it would not be surprising if graph neural networks can
outperform a random forest in the future - this potential is discussed more in the future
work section.
On a more comparative note and a proof of the potential, the graph neural networks
outperformed the feed-forward neural networks quite clearly in all cases besides the
second one.
So they can take advantage of the graph structure and information of
nearby cars.
7.1
Business Case
The source of the problem this thesis has been centered around comes from ShareNow,
but it is relevant to all free-float car-sharing companies.
The value of knowing car
vacancy times was stated back in Section 2.1. The central question from ShareNow’s
perspective is naturally if the obtained results in this thesis can improve the company’s
profitability. The suﬀicient information is though not available to assess this accurately.
If this question should be answered, knowledge of ShareNow’s profit- and cost structure
is necessary. As mentioned in Section 4.1.1 the revenue numbers are incorrect in this
data, making it impossible to assign a value to a trip. Moreover, the expected cost
should be known so the bottom line for a trip can be estimated. This should then be
compared with yet another unknown variable in the form of the cost of moving the car,
which is presumed to be primarily labor costs, as labor in Denmark is expensive.
As a qualitative guess, the results obtained in this thesis are not good enough to be
implemented at ShareNow. This is based on a combination of the predictive power of
the models as well the presumed cost of moving cars. The predictive power has already
been discussed above. Judging by Figure 4.10, it should, in most cases, be cars parked
in satellite zones that should be moved. This is expensive as one employee would have
to go there and drive the car to a high-demand area, which will often be in central
Copenhagen. ShareNow would have to be very confident of a very long vacancy time
before this investment would make sense, and the models from this thesis cannot be said
==PAGE:91==
7.2 Future Work
83
to provide very high certainty.
It should, though, be stated that there might be a potential in using these models
to provide drop-off locations for cars after they have been out of service, as they have
to be moved regardless in this case. Here, some variable penalizing long drives should
then ideally be introduced.
7.2
Future Work
Relating to the initial discussion of the potential of graph neural networks, it is obvious
to try to fit the graph neural networks on even more powerful computers. This will allow
for more complex graph neural networks and utilize more of the available data. Recall
that only two months of data were used for the models in this thesis.
Along the same lines - and as mentioned in this thesis - modeling (graph) neural
networks is an eternity task, and this can naturally be continued. Pytorch-geometric
also includes tons of different modules that can be explored further. Improvements to
the MLPConv could also be tried, like encoding the edge weight with the node features.
Additionally, Pytorch-geometric-temporal [Roz+21] is a new Python library that
might be able to model the dynamic elements of the graphs, which also could potentially
improve performance.
Another relevant point is the zone, which was a key predictor, as seen in the results.
In this thesis, two different handling methods were used, where these two methods
could be seen as being of opposite sides of a spectrum. The zone can potentially be an
even better predictor by using explicit embeddings based on demographics, geography,
usage, etc.
This means that each zone should be mapped to several columns with
this information. Additionally, this will make it easier to assess the potential demand
of adding new areas as this information should already be available. This stands in
contrast to the used methods in this thesis, which requires zones with training data.
Another variable that can be used differently is the distance to the nearest train sta-
tion. In this thesis, it was encoded as a node attribute, but as geographical information
is available, it can also be modeled as a node of a different type. This could also be done
with other geographic points of interest, which might be a better, but more complex,
way of including these external variables.
Regarding the creation of the graph, edge weights are now based on distances as
the crow flies. This can be improved, where the walking distance should be used. An
extreme case is that a pair of cars could right now have a high weight between them
even though they are parked on opposite sides of Copenhagen Harbor.
The methods used (bar the inferior statistical learning methods) in this thesis are no-
toriously known for being black box models that are hard to interpret and have low inter-
pretability. Shapley Additive Explanations (SHAP) is an algorithm to reverse-engineer
the output of a predictive model, and it is introduced in [LL17]. Using this - or any other
method of untangling black box models - could be interesting to understand better how
the different predictors affect the predicted vacancy time.
==PAGE:92==
84
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to introduce graph neural networks from a theoretical standpoint and
apply them in practice. From the theoretical perspective, this thesis explained graph
theory and simple neural networks as these subjects are the foundation of graph neural
networks. Following this foundation, the basics of graph neural networks were given
before presenting three different approaches for propagation in graph neural networks.
The first was the spectral method of graph convolution network. The second was the
graph attention network, which is a spatial method. Thirdly, a method was implemented,
referred to as MLP Convolution, which embedded the target node and neighboring node
using a feed-forward neural network. Additionally, the theoretical section also briefly
introduced some statistical learning methods.
The problem that the methods were applied to was the car vacancy time problem.
The problem and why it was relevant was explained, and it comes from the free-float
car-sharing provider ShareNow, who also has provided the data for this thesis. The
entire processing of the data was given, and a presentation of external data that was
used. A thorough explorative analysis was also provided, where some key-take away was
that ShareNow’s credit for refueling program works, differentiated prices for different
cars makes sense, and geography has a major impact on the popularity of cars.
Then the actual machine learning came, where an explanation of how the problem
was tackled in practice was provided. That included presenting the scoring measures,
how the data was handled and scaled as well as how the different methods were carried
out, and what considerations were made. Six different cases based on what predictors
were used were also introduced, where all models were to be attempted on all cases. An
overview of the software and hardware used was also provided.
Looking at the results, in the case with all predictors, the best model was the random
forest that marginally outperformed the graph convolution network, where it obtained a
r2 of 24.9% and an F1 score of 0.31. The graph neural networks did, in general, perform
better than the more comparative feed-forward neural network. In cases where no zone
information was included, the graph neural networks were superior.
Lastly, a discussion was given that covered some of the potential issues that led to
the conclusion that graph neural networks could not outperform random forest for this
problem. The business case was also discussed explicitly before possible future work
within the field, and this problem was suggested.
==PAGE:94==
86
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX A
All Results
In this appendix, all the five repetitions results for each method in all cases are found.
It is these numbers that the averages and standard deviations in Table 6.1 and Table 6.2
are based upon.
A.1
Random Forest
r2(%)
1
2
3
4
5
No Zones
11.783
11.767
11.775
11.744
11.748
Add zones
19.691
19.733
19.743
19.686
19.678
Add encoded zones
23.424
23.432
23.463
23.466
23.465
Add weather and dist. to station
16.779
16.865
16.892
16.858
16.865
All
22.036
21.992
22.033
22.069
21.957
All encoded zones
24.854
24.833
24.850
24.897
24.895
Table A.1: Overview of the r2 score in percent from five runs of the random forest.
f1
1
2
3
4
5
No Zones
0.1119
0.1115
0.1111
0.1104
0.1119
Add zones
0.2746
0.2733
0.2734
0.2745
0.2740
Add encoded zones
0.2882
0.2851
0.2850
0.2841
0.2869
Add weather and dist. to station
0.1862
0.1972
0.2000
0.1988
0.1974
All
0.3046
0.2999
0.2999
0.3005
0.3029
All encoded zones
0.3116
0.3122
0.3141
0.3106
0.3103
Table A.2: Overview of the f1 score from five runs of the random forest.
==PAGE:96==
88
A All Results
A.2
Feed-forward Neural Network
r2(%)
1
2
3
4
5
No Zones
11.717
11.622
11.413
11.570
11.717
Add zones
23.775
23.921
23.734
23.778
23.770
Add encoded zones
20.894
21.515
21.617
20.799
21.584
Add weather and dist. to station
14.453
14.638
14.362
14.714
14.300
All
23.985
23.901
23.779
23.754
23.713
All encoded zones
21.430
21.358
21.107
21.353
22.066
Table A.3: Overview of the r2 score in percent from five runs of the best feed-forward
neural network.
f1
1
2
3
4
5
No Zones
0.0863
0.0909
0.0786
0.0884
0.0947
Add zones
0.2937
0.2967
0.2883
0.2883
0.3005
Add encoded zones
0.2234
0.2365
0.2369
0.2218
0.2415
Add weather and dist. to station
0.0832
0.0944
0.0791
0.0957
0.0836
All
0.2789
0.2779
0.2759
0.2758
0.2720
All encoded zones
0.2340
0.2280
0.2244
0.2304
0.2411
Table A.4: Overview of the f1 score from five runs of the best feed-forward neural
network.
A.3
Graph Convolution Network
r2(%)
1
2
3
4
5
No Zones
16.544
16.376
16.783
16.525
16.343
Add zones
24.339
24.065
23.980
24.059
23.751
Add encoded zones
22.772
22.690
22.801
22.727
21.267
Add weather and dist. to station
17.948
17.848
17.769
17.522
17.707
All
24.220
24.027
24.506
24.559
24.653
All encoded zones
23.382
23.394
22.961
23.102
23.240
Table A.5: Overview of the r2 score in percent from five runs of the best GCN graph
neural network.
==PAGE:97==
A.4 Graph Attention Network
89
f1
1
2
3
4
5
No Zones
0.1485
0.1230
0.1494
0.1467
0.1283
Add zones
0.2938
0.2847
0.3008
0.2932
0.2776
Add encoded zones
0.2475
0.2422
0.2542
0.2341
0.2164
Add weather and dist. to station
0.1735
0.1606
0.1463
0.1604
0.1489
All
0.3042
0.2775
0.3006
0.3138
0.2982
All encoded zones
0.2741
0.2788
0.2461
0.2519
0.2593
Table A.6: Overview of the f1 score from five runs of the best GCN graph neural
network.
A.4
Graph Attention Network
r2(%)
1
2
3
4
5
No Zones
16.641
16.463
16.442
15.995
16.426
Add zones
23.637
23.974
23.731
23.847
23.811
Add encoded zones
22.959
22.922
23.359
22.747
23.521
Add weather and dist. to station
17.141
17.591
18.327
17.454
17.965
All
23.991
24.112
23.936
23.871
23.931
All encoded zones
23.446
23.132
23.260
23.263
22.768
Table A.7: Overview of the r2 score in percent from five runs of the best GAT graph
neural network.
f1
1
2
3
4
5
No Zones
0.1319
0.1303
0.1175
0.1100
0.1542
Add zones
0.2618
0.3040
0.2906
0.2782
0.2929
Add encoded zones
0.2460
0.2479
0.2631
0.2403
0.2634
Add weather and dist. to station
0.1608
0.1726
0.1794
0.1795
0.1821
All
0.2892
0.2774
0.2903
0.2701
0.2885
All encoded zones
0.2771
0.2724
0.2542
0.2580
0.2463
Table A.8: Overview of the f1 score from five runs of the best GAT graph neural
network.
==PAGE:98==
90
A All Results
A.5
MLP Convolution
r2(%)
1
2
3
4
5
No Zones
16.764
16.754
16.893
16.871
16.775
Add zones
23.313
23.805
23.849
23.886
24.095
Add encoded zones
22.972
23.138
23.198
23.245
23.032
Add weather and dist. to station
17.716
17.906
17.525
17.903
17.969
All
23.927
24.146
23.984
24.230
23.861
All encoded zones
23.027
22.782
23.373
23.219
22.828
Table A.9: Overview of the r2 score in percent from five runs of the best MLPConv
graph neural network.
f1
1
2
3
4
5
No Zones
0.1940
0.1492
0.1523
0.1638
0.1557
Add zones
0.2498
0.2861
0.2598
0.2670
0.2616
Add encoded zones
0.2389
0.2578
0.2483
0.2512
0.2362
Add weather and dist. to station
0.1779
0.2048
0.1628
0.1941
0.1848
All
0.2735
0.2826
0.2780
0.2845
0.2647
All encoded zones
0.2853
0.2833
0.2767
0.2847
0.2560
Table A.10: Overview of the f1 score from five runs of the best MLPConv graph neural
network.
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX B
Convergence of GNN
In this appendix, the convergence of the training- and validation loss of the graph neural
networks are found in the setting where three different sizes were attempted. The train-
ing loss is blue in all graphs, while the validation loss is orange. The optimal validation
loss is marked as a black circle. Due to the early stopping with the patience of 20, this
will always be 20 epochs from the end. Moreover, the number of parameters for each
model is given.
B.1
Graph Convolution Network
==PAGE:100==
92
B Convergence of GNN
==PAGE:101==
B.2 Graph Attention Network
93
B.2
Graph Attention Network
==PAGE:102==
94
B Convergence of GNN
==PAGE:103==
B.3 MLP Convolution
95
B.3
MLP Convolution
==PAGE:104==
96
B Convergence of GNN
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX C
Project Plan Reflections
In this appendix the original project plan from August - i.e. in the very early project
phase - is found at first. Below that reflections on the project plan upon completion in
found.
C.1
Original Project Plan
Project Description
The key to maximize revenue for shared mobility operators is to have their cars drive
as much as possible. Therefore, being able to accurately predict pick-up is vital for
operators as it will allow them to act by moving cars or offer discounts. This thesis will
attempt to utilize Deep Graph Neural Networks in the predictions of pick-up times and
compare it with more conventional methods and other state-of-the-art methods for the
given problem.
The thesis will be based on data from ShareNow. If it is possible to optimize the
models they currently use, ShareNow should be able to better use the resources they
have to move cars around and maximize cart utilization.
As Graph Neural Networks are a relatively new method a large emphasize will be
put on thoroughly understanding this subject and explain it.
Project Deliverables
At the current moment of time, the plan is for the main thesis to include the following
chapters and follow the style of the scientific method:
1. Introduction
2. Current Approaches to the Problem for benchmarking
3. Theory including thorough GNN walkthrough
4. Data including explorative analysis
5. Application of the GNN to ShareNow data
6. Results and comparison with current approaches
==PAGE:106==
98
C Project Plan Reflections
7. Business impact (might be a section under results)
8. Discussion
9. Conclusion
In addition - if all goes well - an article will be written focusing on the application
of GNN on shared mobility from an Academia point of view.
Project Phases and Project Plan
For the project four major phases are identified, which are outlined below with prelimi-
nary deadlines. The four sections are intended to be carried out chronological.
1. Complete theory section: As mentioned a good amount of time will be spent
on this part. In order to fully understand graph neural networks multiple resources
will be used including a course from Penn University and different relevant articles.
This should then be combined into a stand-alone section in the thesis. Deadline:
September 24th.
2. Apply Graph Neural Networks to data: When trying Graph Neural Networks
on the ShareNow data, external data will also be considered. Examples of this
could be locations of train stations and other public transport hubs and weather
data. Deadline: December 3rd.
3. Assess business case: With the modeling in place the possible gains for ShareNow
will be assessed and put the results into a business perspective. Deadline: Decem-
ber 17th.
4. Article: As mentioned the take-aways from an academia stand-point should be
combined into an article for a scientific journal. Given that the thesis itself is
written at this point it should not be to time-consuming. Deadline: before thesis
defense.
This also leaves the two weeks in January for wrapping up the thesis and writing intro-
duction etc.
Risk analysis
At the moment of writing two possible risk have been assessed:
1. Data: As always getting the hands on the correct data can lead to hick-ups. From
my current understanding this should not be a problem. Also since some delay is
allowed as the first time is spent on studying the theoretical background of Graph
Neural Networks.
==PAGE:107==
C.2 Brief Reflections
99
2. Computation Time: As the project centers around neural networks computation
time can become a relevant reason for delays. If this actual will be a problem will
be assessed when actual optimizations are carried out.
C.2
Brief Reflections
To no surprise, this plan ended up being changed a lot.
The first reason was that
preprocessing the data was way more time-consuming due to the reasons discussed in
the main thesis. Data quality was, as such, a risk more than data gathering. Staying at
the points of risks, computation time was though correct. It did not put that project at
risk, but it should more be seen as a limitation.
The order of studying graph neural networks and implementing them was also
swapped to some degree - or at least parallelized. This was since it was learned that graph
neural networks were a broader subject than initially expected. Therefore, the practical
work had to be in place to ensure that the theoretical section aligned adequately.
The expected effort for the business part was higher than what turned out to be the
case. As it was discussed in Section 7.1 much of the needed information to assess the
business case was not available. This is also why this chapter ended up not being in the
thesis. On the other hand, a more prominent focus had to be put into computing than
expected - probably also due to my limited prior knowledge of this subject.
The article is still to be determined. As stated in the project plan, it should not be
an extremely time-consuming task, but because the random forest was the best method,
the takeaways are not as interesting.
==PAGE:108==
100
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
[3Bl17]
3Blue1Brown. Neural Networks - The basics of neural networks, and the
math behind how they learn. 2017. url: https://www.3blue1brown.com/
topics/neural-networks.
[Ai+19]
Yi Ai et al. “A deep learning approach on short-term spatiotemporal distri-
bution forecasting of dockless bike-sharing system.” In: Neural Computing
and Applications 31.5 (2019), pages 1665–1677. doi: 10.1007/s00521-018-
3470-9. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-018-3470-9.
[Bar16]
Albert-Laszlo Barabasi. Network Science. Cambridge University Press, 2016.
isbn: 9781107076266.
[Bec+20]
Henrik Becker et al. “Assessing the welfare impacts of Shared Mobility and
Mobility as a Service (MaaS).” In: Transportation Research Part A: Policy
and Practice 131 (2020). Developments in Mobility as a Service (MaaS) and
Intelligent Mobility, pages 228–243. issn: 0965-8564. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tra.2019.09.027. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0965856418311212.
[CBB14]
Francesco Ciari, Benno Bock, and Michael Balmer. “Modeling Station-Based
and Free-Floating Carsharing Demand: Test Case Study for Berlin.” In:
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
Board 2416 (December 2014), pages 37–47. doi: 10.3141/2416-05.
[Cor+09]
Thomas H. Cormen et al. Introduction to Algorithms. 3. ed. The MIT Press,
2009. isbn: 9780262033848.
[Duv+15]
D. Duvenaud et al. “Convolutional networks on graphs for learning molecu-
lar fingerprints.” In: volume 2015-January. cited By 1153. 2015, pages 2224–
2232. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-
84965159799&partnerID=40&md5=d1a4a84fde168e5c44ad68059698934b.
[FL19]
Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. “Fast Graph Representation Learning
with PyTorch Geometric.” In: ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning
on Graphs and Manifolds. 2019.
[For17]
Brendon Fortuner. Can neural networks solve any problem? 2017. url:
https : / / towardsdatascience . com / can - neural - networks - really -
learn-any-function-65e106617fc6.
==PAGE:110==
102
Bibliography
[Fri+21]
Christine Fricker et al. Stochastic Modelling of Free-Floating Car-Sharing
Systems. Research Report. CIRRELT, February 2021. url: https://hal.
archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03163814.
[Fro+19]
Hansjörg Fromm et al. A study on free-floating carsharing in Europe: Impacts
of car2go and DriveNow on modal shift, vehicle ownership, vehicle kilometers
traveled, and CO2 emissions in 11 European cities. eng. Working Paper
Series in Production and Energy 36. Karlsruhe, 2019. doi: 10.5445/IR/
1000104216. url: http://hdl.handle.net/10419/209622.
[GB10]
Xavier Glorot and Y. Bengio. “Understanding the diﬀiculty of training deep
feedforward neural networks.” In: Journal of Machine Learning Research -
Proceedings Track 9 (January 2010), pages 249–256.
[GBC16]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT
Press, 2016. url: http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[Har+20]
Charles R. Harris et al. “Array programming with NumPy.” In: Nature
585.7825 (September 2020), pages 357–362. doi: 10.1038/s41586- 020-
2649-2. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2.
[Hin+12]
Geoffrey E. Hinton et al. Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation
of feature detectors. 2012. arXiv: 1207.0580 [cs.NE].
[HTF17]
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The Elements of
Statistical Learning. 12. ed. Springer, 2017. isbn: 9780387848570.
[Hun07]
J. D. Hunter. “Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment.” In: Computing in
Science & Engineering 9.3 (2007), pages 90–95. doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.
55.
[HVG11]
David K. Hammond, Pierre Vandergheynst, and Rémi Gribonval. “Wavelets
on graphs via spectral graph theory.” In: Applied and Computational Har-
monic Analysis 30.2 (2011), pages 129–150. issn: 1063-5203. doi: https:
/ / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . acha . 2010 . 04 . 005. url: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1063520310000552.
[HYL17]
W.L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec. “Inductive representation learning
on large graphs.” In: Inductive Representation Learning on Large Graphs
(2017). cited By 290, pages 1024–1034.
[Ins21]
Danish Meteorological Institute. Danish Meteorological Institute - Open
Data. 2021. url: https://confluence.govcloud.dk/display/FDAPI/
Danish+Meteorological+Institute+-+Open+Data.
[JGF18]
Justin Johnson, Agrim Gupta, and Li Fei-Fei. Image Generation from Scene
Graphs. 2018. arXiv: 1804.01622 [cs.CV].
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
103
[Joc+20]
Patrick Jochem et al. “Does free-floating carsharing reduce private vehi-
cle ownership? The case of SHARE NOW in European cities.” In: Trans-
portation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 141 (2020), pages 373–395.
issn: 0965-8564. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tra . 2020 . 09 .
016. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0965856420307291.
[KB17]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Opti-
mization. 2017. arXiv: 1412.6980 [cs.LG].
[Ke+17]
Jintao Ke et al. “Short-term forecasting of passenger demand under on-
demand ride services: A spatio-temporal deep learning approach.” In: Trans-
portation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 85 (2017), pages 591–
608. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2017.10.016. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0968090X17302899.
[KH92]
Anders Krogh and John Hertz. “A Simple Weight Decay Can Improve
Generalization.” In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Edited by J. Moody, S. Hanson, and R. P. Lippmann. Volume 4. Morgan-
Kaufmann, 1992. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/1991/
file/8eefcfdf5990e441f0fb6f3fad709e21-Paper.pdf.
[Kho18]
Julia Kho. Why Random Forest is My Favorite Machine Learning Model.
2018. url: https://towardsdatascience.com/why-random-forest-is-
my-favorite-machine-learning-model-b97651fa3706.
[Kos+20]
Bojan Kostic et al. “Deep Survival Modelling For Shared Mobility.” In: Dan-
ish Journal of Transportation Research (2020). issn: 1603-9696. url: https:
//journals.aau.dk/index.php/td/article/view/6166.
[KW17]
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph
Convolutional Networks. 2017. arXiv: 1609.02907 [cs.LG].
[Lec+98]
Y. Lecun et al. “Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition.”
In: Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11 (1998), pages 2278–2324. doi: 10.1109/
5.726791.
[LL17]
Scott Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model
Predictions. 2017. arXiv: 1705.07874 [cs.AI].
[LP19]
Scott Le Vine and John Polak. “The impact of free-floating carsharing on
car ownership: Early-stage findings from London.” In: Transport Policy 75
(2019), pages 119–127. issn: 0967-070X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tranpol.2017.02.004. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0967070X16305984.
[Luo+20]
Man Luo et al. “D3P: Data-Driven Demand Prediction for Fast Expanding
Electric Vehicle Sharing Systems.” In: Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable
Ubiquitous Technol. 4.1 (March 2020). doi: 10.1145/3381005. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3381005.
==PAGE:112==
104
Bibliography
[Mac+18]
Cláudia A. Soares Machado et al. “An Overview of Shared Mobility.” In:
Sustainability 10.12 (2018). issn: 2071-1050. doi: 10.3390/su10124342.
url: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/10/12/4342.
[MB15]
Johannes Müller and Klaus Bogenberger. “Time Series Analysis of Booking
Data of a Free-Floating Carsharing System in Berlin.” In: Transportation
Research Procedia 10 (2015), pages 345–354. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.trpro.2015.09.084. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2352146515002719.
[Nie15]
Michael A. Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination
Press, 2015. url: http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com.
[Pas+19]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep
Learning Library.” In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
32. Edited by H. Wallach et al. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019, pages 8024–
8035. url: http : / / papers . neurips . cc / paper / 9015 - pytorch - an -
imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.pdf.
[Ped+11]
F. Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python.” In: Journal
of Machine Learning Research 12 (2011), pages 2825–2830.
[RH16]
J. Rich and Christian Hansen. “The Danish National Passenger Model –
model specification and results.” In: European Journal of Transport and In-
frastructure Research 16 (September 2016), pages 573–599. doi: 10.18757/
ejtir.2016.16.4.3159.
[RHW86]
David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams. “Learn-
ing representations by back-propagating errors.” In: Nature 323.6088 (1986),
pages 533–536. doi: 10.1038/323533a0. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/
323533a0.
[Roz+21]
Benedek Rozemberczki et al. “PyTorch Geometric Temporal: Spatiotempo-
ral Signal Processing with Neural Machine Learning Models.” In: Proceedings
of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management. 2021, pages 4564–4573.
[Sch+21]
Maximilian Schiffer et al. “A polynomial-time algorithm for user-based relo-
cation in free-floating car sharing systems.” In: Transportation Research Part
B: Methodological 143 (2021), pages 65–85. issn: 0191-2615. doi: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2020.11.001. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0191261520304239.
[Sha]
ShareNow. ShareNow Frequently Asked Questions. url: https : / / www .
share-now.com/dk/en/faq/ (visited on August 10, 2021).
[Sha20]
German Sharbrok. Why Deep Learning Uses GPUs? 2020. url: %5Curl%
7Bhttps://towardsdatascience.com/why-deep-learning-uses-gpus-
c61b399e93a0%7D.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
105
[tea20]
The pandas development team. pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas. Version latest.
February 2020. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134. url: https://doi.org/
10.5281/zenodo.3509134.
[VD09]
Guido Van Rossum and Fred L. Drake. Python 3 Reference Manual. Scotts
Valley, CA: CreateSpace, 2009. isbn: 1441412697.
[Vel+18]
Petar Veličković et al. Graph Attention Networks. 2018. arXiv: 1710.10903
[stat.ML].
[Vir+20]
Pauli Virtanen et al. “SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific
Computing in Python.” In: Nature Methods 17 (2020), pages 261–272. doi:
10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.
[Vos+17]
Reza Vosooghi et al. “A critical analysis of travel demand estimation for new
one-way carsharing systems.” In: 2017 IEEE 20th International Conference
on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC). 2017, pages 199–205. doi:
10.1109/ITSC.2017.8317917.
[Wan+19]
Yue Wang et al. Dynamic Graph CNN for Learning on Point Clouds. 2019.
arXiv: 1801.07829 [cs.CV].
[Was21]
Michael L. Waskom. “seaborn: statistical data visualization.” In: Journal of
Open Source Software 6.60 (2021), page 3021. doi: 10.21105/joss.03021.
url: https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.03021.
[WCL10]
Hao Wang, Ruey Cheu, and Der-Horng Lee. “Logistical inventory approach
in forecasting and relocating share-use vehicles.” In: 2010 2nd International
Conference on Advanced Computer Control. Volume 5. 2010, pages 314–318.
doi: 10.1109/ICACC.2010.5487071.
[XL07]
J.-X. Xu and J.S. Lim. “A new Evolutionary Neural Network for forecasting
net flow of a car sharing system.” In: 2007 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary
Computation. 2007, pages 1670–1676. doi: 10.1109/CEC.2007.4424674.
[Yoo+19]
Taekwan Yoon et al. “Carsharing demand estimation and fleet simulation
with EV adoption.” In: Journal of Cleaner Production 206 (2019), pages 1051–
1058. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.09.124. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652618328440.
[Zha+19]
Chen Zhang et al. “Travel demand and distance analysis for free-floating
car sharing based on deep learning method.” In: PloS one 14.10 (October
2019), e0223973–e0223973. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0223973. url:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31618244.
[Zhe+20]
Chuanpan Zheng et al. “GMAN: A Graph Multi-Attention Network for
Traﬀic Prediction.” In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial In-
telligence 34.01 (April 2020), pages 1234–1241. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i01.
5477. url: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/
5477.
==PAGE:114==
106
Bibliography
[Zho+21]
Jie Zhou et al. Graph Neural Networks: A Review of Methods and Applica-
tions. 2021. arXiv: 1812.08434 [cs.LG].
[Zhu+19]
Hongming Zhu et al. “Multistep Flow Prediction on Car-Sharing Systems:
A Multi-Graph Convolutional Neural Network with Attention Mechanism.”
In: International Journal of Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineer-
ing 29.11n12 (2019), pages 1727–1740. doi: 10.1142/S0218194019400187.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1142/S0218194019400187. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1142/S0218194019400187.
