==PAGE:1==
MSc in Engineering
Master’s thesis in Physics and Nanotechnology
Data driven blood analysis by Raman spec-
troscopy for ABO blood typing
Emil Alstrup Jensen
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Professor Anders Kristensen, DTU Health Tech
Co-supervisor: Postdoc Murat Serhatlioglu, DTU Health Tech
Co-supervisor: MD PhD Morten Hanefeld Dziegel, Department of Clinical Medicine,
KU/Rigshospitalet
Co-supervisor: Associate Professor Sadasivan Puthusserypady, DTU Health Tech
Co-supervisor: PhD Student Cihan Uyanik, DTU Health Tech
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This study was made in collaboration with the blood bank at Rigshospitalet
who provided all of the blood samples used for experiments. The samples were
provided in agreement with applicable guidelines.
I would like to acknowledge the help and fruitful discussion with all supervisors
on the project.
Kongens Lyngby, 23rd January 2022
Emil Alstrup Jensen
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Årtiers udvikling af Raman spektroskopi teknikker (RS) har muliggjort et effek-
tivt og ikke-invasivt redskab til biosensing, der kan anlysere skrøbelige biokemiske
systemer på molekyler skala.
Eksisterende metoder indenfor blodtypebestem-
melse gør i høj grad brug af dyre a reagenser, Så nye mere bæredygtige metoder
er nødvendige.
I samarbejde med Rigshospitalet i København, har vi i dette arbejde udviklet
en ny og lovende teknologi til AB0 blodtypebestemmelse, der gør brug af RS på
helblod direkte fra EDTA rør. Et spektrometer med høj opløsning er brugt til
Spatial Offset Raman Spectroscopy (SORS) i kombination med en flow platform,
der muliggør hurtig, stabil og præcis dataindsamling af Raman spektra. Disse
bliver senere blive tildelt en bestemt blodtype gruppe ved hjælp af Support Vector
Machine (SVM) klassifikation. Mere end 270 prøver donorer er analyseret således
at nøjagtig blodtypebestemmelse kan laves. En måleprotokol er udviklet i studiet
for at sikre fluid mekanisk stabilitet og optisk præcision.
Dette studie kan udvides ved at forbedre antallet af prøver der kan analyseres
i timen, stabiliteten og justeringen af de optiske elementer der er brugt. Mængden
af data kan også gøres større for at forbedre forudsigelserne af SVM. Derudover
kan blodtypebestemmelsen udvides til at inkludere andre antigener uden for AB0
systemet, hvilket vil skabe en centraliseret måleteknologi, der kan bruge i klinisk
transfusionsmedicin.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Decades of development of Raman spectroscopy techniques (RS) has enabled an
effective and non-invasive biosensing tool, to analyze fragile biochemical systems
down to single cell resolution. Existing blood typing methods rely on expensive
blood group reagents, resulting in a need for other more sustainable methods.
In collaboration with the blood bank at Rigshospitalet in Copenhagen, this
work has developed a new and promising technique for ABO blood typing us-
ing RS on whole blood directly from EDTA coated tubes.
A high resolution
imaging spectrometer for spatial offset Raman spectroscopy in combination with
microfluidic flow cell, allows for fast, stable and precise acquisition of Raman
spectra. These can later be be assigned to a certain blood group by Support
Vector Machine (SVM) classification. More than 270 donor samples are analyzed
such that high accuracy blood typing predictions can be made. A measurement
protocol is proposed in this thesis to ensure microfluidic stability and optical
accuracy.
The study can be further extended by improving the throughput, stability
and optical alignment of measuring technology, as well as increasing the size of
the blood type data dataset in order to improve the SVM prediction accuracy. In
addition to that the blood typing can be extended to include antigens outside the
ABO blood group system, creating a centralized testing technology for clinical
transfusion medicine.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Resumé
iii
Abstract
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
State of the art and scattering theory
3
2.1
Blood analysis by Raman spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
State of the art Raman blood analysis . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Blood type genetics and applications . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
State of the art Raman blood typing . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Scattering theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Classical picture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
Quantum picture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Resonance Raman spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Near-infrared Raman spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Spatially offset Raman spectroscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Optical experiments and microfluidics
21
3.1
The Raman Spectroscopy setups
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Methods of sample preparation and microfluidic setup . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Beam Characterization by Knife-edge measurement . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Multivariate Statistics, Machine and Deep Learning analysis
31
4.1
Preprocessing of Raman spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Dimensionality reduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.3
Classification methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.1
SVM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Cross-validation and performance metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Results and discussion
41
5.1
Resonance Raman spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
NIR hyperspectral SORS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Optimization of flow, sample preparation and reproducibility
. . .
45
5.4
ABO blood typing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Conclusion and outlook
53
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In the past 30 years Raman spectroscopy (RS) have been used extensively as a
technique in various analytical sciences. The non-invasive nature of RS makes
it highly attractive in biomedical and biosensing applications where processes
at single cell level and can be investigated without interfering with the process
itself or cell environment. This makes the technique highly desirable in the field
of early diagnostics and in vivo health assessment in clinics [1]. RS provide a
fingerprint specific to the molecules comprising the whatever biological sample
of interest, and to a degree that can extract extremely subtle information about
the metabolism, immune system or other vital processes in the human body. RS
is already established as a highly accurate analytic tool in laboratories, however
widespread clinical application is not far in the future.
RS on blood have been studied for decades, initially as way to study the
composition of blood components. Blood analysis is an important tool for clinical
assessment of human health as levels of oxygen, nutrients and other substances in
the blood can provide valuable information about processes in the human body.
This makes RS compelling as potential blood analysis tool. A multitude of RS
studies on blood have already been made, however the inherently weak Raman
effect have set some limitations on wide scope applications. This have inspired
an increasing number of surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) studies,
where multiple orders of magnitude enhancement of the scattered Raman signal,
have settled some of the disadvantages of having to use low laser powers in order
not to destroy fragile biochemmical samples [2].
Early diagnosis of diseases is as mentioned one of the main motivations be-
hind Raman blood analysis. However, often times the correlation between the
information extracted in a Raman spectra and the diagnosis is non linear, mean-
ing statistical tools must accompany the RS measurement itself. Multivariate
statistics and machine learning are such powerful statistical tools and have been
utilized for many Raman studies. These methods require large amounts of data
to output accurate diagnostic prediction, and for many rare diseases such scope
of data is simply hard to come by. Furthermore, extensive testing is required for
clinical certification, somewhat limiting current large scale clinical RS [3].
One of the cornerstones of emergency and surgical medicine is transfusion
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
medicine, where fast and accurate information about the blood type is crucial.
The most important blood group system is the ABO Rh system and transfusing
ABO Rh incompatible blood to a patient can have fatal consequences. Current
blood typing assays are build on the agglutination of the blood when mixed
foreign antigens and antibodies and such blood grouping reagents are expensive.
Furthermore, accurate testing can take up to 20 minutes, justifying the need for
faster and cheaper methods. As opposed to blood samples from patients suffering
from rare diseases, a high number of samples with different ABO blood types
are naturally very accessible. Blood banks around the world have thousands of
regular donors, creating the potential for acquisition of large datasets.
RS based ABO blood typing have previously been studied, but on blood com-
ponents that require time consuming sample preparation steps or measurement
techniques. In 2016 ABO blood types were discriminated with high accuracy
using a laser tweezer Raman spectroscopy technique was used to trap single red
blood cells for analysis [4]. In 2012 and 2014 SERS on purified plasma proteins
was used predict ABO blood types as well, in all cases using ML algorithms in
the statistical analysis of the Raman spectra [5, 6]. Both studies showed poten-
tial for accurate ABO blood typing by RS, but involved extensive measurement
methods and sample preparation steps respectively, as well as being build on
relatively narrow statistical foundation.
In this thesis 270 donated blood samples acquired from the blood bank at
Rigshospitalet in Copenhagen are analysed using techniques such as resonant
Raman spectroscopy (RRS) and spatial offset Raman spectroscopy (SORS) with
the aim of accurately predicting ABO blood types. A high throughput of Ra-
man measurements is established by an optimized flow based setup, showing
great stability and reproducibility. A high resolution imaging spectrometer is
used, providing good conditions for high detailed acquisition of Raman spectra,
and state of the art ML algorithms are applied in the prediction of blood types.
The intention of this study is to develop a RS technique for ABO blood typing
with a high throughput, requiring minimum sample preparation and achieving
prediction accuracy on par with state of the art studies.
First a chapter describing scattering theory and the various RS setup used
throughout this study is presented. Furthermore, sections of state of the art of
Raman blood analysis as well as blood typing and blood type genetics are pre-
sented in depth. Then comes a chapter outlining the experimental optical setups,
microfluidics and sample preparation methods. A chapter on the ML algorithms,
methods and concepts used is included to provide a theoretical background and
motivation behind the methods chosen. Finally Raman spectroscopy, optimiza-
tion and ABO blood typing results are presented and discussed.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
State of the art and
scattering theory
Since first predicted by Adolf Smekal in 1923 and later experimentally observed
by C.V. Raman in 1928, Raman scattering has been widely researched and used
for various biomedical and biosensing applications.
Raman spectroscopy is a
non-invasive optical technique for identification of a material by collection of the
Raman scattering specific to the material and its components. Each molecular
bond has a unique Raman signature corresponding to the relative vibration be-
tween the molecules, and so Raman spectroscopy can provide both qualitatively
and quantitatively information about gases, liquids, solids and their composition.
A wide range of Raman spectroscopy techniques have been developed, each of
which is advantageous to different areas of biomedicine [1]. Resonance Raman
spectroscopy (RRS) utilizes an overlap between the excitation wavelength and
some electronic resonance of the molecule of interest, e.g. in blood analysis where
using an excitation wavelength in the Soret band of hemoglobin, can increase the
Raman signal more than a factor of 103. Another Raman enhancement technique
is surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) where plasmonic resonances on
a metallic surface or nanoparticles can be used to enhance the signal up to 14 or
15 orders of magnitude. Spatially offset Raman spectroscopy (SORS) is a tech-
nique where the depth of the sample can be probed, as scattered photons from
layers deeper into the samples are collected at larger spatial offsets. This enables
penetration deeper into a sample where layers of interest can be distinguished.
Simply put blood consist of plasma, an aqueous solution, where a large number
of red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets are suspended. Blood has many
vital functions including transporting oxygen and nutrients from the lungs to
other cells in the body as well as transporting waste products to the kidney and
liver and carrying white blood cells, antibodies and other proteins that make up
the immune system. Consequently the composition of blood is complex and can
provide massive amount of information for clinical assessment of human health [2].
This makes Raman spectroscopy a promising tool in clinical blood analysis in
==PAGE:14==
4
2 State of the art and scattering theory
general, and in the context of detecting the antibodies and antigens that define
ones blood type. It is the intention of this chapter to summarize Raman scattering
theory, blood type genetics and state of the art Raman spectroscopy methods for
blood analysis.
2.1
Blood analysis by Raman spectroscopy
Nearly half of blood’s volume are red blood cells (40-45%), also referred to as
erythrocytes or RBCs. RBCs are biconcave disk formed providing them with a
relatively large surface area and have a diameter of approximately 7.8µm. About
95% of its dry weight comprises of hemoglobin, the protein molecule that binds
and carries oxygen around the body. For the remaining liquid part of the blood
there is a general distinction between plasma and serum. When blood is drawn
from a patient or donor for hematological analysis or blood transfusion purposes,
an anticoagulant such as citrate, heparin or EDTA is added in order to prevent
the blood from clotting. In order to separate plasma an anticoagulant needs to
be added right away in order to keep all the components suspended, and then
by centrifugation of the anticoagulated whole blood, a clear plasma layer can
be distinguished at the top as seen in figure 2.1 (d). Plasma is predominately
water (92-95%) and contains waste products, hormones, electrolytes, antibodies,
nutrients, coagulants such as fibrogen and other proteins such as albumin and
globulin that have vital immune and clotting functions.
After centrifugation a thin layer of buffy coat is isolated as well, containing
the white blood cells and platelets. White blood cells, also known as leukocytes
or WBCs, are made up of three main types, namely lymphocytes, monocytes and
granulocytes, each of which have different roles in the immune system. Platelets,
also referred to as thrombocytes, are cells that clot together when blood vessels
are damaged.
Blood serum is separated naturally when an anticoagulant is not added and
the clotting factors enable the cells to clot. Subsequently, serum does not contain
any blood cells or coagulants. While blood plasma is typically used in transfusion
medicine, serum is used for testing and research [2,7,8].
2.1.1
State of the art Raman blood analysis
The application of Raman spectroscopy for blood analysis began more than 50
years ago specifically as way to study the structure of hemoglobin and RBCs [9].
As described in more detail in section 2.2, hemoglobin is a resonant Raman scatter
at excitation wavelengths around 400 nm, which have been exploited in various
application since the 1970s. Raman Spectroscopy has been used for detection
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Blood analysis by Raman spectroscopy
5
Whole 
Blood
Centrifuged
Blood
Plasma
(55%)
Red blood cells
(45%)
White blood cells, Platelets
(<1%)
a)
d)
Figure 2.1. (a) The structure of a Heme b group, the photoactive part of the protein
subunit of Hemoglobin. The central ring holding the iron atom is known as porphyrin.
(b) Structure of the ABO blood group antigens. The antigens are an arrangement of sug-
ars and the antigen A and B differs by just one sugar at the end; N-Acetylgalactoseamine
for A and galactose for type B. Antigen H is the precursor for antigen A and B and is
also present on the surface of the red blood cells in type O blood. However the H-antigen
does not have an antigen-binding site which where binding with antibodies takes place.
(c) Antigen A sits on the surface of the RBCs in type A blood, antigen B on surface of
the RBCs in type B blood and both are present in type AB blood. Similarly Rhesus
positive and negative blood types, describes whether RhD antigens are present on the
red blood cell surface or not. (d) Whole blood denotes human blood as it is without
separation or removal of its constituents. By centrifugation of anticoagulated whole
blood the main components can be distinguished as 3 visible layers. A layer of plasma
that constitutes around 55% of the total volume and consists of about 92% water and
various vital proteins for blood clothing and immunity. A layer of RBCs that consti-
tutes around 45% of the total volume. And a layer of buffy coat that consists mainly
of WBCs and platelets. (e) Anti-B antibodies can be found in the plasma of type A
blood and likewise anti-A antibodies in type B blood. Type O blood plasma contains
both anti-A and anti-B antibodies while type AB does not contain any. Note that the
majority of people are so called sectretors which means that they have their blood type
antigens dissolved in the plasma as well.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 State of the art and scattering theory
of glycated hemoglobin (HBA1c) as a diagnosis of diabetes as well as long term
monitoring tool, where analysis of Raman spectra of lysed RBCs from a whole
blood sample can be directly correlated to whether the ratio of HbA1c is above a
level, that clinically confirms diagnosis of type II diabetes (HbA1c≥6.5%) [10].
Other applications include in vivo measurements of hemoglobin oxygen sat-
uration that can provide valuable information oxygen delivery to tissue [11, 12]
and instantenous point-of-care hemolysis detection in whole blood that among
other things can prevent clinicians making clinical decisions based on erroneous
data due to hemolyzed samples [13]. Hemolysis is the rupture of red blood cells
that release hemoglobin and other components into the surrounding plasma, and
blood samples are especially vulnerable to hemolysis when drawn from a patient.
Consequently Raman spectroscopy has been explored as a way to monitor and
asses the degree of hemolysis and oxygenation state of hemoglobin in stored red
blood cells for transfusion medicine as well as other forms of potential red cell
storage lesion [14–16]. Analysis of Raman spectra provides a fast way of non-
invasive probing of sealed transfusion plastic bags without breaching the sterility.
This could be used as a clinical tool to determine the quality of a unit before its
transfused into a high risk patient. Raman spectral changes can be assigned to
specific red cell lesions and algorithms can be trained to evaluate whether the
RBCs are still viable and functioning after storage.
Raman spectroscopy analysis involving WBCs and platelets have been re-
searched extensively as well. A laser tweezer Raman spectroscopy (LTRS) setup
in a microfluidic environment, where single cells are excited in an optical trap,
have been used to discriminate between normal blood cells and circulating cancer
cells (CTCs) in blood from patients with solid tumours [17]. Such applications
offer a high potential in tumour diagnosis and advances are being made in both
accuracy and throughput. Furthermore, biochemical changes of WBCs, due to
the immune response after various infections, have been studied recently using
Raman spectroscopy [18]. This opens up for potential fast and eﬀicient detection
of infection and infection cause, helping to determine appropriate treatment in
time sensitive situations. Likewise, single cell Raman analysis of platelets have
been explored for differential diagnosis of Alzheimer disease, that currently rely
on extensive clinical experience of the physician, psychological testing and medi-
cal imaging [19]. Raman spectra of isolated platelets have also shown potential for
discriminating healthy cells and cells from patients with cardiovascular diseases
such as arterial hypertension [20].
Finally, plasma and serum are gaining interest in numerous diagnostic and
monitoring applications.
Many Raman studies of serum/plasma from cancer
patients have been conducted. For instance to diagnose early stage breast can-
cer [21], where both new spectral features appear and existing features change
significantly when comparing diseased against healthy blood plasma. The protein-
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Blood analysis by Raman spectroscopy
7
phospholipid balance in serum of patients with depressive disorders have been
investigated as biomarkers for major depressive disorder (MDD) and bipolar dis-
order (BD) I and II [22]. Apart from being a potential clinical diagnostic tool,
these studies help drive the general research on which proteins or substances that
drive and develop the illnesses. Raman spectroscopy can be used for quantitative
predictions as well. The concentration of C-reactive protein (CRP) in plasma
is clinically used as a biomarker for inflammation due to bacterial infection or
tissue damage, and Raman spectra of plasma have shown accurate correlation
with CRP concentration values [23].
Raman analysis limited to the individual components of whole blood has the
advantage of reducing the number of simultaneous scattering and absorption fac-
tors that need to be considered. However, in many point of care application where
time is a limiting factor, there is a need for Raman spectroscopy to be applied
directly on whole blood which require minimal sample preparation. Similarly,
completely non-invasive in vivo applications through the skin, are a common end
goal in many studies, but as of now most such studies are limited to glucose
monitoring [24] and hemoglobin oxygenation [11,12]. Throughout this study dif-
ferent blood components and sample preparation steps have been considered to
differentiate the ABO blood types.
2.1.2
Blood type genetics and applications
Since Karl Landsteiner laid the foundation of modern blood group classification
and transfusion medicine with his discovery of the ABO group system in the start
1900s, more than 250 RBC surface antigens have been discovered, described and
categorized into more than 30 recognized blood group systems [7]. Antigens are
any substance that can trigger an immune response and every RBC membrane is
covered by millions of so called self-antigens that normally does not trigger any
immune responses [25]. However, when the immune system detects foreign RBC
antigens either by blood transfusion or pregnancy, it will attack them accordingly
and in a manner that can potentially cause shock, kidney failure, circulatory
collapse and potentially death.
RBC phenotyping then refers to determining
which types of antigens that are present on the RBC surfaces in a blood sample.
The ABO blood group antigens are the most immunogenic out of all blood
group antigens and naturally play a crucial role in transfusion medicine.
As
outlined in figure 2.1 (b) and (c) ABO blood group antigens, antigen A, B and
H, are sugars, and whichever combination of these sits on the RBCs determines
the blood type. Antigen A sits on the surface of the RBCs in type A blood,
antigen B in type B blood, both in type AB blood and differs only by one sugar
at the antigen-binding site. N-Acetylgalactoseamine for type A and galactose for
type B antigens. Antigen H is the precursor for both A and B, does not have an
==PAGE:18==
8
2 State of the art and scattering theory
antigen-binding site and can be found on the RBC surface in type O blood as
well. The immune system produces antibodies against whichever antigens that
are not present on the RBC surface. Consequently, anti-B antibodies can be found
type A blood plasma, anti-A can be found in type B blood plasma, both can be
found in type O plasma while type AB does not contain any. The antibodies are
produced naturally when the immune system encounters the foreign antigens in
food or other micro-organisms at an early age. The response when the immune
system encounters a foreign antigen is very individual depending on health and
genetic factors, but to a first approximation the pre-existing antibodies in the
blood plasma binds to the foreign antigens, coating the surface of the RBCs and
causing them to agglutinate or destruct, thereby causing a dangerous hemolytic
transfusion reaction (HTR) in the blood. So if a patient with blood group O
receives RBCs from a donor with either type A, B or AB, anti-A and anti-B
antibodies in the type O plasma would bind to the corresponding antigens causing
HTR.
After antigen A and B, Rh(D) is the most important RBC antigen for transfu-
sion purposes, due to its ability to provoke a strong immune response. More than
49 Rh antigens are known and most are highly immunogenic and can cause HTR
when mixed with the corresponding antibodies. Rh antigens are large proteins
that sits on the RBC membrane, and an individual who does not produce an Rh
antigen will develop antibodies against foreign Rh antigens they are exposed to,
which may persist and cause complications (alloimmunization). Blood typing for
Rh(D) status is routine in transfusion medicine, and only Rh(D)-negative packed
RBCs are given to Rh(D)-neagtive recipients. Hemolytic reactions to other Rh
antigens can occur as well, which means that patients with other principal Rh
antibodies such as anti-c, anti-C, anti-e and anti-E in their plasma, should re-
ceive corresponding antigen negative blood [25]. Along with anti-D these are also
denoted as clinically significant alloantibodies.
Consequently, RBCs from type O Rh negative blood are universal in the sense
that everyone can receive this type, as such a donation contains neither antigen
A, B of Rh(D). This makes it vital in emergency situations or when the recipient
blood type is unknown, however only around 6% of the Danish population have
this type. Furthermore, other foreign antigens might be present increasing the
risk that the patient develops irregular antibodies. This emphasize the need for
fast and accurate ABO blood typing methods in acute point-of-care transfusion
situations.
While the ABO and Rh blood group systems might be the most important
regarding transfusion medicine, extended antigen phenotyping are almost always
performed as a supplement. Whether it be donor or patient blood, a so called
forward typing of ABO Rh(D) antigens is always conducted, where the recipient’s
RBCs are added to known anti-A and anti-B anitbody solutions. Before a trans-
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Blood analysis by Raman spectroscopy
9
fusion is given, backwards typing is performed as well, where a small amount of
the recipients plasma is mixed with the donor RBCs and examined. In both cases
agglutination of the samples are monitored. Extended phenotyping is important
for patients who either have or are at risk of developing alloantibodies, poten-
tially causing HTR. Several versions of extended phenotyping can be conducted
before transfusion depending on the indication given in the cross match test, and
can take several hours [26]. For patients who require transfusions over a long
period of time phenotyping is often extended to include Rh antigens C, c, E, e
and K. The phenotyping is also often extended for women in the childbearing age
or younger to prevent complications in future pregnancies, where alloantibodies
in the mothers blood potentially can contaminate and destroy the fetus’ RBCs
(Hemolytic Disease of the Fetus and Newborn, HDFN). Extended phenotyping
on a larger scale require enormous resources and emphasize the need for cheap
and time effective methods.
As the genetic foundation of most blood groups are well established and au-
tomated molecular testing constantly improves, there have recently been a devel-
opment towards genotyping as an extended blood group typing [27]. By geno-
typing both the RBC antigen alleles are probed and even when confined to the
ABO system and the most common alleles A1, A2, B, O, the characterization
extends to 10 genotypes: A1A2, A1A1, A2A2, A1O, A2O, A1B, A2B, BB, BO
and OO, where A1 and A2 are different composition of the A sugars. In emerg-
ing genotyping assays as many as 59 alleles can be detected at the same cost as
13 seroptyped alleles and the combination of traditional serologic methods and
genotyping is gaining is gaining interest for clinical use [27]. The principle of
antibody based ABO Rh(D) forward and backwards typing have remained un-
changed for centuries and the transition to genotyping in clinical settings is slow,
among other things due to the extreme reliability of serology methods that have
error rates as low as 1 in 1,000,000 in blood donor. But genotyping can give a
better understanding of donors and enable more precise transfusion of distinct
blood components, that ultimately will provide better treatment [28].
The applications of blood types are not just limited to transfusion medicine.
The ABO blood group distribution between populations around the world were
shown to differ substantially shortly after the system was discovered, which raised
questions about which factor effects and natural selection factors had driven this
discrepancy.
Various infectious diseases have been associated to ABO pheon-
types. While the A and B antigens have not yet been attributed any biological
significance, subjects of group A, B and AB have shown to be more susceptible to
arterial and venous thromboembolism (VTE), where a blood clot forms in deep
veins and travels to the lungs. Furthermore, studies suggest that blood group O
brings a selective advantage against severe malaria and increases the likelihood
of severe cholera infections, showcasing the significance of human blood groups
==PAGE:20==
10
2 State of the art and scattering theory
in the context of evolution and the battle against infectious diseases [29].
To sum up, ABO Rh blood is essentially a matter of detecting the presence of
antigen A, B or D on the RBC surface as well as anti-B and anti-A antibodies in
the plasma. The spectroscopic properties of various ABO antigens and antibodies
have previously been studied, showing distinguishable absorbing features of the
antigens/antibodies [30] and highlighting the potential for optical techniques to
determine blood types.
2.1.3
State of the art Raman blood typing
ABO phenotyping typing using Raman spectroscopy is yet to be studied exten-
sively. In 2012 and 2014 surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) on puri-
fied albumin and globulin from blood plasma was used to distinguish between A,
B, AB and O type blood samples in one to one comparisons using silver nanopar-
ticles (Ag NP) for signal enhancement [5,6]. The study was conducted on a total
of 118 blood samples, using a laser excitation wavelength of 785 nm and achieving
great accuracy around 84 −100% for each distinction between the blood types.
The blood plasma was separated from whole blood by 10 min centrifugation
after which the purified serum proteins, albumin and globulin, were extracted
using membrane electrophoresis and rinsing steps. The preparation time of the
albumin/globulin-Ag NP solution totalled more than 40 min.
In 2016 antigen-antibody reactions in ABO phenotypes types was studied by
785 nm excitation SERS as well, using a silver-gold bimetallic surface as SERS
substrate [31]. The red blood cell phase of a total 160 type A, B, AB and O
samples were used and Raman spectra of samples with and without an added mix
of anti-A and anti-B antibodies were analysed and shown to provide a basis for
ABO blood typing. The RBC phase was separated from whole blood by 10 min
centrifugation and washed with PBS to remove impurities, and additional sample
preparation steps including mixture of RBC and antigen solutions and deposition
on the substrate were needed. In 2017 a Fourier transform approach to the Raman
spectra analysis was proposed [32]. A total of 69 A, B and O blood samples
was used to distinguish the blood types from each after a Fourier transform of
the Raman spectra.
Seperated RBCs was washed and diluted with PBS and
deposited on an aluminium coated slides and 785nm excitation wavelength was
used.
In 2016 a LTRS setup was used to trap single red blood cells and obtain
Raman spectra with a 785nm excitation wavelength [4]. 120 type A, B, AB and
O samples was used and blood types could be distinguished pairwise with very
high accuracy (83 −100%). Each sample underwent centrifugation, dilution and
wash procedures as well as steps to trap single cells in a quartz sample holder.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Blood analysis by Raman spectroscopy
11
The performance of these existing studies on Raman ABO phenotyping typing is
outlined in table 2.1 by various scoring metrics.
LTRS on single RBC [4]
Scoring metric (%)
Accuracy
Specificity
Sensitivity
AUC
Type A-B
83.9
83.8
84
87.5
Type A-AB
100
100
100
100
Type A-O
89.9
87.5
92.6
97.3
Type B-AB
100
100
100
100
Type B-O
88.9
97.7
100
99.7
Type AB-O
100
100
100
100
ME-SERS on albumin/globulin [6]
Scoring metric (%)
Accuracy
Specificity
Sensitivity
AUC
Type A-B
92
95
90
97.8
Type AB-A
97
96.7
97.3
97.8
Type A-O
82
83.9
80
84.7
Type AB-B
94.9
95.5
94.6
98.6
Type B-O
92.1
90.3
95
96.5
Type AB-O
100
100
100
100
SERS on untreated plasma [6]
Scoring metric (%)
Accuracy
Specificity
Sensitivity
AUC
Type A-B
74
75
73.3
79.7
Type AB-A
80.6
86.7
75.7
92.3
Type A-O
67.2
64.5
70
69.5
Type AB-B
81.7
75.7
85
83.2
Type B-O
75.8
79.6
70
74.7
Type AB-O
90.3
86.5
93.5
94.2
Table 2.1.
Performance metrics from the two existing studies using classification
models to predict the ABO blood type. The specificity denotes how good the model
predicts true positive values, the sensitivity how good the model predicts true negative
values and the accuracy is the ratio of total true predicted values in the test. These
values are calculated using some user defined classification threshold. The area under
the curve (AUC) represents an average over all such possible classification thresholds.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 State of the art and scattering theory
2.2
Scattering theory
When a molecular or atomic system is exposed to light it interacts in both reso-
nant and non-resonant manners in the form of photoluminescence and scattering.
Photoluminescence is a resonant process where the system is excited to a higher
energy level by absorption of a photon, then spontaneously decays to a lower
energy level and subsequently emits a photon. In this process the system tran-
sitions between the ground state and a real excited state, and the energy of the
emitted photon by relaxation of the excited state corresponds exactly to the en-
ergy difference between the states, ensuring energy conservation. Naturally this
process predominately takes place when the wavelength of the incident light is
matching a highly absorbing wavelength of the material. As seen in figure 2.2
(a) hemoglobin is highly absorbing at wavelengths 300 −600nm (Soret band), so
while using an excitation wavelength in this range is attractive for resonance Ra-
man spectroscopy, it will cause a fluorescent background in the Raman spectrum
as well.
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Wavelength [nm]
103
104
105
Mo ar Extinction Coefficient [cm−1/(M/L)]
Absorption spectr(m of Hemog obin
HbO2
Hb
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Wavelength [nm]
1.34
1.36
1.38
1.40
1.42
1.44
1.46
1.48
Refractive index
Refractive index of blood components and fused silica
Hb
Plasma
SiO2
Figure 2.2. (a) The molar extinction coeﬀicient for hemoglobin and oxy-hemoglobin at
different wavelengths showing that the molecules are highly absorbent at wavelengths
in the range 300 −600nm.
Tabulated data from (Reference Prahl) is used to plot
the spectra.
(b) Refractive index of blood components and fused silica at different
wavelengths. Hemoglobin and plasma makes up most of whole blood which is analyzed
throughout this thesis in various glass sample holder configurations. Tabulated data
from [33] is used to plot the spectra.
In the description of light scattering where the incident radiation is not near
an absorbing wavelength of the material so called virtual states are used. The
system is then not excited to a real state but rather a superposition of real excited
or stationary states, a virtual state, which is of artificial nature. In this case the
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Scattering theory
13
interaction can be non-resonant and the scattered light can have a broad range
of frequencies. The virtual state is not an eigenvalue of the Hamiltonian of the
material system so its energy is not well defined, and when the virtual state
decays, light is scattered in different directions. If the virtual state collapses to
the ground state of the material system the scattered photons will have the same
wavelength as the incident radiation which is called Rayleigh scattering. If the
virtual state collapses to a vibrational state of the material system, Stokes or
anti-Stokes Raman scattering occurs. These virtual states are what separates
Raman spectroscopy from other forms of infared or vibrational spectroscopy [34].
Raman scattering is the inelastic scattering of light by matter. An incident
photon of energy hν1 interacts with a vibrational or rotational mode of a molecule
in the material, and an energy exchange of hνR takes place. In Stokes Raman
scattering the photon excites the mode of the molecule and the scattered photon
emerges with an energy lower than the incident hνS = hν1 −hνR. In anti-Stokes
scattering the mode is already excited so energy is released in the interaction and
the scattered photon emerges with an energy higher than the incident hνA = hν1+
hνR. These processes are outlined in figure 2.3 b) and c). Rayleigh scattering
is the elastic scattering of light and so the incident and scattered photons have
the same energy. This process is outlined in figure 2.3 a). Brillouin scattering
is inelastic like Raman scattering but the energy exchange hνB occurs with an
acoustic mode in the material. This process is outlined in figure 2.3 d). While
Rayleigh and Brillouin scattering can be attributed to random (Rayleigh) or
correlated (Brillouin) variations of the density, composition and orientation of
the molecular or atomic system on a larger scale, Raman scattering is due to
the vibrational and rotational modes in the molecular bonds corresponding to
stretching and bending of the molecules [35].
2.2.1
Classical picture
In the context of blood analysis it makes sense to first take a microscopic approach
to the theoretical description of light scattering, where scattering from an individ-
ual hemoglobin molecule is considered. In its simplest form Raman scattering is
spontaneous and incoherent, so the intensity of the entire material is just a sum
of the contributions of the total number of independent molecules. When the
material system is exposed to light, an external electromagnetic field, oscillating
magnetic and electric multipole moments are induced inside the molecules that
make up the material. The induced oscillating electric dipoles are the dominant
source of scattered light and the intensity is given by [36]:
I = k
′
ωω4
sp2
0 sin2 θ
(2.1)
==PAGE:24==
14
2 State of the art and scattering theory
h
1
Virtual States
h
1
h
S
h
R
h
R
h
B
h
A
h
S
h
1
h
1
h
1
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 2.3. Energy diagram for various types of light scattering. a) Rayleigh, elastic
scattering where the material causes the incident photon to change direction and the
scattered photon has the same energy as the incident.
b) Stokes Raman, inelastic
scattering where the incident photon interacts with the material and some of the energy
is transferred to a vibrational mode such that the energy of the scattered photon is
lower than the incident. c) Anti-Stokes, inelastic scattering where the incident photon
interacts with the material and receives some energy from a vibrational mode so the
scattered photon energy is larger than the incident. d) Brillouin scattering where the
energy exchange is due to acoustic modes of the material. [35]
Where p0 is the amplitude of the induced electric dipole with frequency ωs, θ
is the angle between the axis of the dipole and the direction of the incident
electromagnetic field and where
k
′
ω =
1
32π2ϵ0c3
0
(2.2)
Throughout this thesis the Raman intensity is expressed in terms of wavenumbers,
˜ν, so eq. (2.1) and (2.2) becomes:
I = k
′
˜ν ˜ν4
sp2
0 sin2 θ
(2.3)
k
′
˜ν = π2c0
2ϵ0
(2.4)
Furthermore a Raman shift away from the excitation wavelength λ1 is defined:
∆˜ν = 1
λ1
−1
λs
(2.5)
From eq. (2.3) and (2.5) the scattered intensity is clearly proportional to 1/λ4
1
which should be taken into consideration when choosing excitation wavelength.
As mentioned the electric dipole moment of a molecule, p, is induced by an
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Scattering theory
15
external electromagnetic field and is characterized by an electric field, E:
p = p(1) + p(2) + p(3) + ...
(2.6)
p(1) = α · E
(2.7)
p(2) = 1
2β · EE
(2.8)
p(3) = 1
6γ · EE
(2.9)
Where α is polarizability tensor. β and γ are several orders of magnitude smaller
than α so higher order parts of the power series, p(2) + p(2) + ..., are neglected
in the description of Rayleigh and Raman scattering.
For the three types of
scattering Rayleigh, Stokes and anti-Stokes Raman scattering the dipole moment
takes the following form:
p0(ω1) = αRay · E0(ω1)
(2.10)
p0(ω1 ± ωM) = αRam · E0(ω1)
(2.11)
The components of the polarizability tensor is given in a Taylor series by:
αρσ = (αρσ)0 +
X
k
∂αρσ
∂Qk

0
Qk + 1
2
X
k,l
 ∂2αρσ
∂Qk∂Ql

0
QkQl...
(2.12)
(αρσ)0 is the polarizability tensor components at equilibrium Qk and Ql are
normal coordinates of the molecular vibration with frequency ωk and ωl.
It
is exactly the magnitude of the polarizability that determines the intensity of
scattering, which becomes clear in secytiom 2.3.
2.2.2
Quantum picture
In the quantum picture light is either absorbed or emitted as a consequence of
the molecular system transitioning between discrete energy levels.
Hence the
transition for the entire molecular system is described by the transition electric
dipole like the classical equivalent (2.6) [36]:
(p)fi = (p(1))fi + (p(2))fi + (p(3))fi + ...
(2.13)
(p)fi =

Ψ′
f
ˆp
Ψ′
i

(2.14)
Where Ψ′
i and Ψ′
f are the wavefunctions describing the initial and final state of
the molecular system respectively. The electromagnetic radiation is still treated
==PAGE:26==
16
2 State of the art and scattering theory
classically and so (p(1))fi is still linear in E.
Ψ′
i and Ψ′
f are time-dependent
pertubed wavefunctions:
Ψ′
i = Ψ(0)
i
+ Ψ(1)
i
+ Ψ(2)
i
+ ... + Ψ(n)
i
(2.15)
Ψ′
f = Ψ(0)
f
+ Ψ(1)
f
+ Ψ(2)
f
+ ... + Ψ(n)
f
(2.16)
Where the unpertubed wavefunctions Ψ(0)
i ,Ψ(0)
f
are followed by the equivalent
perturbations. The expansion of Ψ′
i and Ψ′
f means that the first term of the
transition moment electric dipole, (p(1))fi, subsequently takes the form:
(p(1))fi =

Ψ0
f
ˆp
Ψ1
i

+

Ψ1
f
ˆp
Ψ0
i

(2.17)
Like the classical equivalent, the three types of scattering Rayleigh, Stokes and
anti-Stokes Raman scattering the dipole moment takes the following form:
(p(1)
0 (ω1))ii = (α)ii · E0(ω1)
(2.18)
(p(1)
0 (ω1 ± ωM))fi = (α)fi · E0(ω1)
(2.19)
The components of the polarizability tensor, (α)fi, is the given by:
(αρσ)fi = 1
ℏ
X
r̸=i,f
 ⟨f|ˆpρ|r⟩⟨r|ˆpσ|i⟩
ωri −ω1 −iΓr
+ ⟨f|ˆpσ|r⟩⟨r|ˆpρ|i⟩
ωrf + ω1 + iΓr

(2.20)
Where ˆp is the induced transition electric dipole moment operator, |r⟩is some
resonant state in the molecule and Γr relates to the lifetime of this state, τr =
1/(2Γr(ωr)), which is assumed to be finite as opposed to the initial and finite
states. The double subscript on the frequencies, ωri and ωrf, are given by the
frequency differences ωri = ωr −ωi and ωrf = ωr −ωf. Consequently, ωri must
be the absorption frequency of the molecule system for any resonance r, and ωrf
the difference between these states and final state. The scattered frequency, ωs,
must be:
ωs = ω1 −ωfi = ωrf −ωri + ω1
(2.21)
In the description above only the electric dipole moment part, ˆHp, of the total
Hamiltonian is taken into account:
ˆH = ˆHp + ˆHm + ˆHθ
(2.22)
The magnetic dipole term, ˆHm, and electric quadrupole term, ˆHθ, are neglected as
they are zero when E is constant over the molecule. This is a good approximation
as the wavelength of the electromagnetic radiation in the visible range, is multiple
orders of magnitude larger than the size of a hemoglobin molecule (5̃nm).
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Resonance Raman spectroscopy
17
2.3
Resonance Raman spectroscopy
The matrix elements of the polarizability between the final and initial state given
in eq. (2.20) are a measure of the Raman scattering probability. The magnitude
of these elements are clearly dependent on the relative magnitude of resonant
frequencies in the molecular system, ωr, and the frequency of the incident light,
ω1. When the incident frequency is much smaller than any absorption frequency
of the system, ω1 ≪ωri, the denominator ωri −ω1 −iΓr remains relatively
large, as the magnitude of ωri is much larger than iΓr. In this case the Raman
scattering process is denoted as normal and the transition from initial to final
states goes through a virtual state as described previously. When ω1 is close to
one or more absorption frequencies of the molecule system, ω1 ≈ωri and the
denominator ωri −ω1 −iΓr becomes very small for that particular state r and
dominates the sum. This means that the magnitude of the polarizability matrix
elements become very large and the Raman scattering intensity becomes orders
of magnitudes larger. This process is denoted resonance Raman scattering.
As mentioned earlier Raman spectroscopy on hemoglobin using an excitation
wavelength in the Soret band will increase Raman intensities substantially, which
provide a significant advantage to an otherwise weak effect. However, this tech-
nique have a number of drawbacks such as fluorescence and laser induced thermal
degradation of the analyte. Applications of resonance Raman spectroscopy on
blood have generally been limited to hemoglobin, and it is specifically the ππ∗
transitions of the ligand in the heme protein that cause the resonance. As re-
flected in figure 2.2 (a) two bands in the electronic absorption spectrum are avail-
able, namely the Q-band centered around 550nm and the Soret band centered
around 400nm. By excitation in the Soret band a resonance Raman spectrum
will be dominated be the totally symmetric modes of porphyrin ring, the central
ring presented in figure 2.1 (a) [37].
2.4
Near-infrared Raman spectroscopy
The near-infrared (NIR) region of the electromagnetic spectrum is positioned
around 700-2500 nm and most existing NIR Raman analysis on blood have used
a 785 nm excitation wavelength [2]. Near this wavelength most biological samples
are almost transparent, which mean that background fluorescence disturbing the
Raman features is less of a problem. No electronic resonances enhances specific
analytes in the sample either, which have proven advantageous when analyzing
NIR Raman spectra of multiple blood components, where the resonant modes of
the Heme protein are less dominant. As deducted from eq. (2.1) and (2.3), the in-
tensity of the Raman scattering decreases significantly when moving towards the
==PAGE:28==
18
2 State of the art and scattering theory
NIR region as I ∝1/λ, so the improvement of signal-to-noise ratio by decreasing
background fluorescence and a more balanced probing of the blood components,
come at cost of weaker signal. The difference between NIR Raman scattering
and resonance Raman scattering is outlined in figure 2.4 (b).
2.5
Spatially offset Raman spectroscopy
Spatially offset Raman spectroscopy (SORS) is a technique that can probe deep
inside diffusely scattering media, which makes it particular attractive when ana-
lyzing multi-layer systems. In a conventional Raman setup the excitation laser
and scattered light follow the same optical path in a back-scattering configuration.
In diffusely scattering material such as packed RBCs or whole blood, the Raman
scattered photons will propagate randomly, and photons from deep within the
material will not be collected eﬀiciently. These photons might be absorbed by the
material or propagate sideways, before finding a way to the collecting objective.
The few collected scattered photons originating from deep within the material
are often masked by or indistinguishable from surface scattered photons, and so
depth information is often lost in conventional Raman spectroscopy. SORS take
advantage of the fact that scattered photons emanating from deeper into the
sample, on average reach the light collection region at a spatial offset due to the
lateral spreading of scattered photons [38]. This is outlined in figure 2.4 (a).
There is a range of variations to the way the spatially distinct illumination re-
gions are detected. The SORS technique used in this study is called hyperspectral
SORS, where the excitation geometry is still point-like and the response at the
spatial offsets with respect to the excitation point are detected as separate rows
on a CCD camera. The pixel intensity along each row then corresponds to the
scattered response at a specific spatial offset away from the laser excitation spot
position. In most Raman spectroscopy applications the analyte of interest sits on
some kind of polymer or glass substrate or in a microfluidic channel, so the ability
survey the depth profile of the system and suppress unwanted scattering is crucial.
As touched on in a previous section, SORS has been examined as way of monitor-
ing sealed transfusion bags of concentrated red blood cells without breaching the
sterility [15,16]. Here different hemoglobin features are monitored over time by
probing through 400µm of PVC, and while Raman scattering from the PVC still
interferes with interesting spectral markers of hemoglobin, the technique could
open up for automated quality control in blood banks.
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
19
Excitation laser
Depth
Multilayered
sample
Figure 2.4. Various Raman scattering concepts. (a) Propagation of light in multilay-
ered diffusely scattering samples. The deeper light propagate into the sample the larger
the diffusion of scattered photons laterally. Their long and random path through the
sample cause scattered photon from the deep layers to be detected at larger spatial offset
when collected as back scattering. (b) The difference between normal Raman scattering
at NIR excitation and resonance Raman scattering. At NIR excitation wavelengths far
from any absorbing frequency of the material, the system is excited to a virtual state.
When this intermediate state collapses to a vibrational state of the system, Raman
scattered light is emitted. If the excitation wavelength is close to a resonant electronic
state of the material, resonant Raman scattering occurs which can enhance the collected
Raman signal multiple orders of magnitude.
2.6
Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) is a widely used technique where
the analyte of interest is adsorbed on the surface of a nanostructured metal sub-
strate or nanoparticles, enhancing the Raman scattering by a factor of up to 108
or larger. As discussed previously Raman scattering in itself is a very low proba-
bility process, and this is largely due to the absence of a structured environment.
The probability of absorption and re-emission depends on the availability of pho-
tonic states on the molecule, while the probability of vibrational excitation’s is
controlled by the relationship between the energy of the incident photons and
resonant electronic states of the molecule. The vibrational excitation probability
is significantly enhanced by introducing metal surfaces, that the molecules can
use for electron transfer in both ground and excited states. Furthermore, the
probability of initial absorption of an incident photon is directly proportional to
the size of the local electric field around the molecule. So localized enhancement
==PAGE:30==
20
2 State of the art and scattering theory
of the electromagnetic field by plasmon excitation in metal nanoparticles, plas-
monic nanostructures or other field enhancement techniques, can significantly
enhance the Raman signal [39].
SERS on blood components have traditionally been limited to blood plasma
analysis due to challenges of maintaining a healthy environment for living blood
cells. As plasma consists mostly of water the Raman scattering is inherently weak,
which makes it and obvious candidate for SERS. For instance SERS for detection
of metabolites in protein filtered plasma using Ag and Au nanoparticles has been
proposed for point-of-care and screening purposes ( [40]. In addition to that Ag
nanoparticle based SERS have been used to successfully discriminate between
colorectal cancerous and healthy blood plasma [41].
In both instances metal
nanoparticle solutions were mixed with plasma samples and incubated, which
greatly enhanced various Raman features compared to the spectra of plasma
samples without nanoparticle solution.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Optical experiments
and microfluidics
This chapter outlines the optical experiments performed throughout this study,
the Raman spectroscopy setups, and details the Raman data acquisition and
processing and methods of sample preparation and microfluidic setup. Emphasis
is on which considerations have been made to ensure stability and reproducibility
when combining optical alignment and microfluidic elements.
3.1
The Raman Spectroscopy setups
Two iterations of tabletop Raman spectroscopy setups have been used. Firstly,
a resonance Raman spectroscopy setup was established consisting of a 405 nm
continuous wave laser (Cobolt 08-NLD 405 nm) for excitation, a bright field
objective lens (50X/0.8 Nikon CFI60 TU Plan Epi ELWD) to focus the excitation
laser into the sample and collect scattered light in a back scattering configuration
and a spectrometer (Avantes, AvaSpec-HSC-TEC) for Raman analysis. A series
of line filters and notch filters are implemented as well in order to filter sidebands
from the laser and suppress Rayleigh scattering when analyzing the scattered
light. The setup and more details are shown in figure 3.1.
Secondly, a NIR Raman spectroscopy setup was established consisting of a
tunable 785 nm diode laser (Toptica DLC DL-pro 780 nm) for excitation, an
inverted microscope with the same objective as in the resonance Raman setup
and an imaging spectrometer (Shamrock SR-303i) with a build in CCD (Newton
920). Even though the Toptica laser is tunable in the range 765 nm to 805 nm,
the excitation wavelength was kept fixed at 785 nm in accordance with most
NIR Raman analysis on blood components in literature and previous attempts
at Raman blood typing. Like the Cobolt laser the 785 nm laser require sideband
filtering, which is accommodated by a tunable bandpass edge filter adjusted to
and fixed around a CWL at 785 nm. Furthermore, notch filters are applied in
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Optical experiments and microfluidics
Objective
Sample
x
y
z
Spectrometer
Diode laser 
(405 nm)
405 nm 
Line filter
Notch filter
Notch filter
Lens tube
+ Fiber coupler
Optical fibers
Figure 3.1. Resonance Raman spectroscopy setup. A 405nm continuous wave (CW)
laser is used as excitation source and requires sideband filtering.
The light is sent
through a laser line bandpass filter with center wavelength (CWL) at 405nm ensuring
ensuring only a narrow band (FWHM = 10nm) around this wavelength is transmitted.
A mirror then reflects the light at an angle <8◦towards a notch filter that blocks a
certain band of wavelengths depending on the angel of incidence (AOI) (CWL = 405nm).
An AOI of <8◦ensures light around 405 nm (FWHM = 13nm) is blocked by the notch
filter and so the 405nm excitation laser light is directed into a microscope objective via
a mirror. The objective focuses the light into the sample fixed on a piezo stage that can
be moved in the x, y and z direction. The sample can be moved in the z direction by 0.01
µm precision. The back scattered light is collected by the same objective and guided
towards the same notch filter allowing scattered light to be transmitted. A lens tube
couples the light into an optical fiber, then through an additional notch filter and via an
optical fiber into the spectrometer, where a diffraction grating disperses the scattered
light into its constituent wavelengths for analysis.
both the optical path through the inverted microscope and in the spectrometer
to suppress Rayleigh scattering. Since an imaging spectrometer was used it is
especially important to filter the Rayleigh scattering and not overexpose the CCD
camera. The setup and more details are shown in figure 3.2.
In both setups the laser source and the coupling into the microscope objective
have been aligned as precise as possible by adjustments of the mirrors. In order
acquire precise and consistent Raman measurements it is important that the
excitation light is incident vertical onto the sample. In both setups the sample is
fixed on piezo stage with 0.01 and 0.1µm precision respectively in the z-direction,
making it possible to focus the excitation laser with high precision into the sample.
In order to establish confidence that a scan in the z direction through the sample
can be done accurately, it is crucial that the optics are aligned such that the
illumination is vertical onto the sample. The inverted microscope in the 785 nm
setup can advantageously be used for inspection of the sample, as well and as
==PAGE:33==
3.1 The Raman Spectroscopy setups
23
Diode laser 
(765-805 nm)
785 nm
Tunable Bandpass Filter
Microscope
Slit
Spectrometer
Grating
CCD
Figure 3.2.
Near-infared Raman spectroscopy setup. A tunable 765-805 nm diode
laser is used as excitation source. In this study the wavelength is kept fixed at 785nm
and sidebands are filtered using are tunable bandpass edge filter installed at fixed angle
with respect to the incident light corresponding to a CWL at 785nm. The laser light
is then redirected by two mirrors into a microscope port where an additional 785nm
line filter is applied in order to filter sidebands. The laser source is coupled into the
microscope in a back scattering configuration where a 50/50 beam splitter is inserted
to automatically align the optical path from the objective to the collecting optics. A
785nm notch filter (FWHM=33nm) is inserted to suppress Rayleigh scattering and the
output port of the microscope is connected to the spectrometer by a C-mount.
An
adjustable slit is positioned at the entrance of the spectrometer to suppress light away
from the focus of the laser spot. The sample is fixed on piezo stage with 0.1µm precision
in both the x, y and z-direction.
way to position the sample precisely with respect to the incident excitation laser
in xy plan. Also in this case it is important that the optics are well aligned so
the focused laser spot is in the field of view of the microscope.
In the 405 nm setup a single Raman spectrum for a specified integration time
could be measured at a time. The Raman shift was automatically extracted by
the software by input of the excitation wavelength. Raman spectra of well known
silica glass analytes are presented in Figure 3.3 (a) and (b), showing various laser
and filter features as well as Raman glass peaks. The spectrometer and software
have fixed output of 1024 intensity variables in a 0-3311 cm−1 wavenumber range,
corresponding to an average resolution of 3.23 cm−1. The minimum difference
between two lines is 1.53 cm−1.
The imaging spectrometer has the ability to spatially distinguish illumina-
tion regions as described in section 2.5. At the entrance of the spectrometer an
aperture slit is positioned in order to suppress light away from the laser spot. Po-
sitions along the slit entrance then correspond to a scattered response at a spatial
offset from laser spot position. The entrance slit aperture is fixed at 300µm for all
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Optical experiments and microfluidics
−500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Raman shift [c −1]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Intensity
Edge filter
Si–O–Si 
(417 c −1, 530 c −1)
SiO2 (1086 c )1)
Si-O (BO4) (924 cm−1)
B2O3 (1550 c )1)
a) Borosilicate - 405 nm excitation laser
−500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Raman shift [cm−1]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Intensity
Edge filte 
ω1 (440 cm−1)
D1 (490 cm−1)
D2 (605 cm−1)
ω3 (800 cm−1)
ω4 (1060 cm−1)
b) Fused silica - 405 nm excitation lase 
−200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Raman shift [cm−1]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Intensity
Edge filte 
ω1 (440 cm−1)
D1 (490 cm−1)
D2 (605 cm−1)
ω3 (800 cm−1)
ω4 (1060 cm−1)
c) Fused silica - 785 nm excitation lase 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Raman shift [cm−1]
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Pixel y
d) Fused silica - 785 nm excitation laser
Figure 3.3. Reference Raman spectra of borosilicate and fused silica from both Raman
spectroscopy setups. (a) Raman spectrum of borosilicate glass which is often used for
microscope slides and cover slips. The spectrum is obtained using a 405 nm excitation
laser and the Raman features coincide with literature, although the exact composition
of borosilicate can vary due to different ratios of oxides. The peaks have been assigned
using [42–45]. The cutoff wavelength of the notch edge filter is clearly visible around
300 cm−1 equivalent to around 410 nm .
(b) Raman spectrum of fused silica from
405 nm setup.
Raman spectra of fused silica are more well defined and the typical
features have been assigned using [46]. Defect lines D1 and D2 due to the presence of
4- and 3-member silicon-oxygen rings and Si-O bond vibrations ω, are characteristic
for fused silica suggesting good accuracy of the Raman spectroscopy setup. Once again
the filter feature is present on the spectrum. (c) Raman spectrum of fused silica using
a 785 nm excitation wavelength. Similar Raman features can be identified as in the
405 nm equivalent showing great consistency between the setups. The 785 nm notch
filter cutoff can be seen at around 200 cm−1 corresponding to around 798 nm. (d) The
Raman spectrum in (c) is extracted from this CCD image as a single row at y pixel 111
which have the maximum intensity along all columns, suppressing almost all light away
from the laser spot.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Methods of sample preparation and microfluidic setup
25
measurements. For each measurement the imaging spectrometer obtain an image
where pixels along the horizontal axis denote the spectral dispersion and pixels
along the vertical axis denote the aperture slit position. The spectral dispersion
is immediately translated to a Raman shift by input of the excitation wavelength
and an integration time can be set for each measurements. A conventional Ra-
man spectrum can be extracted either by binning all vertical pixel counts or only
specific vertical positions in order to control which spatial offset positions from
the laser spot are included.
The grating in the Shamrock spectrometer can be rotated, meaning that spe-
cific ranges of wavenumbers can be probed and providing a high resolution. For
one position of the grating, 1024 horizontal pixel values are detected, however
multiple measurements can be stitched together so the total number of horizontal
intensity values can reach 2663. The wavenumber range can be adjusted, like-
wise making the resolution adjustable. For each iteration the grating has to be
moved, another measurement has to be conducted, increasing the total measure-
ment time. An average resolution of 0.55 cm−1 was obtained in the fingerprint
region of blood, 400 −1850 cm−1, by measuring at three grating position such
that the measurement time totalled 3 × integration time. Raman measurements
on fused silica are presented in Figure 3.3 (c) and (d).
As seen in Figure 3.3 known Raman features can be identified in borosilicate
and fused silica glass at both near UV and NIR excitation, establishing a reference
for both systems. Both types of glass is used later as sample holders in the form of
microscope glass slips and glass capillaries for the microfluidic setup. This means
that features belonging to these analytes should be identified and suppressed
whenever blood components are analysed.
3.2
Methods of sample preparation and
microfluidic setup
Multiple sample configurations have been examined for optimal Raman analysis
on blood components. Firstly, the sample holder must accommodate the work-
ing distance of the obejctive, WD = 1 mm, limiting the thickness of the walls
surrounding the blood sample. Secondly, the voxel size of the incident excitation
laser must be taken into account when suppressing the Raman signal from the
wall material and quantifying the volume of sample that is illuminated.
The
beam proifle is characterized in the section 3.3 and the voxel size is given by a
beam waist of 2.86 µm and a depth of focus of 20 µm.
Initially, the blood samples were prepared in a Gene Frame configuration as
outlined in Figure 3.4. A 1 by 1 cm Gene Frame was mounted on a borosillicate
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Optical experiments and microfluidics
Objective
50x ELWD
WD = 1.0 mm
NA = 0.8
x
y
z
250   m 
Liquid
(25   L)
Glass
b)
1)
2)
3)
Figure 3.4. The Gene Frame sample configuration (a) A 25 µL Gene Frame is sand-
wiched in between a 1 mm borosillicate microscope slide and 150µm cover slip and
placed above the objective. Later iterations make use of fused silica substrates to en-
close the Gene Frame. (b) Various blood component samples: 1) Whole blood, 2) Blood
plasma and 3) Diluted RBCs.
microscope slide with a thickness of 1 mm and sealed by a borosillicate cover
slip with a thickness of 150 µm. The height of the Gene Frame was 250 µm,
enabling a maximal sample volume of 25 µL. The blood samples could then
be prepared by pipetting a sample volume around 20 µm into the Gene Frame,
keeping the corners clear for reference. This configuration was mainly used in
the 405 nm setup where free movement in the 1 by 1 cm sample area in the
xy-plane facilitated easy positioning of the incident laser without microscope
investigation. Furthermore, the 150 µm thin cover slip enabled focusing inside
the sample volume by adjusting the relative distance between the objective and
Gene Frame chip.
The Gene Frame configuration presented several challenges. The elaborate
sample preparation steps and multiple disposable sample holder parts makes it
unsuitable for high throughput applications.
In addition to that, the station-
ary nature of the sample makes it vulnerable to photodegradation and laser-
induced denaturation of RBCs.
Photodegredation is in large part due to the
strong absorption of Hemoglobin, but even at NIR excitation and low laser pow-
ers, photodamage of hemoglobin can occur. Heme aggregation due thermally or
laser-induced denaturation creates spectral inhomogeneity in the measurements,
which ultimately will disturb the blood type analysis [47]. Flow cell based Raman
techniques have shown to overcome this photodegradation [48] as well as allowing
a potential reusable and high throughput setup.
A basic microfluidic flow chip configuration was then used for further blood
analysis.
The flow cell is displayed in Figure 3.5 (b) and consists of a fused
silica round capillary fixed in PDMS frame with an inlet and outlet, and can
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Methods of sample preparation and microfluidic setup
27
Objective
50x ELWD
WD = 1.0 mm
NA = 0.8
x
y
z
250   m 
55   m 
Liquid
Fused Silica
b)
c)
1)
3)
2)
Figure 3.5.
The flow based sample configuration (a) The analyte flows through a
fused silica capillary while the objective is placed perpendicular to the center of the
channel. Fused silica capillaries of multiple dimensions have been examined. (b), (c)
The sample is loaded directly to the capillary and underpressure at outlet from the
syringe (2) or forward pressure using the pressure pump (1) enables sample exchange
without moving the inlet and outlet connections. Likewise, cleaning and buffer solution
is loaded without moving the flow chip ensuring stable optical alignment.
easily be placed above the objective. As seen in 3.5 (a) the laser spot should
be focused carefully in the center of the capillary xy-plane by inspection of the
microscope, and the z-direction can carefully be probed for the optimal Raman
scattering signal. Different dimensions of fused silica capillaries were examined
and in order to avoid clogging, a relatively large diameter capillary was chosen
for the extensive blood type data collection experiments. Additionally, a specific
protocol was developed in order to maintain a healthy cell environment and ensure
a stable microfluidic environment altogether. Both pressure pump and syringe
induced flow were explored in terms of stability and throughput and the results
are discussed later.
The blood samples from the blood bank at Rigshospitalet used during this
study were sampled in tubes where 1.8 mg EDTA per mL of blood has been added.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Optical experiments and microfluidics
In order to avoid gradients of EDTA when loading blood into the microfluidic
channel a buffer solution was used to both clean and wet the channel in between
measurements. A buffer solution of 1000x 0.5mM EDTA mixed with phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) in 1:1000 ratio was prepared to best match the environment
of the blood samples and further avoid clog formation in the channel.
Another important sample preparation factor is the storage of blood samples.
Multiple studies have been carried out on RBC oxygenation and degradation
over time [14,15] and a maximum time frame from donation to measurement was
established. Blood analysis results and optimization for both configurations are
presented in the last chapter as well as durability measurements and the protocol
used to obtain the blood typing data.
3.3
Beam Characterization by Knife-edge
measurement
0
50
100
150
200
Knife position, z [μm]
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Beam radius [μm]
√2w0 = 2μm
w0 = 1.43μm
2z0 = 20μm
50X Objective Lens
z
x
Moving razor blade
Detector
2z0
w0
w0
Gaussian beam
Figure 3.6. Left are the knife edge measurement data translated to w(z) for the 50x
Objective lens used throughout this thesis. The 405 nm laser is used for the characteri-
zation. Right is an illustration of the measurement method.
As mentioned previously it is important to be able to scan through the samples
and focus the laser spot with a high precision in order to optimize the Raman
signal from the analyte and suppress unwanted scattering. In this context it is
also important to characterize the profile of the focused laser beam and determine
parameters such as the beam waist and depth of focus. The laser beam can be
modelled as propagating Gaussian beam:
I(r) ≈I0e−r2/w2
(3.1)
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Beam Characterization by Knife-edge measurement
29
Where the I0 is the intensity amplitude, w is the beam radius and r is the
radial coordinate.
w is defined as distance between the optical axis and the
position where the intensity has decreased to 1/e2 of its maximal value. The
beam radius of the diverging beam is given by:
w(z) = w0
r
1 + z −z1
z0
(3.2)
Where w0 denotes the beam diameter, 2w0 the beam waist and 2z0 the depth
of focus. These parameters are derived from the measurement in Figure 3.6. For
a Gaussian beam propagation the following applies:
w2
0
z0
= M 2 λ
π
(3.3)
Where λ is the laser wavelength. For a perfect Gaussian the beam quality
is M 2 = 1 [49]. The beam waist and depth of focus can be measured by a so
called knife edge technique. A razorblade is moved in the x and z direction with
respect to the laser beam as outlined in Figure 3.6 and the power is measured by
a detector at different razorblade positions. The laser power values is then fitted:
P = P0 + Pmax
2

1 −erf
√
2(x −x0)
w

(3.4)
Such that values of w can be extracted for different values of z. The beam waist
of the 50x/0.8 objective is 2w0 = 2.86µm and the depth of focus is 2z0 = 20µm.
==PAGE:40==
30
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Multivariate Statistics,
Machine and Deep
Learning analysis
Raman spectroscopy of complex substances such as blood plasma and RBCs pro-
vide extremely detailed spectra and large amounts of data, making it suitable for
machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) to extract information. A
Raman spectrum can consist of multiple thousands of intensity variables so even
small displacements and variations can be learned by AI and ML algorithms. In
recent years data availability have exploded, driving a rapid development and ac-
cessibility of AI and ML tools for data analysis. This development has translated
to Raman spectroscopy where open source ML libraries have enabled easy and
fast spectral analysis. For instance SERS of single molecule systems are tradition-
ally hard to analyze due to the high variability between spectra, caused by the
high flexibility of orientation between substrate and analyte. However, ML and
AI algorithms are able to extract nonlinear information from these datasets [3].
ML is the area of AI that exploit large datasets to train algorithms in or-
der to improve their performance. The ML algorithms learn features from the
data and implement them to perform clustering, classification or regression. The
starting point data might not be a suitable input for the ML algorithm of choice,
which means that some sort of feature extraction is necessary. Feature extrac-
tion derives useful values from the raw data, e.g. by reducing the dimension of
the input dataset, and for many ML applications on Raman spectra this step is
essential. A subset of ML is deep learning (DL) which are representation based
learning methods, meaning that the representation of features in the input data
is automatically found and used for clustering, classification or regression.
In the field of ML there is distinction between supervised and unsupervised
learning. Supervised learning implies that the algorithm is trained by a training
set consisting of N observations that have N known labels, being different classes
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Multivariate Statistics, Machine and Deep Learning analysis
or a numerical value. The objective is then for the model to learn to predict these
labels from the observation and apply this knowledge to other independent sets
of data. In other words the model f is trained to predict y = y1, ..., yN from
x = x1, ..., xN:
y = f(x, w) + ϵ
(4.1)
In the training of the model a set of parameters, w, need to be tuned for op-
timal prediction and the noise, ϵ, of the input data needs to be accounted for
as well. Traditionally, a long range of different supervised ML algorithms have
been used to extract information from Raman spectra. Firstly, linear discrimi-
nation analysis methods (LDA) and models based on regression such as partial
least squares regression (PLS) are popular as they are easy to implement and
computationally effective. As mentioned these models must be used alongside
with some kind dimensionality reduction method and the conventional choice is
principal component analysis (PCA).
Deep learning methods have also gained popularity in recent years as imple-
mentation have become more accessible with open source python libraries such as
Scikit-learn, TensorFlow and PyTorch emerging. The most popular are so called
artificial neural network (ANN) based models, including both multilayer percep-
tron (MLP), convolutional neural networks (CNN) and support vector machines
(SVM). An overview of the most common ML techniques employed in Raman
spectroscopy are presented in a review by Lussier et al. from 2020 [3]. Various
combinations of discrimination analysis methods, dimensionality reduction and
ANN based models are explored in order to achieve a high prediction accuracy.
Unsupervised learning implies that the objective of the ML algorithm is to
find patterns or correlations in the data without any prior knowledge or labeling
of the data. The only unsupervised learning methods considered in this thesis
are outlier detection and density estimation in order to quantify the confidence
level of a given Raman measurement. This chapter attempts to summarize which
ML concepts and algorithms are suitable for Raman spectroscopy analysis and
which are used for blood type discrimination later on.
4.1
Preprocessing of Raman spectra
Before applying any ML algorithms to the Raman spectra a series of prepro-
cessing steps need to be conducted. Noise and fluorescence create a background
drift and in order to quantify the spectral information the background must be
accounted for. This background drift might vary in between measurements due
to thermal fluctuations and other environmental factors, so a robust method is
needed to fit a baseline in each spectrum and correct it. A range of methods
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Preprocessing of Raman spectra
33
such as polynomial fitting, least squares polynomial fitting, derivative methods,
wavelet transform methods, iterative averaging and penalized least squares have
been suggested for baseline correction [50, 51]. Polynomial fitting methods are
very sensitive to the polynomial order used and the optimal order might vary in
between spectra, making it ill-suited for automatic baseline correction. Likewise,
least squares polynomial fitting methods rely on choosing an appropriate subset
of each spectrum, filtering methods such as the wavelet transform often require
extensive prior knowledge about the background signal, derivative methods are
unsuited for noisy signals and iterative averaging falls short when the Raman
signal from multiple blood components overlap and create broad peaks in the
spectra.
The methods based on penalized least squares methods have the advantage
that they do not require any peak detection or other individual treatment of the
spectra. Furthermore, these methods have shown the ability to effectively correct
noisy baselines while maintaining an accurate peak height estimation, making
them desirable for the types of Raman spectra obtained in this thesis. A baseline
correction method using an asymmetrically reweighted penalized least squares
smoothing (arPLS) algorithm presented by Baek et al. [50] is implemented in
python and applied to all spectra throughout this study. Penalized and regular-
ized least square methods are based on minimizing a regularized least squares
function taking the raw signal y, a regularization parameter λ and a penalizing
weights w as inputs:
S(z) = (y −z)T W (y −z) + λzT DT Dz
(4.2)
Where,
D =





1
−2
1
0
· · ·
0
0
0
0
1
−2
1
· · ·
0
0
0
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
0
0
0
· · ·
· · ·
1
−2
1





D is a second order finite difference matrix and W a diagonal matrix with the
penalizing weights on the diagonal. The smoothed baseline z is then found by
minimizing S:
∂S(z)
∂zT
= −2W (y −z) + 2λDT Dz = 0
(4.3)
z = (W + λDT D)−1W y
(4.4)
Previously, penalized least squares methods have assigned weights in W by in-
troducing an additional parameter p such that:
wi =
(
p,
if yi > zi.
1 −p,
otherwise.
(4.5)
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Multivariate Statistics, Machine and Deep Learning analysis
However, more sophisticated adaptive methods have been suggested to better
maintain the peak heights of the original spectra:
wi =
(
1
1+e2(d−(−m+2σ))/σ ,
if yi > zi.
1,
otherwise.
(4.6)
Where d = yi −zi and m and σ are the mean and standard deviation respectively
of y −z in the region where yi < zi. A first baseline is then computed using some
initial guess for w and and a new iteration of z is calculated until the weights do
not change within some tolerance. The algorithm is summarized below and the
corrected spectrum can be found by subtracting z from the original spectrum.
(1)
Build W from initial guess where:
w = (1, 1, ..., 1)
(4.7)
(2)
Compute the smoothed baseline:
z = (W + λDT D)−1W y)
(4.8)
(3)
Compute the difference vector only containing negative elements:
d = y −z,
yi > zi
(4.9)
(4)
Calculate new weights w:
wi =
(
1
1+e2(d−(−m+2σ))/σ ,
if yi > zi.
1,
otherwise.
(4.10)
(5)
Compare the new weights to the previous iteration:
(4.11)
ratio =
wt −wt+1/
wt
(6)
Repeat steps (1)-(5) with updated weights,
(4.12)
if the ratio is above some defined tolerance.
(4.13)
(7)
Otherwise, compute corrected spectrum y′ = y −z
(4.14)
Additional preprocessing steps include normalizing the spectra to the area
under the curve and implementing various degrees of a Chebyshev type II low
pass filter.
Importantly, the preprocessing steps should be applied to reduce
variance in the data that is present across all classes, without removing features
or variance describing a specific class. The regularization parameter λ in the
arPLS baseline correction as well as the order and cutoff frequency of the low
pass filter are essentially treated as hyperparameters when optimizing the ML
algorithms. Examples of the applying the different preprocessing steps can be
seen in figure 4.1.
4.2
Dimensionality reduction
As noted previously some classification and regression models, such as LDA and
PLS, require that the dimension of the input data is reduced. In other contexts,
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Dimensionality reduction
35
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Raman  hift [cm−1]
1700
1800
1900
2000
2100
2200
Inten ity
a) arPLS ba eline fit for variou  λ
Whole blood Raman  ignal
λ = 105
λ = 107
λ = 109
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Raman  hift [cm−1]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Inten ity
λ = 105
λ = 107
λ = 109
b) Ba eline corrected  pectrum
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Raman shift [cm−1]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Intensity
Wn = 0.05
Wn = 0.1
Wn = 0.5
c) Chebyshe  type II low pass filter
0
100
200
300
Intensity
d) Normalization to area under the curve
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Raman shift [cm 1]
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
Intensity
Normalized
Figure 4.1. Effect of various preprocessing steps applied to whole blood Raman spectra.
(a) arPLS algorithm with λ = 105, λ = 107 and λ = 109 respectively fitted to a whole
blood Raman spectrum. (b) The corresponding baseline corrected whole blood Raman
spectra. The λ parameter greatly influence peak intensities and shoulders in the baseline
corrected spectra. (c) Chebyshev type II low pass filters applied to a baseline corrected
whole blood Raman spectrum. If the cutoff frequency, Wn, is set to low, significant
spectral features are removed by the low pass filter, which is clearly the case with
Wn = 0.05. (d) The average of 813 whole blood Raman spectra obtained at similar
conditions plotted with one standard deviation. When the spectra are normalized the
variance in the dataset is significantly reduced. All preprocessing steps are treated as
hyperparameters throughout the ML analysis in order to ensure no important features
are filtered out in the process.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Multivariate Statistics, Machine and Deep Learning analysis
such as ANN based models, the dimension could be reduced anyway for both
better performance and reduced computational cost, but nevertheless it should
be applied in a way that no valuable information is lost.
Depending on the
spectrometer the Raman spectra acquired in this study consist of M = 1024
or M = 2663 intensity variables, spanning a very high dimensional space. The
most common way of reducing the dimension of a large dataset is PCA. The
goal of PCA is to find a lower-dimensional representation of the dataset while
simultaneously maintaining a certain amount of variability in the data. While
the Raman spectrum is resolved by thousands of intensity variables, maybe only
a handful peaks in the spectrum accounts for useful information, so from an
application point of view the true dimension is much lower.
PCA makes the
assumption that the lower dimensional representation is linear and is essentially
a projection of the original observations onto the lower dimensional subspace.
Given N Raman spectra observations, each consisting of M intensity variables
or features:
x1, x2, ..., xN ∈RM,
(4.15)
A new lower dimension n ≤M is picked and a new n-dimensional representation
is derived:
y1, y2, ..., yN ∈Rn
(4.16)
The dimensional observations, xi, are transformed to lower dimensional observa-
tion, yi, by selecting an orthonormal basis V = (v1, v2, ..., vn) spanning the low
dimensional space, and projecting xi onto V :
(1)
Compute mean of observations,
m = 1
N
N
X
i=1
xi
(4.17)
(2)
Center observations,
exi = xi −m
(4.18)
(3)
Collect all centered observations in a matrix,
f
X = (ex1, ex2, ..., exN)
(4.19)
(4)
Project centered observations onto the low-dimensional space,
yT
i = exT
i V
(4.20)
These three steps outline the principal of PCA, where the first two steps ensure
that the mean of the observations is not included as a variable in the reduced
dataset. V should be chosen such that it is an orthonormal basis and it maximizes
the variance of yi. This variance scaled by the number of observations can be
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Classification methods
37
expressed as:
W =
N
X
i=1
(yi −eyi)2 =
N
X
i=i
yT
i yi
(4.21)
eyi = 1
N
N
X
i=1
yi = 0
(4.22)
Where the mean of the projected data is also centered. It turns out that W
is maximized by choosing v1, v2, ..., vn as the eigenvectors of f
XT f
X with the n
largest eigenvalues [?]. This finalizes the PCA algorithm:
(1)
Center data:
xi −m,
m = 1
N
N
X
i=1
xi
(4.23)
(2)
Compute the SVD:
f
X = UΣV T
(4.24)
(3)
Compute the first n principal components:
yT
i = exT
i Vn
(4.25)
The remaining variance explained after dimensionality reduction can be calcu-
lated by projecting the new observations back to the original space and comparing
the Fröbenius norm between the two datasets:
X′ = f
XVnV T
n
(4.26)
Variance explained = ∥X′∥2
F
f
X

2
F
(4.27)
yT
i are called the principal components (PCs) and it is normal practice to choose
the number of PCs, n, such that the explained variance ends up accounting for
a chosen confidence level, e.i. 95%.
4.3
Classification methods
Most of the ML analysis conducted throughout this study is about assigning
class labels to each obtained Raman spectrum, e.i. predict which blood type
the spectrum belongs to. For ABO blood typing this is a matter of multiclass
labeling and there is different classification approaches to do this. One approach is
to compare each type pairwise and in that sense reducing the problem to binary
classification.
This approach was used by both existing studies using ML for
Raman ABO blood typing [4,6]. Binary classification frees up more options since
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Multivariate Statistics, Machine and Deep Learning analysis
some algorithms are specifically designed for binary problems and inherently does
not support multi-class classification including two of the most popular methods
LDA and SVM. Multiple classifiers are tried out in a trial and error approach,
however, SVM proved most promising is are investigated more in depth.
4.3.1
SVM
Support vector machines (SVMs) are a set of supervised ML algorithms that build
on a framework developed in the 1990s. SVMs attempt to create a set of hyper-
planes or decision boundaries that separate different classes in high dimensional
space. An optimal separation is created by using hyperplanes that maximizes the
distance to the nearest training points from either class. This creates margins
on both sides of the decision boundary. For a linearly separable example, these
training data points are referred to as the support vectors, and classification is
straightforward. Points that fall on one side of the decision boundary are labeled
as one class and the points on the other side are labeled as an other class. In
an example where the classes are not linearly separable, some data points will
violate a linear decision boundary and the support vectors will be samples within
the margins. In this case the original input space is projected into a higher di-
mensional space by a kernel function, where the classes might then be linearly
separable [?].
Considering a training dataset of N observation vectors xi ∈Rp, i = 1, 2, ..., N
the separating hyperplane in a perfectly separable case, can be formulated as [52]:
f(x) = b + xT w = 0
(4.28)
Where a series of true labels are given as y ∈{1, −1}n. The task of the support
vector classifier (SVC) is then to determine b ∈R and w ∈Rp such that the
prediction of f(x) is correct for as many samples as possible. This corresponds
to predicting the sign of f(x).
SVC solves this problem by finding values of
b and w such that the distance from the separating hyperplane to the margin
boundary is as large as possible for correctly classified observations. This amounts
to minimizing the norm of the coeﬀicients ∥w∥2:
min
b,w
1
2∥w∥2 = min
b,w
1
2wT w
(4.29)
subject to :
yi(b + xT
i w) ≥1,
i = 1, 2, ..., N
(4.30)
In the non-separable case some samples are allowed to violate their margin bound-
ary by a certain distance ξ = (ξ1, ξ2, ..., ξN). Furthermore, the input training vec-
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Cross-validation and performance metrics
39
tors are transformed by a kernel function ϕ(x) modifying eq. (4.29) and (4.30):
min
b,w
1
2wT w + C
N
X
i=1
ξi
(4.31)
subject to :
yi(b + ϕ(xi)T w) ≥1 −ξi,
i = 1, 2, ..., N
(4.32)
Where C is a penalty term acting like an inverse regularization parameter. A
series of different kernel functions ϕ(x) are tried out in a trial and error approach:
Linear :
⟨xi, xj⟩
(4.33)
Polynomial :
(γ⟨xi, xj⟩+ r)d
(4.34)
Radial Basis Function (RBF) :
exp

−γ∥xi −xj∥2
(4.35)
Sigmoid :
tanh(γ⟨xi, xj⟩+ r)
(4.36)
The kernel parameters γ, r, d as well as the penalty parameter C are treated as
hyperparameters when optimizing the models. The SVM classifier is implemented
using the python library Scikit-learn.
4.4
Cross-validation and performance metrics
One of the most important aspects of ML is testing and quantifying the model
performance once an algorithm has been trained. Most importantly the available
data should always be split into a test and training set in order to avoid overfitting
and false estimation of performance. As previously mentioned a set of optimal
hyperparameters for the models need to be estimated and if the performance
of these parameters is evaluated on the test set, prior knowledge from the test
set risk leaking into the general model evaluation. For this reason an additional
validation set is often set aside as well.
However the 3-fold split present further complications when the dataset is
of limited size, as it reduces the amount of data available for training and sub-
sequently affect the model performance. The industry standard when validat-
ing models is therefore so called cross-validation, more specifically K-fold cross-
validation (CV). In this approach a separate validation set is no longer needed.
Instead the training set is split into K smaller sets and for each iteration K −1
sets are used for training and 1 for validation. The performance is then averaged
over all K combinations. Taken to the extreme, K can be set as the total number
of data observation, leaving only one data point for validation in each iteration.
This procedure is known as Leave-one-out CV (LOOCV) and is especially pow-
erful for small datasets.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Multivariate Statistics, Machine and Deep Learning analysis
Once the hyperparameters have been estimated a series of scoring metrics
can be used to evaluate the overall performance of a model. In binary classi-
fication problems metrics like sensitivity, specificity and accuracy is often used.
The specificity is a measure of the predictions of true positives, the sensitivity a
measure of the prediction of true negatives and the accuracy a measure of the
prediction of total positives:
Sensitivity =
True positives
True positives + False negatives =
TP
TP + FN
(4.37)
Specificity =
True negatives
True negatives + False positives =
TN
TN + FP
(4.38)
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(4.39)
A widely used tool to evaluate the diagnostic ability of a binary classifier are
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves. A ROC curve is defined by a
moving discrimination threshold θ such that the output of a classifier yi > θ is
assigned to one class and yi ≤θ is assigned to the other. For an arbitrary value
of θ, the true and false positive rates (TPR, FPR) can then be calculated:
TPR(θ) =
TP(θ)
TP(θ) + FN(θ)
(4.40)
FPR(θ) =
FP(θ)
FP(θ) + TN(θ)
(4.41)
A ROC curve can then be plotted as the TPR values versus the FPR values.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5
Results and discussion
The main motivation behind this thesis is discriminating between Raman spectra
of blood samples donors of blood type A, type B, type AB and type O respectively,
with the aim of developing a fast and accurate technique for blood typing. Two
Raman spectroscopy setups were established with excitation wavelengths of 405
nm and 785 nm for comparison and to determine optimal conditions for extracting
information on blood type antigens and antibodies. Stationary measurements
were carried out on various blood components in a Gene Frame configuration
to generate as detailed Raman spectra as possible and reproduce and assign
known Raman features of blood components. Every analyzed Raman spectra
were preprocessed using the steps outlined in section 4.1.
In order to avoid photodegradation and increase throughput, a flow cell config-
uration was established and optimized for stable Raman measurements on whole
blood. Finally, a large dataset containing 813 Raman spectra of whole blood
samples from 270 donors was collected, and ML algorithms were trained on part
of the dataset to predict ABO blood types with high accuracy. The findings of
these experiments are presented and discussed throughput this chapter.
5.1
Resonance Raman spectroscopy
Strongly resonant Raman signals were acquired from both whole blood and RBC
samples in the Gene Frame configuration. As presented in Figure 5.1 very dis-
tinct hemoglobin Raman features at 675, 1126 and 1359cm−1 can be attributed
to pyrrole, which constitutes the outer part of the porphyrin ring in the heme pro-
tein. In addition to that a broad band from 1400 to 1650 cm−1 stand out. A few
Raman features from plasma proteins were visible on measurements conducted
on separated plasma in the Gene Frame configuration, including the C-C stretch
in phenylananine, β-carotene and amide I as well as distinct water peaks at 2935
and 3211 cm−1 outside the region of interest. Phenylananine, an amino acid, and
amide I, an absorption bands in proteins, could potentially contain information
about plasma proteins such as antibodies, however the relatively weak signal and
overlap with the dominant hemoglobin scattering suggest that isolated plasma
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Results and discussion
in this configuration is not desirable for blood typing purposes. As evident from
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Intensit1
Si–O–Si (417 cm−1)
Si–O–Si
(524 cm−1)
ν(pyr half-ring)
(1359 cm−1)
δ(p1− defo−))sym
(675 c)−1)
ν(CαN)
(1126 c)−1)
ν(p1− h (f-ring)
(1161 cm−1)
δ(CH2/CH3)
(1475 c)31)
ν(CαCm)asym
(1571 c)31)
ν(Ca=Cb)
(1621 c)31)
Si-O (BO4)
(920 cm−1)
Ra)an spectrum, Gene Frame configuration, I = 18mW, λ = 405 nm
RBCs
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
R m n shift [cm−1]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Intensity
Si–O–Si (417 cm−1)
Si-O-Si (524 cm−1)
β-carotene (1523 cm31)
A)ide I (1654 c)−1)
Si-O (BO4) (924 cm−1)
β-carotene, C-C stretch
(1160 cm−1)
Phen1lalanine, C-C stretch
(1008 cm−1)
Plas)a
Figure 5.1. 405 nm excited Raman spectra of RBCs and plasma respectively. A laser
power of 18mW and an integration time of 50s were used. Hemoglobin, plasma and
glass Raman features have been assigned using [2, 4, 22, 43, 44, 53]. 7 distinct Raman
features have been assigned for hemoglobin, 4 for plasma and 3 for borosilicate.
both Figures 3.3, 5.2 and 5.3 the borosilicate glass used to encapsulate the blood
components has strong Raman features in band from 300-1500cm−1. This sig-
nal could partly be suppressed by accurate z positioning, but strong absorption
of Hemoglobin at the 405 nm Raman excitation prevented the required depth
of focusing into the liquid layer of the sample configuration. Furthermore, pho-
todegradation was observed in the RBC samples as burning marks around the
laser spot and appropriate reduction of the of the laser power could not be ob-
tained without loosing too much signal. Steep fluorescent background drift was
observed at both RBC and plasma measurements, complicating the preprocessing
of the spectra and possible disguising useful information.
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Resonance Raman spectroscopy
43
0
100
200
300
400
500
z [μm]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Intens ty
S –O–S  (417 cm−1)
SiO2 (1086 cm−1)
OH− (2935, 3211 cm−1)
OH− (2935, 3211 cm−1)
β-carotene (1523 cm−1)
Amide I (1654 cm−1)
S -O (BO4) (924 cm−1)
Gene Frame conf gurat on, z scan, 405 nm
Glass
Plasma
z
Figure 5.2.
Z-scan into a Gene Frame/borosilicate configuration containing blood
plasma. A laser power of 18mW and an integration time of 50s were used. Borosilicate
peaks in the band around 1000µm can be suppressed, making blood plasma Raman
features visible in this range.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
z [μm]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Intensity
Si–O–Si (417 cm−1)
Si–O–Si
(524 cm−1)
ν((−) hal -ring)
(1359 cm−1)
δ((−) de o)m)sym
(675 cm−1)
ν(CαN)
(1126 cm−1)
ν((−) hal -ring)
(1161 cm−1)
δ(CH2/CH3)
(1475 cm−1)
ν(CαCm)asym
(1571 cm−1)
ν(Ca=Cb)
(1621 cm−1)
Si-O (BO4)
(920 cm−1)
Gene F)ame con igu)ation, z-scan, 405 nm
Glass
Hemoglobin
z
Figure 5.3. Z-scan into a Gene Frame/borosilicate configuration containing RBCs. A
laser power of 18mW and an integration time of 50s were used. The strong absorp-
tion of hemoglobin at 405 nm is clearly expressed as all scattering signal is completely
suppressed a few hundred µm into the sample. It does not seem possible to suppress
borosilicate peaks while increasing hemoglobin features in this configuration.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Results and discussion
5.2
NIR hyperspectral SORS
Once again measurements on the RBC phase and blood plasma phase were con-
ducted in NIR Raman spectroscopy setup in order to extract the most detailed
spectra. Plasma turned out to be a very weak Raman scatter at NIR excita-
tion, and since no noticeable difference between concentrated RBCs and whole
blood measurements was observed, the remaining experiments were carried out
on whole blood. The high resolution of the imaging spectrometer and leveled
NIR excitation between all analytes provided extremely detailed Raman spectra
and 34 features could be assigned as presented in Figure 5.4.
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Raman shift [cm−1]
−0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Inten.it2 [a.0.]
γ (CmH=)
(974 c)−1)
Phe 
(1006 c)−1)
Phe 
(1033 cm31)
δ(=CbH2)4 
(1082 c)−1)
ν(=Cb-methyl) 
(1129 c)−1)
ν30 
(1173 cm31)
ν(pyr)pyr 
(1156 cm−1)
ν21 
(1308 cm31)
δ(CmH) 
(1207 c)−1)
δ(CmH) 
(1227 c)−1)
ν(CβC1)asym 
(993 cm31)
ν46 
(937 c)31)
Phe (C-C) 
(898 cm−1)
γ10 
(857 c)−1)
γ10 
(827 c)−1)
ν6 
(791 c)−1)
ν (C-N-C) 
(754 cm−1)
ν7 
(676 c)−1)
Phe(C-C) 
(621 cm−1)
ν(FeO2) 
(567 c)−1)
p(S-S) 
(490 cm−1)
δ(Fe-O-O) 
(419 cm−1)
ν(py−)asym 
(1371 cm31)
ν40 
(1337 c)31)
δ(CH2/CH3) 
(1448 c)31)
ν(CβCβ) 
(1547 c)31)
ν(CβCβ) 
(1566 c)31)
ν(CaCm)asym 
(1582 c)31)
Phe/T2− 
(1606 c)31)
ν(C = C) 
(1620 c)31)
ν(CaCm)asym 
(1639 c)31)
A)ide I 
(1653 c)31)
ν(p2−  −ea/hing) 
(1526 c)31)
ν20 
(1397 c)31)
Ra)an spec/−0), Flow Cell configuration, I = 257.1 mA, λ = 785 nm
Figure 5.4.
Average spectrum of all 813 Raman measurements carried out on the
optimized flow cell. The same preprocessing step are applied as in the ML blood typing
study. A laser current of I = 257.1 mA, a flow rate of 10µL/min and an integration
time of 60s were used. 34 assignments of Raman features have been made. ν and γ
denotes in-plane and out-of-plane vibrational modes respectively and Phe is short for
the amino acid phenylalanine which is present in both hemoglobin and other membrane
proteins. Tyr is short for tyrosine another amino acid and pyr for pyrrole, which is
the outer ring structures of Porphyrin, the main part of hemoglobin. The numbered
ν and γ assignments are various vibrational modes of these ring structures. The band
assignments have been made using [2, 4]. Around 490 cm1 is the dominant D1 fused
silica peak located as discussed in Figure 3.3. This might explain the high variance
between spectra around this band, as reassembling of the flow cell configuration require
manual selection of a z focus position based on a z scan. This band is bypassed in the
Ml analysis for the same reasons.
In general the scattered signal from the fused silica capillaries appeared less
interfering in blood component fingerprint region (400-1700cm−1), making it pos-
sible to designate even small Raman blood features.
Furthermore, the weak
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Optimization of flow, sample preparation and reproducibility
45
absorption at NIR excitation enabled deep probing into the samples to almost
completely suppress Raman scattered light from the fused silica capillaries, as
seen in the Figures 5.5 and 5.6. SORS also allowed for deeper penetration into
the samples by collection of scattered light at a spatial offset. While including
more spatial offset for later analysis does not necessarily provide more informa-
tion in these types of measurements, it could prove useful to monitor and probe
cell free layers and viscoelastic focusing of cells in other applications.
5.3
Optimization of flow, sample preparation and
reproducibility
In order to establish a high degree of reproducibility and stability a series of
experiments were conducted on flow variation and dilution. Dilution of the whole
blood samples could be another tool to accommodate possible clog formation in
the microfluidic channel, but as seen in Figure 5.7 this would come at cost of
weaker signal and additional sample preparation steps as well.
The flow rate of a sample through the capillary was controlled by a syringe
pump (Harvard Apparatus 11 Plus) pulling the sample through system at an
adjustable flow rate. In order to find a flow rate level where fluctuations does not
influence the stability of the measurements, changes to the Raman spectra were
inspected at different flow rates presented in Figure 5.8. Stable measurements
could be obtained over large range of flow rates and the rate was kept fixed at
10µm during acquisition of the blood type dataset.
Day to day comparisons
of stored samples showed no noticeable spectral differences over a 3 day span,
establishing flexibility when collecting blood sample from the blood bank, and
even longer storage might be possible. The results are presented in Figure 5.9.
A measurement protocol could then be established for the optimized flow cell
setup:
1. 1 mL whole blood samples are collected from the blood bank within 3 days
of donation.
2. Before starting data acquisition a z scan is performed to find the optimal
z focus. The under pressure driven flow from the syringe pump enables
sample exchange without interfering with the capillary inlet and outlet,
creating optical and microfluidic stability between measurements.
3. An integration time of 60 s is used for 3 different grating positions, entailing
3 minutes per measurement.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Results and discussion
−10.0 −7.5 −5.0 −2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
z [μm]
0
50
100
150
200
250
Intensity
Flo  Cell configuration, z-scan, 785 nm
Fused silica
Hemoglobin
−10.0
−7.5
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
z [μm]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Intensity
Flow Cell, z-scan, Pixels  ertically binned, 785 nm
Fused silica
Hemoglobin
z
z=-10   m
z=10   m
z=-4   m
z=4   m
Figure 5.5. Z scan into the large fused silica capillary used in the final iteration of the
flow cell configuration (OD = 55µm, ID = 250µm). A laser current of 257.1 mA, a flow
rate of 10µL/min and an integration time of 60s were used. The z-scan tracks the most
dominant fused silica peaks (491, 602 cm−1) and hemoglobin peaks (1006, 1227, 1448,
1620, 1606, 1582, 1566, 1547 cm−1) in order to find a z focus position where the fused
silica features are suppressed and the hemoglobin features are in focus. Such a scan must
be part of the protocol when reassembling the system in order to ensure reproducibility.
To the top left only the spatial position row with the highest scattering intensity is
plotted, and after probing around 10µm into the liquid layer, the appearance of the
spectra does not change significantly until the hemoglobin scattering starts to disperse.
To the top right all available spatial offsets are binned, enabling deeper penetration
into the sample. At the bottom the probing approach and corresponding glass peak
suppression are outlined.
==PAGE:57==
5.4 ABO blood typing
47
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Raman shift [cm−1]
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
Spatial offset [μm]
Scattered intensity at z = −10μm
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Raman shift [cm−1]
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
Spatial offset [μm]
Scattered intensity at z = 0μm
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Raman shift [cm−1]
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
Spatial offset [μm]
Scattered intensity at z = 10μm
−20
−10
0
10
20
550
600
650
700
750
800
850
900
z=-10μm
z=-4μm
z=4μm
z=10μm
Fused  ilica, 1620 cm−1
−20
−10
0
10
20
z=-10μm
z=-4μm
z=4μm
z=10μm
Hemoglobin, 1620 cm−1
Spatial off et [μm]
Inten ity
Figure 5.6.
The scattered intensity at all spatial offsets and at three z positions,
equivalent to the z scan in Figure 5.5. At z=10µm a high spatial dispersion is clearly
visible, while hemoglobin features seem to be spatially localized around z=0µm. Various
combinations of vertical binning of intensities are tried out in the ML analysis.
4. The capillary is cleaned and wetted in between sample exchange for approx-
imately 5 min, using the EDTA/PBS buffer solution.
5. The chosen integration time is a compromise between signal strength and
throughput. The throughput of the current configuration is around 7 sam-
ples/h.
5.4
ABO blood typing
813 Raman spectra on samples from 270 different donors were collected using
the optimzed NIR Raman flow cell setup.
The dataset contained 69 type A
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Results and discussion
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Raman  hift [cm−1]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Inten ity
Stationary, RBC , Dilution  erie  by PBS
2x dilution
4x dilution
8x dilution
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
× dilution
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Intensit 
Stationar , RBCs, Dilution series b  PBS
754 cm−1
1006 cm−1
1227 cm−1
1547 cm−1
1566 cm−1
1582 cm−1
1606 cm−1
1636 cm−1
754 cm−1
Figure 5.7. Dilution series conducted on samples in a stationary Gene Frame configu-
ration. The separated RBC phase of a whole blood sample was diluted 2, 4 and 8 times
respectively with PBS. A laser current of 257.1 mA and 180s integration time were used.
To the left are the unprocessed Raman spectra of the 3 diluted samples and to the right
the intensity of the most dominant assigned hemoglobin from baseline corrected Raman
spectra at various degree of dilution. Both the Raman peak intensities and fluorescent
drift seem to decrease as the samples are diluted more.
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Raman shift [cm−1]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Intensity [a. .]
10 μL/min
1 μL/min
20 μL/min
2 μL/min
50 μL/min
Flow dependency, 785 nm
0
10
20
30
40
50
Flow rate [μL/min]
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
Intensity [a.u.]
1006 cm−1
1566 cm−1
1620 cm−1
Flow de endency, Dominant Hb  eaks
Figure 5.8. 785 nm excitation Raman spectra measured at a constant z focus inside the
250µm inner diameter fused silica capillary. The flow rate was varied using a calibrated
syringe pump. A laser current of 257.1 mA and 60s integration time were used. To
the left is the entire Raman spectrum at the different flow rates. To the right are the
intensity of the 3 most dominant hemoglobin peaks as a function of the flow rate. Stable
measurements over a large range of flow rates seem to be obtainable.
==PAGE:59==
5.4 ABO blood typing
49
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Raman shift [cm−1]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Intensity [a.u.]
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Flow Cell configu ation, Day to day compa ison, 785 nm
500
1000
1500
Raman shift [c −1]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Intensity (a.u.)
Day 1-2
Day 2-3
Day 1-3
Spectral differences
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Day
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
1006 cm−1
1566 c −1
1620 c −1
Do inant Hb peaks
Figure 5.9.
Day to day comparisons of Raman spectra measured in the optimized
flow cell configuration. A laser current of 257.1 mA, a flow rate of 10µL/min and an
integration time of 60s were used. Day 1 denotes measurements the same day as the
whole blood sample has been extracted and so on. The large whole blood type dataset
has been used to confirm stability of the samples over a 3 day storage period. To the
left is an average spectrum of the 90 measurements conducted at day 1, an average
spectrum of the 414 measurements conducted at day 2 and an average spectrum of
the 309 measurements conducted at day 3.
The day to day spectra are normalized
and the standard deviation is plotted as well. To the right are the average day to day
spectral differences as well as the average intensity of the 3 most dominant hemoglobin
peaks plotted for each day. The measurements are consistent within the measurement
uncertainty, suggesting sample stability over a 3 day period and in between reassembly
of the flow cell setup.
samples, 69 type B samples, 63 type AB samples and 69 type O samples. All
measurements were conducted at the same conditions. A laser current of 257.1
mA, an integration time of 60s and a flow rate of 10µL/min was used.
The
samples were collected at Rigshospitalet and used for measurements maximum
three days after donation. The samples could be mounted directly at the flow
cell inlet as shown in Figure 3.5, creating a fast and stable sample exchange. A
protocol was followed for each measurement as discussed previously.
The preprocessing parameters such as the baseline smoothing parameter λ =
1011, the filter order N = 8 and cutoff frequency wn = 0.18 for the low pass
filter were optimized using LOOCV. Furthermore, an optimal value of 658 cm−1
was chosen as the cutoff at the start of each spectrum, due to the fused silica
disturbance and high general spectral variance below this cutoff as discussed in
Figure 5.4.
Likewise, the best results were obtained when including only the
maximal intensity row from the CCD.
The spectral differences between the blood types can be seen in Figure 5.10.
The spectral differences are small and no general pattern can be derived. The
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Results and discussion
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Intensity [a.u.]
Difference
Type A
Type AB
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Difference
Type B
Type AB
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Difference
Type O
Type AB
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Raman shift [cm 1]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Intensity [a.u.]
Difference
Type B
Type A
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Raman shift [cm 1]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Difference
Type O
Type A
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Raman shift [cm 1]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Difference
Type O
Type B
Figure 5.10. Spectral comparisons between the four blood types. The optimal prepro-
cessing parameters have been applied. Depending which two blood types are compared,
various parts of the spectrum seem to account for the differences. Blood type O differ-
entiates from type A, B and AB in the band from 1550cm−1 to 1750cm−1. There is no
general pattern but the blood antigens seem to affect vibrational modes all around the
porphyrin ring.
smallest difference are between blood type AB and A, which is also reflected in
the performance metrics.
The approach consistently showing the best results
was a pairwise comparison between blood types using a combination of PCA and
a SVM classifier with a Radial basis function (RBF) kernel. The dimension of
the datset was reduced to 15 Principal components explaining more than 95% of
the variance. The RBF kernel is relatively easy to optimize by adjustments of
the hyperparameters, making it good starting point. As seen in Figure 5.11 the
performance of the prediction model depends heavily on the hyperparameters C
and γ.
To evaluate the performance of the SVM classifier, ROC curves were generated
for each pairwise comparison of blood types, resulting in AUC values of 0.954,
0.91, 0.952, 1.0, 0.957 and 0.975 for AB-A, AB-B, AB-O, A-B, A-O and B-O
comparisons respectively. The AUC score represents an average value of how
well the model predicts true positive and negative values. The performance is
close to existing studies on Raman blood typing, lying in the range 0.9−1.0. For
some of the blood type comparisons this study performs better and for other it
performs worse, and a larger scale data acquisition and testing study should be
made to properly evaluate the methods. However, this flow based method using
untreated whole significantly outperforms the results on untreated plasma in [6].
==PAGE:61==
5.4 ABO blood typing
51
10−10
10−6
10−2
102
γ
10−3
101
105
109
C
LOOCV AUC score - Type A vs. B
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
10−10
10−6
10−2
102
γ
10−3
101
105
109
C
LOOCV AUC score - Type A vs. O
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
10−10
10−6
10−2
102
γ
10−3
101
105
109
C
LOOCV AUC score - Type AB vs. A
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
10−10
10−6
10−2
102
γ
10−3
101
105
109
C
LOOCV AUC score - Type AB vs. B
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
10−10
10−6
10−2
102
γ
10−3
101
105
109
C
LOOCV AUC score - Type AB vs. O
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
10−10
10−6
10−2
102
γ
10−3
101
105
109
C
LOOCV AUC score - Type B vs. O
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Figure 5.11. Optimization of hyperparameters C and γ in the SVM classfier using a
rbf. The parameters are optimized using LOOSV. The top right corners are empty. The
performance of the SVM classifier clearly depends massively on the parameters chosen.
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Results and discussion
Like in the LTRS on a single RBC study [4] and the SERS on plasma study [6]
this analysis use LOOCV in the evaluation of blood type prediction.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
False Positive Rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
True Positive Rate
Leave-one-out Crossvalidation, ROC curves, SVC classifier
AB vs. A (AUC = 0.954)
AB vs. B (AUC = 0.91)
AB vs. O (AUC = 0.952)
A vs. B (AUC = 1.0)
A vs. O (AUC = 0.957)
B vs. O (AUC = 0.975)
Chance level
Figure 5.12. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) of pairwise classification ABO
blood types, suing LOOCV and a SVC classifier with optimal parameters.
One vs. One and One vs. Rest approaches were also pursued, in order to
perform multi-label classification rather than comparing the blood types pairwise.
The SVM classifier performed the best when the hyperparameters were optimized
for each pairwise comparison, so this should be implemented in a One vs. One
or One vs. Rest framework in the future.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion and
outlook
In the work presented here a new RS based blood typing technology was devel-
oped, using a flow cell to analyze whole blood samples. The method was tested
on a dataset consisting of 813 samples from 270 donors, where Raman spectra
from each blood type were discriminated using machine learning.
The blood
types could be distinguished by an average AUC score of 0.958, showing great
potential for future blood typing applications.
Samples could be analyzed with a throughput of around 8 minutes pr. sample,
which is a clear advantage compared to existing Raman blood typing studies [4,6].
A throughput of around 10 minutes is already comparable with current clinical
ABO blood typing methods, and several improvements could be implemented to
increase the throughput. The difference spectra between the blood types indi-
cated that large parts of the spectrum does not provide any valuable information,
and so a smaller wavenumber range could be found, such that one grating posi-
tion is suﬀicient for one measurement. This would reduce the measurement time
by a factor of 3. The integration time could also be reduced by improving on
the optical alignment and reducing loss in the setup. For instance by replacing
the auto aligning 50/50 beamsplitter in the inverted microscope with another
solution, such that a higher ration of scattered light is collected, thereby reduc-
ing the required integration time. Another way of improving the signal is by
investigating the type of flow in the capillary and determining exactly how the
RBCs are focused. As evident from the z-scan analysis even a couple of µ relative
displacement between the analyte and focus position has great influence on the
scattered response. So something could be gained by exactly controlling the flow
and position of the RBCs in the microfluidic channel.
The time used for cleaning in between measurements is currently around 5 min,
which could be reduced significantly by automating the loading of the capillary.
So the limiting factor is the integration time and there is certainly potential for
moving the time per measured blood typing under 1 minute.
In order to improve the performance of the ML algorithms, more work should
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Conclusion and outlook
be put in to the feature extraction. One approach would be to track the intensity
values of each of the 34 assigned features in Figure5.4, and collecting them in an
input vector. From the difference spectra it is clear that the discrepancy between
blood types can be found around these features, and filtering out everything else
could very well improve the results. Throughout the ML analysis the prepro-
cessing steps appeared to have the most effect on performance, so rethinking the
notion of using the entire Raman spectrum as an input vector, could give better
results. If the throughput of the measurement setup is increased, a much larger
dataset could be obtained as well, making powerful algorithms such as CNN more
suitable.
Even though AUC score around 95% seems high it is still far from good enough
for clinical application. Blood typing assays used in blood banks and in emergency
care are build on testing and optimization over decades, and several types of tests
goes in to achieving error rates as low as 1:1,000,000 [28]. Well established systems
are being used right now, with multiple steps and cross matching mechanisms,
making it possible to almost never make any mistakes. However, in time RS
could replace a part of this testing assembly line, for instance in the initial ABO
forward typing. Perhaps the most promising application of RS based blood is the
potential of probing for other antigens than A and B simultaneously, opening up
for a very detailed standard blood typing method in the clinic.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
K. J. I. Ember, M. A. Hoeve, S. L. McAughtrie, M. S. Bergholt, B. J. Dwyer,
M. M. Stevens, K. Faulds, S. J. Forbes, and C. J. Campbell, “Raman spec-
troscopy and regenerative medicine: a review,” npj Regenerative Medicine,
vol. 2, 12 2017.
[2]
C. G. Atkins, K. Buckley, M. W. Blades, and R. F. Turner, “Raman spec-
troscopy of blood and blood components,” Applied Spectroscopy, vol. 71,
pp. 767–793, 5 2017.
[3]
F. Lussier, V. Thibault, B. Charron, G. Q. Wallace, and J. F. Masson, “Deep
learning and artificial intelligence methods for raman and surface-enhanced
raman scattering,” TrAC - Trends in Analytical Chemistry, vol. 124, 3 2020.
[4]
D. Lin, Z. Zheng, Q. Wang, H. Huang, Z. Huang, Y. Yu, S. Qiu, C. Wen,
M. Cheng, and S. Feng, “Label-free optical sensor based on red blood cells
laser tweezers raman spectroscopy analysis for abo blood typing,” Optics
Express, vol. 24, p. 24750, 10 2016.
[5]
J. Wang, J. Lin, Z. Huang, L. Sun, Y. Shao, P. Lu, W. Shi, J. Lin, and
R. Chen, “Study of abo blood types by combining membrane electrophoresis
with surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy,” vol. 8553, p. 855323, SPIE, 12
2012.
[6]
J. Wang, Y. Y. Zeng, J. Q. Lin, L. Lin, X. C. Wang, G. N. Chen, Z. F. Huang,
B. H. Li, H. S. Zeng, and R. Chen, “Sers spectroscopy and multivariate
analysis of globulin in human blood,” Laser Physics, vol. 24, 2014.
[7]
C. D. Hillyer, R. G. Strauss, and N. L. Luban, Handbook of Pediatric Trans-
fusion Medicine. 2004.
[8]
D. R. Parachalil, J. McIntyre, and H. J. Byrne, “Potential of raman spec-
troscopy for the analysis of plasma/serum in the liquid state: recent ad-
vances,” Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, vol. 412, pp. 1993–2007, 4
2020.
==PAGE:66==
56
Bibliography
[9]
T. C. Strekas and T. G. Spiro, “Hemoglobin: Resonance raman spectra,”
1972.
[10] J. Lin, J. Lin, Z. Huang, P. Lu, J. Wang, X. Wang, and R. Chen, “Ra-
man spectroscopy of human hemoglobin for diabetes detection,” Journal of
Innovative Optical Health Sciences, vol. 7, 2014.
[11] I. P. T. Filho, J. Terner, R. N. Pittman, L. G. S. III, K. R. Ward, T. Filho,
L. nardo G Somera III, and K. R. W. Hemoglobin, “Hemoglobin oxygen
saturation measurements using resonance raman intravital microscopy,” Am
J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol, vol. 289, pp. 488–495, 2005.
[12] I. P. T. Filho, N. M. Nguyen, R. Jivani, J. Terner, P. Romfh, D. Vakhshoori,
and K. R. Ward, “Oxygen saturation monitoring using resonance raman
spectroscopy,” Journal of Surgical Research, vol. 201, pp. 425–431, 4 2016.
[13] M. Matthiae, X. Zhu, R. Marie, and A. Kristensen, “In-line whole blood
fractionation for raman analysis of blood plasma,” Analyst, vol. 144, pp. 602–
610, 1 2019.
[14] R. Gautam, J. Y. Oh, M. B. Marques, R. A. Dluhy, and R. P. Patel, “Char-
acterization of storage-induced red blood cell hemolysis using raman spec-
troscopy,” Lab Medicine, vol. 49, pp. 298–310, 10 2018.
[15] M. Z. Vardaki, C. G. Atkins, H. G. Schulze, D. V. Devine, K. Serrano,
M. W. Blades, and R. F. Turner, “Raman spectroscopy of stored red blood
cell concentrate within sealed transfusion blood bags,” Analyst, vol. 143,
pp. 6006–6013, 12 2018.
[16] K. Buckley, C. G. Atkins, D. Chen, H. G. Schulze, D. V. Devine, M. W.
Blades, and R. F. Turner, “Non-invasive spectroscopy of transfusable red
blood cells stored inside sealed plastic blood-bags,” Analyst, vol. 141,
pp. 1678–1685, 3 2016.
[17] S. Dochow, C. Krafft, U. Neugebauer, T. Bocklitz, T. Henkel, G. Mayer,
J. Albert, and J. Popp, “Tumour cell identification by means of raman spec-
troscopy in combination with optical traps and microfluidic environments,”
Lab on a Chip, vol. 11, pp. 1484–1490, 4 2011.
[18] A. Pistiki, A. Ramoji, O. Ryabchykov, D. Thomas-Rüddel, A. T. Press,
O. Makarewicz, E. J. Giamarellos-Bourboulis, M. Bauer, T. Bocklitz,
J. Popp, and U. Neugebauer, “Biochemical analysis of leukocytes after in
vitro and in vivo activation with bacterial and fungal pathogens using ra-
man spectroscopy,” International Journal of Molecular Sciences, vol. 22, 10
2021.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
57
[19] P. Chen, Q. Tian, S. J. Baek, X. L. Shang, A. Park, Z. C. Liu, X. Q. Yao,
J. Z. Wang, X. H. Wang, Y. Cheng, J. Peng, A. G. Shen, and J. M. Hu,
“Laser raman detection of platelet as a non-invasive approach for early and
differential diagnosis of alzheimer’s disease,” Laser Physics Letters, vol. 8,
pp. 547–552, 7 2011.
[20] D. L. García-Rubio, M. B. de la Mora, I. Badillo-Ramírez, D. Cerecedo,
J. M. Saniger, J. L. Benítez-Benítez, and M. Villagrán-Muniz, “Analysis
of platelets in hypertensive and normotensive individuals using raman and
fourier transform infrared-attenuated total reflectance spectroscopies,” Jour-
nal of Raman Spectroscopy, vol. 50, pp. 509–521, 4 2019.
[21] H. F. Nargis, H. Nawaz, A. Ditta, T. Mahmood, M. I. Majeed, N. Rashid,
M. Muddassar, H. N. Bhatti, M. Saleem, K. Jilani, F. Bonnier, and H. J.
Byrne, “Raman spectroscopy of blood plasma samples from breast cancer
patients at different stages,” Spectrochimica Acta - Part A: Molecular and
Biomolecular Spectroscopy, vol. 222, 11 2019.
[22] J. Depciuch, M. Sowa-Kućma, G. Nowak, D. Dudek, M. Siwek, K. Styczeń,
and M. Parlińska-Wojtan, “Phospholipid-protein balance in affective disor-
ders: Analysis of human blood serum using raman and ftir spectroscopy. a
pilot study,” Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis, vol. 131,
pp. 287–296, 11 2016.
[23] M. S. Bergholt and S. Hassing, “Quantification of c-reactive protein in human
blood plasma using near-infrared raman spectroscopy,” Analyst, vol. 134,
pp. 2123–2127, 2009.
[24] C. R. Kong, I. Barman, N. C. Dingari, J. W. Kang, L. Galindo, R. R. Dasari,
and M. S. Feld, “A novel non-imaging optics based raman spectroscopy de-
vice for transdermal blood analyte measurement,” AIP Advances, vol. 1, 9
2011.
[25] L. Dean, “Blood groups and red cell antigens [internet],” National Center
for Biotechnology Information (US);, 2005.
[26] C. S. Scher, A. David, K. H. Liu, S. Perelman, and S. Leavitt, Essentials of
Blood Product Management in Anesthesia Practice. Springer, 2021.
[27] G. R. Krog, K. Rieneck, F. B. Clausen, R. Steffensen, and M. H. Dziegiel,
“Blood group genotyping of blood donors: validation of a highly accurate
routine method,” Transfusion, vol. 59, pp. 3264–3274, 10 2019.
[28] W. A. Flegel, “Abo genotyping: The quest for clinical applications,” Blood
Transfusion, vol. 11, pp. 6–9, 2013.
==PAGE:68==
58
Bibliography
[29] D. J. Anstee, “The relationship between blood groups and disease,” Blood,
vol. 115, pp. 4635–4643, 6 2010.
[30] S. S. Seyedi, P. Parvin, A. Jafargholi, N. Hashemi, S. M. Tabatabaee, A. Ab-
basian, and A. Khorrami, “Spectroscopic properties of various blood antigen-
s/antibodies,” Biomedical Optics Express, vol. 11, p. 2298, 4 2020.
[31] A. Kamińska, A. Kowalska, P. Albrycht, E. Witkowska, and J. Waluk, “Abo
blood groups’ antigen-antibody interactions studied using sers spectroscopy:
Towards blood typing,” Analytical Methods, vol. 8, pp. 1463–1472, 2 2016.
[32] Q. Li, I. of Electrical, E. Engineers, I. E. in Medicine, and B. Society, CISP-
BMEI 2017 : proceedings, 2017 10th International Congress on Image and
Signal Processing, BioMedical Engineering and Informatics : 14-16 October
2017, Shanghai, China.
[33] “Tabulated molar extinction coeﬀicient for hemoglobin in water.” https:
//omlc.org/spectra/hemoglobin/summary.html. Accessed: 202-01-23.
[34] S. O. Williams and D. G. Imre, “Raman spectroscopy: Time-dependent
pictures,” 1988.
[35] B. E. A. Saleh and M. C. Teich, Fundamentals of Photonics , 2nd Edition.
2007.
[36] D. A. D. A. Long, The Raman effect : a unified treatment of the theory of
Raman scattering by molecules. Wiley, 2002.
[37] E. V. Efremov, F. Ariese, and C. Gooijer, “Achievements in resonance ra-
man spectroscopy. review of a technique with a distinct analytical chemistry
potential,” Analytica Chimica Acta, vol. 606, pp. 119–134, 1 2008.
[38] S. Mosca, C. Conti, N. Stone, and P. Matousek, “Spatially offset raman
spectroscopy,” Nature Reviews Methods Primers, vol. 1, 12 2021.
[39] J. Langer, D. J. de Aberasturi, J. Aizpurua, R. A. Alvarez-Puebla, B. Au-
guié, J. J. Baumberg, G. C. Bazan, S. E. Bell, A. Boisen, A. G. Brolo,
J. Choo, D. Cialla-May, V. Deckert, L. Fabris, K. Faulds, F. J. G. de Abajo,
R. Goodacre, D. Graham, A. J. Haes, C. L. Haynes, C. Huck, T. Itoh,
M. Käll, J. Kneipp, N. A. Kotov, H. Kuang, E. C. L. Ru, H. K. Lee, J. F.
Li, X. Y. Ling, S. A. Maier, T. Mayerhöfer, M. Moskovits, K. Murakoshi,
J. M. Nam, S. Nie, Y. Ozaki, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Perez-Juste, J. Popp,
A. Pucci, S. Reich, B. Ren, G. C. Schatz, T. Shegai, S. Schlücker, L. L. Tay,
K. G. Thomas, Z. Q. Tian, R. P. van Duyne, T. Vo-Dinh, Y. Wang, K. A.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
59
Willets, C. Xu, H. Xu, Y. Xu, Y. S. Yamamoto, B. Zhao, and L. M. Liz-
Marzán, “Present and future of surface-enhanced raman scattering,” ACS
Nano, vol. 14, pp. 28–117, 1 2020.
[40] A. Bonifacio, S. D. Marta, R. Spizzo, S. Cervo, A. Steffan, A. Colombatti,
and V. Sergo, “Surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy of blood plasma and
serum using ag and au nanoparticles: A systematic study,” Analytical and
Bioanalytical Chemistry, vol. 406, pp. 2355–2365, 4 2014.
[41] D. Lin, S. Feng, J. Pan, Y. Chen, J. Lin, G. Chen, S. Xie, H. Zeng, and
R. Chen, “Colorectal cancer detection by gold nanoparticle based surface-
enhanced raman spectroscopy of blood serum and statistical analysis,” 2011.
[42] A. K. Yadav and P. Singh, “A review of the structures of oxide glasses by
raman spectroscopy,” RSC Advances, vol. 5, pp. 67583–67609, 7 2015.
[43] O. N. Koroleva, L. A. Shabunina, and V. N. Bykov, “Structure of borosilicate
glass according to raman spectroscopy data glass of the na 2 o-b 2 o 3-sio 2
system with a b 2 o 3 content from 20 to,” 2010.
[44] M. Fabian, F. Gergely, J. Osan, T. Cendak, S. Kesari, and R. Rao, “Struc-
tural investigation of borosilicate glasses containing lanthanide ions,” Scien-
tific reports, vol. 10, p. 7835, 5 2020.
[45] B. Cetin, H. Kaplan, and G. Durkaya, “A new generation, promising en-
gineering material: Cubic boron nitride (c-bn),” Hittite Journal of Science
and Engineering, vol. 2, pp. 85–90, 2015.
[46] D. J. Little, M. Ams, P. Dekker, G. D. Marshall, J. M. Dawes, M. J. Withford,
K. M. Davis, K. Miura, N. Sugimoto, K. Hirao, A. Zoubir, M. Richardson,
C. Rivero, A. Schulte, C. Lopez, K. Richardson, N. Ho, R. Vallee, J. Blewett,
A. K. Kar, D. T. Reid, S. Shen, and A. Jha, “7370) waveguides; (160.2750)
glass and other amorphous materials; (190.4180) multiphoton processes,”
1996.
[47] P. Lemler, W. R. Premasiri, A. DelMonaco, and L. D. Ziegler, “Nir ra-
man spectra of whole human blood: Effects of laser-induced and in vitro
hemoglobin denaturation,” Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, vol. 406,
pp. 193–200, 1 2014.
[48] B. Hansson, C. H. Allen, S. Qutob, B. Behr, B. Nyiri, V. Chauhan, and
S. Murugkar, “Development of a flow cell based raman spectroscopy tech-
nique to overcome photodegradation in human blood,” Biomedical Optics
Express, vol. 10, p. 2275, 5 2019.
==PAGE:70==
60
Bibliography
[49] J. hua Wen, L. ping Jia, and Y. hong Zhu, “Measurement of the laser beam
quality using knife-edge method,” vol. 7511, p. 751112, SPIE, 11 2009.
[50] S.-J. Baek, A. Park, Y.-J. Ahn, and J. Choo, “Baseline correction using
asymmetrically reweighted penalized least squares smoothing,” The Analyst,
vol. 140, pp. 250–257, 2015.
[51] F. Zhang, X. Tang, A. Tong, B. Wang, and J. Wang, “An automatic baseline
correction method based on the penalized least squares method,” Sensors
(Switzerland), vol. 20, 4 2020.
[52] C. C. Chang and C. J. Lin, “Libsvm: A library for support vector machines,”
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, vol. 2, 4 2011.
[53] A. Rygula, K. Majzner, K. M. Marzec, A. Kaczor, M. Pilarczyk, and
M. Baranska, “Raman spectroscopy of proteins: A review,” Journal of Ra-
man Spectroscopy, vol. 44, pp. 1061–1076, 8 2013.
