==PAGE:1==
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast
grating sensor chip for troponin detection
Master Thesis
DTU Health
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detec­
tion
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
Peter Groth Stounbjerg
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
healthtech.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Biophotonic Imaging,
Department of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Peter Groth Stounbjerg ­ s135331
Signature
Date
ii
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project aimed to develop and characterize a reliable and scalable coating/immobiliza­
tion method suitable for high contrast grating (HCG) type biosensors. (3­Aminopropyl)­
triethoxysilane (APTMS) was used in combination with three popular solvents (toluene,
isopropanol and methanol) in order to find the best suited solvent, as well as the ideal
silanisation time. The structure of the APTMS layers formed was investigated with X­ray
photoelectron spectroscopy, contact angle measurements, X­ray reflectivity and reflec­
tion spectroscopy. Toluene as the silanisation solvent, showed better results compared
to isopropanol and methanol. A silanisation time of 30 minutes yielded an APTMS layer
thickness of 1.3 ± 0.05 nm with a surface roughness of 0.3 nm. The APTMS layer proved
capable of binding biotin, which made the HCGs able to bind and sense avidin. Reflection
spectroscopy measurements showed increasing red shifts for higher analyte concentra­
tions, but high standard deviations of reflection spectroscopy measurements meant that
the limit of detection was too high for detection of troponin. The results show that the
functionalisation of the HCG with APTMS is indeed reliable and scalable, not only for
functionalising HCGs, but all silicon surfaces needing a thin silane layer bound to them.
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Lars René Lindvold, Senior Scientist, Supervisor
I would like to extend my deepest gratitude to Lars for supervising this project as well as
being an invaluable sparing partner for ideas and possible solutions.
Ada­Ioana Bunea, Tenure Track Assistant Professor, co­supervisor
I’m also extremely grateful to Ada for all the help and guidance she has provided during
these past six months. Her expertise and insights have been invaluable in reaching the
goals set for this project.
Andrei Lavrinenko, Associate Professor, co­supervisor
I would also like to extend my sincere thanks to Andrei for the weekly advise and guidance.
His theoretical knowledge on this field has been an immense help in achieving the results
presented in this thesis.
Leonid Beliaev, PhD Student
Special thanks to Leonid for providing the many wafers and gratings used in this project,
and for helping with HCG measurements and performing the XRD measurements in the
cleanroom.
iv
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
High contrast gratings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Immobilization of antibodies to a solid surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
X­Ray photoelectron spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
X­ray reflectivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Fluorescence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Materials and methods
13
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Results
19
4.1
XPS data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Contact angle measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
XPS depth profile measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
X­Ray reflectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.5
Fluorescence microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.6
High contrast grating measurements on 2D gratings . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.7
High contrast grating measurements on 1D gratings . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Discussion
33
6
Conclusion
39
7
Perspectivation
41
Bibliography
43
Appendix A
47
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Myocardial infarction is a disease characterized by the death of cardiac myocytes, caused
by an imbalance between the demand for oxygen and nutrients by the cardiac tissue and
the supply of blood. The symptoms of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) include chest
pain, which travels from left arm to neck, shortness of breath, sweating, nausea, vomiting,
abnormal heart beating, anxiety, fatigue, weakness, stress, depression, and can easily be
misdiagnosed, leaving the patient vulnerable to heart attacks [1]. Thus, in patients with
these symptoms, there is a need for conducting tests that are fast in order to provide timely
and proper diagnosis. When the cardiac myocytes are damaged from AMI, proteins called
troponins enter the circulation. The cardiac troponin concentrations in blood have been
shown to be significantly correlated to the onset of AMI, and troponins can therefore be
used as a biomarker for AMI. Two troponins are traditionally used as biomarkers; cardiac
troponin T and cardiac troponin I. The serum concentrations of these proteins in patients
with AMI are as low as 10 and 30 pg/mL, respectively, which means highly sensitive
methods are needed to detect them [2]. A test also needs to be performed shortly after
the patient suffers from chest pain, and according to the recommendations of the National
Academy of Clinical Biochemistry, clinical testing of serum samples for cardiac biomarkers
should be made available with a turnaround time of less than one hour [3]. For this reason,
point­of­care (POC) testing is greatly needed, since transporting a blood sample from the
hospital bed to a lab for diagnosis may take longer than the recommended hour and risking
the life of the patient.
One solution is the use of a POC biosensor. Biosensors consists of a bio­recognition ele­
ment, a transducer and a signal detection element. The bio­recognition element facilitates
the sensing of the analyte, which in turn is read by the transducer element. A transducer
may be optical, electrochemical, thermometric, piezoelectric, magnetic, or micromechan­
ical. The signal from the transducer is read by the signal detection element, which often
amplifies the signal and provides the user information about the interaction happening the
bio­recognition element [4].
The commercially available POC device, AQT90, made by the danish company Radiome­
ter, uses lanthanide flourescence based sensing method to detect troponin even below
the needed 10 pg/m. The device uses long lifetime flouresnce from tracer antibodies
chelated with the lanthanide europium and a UV emitting light source to excite the eu­
ropium. The result is a very sensitive device that can provide precise troponin levels
within 20 minutes[5].
This project focuses on a silicon­based high contrast grating (HCG) sensor chip as the
transducer for detecting troponin. The chip is structured as a periodic grating, which
resonance wavelength is highly sensitive to refractive index contrast between the grating
and the surroundings [6]. A more detailed description of how the sensor chip works will be
given, but when an analyte is bound to the HCG surface, even at low amounts, it changes
the refractive index contrast of the HCG which changes the resonance of incident light
within the HCG, ultimately resulting in a resonance wavelength shift [7].
Antibodies, which are glyco­proteins highly specific in what they bind to, can be exploited
by functionalizing the HCGs towards troponin, and thereby obtaining the biorecognition
layer needed to turn the HCG into a biosensor. The method has been shown to detect
troponin at concentrations of 100 pg/mL [6], which means that with small improvements,
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
1
==PAGE:10==
the method is suitable for troponin detection in relation to AMI. However, immobilizing
antibodies to the HCG poses some challenges. Antibodies cannot be bound covalently
to the insulating silicon dioxide layer and relying on adsorption of the antibodies is not
ideal, since they are easily washed off the surface and leaked into the aqueous solution
surrounding them [8]. The surface of the sensor should therefore be modified in order to
bind the antibodies and transform the HCG from a refractive index detector into a biosen­
sor able to detect the desired antigen.
This project investigated how to best functionalize a HCG to binding biomolecules to the
HCG surface in order for specific binding of analyte in a sample, effectively turning the
HCG into a sensitive biosensor. The aim of the project was to develop and characterize
a reliable and scalable coating/immobilization method suitable for HCG type biosensors.
The layer should be thin and smooth, since RI sensors such as the HCG are only sensitive
to changes close to the sensor surface.
2
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
2.1
High contrast gratings
A typical HCG consists of a one­dimensional periodic array of high­index structures (rect­
angular bars, tubes, or sinusoidal modulations of the refractive index), surrounded by a
low­index medium. Due to high degrees of optical tunability (wavelength, phase, polariza­
tion, intensity), these structures have been implemented in a broad scope of applications
in research and industry: refractive index and fluorescence biosensors, solar cells and
photodetectors, signal processing, polarizers and wave plates, spectrometers, active tun­
able filters, mirrors for lasers and optical security features [9].
The HCG used in this project is made of a thin layer of silicon with thickness of only a few
hundred nanometers. This layer contains the grating structure and sits on top of a SiO2
substrate which has much lower refractive index than the pure silicon of which the grating
is made of. The Si grating is therefore surrounded by low refractive index air on one side
and SiO2 on the other, which makes the high refractive index contrast needed for these
gratings to work as intended here. A depiction of a 2D Si­based HCG with surface­normal
optical coupling is shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Schematic of a silicon based high contrast grating.
The refractive index contrast in the HCG is high at both the entrance and exit planes
resulting in a strong coupling between resonance modes at both the exit and entrance
boundaries. The Si/air and Si/oxide interfaces are acting as cavity boundaries which
makes the resonances possible.
HCGs relies on the concept of leaky­mode resonances or guided­mode resonances, also
known as resonant gratings waveguide structures or resonant guided­mode filters. Where
normal waveguides without modulations in refractive index would not be able to be excited
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
3
==PAGE:12==
by a plane wave hitting them, these modulating gratings allow for leaky mode resonance.
The periodicity of the HCG plays the decisive role in generating a transverse momen­
tum, which causes the guided mode to leak into the grating and be guided by the grating
structure [10]. The light that is leaked interferes with the incident light, and at a certain
resonance wavelength, destructive interference with the transmitted light and construc­
tive interference with the reflected light, results in highly efficient resonant reflections for
a particular wavelength interval [11].
This resonance wavelength is highly sensitive to refractive index contrast between the
grating and the surroundings, which is why the design of the HCG determines the res­
onance wavelength. However, the resonance wavelength therefore is also sensitive to
changes in refractive index of the surroundings. Optical biosensing uses the sensitivity
of guided or resonant modes confined in HCGs to the environmental conditions. Among
several different approaches, refractometric sensing and wavelength interrogation can be
used where very small concentration variations of a specific analyte induce small changes
of the refractive index contrast, resulting in the shift of resonance wavelength. This fea­
ture is exploited for the detection of biomarkers, some of which are associated with human
disease. This can be achieved by binding antibodies against specific biomarkers to the
HCG surface where they provide a platform for rapid, sensitive and specific detection of
antigens [10].
One key advantage of using HCGs as sensors, is that HCGs can be produced en masse,
with a variety of fabrication processes and materials available, and at low cost using a
standard silicon optical lithography and etching technique that can accommodate 96­well,
384­well or 1536­well formats that may be suitable for high­throughput screening appli­
cations. With proper functionalizing of biomolecules, HCGs can be a cheap, fast and
sensitive method for detecting biomarkers [6].
4
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Immobilization of antibodies to a solid surface
In order to detect biomolecules with the HCG, we have to immobilize antibodies on its
surface. This allows for specific binding of molecules that will change the RI inside the
HCG, which results in a measurable resonance wavelength change. Biotin and avidin are
often used to model the antibody­antigen interaction. Biotin is a water soluble vitamin B7.
Avidin is a tetrameric biotin­binding protein found in egg white that consists of four identical
β­barrels that each can bind one avidin molecule. The binding mechanism resembles the
one between antibodies and antigens, although stronger, and is one of the strongest non­
covalent interactions found in nature. Biotin and avidin are often used to model antibody­
antigen interactions because of this stronger binding mechanism and their relative lower
cost [12].
Antibodies are glycoproteins that are also known as an immunoglobulins. Often depicted
in the IgG form (Figure 2.2), the antibody is a large, Y­shaped protein used by the immune
system to identify and neutralize foreign objects such as pathogenic bacteria and viruses.
The IgG antibody is made up of a Fc region consisting of so­called constant heavy chains
that does not vary between different IgG antibodies. The ”arms” of the Y­shaped protein
are called the Fab region, which consists of both constant and variable light and heavy
chains. The Fab region is designed to recognize a unique molecule of the pathogen, called
an antigen, and to bind it via non­covalent interactions such as electrostatic interactions,
hydrogen bonds, Van der Waals forces, or hydrophobic interactions. Both ”arms” of the
antibody contain a fab region that is specific for one particular epitope on an antigen,
allowing these two structures to bind together with high specificity and strength [13].
Figure 2.2: IgG antibody structure
The two most common strategies to get antibodies to stick to solid surfaces, such as
the HCG, are passive adsorption and covalent bonding [14]. Passive adsorption relies
primarily on hydrophobic interactions or hydrophobic/ionic interactions between the anti­
body and the surface. This is a widely used method, e.g in enzyme­linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) tests. However, a major limitation in this case is the weak binding of the
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
5
==PAGE:14==
antibodies to the surface, which means that the antibodies can leak into a sample so­
lution, effectively worsening the test as time passes. Additionally, studies have shown
that a high coverage percentage, which is desired with the HCG, results in more leakage
of antibodies, and with low antibody coverage there is a tendency for the antibodies to
adsorb with the fab region oriented towards the surface, greatly reducing their binding
capabilities [15].
Figure 2.3: Molecular structure of APTMS. Me = methyl group.
Binding antibodies covalently to surfaces is another widely used strategy.
Since the
aim is to attach antibodies to the HCG, one problem must be solved: The HCG sub­
strate is silicon/silicon oxide, which does not contain any chemically functional groups
on its surface onto which antibodies can bind directly [14]. Therefore, a functionaliza­
tion layer must be applied to the HCG in order to obtain functional groups on the HCG
surface. Since the reflection measurements with HCGs are affected most by changes
in RI close to the grating surface, the functionalization should be as thin as possible for
maximal efficiency. A common approach to achieve this is using aminosilanes such as
(3­Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES) and (3­Aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane (APTMS)
[16, 17], both consisting of a central silicon molecule, bound to three ethoxy/methoxy
groups and an amine terminated carbon chain as seen in Figure 2.3 [18].
Aminosilanes work as coupling agents and can bond to hydroxylated surfaces in two dif­
ferent ways. As seen in Figure 2.4a, aminosilanes (in this case APTMS) can react with
water in a hydrolysis reaction to form silanols, while liberation of the corresponding by­
product, in this case methanol, will occur. These silanols can then react with other silanols
to form a stable siloxane bond (­Si­O­Si­) in a condensation reaction. In the presence of
hydroxyl groups at the surface, silanols will form a stable M–O­Si bond (M = Si, Al, Fe,
etc.) in a second condensation reaction. Although described sequentially, these reactions
can occur simultaneously after the initial hydrolysis step.
6
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:15==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4: The reaction between APTMS and a hydroxylated surface. (a) depicts the
reaction where water is present and hydrolysis of the APTMS methoxy groups starts the
reaction. The hydrolised side chains causes co­polymerisation of hydrolysed APTMS
molecules, but also allows for bonding to the surface first by hydrogen bond formation and
subsequently covalent bond formation by a second codnenstation reaction. (b) depicts a
reaction where the APTMS reacts directly with the hydroxylated surface, without water or
with trace amounts of water being present [19].
If very little water is present during the reaction, the aminosilane can react directly with
the hydroxylated substrate, but this reaction is slower than when water is present as seen
in Figure 2.4b. Here, the aminosilane will react with atmospheric moisture or water ad­
sorbed on a surface to form silanols, while liberation of the corresponding by­product will
occur. These silanols can then react with other silanols to form a stable siloxane bond
(­Si­O­Si­) before binding to the hydroxylated surface, similar to when water is present in
higher concentrations. This is the key chemistry that allows silanes to function as valu­
able surface­treating or “coupling” agents [20]. At the substrate surface, there is usually
only one bond from each silicon of the aminosilane to the substrate and the other two
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
7
==PAGE:16==
silanol groups are either present in free form or condensated form available for reaction­
s/interactions. Addtionally there are many possible ways for APTES/APTMS to interact
with surface silanol/silanolate groups, e.g. via hydrogen bonds, electrostatic attractions,
and siloxane bonds, as shown in Figure 2.5 (a), (b) and (c), respectively.
Figure 2.5: Different ways APTMS can interact with a surface [21].
These structures can result in low silane grafting density and weakly attached silane
molecules instead of forming a self­assembled monolayer. Secondly, since aminosilanes
polymerize in the presence of water, excessive co­ploymerization can heavily compro­
mise the silanization of the surface [15]. The balance can be challenging since water
helps the hydrolysis reaction needed to start the grafting in the first place, which is why
some protocols use water in the silanization process. Additionally, the amine group can
inter­ and intra­molecularly catalyze silane attachment and formation of oligomers and
polymers of silanes, which is also not wanted [22].
Besides these sources of error during the silanization process, there is no agreement in
the scientific community of optimal experimental conditions. The type of solvent, silane
and water concentrations, temperature, silanization time, and curing/drying method are
tunable and when altered, yield greatly different results [16]. Generally, the protocol for
the functionalization of silicon substrates with APTES/APTMS follows four steps. First,
the substrates are cleaned to remove contaminants. Secondly, an activation process is
performed in order to generate hydroxyl groups on the surface of the silicon substrate.
Thirdly, the APTES/APTMS solution is added to the solid surface needed to be silanized.
Lastly, excessive APTES/APTMS not covalently attached to the surface is removed in a
post­deposition process and the bonds are strengthened in a curing step [22], [17].
A successful process results in a complete coverage of the surface and ideally with a
monolayer of APTES/APTMS with amino­groups pointing up from the silicon surface [16].
Since proteins contain functional groups on their surface from the amino acid side chains,
crosslinkers can be used to bind the aminosilane at one end and functional groups of
the amino acids at the other end. Several different crosslinkers exist, but some common
examples are glutaraldehyde and using 1­ethyl­3­(­3­dimethylaminopropyl) (EDC) and
N­hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) (EDC­NHS). Glutaraldehyde is a short carbonyl that has
aldehyde groups at both ends. Aldehyde groups have high affinity for binding amines, so
this molecule can covalently link proteins whose surface contains amino acids with side
chains containing amines. Often, Lysine binds to glutaraldehyde due to its long side chain
that makes it sterically easier for the reaction to occur [23].
EDC­NHS have the ability to crosslink primary amines to carboxylic acid groups. As seen
in Figure 2.6, this is done by the EDC reacting with carboxylic acid groups to form an active
8
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:17==
O­acylisourea intermediate that is easily displaced by nucleophilic attacks from primary
amines. The primary amine forms an amide bond with the original carboxyl group, and
an EDC by­product is released as a soluble urea derivative [24].
Figure 2.6: EDC­NHS reaction. The EDC reacts with a carboxylate molecule and forms an
unstable reactive o­acylisuerea ester, which can react with an amine and form an amide
bond. When using NHS in combination with EDC, semi stable amine­reactive NHS esters
form instead of the unstable reactive o­acylisuerea ester, which can also readily react with
amines and form an amide bond [25].
NHS is often included in EDC coupling protocols to improve efficiency. NHS forms semi
stable amine­reactive NHS esters which also reacts to primary amines. Because no por­
tion of the chemical structure of EDC becomes part of the final bond between conjugated
molecules, EDC/NHS is considered zero­length carboxyl­to­amine crosslinking [24].
2.3
X­Ray photoelectron spectroscopy
Since the APTMS layer is often some Å to a few nm thick [26], it can be hard to deter­
mine successful grafting of APTMS to the HCG. For the direct determination of surface
elements, a common method is measuring the interactions between an excitation radia­
tion and the inner electrons, as with X­Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) that uses
a characteristic monochromatic X­ray radiation. Induced by an excitation radiation, an
electron is removed in an atom from an inner energy level and the radiation leaving the
surface is measured. All energy of the X­ray quant is transferred to an electron in an inner
energy level. This electron is ejected from the surface, and the kinetic energy of this pho­
toelectron is the energy of the x­ray quant minus the energy required to leave the surface
as shown in Figure 2.7.
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.7: Schematic of the principle of XPS.
The energy needed to leave the surface is mainly determined by the type of atom from
which the electron is removed. Since dydrogen has no core electrons, XPS is not suited
to detect it. The hydrogen’s 1s electron is a valence electron which participates in chem­
ical bonding and any signal from hydrogen would overlap with signals from excitation of
valence electrons from other surface atoms [27]. X­rays penetrate into materials, causing
the XPS signal to originate from the layer with the thickness 3x λ, where λ is the electron
mean free path which is typically 10­20 Å depending on the material [28].
An additional energy shift is given by the chemical environment of the atom and thus its
binding state, and this additional shift is called chemical shift.
XPS yields information not only about surface elements and their binding configuration,
but also about the proportions of the elements, by analyzing the peak intensities (peak
area), which makes a quantitative analysis of the surface composition possible [29]. By
radiating a sample, we can verify that the elements present in the APTMS is present
on the surface and thus if APTMS have successfully been bound to the HCG. Since the
samples measured on in this project does not contain nitrogen in any form before applying
an aminosilane, nitrogen is a direct indicator of successful bonding.
2.3.1
Ion Gun
Frequently, XPS systems are equipped with ion sources that are used to etch sample
surfaces. With an ion beam, the atoms from the top layer of a sample can be removed,
and the second layer becomes the surface which can then be measured. With sequen­
tial performance of XPS measurements and ion etching, surface depth profiles can be
obtained, giving much needed information about the chemical composition of what lies
underneath the immediate surface. However, ion etching has two main problems: firstly,
the ion beam can disintegrate the surface composition and the oxidization state of oxides
can be changed. Secondly, not all elements may be removed from the surface with the
same efficiency, so ion etching can change the surface composition [29].
2.4
X­ray reflectivity
When electromagnetic waves are incident onto a surface, they are reflected off the sur­
face at the same angle as the incoming wave, but some of the electromagnetic wave is
refracted into the surface, also with the same angle as the incoming light. For perfectly
flat, uniform surfaces, all the X­rays are reflected off the surface at angles lower than the
critical angle for total internal reflection, as seen in Figure 2.8a.
10
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:19==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.8: X­rays interacting with a surface. (a) incident angle is lower than the critical
angle for total reflection and all X­rays are reflected. (b) the incident light is equal to the
critical angle for total reflection and the x­rays propagate along the sample surface. (c)
indicent angle is higher than the critical angle for total reflection and the X­rays penetrate
into the sample [30]
When the angle of the incident X­rays is increased to the critical angle for total internal
reflection, the reflectivity of the material is lowered since the X­rays are refracted into the
material instead of reflected off the surface, as seen in Figure 2.8b and 2.8c. When a
film is deposited on a surface, it creates an extra interface for the X­rays to interact with.
These extra interfaces causes oscillations in the reflected signal, where thicker films re­
sult in shorter periods of the oscillations. The amplitude of the oscillations is affected by
the density of the film, where higher densities cause larger amplitudes of the oscillations.
The surface roughness of the interfaces causes the intensity of the reflected X­ray sig­
nal to decrease, where a higher roughness causes the signal to drop more rapidly. The
amplitude of the oscillations is also lowered with higher surface roughness. The software
extracts information about the layer thickness, density and roughness of each layer from
the reflectivity measurement, if the right model for the sample is provided. In the case of
the measurements shown later in this project, the model is depicted in Figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: X­ray reflectivity model used by the XRR software in order to provide informa­
tion about the samples [31]
X­ray reflectivity (XRR) measurements can therefore provide crucial information of layer
thickness, even at thicknesses down to 1 nm, where other methods like spectroscopic
ellipsometry can be limited [30].
2.5
Fluorescence
When considering organic fluorescent molecules, it is important to note that due to the
many vibrational states of organic molecules, their energy levels become bands. This
causes the absorbance and emission spectra to broaden compared to atomic fluores­
cence. As seen in Figure 2.10, one can consider a molecule in the lowest energy level
of the ground state from where it can absorb light of a variety of wavelengths, bringing it
to an excited state. It then vibrates and loses energy nonradiatively to the lowest level
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
11
==PAGE:20==
of the excited state, from where it decays by emitting a photon to any of the vibrational
levels of the ground state. Finally, it gives up energy nonradiatively to return to the lowest
vibrational level of the ground state [32].
Vibrations in the molecule is a source of energy loss, which is why the emitted light is of
lower energy compared to the absorbed. This can be observed by a red shift ­ a so called
Stokes shift. As seen in Figure 2.10, the vibrational levels of the triplet states can overlap
the vibrational levels of the singlet states, allowing the molecule a way of nonradiatively
going from a singlet state into the corresponding triplet state, a phenomenon known as
intersystem crossing.
Figure 2.10: Jablonski diagram depicting what happens to a biomolecule that absorbs
light. First a photon is absorbed and the molecule enters an excited state. Via internal
conversion and vibrational relaxation, its energy is lowered to its lowest excited state.
From there it can lose energy by emitting a photon (fluorescence) and reach its ground
state either directly or via additional vibrational relaxation. Some excited states overlap
with the triplet excited state that the molecule and enter via intersystem crossing. The
molecule can exist in an excited triplet state for much longer than in the singlet excited
state, and then a photon is emitted from a triplet state it is called phosphorescence.
Excited states are chemically unstable and this is particularly true for molecules in the
triplet state [32]. This instability can cause the fluorophore to react with other nearby
species, often oxygen found dissolved in the solvent. The reaction kills the fluorophore’s
ability to fluoresce, a phenomenon known as photobleaching, which is often undesirable
[33]. By keeping fluorophores away from excitation sources, one can minimize the pho­
tobleaching to only occurring during measurements.
Covalently attaching fluorophores to non­fluorescent molecules allows easy optical detec­
tion, even of single molecules, by illuminating the sample with a light source that excites
the fluorophore and capturing only the emitted red shifted light. This can be done in a
multitude of ways, but the simplest is fluorescence microscopy [34]. In this project, fluores­
cence microscopy is used to detect successful binding of fluorescent avidin­sulforhodamine
101 to the HCG.
12
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:21==
3
Materials and methods
3.1
Materials
3.1.1
Chemicals
Piranha solution was made with sulfuric acid 96% and hydrogen peroxide 31% both from
BASF. The silanization was performed in three different solvents: HPLC grade methanol
(≥99.9 % VWR Cas:67­56­1), 2­propanol (CHEMSOLUTE 99.8% Cas: 67­63­0) and
toluene (VWR Chemicals, Cas: 108­88­3)
50 mg water soluble biotin­NHS (Merch Millipore Corporation, lot 3563167) was used
together with 5 mg Avidin­fulforhodamine 101 lyophilized powder (Sigma Aldrich, lot:
MKCM2830) to model as antibody­antigen.
3.1.2
Wafers and high contrast gratings
All HCGs were kindly provided by PhD student Leonid Baliaev. His and earlier studies
have shown that different types of HCGs showed different sensitivity towards RI changes
[6], which is why there was interest in measuring both 1D, 2D and 1D pedestal HCGs.
Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of top view and cross view of the 1D HCG
can be seen in Figure 3.1 and 3.2.
Figure 3.1: Scanning electron microscopy images showing the structure of a 1D high
contrast grating. It consists of long pillar structures running along the entire grating with
a certain periodicity, height and width. The width is 338.7 nm for this 1D grating.
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.2: Height profile of a 1D high contrast grating. The height of the Si­pillars are,
for this high contrast grating is 533.7 nm.
SEM images of top view and cross view of the 2D HCG can be seen in Figure 3.3 and
3.4.
Figure 3.3: Scanning electron microscopy images showing the structure of a 2D high
contrast grating. It consists of circular holes with a certain periodicity and diameter. The
diameter is 242.6 nm for this 2D grating.
Figure 3.4: cross view of a 2D high contrast grating.
SEM images of the cross section of the 1D pedestal grating can be seen in Figure 3.5.
14
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.5: Scanning electron microscopy images showing the structure of a 1D pedestal
high contrast grating. Like the regular 1D grating, it consist of long pillar structures, that
for the pedestal high contrast grating is under­etched to improve the resonance.
3.1.3
Apparatus
XPS K­Alpha
Attension goniometer
Zeiss Axio Observer A1 fluorescence microscope with an axiocam 105 color microscopy
camera using Zen software
Rigaku XRD SmartLab
3.2
Methods
3.2.1
Piranha treatment
To clean and hydroxylate the wafer and HCG surfaces and thus allow for improved bond­
ing conditions for the APTMS, wafers and HCGs were cleaned in a piranha solution (sul­
furic acid and hydrogen peroxide in 4:1 vol/vol ratio) for one hour and then rinsed with
DI­water and blow­dried with nitrogen, before the silanization with APTMS.
3.2.2
Silanization protocols
Wafers and HCGs were silanized with APTMS in different solvents shown to work in the
literature in order to compare and find the best match for this project. APTMS was cho­
sen as the aminosilane because it is less hygroscopic and generally easier to work with
compared to APTES. The silanization times were 15, 30, 60, 120, 180 and 360 minutes
and three different solvents were used; isopropanol (IPA), methanol and toluene.
Isopropanol
The cleaned wafers and HCGs were placed in a solution of 2.5 vol % APTMS, 2.5 vol
% deionized (DI) water, and 95 vol % IPA at room temperature. The samples were then
rinsed in IPA (3x) and DI water (3x) and afterwards blow­dried with nitrogen [35].
Methanol
A stock solution of 50% methanol, 47.5% APTMS and 2.5% DI water was prepared and
allowed to age for at least one hour at 4°C. Literature shows that this stock solution could
be stored at 4°C indefinitely. At the time of silanization, the stock solution was diluted
1 : 500 in methanol, yielding a final APTMS concentration in solution of 0.095%, and the
wafers and HCGs were incubated in this solution at room temperature. At the end of
incubation, the wafers and HCGs were thoroughly rinsed with methanol and blow­dried
with nitrogen [36].
Toluene
Cleaned wafers and HCGs were placed in an open container with a 0.05 % solution of
APTMS in anhydrous toluene at room temperature. After the silanization, the wafers were
rinsed with toluene (2x) and methanol (2x) and blow­dried with nitrogen [37].
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
15
==PAGE:24==
3.2.3
Biotin immobilization
Instead of using antibodies to bind an antigen, biotin was used as a model for antibodies.
It binds avidin/streptavidin and with greater strength than normal antibody­antigen inter­
actions, which makes it a popular substitute for antibodies in research. 50 mg biotin­NHS
powder was dissolved in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) buffer to a concentration of 10
mM at neutral pH. 75 uL of biotin­NHS buffer solution was placed on top of the HCGs,
covering the entire grating, but not the entire chip. The biotin­NHS was given 30 minutes
to react with the APMTS layer before washing in DI water twice and drying under a stream
of nitrogen [38].
3.2.4
Binding avidin
Fluorescently labelled avidin (sulforhodamine 101) was used to bind to biotin as a model
for an antigen. A stock solution of avidin­sulforhodamine 101 conjugate was made by
dissolving 5 mg of avidin­sulforhodamine 101 powder in PBS, which was subsequently
diluted in PBS to reach the concentrations needed for the experiments. The concentra­
tions were chosen to be 0.71 ng/mL, 7.1 ng/mL, 71 ng/mL, 710 ng/mL, 7.1 µg/mL and
71 µg/mL. Binding was achieved by placing 75 uL of avidin­sulforhodamine 101 solution
on top of a HCG for 10 minutes, before washing thrice in DI water and drying under a
stream of nitrogen. Avidin­sulforhodamine 101 solutions, wafers and HCGs were kept
away from light during the entire process to avoid photobleaching of the sulforhodamine
101 fluorophore [32].
3.2.5
X­ray photoelectron spectroscopy
In order to get information about how APTMS reacts with silicon surfaces, as well as con­
firming the bodning of APTMS was successful, XPS was used. XPS measurements were
performed on an XPS K­Alpha. 10 cycles was used for survey spectrum measurements
and 5 cycles for individual elements spectra. Ion gun etching was done with 2000 eV,
high current, 2mm raster size, which etches 0.48 nm of Ta2O5 pr second. The samples
were etched for 10 x 1 second cycles.
3.2.6
Contact angle
The contact angle of wafers changes when APTMS is bound to the surface. The amine
from the APTMS should cause a change in contact angle, and by measuring the contact
angle of wafers silanized differently, we can get information about the APTMS layers.
Contact angle measurements were performed on an Attension goniometer with OneAt­
tension software in dynamic contact angle mode.
3.2.7
Fluorescence microscopy
The sulforhodamine­avidin was purchased not only to be measured with reflection spec­
troscopy, but also be detectable with flourescence microscopy in order to visually confirm
binding of avidin to the biotin. Fluorescence microscope images was taken on a Zeiss
Axio Bbserver A1 fluorescence microscope with an axiocam 105 color microscopy cam­
era using Zen software. The magnification was 10X with a numerical aperture of 0.25.
Excitation was done with a HXP 120 C lighting unit, and light filtering was done with a
Texas Red filter which has an excitation filter Bandwidth (nm) of 562/40 nm and using a
low pass dichromatic mirror with a cutoff 595 nm. Images were processed in ImageJ after
capture.
3.2.8
X­ray reflectivity
X­ray reflectivity (XRR) provides information about layer thickness, density and rough­
ness, which is information greatly needed for this project. The X­ray reflectivity measure­
ments were made on Rigaku XRD SmartLab equipment. The software requires a model
for the sample, which for this project can be seen in Figure 2.9.
16
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:25==
3.2.9
Reflection spectrum measurements
A supercontinuum light source (SuperK Extreme, NKT Photonics A/S) was used to probe
the samples with a broadband signal (350­2400 nm). The SuperK spectrum presents a
powerful laser peak at the Nd:YAG wavelength (1064 nm, used for pumping) which needs
to be filtered out in order not to destroy the samples with a too powerful light signal (hence
the longpass filters we use 1400­2400 for 2D grating and 1200­2400 for 1D grating). An
Optical Spectrum Analyzer (OSA) ANDO® AQ­6315E) is used to obtain the signal which
is guided to the OSA by means of a single mode fibre
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:27==
4
Results
4.1
XPS data
For the purpose of getting information about how APTMS reacts with silicon surfaces
treated with piranha, 18 regular silicon wafers were prepared with the different silanization
protocols presented in the Methods section. Since regular wafers and the HCGs should
react the same way to the functionalization steps, these measurements were made on cut­
up silicon wafers. The silanization protocols were chosen from literature that had shown
successful silanization with these three solvents. The silanization times, however, were
altered to a wide range to better compare the solvents and find the optimal protocol for
fictionalization of the HCGs. Jakša et al. [37] used toluene with APTMS to silanize for
1, 3, 6 and 22 hours, Yadav et al. [36] used 10­60 minutes silanation times in methanol
and Heinig et al. [35] used IPA for 30 minutes to achieve silanization of their surfaces.
Due to the varying silanization times in each article, 15, 30, 60, 120, 180 and 360 minutes
were chosen to be used with the three solvents to get insight into how the APTMS reacts
over time. To get information about the chemical distribution of the wafer’s surface, XPS
was used. The method provides information of which atoms that can be found of the
wafer, as well as a distribution of said atoms. All measurements were made on areas of
the wafers that appeared clean, flat and uniform when looking at the wafers through the
camera installed in the K­Alpha. The 18 chips were examined and a XPS survery of their
atom distribution can be seen in Figure 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3.
15
30
60
120
180
360
0
20
40
Silanization time (min)
O1s
Si2p
C1s
N1s
Figure 4.1: Atom percentage distribution (oxygen, silicon, carbon and nitrogen) of six
samples silanized in toluene for 15, 30, 60, 120, 180 and 360 minutes.
Figure 4.1 shows the atom distribution of six samples silanized in toluene for 15, 30, 60,
120, 180 and 360 minutes. It shows that silanization times longer than 15 minutes and
up until 60 minutes results in decreasing nitrogen concentration, which should be directly
related to the APTMS concentration, due to APTMS being the only contributing factor to
nitrogen on the wafer. At silanization times longer than 60 minutes the trend reverses and
larger nitrogen concentrations are observed. Since carbon and oxygen is found on almost
every surface due to the CO2 in the atmosphere, they are both less of a direct indicator of
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
19
==PAGE:28==
the APTMS concentration. However, quite low carbon concentrations are seen after 60
minutes compared to the other silanization times in toluene.
15
30
60
120
180
360
0
20
40
60
80
Silanization time (min)
O1s
Si2p
C1s
N1s
Figure 4.2: Atom percentage distribution (oxygen, silicon, carbon and nitrogen) of six
samples silanized in isopropanol for 15, 30, 60, 120, 180 and 360 minutes.
Figure 4.2 generally shows very different results than seen in Figure 4.1. It shows that
when IPA is used as solvent, carbon generally dominates the surface composition of
atoms across all silanization times. The nitrogen levels are highest after silanizing for
15 minutes and decreases with with longer silanization times. The Si­concentrations are
generally lower than for toluene, to the point where no Si is found at the surface after 180
and 360 minutes.
Figure 4.3 shows little variation in atom­composition for the six wafers. Carbon, Silicon,
oxygen and nitrogen shows similar concentrations on all 6 wafers. A silanization time of
120 minutes shows slight variation in concentrations with carbon being the most preva­
lent where the five other wafers showed highest concentrations of silicon. The nitrogen
concentration showed slightly elevated levels after 360 minutes. Generally it seems that
silanizing with methanol gives similar results no matter the silanization time.
15
30
60
120
180
360
0
20
40
Silanization time (min)
O1s
Si2p
C1s
N1s
Figure 4.3: Atom percentage distribution (oxygen, silicon, carbon and nitrogen) of six
samples silanized in methanol for 15, 30, 60, 120, 180 and 360 minutes.
20
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:29==
4.2
Contact angle measurements
To get information about the wettability of the wafers prior to and after silanization, con­
tact angle measurements were made. The contact angle is a measure of the sample’s
hydrophobic properties. Below 90°, the surface is considered hydrophilic and above 90°,
the sample is hydrophobic. Due to the polar characteriztic of the amine at the end of
APTMS, the surface should be hydrophilic for a self sammembled monolayer of APTMS.
Therefore can the contact angle measurements provide information about the success of
the silanization.
The measurements were done with regular silicon wafers cut into smaller pieces just as
in the previous XPS measurements. This was done since the HCG structures greatly
influenced the contact angle measurements. This was especially the case for the 1D
HCGs were the long straight grating structures resulted in the water being confined since
the water was stopped from advancing over the surface, completely invalidating any result
achieved on these HCGs.
Clean wafers without piranha treatment but exposed to plenty of ambient air showed a
contact angle of 17 degrees (data not shown) and piranha treated silicon wafers showed
a contact angle of 70 degrees, which matches literature [39].
0
50
100 150 200 250 300 350
0
20
40
60
80
100
Time (minutes)
Contact angle (degrees)
Contact angle of silicon wafer silanized in IPA
Toluene
IPA
Methanol
Figure 4.4: Contact angle of silicon wafers silanized in toluene, isopropanol and methanol
for 15, 30, 60, 120, 180 and 360 minutes.
Figure 4.4 shows that after 15 minutes of silanization time in toluene the wafer was slightly
hydrophobic with a contact angle of 91°, but quickly becomes hydrophilic with longer
silanization times. The contact angle reaches a minimum after 60 minutes and contin­
ues to increase with longer silanization times.
The contact angle of wafers silanized in IPA, showed a similar trend as for wafer silanized
in toluene with a contact angle minimum after 60 minutes. However, the contact angle
does not vary as much as with toluene and lies centered around 60°for all the wafers.
The U­shaped tendency for the first 180 minutes is seen again for wafers silanized in
methanol, although less pronounced. Figure 4.4 showed an increase in contact angle
after 180 minues when toluene is used, and showed no significant change in contact
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
21
==PAGE:30==
angle after 180 minutes when IPA was used, a decrease is seen when using methanol for
longer silanization times. The contact angles are the least varying when silanizing with
methanol and are generally lower than when using IPA. The lowest contact angle was
seen after 60 minutes of silanizing with toluene, however.
Every measurement seen in Figure 4.4 was repeated once on the same wafer, and on
the same area and showed no significant change in contact angle.
4.3
XPS depth profile measurements
All results so far show that the silanization of the silicon does change over time, but to
get an idea of the APTMS layer thickness and compare the different silanization methods
depth profile measurements were made. They were made on a new batch of silicon wafers
that were prepared and functionalized just as the wafers used in section 4.1. Due to visual
inspection of the first and second batches, the wafers silanized with IPA were discarded.
Co­polymerisation of the APTMS during silanization, meant that the wafers became visibly
dirty and showed a visible non­uniform layer of APTMS. The co­polymerisation was also
evident from the solution becoming milky during the process. For this reason IPA was
discarded as a potential best solvent and from this point on, only methanol and toluene
were considered. Depth profile measurements were then made on the rest of the wafers.
The wafers were etched for 10 cycles each lasting 1 second, with high current and with
2000 eV.
Figure 4.5a shows a partial spectrum of the top layer of the wafer silanized with APTMS in
toluene for 30 minutes and shows a peak with matching binding energy of nitrogen which
is located at 400 eV. The peak is noisy and not large, but it is clear that nitrogen from the
APTMS is present on the surface of this wafer.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: XPS spectrum measurements on wafer silanized with APTMS in toluene for
30 minutes. (a) shows the nitrogen signal of the top layer. (b) shows a 2D chart of the
XPS spectra of nitrogen where each spectrum is after each etching cycle.
The same area was scanned after each etching cycle and the spectra can be seen in
Figure 4.5b presented as a 2D chart. The signal gets lower for each etching cycle, but
elevated signal 399 eV are still observed after 5 etch cycles, although with very noisy
signal, indicating very low concentrations of nitrogen after 5 etching cycles.
22
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.6: Stacked chart of XPS spectra of silicon signal on wafer silanized with APTMS
in toluene for 30 minutes. Each spectrum is after each etch cycle.
Figure 4.6 shows the silicon signal obtained after 10 one second cycles, presented in a
stacked chart. It is evident that at first two distinguishable peaks are seen. The peak at
103.5 eV is a measure of the silicon oxide present at the surface and the peak around
99.4 eV represents elemental silicon. From Figure 4.6 it can be seen that after five cycles
the signal is reduced to one peak around 99.4 eV.
Figure 4.7a shows the XPS spectrum of nitrogen signal on wafer silanized with APTMS
in methanol for 30 minutes. The peak is centered at 400 eV which is what is expected
from nitrogen, and especially C­NH2. The signal is noisy as also seen in figure 4.5a, and
marginally larger in intensity. Figure 4.7b shows that the signal is reduced to noise after
only one ethcing cycle, indicating that all nitrogen is removed by the very first etching step.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: XPS spectrum measurements on wafer silanized with APTMS in methanol for
30 minutes. (a) shows the nitrogen signal of the top layer. (b) shows a 2D chart of the
XPS spectra of nitrogen where each spectrum is after each etching cycle.
The signal from the silicon oxide, which can be seen in Figure 4.7b is also etched away
faster than seen in Figure 4.8. After 3 etching cycles, the signal is reduced to one peak,
indicating that what being measured on is the bulk silicon from the wafer.
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.8: Stacked chart of XPS spectra of silicon signal on wafer silanized with APTMS
in methanol for 30 minutes. Each spectrum is after each etch cycle.
To get similar XPS results with methanol as for toluene, the silanization time had to be
360 minutes. The data for silanizing with APTMS in methanol can be seen in Figure 4.9a
and 4.9b and shows that the nitrogen signal is lost after 5 etching cycles and silicon oxide
peak is lost after 5 etching cycles as well.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: XPS spectrum measurements on wafer silanized with APTMS in toluene for
360 minutes. (a) shows the nitrogen signal of the top layer. (b) shows a 2D chart of the
XPS spectra of nitrogen where each spectrum is after each etching cycle.
Since the 6 hours of silanization time to obtain similar results as with 30 minutes in toluene,
and since the other wafers made with toluene did not show better results than after 30
minutes, the 30 minutes silanisaiton protocol in toluene was favored at this point.
4.4
X­Ray reflectivity
In order to know the thickness of the APTMS layer after 30 minute in toluene a new wafer
was prepared and measured with XRR. This method uses grazing X­ray radiation to obtain
information of the thickness of all the layers on the sample. The model and the fit can be
seen in figure 4.10, and the model fits the layer to be 1.324 ± 0.05 nm. The roughness
was 0.3 nm and the density of the APTMS layer was 2.3g/cm3.
24
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.10: X­ray reflectivity measurement and model fit used to obtain APTMS thickness
on wafer silanized in toluene for 30 minutes.
The results meant that the 30 minute toluene silanization protocol was chosen as the best
suited protocol, and all HCGs were silanized using this method.
4.5
Fluorescence microscopy
Binding avidin­sulforhodamine 101 to the HCG surfaces allowed not only for RI mea­
surements, but also for detection under a fluorescence microscope. Sulforhodamine has
absorption and emission peaks that 586 and 605 nm respectively. The absorption and
emission spectra can be seen in Figure 4.11
Figure 4.11: Absorption and emission spectra of sulforhodamine 101
Sulforhodamine 101 is excited most efficiently with yellow light around its absorption peak,
however, it will absorb green light as well due to a wide absorption spectrum, as seen
in Figure 4.11. The emitted light will primarily be red, although the emission spectrum
overlaps with the yellow part of the absorption spectrum.
Figure 4.12 shows fluorescence microscope images taken of three 2D gratings, which had
different concentrations of avidin­sulforhodamine 101 in PBS buffer react with the surface
for 10 minutes.
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
25
==PAGE:34==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.12: Fluorescence microscope images of three 2D gratings exposed to avidin­
sulforhodamine 101 in varying concentrations. (a) was exposed to an unknown, but rel­
atively high concentration (∼0.5 mg/mL) of avidin­sulforhodamine 101, (b) was exposed
to 7.1 ug/mL of avidin­sulforhodamine 101 and (c) was exposed to 710 pg/mL of avidin­
sulforhodamine 101. The magnification was 10x with numerical aperture of 0.25, and the
filter was set to Texas Red. The emission light was centered around 562 nm.
The images in Figure 4.12 (a) shows a multiple sources of fluorescence from numerous
avidin­sulforhodamine 101 molecules. Additionally, was it easy to find these in the micro­
scope, since all parts of the grating looked similar to what is seen in the image. Figure
4.12 (b) shows only a few sources of fluorescence which correlates with much lower con­
centrations of fluorescently labelled avidin. Almost all areas of the grating looked similar
to what is seen Figure 4.12 (b). Figure 4.12 (c) shows a single source of fluorescence,
however a big one containing multiple flourophoes. This was, however, one of the few
sources of fluorescence that was found looking at many parts of the grating, indicating
much less bonding of avidin­sulforhodamine 101 to the surface compared to the grating
seen in Figure 4.12 (a) and (b).
26
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:35==
4.6
High contrast grating measurements on 2D gratings
Now that the preferred silanization protocol has been established and the types of HCGs
has been chosen, the next step was to bind a biomolecule to the HCG surface and sub­
sequently add an analyte targetting said biomolecule. Ideally, this would be Anti­troponin
and troponin, but due to lower cost and being readily accessible biotin­NHS and avidin­
sulforhodamine 101 was chosen as a model for an antibody­antigen interaction.
Figure 4.13 shows spectra from the same 2D HCG that was measured before any func­
tionalization (Air), after piranha treatment and silanized with APTMS (APTMS) and after
biotin­NHS was bound to the APTMS layer and avidin­sulforhodamine 101 in PBS was
bound to the surface (Biotin + Avidin).
Figure 4.13: Reflectance measurements done on the same 2D high contrast grating
in air (baseline), after silanization with APTMS, and after binding first biotin­NHS and
secondly avidin­sulforhodamine 101. APTMS, (3­Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane; NHS, N­
Hydroxysulfosuccinimide.
The resonance peak clearly red­shifts with each step due to binding of material to the 2D
HCG with higher RI than air. The red shift is in accordance with simulations made, as
well as experimental results in literature [7],[6] and was therefore expected. It should be
stated that only the position of the resonance wavelength is important, not the intensity of
the signal. This goes for all subsequent measurements using HCGs.
12 additional 2D gratings were prepared with piranha, of which nine got treated with
APTMS. Six of the nine were treated with biotin­NHS effectively functionalizing the grating
towards avidin, and of the six, three were exposed to a PBS­solution of avidin containing
an unknown, but relatively high concentration (∼0.5 mg/mL) of avidin­sulforhodamine
101.
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.14: Resonance wavelength shifts measured on 12 2D gratings. Three were only
treated with piranha, three were treated with piranha and APTMS, three with piranha,
APTMS and biotin and 3 were treated with piranha, APTMS, biotin and Avidin. The 12
gratings were measured before and after treatment and the resonance wavelength shift
was plotted.
This resulted in having three 2D gratings only exposed to piranha treatment, three were
treated with piranha and APTMS, three gratings were treated with piranha, APTMS and
biotin and three 2D gratings were treated with piranha, APTMS, biotin and Avidin. The 12
gratings were measured on the HCG setup before and after treatment and the resonance
wavelength shift was plotted, as seen in figure 4.14. Notably, the piranha treatment alone,
resulted in a blue shift of the resonance wavelength, in one case of over 1 nm compared
to before any treatment.
Treating a wafer with piranha and APTMS caused a red shift of approximately 1 nm, which,
due to the blue shift seen after the piranha treatment, means the APMTS treatment alone
causes a larger shift than what is seen in figure 4.14.
The results from the addition of biotin suffers from the design of the experiment. One of
the gratings which was treated with piranha, silanized with APTMS and had biotin bound
to the APTMS, showed a smaller red shift than one of the gratings only being treated with
piranha and ATPMS. This could be due to a large blue shift from the piranha treatment, a
relatively small red shift from the APTMS, and a relatively small red shift from the binding
of biotin. Unfortunately, it is not possible from these results to determine if this is the case.
The other two gratings showed red shifts, as expected, with piranha treatment, APTMS
and biotin, compared to only piranha treatment and APTMS.
Binding avidin­sulforhodamine 101 for 10 minutes to fully functionalized gratings showed
a large additional red shift from the change in RI inside the grating by the protein, as ex­
pected. Again does the design of the experiment make it hard to determine how large the
shift actually is, but the results indicate that binding biomolecules to the gratings surface
does result in a measureable red shift.
28
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:37==
4.7
High contrast grating measurements on 1D gratings
Just as in Figure 4.13 that showed the spectra measured on a a 2D HCG, Figure 4.15
shows the spectra on a 1D grating. This time however, the biotin and avidin steps are
separated so the shift of each step is evident.
Figure 4.15: Reflectance measurements done on the same 1D high contrast grating in
air (baseline), after silanization with APTMS, after binding biotin­NHS, and lastly after
binding avidin­sulforhodamine 101.
APTMS, (3­Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane; NHS, N­
Hydroxysulfosuccinimide.
What is seen is a red shift of resonance wavelength after each step, with the APTMS step
contributing most to the shift, though with both biotin­NHS and avidin­sulforhodamine 101
having small contributions. The resonance is of another shape than what was seen in
Figure 4.13. For the 1D HCGs the resonance manifests itself as a sharp dip in reflectance
without a peak just prior to the dip.
Since the shift of binding biotin­NHS to the HCGs were not thoroughly explored with the
2D HCGs, a series of 2D HCGs were made and treated with piranha and APTMS. The
results are seen in Figure 4.16, which unfortunately lacks data points.
The HCGs are extremely sensitive and needs the area being measured to be the same
for each measurement to be precise. Since the orientation of the HCGs were not noted
after being measured prior to functionalization, the HCGs were not always put back into
reflectivity setup the same way for the subsequent measurements. This meant that the
resonance shifts did not make sense for these samples, which is why they are not in
Figure 4.16. The data that fortunately were measured with the right orientation, shows an
additional shift when biotin is bound to the APTMS layer, compared to just the shift from
the silanization
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.16: Resonance wavelength shifts of wafers first functionalized with APTMS, and
subsequently measured after binding biotin. APTMS, (3­Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane
In order to estimate a limit of detection (LOD) of the 1D gratings, 14 gratings were pro­
vided. Since a large range of concentrations (spanning 7 order of magnitude) were cho­
sen for the LOD measurements, and only 14 gratings were available, each concentration
could be repeated just once. Each grating were measured at the same spot, five times,
in order to get a mean value and standard deviation for the resonance shift. Figure 4.17
shows the results obtained from the measurements.
Figure 4.17: Resonance wavelength shifts of 1D high contrast gratings cleaned with
piranha, silanized with APTMS, and functionalized with biotin­NHS after 10 minutes
of reacting with various concentrations of avidin­sulforhodamine 101.
APTMS, (3­
Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane; NHS, N­Hydroxysulfosuccinimide.
Noticeable, one of the gratings exposed to 710 ng/mL, shows a resonance shift so large
that it is statistically considered an extreme outlier. For that reason the data point was
30
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:39==
removed and the rest of the data is presented in Figure 4.18.
Figure 4.18: Resonance wavelength shifts of 1D high contrast gratings (cleaned with
piranha, silanized with APTMS, and functionalized with biotin­NHS) after 10 minutes
of reacting with various concentrations of avidin­sulforhodamine 101.
APTMS, (3­
Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane; NHS, N­Hydroxysulfosuccinimide
The data shows a trend were higher concentrations of avidin results in a larger reso­
nance red shift. The measurements on each grating shows large standard deviations
(SDs) compared to the size of the red shifts seen, however. The sample with the high­
est avidin­sulforhodamine concentration showed average red shifts of 0.55 nm, but the
measurements show SDs of sometimes more than 0.3 nm.
Previous studies has used a similar method to determine troponin concentrations and their
data was fitted to an S­curve, indicating a saturation of the grating at concentrations in the
µg/mL range [6]. This data could be fitted like that as well, but Figure 4.14 has shown much
larger red shifts with higher avidin­sulforhodamine concentrations than seen in Figure
4.18. The shifts In Figure 4.14 were measured on a 2D HCG, but the 1D HCGs should
be more sensitive to RI changes, which should mean that the resonance wavelength
shift should be even larger for 1D gratings. Additionally the fluorescence microscope
images did not indicate a full coverage of the HCG, even at high avidin­sulforhodamine
101 concentrations. The data has therefore not been fitted to an s­curve.
To test if 1D pedestal HCGs showed improved sensing capabilities, four 1D pedestal
HCGs were functionalized to detect avidin and three of the solutions also measured on in
Figure 4.18 we measured on. The shifts were plotted and can be seen in Figure 4.19.
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.19: Resonance wavelength shifts of 1D pedestal high contrast gratings (cleaned
with piranha, silanized with APTMS, and functionalized with biotin­NHS) after 10 min­
utes of reacting with various concentrations of avidin­sulforhodamine 101. APTMS, (3­
Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane; NHS, N­Hydroxysulfosuccinimide
A small shift of 0.1 nm ± 0.06 nm is seen when the concentration of avidin­sulforhodamine
101 was 0.71 ng/mL. Two 1D pedestal HCGs were used to detect 71 ug/mL and the
red shifts were 0.54nm and 0.55 nm with SDs of 0.09 and 0.22136 respectively. The
measurement of 7.1 ng/mL showed a shift of 0.0 nm with a SD of 0.08367 nm.
32
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:41==
5
Discussion
Even though the goal of this project was to functionalize HCGs, most of the measurements
were made on regular, cut up, silicon wafers. Since the HCGs and the silicon wafers
both consists of silicon that always reacts with oxygen in the atmosphere resulting in a
native oxide layer, the wafers should act as a viable replacement for the HCG for the
measurements made on the wafers. By replacing the HCGs with silicon wafers for some
of the measurements, it was possible to make more experiments with lower expenses,
due to the time, chemicals and equipment it took to make HCGs.
Since carbon and oxygen is found on almost every surface due to the CO2 in the atmo­
sphere, they are both less of a direct indicator of the APTMS concentration, compared
to nitrogen, but very low carbon concentrations could indicate a that the APTMS layer is
extremely thin and the XPS measures the silicon through the layer or that some of the
area measured on isn’t covered by APTMS and that the silicon substrate is what is being
measured. An ideal monolayer layer of APTMS would look like what is seen in Figure 2.4b.
This results in an atom distribution of roughly 1:1:2:3 ratio of silicon:nitrogen:oxygen:carbon.
However, there will always be moisture and CO2 present on the surface of wafers exposed
to the atmosphere resulting in higher carbon and oxygen surface levels. Additionally, the
XPS signal will originate from the layer with the thickness 3 x λ, where λ is the electron
mean free path which is typically 10­20 Å depending on the material [28]. Therefore, when
measuring on an ATPMS layer of around 1 nm, we also measure into the wafer, detect­
ing extra silicon as well as oxygen from the native oxide layer. Therefore it is completely
reasonable that low nitrogen levels are measured, when measuring on thin layers. High
levels of carbon and especially nitrogen is therefore the best indicator of APTMS layer
thickness when looking at Figure 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3.
The XPS measurements summarized in Figure 4.1 indicate that silanization times longer
than 15 minutes and up until 60 minutes result in lower nitrogen concentration, which
should be directly related to the APTMS concentration, due to APTMS being the only
contributing factor to nitrogen on the wafer. At silanization times longer than 60 minutes
the trend reverses and larger nitrogen concentrations are observed, indicating a higher
concentration of APTMS being attached to the surface, suggesting thicker APTMS layers.
30 minute silanization times therefore seemed like a good starting point, where the XPS
measurements indicate a thin APTMS layer, with a convenient short silanization time.
Figure 4.2 shows very large carbon concentrations and quite low silicon concentrations
for all wafers silanized in IPA. Up until the measurements on wafers being silanized for
180 and 360 minutes, this could indicate very thick layers which correlates well with the
visual inspections of the wafers that showed visible staining of the wafers. After 180
and 360 minutes, the silicon completely vanishes however. At first thought it could be
due to IPA still being present on the wafer, but the wafers were completely dry, and the
vacuum inside the XPS would mean all IPA would have evaporated. Additionally, this
explanation does not explain why there is still a nitrogen signal. The reason for these
results are therefore unknown. It should also be stated that co­polymerisation was evident
from the IPA solution becoming milky during the silanization process. If excessive co­
polymerisation is the cause of the weird behavior, silanizing the wafers upside down,
could potentially help with binding large polymers sinking to the bottom due to gravity.
This would require a wafer holder of some kind and was not avaliable for this project. Due
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
33
==PAGE:42==
to the many oddities surrounding silanization in IPA, IPA was disregarded as a potential
best solvent for silanization.
Figure 4.3 showed very similar results no matter the silanization time in methanol. The
nitrogen signal is almost the same, only increasing slightly after 360 minutes and the car­
bon and silicon concentrations did not vary a lot between the samples. It appears that the
silanization time, does not affect the layer thickness much, and due to this a silanization
time of 120 minutes in methanol was chosen as the best option to proceed in parralel
with 30 minutes in toluene. This is due to the slightly elevated carbon concentrations in­
dicating higher chances of full APTMS coverage. The final concentration of the APTMS
in methanol was very low compared to especially the IPA protocol, but also the toluene
protocol, so these results seemed very promising.
Importantly, the APTMS solutions were not kept away from the air and the humidity it pro­
vides. Most protocols keep the APTMS solutions away from air by having the reaction
in a Schlenck flask or having the reaction take place in a closed environment under ni­
trogen atmosphere [37], [40]. Before starting the experiments the idea was to keep the
wafers and HCGs under a nitrogen atmosphere, but it was realized that it was too incon­
venient with so many samples having to be prepared. It would also require a much higher
amount of solvent, which was scarce in the first place, to individually silanize every wafer­
/HCG than doing the HVG silanization in batches. Additionally, it was nearly impossible
to silanize under constant stirring since stirring with a magnet caused the wafers/HCGs
to move in the beaker, and it was paramount to know which HCG was which, since every
HCGs had slightly different resonance frequency prior to functionalization and mixing the
HCGs up, would result in wrong measurements of shifts due to the silanization. If these
experiments were to be repeated, implementing a water free atmosphere during silaniza­
tion should definitely be considered as well as having a setup that allowed for stirring
during silanization.
The contact angle measurements showed a tendency which was an initial drop in con­
tact angle followed by an increase for all solvents. The drop in contact angle indicates
the silanization is working and that the surface is being coated with polar amines. How­
ever, the sebsequent increase in contact angle could mean a couple of things. It could
mean less amines, but the XPS measurements seen in Figure 4.1 showed an increase in
nitrogen with longer silanization times, indicating more amines on the wafer surface. An­
other possible explanation is that since the wafer surfaces are hydrophilic, a high surface
roughness would mean lower contact angle. If longer silanization times in toluene means
lower roughness, it should be investigated if this is due to much thicker APTMS layers.
Figure 4.1, indicates such a relation, however Figure 4.3 shows more nitrogen after 360
minutes of silanization in methanol, but where a drop in contact angle is seen in Figure ??.
It could mean that the co­polymerisation is less prenounced in toluene where less water
is present, and therefore the APTMS produces smoother layers in the anhydrous solvent
compared to in methanol where water was added. However, more characterization, like
AFM, is needed to know exactly how the layers look, which unfortunately was not done.
When comparing the depth measurements seen in Figure 4.5b and 4.7b, it is clear that
the APTMS layer is thicker when using toluene compared to methanol for 30 minutes. The
nitrogen signal vanishes after one etching cycle indicating a very thin APTMS layer, which
could be a great thing if a monolayer is formed, but it could also mean that there might
not be full coverage of the wafer. Since the ethcing rate is quite low and only removes
0.48 nm of tantalum pentoxide pr cycle, these results indicate that even in toluene where
the nitrogen signal somewhat remains after 5 cycles, the APTMS layer thickness is very
small, and since a monolayer is not strictly needed, a layer of 1­2 nanometers with better
34
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:43==
chance of achieving full coverage was preferred.
The XRR measurement on the wafer silanized for 30 minutes in toluene, confirmed that a
thin layer of 1.3 nm was achieved. This result shows that the toluene protocol, despite the
ambient atmosphere and the lack of proper stirring, still provides a functionalization layer
on silicon wafers and can be applied to HCGs. This was the goal of the project, and the
next step of showing that it is possible to link molecules to the APTMS layer, and using
them to detect specific proteins could begin.
Fluorescence microscopy was used to get an immediate idea of the linking protocol of
biotin­NHS to the APTMS worked. With lower concentrations of avidin­sulforhodamine
101 less fluorescence was seen, which is not surprising, but the low amount of fluores­
cence seen was not expected. When, roughly, calculating how many avidin molecules
that are needed to cover the surface being exposed to avidin, and further calculating the
concentration needed to reach that amount of avidin with 75 µ L of, it results in a con­
centration of 24 ng/µ L, given every molecule binds to the surface. This of course is not
the case, but it should give a rough estimate of what concentration is needed to cover a
surface. When looking at Figure 4.12 it is clear that the HCG surfaces are nowhere near
saturated, even at concentrations 4 orders of magnitude higher than 24 ng/µ L. It opens
the question of, whether what is seen is a result of unsuccessful binding of biotin­NHS to
the APTMS and is what we are seeing merely adsorption of avidin­sulforhodamine to the
surface due to improper washing of the HCGs post avidin treatment.
To rule this out, more experiments were made. The results in Figure 4.14 pretty clearly
shows that with the same protocols used on the HCGs used in the fluorescence mi­
croscopy images, quite large red shifts are seen after binding avidin at 0.5 mg/mL con­
centrations. Unfortunately, the experiment did not show conclusive evidence that biotin
was bound, but shifts of this size indicates large amounts of molecules bound to the grat­
ing. Literature also using HCGs to detect troponin, had a maximum shift of around 1.7 nm
when binding high concentrations of rabbit antigens to anti­rabbit antibodies. The large
shifts seen in figure 4.17 strongly indicates that large amounts of avidin­sulforhodamine
101 is bound to the HCGs. The idea of the experiment was to get a quick idea of shift­sizes
with each step. The flaw was that 12 HCGs were used and only measured after their final
functionalization/binding step, and not three HCGs that were measured after each step.
The cleaning step with piranha was the first step of all the wafers, meaning this is the most
precise results in this figure. What is seen is a blue shift for all three samples. When the
RI is increased inside the HCG, a red shift is observed, but a blue shift cannot mean a
lowering of the RI, since the RI of air is already so close to 1. Two possible reasons come
to mind:
1: The fluorocarbon based passivation layer from the lithography steps is being removed
from the HCGs by the piranha which changes the structure by making the air gaps larger.
2: The oxidation of the silicon surface lowers the refractive index of the outermost parts
of the features, while also making them expand, which could make the resonance shift.
If these are the only options and figuring out which of them is true is unfortunately outside
the scope of this project, but would be fascinating to figure out.
A proper representation of the shifts of each step is seen in Figure 4.13. These spectra
were made on a 2D HCG, unfortunately a measurement was not made after the biotin
step. The reflection spectra shows two clear resonance features ­ a main resonance and
a smaller secondary resonance. Other spectra (not shown) shows that the secondary
resonance is located at both sides of the main resonance. The cause of these secondary
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
35
==PAGE:44==
resonances is still unclear, but could be due to imperfection in the HCGs causing addi­
tional resonances besides the one expected. What is also clear is the shift in resonance
wavelength from applying the APTMS and from binding biotin and avidin. The signals
have oscillations in them due to Fabry­Perrot resonance, which can make reading the
peak value hard from the spectra themselves, but applying a fourier filter makes the sig­
nal smooth and the peak value easy to read.
At this point, there could still be doubts about whether the biotin bonding was successful
or not. Therefore, the resonance wavelength of 16 1D HCGs was measured prior to any
functionalization and again after both piranha treatment and silanization with APTMS, and
lastly after binding biotin to the APTMS. The results are seen in Figure 4.16, which unfor­
tunately lacks data points. The HCGs are extremely sensitive and needs the area being
measured to be the same for each measurement to be precise. That was a lesson learned
from this experiment. Since the orientation of the HCGs were not noted after being mea­
sured prior to functionalization, the HCGs were not always put back into reflectivity setup
the same way for the subsequent measurements. This meant that the resonance shifts
did not make sense for these samples, which is why they are not included in the figure.
The data that fortunately were made with the right orientation, shows an additional shift
when biotin is bound to the APTMS layer, compared to just the shift from the silanization.
This result shows that the biotin is bound to the surface, and since biotin­NHS is a small
molecule binding it to a surface should produce a thin film. Literature shows that biotin­
NHS creates a film with a thickness of 1.6 nm, which is similar to the 1.4 nm thickness
of APTMS achieved in this project [41]. Therefore it makes sense that the red shifts ob­
served after binding biotin is similar to the red shifts seen after silanizing with APTMS. Of
course these things can’t be directly compared when the densities and refractive indices
of the layers are not the same. The results do however, confirm that biotin is bound to the
surface, and it indicates that the HCG surface consists of a biotin film after applying the
biotin­NHS protocol.
The results at this point show that the HCGs can be functionalized and detect bonding of
biomolecules. In order to get an idea of the detection limit, defined as the concentration
of analyte triggering the 10 % of the device’s response, and the dynamic range, defined
as the range of concentrations where the device’s response is approximately linear, 14
HCGs were prepared. They were all treated with piranha, functionalized with APTMS in
toluene and reacted with biotin­NHS and dried, before being exposed to various concen­
trations of avidin­sulforhodamine 101 in PBS buffer. The concentrations were picked to
resemble the concentrations of troponin used in [6]. To compencate for the larger molecu­
lar structure of avidin compared to troponin, the concentrations of avidin­sulforhodamine
101 were lowered slightly. Assuming avidin and tropinin having the same density and
being circular, avidin is approximately 40% larger than troponin, so concentrations used
in [6] were reduced accordingly to make comparing the results easier.
The results seen in Figure 4.18 shows an increase in red shift when the concentration
increases, which is what was expected. However, it is not obvious how to fit the data.
The fitting model of data like this is typically referred to as four­parameter logistic equation,
which is an S­shaped (sigmoid) curve. The model allows for determination of LOD and
dynamic range, as well as an easy way of determine saturation of the sensor. For the
data shown in Figure 4.18 it appears that the data could be fitted to an S­curve, but due to
the large SDs, it is hard to tell. The data could just as well be fitted to a linear function, if it
was not for literature telling us that an S­curve is the way to go. What further talk against
the S­curve is that it implies a maximum detectable value, and the results from the 2D
HCGs in Figure 4.14 showed much larger red shifts than seen in Figure 4.18.
36
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:45==
Although being a different grating, the 2D HCG, should not have much larger sensitivity
towards RI changes, which this implies, on the contrary does results made by Leonid Bali­
aev, show that the 1D grating should show larger shifts compared to the 2D HCG. The flu­
orescence microscopy measurements also did not indicate saturation of the HCGs, even
at concentrations much higher than what was used in Figure 4.18. A sensor does not
have to be saturated to give its maximum value due to the limited binding time given, but
these types of measurements tend to yield maximum binding before 10 minutes, which is
what was used in this project. It is therefore on the basis of these few measurements hard
to determine if a maximum detectable value has been measured, or not, and it is therefore
hard to determine a dynamic range for the sensor at this point. One could try to make a
linear fit of the data points, but without better data it would be guess work. The same ap­
plies for the LOD, where with the before mentioned definition needs a maximum response
of the sensor. Often times the LOD is defined as a signal above 3 X SD(SampleBlank)
and, with this definition an LOD could be found. Due to the high SDs this comes with new
problems. The SDs of the lowest concentration of 0.071 ng/mL are 0.34 nm and 0.16 nm
for the two HCGs, which means the average SD here is 0.25 nm. To be within this LOD, a
shift of 0.75 nm would therefore be needed, which exceeds the maximum average shift of
any sample essentially making the sensor useless for the purpose of detecting troponin.
Generally, the high SDs make life hard for this type of sensor and it should be attempted
to lower this value from a measuring setup perspective. Generally with shifts being sub­
nanometer, the SD of the measurements should not exceed 0.1 nm, which in itself is quite
high. The device should as a minimum be precise in its measurements and ideally both
precise and accurate. With SDs this big, it is impossible to know if the method is accurate
or not.
The same large SDs are be seen in the 1D pedestal HCG reflection measurements seen
in Figure 4.19. It shows similar red­shifts at the highest concentration of 71 ug/mL as the
1D HCGs, but at a concentration of 7.1 ng/mL the 1D pedestal HCG literally measured
no shift at all, which is worse than what was seen for the 1D HCG. The 1D pedestal HCG
should, due to the slightly altered grating structure compared to the 1D HCG, give larger
red­shifts for the same refractive index change within the grating, but it is not observed
here. Altough these results are worse than for the regular 1D HCG, it should be noted
that these are the results of a single grating, and more data should be collected before
such a determination can be made.
The maximum response in Figure 4.18 are lower than anticipated and literature has shown
shifts of 1.75 nm when using anti rabbit antibodies and rabbit antigens [6]. The shift of
the outlier seen in Figure 4.17, of 2.35 nm is slightly higher than what was seen in [6] and
since biotin and avidin has a stronger bonding than the antibody­antigen interaction, as
well as the HCG has shown improved refractive index sensitivity compared to the HCG
used in [6], values of this order was expected. It therefore begs the question, if this point
in fact was an outlier, or if it shows the real potential of the HCG as a biosensor.
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:47==
6
Conclusion
The aim of the project was to develop and characterize a reliable and scalable coating
method/immobilization method suitable for HCG type biosensors. The functionalization
of the HCGs resulted in, according to the characterization methods used, a thin layer of
APTMS, of roughly 1.3 nm in thickness. The layer was reasonably smooth, with a rough­
ness of 0.3 nm, which is less than the length of one APTMS molecule. Silanizing the
HCGs resulted in a clear red shift when doing reflection measurements, and the subse­
quent bonding of biotin­NHS and avidin­sulforhodamine 101 was detectable. The part of
the aim linked to achieving a useful functionalization layer is therefore concluded to have
been fulfilled and the functionalization protocol can be seen in Appendix A.
Unfortunately, the method in its current state was not able to detect proteins down to
the concentrations needed for troponin detection, and optimizations have to be made in
order to reach this goal. Firstly, better re­readablility of the HCGs is needed, to where the
same HCG being measured more than once at the same spot gives the same response
every time. As of writing this thesis, the standard deviations of the measurements are so
high that the LOD is too high to be a proper biosensor. Secondly, there are many ways
of potentially optimizing the silanization procedure, though the results shown indicates
APTMS layers perfectly in line with what is needed for a functionalization layer. Lastly,
is much more data needed to get a standard curve for the measurements of the wanted
analyte. Due to the conditions of writing a master thesis, limited time meant that only one
experiment could be made, trying to achieve signal response curve. More HCGs should
be made and the experiment should be repeated in order to see if better results could be
achieved ­ perhaps with even more sensitive HCG designs.
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:49==
7
Perspectivation
The value of silane coupling agents was first discovered in the 1940s in conjunction with
the development of fiberglass­reinforced polyester composites. Since then the use of
arganosilanes has expanded into many fields and are used in paints and coatings, as coat­
ing primers, Organosilanes are also used as water scavengers in moisture­sensitive for­
mulations, as blocking agents in antibiotic synthesis, as adhesion promoters, as crosslink­
ing agents, as dispersing/hydrophobing agents and as used in this project: as coupling
agents [20]. The list of course goes much further than this, but it goes to show that
organosilanes are everywhere even though we don’t notice and the potential uses are
seemingly endless.
The aim of this projects was to functionalize HCGs in order to bind specific biomolecules
to the surface. Within this aim, was a goal of making the layer thin and smooth, since
RI sensors such as the HCG are only sensitive to changes close to the sensor surface.
However, this is also true for sensors such as surface Photonic Ring Resonators so the
results achieved in this project are not limited to HCGs, but could be used elsewhere as
well. An example is with vapour deposition of gold films on silicon dioxide surfaces such
as glass and quartz, which is used extensively in sensor setups, such as surface plasmon
resonance and quartz crystal microbalance. Gold is the best metal for these setups due
to its sought after material properties and the fact that it can easily be functionalized using
thiol molecules. Normally, a few hundred angstroms thick transition metal under­layers
(chromium, titanium) have to be deposited first to enhance the gold adhesion onto the
substrate. Otherwise, peeling, and time­dependent device performances deterioration
becomes a problem over time. However, the use of Cr and other metals as undercoating
layers presents some drawbacks due to metal diffusion:
1: Cr atoms can interfere with the thiol molecules resulting in lower functionalization cov­
erage
2: possible galvanic cell formation when exposed to an electrolyte.
Both of these are incompatible with biosensor applications. (Use of ultra­thin organic
silane films for the improvement of gold adhesion to the silicon dioxide wafers for (bio)sensor
applications) By using a silane as an adhesion layer to deposit gold on silicon, it is possi­
ble that the problems meantioned with using metals as adhesion layers could be solved.
Ideally the underlayer is as thin as possible without comprimising the gold adhesion, and
since very thin layers of gold are often deposited, the underlayer should ideally also be
smooth. By optimizing the silanization process as seen in this project, it is perhaps pos­
sible to improve sensors using gold surfaces and avoid the drawbacks that comes with
metal adhesion layers.
This project focused mostly on how different solvents affected the silanization of HCGs,
but with more time, there were a long list of things that could have been interesting to inves­
tigate. As with all chemical reactions and processes, temperature plays a big part. Since
it was a goal to achieve a silanization protocol that was as easy as possible to perform, all
experiments were performed at room temperature. However, elevated temperatures has
been shown to alter how well and how fast aminosilanes reacts [37], [40], making it an
interesting avenue to pursue. The APTMS concentrations for each solvent were chosen
from literature and which means that there is a possibility for optimisation by varying the
APTMS concentration and possibly achieve better results, or maybe more likely, faster
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
41
==PAGE:50==
results without compromising the silanization. Other methods of deposition could also
be pursued. Vapor deposition of aminosilanes is widely described in literature, and could
perhaps be interesting to investigate. This project used biotin and avidin as a model for an
antibody­antigen interaction, but when real antibodies are going to be linked to the HCG,
it would be really interesting to investigate what difference orienting the antibodies would
have on the sensitivity. By binding protein A, which is a protein that binds the FC­region of
antibodies, to the HCG and subsequently let the protein A bind anti­troponin antibodies,
the anti­troponin antibodies would be oriented upwards from the surface, gratly increas­
ing the individual antibody’s ability to bind antigens compared to a random orientation
otherwise achieved. For further work with this HCG setup, optimization of the setup to get
better resolution and re­readability of the HCGs should be a priority. When the expected
resonance shifts for troponin detection are in the sub nanometer range and the SD on
measurements are 0.2­0.3 nm, it causes too much uncertainty on the results. It should
therefore be a priority to get this number down, since it limits the usability of the sensor
system. Finally, implementing a microfluidic setup surrounding the HCG would mean it
was possible to react and bind antibodies and antigens while measuring the response
and get real time sensorgram as seen with an SPR from the response.
There are also things that could have been improved in the silanization procedure. The
washing of the wafers and HCGs after each functionalization step, was not optimal. The
washing procedure consisted of, as vigorously as possible for 10 seconds, running the
wafer/HCG trough the solvent is was being washed with, and dipped into the solvent 3
times for each washing cycle. Instead it would be better to use proper cleaning techniques
such as the ones used in the clean rooms, after each step, to ensure that every HCG is
cleaned properly and the same way. Many articles uses a curing step after silanizing,
where they place the chip/wafer/HCG in an oven at around 100 °C, for a few minutes
to help the grafting. An oven was requested for this project, but unfortunately it was
impossible to make that happen. For further research a curing step should be included
and perhaps investigate how it affects the HCGs. Having the HCGs in a holder during
these functionalization steps would be a great improvement and make life much easier
in the laboratory. It would allow for stirring, it would make keeping track of the HCGs
easier and generally be an improvement to the process. In the future, the HCGs could be
functionalized while still being on the intact 4­inch wafer they were produced on and only
after the silanization step, would the HCGs be cut into smaller individual pieces.
42
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Lei Lu et al. “Myocardial Infarction: Symptoms and Treatments”. eng. In: Cell Bio­
chemistry and Biophysics 72.3 (2015), pp. 865–867. ISSN: 15590283, 10859195.
DOI: 10.1007/s12013-015-0553-4.
[2]
Sayali Upasham, Ambalika Tanak, and Shalini Prasad. “Cardiac troponin biosen­
sors: where are we now?” eng. In: Advanced Health Care Technologies Volume 4
(2018), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 2350269x. DOI: 10.2147/AHCT.S138543.
[3]
Robert H. Christenson and Hassan M.E. Azzazy. “Cardiac point of care testing: A
focused review of current National Academy of Clinical Biochemistry guidelines and
measurement platforms”. eng. In: Clinical Biochemistry 42.3 (2009), pp. 150–157.
ISSN: 18732933, 00099120. DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2008.09.105.
[4]
Laura M. Lechuga. “Biosensor”. eng. In: Encyclopedia of Astrobiology (2015), pp. 311–
315. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-44185-5_190.
[5]
Olga Rodenko et al. “High­sensitivity detection of cardiac troponin I with UV LED ex­
citation for use in point­of­care immunoassay”. eng. In: Biomedical Optics Express
8.8 (2017), pp. 3749–3762. ISSN: 21567085. DOI: 10.1364/BOE.8.003749.
[6]
Tianbo Sun et al. “High­contrast grating resonators for label­free detection of dis­
ease biomarkers”. eng. In: Scientific Reports 6.1 (2016). ISSN: 20452322. DOI:
10.1038/srep27482.
[7]
Giovanni Finco et al. “Guided­mode resonance on pedestal and half­buried high­
contrast gratings for biosensing applications”. eng. In: Nanophotonics 10.17 (2021),
pp. 4289–4296. ISSN: 21928614, 21928606. DOI: 10.1515/nanoph-2021-0347.
[8]
Soshana Smith et al. “A comprehensive review of the covalent immobilization of
biomolecules onto electrospun nanofibers”. eng. In: Nanomaterials 10.11 (2020),
pp. 1–39. ISSN: 20794991. DOI: 10.3390/nano10112142.
[9]
Giorgio Quaranta et al. “Recent Advances in Resonant Waveguide Gratings”. eng.
In: Laser and Photonics Reviews 12.9 (2018), p. 1800017. ISSN: 18638899, 18638880.
DOI: 10.1002/lpor.201800017.
[10]
Tianbo Sun. “High Contrast Grating for Optical Sensing”. PhD thesis. EECS De­
partment, University of California, Berkeley, Dec. 2017. URL: http://www2.eecs.
berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2017/EECS-2017-170.html.
[11]
Pétur Gordon Hermannsson. “Design and use of guided mode resonance filters for
refractive index sensing”. PhD dissertation. Technical University of Denmark, 2015.
[12]
Claire E. Chivers et al. “How the biotin­streptavidin interaction was made even
stronger: Investigation via crystallography and a chimaeric tetramer”. eng. In: Bio­
chemical Journal 435.1 (2011), pp. 55–63. ISSN: 14708728, 02646021. DOI: 10.
1042/BJ20101593.
[13]
Charles A.; Travers Janeway. Immunobiology: The Immune System in Health and
Disease. 5th edition, Immunobiology. eng. Garland Science, 2001, 732 s. ISBN:
081533642x, 9780815336426.
[14]
Takeshi Ikeda et al. “Oriented immobilization of antibodies on a silicon wafer using
Si­tagged protein A”. eng. In: Analytical Biochemistry 385.1 (2009), pp. 132–137.
ISSN: 10960309, 00032697. DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2008.11.001.
[15]
Meredith E. Wiseman and Curtis W. Frank. “Antibody Adsorption and Orientation
on Hydrophobic Surfaces”. In: Langmuir 28.3 (2012). PMID: 22181558, pp. 1765–
1774. DOI: 10.1021/la203095p. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/la203095p. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1021/la203095p.
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
43
==PAGE:52==
[16]
Nina Bjørk Arnfinnsdottir et al. “Impact of silanization parameters and antibody im­
mobilization strategy on binding capacity of photonic ring resonators”. eng. In: Sen­
sors (switzerland) 20.11 (2020), p. 3163. ISSN: 14243210, 14248220. DOI: 10.3390/
s20113163.
[17]
G. Jakša, B. Štefane, and J. Kovač. “Influence of different solvents on the morphol­
ogy of APTMS­modified silicon surfaces”. eng. In: Applied Surface Science 315.1
(2014), pp. 516–522. ISSN: 18735584, 01694332. DOI: 10.1016/j.apsusc.2014.05.
157.
[18]
Emily Asenath­Smith and Wei Chen. “How To Prevent the Loss of Surface Func­
tionality Derived from Aminosilanes”. In: Langmuir : the ACS journal of surfaces and
colloids 24 (Nov. 2008), pp. 12405–9. DOI: 10.1021/la802234x.
[19]
Barry Arkles. Silane Coupling Agents: Connecting Across Boundaries (3rd Edition).
4 Gelest, Inc. Morrisville, PA, 2014.
[20]
Thierry Materne et al. “Organosilane Technology in Coating Applications:Review
and Perspectives”. eng. In: Dow Corning (20).
[21]
Raechelle D’Sa et al. “Inhibition of lens epithelial cell growth via immobilisation of
hyaluronic acid on atmospheric pressure plasma modified polystyrene”. In: Soft
Matter 7 (Jan. 2011), pp. 608–617. DOI: 10.1039/C0SM00936A.
[22]
G. Jakša, B. Štefane, and J. Kovač. “XPS and AFM characterization of aminosilanes
with different numbers of bonding sites on a silicon wafer”. eng. In: Surface and
Interface Analysis 45.11 (2013), pp. 1709–1713. ISSN: 10969918, 01422421. DOI:
10.1002/sia.5311.
[23]
Isabelle Migneault et al. “Glutaraldehyde: behavior in aqueous solution, reaction
with proteins, and application to enzyme crosslinking”. In: BioTechniques 37.5 (2004).
PMID: 15560135, pp. 790–802. DOI: 10.2144/04375RV01. eprint: https://doi.org/
10.2144/04375RV01. URL: https://doi.org/10.2144/04375RV01.
[24]
Malithi P. Wickramathilaka and Bernard Y. Tao. “Characterization of covalent crosslink­
ing strategies for synthesizing DNA­based bioconjugates”. eng. In: Journal of Bio­
logical Engineering 13.1 (2019), p. 63. ISSN: 17541611. DOI: 10.1186/s13036-019-
0191-2.
[25]
Adam Hughes. “Biosensing on the End of an Optical Fiber”. PhD thesis. June 2015.
DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.3763.8163.
[26]
Amrita R. Yadav et al. “Comparative study of solution­phase and vapor­phase de­
position of aminosilanes on silicon dioxide surfaces”. eng. In: Materials Science
and Engineering C 35.1 (2014), pp. 283–290. ISSN: 18730191, 09284931. DOI:
10.1016/j.msec.2013.11.017.
[27]
Nenad Stojilovic. “Why can’t we see hydrogen in X­ray photoelectron spectroscopy?”
eng. In: Journal of Chemical Education 89.10 (2012), pp. 1331–1332. ISSN: 19381328.
DOI: 10.1021/ed300057j.
[28]
Depth of Analysis, Inelastic Mean Free Path. http://www.xpsfitting.com/2012/08/
depth-of-analysis-inelastic-mean-free.html. Accessed: 2022­01­17.
[29]
Mathias Schulze, Andrea Haug, and K. Andreas Friedrich. “X­ray photoelectron
spectroscopy”. eng. In: Pem Fuel Cell Diagnostic Tools (2011), pp. 381–394.
[30]
Miho Yasaka. “X­ray thin film measurement techniques V. X­ray reflectivity mea­
surement”. In: The Rigaku journal, technical articles 26 (2) (2010).
[31]
XRRModel. http://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk/index.php/Specific_Process_Knowledge/
Characterization/XRD/XRD_SmartLab/ALD_deposited_alumina_and_titania_XRR.
Accessed: 2022­01­17.
44
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:53==
[32]
David E. Wolf. “Fundamentals of Fluorescence and Fluorescence Microscopy”. eng.
In: Methods in Cell Biology 81 (2007), pp. 63–91. ISSN: 0091679x. DOI: 10.1016/
S0091-679X(06)81005-8.
[33]
Loling Song et al. “Influence of the triplet excited state on the photobleaching kinet­
ics of fluorescein in microscopy”. eng. In: Biophysical Journal 70.6 (1996), pp. 2959–
2968. ISSN: 15420086, 00063495. DOI: 10.1016/S0006-3495(96)79866-1.
[34]
Jurek W. Dobrucki. “Fluorescence Microscopy”. eng. In: Fluorescence Microscopy:
From Principles To Biological Applications (2013), pp. 97–142. DOI: 10.1002/9783527671595.
ch3.
[35]
Mario F Heinig et al. “Aminopropylsilatrane Linkers for Easy and Fast Fabrication
of High­Quality 10 nm Thick Gold Films on SiO<sub>2 </sub>Substrates”. eng.
In: Acs Applied Nano Materials 3.5 (2020), pp. 4418–4427. ISSN: 25740970. DOI:
10.1021/acsanm.0c00531.
[36]
Amrita R. Yadav et al. “Comparative study of solution­phase and vapor­phase de­
position of aminosilanes on silicon dioxide surfaces”. eng. In: Materials Science
and Engineering C 35.1 (2014), pp. 283–290. ISSN: 18730191, 09284931. DOI:
10.1016/j.msec.2013.11.017.
[37]
G. Jakša, B. Štefane, and J. Kovač. “XPS and AFM characterization of aminosilanes
with different numbers of bonding sites on a silicon wafer”. eng. In: Surface and
Interface Analysis 45.11 (2013), pp. 1709–1713. ISSN: 10969918, 01422421. DOI:
10.1002/sia.5311.
[38]
EZ­Link NHS­Biotin Reagents. https : / / www . thermofisher . com / order / catalog /
product/20217. Accessed: 2010­09­30.
[39]
X.M Yang et al. “Silicon wafer wettability and aging behaviors: Impact on gold thin­
film morphology”. In: Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing 26 (Oct. 2014),
pp. 25–32. DOI: 10.1016/j.mssp.2014.03.044.
[40]
Emily Asenath Smith and Wei Chen. “How to prevent the loss of surface functional­
ity derived from aminosilanes”. eng. In: Langmuir 24.21 (2008), pp. 12405–12409.
ISSN: 15205827, 07437463. DOI: 10.1021/la802234x.
[41]
Yifei Li and Haining Zhang. “Binding of streptavidin to surface­attached biotin with
different spacer thicknesses”. eng. In: Journal of Wuhan University of Technology­
mater. Sci. Ed 30.6 (2015), pp. 1304–1309. ISSN: 19930437, 10002413. DOI: 10.
1007/s11595-015-1312-5.
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
==PAGE:55==
Appendix A
To clean and hydroxylate the wafer and HCG surfaces and thus allow for improved bond­
ing conditions for the APTMS, first clean the HCGs in a piranha solution (sulfuric acid and
hydrogen peroxide in 4:1 ratio) for one hour. Remember to add the hydrogen peroxide
slowly to the sulfuric acid. Then rinse with DI­water and dry blow­dry with nitrogen, before
the silanization with APTMS.
The cleaned HCGs/wafers are placed in an open container with a 3 mM solution of APTMS
in anhydrous toluene (150 ml toluene and 75 μl aminosilane) at room temperature for 30
minutes. Make sure to do this under a fume hood. Make sure to stir the ATPMS­toluene
solution before putting the HCGs in the solution. During the process, make sure that
careful stirring is happening.
After the silanization, the HCGs/wafers are taken out of the APTMS/toluene solution care­
fully to avoid scratching the surfaces and are rinsed with toluene (2x) and methanol (2x)
and dried under a stream of nitrogen. The procedure used in this project was to hold the
HCG with the tweezer and stir toluene/methanol in a glass beaker with the HCG/wafer for
about 15 seconds per cycle, while also dipping the HCG in and out of the toluene/methanol
a couple of times per washing cycle.
Make sure to dry the HCGs completely by blowdrying both sides of the HCG/wafer, since
the toluene can dissolve a potential plastic container, ruining both the container and the
HCG.
The biotin­NHS should be dissolved in PBS to a concentration of around 10 mM. That is
what literature suggests. Add 75 uL of the solution to each HCG and let it react for 30
minutes. Afterwards clean wafer (3X) in DI water and blow dry with nitrogen.
The avidin­sulforhodamine 101 used, was dissolved in PBS as well, and also applied to
the HCGs by adding 75 uL of solution to each HCG and let them react for 10 minutes.
This way the amount of liquid exposed to the HCGs are similar to what we would run over
the HCG in a microfluidic setup (≈8µL/min).
Functionalization of Si­based high contrast grating sensor chip for troponin detection
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
healthtech.dtu.dk
