==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis
Quantitative evaluation of metal binding in
transition metal complexes in solution via
simulations
Author
Christoﬀer Højgaard Egeberg (s160719)
Supervisor
Postdoc Asmus Ougaard Dohn, DTU Physics
Co-supervisor
Senior Researcher Kristoﬀer Haldrup, DTU Physics
Danmarks
Tekniske 
Universitet
DTU Physics
January 27 2021
Department of Physics
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
i
ABSTRACT
Abstract
Computer simulations constitute an important tool for guiding the interpretation of
experimental results as well as gaining new theoretical insights in the world of molec-
ular physics. In this thesis, density functional theory (DFT) and Born-Oppenheimer
molecular dynamics (BOMD) simulations are employed to investigate the binding en-
ergy and free energy environment of the [AgPt2(P2O5H2)4]3−transition metal complex
(Ag-PtPOP) with Ag in an axial coordination. Simulations are carried out in environ-
ments of vacuum and two diﬀerent implementations of aqueous solution governed by
the continuum solvent model (CSM) and the quantum mechanical/molecular mechan-
ical (QM/MM) frameworks yielding respectively a continuous and an explicit aqueous
solution environment. Geometric relaxations and Kohn-Sham orbitals bear witness of a
bonding nature of photo-excited Ag-PtPOP in both vacuum and CSM-solvent settings
manifesting itself in BOMD simulations with stable excited state Ag-PtPOP complexes
and interaction energy curves showcasing binding energies that are stronger in the ground
state than in the excited state contradicting ﬁndings from previous studies. Conversely,
QM/MM BOMD simulations with explicit water molecule interactions show a dissocia-
tive nature of silver - spontaneously in the ground state and after an initial stable phase
in the excited state. This behaviour is investigated further using umbrella sampling, a
free energy proﬁle method novel to metal-PtPOP systems, which conﬁrms the strictly
dissociative behaviour of ground state Ag-PtPOP. For the excited state Ag-PtPOP com-
plex, a binding energy is determined from the resulting free energy proﬁle but due to
convergence issues and unforeseen eﬀects of the umbrella sampling bias the credibility of
the binding energy is limited. The study nevertheless showcases the validity of umbrella
sampling for metal-PtPOP investigations and presents solutions to be implemented in
future simulation studies for better performance of the umbrella sampling simulations as
well as more detailed results in multiple dimensions. Previously reported binding ener-
gies fulﬁl the theoretical assumption that the excited state is more strongly bound than
the ground state, but they are all too large in magnitude to explain the dissociation of
Ag in QM/MM BOMD simulations that is similarly reported. The results of this study
conversely display weaker binding energies that is within reach of the thermal energy of
the explicit solvent molecules but with stronger bonding in the ground state than in the
excited state. Investigating this discrepancy in detail and performing an umbrella sam-
pling study using proposed improvements forms a strong foundation for future robust
and accurate simulation studies of the Ag-PtPOP complex which potentially can lead to
an improved understanding of chemical bonding between like-charged transition metals.
==PAGE:3==
ii
CONTENTS
Contents
Abstract
i
1
Introduction and background
1
1.1
The diplatinum complex PtPOP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Ag-PtPOP complex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Outline of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theory
8
2.1
Density Functional Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Born-Oppenheimer Molecular Dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
QM/MM MD simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Free energy analysis with umbrella sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Simulation tools
17
3.1
DFT with the ASE and GPAW environments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
The key parameters of DFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
The D3 dispersion correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Excited state DFT with direct optimization and the maximum overlap
method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
The Continuum Solvent Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
QM/MM in GPAW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Preparational studies
29
4.1
Convergence studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Selection of parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Results
35
5.1
Geometric relaxations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Photoexcitation of Ag-PtPOP in diﬀerent environments . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Interaction energy curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
Umbrella sampling with QM/MM MD simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4.1
Challenges during umbrella sampling simulations
. . . . . . . . .
53
5.4.2
Free energy proﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.5
Discussion of the environment impact and the bonding strength . . . . .
65
==PAGE:4==
iii
CONTENTS
6
Conclusion and outlook
70
7
Appendix
74
==PAGE:5==
1
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
1
Introduction and background
In order to steer the world of today in a more sustainable direction many challenges
have to be overcome which in turn requires scientiﬁc breakthroughs and technological
advancement. For this purpose, the understanding of reactions and molecular behaviour
on atomic timescales plays a major role as new theoretical insights can pave the way
for the catalysts of tomorrow. Since Zewail performed the ﬁrst optical experiments on
a femtosecond timescale in the 1980s, a feat for which he was later rewarded with the
Nobel Prize in Chemistry, various ultrafast spectroscopy methods have made it possible
to perform measurements of reactions on the timescale they occur at. The emergence
of time-resolved X-ray scattering methods have since made it possible to study atomic
motion in solution, due to the geometric structure information X-ray scattering in general
provides. However, while these methods give an insight in the incredibly fast dynamics,
translating the measured data into geometric structures and subsequently movement is
an inverse problem with complexity increasing with the molecule size. For this reason,
computer simulations are used in order to aid the analysis of experiment data as well as
increase the theoretical understanding of the underlying atomic mechanisms causing an
observed reaction.
Using various simulation methods, this thesis investigates a transition metal complex
known by the shorthand name Ag-PtPOP with focus on its stability in a linear Ag-Pt-Pt
conﬁguration. In order to do so, the remaining part of this section will brieﬂy introduce
the Ag-PtPOP complex and its main component, the PtPOP complex, followed by an
outline of the thesis and its main motivations.
1.1
The diplatinum complex PtPOP
In 1977 Sperline, Dickson, and Roundhill [1] identiﬁed a Pt(II) complex with a strong
absorbance at 368 nm and green luminescence at 514 nm. These photophysical properties
along with its potential as a catalyst [2, 3] sparked intense scientiﬁc interest in the
complex that later was determined to be the tetrakis-µ-pyrophosphitodiplatinate(II) ion
(PtPOP) with the composition [Pt2(P2O5H2)4]4−. The structure of PtPOP, as seen in
ﬁgure 1(a), was ﬁrst determined by Pinto et al. [4] in 1980 in crystal form. It consists
of two platinum(II) centres each surrounded by four equidistant phosphorous atoms
conﬁgured in a plane forming a ligand scaﬀolding. Between the two rings, oxygen atoms
form bridges gluing the two halves of the scaﬀolding together.
Following the initial
surge of interest, the relevance of PtPOP faded as it was deemed unﬁt for commercial
==PAGE:6==
2
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
(a) PtPOP
(b) Ag-PtPOP
Figure 1: Geometrical structures of (a) the PtPOP ion [Pt2(P2O5H2)4]4−and (b) the
Ag-PtPOP ion [AgPt2(P2O5H2)4]3−. P atoms surrounding the Pt atoms in square planar
conﬁgurations. The Ag-PtPOP conﬁguration under investigation in this project contains
Ag located axially to the Pt atoms. H: dark grey, O: red, P: orange, Ag: light grey, Pt:
sand coloured.
applications. In 1993, however, Thiel et al. [5] conducted time-resolved X-ray absorption
ﬁne structure measurements on photoexcited PtPOP in solution which reignited the
interest in the complex as it constituted a good model compound for time-resolved x-
ray studies due to the by then well known excited states and a clear structural signal
stemming from a contraction in the Pt-Pt distance upon excitation.
In the ground state the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) consists of an
anti-bonding 5dσ∗-orbital facilitating a Pt-Pt bond with low bond ordering1, while the
lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), which becomes occupied in the lowest
excited state, consists of a bonding 6pσ-orbital yielding a higher Pt-Pt bond ordering
[2, 6, 7, 8]. In the excited state the Pt-Pt bond is thus shorter but the overall distance
between the two phosphorous planes remains unchanged [8] causing increased stress in
the ligand bridges. A molecular orbital diagram showcasing the features mentioned here
is shown in ﬁgure 2(a).
By use of X-ray scattering and femtosecond spectroscopy methods the Pt-Pt bond
length has been measured to be 2.9-3.0 ˚A in the ground state contracting to 2.7-2.8 ˚A in
the excited state [8, 9]. Inducing an electron transition from the dσ∗-orbital to the lowest
1For clarity, bond order as introduced by Linus Pauling is the diﬀerence between the number of
electrons in binding molecular orbitals and the number of electrons in anti-binding molecular orbitals
==PAGE:7==
3
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
(a) PtPOP
(b) Ag-PtPOP
Figure 2: Suggested molecular orbital diagrams of (a) PtPOP and (b) axially coordinated
Ag-PtPOP. The empty Ag+ 5s-orbital mixes with the bonding pσ-orbital and the anti-
bonding dσ∗-orbital, facilitating potential bond formation. Reproduced with permission
from P. Lenzen (DTU Physics) in unpublished work.
excited state creates an excited singlet 1A2u state with a lifetime on the order of 10 ps [9].
Through intersystem crossing PtPOP can transition into the excited triplet 3A2u state,
which is otherwise forbidden by symmetry, with a lifetime of around 10 µs [10]. This
triplet state is catalytically active [7] in a number of reactions including abstraction of
hydrogen from secondary alcohols and hydrocarbons, abstraction of halogen atoms from
alkyl and aryl halides, as well as aﬀecting some reductive and oxidative electron transfers
[2, 3, 6, 7].
1.2
The Ag-PtPOP complex
In 1988 Nagle et al. [11] published a short article showing evidence of bonding between
the excited triplet state PtPOP and Tl+ forming a metal-metal bonded excited state
complex - a so-called exciplex. By adding Tl(I) to a solution containing PtPOP they
observed the location of the luminescence emission peak was altered. At high enough
Tl+ concentrations, emission spectra suggested that two Tl+ ions could simultaneously
form bonds with excited state PtPOP. Also ground state PtPOP was found to undergo
complex formation with Tl+ but this process similarly required high Tl+ concentrations.
The authors reached the conclusion that PtPOP and Tl+ readily form bonds and that
the resulting complex is dramatically more stable with PtPOP being in its excited triplet
state. Based on the observations Nagle et al. proposed that the exciplex formation be-
==PAGE:8==
4
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
tween the excited triplet PtPOP and Tl+ happens with an axial coordination of Tl+
where the thallium atom is located on the Pt-Pt axis.
In the 1990’s, more in-depth studies of metal-PtPOP exciplexes were performed,
including notable contributions from Clodfelter et al. also on Tl-PtPOP [12] and Petti-
john et al. on Au-PtPOP [13] which were among the ﬁrst to showcase bonding between
like-charged d8-10 atoms. These studies conﬁrmed that the luminescence emissions were
altered by the addition of metal ions and agreed on excited state PtPOP facilitating
a better environment for (axial) bonding than the corresponding ground state. This
stems from the fact that PtPOP its ground state has ﬁlled 5dz2 platinum orbitals which
leaves only the empty 6pz orbitals available for orbital mixing leading to a predicted
bond order of 0. Conversely, the excited state PtPOP has had an electron promoted,
e.g. through light absorption, from the antibonding dσ∗molecular orbital (primarily
consisting of 5dz2) to the bonding pσ molecular orbital (primarily consisting of 6pz).
This leads to half-ﬁlled dσ∗and pσ molecular orbitals, which according to Clodfelter
are situated largely along the axial sites of the PtPOP molecule and allows for orbital
mixing with the isoenergetic ﬁlled 6s and empty 6pz of Tl+, ultimately increasing the
bond order to 1. Pettijohn shares the perception of axial bonding sites on excited state
PtPOP and presents a corresponding bonding formation for Au-PtPOP. This project
revolves around bonding between silver and PtPOP. According to the binding scheme
just presented, Ag-PtPOP should form an axial exciplex through orbital mixing of dσ∗
and pσ orbitals from PtPOP and the 5s orbital from Ag. A molecular orbital diagram,
which is recreated from unpublished work of P. Lenzen in the same research group as
this project is aﬃliated to, showing these suggested features is shown in ﬁgure 2(b).
In 2010 Christensen et al. [14] used solution-state X-ray scattering to study an aque-
ous solution containing PtPOP and Ag+ ions in order to investigate the formation of
Ag-PtPOP exciplexes with Ag at axial sites of excited PtPOP, as illustrated in ﬁgure
1(b). From analysis of the scattering data it was found that the exciplex does exist in
the expected axial conﬁguration with a Ag-Pt distance of 2.47 ± 0.07 ˚A and a Pt-Pt
distance of 2.84 ± 0.08, which is slightly longer than the ﬁndings in [8] of 2.74 ± 0.06 ˚A
for the Pt-Pt distance in the excited state of PtPOP. This suggests that the Pt-Pt bond
might be elongated slightly by the addition of Ag which would be physically sound as
the Pt-Ag bond would redistribute the electron density in order to facilitate the bonding.
While the Pt-Pt distance in Ag-PtPOP is longer than reported for the excited PtPOP
complex, it should be noted that these distances are both shorter than the Pt-Pt dis-
==PAGE:9==
5
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
tance for the PtPOP ground state of 2.9-3.0 ˚A, indicative of the strong bonding in both
structures in the excited state.
In 2012 Kong et al. [15] by use of time dependent DFT (TD-DFT) calculations de-
termined optimized structures of the axial Ag-PtPOP exciplex. In aqueous solution the
Pt-Pt distance was determined to be 2.79 ˚A while it in gas phase was determined to be
2.82 ˚A. While these observations correspond well to the experimental data in [8, 14], the
Ag-Pt distances of 2.88 ˚A and 2.87 ˚A in gas phase and aqueous solution respectively are
signiﬁcantly longer than the 2.47 ˚A found experimentally by Christensen in 2010 [14].
Kong ”tentatively” ascribes this deviation to the presence of ground-state Ag-PtPOP
complex in solution which Christensen et al. did not take into account in their analysis,
and thus it seems likely that the actual exciplex Ag-Pt distance in [14] could be longer.
Along with the optimized structures Kong also draws the HOMO and LUMO orbitals for
the Ag-PtPOP exciplex in water, where a ﬁlled HOMO orbital corresponds to a ground
state Ag-PtPOP complex and a half-ﬁlled LUMO orbital corresponds to the Ag-PtPOP
exciplex. From these it is evident that the antibonding orbital in the HOMO is replaced
by a bonding pσ orbital as also prescribed previously.
This forms a metal σ-orbital
between the Pt atoms responsible for the Pt-Pt contraction in the triplet excited state.
While the ground state HOMO orbital is featured in the article, it should be noted that
no structural parameters are presented for the ground state Ag-PtPOP complex.
While the axially coordinated Ag-PtPOP is in focus in this project, it remains relevant
to also mention a study by Kruppa et al. from 2016 [16] where electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry and laser spectroscopy as well as TD-DFT in gas phase were employed
to investigate a protonated version of the Ag-PtPOP complex [Ag,H+PtPOP]2−, among
other PtPOP species. Kruppa et al. concludes that according to their experiments and
simulations ground state [Ag,H+PtPOP]2−coordinates Ag in a side-on conﬁguration in
close proximity to three oxygen atoms and, consequently, not in the axial position. While
a stable [Ag,H+PtPOP]2−conﬁguration with axially coordinated Ag is also found, this is
higher in energy than the side coordination by an amount of 36 kJ/mol corresponding to
0.37 eV per molecule. From the optimized structures electronic absorption spectra were
calculated. Comparing these to experimental results from UV photo-induced dissocia-
tion yield spectra it was concluded that a large spectral shift from PtPOP to Ag-PtPOP,
as would be expected for the axial coordination, was not present and this provided an-
other strong indication that the favoured coordination in the ground state is a side-on
conﬁguration of Ag. Upon photoexcitation experimental data showed dissociation of Ag0
==PAGE:10==
6
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
which is the direct opposite of an exciplex with a more tightly bound Ag atom. This
study thus oﬀers a diﬀerent take on the bonding mechanics at play than introduced so
far. It should however also be noted that in the scheme of Clodfelter and Pettijohn no
signiﬁcant axial bonding is expected in the ground state of the complex. Only in the
excited state, a strong axial metal-PtPOP bonding should occur. What can be said for
certain is that the experimental methods are diﬀerent. Thus, it is probable that spectro-
scopic measurements made in solution are not directly comparable to the environment of
the electrospraying ionization process used by Kruppa. Perhaps for this reason, Kruppa
et al. also call for systematic investigations of solvent eﬀects. Nevertheless, this article
oﬀers an interesting diﬀerent perspective of which bonding mechanisms could be in play
in the Ag-PtPOP complex.
In 2021 a master thesis by M. Hansen [17], written in the same research group as this
project is aﬃliated with, the axial coordination in the picture of Clodfelter and Pettijohn
as well as the side-on conﬁguration in the picture of Kruppa were investigated with DFT
and QM/MM MD simulations in order to gain a further understanding of the bonding
between Ag+ and PtPOP. The ground state and excited state structures were optimized
in vacuum leading to the ﬁndings that for the vacuum optimized structures, the ground
state complex was lower in energy for the side-on coordination of Ag, whereas the excited
state exciplex favors the axial coordination of Ag and the side-on Ag dissociates.
Going forth from these optimized structures, the bonding nature of respectively axi-
ally and side-on coordinated Ag-PtPOP were investigated with diﬀerent methods includ-
ing potential energy surfaces (PES) based on single point calculations of the complex
(and its Ag+ and PtPOP monomers) in vacuum and in a continuous solvent model mim-
icking solvent eﬀects. Finally, QM/MM MD simulations explicitly incorporating solvent
eﬀects were performed. All unconstrained QM/MM MD simulations let to dissociation
of Ag in the ground state. In attempts to perform simulations in the excited state con-
vergence issues put an early stop to most of the attempts. It was however observed that
keeping the Ag atom constrained by a hook and that changing some of the essential
DFT parameters, could keep simulations away from convergence issues for longer. Just
like the vacuum geometry optimizations, the potential energy surfaces showed that the
side-on coordination of Ag is more stable than the axial counterpart in the ground state
complex. In the exciplex only the axial coordination with a vacuum environment yielded
signs of bonding - the vacuum side-on coordination only showed signs of dissociation.
Hence, the PES single point calculations in general seem to support both Kruppa’s case
for the ground state complex and the picture of Clodfelter and Pettijohn for the excited
==PAGE:11==
7
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
state exciplex. Due to compatibility issues the continuum solvent model could not be
used alongside the excitation tool used for performing excited state calculations and thus
no potential energy surfaces could be computed for this purpose. Thus, while especially
the vacuum results seem to support a ground state side coordination of Ag and a excited
state axial coordination of Ag in Ag-PtPOP, the lack of results of Ag-PtPOP in solution
- both in a continuous model and with explicit solvent molecules - calls for further in-
vestigation with diﬀerent techniques and use of new tools circumventing the experienced
convergence and compatibility issues.
1.3
Outline of the thesis
Using the ﬁndings of [17] as a starting point, this thesis aims to shed new light on the
energetic landscape of Ag-PtPOP and the strength with which bonding occurs as well
as investigate how diﬀerent types of simulation environments aﬀect these landscapes.
Since earlier works indicate that a stable exciplex only exists for axial Ag-PtPOP, ef-
forts are concentrated on determining the energy landscape of axially coordinated Ag,
which ultimately can lead to a broader understanding of the reaction mechanisms in
metal-PtPOP exciplexes and bonding between like-charged d8-10 atoms. As in [17], DFT
calculations are used to produce interaction energy curves2 determined respectively in
a vacuum and in a continuum solvent description as well as to perform QM/MM MD
simulations on the system. By building on top of the methods used in the former study,
the QM/MM MD simulations are used as part of a free energy analysis that by means
of umbrella sampling, if successful, provides a full free energy landscape along the ax-
ial direction for Ag-Pt bonding in the explicit solvent environment. According to the
author’s best knowing this is the only QM/MM investigation of Ag-PtPOP performed
after the novel QM/MM MD simulations in [17] and the ﬁrst time umbrella sampling
is applied in conjunction with QM/MM simulations on a metal-PtPOP system. While
diﬀerent in nature, the interaction energy curves and the corresponding free energy pro-
ﬁle allow comparison of the energy landscape as well as Kohn-Sham orbitals of the bond
dynamics between Ag+ and PtPOP in vacuum, continuum solvent, and explicit solvent
environments. Along with employing newly developed DFT simulation tools to avoid
the compatibility issues and minimize the convergence issues experienced in the former
Ag-PtPOP study, this constitutes the main contribution of this work.
2The name interaction energy curves is by this author preferred over potential energy surfaces as
used in [17] since interaction leading to bonding between the building blocks of Ag-PtPOP is in focus
as opposed to the potential energy of the structure. This is simply a matter of naming convention and
the terms express the same diﬀerence in energy.
==PAGE:12==
8
2
THEORY
The remainder of this thesis is structured in the following sections. Section 2 intro-
duces the theory behind the applied computer simulation frameworks including DFT,
QM/MM MD simulations, and umbrella sampling. Section 3 presents the corresponding
tools used to conduct the simulations which include the ASE and GPAW software pack-
ages for handling and manipulating atom objects and performing DFT calculations along
with excited state handling, dispersion correction, and solvent model tools. In section 4
the DFT parameters used in production runs are selected after performing convergence
studies. Section 5 presents the obtained results for optimized structures, molecular dy-
namics studies of photo-excited structures in environments of vacuum, CSM-solvent,
and QM/MM-solvent, interaction energy curves in vacuum and CSM-solvent, and the
free energy proﬁles of Ag-PtPOP as determined with QM/MM MD umbrella sampling.
Finally, the obtained results and methods used are discussed and concrete next steps for
further investigations of the Ag-PtPOP complex in solvation with an optimized set of
simulation tools is outlined.
2
Theory
After the introduction of the Ag-PtPOP complex and the overall aim of the thesis, this
section presents the theoretical background of the used simulation frameworks. Density
functional theory (DFT), the powerful quantum mechanical computation method for
determining energies and other properties of ground state structures, is introduced ﬁrst,
followed by the QM/MM MD simulation scheme where a quantum mechanical descrip-
tion of a solute is combined with a mechanical description of the solvent molecules in
order to account for solvent eﬀects in a computationally eﬃcient manner manner. Lastly,
umbrella sampling, a method for performing free energy analysis in systems governed by
the probabilistic nature of statistical mechanics, and the umbrella integration method
for unravelling the global free energy is presented.
2.1
Density Functional Theory
Determining the energy of a molecular structure involves solving the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion,
ˆHΨ = EΨ,
(1)
==PAGE:13==
9
2
THEORY
where Ψ(r1, r2, ..., rN) is the wave-function describing N electrons containing 3N spatial
variables, E is the energy of the system, and ˆH is the Hamiltonian of the system. ˆH is
given by the sum of the kinetic energy operators for the nuclei ˆTn and the electrons ˆTe
and the potential energy operators for the electron-nucleus ˆVen, the nucleus-nucleus ˆVnn,
and the electron-electron ˆUee interactions of the system:
ˆH = ˆTn + ˆTe + ˆVnn + ˆVen + ˆUee
(2)
For simple systems such as the hydrogen atom, the energy and wave function can be
obtained analytically. However, for systems containing many electrons, even if the power-
ful adiabatic approximation is introduced and the complexity of the ﬁrst and third term
vanishes by solving only for the electronic structure for ﬁxed nuclei, the Schr¨odinger
equation is practically still impossible to solve without further approximations since es-
pecially the ˆUee terms get very complicated as the number of electrons increases. Many
diﬀerent computational frameworks such as Hartree-Fock, Coupled-Cluster, and Density
Functional Theory with varying levels of accuracy and complexity have been developed
in order to solve the electronic structure problem. Density Functional Theory (DFT)
provides an approach striking a good balance between accuracy and speed for many
purposes and has over past decades evolved into being one of the most used electronic
structure calculation methods for calculating energies, geometries, and other properties
of atomic structures.
The foundation for DFT was laid in the 1960’s when Hohenberg and Kohn introduced
two important theorems [18]. These theorems were made for a system of an electron gas
under the inﬂuence of an external potential ˆVext and the system thus has a Hamiltonian
given by
ˆ
He = ˆTe + ˆUee + ˆVext.
(3)
The ﬁrst Hohenberg-Kohn theorem states [19] that the external potential is univocally
determined by the electronic density, besides a trivial additive constant. The second the-
orem states that the energy, which due to the ﬁrst theorem is a functional of the density,
has a minimum only at the ground state density and that the corresponding energy is
the ground state energy. Thus, these theorems reduce the dimensionality of solving the
electronic structure problem from a 3N dimensional wave function to a 3-dimensional
density while also yielding the ground state of the system.
==PAGE:14==
10
2
THEORY
Not long after, the Kohn-Sham equations were introduced, making it possible to
substitute the real electron system with a ﬁctitious reference system that has the same
electron density, n(r), but where there is no electron-electron interaction. In this picture,
each electron is assigned to a Kohn-Sham orbital governed by [20]
ˆHR φi (r) = ξi φi (r) ,
(4)
where ˆHR denotes the Hamiltonian of the reference system with non-interacting elec-
trons, φi (r) denotes the orbital wave function for the ith electron, and the eigenvalue ξi
denotes the energy of electron i. From these orbitals, the electron density follows as:
n(r) =
X
i
fi |φi(r)|2 ,
(5)
where fi is the occupation number of orbital i. The total energy of this reference sys-
tem has contributions from the kinetic energies of the electrons Ts[n] and the external
potential of the reference system, which for a real system would be dominated by the
potential from the nuclei vnuclei(r).
By using the energy obtained through the non-
interacting reference system and by using the Hartree energy to account approximately
for the electron-electron interaction, the ground state energy of the real system is given
by the Kohn-Sham energy functional [20],
E[n] =
Z
vnuclei(r)n(r)dr + 1
2
Z Z n(r)n(r′)
|r −r′| drdr′ + Ts[n] + Exc[n],
(6)
where Exc[n], known as the exchange-correlation energy, is the the only unknown
term. If an exact universal expression for the exchange-correlation energy was to exist,
properties such as the energy and geometry of molecular structures could readily be
computed exactly with DFT. However, no exact universal exchange-correlation energy
functional of density is known. For this reason various electronic density functionals
have been developed over the years to approximate the electronic structure in order
to determine the energy as accurately as possible. Many classes of functionals exist of
which the simplest is Local Density Approximation (LDA) which only depends on the
density itself. The functional is divided in an exchange term, which contains the repul-
sion eﬀects due to the Pauli Exclusion principle, and a correlation term, which contains
all other interaction eﬀects that are otherwise not accounted for in eq. (6) including
the energy lowering that occurs due to the mutual avoidance of electrons to lower the
==PAGE:15==
11
2
THEORY
Coulomb repulsion energy. Functionals to this level of theory was widely used in solid
state physics when introduced and while it did produce reasonable molecular geometries
and vibration frequencies, it could strongly overestimate atomization energies [21] and
thus the DFT approach was not favored within quantum chemistry. With the introduc-
tion of the next level of functionals on the ”Jacob’s ladder of DFT”, generalized gradient
approximation (GGA) functionals, which depend on both the density and the gradient
of the density, made atomization energies much more accurate allowing DFT to expand
into the realm of computational chemistry. Since then even more accurate functionals,
broadly known as hybrid functionals, has seen the light of day by mixing GGA terms
with Hartree-Fock terms. These however come at a large computational cost, and for
the purpose of this project, a GGA functional used widely within quantum chemistry,
which will be presented in more detail in section 3.1, is employed.
A DFT calculation is performed at a given conﬁguration of the nuclei. It begins with
an initial guess for the electron density. From this density an eﬀective potential entering
in the Hamiltonain in eq. (4) is computed and used to identify the corresponding Kohn-
Sham orbitals which in turn yields a new density. This is an iterative process that is
continued until self-consistency. Very ﬁttingly, it is known as the self consistent ﬁeld
(SCF) cycle. After convergence the ground state energy of the molecule, as given by eq.
(6), is known for this speciﬁc nuclei conﬁguration. Hence, for single point calculations
this is the full picture needed in order to study a molecule. However, in order to study
of the dynamics of a molecule, DFT in itself is not adequate and thus we turn to the
realm of Born-Oppenheimer Molecular Dynamics.
2.2
Born-Oppenheimer Molecular Dynamics
In the adiabatic approximation, the wave function for the full system, Ψ, solving the
time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation can be written in the form [19, eq. 1.8 and p. 10]:
Ψ (R, r, t) = Θm(R, t)Φm(R, r),
(7)
where Θ and Φ are the wave functions of the nuclei and the electron systems respectively.
In this picture, the electrons instantaneously occupy stationary states and the actual time
dependency of the dynamics is modelled to matter only through the, in comparison, slow
nuclei movement, which are approximated as classical particles. Built inherently into this
expression is furthermore the Born-Oppenheimer approximation which disregards cor-
==PAGE:16==
12
2
THEORY
rections to the nuclei energy levels stemming from the dependence of the electronic wave
function on the nuclear coordinates. This means that Ψ cannot include multiple adi-
abatic states from the so-called adiabatic basis set but can only exist in the adiabatic
state m, which in many dynamic simulations is the ground state. However, this can in
principle be chosen freely and modelled to the degree of success which appropriate tools
for excited states calculations allow.
The Hellmann-Feynman theorem allows using the Newtonian equations of motion for
modelling the nuclei movement by substituting the usual derivative of the energy, in this
project the energy from equation (6), for the adiabatic state m with the expectation
value of the variation of the corresponding electronic part of the Hamiltonian from eq.
(1), ˆhe = ˆTe + ˆVnn + ˆVen + ˆUee. For nucleus i the equation of motion reads as [19, eq.
1.21-1.23]:
Mi
d2Ri(t)
dt2
= −
*
Φm(R)

∂ˆhe(R)
∂Ri
 Φm(R)
+
(8)
Numerical integration of this equation yields the motion of the nuclei, and molecu-
lar dynamics (MD) simulations can thus readily be made by taking steps forward in
time according to the forces acting on the system in after each DFT (or a similar elec-
tronic structure framework) calculation. This method falls under the ab-initio molecular
dynamics category and due to the approximations it rests on, it is known as Born-
Oppenheimer Molecular Dynamics (BOMD). While not being related to dynamics, this
equation also functions in a stationary form where no integration over time takes place.
This allows geometry optimization to be carried out for ﬁnding a solution to the sta-
tionary problem, ∇Em(R) = 0, which is an important tool to arrive at the preferred
spatial geometry of a given molecule according to the given framework for determining
the potential energy of the system, commonly referred to as the optimized or the relaxed
structure.
With DFT calculation results as input, BOMD thus makes it possible to take steps
forward in time and space where new DFT calculations can be computed. In vacuum
settings, this iterative approach is suﬃcient to explore the dynamics of a system. For
a molecule in solution, where thousands of solvent molecules are needed, using DFT
alone for BOMD is not a viable option for determining the energy due the sheer size of
the system. Hence, in order to do studies in solution, a methodology better suited for
dealing with large amounts of solvent molecules will be introduced in the next section
dealing with QM/MM MD simulations.
==PAGE:17==
13
2
THEORY
2.3
QM/MM MD simulations
In 1976 Warshel and Levitt introduced the quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics
(QM/ MM) methodology [22]. QM/MM MD simulations are a type of BOMD simula-
tions where the solute molecule is described by use of ab-initio quantum mechanical calcu-
lations and the surrounding solvent molecules are described by use of so-called Molecular
Mechanics calculations which model the dynamics through classical force-ﬁelds. Thus,
this combination makes it possible to model complexes such as the Ag-PtPOP complex
to a high degree of accuracy with DFT in a QM region while treating solvent eﬀects in
a computationally far less expensive manner where solvent molecules are modelled as
point charges in an MM region. The total energy of the system is then given by the sum
of the energies of the QM region, the MM region, and an additional term accounting for
interactions between the two regions:
Etotal = EQM + EMM + EQMMM,
(9)
with the Es denoting the diﬀerent energy terms in the system. In the QM region EQM
will in this project be given by DFT energies. In the MM region, several water solvent
models are available for describing EMM. The one used in this project will be presented
in section 3.5.
The interaction EQMMM between the QM and MM regions is in the
electrostatic embedding version of QM/MM given by [23],
EQMMM = −
NMM
X
m=1
qm
Z
n(r)
|r −Rm|dr +
NMM
X
m=1
NQM
X
n=1
qmZn
|Rn −Rm| + ENES,
(10)
where qm are the point charges and Rm their positions in the MM system, while Zn
denotes the atomic numbers of the nuclei and Rn their positions in the QM system.
The electrostatic interactions are clearly visible in the ﬁrst two terms with Coulombic
interactions between 1) the QM electronic density and the MM point charges and 2)
the MM point charges and QM nuclei. The ﬁnal interaction term, ENES, is there in
order to include the non-electrostatic (NES) interaction eﬀects due to Pauli repulsion
and dispersion. ENES is mostly expressed through Lennard-Jones pair potentials [23]
between all possible pairs with one QM nucleus and one MM point charge. The Lennard-
Jones parameters can either be taken from a database or ﬁtted in order to ﬁne-tune them
to the exact system at hand. For the scope of this project no ﬁtting will take place.
Instead, the Lennard-Jones pair potential parameters used by [17], originating from [24]
and [25], will also be used in this study. Having introduced the basics, QM/MM MD
==PAGE:18==
14
2
THEORY
simulations can now readily be performed for structural studies of the QM molecule.
However, in this study the aim is to investigate the energetic environment related to the
axial binding of Ag to PtPOP. In vacuum or continuous solvent environment settings this
behaviour can be studied with interaction energy curves from single point calculations.
However, in a QM/MM MD simulation, where the complex is modelled temporally in
a non-static environment of explicit solvent molecules, the probabilistic nature of the
system governed by statistical mechanics has to be accounted for. For this reason, a free
energy sampling method, which allows estimation of free energy proﬁles which in turn
can help shed light on the free energy landscape of solute axially coordinated Ag-PtPOP,
is explored next.
2.4
Free energy analysis with umbrella sampling
The correct way to study energy curves of a given system studied for example with
BOMD QM/MM simulations does not involve looking directly at potential energies of
speciﬁc conﬁgurations as can be done in vacuum since there are no ”true” speciﬁc conﬁg-
urations to use due to thermal ﬂuctuations. Instead, all the conﬁgurations that happen
during a simulation is part of the ”true” behaviour of the system and therefore they
all should be included. Statistical mechanics oﬀers a scheme for modelling this via the
canonical ensemble where the partition function of the system Q is given by the following
integral over the entire phase-space [26]:
Q =
Z
exp [−βE(r)] dNr,
(11)
where E, in this simple description, is the momentum-independent potential energy,
β = 1/(kBT), kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and N
is the number of degrees of freedom in the system. For a system where the number
of particles, the volume, and the temperature are constant, which is the case for the
so-called NVT molecular dynamics simulations performed in this project, the Helmholtz
free energy, A, can be computed via the well known relation:
A = −1
β ln (Q)
(12)
In order to determine the free energy, the partition function thus has to be known but
the integrals over phase-space in Q are impossible to calculate on the basis of computer
simulations. Usually a simulation study is interested in the free energy path between
==PAGE:19==
15
2
THEORY
two thermodynamic states or simply the free energy diﬀerence between them. In this
study the free energy landscape is investigated along a reaction coordinate ξ which is
given by the Ag-Pt distance and spans a range where axially coordinated Ag-PtPOP
would be expected to respectively show bonding and split into its separate Ag and Pt-
POP monomers. For an ergodic system, i.e. where every point in phase-space is visited
during the simulation, the ensemble average Q(ξ), which is computed by integrating
out all degrees of freedom except ξ, becomes equal to the time average P(ξ) for inﬁnite
sampling [26]. Thus, under the assumption that the system is ergodic, an inﬁnitely long
simulation would yield a distribution P(ξ) matching exactly Q(ξ), which in turn would
yield the free energy proﬁle A(ξ). However, simulations do not run inﬁnitely and there-
fore tend to sample regions around local or global minima well whereas higher energy
areas are sampled much less. If large energy barriers exist, some regions would not be
sampled at all, and the larger the system is the more sampling is required due to the
added degrees of freedom.
A widespread approach for ensuring a good amount of sampling in all regions of
conﬁguration space is by use of umbrella sampling which was ﬁrst introduced by Torrie
and Valleau in 1977 [27]. The idea of umbrella sampling is to use a series of diﬀerent
trajectory windows with diﬀerent biases favouring diﬀerent conﬁgurations. The biases
used here are harmonic potentials
ωi(ξ) = K
2 (ξ −ξref
i )2,
(13)
where K is the strength of the harmonic bias, i is the trajectory window, ξref
i
is the
equilibrium distance of the harmonic bias in window i, and ωi(ξ) is the applied bias in
window i. The windows i are spaced evenly along the reaction coordinate ξ and the
value of the bias strength K is equal for all windows. The unbiased local free energy in
the i windows is then given by [26]
Au
i (ξ) = −1
β ln P b
i (ξ) −ωi(ξ) + Fi,
(14)
where P b
i (ξ) is the biased distribution for window i, and Fi is an additive constant.
With suﬃcient sampling of the windows, this gives an exact [26] description in each
of the windows. However, the windows individually do not oﬀer great insight into the
underlying governing energy proﬁles and therefore the windows need to be combined.
This is usually done either with the weighted histrogram analysis method (WHAM) [28],
==PAGE:20==
16
2
THEORY
which averages over the unbiased distributions P u
i (ξ) that are estimated iteratively, or
with umbrella integration [29] which conversely averages over the unbiased mean force
∂Au
i
∂ξ . For both options the parameter K is important as it determines to what degree
the distributions from diﬀerent windows overlap. Small values produces broad distri-
butions along the reaction coordinate which in turn produces a good combination of
windows given that the K value is still large enough to drive the system to the high
potential energy conﬁgurations of the free energy landscape. A large K value produces
narrow distributions along the reaction coordinate which might not overlap between win-
dows. The umbrella integration method is chosen to perform the data analysis since the
WHAM method requires overlapping distributions whereas umbrella integration is more
ﬂexible. While overlapping distributions could be ensured by tuning of the strength of
the bias, the limited time period of the project and the large computational load asso-
ciated with performing QM/MM MD umbrella sampling test runs have not been feasible.
In umbrella integration the biased distributions along ξ in each window are modelled
as normal distributions [29]
P b
i (ξ) =
1
σb
i
√
2π exp

−1
2
 
ξ −ξb
i
σb
i
!2
,
(15)
where ξb
i is the mean and
 σb
i
2 the variance along ξ for the trajectory conﬁgurations in
window i. The expression for the unbiased mean force for window i given by ∂Au
i
∂ξ thus
becomes:
∂Au
i
∂ξ = −1
β
∂ln P b
i (ξ)
∂ξ
−dωi
dξ = 1
β
ξ −ξb
i
 σb
i
2 −K(ξ −ξref
i )
(16)
This expression is independent of the Fi term in eq. (14), which as a side note makes
the umbrella integration algorithm much faster than the WHAM approach, which uses
a recursive algorithm alternately computing Fi and an estimate of a global unbiased
distribution P u(ξ) until convergence is reached. In order to combine the diﬀerent win-
dows, the reaction coordinate ξ has to be divided into bins that are independent of the
windows and span the whole range of ξ. For each bin, centered at ξbin, the windows are
then combined by a weighted average of the diﬀerent window ∂Au
i
∂ξ given by [29]
∂A(ξ)
∂ξ

ξbin
=
windows
X
i
pi(ξbin)
∂Au
i (ξ)
∂ξ

ξbin
,
(17)
==PAGE:21==
17
3
SIMULATION TOOLS
with the normalized weights
pi(ξ) =
NiP b
i (ξ)
P
i NiP b
i (ξ).
(18)
As the ﬁnal step of the umbrella integration, the global free energy proﬁle along the
reaction coordinate A(ξ) is given by numerical integration of eq. (17). And with that,
the umbrella sampling method using umbrella integration along with all other theoretical
frameworks being employed for calculations in this work have now been introduced. The
implementations of them and speciﬁc tools used for simulations in this project are brieﬂy
presented in the next section.
3
Simulation tools
After having introduced the underlying theoretical justiﬁcation of the simulations, the
tools and methods used to apply them are introduced in this section. This includes ﬁrst
and foremost the ASE and GPAW environments which oﬀer the range of programmes
and functions used throughout this project, where the applied GPAW settings for the
exchange-correlation functional and basis sets as well as other important parameters are
revealed, followed by a presentation of the basis set superposition error and a method
to negate it. Thereafter follows an introduction of the D3 dispersion correction model,
the Continuum Solvent Model, as well as the maximum overlap and direct optimization
methods used for facilitating excited state calculations. Finally, the QM/MM imple-
mentation in GPAW and features used for performing the umbrella sampling with it are
presented.
3.1
DFT with the ASE and GPAW environments
Calculations in this project are perfomed using the Atomic Simulation Environment
(ASE) [30] and the Grid-based Projecter-Augmented Wave (GPAW) [31, 32] Python
modules. ASE oﬀers a handy environment which makes it possible to arrange and ma-
nipulate atoms and atomic systems, add calculators to atomic conﬁgurations allowing
determination of their potential energies, as well as add desired constraints and biases in
simulations. GPAW, which makes use of the projector augmented wave (PAW) method
as introduced by Bl¨ochl in 1994 [33] for performing DFT calculations, acts as the main
calculator for describing the Ag-PtPOP complex. GPAW implements a PAW formal-
ism as a linear transformation between the true all-electron Kohn-Sham wavefunctions
and smooth pseudo-wave-functions. Within an augmentation sphere close to the atomic
==PAGE:22==
18
3
SIMULATION TOOLS
cores, core electron states and the corresponding smooth core density are kept in a
frozen conﬁguration where they are not aﬀected by the DFT iterations to determine the
ground state density. This simpliﬁes the description of the density near atomic cores
greatly as the real potentials stemming from there are steep and ﬂuctuating. Outside
the augmentation sphere, all-electron wavefunctions and the introduced smooth pseudo-
wavefunctions are identical and thus oﬀer the same description of the valence electron
state orbitals, which are the most important ones for processes such as bonding and
photoexcitation. It is thus the density of these non-frozen valence electrons that are
calculated until self-consistency within the DFT framework. Due to the smooth de-
scription, an atomic system can be fully described by a grid of real-space points, where
DFT computations are performed at. The real space grid oﬀers good computational
scalability, possibilities for parallelization, as well as systematic convergence properties
[32]. Along with its applied tools and methods, which will be introduced throughout
this section, this makes GPAW well suited for a study of the relatively large Ag-PtPOP
complex and the many iterations that are needed in the QM/MM MD simulations in
order for the umbrella sampling to be successful. To kick things oﬀ, the key parameters
of the DFT calculations will be introduced in the following.
3.1.1
The key parameters of DFT
Some key parameters have to be chosen and/or optimized before carrying out DFT cal-
culations on a structure. The ﬁrst key parameter is the spacing between the points of
the real space grid introduced above where credible results are only produced if the grid
spacing is suﬃciently small. However, decreasing the grid spacing does also prolongs the
duration of the calculations as the computational load scales linearly with the number of
grid points in the system for the same number of computer CPUs. Similarly, the vacuum
padding around the structure, which is a measure of how much empty space is inserted
between the structure and the borders of the simulation cell within which the real space
grid points are distributed for a GPAW calculation, should be designated. The term
”vacuum padding” thus refers to a thickness of the empty space between the structure
and the DFT computation cell borders. A too small padding would cut away parts of
the electron orbitals which leads to wrong results. On the other hand a large vacuum
padding would result in a larger DFT computation cell containing more grid points than
required for producing an accurate result which in turn would increase the computational
load unnecessarily. For these reasons, the grid spacing and vacuum padding parameters
are chosen according to the results of a brief convergence study presented in section 4.1.
==PAGE:23==
19
3
SIMULATION TOOLS
Another important parameter is the exchange-correlation functional which enters the
DFT framework through equation (6). This project aims to be consistent with the pre-
vious study on Ag-PtPOP by [17] for the parameters and tools where new methods or
improvements are not attempted. Therefore, the BLYP GGA functional used in that
study, as well as in preceding studies on PtPOP with QM/MM MD simulations by
G. Levi [34] and Dohn et al. [35], will also be employed here. The BLYP functional,
widely used within molecular physics and quantum chemistry, consists of an exchange
term with correct asymptotic behaviour as implemented by Becke [36] and a correlation
term as implemented by Lee, Yang, and Parr [37] derived by building on top of work by
Colle and Salvetti on the correlation in helium [38]. The more accurate B3LYP hybrid
functional incorporating a mixture of the BLYP and exact exchange from Hartree-Fock
theory could be applied to achieve more accurate predictions. The GPAW implementa-
tion does however only provide forces from non-local terms like Hartree-Fock exchange
in plane-wave mode which is not the mode used in this project. Therefore, the beneﬁts of
exact exchange cannot be incorporated in GPAW MD simulations. A hybrid functional
like this would nevertheless also have increased the overall computational load which is
not beneﬁcial for the QM/MM MD simulation based free energy analysis where as many
iterations as possible are required.
The ﬁnal key parameter is the basis set, which in GPAW is correlated to the mode of
operation. GPAW was originally developed with focus on solid state physics which made
plane wave and ﬁnite diﬀerence the standard. A linear combination of atomic orbitals
(LCAO) method, which historically has been widely used within quantum chemistry,
with basis sets localized at atom positions, in contrast to global plane waves, was later
implemented in GPAW [39]. The accuracy of the LCAO is dependent on the basis set
it is used in conjunction with. Large basis sets oﬀer the more accurate description but
the computation time increases with the number of basis functions. Therefore, a lim-
ited basis set is applied. While a such LCAO mode calculation is less accurate than
its plane wave and ﬁnite diﬀerence counterparts in terms of predicted potential energy,
it makes up for this ﬂaw by being computationally less expensive and still predicting
highly accurate structure geometries. Therefore it constitutes an excellent approach for
most molecular dynamics studies, including this one. One should however keep in mind
how the less accurate energy prediction could aﬀect related properties.
When using LCAO for DFT, a basis set must be chosen. Many diﬀerent basis sets
==PAGE:24==
20
3
SIMULATION TOOLS
with varying degrees of complexity exist. In general the larger the basis set is, the more
accurate results become. Conversely, the required computational load increases with the
number of the basis functions due to the higher number of degrees of freedom requiring
more iterations for reaching self-consistency [39]. The basis sets generated with GPAW
are Gaussian type orbitals [39], consisting of a product of spherical harmonics and radial
functions classiﬁed by the following system. The minimum basis set consists of just
enough orbitals to contain the electrons of the neutral atom (and similar atoms from the
same period). For hydrogen and helium this would correspond to only one s-function
(1s), for period 2 elements such as oxygen two s-functions (1s and 2s) and one set of
p-functions (2px, 2py, and 2pz) are available, and so on for higher period elements. This
minumum basis set is known as a single zeta (sz) type basis, with the letter zeta referring
to the commonly used ζ in the radial functions. A double zeta (dz) type basis doubles
the number of each type of basis function yielding a basis consisting of two s-functions
for hydrogen (1s and 1s’) and so forth. This generalises into triple zeta (tz) basis types,
quadruple zeta (qz) basis types, and so on. In most cases, higher angular momentum
functions - p-functions, for systems only having up to s-functions, d-functions for sys-
tems only having up to p-functions, and so forth - are important [40, p. 195] for good
performance. Including such polarization functions leads to, for example in the case of a
dz basis, to a dzp basis. GPAW uses a category of bases called split valence bases, where
only the basis functions for the valence electrons are included in calculations. Since the
core electron density is frozen and therefore constant, such basis functions for core states
are redundant in the basis set and can be treated through the atomic PAW setup ﬁles.
The previous study on Ag-PtPOP [17] was performed exclusively with a dzp basis
which was also deemed suﬃcient in convergence studies of PtPOP in [34]. In addition
to this, dzp was shown to provide suﬃcient accuracy for most calculations in the GPAW
LCAO implementation paper [39].
Other types of basis functions not native to the
LCAO function generator of GPAW such as the contracted correlation consistent or
Ahlrichs basis set types, which are better optimized for focusing on the description of
the important valence electrons [40, p. 200], were brieﬂy considered for use in this project
to gain a more accurate description of the weakest-bonded electrons. The principle of
a contracted basis set is that it reduces the number of basis functions needed for a
chemically good description of valence electrons for all-electron basis sets while still
giving a a good description of the inner electrons which have the greatest contributions
to the potential energy. In all electron basis sets, a large number of basis functions
are needed to describe the chemically uninteresting inner electrons.
Through linear
==PAGE:25==
21
3
SIMULATION TOOLS
combination of inner electron basis functions a lower number of contracted basis functions
can be generated, through which the energy contribution of the inner electrons can be
expressed highly accurately keeping the computational load for high energy accuracy
small. A larger fraction of the basis functions within a contracted basis set can thus be
used for describing the chemically interesting valence electrons.
The requirement for every atom type within Ag-PtPOP to be included in the basis,
however, quickly removed contracted correlation sets such as cc-pVDZ as possibilities
seeing that the basis sets available from the Basis Set Exchange [41] do not incorporate
basis functions for Ag and Pt atoms. The Ahlrichs type basis sets [42] do oﬀer bases
for all 5 atoms, and were therefore explored. Using the full contracted basis is not com-
patible with the PAW method and therefore adaptions have to be made. After manual
removal of the contracted function terms, the Ahlrichs basis sets can be converted to the
PAW formalism as described by Phung et al. [43]. In a GPAW generator script capable
of carrying out this conversion implemented by Rossi et al. [44], augmented numerical
atomic orbital sets can be produced from the Gaussian-type orbitals of Ahlrichs basis
sets, with their contraction terms removed beforehand. While this approach does in fact
yield usable basis sets in GPAW, a number of components within this conversion invoked
too much uncertainty about the the produced basis sets to be considered for production
runs. Firstly, due to a bug within GPAW all Gaussian orbitals for g-functions and some
f-functions had to be removed before converting the basis into a GPAW basis set in order
for the basis sets to be operational. Secondly, the conversion of an optimized contracted
basis set into a basis set ﬁtting the PAW formalism, where contracted functions as well
as g- and f-functions are removed, risks creating unbalanced or ineﬃcient sets [43] con-
trary to the optimized basis set it would bring in its full form. This is exempliﬁed by the
quadruple zeta sets (def2-QZVP, def2-QZVPD, def2-QZVPP, and def2-QZVPPD) not
converging in a single set of test calculations on Ag-PtPOP, Ag, and PtPOP structures.
Thirdly, the atomic PAW setups used by GPAW include a number of frozen core electrons
for O, P, Ag, and Pt atoms. The Ahlrichs sets are built with an all-electron nature for H,
O, and P atoms and use an eﬀective core potential to describe core electrons for Ag and
Pt. The number of frozen core electrons in the PAW setups for Ag and Pt do not match
the number of electrons described in the eﬀective core potential. Except for the case of
H, these diﬀerences introduce a mismatch in how many electrons the basis functions are
supposed to describe. These misalignments point toward converted Ahlrichs type basis
sets not being well-suited for a GPAW QM/MM study and for this reason they will not
be applied in any production runs. Already produced convergence results will however
be presented along with data from other basis sets in section 4.1.
==PAGE:26==
22
3
SIMULATION TOOLS
Due to localized nature and the incompleteness of practically all LCAO bases, a basis
set superposition error (BSSE) [40, p. 225-227] is present in all LCAO calculations and
is, when possible, important to remedy when performing and comparing single point
calculations with diﬀerent geometries. Computing the interaction energy for a dimer
and its 2 monomers, for example for Ag-PtPOP its Ag and PtPOP monomers, in order
to estimate the binding energy between them, could naively be computed by
Einteraction = Edimer1,2 −Emonomer 11 −Emonomer 22,
(19)
where the dimer energy is calculated with basis functions from both monomers 1 and 2,
whereas the monomers are calculated using their own basis functions only. Calculating
the interaction like this induces a BSSE error because more basis functions are available
for the atoms in the dimer calculation than in the monomer calculation which results in
a energy lowering for atoms that can use the extra basis functions belonging to the other
monomer. This induces an overestimation of the interaction energy yielding a seemingly
more stable binding energy than it physically is. This feature of an incomplete LCAO
basis can be negated by the Counterpoise correction [40, equations (5.16-17)] where the
monomer calculations are not performed in a conﬁguration with only their own basis
functions, but instead include basis functions of both monomers at the same geometrical
conﬁguration as in the dimer calculation so the same set of basis functions are avail-
able for all three energy calculations. When calculating the potential energy of a single
monomer, only the electrons and nuclear potentials from that monomer enter the calcu-
lation but they can occupy basis functions from both monomers, allowing the same type
of energy lowering as present in the dimer calculation. In GPAW this is accomplished by
setting monomers that should only supply its basis functions, but otherwise not be part
of the calculation, as ”ghost” atoms in the ”setups” keyword argument of the GPAW
calculator. For the Ag-PtPOP complex the Counterpoise corrected interaction energy
can be schematised by the following relation:
Einteraction = EAg−PtPOP −EPtPOP (ghost Ag) −EAg (ghost PtPOP)
(20)
In this project, the Counterpoise correction will be applied for all computed interaction
energies for vacuum and CSM settings. The correction cannot be incorporated in the
QM/MM MD simulations and results from these, therefore, have to be considered with
the bias this induces in mind.
==PAGE:27==
23
3
SIMULATION TOOLS
3.2
The D3 dispersion correction
London dispersion forces arise between atoms or molecules when ﬂuctuations in the
electron density occurs in one atom, which immediately aﬀects the electronic density of
other atoms to seek an energetically more favourable conﬁguration. While the attraction
that follows is weak, with many atoms contributing it can grow strong enough to cre-
ate weak van der Waals bonds. This type of bonding mechanism is longer ranged than
ionic and covalent bonds, which are based on diﬀerent degrees of electron sharing, and
it can therefore maintain attraction between atoms at distances where orbital functions
from diﬀerent atoms no longer overlap. In a molecular study dispersion thus plays an
important role in describing the long range interaction accurately. However, dispersion
eﬀects are not well described by the local nature of DFT where the electronic densities
and their gradients, to a GGA level of description, are used to predict system properties.
As a means to remedy the lacking dispersion description, Grimme et al. [45] created
the D3 dispersion correction model that can be applied with a variety of DFT functionals,
including BLYP. The correction models the dispersion as a sum of r−6 and r−8 terms
each having their own dispersion coeﬃcient ﬁtted with TD-DFT to the ﬁrst 94 elements
of the periodic table. Using the resulting expressions, the D3 calculator that is wrapped
around the GPAW calculator adjusts the energy obtained by a DFT calculation through
atom-pairwise dispersion interactions and updates the forces. The corrections neither
take into account nor adjust the electronic structure of the system found through DFT,
and the method thus solely depend on the geometric structure of the atoms.
3.3
Excited state DFT with direct optimization and the maxi-
mum overlap method
The success of DFT and its ability to predict system quantities to a high degree of
accuracy in ground state conﬁgurations is in great extent due to the minimum energy
principle, as introduced by Hohenberg and Kohn, through which the global minimum
energy corresponds to the true ground state of a structure.
Several methods within
the world of DFT, which have been built on top of the original framework, allow cal-
culations of excited state structures with the signiﬁcant diﬀerence that the minimum
energy principle from ground state studies does not apply for excited states. This makes
the task of predicting excited state properties immensely more complicated as not only
global minimums but also saddle points within DFT calculations could correspond to
==PAGE:28==
24
3
SIMULATION TOOLS
the ”best” state in the sense that they oﬀer the best consistency with experimentally
observable features, as exempliﬁed for excited state CO in a recent study by Ivanov et
al. [46], where the best conﬁguration with an electronic density yielding the correct
axial symmetry of the molecule is not the one with the minimum energy. In the former
Ag-PtPOP study [17], excited states were described by means of the regular SCF ap-
proach along with the maximum overlap method (MOM) [47] which after every iteration
guides the variational density calculation towards the next set of occupations numbers
through a principle of maximum overlap between the current iteration orbitals and the
initially guessed orbitals, in order to keep the electronic structure from collapsing to the
set of ground state occupation numbers. In the SCF maximum overlap method (SCF-
MOM) approach density mixing and smearing of occupation numbers are key drivers
for reaching new iterations on the way to self-consistency. This in turn also means that
the SCF-MOM method is prone to convergence issues in the case of unequally occupied
degenerate or near-degenerate orbitals, which are present in a transition metal complex
like Ag-PtPOP. Ultimately, this contributed to the convergence problems experienced
by [17] for the interaction energy curve single point calculations for long Ag-Pt distances
as well as in the QM/MM MD simulations. In an attempt to handle these issues bet-
ter, this project uses the newly developed direct optimization (DO) method created by
Ivanov and Levi et al. [46, 48] as an alternative to the traditional SCF. It is based on an
exponential transformation which keeps the orthonormality between the orbitals which
in turn allows well-established direct minimization methods to be applied. As opposed
to the SCF, the DO approach does not use density mixing and uses ﬁxed uniform occu-
pation numbers throughout a calculation. For a DO-MOM excited state calculation this
ensures better convergence, but it also makes the initial occupation numbers and orbitals
supplied to the MOM tool play a very important role for what state a calculation will
converge to. Without knowledge about a certain state, however, it is unclear how to
best choose an initial guess for a calculation. An investigation of this for Ag-PtPOP is
beyond the scope of this project. It is, however, also assumed to have a small inﬂuence
on the binding energy study as the degenerate, or at least quasi-degenerate, states of
Ag-PtPOP at long Ag-Pt distances are very similar in energy and structure as found by
a research group3, to which the main supervisor of this thesis is attached, in support to
this project. This is a point that will be revisited after the results of the study have been
presented. While the focus here has been on excited state calculations, the exponential
transformation direct minimization eigensolver can just as well be used for ground state
calculations. In both cases it reaches convergence faster than the traditional SCF for
3From the Science Institute and Faculty of Physical Sciences, University of Iceland
==PAGE:29==
25
3
SIMULATION TOOLS
many systems [46, 48]. Hence, all calculations in this project are performed with the
exponential transformation eigensolver with the exception of the ﬁnite diﬀerence calcu-
lations conducted in the convergence study for reference. In all ground state calculations
the default search direction algorithm ’L-BFGS’ will be applied, while the more advanced
’L-SR1’ search direction algorithm will be applied for excited states as recommended by
the authors [48].
3.4
The Continuum Solvent Method
The default GPAW calculator operates in vacuum which for this project constitutes one
of the environments Ag-PtPOP is investigated in. While a vacuum at zero temperature
accounts for the simplest environment, it cannot account for the many eﬀects present in
a real-world laboratory. A tool allowing studies in a more realistic solvent environment
through a continuous description of the surroundings and their eﬀect on a solute is the
GPAW implementation of a continuum solvent model (CSM) by Held and Walter [49]
from 2014. Building on top of previous work on continuum solvent models [50, 51, 52],
this implementation considers a system consisting of a polarizable continuum and a
vacuum cavity within which the solute resides. Deﬁning the border between continuum
and cavity as well as the eﬀects imposed on the solute by the continuum in a manner
leading to an accurate model, is the main challenge for a such model. In the GPAW
implementation, the smooth distribution function is used for describing the electrostatic
screening eﬀect of the solvent related through the Poisson equation to the electrostatic
energy for the total charge distribution of the solute.
The deﬁnition of the smooth
distribution function depends on an eﬀective repulsive potential ﬁtted to experimental
data of van der Walls radii. The model depends on two experimentally ﬁtted parameters
and a static dielectric constant of the solvent taken from experimental data. A given
solvent environment can then be simulated at a given temperature. This work uses values
from the implementation paper for water to conduct CSM calculations in GPAW with
the ’SolvationGPAW’ calculator of Ag-PtPOP in aqueous solution at room temperature.
Due to the continuous force-ﬁeld nature of the CSM model, only single point DFT
calculations are required to describe the solute in a solvent which is a giant advantage
compared to the many iterations needed in QM/MM MD simulations which on the
other hand include explicit solvent molecules allowing for interaction eﬀects between
single solvent molecules and the solute. As a ﬁnal remark it should be noted that the
CSM and MOM tools within GPAW were not compatible at the time the [17] study was
performed. This has since been resolved and therefore excited state CSM calculations
==PAGE:30==
26
3
SIMULATION TOOLS
can be included within this thesis, giving a broader means of comparison for solvent
eﬀects as described by a continuous solvent model and an explicit solvent model.
3.5
QM/MM in GPAW
In 2017 Dohn et al. [35] implemented the QM/MM framework in GPAW by means
of an explicit interaction QM/MM calculator ’EIQMMM’ that coordinates the various
contributions from equations (9) and (10). The QM region is described by the GPAW
calculator - in this project with the D3 dispersion calculator wrapped around it, the
interaction between the QM and MM regions are described through equation (10), and
Lennard-Jones pair potential parameters, which only leaves the model from the MM
region to be introduced. In the GPAW QM/MM implementation paper, PtPOP and its
Pt-Pt bond was described with very good precision to experimental values over roughly
half a nanosecond by use of the TIP4P potential [53] which ranks as one of the best
models for describing water as a solvent [54]. For these reasons the TIP4P potential will
also be applied for QM/MM MD simulations in this project. The potential approximates
the electronic density of water through 4 point charges at each water molecule in the
unit cell box deﬁning the MM region for the QM/MM MD simulations performed. In
this project, approximately 2700 water molecules are used for this box. In order to make
sure that the water molecules act consistently, the geometry of the molecules are kept
constant by use of ASE constraints. This in turn also means that no protonation can
occur on the solute, as hydrogen atoms from water molecules are ﬁxed to their original
molecule.
An MD simulation is performed by integrating equation (8) by means of
an integrator from ASE. The ’Langevin’ thermostat simulates the system through the
canonical ensemble as suitable for systems where the number of particles, the volume,
and the temperature are kept constant, the latter achieved through a coupling to a heat
bath.
The ’VelocityVerlet’ thermostat on the other hand describes systems through
the microcanonical ensemble with constant number of particles, volume, and energy.
Thus, a simulation can be chosen to either conserve the energy of a system or apply
friction in order to, over time, equilibrate the system at a given temperature. In general,
QM/MM MD simulations are best performed on charge-neutral systems. Therefore 3 K+
counterions are added as secondary MM elements, interacting with the solvent and the
solute through a Coulomb and a Lennard-Jones term, in order to counteract the charge
of the Ag-PtPOP complex. The counterions are distributed within the MM box so they
interact and interfere as little as possible with the QM region. In order to ensure that
counterions maintains a large distance to all QM atoms at all times, a Hookean repulsive
==PAGE:31==
27
3
SIMULATION TOOLS
force is attached to the three counterions to keep them away from the geometrical mean
position of the Ag-PtPOP complex. The repulsive force, which acts like an inverted
spring by means of the ASE ’Hookean’ class, only acts on the counterion and kicks in
when the distance between the counterion and the geometrical mean, dK+, is less than
12 ˚A. Applying a spring constant with a value of k = 1000 kcal/mol the repulsion force
is given by:
FK+ =



k (12˚A −dK+)
if dK+ < 12 ˚A
0
otherwise
(21)
With this description, QM/MM MD simulations can readily be performed. In order to
perform umbrella sampling through QM/MM simulations a bias along the reaction coor-
dinate ξ that the sampling is performed over needs to be added. The reaction coordinate
is modelled by the distance between the Ag atom and the Pt atom closest to it, dAg-Pt,
in the axial conﬁguration of Ag-PtPOP. The applied bias is a harmonic bias around
the equilibrium distance ξref
Ag-Pt, i of trajectory window i as given by equation (13). ASE
does not contain a function to apply a such spring force within its ’Hookean’ class, and
therefore a custom ’HookeanWithEquilibrium’ class with a spring connecting two atoms
with a deﬁnable equilibrium distance has been implemented for this purpose.
In ﬁgure 3 a sketch showing the diﬀerent elements of a QM/MM calculation can be
seen. A calculation uses two diﬀerent unit cell boxes as shown on the left hand side - one
for the MM region modelling water molecules and counterions and one for the QM region
for modelling Ag-PtPOP. The QM box is situated in the center of the MM box. Water
molecules are allowed to drift inside the region where the QM box is located and have
close distance interactions with QM atoms but they are not included in DFT calculations
for Ag-PtPOP. Also visible are the counterions, which are kept away from the QM region
by a repulsive hookean force that is active inside the sphere represented by a broken-lined
red circle. On the right hand side of the ﬁgure, the box for the QM region is scaled up.
Shown here is the QM box for the case of umbrella sampling, where a spring connects
the Ag and the closest Pt atom to introduce the required bias. For normal QM/MM
MD simulations, the Ag-PtPOP complex would be situated here without any additional
spring.
For the umbrella sampling, trajectory windows with diﬀerent Ag-Pt distance geome-
tries are required.
In an attempt to make an automated process for creating these
geometries starting from a geometrically optimized structure for creating the trajectory
==PAGE:32==
28
3
SIMULATION TOOLS
Figure 3: Sketch of the diﬀerent regions of a QM/MM calculation. The left side shows
the large MM unit cell containing water molecules and counterions and the smaller QM
unit cell containing the Ag-PtPOP complex. The counterions are kept away from the
centered QM box by a repulsive hookean force that acts on the counterions if they cross
the sphere boundary marked by a broken-lined red circle. The right side shows a scaled
up QM box with the Ag-PtPOP complex as well as the applied bias spring between Ag
and Pt for use in umbrella sampling QM/MM calculations.
windows with diﬀerent dAg-Pt equilibrium distances, which would over time drive the Ag
atom towards the right dAg-Pt range followed by equilibration of the system, a modif-
cation was made in the ’EIQMMM’ class allowing the assignment of a ﬁxed size QM
box. However, this strategy quickly proved to be more bothersome than helpful due to
very large kinetic energies being introduced for some Ag-Pt distances and therefore the
trajectories were made by manually relocating Ag atoms to the relevant dAg-Pt equilib-
rium distances. Nevertheless, the custom ﬁxed-size QM box still adds value as it makes
it possible for QM/MM calculations to use exactly deﬁned grid spacings which has so
far not been possible with the normal ’EIQMMM’ class where the grid spacing in any
Cartesian direction at the beginning of a calculation is rounded to the closest value sup-
plying a number of grid points divisible by 4 while the given vacuum padding is exact
- when in fact the opposite is often desired. This rounding can furthermore introduce
slightly diﬀerent grid spacings along the diﬀerent Cartesian directions in a calculation.
Although this only has a small eﬀect on the large QM box required by Ag-PtPOP, the
implemented box does yield a more consistent description and is therefore used for all
QM/MM MD simulations in this work.
==PAGE:33==
29
4
PREPARATIONAL STUDIES
Having selected the ASE and GPAW environments for carrying out DFT calculations
with a LCAO setting and the BLYP functional, the the DO-MOM method for excited
state calculations, as well as tools for accounting for dispersion eﬀects via the D3 cor-
rection and solvent eﬀects via the GPAW implementations of a CSM model and the
QM/MM framework, this concludes the collection of tools used in the project.
4
Preparational studies
Following the introductory sections providing an overview of the system, the underlying
theory, and the simulation tools, this section presents the results of a number of conver-
gence studies and the parameters selected for use in later calculations. The grid spacing
and vacuum padding DFT parameters are tested over a range of values and a collection
of diﬀerent basis sets are evaluated and compared to results from ﬁnite diﬀerence cal-
culations. This gives rise to a set of DFT parameters that will be selected for use in
calculations for the remainder of this project.
4.1
Convergence studies
In the DFT calculations employed in this study the grid spacing, the vacuum padding,
and the basis set constitute the main parameters to optimize before conducting investi-
gations of Ag-PtPOP. Ideally, the set of parameters yielding the most accurate results
would be used but due to the heavy calculations corresponding to a highly accurate set
of parameters, a good balance between accuracy and speed has to be achieved in order
to be able to perform QM/MM MD simulations over long periods of time which is an
important requirement for credible umbrella sampling results.
In molecular DFT studies, convergence tests are often performed with respect to
characteristic structural distances. In [17], a such convergence study showed that the
characteristic Ag-Pt and Pt-Pt distances were very close to being constant for varying
grid spacings. Since the same system is investigated in this study, a such test will not
be performed. Instead, a convergence study with respect the potential energy will be
in focus. A convergence study with respect to the vacuum padding was performed on a
previously relaxed axial Ag-PtPOP structure over a range of vacuum paddings with a
constant grid spacing of 0.18 ˚A using ﬁnite diﬀerence mode in order to ensure a highly
precise description of the system convergence. A similar convergence study with respect
to grid spacing was carried out over a range of spacings with a vacuum padding of 7 ˚A.
==PAGE:34==
30
4
PREPARATIONAL STUDIES
(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Convergence plots of potential energy of Ag-PtPOP versus (a) vacuum padding
(grid spacing 0.18 ˚A) and (b) grid spacing (vacuum padding 7 ˚A) in ﬁnite diﬀerence
mode. Dotted reference lines corresponds to a 0 % deviation from the value at the most
dense grid spacing (0.10 ˚A)/largest vacuum padding (12 ˚A). Convergence of energy with
respect to vacuum padding within 0.03 % occurs for all tested settings with a ﬂuctuation
present only at the smallest padding. The convergence of energy with respect to grid
spacing is slow and monotonic but not yet fully converged at the very dense 0.10 ˚A
spacing.
All calculations were performed in a vacuum environment. As seen from the convergence
plots in ﬁgure 4(a), the vacuum padding only has a small inﬂuence on the overall poten-
tial energy with all results being within 0.025 % of the value at 12 ˚A. With the exception
of the smallest padding, any of the tested vacuum paddings could reasonably be used
in further studies. The grid spacing, as evident from ﬁgure 4(b), has a larger eﬀect on
the potential energy with a deviation in energy of over 4 % for the largest grid spacing
setting compared to the smallest. The energy converges monotonically with smaller grid
spacings and deviations from the result for the most dense setting are smaller than 0.6
% for all grid spacings ≤0.18 ˚A, which depending on the nature of a study, could all rea-
sonably be used. Since the largest possible number of calculations has to be performed
within the project time, 0.18 ˚A thus provides a good choice in balancing accuracy and
speed.
In this project, not only the energy but also the interaction energy as given by equa-
tion (20) is of relevance for investigating the binding energy of the Ag - PtPOP bond.
Using the standard GPAW grid spacing of 0.18 ˚A as well as the BLYP qzp basis set,
the interaction energy is studied as function of vacuum padding and grid spacing on an
==PAGE:35==
31
4
PREPARATIONAL STUDIES
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: Convergence plots of the interaction energy between Ag-PtPOP and its Ag
and PtPOP monomers versus (a) vacuum padding (grid spacing 0.18 ˚A) and (b) grid
spacing (vacuum 7 ˚A) with a BLYP dzp basis set. Dotted reference lines corresponds to
a 0 % deviation from the value at the most dense grid spacing (0.10 ˚A)/largest vacuum
padding (12 ˚A). All tested vacuum padding settings are within 2.1 % of the most accurate
interaction energy. All grid spacing settings are within an even smaller range of less than
0.4 % from the most accurate setting.
optimized Ag-PtPOP structure with the results presented in ﬁgure 5. As evident from
the ﬁgure, the convergence across vacuum paddings (a) happens across a wider binding
energy range than the convergence across grid spacings (b). Thus, in contrast to the
potential energy dependencies in ﬁgure 4, the value of the binding energy depends more
strongly on the vacuum padding than the grid spacing. Results for the grid spacings ≤
0.18 ˚A ﬁts within 0.1 % to the binding energy of the most dense setting, while the binding
energy deviates less than 0.3 % from the 12 ˚A padding setting for vacuum paddings ≥
7 ˚A. Therefore, in terms of the interaction energy, it is more important to include larger
vacuum paddings than denser grids for obtaining as accurate a description as possible.
On top of the vacuum paddings and grid spacings a selection of basis sets native
to GPAW and the Ahlrichs basis sets introduced in the previous sections have been
tested in terms of performance. The featured Ahlrichs basis sets are the def2- SVP,
SVPD, TZVP, TZVPD, TZVPP, and TZVPPD basis sets. Firstly, they are compared in
terms of the predicted potential energy for the whole Ag-PtPOP structure followed by
predicted interaction energies corrected for the BSSE as given by equation (20). Figure 6
shows the potential energies for Ag-PtPOP calculated across tested GPAW and Ahlrichs
basis sets and the highly accurate ﬁnite diﬀerence (FD) mode as well as the deviations
==PAGE:36==
32
4
PREPARATIONAL STUDIES
Figure 6: Potential energy of Ag-PtPOP determined with diﬀerent LCAO basis sets and
their deviation from ﬁnite diﬀerence (FD) mode. GPAW basis sets (lower case letters)
have deviations ranging down to 10 % from the FD result. Adapted Ahlrichs basis sets
(upper case letters) performs better with slightly smaller deviations.
of other basis sets from the FD result. From the ﬁgure it is evident that the more precise
FD mode predicts an energy signiﬁcantly lower than any LCAO basis set. In a deviation
range between 5 % and 10 % the Ahlrichs basis types are present, which in principle
means they in general perform better than the native GPAW basis sets that at best
can reach a deviation of around 10 %. These diﬀerences are all signiﬁcant and show
the price to be paid by a fast LCAO calculation compared to the more accurate ﬁnite
diﬀerence mode. The LCAO basis sets are in general made for molecular studies and
therefore they still are able to describe many system features to a suﬃcient degree of
accuracy. Furthermore, the direct optimization eigensolver in GPAW only works with
an LCAO basis set and not with the ﬁnite diﬀerence mode. Therefore, calculations in
ﬁnite diﬀerence mode would be prone to convergence issues - especially for the isolated
transition metal Ag in vacuum with degenerate energy levels and numerous ways of
occupying the d-orbitals [55] - as also is the case in the next ﬁgure. Figure 7 shows
the predicted interaction energy of an optimized Ag-PtPOP structure across the basis
sets as well as their deviation from the qzp basis set calculation. For the parameters
used and the vacuum environment the calculations were conducted in, FD and def2-
TZVPPD calculations suﬀered from convergence issues in the monomer calculations.
For the remaining basis sets the respectively unpolarized and polarized GPAW basis
sets show clear trends which also is the case for the diﬀerent classes of Ahlrichs basis
sets.
From the potential energy plot it is evident that a basis set with polarization
==PAGE:37==
33
4
PREPARATIONAL STUDIES
Figure 7: Interaction energy of the Ag and PtPOP monomers in Ag-PtPOP for various
native GPAW (lower case) and Ahlrichs (upper case letters) basis sets in vacuum. The
TZVPPD and ﬁnite diﬀerence mode calculations, which were present in ﬁgure 6, suﬀered
from convergence issues for the monomer calculations and thus could not be used for
determining interaction energies.
is required for a good description of the system. On top of this, the potential energy
plot suggests that Ahlrich basis sets in general perform better than the native GPAW
basis sets. However, as experienced for the interaction energy calculations, one of the
Ahlrichs basis sets was not well suited for the problem. While this was not investigated
in great detail, it is likely that the generated Ahlrichs basis sets are unbalanced to some
degree and that the eﬃciency of them is not as great as their original contracted basis
set counterparts. Therefore the notion of using a basis set not native to GPAW but with
good performance in other programs is dismissed for the purpose of this project.
4.2
Selection of parameters
Calculating accurate binding energies of Ag-PtPOP and simulating the behaviour of
photoexcitated Ag-PtPOP over long periods of time, as is required in the umbrella sam-
pling framework, by use of DFT makes it necessary to choose DFT settings oﬀering a
high computation speed and a suﬃcient accuracy. The default grid spacing in GPAW is
0.18 ˚A - a setting also employed in previous studies of PtPOP and Ag-PtPOP [34, 17].
In the Ag-PtPOP study [17], the set of parameters generally used were a grid spacing of
0.18 ˚A and a vacuum padding of 4 ˚A which were changed in case of convergence issues
to 0.14 ˚A and 7 ˚A. In order to be as consistent as possible with the previous study, grid
==PAGE:38==
34
4
PREPARATIONAL STUDIES
spacings of 0.14 ˚A and 0.18 ˚A and vacuum paddings of 4 ˚A and 7 ˚A are the ones mainly
considered for use in this work. While a grid spacing of 0.18 ˚A is less accurate, as seen in
ﬁgure 4(b), this project will also select 0.18 ˚A for the grid spacing since the total number
of grid points in the DFT calculation cell more than doubles when going from a 0.18
˚A to a 0.14 ˚A grid spacing, which in turn increases the computation time to a similar
degree. Going from a 4 ˚A vacuum padding to a 7 ˚A vacuum padding also signiﬁcantly
increases the number of grid points. However, since this project ultimately is focused on
an accurate description of the interaction energy curves between Ag and PtPOP along
the Pt-Pt axis, the gain in accuracy in going from 4 ˚A of padding to 7 ˚A of padding, as
evident from ﬁgure 5(a), could be important for accounting correctly for the asymptotic
behaviour at large Ag - Pt distances. For this reason 7 ˚A will employed as the standard
vacuum padding for the course of this project.
The BLYP dzp basis set is the default in GPAW and oﬀers a suﬃcient description
for most purposes. From ﬁgures 6 and 7 it is clear that a polarized basis set is needed
for investigating Ag-PtPOP when using one of the native GPAW basis sets. Similarly,
the ﬁgures show that the diﬀerence in using dzp and the more complex tzp and qzp
bases, which increase the computational load, is small. Considering the fact that previ-
ous studies of PtPOP and Ag-PtPOP [34, 17] successfully have used the dzp basis set,
this leaves the dzp basis as the obvious choice for this project as well.
For the sake of clarity and reproducibility, all settings and details in regard to the
DFT settings used in calculations in the remainder of this thesis are summarised below.
DFT calculations are performed with:
GPAW (version 21.6.1b1)
BLYP functional
LCAO dzp basis set
DO-MOM (MOM for excited states)
0.18 ˚A grid spacing
7 ˚A vacuum padding
D3 dispersion correction is subsequently added to all DFT energies
With all DFT settings selected, we are now ready to carry out investigations of the
Ag-PtPOP complex and the energetic environment for bonding between its monomers.
The results are presented in the following sections.
==PAGE:39==
35
5
RESULTS
Table 1: Characteristic bond lengths for ground and excited state Ag-PtPOP complexes
in vacuum as determined through the geometric relaxation. Corresponding results from
Hansen [17] and Kong [15] in a vacuum environment are included for reference.
Vacuum
GS
ES
˚A

dAg - Pt
dPt - Pt
dAg - Pt
dPt - Pt
Own results
2.63
2.81
2.80
2.96
Hansen(2021)
2.63
2.83
2.75
2.99
Kong(2012)
-
-
2.88
2.82
5
Results
After choosing appropriate tools and settings, the main investigations of this thesis can
now be carried out in the attempt to obtain a greater knowledge about the Ag-PtPOP
complex and the nature of the Ag - PtPOP bond. Firstly, geometric relaxations in re-
spectively vacuum and CSM environments are conducted, followed by MD simulation
test runs of photo-excited Ag-PtPOP in three diﬀerent environments. Thereafter, in-
teraction energy curves are produced in vacuum and CSM environments, followed by
the major driving force behind this project - an umbrella sampling study of Ag-PtPOP
conducted with QM/MM MD simulations for describing the free energy landscape along
the axial Ag - PtPOP bond.
5.1
Geometric relaxations
Geometrical relaxations are performed by solving for a stationary solution to equation (8)
in order to ﬁnd structurally stable structures. Relaxations are carried out for Ag-PtPOP
in respectively vacuum and CSM environment settings in both ground and excited states.
Starting from vacuum-optimized structures in the previous Ag-PtPOP study [17], atoms
are randomly displaced with the ASE ’rattle’ function according to a Gaussian distri-
bution with a mean of 0 ˚A and a standard deviation of 0.03 ˚A. Relaxations are then
performed with the ’FIRE’ optimizer from ASE using the DFT parameters presented in
section 4.2 and D3 dispersion correction until all forces are below a very strict threshold
of 0.01 eV/˚A.
The characteristic bond lengths of the ground and excited state structures produced
as a result of the geometrical optimization in vacuum are shown in table 1 along with
==PAGE:40==
36
5
RESULTS
Table 2: Characteristic bond lengths for ground and excited state Ag-PtPOP complexes
in a CSM environment as determined through the geometric relaxation. Corresponding
results from Christensen [14] and Kong [15] in a solvent environment are included for
reference.
Solution
GS
ES
˚A

dAg - Pt
dPt - Pt
dAg - Pt
dPt - Pt
Own results
2.69
2.89
2.83
2.86
Christensen(2010)
-
-
2.47±0.07
2.74±0.06
Kong(2012)
-
-
2.87
2.79
relevant reference values reported in previous works. For the ground state structure in
vacuum the bond lengths are 2.63 ˚A for the Ag-Pt distance and 2.81 ˚A for the Pt-Pt
distance which is very close to the ﬁndings by Hansen with a diﬀerence of only 0.02 ˚A
in the Pt-Pt distance. In the excited state the optimized structure has a Ag-Pt distance
of 2.80 ˚A whereas the Pt-Pt distance has a value of 2.96 ˚A. These values diﬀer slightly
more from the values reported by Hansen but are within 0.05 ˚A of the results from there
- slightly longer for the Ag-Pt bond and slightly shorter for the Pt-Pt bond. This brings
the produced structure closer than the one reported by Hansen to the 2.88 ˚A Ag-Pt and
2.82 Pt-Pt distances reported by Kong but the bond lengths still diﬀers by around 0.1
˚A or more.
The characteristic bond lengths of ground and excited state CSM-optimized struc-
tures are shown in table 2 along with the values obtained experimentally by Christensen
and in the theoretical study by Kong. In the ground state both the 2.69 ˚A Pt-Pt distance
as well as the 2.89 ˚A Ag-Pt distance are longer than the corresponding bond lengths
in vacuum. No other ground state structures have been found in the literature for an
axial Ag-PtPOP structure.
The 2.83 ˚A Ag-Pt distance and the 2.86 Pt-Pt distance
for the excited state structure lie within close vicinity of the values in aqueous solution
reported by Kong via the use of a more advanced hybrid functional (B3WP91) - partic-
ularly the Ag - Pt bond which is crucial in this study. The Pt-Pt bond length is slightly
further away from the experimentally observed 2.74 ˚A as observed by Christensen. A
discrepancy exists between the Ag-Pt distance of the produced structure and the value
reported by Christensen but as was argued by Kong this can be ascribed to not including
the presence of ground state Ag-PtPOP in the analysis performed by Christensen et al..
==PAGE:41==
37
5
RESULTS
(a) Vacuum - HOMO-1
(b) Vacuum - HOMO
(c) CSM - HOMO-1
(d) CSM - HOMO
Figure 8: HOMO-1 and HOMO molecular orbitals of Ag-PtPOP excited state for the
vacuum-optimized and solvent-optimized structures.
Isosurfaces are drawn at 0.015
q
e−/˚A
3.
The HOMO molecular orbital (molecular orbital number 110 in the GPAW calcula-
tion) of the excited state Ag-PtPOP as well as the HOMO-1 molecular orbital (molecular
orbital number 109 in the GPAW calculation) are plotted for respectively vacuum and
CSM environments in ﬁgure 8 as 0.015
q
e−/˚A
3 isosurfaces. In both vacuum and CSM
environments the HOMO molecular orbital is very similar to the one reported by Kong
[15] with a mixing of the bonding pσ molecular orbital between Pt atoms and the s orbital
of Ag. The CSM HOMO-1 molecular orbital similarly portrays the same characteristics
as reported by Kong with the anti-bonding dσ∗molecular orbital clearly showing. The
==PAGE:42==
38
5
RESULTS
vacuum HOMO-1 molecular orbital on the other hand does not fully correspond to the
same molecular orbital. While portraying some of the same features, the orbitals are
distorted compared to the CSM counterparts and the anti-bonding nature between Pt
atoms is not present in the same way, which is likely due to the lack of the stabilizing
eﬀect a solvent environment provides.
5.2
Photoexcitation of Ag-PtPOP in diﬀerent environments
Based on the literature study there is no experimental proof that stable ground state
axial Ag-PtPOP complexes, such as the structures optimized here, exist in solution.
Nevertheless, it is instructive to investigate the dynamics upon photo-excitation of the
relaxed ground state structures in order to investigate whether the Ag-PtPOP exci-
plexes will seek towards the relaxed excited state structures, seek towards some other
stable structures, or dissociate. Therefore, MD simulations are performed in respectively
vacuum, CSM, and QM/MM environments to investigate the dynamics as well as the
inﬂuence of the environment.
The simulation in vacuum starts from the vacuum-optimized ground state structure
while the simulations in CSM and QM/MM start from the CSM-optimized ground struc-
ture since they both simulate a solvent environment. At time t = 0 the ground structure
is excited by means of the MOM tool followed by time and force propagation governed
by equation (8). For the vacuum and CSM descriptions the ’VelocityVerlet’ integrator is
employed whereas the ’Langevin’ integrator with a 0.01 friction coeﬃcient and at a tem-
perature of 300 K is used for the QM/MM description. In an ideal simulation, the time
steps are inﬁnitesimal since updating the structural geometry according to the forces
acting at a given moment in time immediately gives rise to diﬀerent forces. On the other
hand, with very short time steps only very short simulation times can be investigated,
as each new moment in time requires a full DFT / QM/MM calculation. Therefore,
taking as long time steps as possible without inducing any unphysical movement for
atoms subject to high frequency motion, is preferred. The hydrogen atoms are much
lighter than the other atoms in Ag-PtPOP and are therefore prone to rapid, unphysical
motion if the time steps are too long. In a 2009 paper by Zheng et. al [56] it is described
that setting the masses of hydrogen atoms to 10 atomic units (amu) allows time steps
of 3 fs to be taken in QM/MM MD simulations used for umbrella sampling, which leads
to free energy proﬁles reproducing results obtained with time steps of only 1 fs and a
hydrogen mass of 1 amu with high precision. While the kinetic properties are changed
==PAGE:43==
39
5
RESULTS
signiﬁcantly by such a procedure, the overall thermodynamic properties are in principle
unaﬀected [56]. On top of this, the hydrogen atoms are located in the ligand structure
and are not assumed to be important for the Ag - PtPOP interaction studied here.
Therefore, umbrella sampling QM/MM MD simulations will use 3 fs time steps with
hydrogen masses set to 10 amu for the hydrogen atoms within Ag-PtPOP. The hydrogen
atoms in the explicit water molecules in the surrounding MM-region are left unchanged.
Although the MD simulations conducted in this photo-excitation study are not part of
the umbrella sampling study, the same parameters will be used in all conducted MD
simulations including these photo-excitation MD test runs. The convergence parameters
used during MD simulations for the DFT calculator will be same as the ’tight’ require-
ments employed by [17] where in addition to the precision requirements for the energy
and the density, all forces are determined with a precision to within 10−4 eV/˚A in each
iteration.
Figure 9(a) shows the bond lengths between Ag and Pt as well as the two Pt atoms of
PtPOP as function of time in the vacuum MD simulation of photo-excited Ag-PtPOP.
Upon excitation from the ground state the characteristic distances immediately adapt
and start oscillating around the values found for the vacuum-optimized excited state.
With ﬂuctuations reducing in magnitude the structure keeps oscillating around a Ag-Pt
distance of around 2.80 ˚A and a Pt-Pt distance of around 2.96 ˚A throughout the 15 ps
simulation. This clearly shows that a photo-induced excitation from the ground state
structure would converge to the expected excited state structure in vacuum.
The results from the CSM MD simulation of Ag-PtPOP shown in ﬁgure 9(b) follows
the same pattern. Following the excitation at t = 0, the Ag-Pt and Pt-Pt distances
oscillate around the dAg-Pt = 2.83 ˚A and dPt-Pt = 2.86 ˚A values found for the solution-
optimized excited state structure with the magnitude of the oscillations decreasing over
time. The Pt-Pt distance settles to a 0.02 ˚A range lying just above the value of the op-
timized structure while the Ag-Pt distance oscillates over a slightly larger range. Clear
convergence towards the solution-optimized structure is thus observed upon excitation
of the optimized ground structure.
In order to perform the same sort of MD study with a QM/MM description the
starting point should be an equilibrated QM/MM system of the ground state Ag-PtPOP.
However, as was also observed by [17], QM/MM MD simulations with an axial ground
state Ag-PtPOP structure at 300 K are not stable and thus cannot be used to equilibrate
==PAGE:44==
40
5
RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 9: Ag-Pt and Pt-Pt bond lengths as function of time in MD simulations in (a)
a vacuum description, (b) a CSM description, (c) a QM/MM description of the ground
state only, and (d) a QM/MM description for the optimized structures in the respective
mediums with excitation occurring at t = 0 (not for (c)). The corresponding optimized
structure bond length values are shown with dashed (Ag-Pt) and dotted (Pt-Pt) lines.
the system. An attempt for a such equilibration, where the MM system ﬁrst had been
equilibrated followed by the insertion of the CSM-optimized ground state Ag-PtPOP
and removal of overlapping water molecules, is seen in ﬁgure 9(c). Over the duration of
the ﬁrst picosecond of simulation the Ag atom drifts away from the Pt atom and thereby
PtPOP with increasing speed, showing a clearly dissociative nature which leaves no
chance of equilibration at 300 K. Instead, an equilibration was performed with a ﬁxed
ground state structure. While this constraint is unphysical and keeps the total energy
of the system artiﬁcially high, it allows studying the excitation process from a starting
==PAGE:45==
41
5
RESULTS
point that resembles what axial ground state Ag-PtPOP in solution would look like.
Figure 9(d) shows the characteristic bond lengths during the QM/MM MD simulation
performed at 300 K following excitation of Ag-PtPOP. For the ﬁrst almost 9 ps, the
system oscillates irregularly around the bond lengths found for the solution-optimized
structure. While some ﬂuctuations of signiﬁcant magnitude occur, this time period would
suggest that excited state Ag-PtPOP is stable in the explicit solvent describtion with
irregular oscillations of the Ag-Pt and Pt-Pt distances. However, after a time shortly
before 9 ps the Pt-Pt distance increases and oscillates around a distance of approximately
3.2 ˚A. At around 10 ps the Ag-Pt distance increases swiftly and continues to do so until
the DFT calculation no longer is able to converge. Following a stable phase of several
picoseconds the exciplex thus dissociates. Upon visual inspection of the development in
the HOMO molecular orbital, as presented in ﬁgure 10, it is evident that the Ag atom
dissociates in a direction forming an angle to the axial Pt-Pt axis and that the HOMO
molecular orbital at the last iteration no longer incorporates a signiﬁcant amount of the
Ag s-orbital. Instead, the excited electron is localised on the PtPOP monomer. This
break down of the bonding HOMO molecular orbital eﬀectively marks the dissociation of
the exciplex. The stable phase exempliﬁed with orbitals at a time of 4950 fs continues to
have a HOMO molecular orbital similar to the LUMO molecular orbital (for ground state
Ag-PtPOP) reported by Kong [15] as well as the HOMO molecular orbitals generated
in both CSM and vacuum environments for the optimized structures in ﬁgure 8. The
simulation run thus suggests that the Ag binds when in a truly axial position but that
interactions with explicit water molecules can push the Ag atom partly sideways out of
the equilibrium and that another type of HOMO molecular orbital with non-bonding
properties eventually is preferred making the Ag atom dissociate from the complex.
5.3
Interaction energy curves
In order to investigate the energy landscape involved in the axial bonding between Ag
and PtPOP, interaction energy curves are generated along the Ag-Pt-Pt axis. In vacuum
and in the CSM picture, this can be done in a simple manner through a series of single
point DFT calculations. The interaction energy is determined by use of equation (20)
for a selection of Ag-PtPOP conﬁgurations with Ag-Pt distances ranging from 1.6 ˚A to
6.5 ˚A. The required structures are prepared in ASE by translation of the Ag atom. In
order for calculations performed at diﬀerent Ag-Pt distances to be comparable, identical
DFT simulation cells have to be applied for all conﬁgurations. Thus, the simulation cell
is deﬁned in regard to the conﬁguration with the largest Ag-Pt distance by means of
==PAGE:46==
42
5
RESULTS
(a) t = 0 fs
(b) t = 4950 fs
(c) t = 9999 fs
(d) t = 10140 fs
Figure 10: HOMO molecular orbital of Ag-PtPOP excited state at diﬀerent times for
the QM/MM MD photo-excitation simulation. Isosurfaces are drawn at 0.015
q
e−/˚A
3.
In the two latter orbital plots, the HOMO molecular orbital has changed away from the
initial form and the Ag atom is drifting in the xy plane. This development eventually
no longer facilitates a bonding HOMO molecular orbital between Ag and PtPOP.
the ’Cluster.minimal box’ function from GPAW ensuring a grid spacing of 0.18 ˚A and a
vacuum padding of minimally 7 ˚A. This ensures an exact grid spacing by rounding up
the padding distance until it corresponds to a number of grid points divisible by 4 along
each Cartesian coordinate. At each conﬁguration, single point DFT calculations of the
Ag-PtPOP dimer energy as well as Ag and PtPOP monomer energies in both ground
and excited states are performed from which the interaction energies are computed. For
the ground state, the interaction energy curve is simply given by the BSSE corrected dif-
==PAGE:47==
43
5
RESULTS
ference between the results of the ground state dimer and its monomers. For the excited
state, the situation is more unclear. In the picture of the molecular orbital diagram in
ﬁgure 2(b) an excited electron stemming from the anti-bonding dσ∗molecular orbital
would occupy the sσ orbital. However, for determining the interaction energy this elec-
tron must be assigned to one of the two monomers. At distances close to the equilibrium
bond length this will not aﬀect the result signiﬁcantly since the electron can occupy the
orbitals of ’ghost’ atoms and thereby eﬀectively remain in a mixed pσ and sσ molecular
orbital. At long distances, i.e. after dissociation, the excited electron must be localized
to one monomer only, and this assignment could inﬂuence the asymptotic behaviour of
the interaction energy which in turn can aﬀect the estimated binding energy. In the
picture of Clodfelter and Pettijohn as well as the molecular orbital diagram in ﬁgure
2(b) the excitation of PtPOP facilitates the axial bonding. Therefore this investigation
will limit itself to this picture where the electron initially excited from the dσ∗molecular
orbital will occupy either the 5s orbital of Ag or the pσ molecular orbital of PtPOP
arising from Pt 6pz orbital mixing upon dissociation of Ag. Both possibilities will be
explored in the following.
The interaction energy of a dimer system can conveniently be described through the
Morse potential for diatomic molecules. At an inter-atomic distance smaller than or
in the vicinity of the length of the covalent bond, the potential displays a harmonic
shape that changes into an anharmonic behaviour for large inter-atomic distances with
an asymptote at 0. The Morse potential is given by:
VMorse(r) = De(1 −e−a(r−re)2) + k,
(22)
where r denotes the distance between atoms, the a parameter controls the width of the
harmonic well, re is the equilibrium bond distance, and De is the well depth relative
to the dissociated atoms at the asymptote. A parameter k not present in the normal
Morse potential has been added for handling interaction energy curves with non-zero
asymptotes - something that is likely to occur with the GPAW description of transition
metal atoms and a system that potentially is torn apart in a conﬁguration that is not
natural for the system. Fitting the Morse potential to the interaction energy curve,
yields an estimate of the binding energy between Ag and Pt given by
Ebond = De,
==PAGE:48==
44
5
RESULTS
Figure 11: Interaction energy curves for ground and excited state Ag-PtPOP in vacuum
with the excited electron localised fully on a PtPOP4−monomer at large separation
distances. The left pane shows the calculated interaction energies as well as ﬁtted Morse
potentials. The right pane shows the ﬁtted Morse potentials translated vertically to
asymptotic values of 0 eV zoomed in on the region around the equilibrium for easy
comparison of the ﬁts.
as well as the corresponding equilibrium distance at which it occurs.
Figure 11 shows the interaction energy curves for ground and excited state Ag-PtPOP
in a vacuum description with Ag+ and PtPOP4−monomers where the excited electron is
localized on PtPOP. The calculations are performed spin-paired as a consequence of the
ground state monomers having no half-ﬁlled orbitals. The left pane shows the computed
interaction energies along the Ag-Pt axis and a Morse potential ﬁtted on the form of
equation (22) for the ground and excited state Ag-PtPOP complex. As was also observed
by Hansen [17], the curves in vacuum are shifted from an asymptotic value of 0 eV to a
signiﬁcant degree requiring the extra k parameter to make ﬁtting to a Morse potential
feasible. The ground state curve is smooth and has a typical Morse potential well in the
vicinity of the minimum. The excited state curve is also smooth for small inter-atomic
distances but from around 3.3 ˚A and up ﬂuctuations start to occur in individual points.
In the right pane of the ﬁgure the ﬁts alone are plotted in the vicinity of the equilibria
with the ﬁts translated by their respective k values in order to make them have asymp-
totic values of 0 eV. While a minimum is present for the excited state, the depth of
the well is smaller than that of the the ground state, yielding a smaller binding energy
estimate. Based on the proﬁles, it is clear that excitation of the ground state leads to an
excited state with negative interaction energy that can oscillate around its equilibrium
==PAGE:49==
45
5
RESULTS
Figure 12: Interaction energy curves for ground and excited state Ag-PtPOP in a CSM
environment with the excited electron localised fully on a PtPOP4−monomer at large
separation distances. The left pane shows the calculated interaction energies as well
as ﬁtted Morse potentials. The right pane shows the ﬁtted Morse potentials translated
vertically to asymptotic values of 0 eV zoomed in on the region around the equilibrium.
distance as observed in the the MD simulation. The ﬁtting parameters show that the
excited state has an equilibrium distance at 2.89 ± 0.02 ˚A, which is slightly longer than
the 2.80 ˚A of the optimized structure, with a binding energy of 0.30 ± 0.04 eV while the
ground state has its equilibrium at 2.65 ± 0.01 ˚A, which is an almost perfect match to
the 2.63 ˚A of the optimized structure, with a binding energy of 0.93 ± 0.05 eV.
Figure 12 shows the corresponding interaction energy curves in the CSM description
with the computed interaction energies and ﬁtted Morse potentials shown in the left
pane and translated ﬁts with asymptotes at 0 eV shown in the right pane. As evident
from the plots, the ground state curve has a similar shape to the one in vacuum but with
an asymptotic behavior at a diﬀerent value closer to 0 eV - this time with a positive
asymptote value. According to the ﬁt, the equilibrium occurs at 2.71 ± 0.01 ˚A, in very
close vicinity to the 2.69 ˚A of the optimized structure, with a binding energy of 0.62 ±
0.06 eV.
The excited state curve displays similar trends to the vacuum excited state curve
for small distances but for distances over 3.3 ˚A the curve changes behaviour. Instead
of increasing slightly, it decreases to an asymptotic value slightly lower than the value
at the local minimum at around 2.8 ˚A. This results in the ﬁt not having a meaning-
ful minimum which corresponds to a system with no bonding. According to this ﬁtted
==PAGE:50==
46
5
RESULTS
model, the Ag atom would in other words dissociate upon excitation in a solvent en-
vironment. However, both the vacuum excited state curve and in particular the CSM
excited state curve contain discontinuities which are ascribed to the degenerate energy
levels of the monomers. The curves of the computed potential energies for the excited
state Ag-PtPOP dimer are upon inspection seen to be smooth in both vacuum and in the
CSM environment (see Appendix A). The CSM energies maintain a signiﬁcant energy
diﬀerence between the ground state and the excited state Ag-PtPOP for all distances
while the vacuum energies in the excited state converges towards the same potential
energy value as the ground energies for large distances. That the excited state collapses
towards the ground state is also backed up by visual inspection of the HOMO-1 and the
HOMO orbitals of excited state Ag-PtPOP (molecular orbitals number 109 and 110)
where the clearly diﬀerent features of the HOMO-1 orbital and the HOMO orbital that
were observed in ﬁgure 8 reconﬁgure towards a similar spatial distribution for large Ag-
Pt distances. Examples of the diﬀerence between short and long Ag-Pt distance orbitals
in respectively vacuum and CSM environments are shown in Appendix B. Hence, the
solvent environment has a stabilizing eﬀect on the excited state not present in vacuum
which maintains an energy diﬀerence for all tested Ag-Pt distances. The ﬂuctuations in
the interaction energies instead stem from the monomer calculations. The potential en-
ergy curves for these are also well-behaved at short distances but from around 3.5 ˚A the
quasi-degenerate energy levels changes in their order and diﬀerent molecular orbitals are
determined for the ground state HOMO. This in turn aﬀects the MOM initial guess in
the excited state calculation for PtPOP which ultimately can lead to PtPOP converging
towards diﬀerent electronic conﬁgurations in the excited state calculations. Ideally, the
same MOM initial guess taken from a set of orbitals at a short Ag-Pt distance could be
used at all distances to yield smooth monomer results but this has proved unsuccessful.
Either due to the results being similar to the ones presented in ﬁgures 11 and 12 or due
to calculations at long ranges not being able to converge.
While not having a smooth and continuous function stemming from similar occupied
orbitals from all distances poses a problem for a study of the interaction energy, no sim-
ple solution exist within the palette of tools available. It simply is an eﬀect of studying
a transition metal complex with degenerate energy levels using ghost orbitals from the
other monomer which is necessary to account for the BSSE. Nevertheless, the course of
the interaction energy curve in ﬁgure 12 of excited state Ag-PtPOP in CSM suggests
that a minimum is present even though the long-range distances displays a diﬀerent
behaviour. Therefore a Morse ﬁt has been made to the data excluding the 7 last points.
==PAGE:51==
47
5
RESULTS
This yields a Morse ﬁt with an equilibrium distance at 2.97 ± 0.04 ˚A, which is longer
than the 2.83 ˚A of the optimized structure, with a small binding energy of 0.16 ± 0.04 eV.
The calculations for producing the interaction energy curves have been performed
in a manner consistent to that used by Hansen [17] and therefore the results would be
expected to be similar. In the previous study, no excited state calculations could be per-
formed within the CSM environment and the long distance excited state calculations in
vacuum suﬀered from convergence issues. The fact that all calculation points are present
in the presented plots therefore provides evidence that the DO-MOM method is a strong
tool for aiding convergence in excited state calculations of Ag-PtPOP in an axial conﬁg-
uration. The vacuum results in general are located at the same interaction energy areas.
The ground state CSM results are on the other hand placed diﬀerently with diﬀerent
asymptotes. Upon investigation of calculation scripts from [17] it was found that the
CSM calculations had been performed without the D3 correction and conducting the
same CSM calculations as above with the dispersion correction left out reproduces the
location of all interaction energy curves reported in [17] (see Appendix C). The binding
energies found by Hansen are signiﬁcantly higher than the ones found here. For ground
state CSM it was found to be 1.29 eV, while the ground state vacuum binding energy was
1.18 eV. The diﬀerence is even larger for the excited state vacuum calculations, which
yielded a - in comparison - massive 1.88 eV binding energy. For the vacuum plots, the
ﬁts from Hansen are based on few points and only in the range close to the equilibrium
distance. It can therefore be questioned how conﬁdent the reported values are. On the
other hand, as seen above, ﬁtting a Morse potential to only the promising part of the
data produced in this study does not seem to increase the estimate for an excited state
binding energy signiﬁcantly as it is around an order of magnitude smaller than the vac-
uum value reported in [17]. The ground state CSM plot produced by Hansen contains
the same distance points as calculated here, and thus the discrepancy in the binding en-
ergy is certainly not due to a diﬀerent amounts of data available for the ﬁtting. In later
studies, the reason for this discrepancy should be studied to see if it somehow stems from
a diﬀerence in the DO-MOM and SCF-MOM approaches, the diﬀerent optimized struc-
tures, diﬀerences in the basis sets in the used GPAW versions, or something entirely else.
The description so far has focused on the case where the excited electron remains
at PtPOP after dissociation occurs - a picture corresponding to the Ag+ and PtPOP4−
monomers of the ground state keeping the same nominal charge after excitation. In
order to evaluate whether this corresponds to the way the electrons distribute in the
==PAGE:52==
48
5
RESULTS
Figure 13: Hirshfeld charges on the Ag atom in the dimer Ag-PtPOP calculations in
ground and excited states in vacuum (left) and CSM (right) environments. The CSM
Hirshfeld charges converges to charges in the vicinity of 0 or +1 at long Ag-Pt distances
where dissociation would eﬀectively have occurred. In vacuum the charges have not
converged to physically sound charge distributions with the charge of Ag becoming ever
more negative at increased Ag-Pt distances.
dimer calculations, a Hirshfeld charge [57] analysis - a method for comparing the charge
density surrounding an atom to that of the neutral atom in order to give an estimate of
the eﬀective charge of the atom - has been performed on the Ag atom in the Ag-PtPOP
dimer calculations. Figure 13 shows the Ag Hirshfeld charge as function of the Ag-Pt
distance for ground and excited states for vacuum (left) and CSM (right) environments.
In both environments the charge distribution around Ag corresponds to a neutral charge
at short separations where orbitals can mix to a large degree. At longer distances, the
vacuum Hirshfeld charges have decreasing charges in both ground and excited states
meaning that the further the Ag atom is from the PtPOP complex, the closer it is to
getting a charge of -1 without signs of convergence at a separation distance of more
than 6 ˚A. This does not correspond to any of the usual Ag oxidation states which are all
positive. This as well as the fact that the vacuum interaction energy curves are displaced
from 0 eV by an amount on the order of 10 eV suggests that in the vacuum environment
of the DFT calculations employed here, some sort of changing interaction continues to
occur when the distance is over 6.0 ˚A. One reason for the shifted interaction energy
could be that the monomers are not suitable in a vacuum description. As we shall see
in ﬁgure 14, changing the monomer charges for the excited state interaction energy does
change the location of the asymptote. It nevertheless does not change the vacuum curves
Hirshfeld charge on the Ag atom for the dimer calculations.
==PAGE:53==
49
5
RESULTS
Figure 14: Interaction energy curves for excited state Ag-PtPOP in vacuum and CSM
environments with the excited electron localised fully on the Ag0 monomer at large
separation distances. The left pane shows the calculated interaction energies as well as
a ﬁtted Morse potential. The right pane shows the ﬁtted Morse potential translated
vertically to asymptotic values of 0 eV zoomed in on the region around the equilibrium.
For the CSM environment, the Hirshfeld charges show a clear tendency that upon
dissociation the ground state dimer Ag atom moves towards a charge of 1+ while the Ag
in the excited state Ag-PtPOP calculations tends toward a neutral charge which is in
opposition to the monomer picture of PtPOP4−and Ag+ used for the curves presented
above. This behaviour of the charge as function of the distance is backed up by visual
inspection of the CSM excited state HOMO molecular orbital that is localised more
strongly at Ag for the longer Ag-Pt distances (see Appendix B). It should, however,
be noted that the Hirshfeld charge analysis only provides an estimate of the behaviour
and that exact charges of 1+ or 0 that would be expected on dissociated Ag in a real
system are not showcased by the GPAW calculations. This display of partial charges
that are remnant on the monomers of the dimer thus symbolizes the limits of the GPAW
calculator’s accuracy in the description of the bond breaking process.
Using the diﬀerently charged monomers PtPOP3−with a half-ﬁlled dσ∗molecular or-
bital and Ag0 with a half-ﬁlled s orbital a new set of interaction energy curves have been
computed for excited state Ag-PtPOP. The ground state interaction is still described
by the same charge distributions and is thus not presented again. Due to the changed
monomer assignments in the excited state the calculations have to be spin-restricted.
The dimer calculations produces entirely analogous results to the previous calculations.
The electron distribution and polarization restriction on the monomers lead to some
==PAGE:54==
50
5
RESULTS
calculations not converging but enough results were generated for the general course of
the curves to be clear as evident in ﬁgure 14. The vacuum curve continues to decrease
after a distance of 3.0 ˚A and shows no signs of bonding. The negative slope of the
curve at long distances corresponds much better to the Hirshfeld charges observed in
the dimer calculations by giving a much more clear proof of the interaction that is still
occurring at very large Ag-Pt separations. The location of the curve has translated to
a region much closer to the 0 eV interaction a real diatomic molecule would have upon
dissociation which could suggest this interaction scheme is better suited for a vacuum en-
vironment. The decreasing interaction energy curve will along with the Hirshfeld charge
on the Ag atom likely start showing a converging behaviour at a large enough distance -
possibly when the Ag atom reaches a Hirshfeld charge around -1. This quirky behaviour
is not a reliable description for a real system observed in laboratory settings where no
true vacuum can be obtained. Without other particles present to stabilize the orbitals,
the GPAW simulated vacuum can sustain orbitals expanding much further than in any
practical setting, which can oﬀer an explanation to the diﬀerence of the vacuum curve
to the one produced in the CSM environment. Nevertheless, the decreasing interac-
tion energy curve suggests that the fact that the geometric optimization found a stable
vacuum excited state Ag-PtPOP structure could be due to the basis set superposition
in the the limited size LCAO basis set contributing to creating a bonding eﬀect that
might not actually be present. A complete basis set might instead not converge to a
vacuum excited structure which would support the idea that Ag and PtPOP monomers
should not form a bond in a vacuum setting for excited state Ag-PtPOP as observed in
DFT calculations by Kruppa [16]. Along the same lines, it is highly possible that the
diﬀerently charged Ag-PtPOP species of Ag-PtPOP from Kruppa and Hansen’s studies
could display a behaviour better ﬁtted to a normal Morse potential. Since this thesis
is mainly focused on the eﬀects of a solvent on the Ag-PtPOP complex the eﬀects of
diﬀerent charged Ag-PtPOP species is not investigated any further here.
The CSM excited state curve portrays a behaviour similar to that of the other
monomer charges but with less pronounced ﬂuctuations although the long-distance be-
haviour still appears to be inﬂuenced by other occupational states than for the short
distances. Using the same logic as above and ﬁtting only to the distances up to and
including 3.3 ˚A portraying Morse potential features, a bond with an equilibrium dis-
tance of 2.93 ± 0.06 ˚A and a binding energy of 0.21 ± 0.07 eV is found. This is again a
longer bond than the 2.83 ˚A found for the optimized CSM excited state structure, but
it is slightly closer than was the case for the ﬁt created from the other set of monomer
==PAGE:55==
51
5
RESULTS
charges. The binding energy is similarly lower than the ones found for the ground state
and signiﬁcantly lower than the CSM ground state binding energy reported by Hansen
[17].
Overall, the produced interaction energy curves do not tend towards 0 eV at large
separations suggesting that the monomer descriptions are not ideal. Similarly, the par-
tial charges observed in the Hirshfeld charge analysis suggest that the excited electron
(as well as potential other high energy electrons) does not fully localise on one or the
other monomer in dimer Ag-PtPOP calculations but maintain a small presence at the
”wrong” monomer at large separations when they are eﬀectively dissociated. This points
towards the description provided by the GPAW DFT calculations not being adequate to
perfectly predict accurate interaction energies with correct asymptotic behaviour. Most
of the interaction curves do however display a bonding character with equilibria close
to those found by the geometric optimizations.
Thus, this suggests that interaction
energy curves along the axial Ag-Pt reaction coordinate in both vacuum and CSM en-
vironments do predict bonds close to the expected bond lengths. Stronger bonding is
however predicted for the ground state than the excited state which does not correspond
to the framework advocated by Clodfelter and Pettijohn for axial metal-PtPOP bonding.
Similarly, while calculations in the vacuum environment do produce interaction energy
curves that can explain the bonding observed in the MD simulation, the Hirshfeld charge
behaviour on the Ag atom at long Ag-Pt distances does not correspond to any of its
usual oxidation states and also not the tested monomer charge distributions. Whether
the vacuum interaction energy curves are reliable in their current form, is therefore dis-
putable. Calculations with Ag1−and PtPOP2- however also come across as unphysical
and have not been attempted.
5.4
Umbrella sampling with QM/MM MD simulations
The interaction energy approach employed previously for estimating the binding energy
is infeasible in an explicit solvent environment. Instead, the umbrella sampling QM/MM
MD scheme as described in section 3.5 will be used for determining the Helmholtz free
energy proﬁle along the Ag-Pt distance reaction coordinate. As seen in ﬁgure 9, and
as also reported by Hansen [17], a QM/MM box with ground state Ag-PtPOP cannot
equilibrate at 300 K without dissociation of Ag. The excited state maintains a bond for
longer but eventually the Ag atom is also here found to dissociate after some picosec-
==PAGE:56==
52
5
RESULTS
onds of simulation. Therefore, the simulations will not be equilibrated before starting
the umbrella sampling MD simulations. Instead the initial iterations will be left out of
the free energy sampling analysis until a point in time where the system has reached an
equilibrium so the temperature remains constant.
The umbrella sampling is conducted for both ground and excited state Ag-PtPOP
starting from the optimized structures. Separate simulation windows are generated for
21 Ag-PtPOP structures with the Ag atom translated along the Pt-Pt axis to the equi-
librium distance of the applied spring bias from equation (13) for the given window.
Starting from a spring equilibrium distance of 2.0 ˚A for the shortest Ag-Pt distance win-
dow, a spring equilibrium distance window is created for every 0.2 ˚A, up to the longest
spring equilibrium distance window of 6.0 ˚A. Doing this for both the ground and the
excited state Ag-PtPOP complex yields a total of 42 separate simulation trajectories
that all need to undergo as many iterations as possible to best fulﬁll the ergodic system
requirement in the umbrella sampling formulation. Thus, obtaining free energy proﬁles
of the Ag-PtPOP complex in an explicit solvent environment comes with a very high
computational load.
An umbrella sampling study produces the best results if the strength of the bias,
here in the form of a spring connecting the Ag and Pt atoms, is tuned to the system in
order to get a good amount of overlap of observed Ag-Pt distances between neighboring
windows. This has not been possible to ensure before starting production runs due to
the limited time period of this project. Nevertheless, the umbrella integration method
applied for combining the data from diﬀerent windows can produce reasonable results
even for spring constant values that induce both too narrow and too wide Ag-Pt distance
distributions. The spring constant value applied for all simulation windows in this study
is 500 kJ per mole per ˚A2. A test of the umbrella integration method, for ensuring that
the method is applied correctly and reliably, has successfully been conducted on a simple
NaCl system to compute the free energy proﬁle based on simulated data supplied by the
main supervisor of this project. The generated free energy proﬁle for the diatomic NaCl
molecule is presented in Appendix D along with a brief comparison to a free energy
proﬁle for NaCl from the literature. Before the results of the QM/MM MD umbrella
sampling is presented, a number of problems that occurred during the simulations will
be highlighted.
==PAGE:57==
53
5
RESULTS
5.4.1
Challenges during umbrella sampling simulations
The initial repulsive hooks on counterions did not have the intended eﬀect as the coun-
terions could drift too close to the outermost QM atoms of the Ag-PtPOP structure
causing undesired interaction. Therefore the repulsive force on the counterions from the
QM geometrical center of mass was changed to set in when the distance between the
center and the counterion decreased to less than 18 ˚A. This caused one counterion to
move rapidly away from the QM region initially increasing the kinetic energy of the
system. After equilibration this will not aﬀect the system otherwise. Furthermore, as
an added security a similar repulsive force was applied to the counterions if they came
closer than 12 ˚A to individual QM atoms. In order to not induce too much energy into
the system requiring longer simulation times before equilibration, all repulsive spring
constants were decreased to a value of 100 kcal/mol.
An overall drift of the QM atoms towards one side of the MM simulation box, where
counterions tended to localise after equilibration, was observed for many simulation
windows. Therefore countermeasures were put in place for maintaining a net translation
of 0 within the MM box of the center of mass of the QM atoms as well as a net angular
momentum of 0 around the QM center of mass for the QM atoms. While the QM atoms
are still allowed to move relative to each over, this correction ensures that Ag-PtPOP
complex in the QM part cannot build up translational or rotational speed as a whole so
the complex can maintain the same position and orientation in the MM box throughout
the simulations making the description of the QM atoms within the QM calculation
consistent throughout the simulations. With these remedies implemented the QM/MM
simulations were restarted in their ﬁnal version used for the production runs. While
other problems such as convergence issues and stability of the PtPOP complex aﬀected
the excited state calculations to a very large degree, these eﬀects will be discussed upon
presentation of the results.
5.4.2
Free energy proﬁles
The raw data produced in the umbrella simulation windows is showcased across the 42
windows in table 3 featuring the spring equilibrium distances ξref
i , the total time simu-
lated t, as well as the means ξb
i and standard deviations σb
i of the biased Ag-Pt distance
distributions in each window. Most ground state windows have simulation times above
40 ps, while most excited state simulations run under 20 ps with some of the longest
distances running for less than 5 ps. The mean distances of the ground state windows
are systematically longer than the spring equilibrium distances suggesting a dissociative
==PAGE:58==
54
5
RESULTS
Table 3: Simulation times t, Ag-Pt distance means ξb
i , and Ag-Pt distance standard
deviation σb
i across the 42 umbrella sampling simulation windows with equilibrium spring
distances ξref
i .
GS
ES
ξref
i
[˚A]
t [ps]
ξb
i [˚A]
σb
i [˚A]
t [ps]
ξb
i [˚A]
σb
i [˚A]
2.0
47.3
2.49
0.046
47.2
2.46
0.056
2.2
47.3
2.57
0.049
45.9
2.52
0.049
2.4
45.8
2.64
0.048
44.4
2.60
0.048
2.6
45.7
2.76
0.062
40.9
2.71
0.055
2.8
45.7
2.91
0.075
34.5
2.86
0.102
3.0
45.5
3.12
0.090
26.1
3.02
0.099
3.2
44.2
3.35
0.088
17.9
3.33
0.147
3.4
16.8
3.53
0.096
17.5
3.41
0.127
3.6
72.2
3.79
0.081
14.2
3.62
0.135
3.8
66.7
3.96
0.072
12.9
3.85
0.138
4.0
70.0
4.16
0.075
13.4
4.12
0.140
4.2
66.9
4.34
0.079
9.8
4.29
0.159
4.4
60.7
4.55
0.075
6.5
4.50
0.150
4.6
65.4
4.75
0.073
4.8
4.65
0.148
4.8
68.4
4.95
0.074
4.0
4.89
0.136
5.0
95.8
5.17
0.074
12.9
5.17
0.121
5.2
87.6
5.37
0.072
3.9
5.31
0.151
5.4
43.0
5.61
0.075
9.5
5.58
0.143
5.6
21.2
5.78
0.078
4.1
5.73
0.159
5.8
42.7
6.02
0.086
3.4
6.00
0.140
6.0
28.1
6.22
0.086
3.8
6.19
0.170
behaviour. For the excited state the same is the case for the shortest and the longest
spring equilibrium windows. For the distances between 3 and 4 ˚A, the excited state
mean distances are close to the spring equilibria. The standard deviations of the excited
state distances are larger than for the ground state window distributions due to fewer
iterations completed and due to the splitting of the PtPOP ion that occurred for many
long Ag-Pt distance excited state windows (and a handful of ground state windows). In
general, the shortest Ag-Pt distance windows run more smoothly than the longest dis-
tance windows. This eﬀect is most dominant in the excited state where the degeneracy
of the problem heavily hampered the simulations.
==PAGE:59==
55
5
RESULTS
Figure 15: Ag-Pt distance dAg-Pt, Pt-Pt distance dPt-Pt, temperature T, and Ag-Pt-
Pt angle as function of time for the ground state 4.6 ˚A spring equilibrium simulation
window.
As an example of the course of a typical ground state simulation, raw data in the
form of the Ag-Pt distance dAg-Pt, the Pt-Pt distance dPt-Pt, the temperature T, and the
Ag-Pt-Pt angle from the 4.6 ˚A spring equilibrium window is shown in ﬁgure 15. Since
the simulation is not started from an equibrilated system, the temperature immediately
rises as the system initially gains a signiﬁcant amount of kinetic energy. After a few
picoseconds, the system reaches a temperature of 300 K after which the system is ready
for sampling. Upon an immediate contraction of the Ag-Pt distance, the distance ex-
pands further than the 4.6 ˚A starting distance and oscillates around a 0.1-0.2 ˚A larger
distance showing a dissociative behaviour by favouring distances larger than the spring
equilibrium distance. This behaviour is observed in all ground state windows as also
evident from the mean distances in table 3. The Pt-Pt distance expands initially and
oscillates around a distance slightly above 3.0 ˚A for the duration of the simulation. The
Ag-Pt-Pt angle decreases from the initial 180◦, corresponding to the truly axial conﬁgu-
ration, to values down to 125-140◦. This is a signiﬁcant angular deviation from the ideal
180◦associated with axial bonding. This angular deviation is systematically seen for all
==PAGE:60==
56
5
RESULTS
(a) t = 0 fs
(b) t = 20000 fs
(c) t = 40000 fs
(d) t = 60000 fs
Figure 16: Ground state Ag-PtPOP HOMO molecular orbitals at diﬀerent points in the
simulation for the 4.6 ˚A window. Isosurfaces are drawn at 0.015
q
e−/˚A
3.
ground state windows with the deviation generally increasing with the spring equilibrium
distance of the window. The longest equilibrium distances thus have Ag-Pt-Pt angles
smaller than 125◦for signiﬁcant portions of the simulation.
Isosurface plots of the HOMO molecular orbital of the example 4.6 ˚A ground state
window at a value of 0.015
q
e−/˚A
3 is seen at diﬀerent simulation times in ﬁgure 16.
At t = 0fs the simulation starts of with a molecular orbital entirely diﬀerent to the
ground state HOMO orbital reported by Kong [15] in aqueous solution, after which the
interactions with the explicit water molecules cause the Ag atom to move transversely to
the Pt-Pt axis. The initial dissimilarity to the previous observations is likely caused by
==PAGE:61==
57
5
RESULTS
the calculation away from the equilibrium and the eﬀects of the explicit water molecules
and the TIP4P point charges representing them. It nevertheless is interesting that this
initial ground state HOMO is diﬀerent from the single point Ag-PtPOP calculations
excited state HOMO-1 orbitals in ﬁgure 24 (and ﬁgure 23) with CSM (and vacuum) in
Appendix B. This diﬀerence suggests that large Ag translations along the Pt-Pt axis
from the Ag-Pt distance of the CSM-optimized structure give rise to diﬀerent orbital
conﬁgurations in the QM/MM solvent on the one side and vacuum and the CSM solvent
on the other side for ground state Ag-PtPOP. At later points in time in ﬁgure 16 the Ag
atom has moved transversely to the Pt-Pt axis and forms an Ag-Pt-Pt angle deviating
signiﬁcantly from 180◦. On top of this, the character of the molecular orbital has changed
from being localised largely on one Pt atom as well as some O and P atoms to forming an
orbital looking like a dxy-type orbital localised on the Ag atom with no binding between
the monomers. This sort of Ag d-orbital state continues to form the HOMO molecular
orbital for the rest of the simulation with the Ag atom forming a signiﬁcant angle to
the Pt-Pt axis. This suggests that, if the Ag and Pt atoms were not connected by a
spring, the Ag atom would likely either transition towards a side conﬁguration of the Ag
atom as have previously been observed to be more stable than the axial ground state
Ag-PtPOP by Kruppa [16] and by Hansen [17] or dissociate entirely from the PtPOP
complex. This behaviour is typical for all ground state simulation windows but most
prominent for the longer distances.
The 4.2 ˚A window is an example of a typical excited state simulation window with its
Ag-Pt distance, Pt-Pt distance, temperature, and Ag-Pt-Pt angle shown as function of
time in ﬁgure 17. The Ag-Pt distance oscillates in the vicinity of the spring equilibrium
for approximately 4 ps, after which the oscillation occurs around larger distances. This
behaviour continues for a number of picoseconds while the Pt-Pt distance remains rela-
tively well behaved. After 9 ps a dissociative behaviour is observed between the Pt atoms
as they drift away from each other accompanied by various ligand fragments until the
simulation crashes for having QM atoms crossing the QM cell boundary. The Ag-Pt-Pt
angle is similarly deviating from 180◦as was observed for the ground state simulations,
but the deviations are generally smaller in size. The excited state simulations are how-
ever, in general, shorter in time why they could portray the same behaviour given that
the simulations had completed more iterations.
Isosurface plots of the HOMO molecular orbital of the example 4.2 ˚A excited state
window are seen at diﬀerent simulation times in ﬁgure 18. At t = 0 fs the simulation
==PAGE:62==
58
5
RESULTS
Figure 17: Ag-Pt distance dAg-Pt, Pt-Pt distance dPt-Pt, temperature T, and Ag-Pt-
Pt angle as function of time for the excited state 4.2 ˚A spring equilibrium simulation
window.
starts oﬀwith a molecular orbital similar to the ground state LUMO orbital reported by
Kong [15] in aqueous solution as well as the excited state HOMO orbitals at long Ag-Pt
separation produced in CSM (see ﬁgure 24) and vacuum (see ﬁgure 23) environments.
The simulation that goes on for about 10 ps, has an initial stable phase as evident from
ﬁgure 17, where the Ag-Pt distance oscillates around the same value. At t = 3000 fs the
system is still in this stable phase and as shown in ﬁgure 18(b) the Ag-PtPOP keeps hav-
ing a similar molecular orbital with elements of a Ag s-orbital as well as the bonding pσ
molecular orbital between Pt atoms although the Ag position distorts the orbital shapes.
At later simulation times when the stable phase is substituted by diﬀerent Ag-Pt and
Pt-Pt distance behaviours, the orbital plots reveal that the HOMO orbital of excited
state Ag-PtPOP switches to another type of state with a dxy-orbital type behaviour on
the Ag atom as opposed to the characteristic s orbital so far associated with the axial
excited state bonding HOMO orbital. When this new behaviour starts occurring, the Ag
position shifts further away from the Pt-Pt axis, once again favouring a Ag-Pt-Pt angle
signiﬁcantly deviating from 180◦. The simulation continues this behaviour for a while,
==PAGE:63==
59
5
RESULTS
(a) t = 0 fs
(b) t = 3000 fs
(c) t = 6000 fs
(d) t = 9800 fs
Figure 18: Excited state Ag-PtPOP HOMO molecular orbitals at diﬀerent points in the
simulation for the 4.2 ˚A window. Isosurfaces are drawn at 0.005
q
e−/˚A
3 for the (a)
and (b) plots, at 0.015
q
e−/˚A
3 for the (c) plot, and at 0.03
q
e−/˚A
3 for the (d) plot to
make the Pt-Pt dissociation visible.
until the Ag atom via the spring pulls in the Pt atom by a suﬃciently large amount that
it dissociates from the other Pt atom and the PtPOP complex is shredded apart. For the
last completed iteration at t = 9800 fs, the HOMO molecular orbital still portrays a dxy-
like orbital behaviour on Ag and is still partly localised on the PtPOP remnants. Thus,
this simulation window suggests that an initially stable state similar to what would be
expected for the Ag-PtPOP exciplex based on the literature is replaced by a state with
a dxy-like orbital on Ag which over long simulation times eventually leads to a repulsion
on the Ag atom large enough that it via the spring breaks the PtPOP complex apart.
==PAGE:64==
60
5
RESULTS
This behaviour is observed for almost all Ag-Pt distance windows longer than 3.0 ˚A and
the change to another type of orbital in general kicks in earlier in the simulation the
longer the Ag-Pt distance is. The presence of explicit water molecules thus seem to push
the Ag atom away from the Pt-Pt axis and the initially stable conﬁguration showing the
behaviour expected from the metal-PtPOP exciplex bonding as described by Clodfelter
and Pettijohn, followed by a switch in HOMO orbital which eventually leads to a disso-
ciative behaviour. The longer stable phases at short distances are ascribed to a stronger
binding being present in the initial HOMO meolecular orbital, which requires stronger
interactions from the solvent water molecules to push the Ag away from a position close
to the Pt-Pt axis.
Excited state calculations at long equilibrium distances were in general heavily af-
fected by the degenerate broken symmetry states leading either to ordinary convergence
issues or dissociation of the PtPOP complex itself where the two Pt-centered halves are
shredded apart due to the spring connecting one Pt to the Ag. The spring makes dis-
sociation of Ag, that might otherwise have occurred, impossible regardless of how large
the repulsion is. Therefore, for repulsive forces large enough the pull exerted by Ag on
Pt via the spring constraint will eventually overcome the strength of the bonds within
PtPOP. This highly unphysical behaviour is naturally unwanted and could be a sign
that the applied spring constant was too large. While a weaker spring force would allow
the Ag to move more freely and to potentially move to locations further from the Pt
atom where the repulsion is not as big, this would yield less control of the position of
the Ag. The umbrella sampling study was meant to investigate the axial bonding but if
the Ag atom can deviate even more from the Pt-Pt axis, the sampling is no more really
performed upon an axial positioning of the Ag atom.
The problem of the PtPOP complex being pulled apart could however also be avoided
by not letting the spring force act on both the Ag and the Pt atom, but only on the
Ag atom. This would make the bias enter the calculation only through one of the two
subparts of the system, eﬀectively imposing a force that is not countered by an opposite
force acting on another subpart of the system, which before starting the simulations was
deemed the less favourable simulation setup. Nevertheless, the one-sided spring bias in
conjunction with the corrections for drift of the QM atoms in the MM box could lead to
more stable simulations running for longer periods of time - something which could be
attempted in future Ag-PtPOP simulation studies. This however also would not avoid
the solvent water molecules eventually pushing Ag away from the Pt-Pt axis and the
bonding HOMO orbital. Therefore the applied bias could in the future be adjusted to
==PAGE:65==
61
5
RESULTS
be applied as a function of not only one reaction coordinate but a multidimensional set
of reaction coordinates, to account for (and counteract) the translations in the plane
transverse to the Pt-Pt axis as well as along the Pt-Pt axis separately instead of only de-
pending on the Ag-Pt distance where the direction of the Ag-Pt vector has no inﬂuence
on the bias. In this study the reaction coordinate only consisted of the Ag-Pt distance,
and this would thus need to be divided into its Cartesian (or equivalent) coordinate
elements in order to conduct the umbrella sampling in a more reliable way for describ-
ing the axial Ag-PtPOP stability along not only the Pt-Pt axis, but along all principal
directions. Another more crude way of obtaining long-running umbrella sampling simu-
lations would be to constrain the Ag atom to only move along the Pt-Pt axis and thus
avoid degeneracy of the HOMO orbital with diﬀerent states. This however eliminates
a large part of the eﬀect the explicit solvent molecules have on the Ag atom. It thus
very speciﬁcally would only be an option for a study of the stability of the Ag-PtPOP
exciplex along the Pt-Pt axis, whereas the general stability in terms of translation in all
directions would require a higher dimensional bias.
Due to the described eﬀects, the long equilibrium distance windows did not get
through enough iterations to fulﬁll the umbrella sampling requirements of ergodicity.
While the DO-MOM method produced results for longer Ag-Pt distances than achieved
in the previous Ag-PtPOP study [17] for single point calculations of the interaction
energy, the method falls short in being able to deal with the degenerate nature of the
orbitals when interactions with explicit water molecules changes the Ag position too
much. A simple solution for dealing with degenerate states does, in general, not exist
- especially for excited states where the newly developed DO-MOM method is already
being applied as a tool to deal with the encountered degenerate states in a more ef-
fective way than the SCF-MOM method. Nevertheless, the data for the excited state
simulations that has been produced can still be analyzed - though on the terms that
the requirement of ergodicity is not fulﬁlled fully and that diﬀerent degenerate states at
long Ag-Pt distances eventually cause undesired behaviour such as fragmentation of the
PtPOP ion.
The umbrella sampling is only supposed to contain data from equilibrated systems
and therefore the ﬁrst 5 ps of data is ﬁltered away. For all ground state and for some
excited state windows this leaves several tens of picoseconds of sampled data, while other
windows have little or no data left. From the equilibrated data, the unbiased free energy
proﬁles is determined by use of the umbrella integration method. The resulting free
==PAGE:66==
62
5
RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 19: Free energy proﬁles along the Ag-Pt distance reaction coordinate for (a)
the ground state and (b) the excited state Ag-PtPOP complex determined by means
of umbrella integration from equibrilated umbrella sampled data from the in total 42
simulation windows.
energy proﬁles are shown in ﬁgure 19. Neither for the ground state free energy proﬁle
(a) nor for the excited state free energy proﬁle (b) a minimum is present. Thus, based
on the whole set of equibrilated data, no binding between the PtPOP complex and the
Ag atom in an axial conﬁguration is predicted. The ground state curve is decreasing
linearly for Ag-Pt distances shorter than the Ag-Pt bond length for the CSM-optimized
structure and after a break in the curve it continues decreasing linearly with a slightly
less negative slope. According to this ground state Ag-PtPOP free energy proﬁle, the Ag
atom would spontaneously dissociate from PtPOP with two diﬀerent repulsion strength
zones depending on the distance between the monomers. That no minima are present
also is consistent with the fact that no mean distances in table 3 are shorter than the
corresponding window spring equilibrium distance for the ground state windows.
The excited state free energy proﬁle similarly is decreasing all along the Ag-Pt reac-
tion coordinate for the Ag-Pt distance range present in the equilibrated data set. Values
under approximately 2.4 ˚A and over 5.8 ˚A are not present and therefore the curve in
these areas does not show a reliable behaviour. Instead these areas are nothing more
than unphysical remnants of the umbrella integration method. In the vicinity of the
CSM-optimzed bond length the curve is close to a slope of 0. Thereafter the slope of
the curve decreases with increasing Ag-Pt distances corresponding to a system where
the repulsion force on a dissociating Ag atom increases the larger the Ag-Pt distance
becomes. This is obviously not a realistic behaviour of the system but rather a symbol
==PAGE:67==
63
5
RESULTS
Figure 20: Free energy proﬁle along the Ag-Pt distance reaction coordinate for the
excited state Ag-PtPOP complex determined by means of umbrella integration from
adapted umbrella sampled data from the 21 excited state simulation windows. A Morse
potential is ﬁtted to the curve to estimate the binding energy between Ag and PtPOP.
of not having suﬃcient amounts of data for large Ag-Pt distances for the excited state
for the umbrella integration method to yield a realistic picture of the system.
The diﬀerent slopes near the optimal Ag-Pt bond length of the CSM-optimized struc-
ture reveal that the excited state Ag-PtPOP is closer to having a minimum than the
ground state as also expected based on the literature study of metal-PtPOP bonding.
This stands in direct opposition to the interaction energy curves from the last section
where the ground state displayed a stronger bond between Ag and PtPOP along the
Pt-Pt axis. This implies that translations of the Ag atom normal to the Pt-Pt axis,
brought about by interactions with explicit water molecules in the QM/MM MD simu-
lations, play an important role in the stability of the structure and that these directions
should also be investigated with single point interaction energy calculations with CSM
and vacuum environments in order to estimate whether the axial position of Ag consti-
tutes a local or a global minimum - especially for the case of the ground state Ag-PtPOP
complex where the eﬀect of lateral movement could prove deﬁning for system behaviour
if the Ag atom easily could transition towards a more stable side conﬁguration.
From the data for the 4.6 ˚A example window for an excited state simulation in
ﬁgure 17, it was evident that the Ag-Pt initially oscillated very close to the spring
equilibrium distance instead of at longer distances as was systematically observed for
the ground state windows. This behaviour was general for the excited state windows
==PAGE:68==
64
5
RESULTS
at distances longer than the bond length of the CSM-optimzed structure.
At later
simulation times the Ag-Pt distances increased, and the Ag-Pt-Pt deviated more from
180◦. In general, these increases occurred abruptly, showing signs of a change in the
occupied orbitals. As observed previously, diﬀerent states with diﬀerent features are
close, if not fully degenerate, in energy at the longer Ag-Pt distances and therefore such
changes, with diﬀerent Ag-Pt bond properties, are likely to have occurred and inﬂuenced
the sampling distributions. Therefore, an attempt to carry out umbrella integration on
a data set including only one type of HOMO orbital has been carried out to ensure
that the degenerate states that starts occurring for Ag positions far from the Pt-Pt
axis do not aﬀect the free energy proﬁle results. This however comes at the large cost
that the data does not fully come from equilibriated systems. Therefore the credibility
of the produced results is not very high for another reason. Nevertheless, it is deemed
relevant to investigate only the ﬁrst period of the excited state data, where a stable phase
occurred, since this phase is connected to the HOMO molecular orbital facilitating the
axial bonding behaviour of the Ag-PtPOP exciplex. On top of this, the free energy proﬁle
that follows is the ﬁrst ever produced QM/MM MD umbrella sampling study showing
bonding between a transition metal atom and PtPOP, according to the author’s best
knowing, and therefore the results are stated in spite of the low credibility.
For this adapted set of excited state simulation data, the ﬁrst 900 fs of the raw
data is ﬁltered out.
Similarly, raw data after a change of Ag-Pt distance behaviour
accompanied by a decreasing Ag-Pt-Pt angle following the initially good behaviour,
which is seen across all simulation windows with spring equilibria larger than 2.8 ˚A, is
ﬁltered away due to the changes in molecular occupation numbers producing HOMO
orbitals that no longer facilitates bonding. With this heavily reduced data set in hand,
umbrella integration is used to recombine the diﬀerent windows resulting in the unbiased
free energy proﬁle for the excited state Ag-PtPOP complex in ﬁgure 20. This curve,
while having a low credibility in terms of window trajectory sizes and lack of complete
equilibration, has a shape similar to the interaction energy curves of the previous section
with a clearly deﬁned minimum. In the region between 2.0 ˚A and up to 5.0 ˚A it very
closely resembles a Morse potential with a minimum just under 3 ˚A. For longer Ag-Pt
distances the proﬁle starts decreasing slightly. This however happens in the region most
aﬀected by the lack of data. A Morse potential has been ﬁtted to the free energy proﬁle,
yielding a binding energy of 0.46 eV at a Ag-Pt distance of 2.92 ˚A. As was the case for
the CSM interaction energy curve, the predicted equilibrium distance is longer than the
2.83 ˚A of the CSM-optimized structure, and the binding energy is the strongest excited
state binding energy observed within this study. The method umbrella sampling does
==PAGE:69==
65
5
RESULTS
however not correct for a BSSE why the actual value would be smaller. Similarly, a very
long list of signiﬁcant factors add uncertainty to the predicted properties. For this reason
uncertainties from the ﬁtting process is not included in the values, as they would not give
a true representation of the underlying uncertainties. Nevertheless, the results stand as
a reference for future studies of Ag-PtPOP and concludes the ﬁrst known attempt of
QM/MM MD umbrella sampling on a metal-PtPOP exciplex.
5.5
Discussion of the environment impact and the bonding
strength
The Ag-PtPOP complex has shown diﬀerent behaviours in the vacuum, continuous sol-
vent, and explicit solvent environments. On the one hand, the vacuum and CSM environ-
ments oﬀer continuous descriptions of respectively no interaction with the surroundings
and a solvent continuum, which enabled production of optimized geometries and sta-
ble photo-excitation MD simulations where the dominant force components on the Ag
atom continues to occur in the Pt-Pt axis direction throughout the simulations. On
the other hand, the QM/MM environment describes interactions with explicit solvent
molecules with energies distributed by a Maxwell speed distribution which for a given
QM-part structure geometry yields diﬀerent calculation results depending on the sol-
vent molecules conﬁguration at a given moment in time. In the excited state QM/MM
simulations, the forces in the initial phases of the simulations were found to maintain a
Ag location close to the Pt-Pt axis. At later simulation times, forces not parallel to the
Pt-Pt axis stemming from interactions with solvent molecules eventually start pushing
the Ag atom in transverse directions to the axis which eventually leads to the DO-MOM
method converging towards diﬀerent molecular orbitals for the HOMO molecular orbital
than the one associated with the axial bonding in the excited state simulations.
This diﬀerence in the behaviour of the forces on the Ag atom and the correspond-
ing diﬀerence in the long time behaviour of the various MD simulations means that
the vacuum and CSM investigation of the binding energy provides energy proﬁles in a
speciﬁc direction solely along the Pt-Pt axis whereas the results obtained in QM/MM
investigations in general have suﬀered from the transverse displacements of Ag. While
the movement of Ag is realistic, and in fact oﬀers the most realistic simulation setting of
a real laboratory system with moving solvent molecules bumping into the Ag atom from
all directions with kinetic energies according to a Maxwell speed distribution at the given
environment temperature, these eﬀects make the system drift towards geometries with
diﬀerent molecular orbitals which do not display the character that we want to study
==PAGE:70==
66
5
RESULTS
Table 4: Summarising table for binding energies found between Ag and PtPOP in vac-
uum, CSM, and QM/MM environments for the ground and excited state structures
through interaction energy curves and umbrella sampling free energy proﬁles.
Environment
GS [eV]
ES [eV]
Vacuum
0.93
0.30
CSM
0.62
0.21
QM/MM
None
0.46
- namely the axial bonding of the Ag atom to the PtPOP complex. In these displaced
Ag atom areas, excited state calculations experience convergence issues due to the de-
generate states that are available of which some eventually show a highly dissociative
behaviour of the Ag atom in the excited state. Based on the investigations performed
here, the convergence problems are not present until the switch of the HOMO orbital
to non-binding molecular orbitals with a dxy-orbital behaviour on the Ag atom occurs.
Future umbrella sampling studies of axial Ag-PtPOP with QM/MM MD could therefore
with advantage constrain the Ag atom to the Pt-Pt axis by applying a multi-directional
bias which does not depend only on the Ag-Pt distance but rather its Pt-Pt axis and
transverse plane components. While multidimensional umbrella integration is possible,
it is more diﬃcult and prone to statistical error making WHAM the better recombination
method of umbrella sampling windows for the multidimensional reaction coordinates [26].
The binding energies estimated through BSSE corrected interaction energy curves
showed that the binding energy between Ag and PtPOP is stronger in the ground state
than the excited state which is a contradiction of the picture advocated by Clodfelter
and Pettijohn [12, 13] where the excited state complex facilitates a stronger bond. On
top of this, Hansen [17] found that the binding energies in vacuum for axial bonding
was 1.18 eV in the ground state and 1.88 eV in the excited state whereas the CSM
ground state binding energy was 1.29 eV. A side conﬁguration of the Ag atom showed
even stronger binding energies for ground state Ag-PtPOP [17] supporting the ﬁndings
reported by Kruppa [16] that a side conﬁguration of Ag on PtPOP is favoured. While
more calculations have been carried out at long Ag-Pt distances in this study than the
study by Hansen, the deviations to the binding energies produced in this study are too
large to be ascribed to uncertainty in the Morse ﬁt asymptotes only. The most probable
reason for these deviations is diﬀerences in the GPAW versions and the according basis
sets with the one employed in the study by Hansen generally producing stronger bonding
==PAGE:71==
67
5
RESULTS
of Ag-PtPOP as well as having a more strongly bound excited state. Other probable
causes are diﬀerences in the optimzed structures and potentially in what state the DO-
MOM and SCF-MOM methods converge towards at non-equilibrium Ag-Pt distances.
The GPAW version employed in this study thus does not reﬂect the expected bonding
picture. It is however likely that the stronger ground state binding energies found in this
study do not correspond to global interaction energy minima but rather local interaction
energy minima with side conﬁgurations of Ag being even more stable. The stability
of the bonding of Ag in an axial position is in this case not reﬂected by the produced
interaction energy curves, as the the energy environment normal to the Pt-Pt axis could
contain smaller energy barriers for transitioning to a side conﬁguration of Ag.
The DO-MOM method applied in this study allowed calculations of Ag-PtPOP at
all attempted Ag-Pt distances in the interaction energy curves and it thus handles the
degenerate states that are present much better than the SCF-MOM method. There are,
however, discontinuities in the monomer potential energy curves, caused by the increas-
ing separation from the ghost orbitals of the other monomer, which also showed in the
interaction energy curves. Using diﬀerent initial orbital guesses for the MOM method
did not signiﬁcantly improve this behaviour. The research group at the Science Institute
and Faculty of Physical Sciences, University of Iceland, where the DO-MOM method was
developed and implemented in GPAW are in the process of developing another approach
in GPAW, which by use of Minimum Mode Following can navigate through degenerate
states without changes in the occupations of molecular orbitals when the Ag-Pt dis-
tance is increased. Once established, this method could therefore potentially be used for
achieving monomer potential energy curves without discontinuities and thereby interac-
tion energy curves with nicer asymptotic behaviour.
The generated estimates for the binding energy between Ag and PtPOP can be seen
in table 4.
In this table, only the CSM excited state binding energy corresponding
to the monomers best matching the Hirshfeld charge analysis showing Ag charges of
approximately 1+ and 0 for respectively the ground and excited state is included. For
vacuum where none of the tested monomer conﬁgurations match the Hirshfeld charge
analysis, the only excited state monomer conﬁguration showing bonding is included. In
order to put the binding energies into perspective, the Maxwell speed distribution [58,
equation 6.62] of the classical kinetic energies for water molecules at 300 K used in the
QM/MM MD simulations is shown in ﬁgure 21. From the plot it is evident that in
explicit solvent, the binding energy - which is given with a high uncertainty due to the
==PAGE:72==
68
5
RESULTS
Figure 21: Water molecule energies as given by the Maxwell speed distribution at 300 K.
The values of excited state binding energies in continuous (CSM) and explicit (QM/MM)
solvents are highlighted.
very limited and unequilibrated sampling - is signiﬁcantly higher in energy than even
the highest energy water molecules. Therefore, axial dissociation of the Ag atom is not
brought upon by single collisions but rather combined eﬀects of many collisions. As
seen in all umbrella simulation windows, the Ag atom tends to move transversely which
could suggest that the energy barrier to break out of the bonding excited state HOMO
molecular orbital in this direction is easier - a Ag motion behaviour that would not be
penalized with increased bias energy with the current implementation of the applied bias
spring. The simulations are performed without accounting for the incomplete basis set
whereas the vacuum and CSM binding energies stem from the BSSE corrected interaction
energy curves. Therefore, the binding energy of the QM/MM excited state Ag-PtPOP
is likely overestimated and the diﬀerence between the CSM and the QM/MM binding
energy in the plot and in table 4 misleading.
For comparison, the BSSE corrected
CSM excited binding energy is higher in energy than 99.9 % of the water molecules
but with a value of only 0.21 eV. Had there been explicit water molecules in the CSM
model, collisions would eventually nudge the Ag atom enough to make it dissociate
from the excited Ag-PtPOP structure although the structure would remain semi-stable
for a certain time period. That the mean water molecule energy is signiﬁcantly lower
than the CSM binding energy suggests that the CSM photo-excitation MD simulation
should run smoothly as was also observed. Thus, the two solvent descriptions are not
==PAGE:73==
69
5
RESULTS
entirely consistent with the major diﬀerence showing in the direction forces act on the
Ag atom when its perfectly aligned on the Pt-Pt axis. This makes CSM a much easier
way of studying the Ag-PtPOP complex but it lacks inclusion of the random motion of
water which ultimately is what causes the dissociation of Ag in the excited state. The
continuum solvent model thus cannot give as realistic a description of the system as the
QM/MM explicit solvent model in regards to MD simulations. The binding energies are
however estimated more easily and with more precision with CSM compared to QM/MM
due to both the lacking correction of a BSSE induced by an incomplete basis set and
due to stability problems encountered in the umbrella sampling runs. While one of these
issues could be remedied with a more suitable bias, the lacking correction of the BSSE of
incomplete basis sets will remain a ﬂaw in umbrella sampling studies. The two solvent
models therefore both come with a set of pros and cons that have to be weighed for
the problem at hand. Applied adequately, they therefore both are suitable for future
binding energy and MD simulation studies with results that will diﬀer according to the
incompleteness of the basis set.
==PAGE:74==
70
6
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
6
Conclusion and outlook
In this work LCAO-mode DFT calculations with the BLYP functional has been used
to perform geometric relaxations, photo-excited BOMD simulations, interaction energy
investigations, and QM/MM BOMD umbrella sampling of the Ag-PtPOP complex in
environments of vacuum, a continuum solvent, and an explicit solvent in order to inves-
tigate the axial bonding of Ag to PtPOP in the ground and excited state complexes in
greater detail than previously reported.
Geometric relaxations in vacuum yielded ground state and excited state structures
similar to those reported by Hansen [17] but relaxed to a greater extent. For the excited
state, the Ag-Pt bond length of 2.80 ˚A is slightly shorter than the one reported by Kong
[15] whereas the Pt-Pt bond of 2.96 ˚A is longer with deviations of approximately 0.1 ˚A.
Relaxations were similarly conducted with the Continuum Solvent Model (CSM) yield-
ing an excited state structure with a Ag-Pt bond length of 2.83 ˚A and a Pt-Pt bond
length of 2.86 ˚A which are both in close proximity to the aqueous structure reported by
Kong. The Kohn-Sham HOMO-1 and HOMO molecular orbitals of the excited state Ag-
PtPOP structures were for vacuum similar to and for the CSM-solvent almost identical
to the molecular orbitals reported by Kong with the HOMO molecular orbital displaying
mixing between the bonding pσ molecular orbital between Pt atoms and the s orbital of
Ag.
In vacuum and CSM-solvent, 15 ps BOMD simulations of Ag-PtPOP excited from the
ground state structure transitioned towards the generated relaxed excited state struc-
tures with Ag-Pt bond lengths oscillating along the Pt-Pt axis around the bond lengths
of the relaxed structures. In the QM/MM-solvent, a BOMD simulation of photo-excited
Ag-PtPOP showed an initial stable phase of the Ag-PtPOP complex maintaining the
axially bonding HOMO molecular orbital lasting several picoseconds which was followed
by increased Pt-Pt bond lengths and ultimately a dissociation of the Ag atom after ap-
proximately 10 ps. The vacuum and CSM-solvent simulations displayed HOMO molec-
ular orbitals of similar shape throughout the simulations whereas the QM/MM-solvent
HOMO molecular orbital changed appearance and no longer contained the features of
the bonding molecular orbital which brought upon the dissociation of the Ag atom.
Interaction energy curves in vacuum and CSM-solvent of ground and excited state
Ag-PtPOP were produced and ﬁtted to Morse potentials leading to ground state binding
==PAGE:75==
71
6
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
energies of 0.93 eV for the vacuum and 0.62 eV for the CSM-solvent setting, which are
considerably larger than the corresponding excited state binding energies of 0.30 eV in
vacuum and 0.21 eV in CSM-solvent. The binding energies determined in the previous
Ag-PtPOP study by Hansen [17], with ground state binding energies being around 1.2-1.3
eV and the vacuum excited state binding energy being approximately 1.9 eV, are signif-
icantly larger, likely due to a combination of a diﬀerent basis set, the relaxed structure
geometries, and diﬀerences between the applied DFT calculator. While the Ag-PtPOP
calculations with Ag translated along the Pt-Pt axis produced smooth potential energy
proﬁles, the Ag and PtPOP monomer calculations showed signs of degeneracy for long
Ag-Pt distances creating discontinuities in the interaction energy curves. A Hirshfeld
charge analysis showed that the vacuum calculations of Ag-PtPOP at large Ag-Pt sepa-
rations had declining charges showing no signs of convergence at a Ag-Pt distance of 6.5
˚A but transitioning towards a negatively charged Ag atom state - an unusual state for a
Ag atom in the presence of a negatively charged ion. In the CSM-solvent, the Ag atom
behaved more realistically by converging towards a charge close to 1+ in the ground
state and 0 in the excited state for long Ag-Pt separations. The CSM-solvent charge
asymptotes at long Ag-Pt distances were however partial charges deviating from a whole
number charge by approximately 0.2 e underlining the limits of the GPAW calculator’s
chemical accuracy.
Umbrella sampling was conducted with 21 simulations with diﬀerently placed Hookean
bias potentials in order to determine the Helmholtz free energy proﬁle along the Ag-Pt
distance reaction coordinate for both the ground state and the excited state Ag-PtPOP
complex. Ground state simulations running between 16.8 ps and 95.8 ps quickly ex-
panded the Ag-Pt distance as the Ag atom was displaced from the Pt-Pt axis and the
ground state HOMO molecular orbitals had a tendency to change towards molecular
orbitals with a dxy nature on the Ag atom - a tendency that grew stronger with in-
creasing Ag-Pt distances. Excited state simulations running between 3.4 ps and 47.2
ps portrayed an initially stable phase which maintained a bonding HOMO molecular
orbital as found for the relaxed structures and reported by Kong. In general, the closer
the Ag-Pt distance was to the bond length of the relaxed structure, the longer this initial
phase lasted. Eventually, the Ag atom was displaced from the Pt-Pt axis by interac-
tions with water molecules and another HOMO molecular orbital with a non-bonding
behaviour was occupied instead. If a simulation reached a such state, it was followed by
a dissociative behaviour which led to the PtPOP complex being pulled apart. The free
energy proﬁles produced with umbrella integration from the whole set of equilibrated
==PAGE:76==
72
6
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
data showed a dissociative behaviour of the Ag atom in both ground and excited states
with no free energy minimum. An adapted data set containing only the stable phases of
the excited states was also considered which yielded a free energy curve minimum and,
upon ﬁtting to a Morse potential, a binding energy of 0.46 eV with a bond length of
2.92 ˚A. These seemingly promising values were computed based on small data sets for
most long Ag-Pt distance windows and was sampled including unequilibrated data and
the credibility of the results is therefore signiﬁcantly limited. Nevertheless, the initially
stable phases suggest that an improved umbrella sampling could be performed with a
bias not only aﬀecting the Ag-Pt distance but also keeping the Ag atom close to the Pt-
Pt axis where the binding HOMO orbital is occupied. Upon inspection of the thermal
energy distribution of the solvent molecules all binding energies are signiﬁcantly larger
than the large majority of water molecule kinetic energies in the explicit description.
They nevertheless are so close that the highest energy molecules at a temperature of 300
K could give the Ag atom signiﬁcant nudges which, in suﬃcient numbers, can knock the
Ag atom away from the axial bonding location and eventually cause dissociation. This
similarly contradicts the observations by Hansen [17] where no apparent reason could be
given for the dissociation of Ag based on the determined binding energies.
Immediate next steps in further research thus include conducting umbrella sampling
with a redeﬁned bias with multiple reaction coordinates as this would avoid the Ag atom
getting pushed too far from the Pt-Pt axis, a behaviour severely hampering the sam-
pling. On top of making simulations more robust, this would also result in production of
multidimensional free energy surfaces giving an insight into the most favourable reaction
paths and the corresponding energy barriers in the axial Ag - PtPOP reaction. This
would in turn motivate interaction energy surfaces in other directions or even better in
higher dimensions to fully locate and evaluate the most important energy barriers for the
Ag - PtPOP bonding in continuous descriptions. For this purpose, minimum mode fol-
lowing methods could with advantage be applied when and if a such tool is implemented
in GPAW. Additionally, on the one hand, the binding energies determined by Hansen
better portray the picture of Clodfelter and Pettijohn [12, 13] of a more strongly bound
excited state but the binding energies are too high to explain the dissociation of the Ag
atom observed in the QM/MM MD simulations. On the other hand, in this project it has
been found that the binding energies are on a scale where the thermal energy of water
molecules could be responsible for the dissociation of Ag at 300 K but the ground state
displays a stronger bonding than the excited state. Therefore, the underlying reasons for
these discrepancies remain unclear and the diﬀerence between the basis sets used here
==PAGE:77==
73
6
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
and by Hansen, the DO-MOM and the SCF-MOM methods, as well as other potential
causes should be examined in detail. In combination, these steps could shed new light
on the bonding environment as well as the key factors needed in order to create an op-
timal simulation setup for the Ag-PtPOP complex. Ultimately, this could complement
and advance knowledge about the bonding mechanics in metal-PtPOP complexes and
potentially lead to an improved understanding of chemical bonding between like-charged
transition metals.
==PAGE:78==
74
7
APPENDIX
7
Appendix
Appendix A - Raw potential energies from interaction energy
curve calculations
Given below are the raw potential energies used for computing the interaction energies
in the ground and excited state Ag-PtPOP complexes in ﬁgures 11 and 12. The energies
are given relative to the lowest potential energy value for that speciﬁc dimer or monomer.
Figure 22: Raw energies used for computing the interaction energies in ﬁgures 11 and
12. Energies are given relative to the lowest energy of a that speciﬁc dimer or monomer
over the range of conﬁgurations.
==PAGE:79==
75
7
APPENDIX
Appendix B - Isosurface orbital plots at long and short Ag-Pt
distances
Isosurface plots for the HOMO-1 (molecular orbital number 109) and HOMO (molecular
orbital number 110) molecular orbitals of excited state Ag-PtPOP for example structures
with Ag-Pt distances 2.5 ˚A and 5.5 ˚A. Vacuum results are shown in ﬁgure 23 while CSM
results are shown in ﬁgure 24. In vacuum both the HOMO-1 and the HOMO molecular
orbitals that bear respectively anti-bonding and bonding features between the Pt atoms
for the optimized structure has anti-bonding features at large Ag-Pt separations. The
HOMO orbital thus changes character due to the axial translation of Ag. In the CSM
environment, the HOMO-1 molecular orbital maintains its anti-bonding nature between
the Pt atoms. At long distances, the HOMO-1 orbital electron is located at PtPOP.
The HOMO molecular orbital shows no anti-bonding character between Pt atoms. At
short distances it facilitates bonding between Pt atoms as well as between Ag and Pt as
suggested in the molecular orbital diagram in ﬁgure 2, while it at long distances localises
on the Ag atom as an s-orbital.
==PAGE:80==
76
7
APPENDIX
(a) HOMO-1, 2.5 ˚A
(b) HOMO, 2.5 ˚A
(c) HOMO-1, 5.5 ˚A
(d) HOMO, 5.5 ˚A
Figure 23: Vacuum environment HOMO-1 (molecular orbital number 109) and HOMO
(molecular orbital number 109) molecular orbitals of excited state Ag-PtPOP at the Ag-
Pt distances 2.5 ˚A and 5.5 ˚A. HOMO-1 orbitals are drawn at 0.01
q
e−/˚A
3 and HOMO
orbitals are drawn at 0.015
q
e−/˚A
3.
==PAGE:81==
77
7
APPENDIX
(a) HOMO-1, 2.5 ˚A
(b) HOMO, 2.5 ˚A
(c) HOMO-1, 5.5 ˚A
(d) HOMO, 5.5 ˚A
Figure 24: CSM environment HOMO-1 (molecular orbital number 109) and HOMO
(molecular orbital number 109) molecular orbitals of excited state Ag-PtPOP at the
Ag-Pt distances 2.5 ˚A and 5.5 ˚A. HOMO-1 orbitals are drawn at 0.015
q
e−/˚A
3 and
HOMO orbitals are drawn at 0.02
q
e−/˚A
3.
==PAGE:82==
78
7
APPENDIX
Appendix C - Reproduction of interaction energy curve from
previous Ag-PtPOP study
The plot in ﬁgure 12 of the CSM interaction energy curves was found to not replicate the
location of the ground state CSM potential energy surface determined by Hansen [17].
Upon discovery of this diﬀerence the reason was found in the D3 correction not being
included in the CSM calculations. Therefore, in order to showcase consistency with the
former study, a reproduction of the plots in ﬁgure 25 (top) in [17] with a consistent use
of the D3 correction is shown here in ﬁgure 25. An excited state CSM interaction energy
curve was not possible to create in the former study but has been included here - also
with no D3 correction to show where the location would most likely have been had it
been present in [17].
Figure 25: Recreation of plot from ﬁgure 25 (top) in [17] where the D3 correction has
been left out for CSM calculations. This reproduces the location and shape of the CSM
ground state curve produced in that study. In addition, the excited state CSM curve
(without the D3 correction) has been included in this plot.
==PAGE:83==
79
7
APPENDIX
Appendix D - Umbrella integration test on NaCl
A test application of the umbrella integration method has been applied to data supplied
by Asmus Dohn, the main supervisor of the project, who simulated a simple NaCl system
for 1 ns in diﬀerent sample windows. The ﬁner simulation details are not presented for
the purpose of this test application. 40 simulation windows were made starting with
the shortest window equilibrium distance of 2.1 ˚A and ending with the longest window
equilibrium distance of 6.0 ˚A with a spacing of 0.1 ˚A between neighboring windows. The
applied spring constant was 750 kJ per mole per ˚A2. The data is analyzed by means
of equations (13) through (18). The generated global, unbiased free energy surface is
shown in ﬁgure 26 for a recombination of windows using 100 bins. The shape and the
relative values reproduce the ﬁndings of a MD simulation study by Timko et al. in 2010
[59] to a high degree. A minimum in the free energy surface (or the potential of mean
force as it is called in [59]) is observed at around 2.7 ˚A. In [59] the free energy falls to the
same minimum value at around 4.8 ˚A whereas the ﬂat region produced here is slightly
higher in free energy.
Figure 26: Free energy surface of the Na-Cl dissociation as calculated by the umbrella
integration method for recombination of sampled Na-Cl distance distributions in trajec-
tory windows with diﬀerent bias equilibrium distances. The free energy is denoted as A
while the separation distance is denoted by the reaction coordinate ξ. The shape and
the relative values reproduces the ﬁndings of a MD simulation study by [59] to a high
degree. The free energy surface has been recombined over the windows using 100 bins.
==PAGE:84==
80
REFERENCES
References
[1] Roger P. Sperline, Mark K. Dickson, and D. Max Roundhill. New route to the
directed synthesis of mixed metal chain oligomers. Identiﬁcation of a platinum
complex having an intense emission in the visible spectrum in aqueous solution.
Journal of the Chemical Society, Chemical Communications, (2):62–63, 1 1977.
doi:10.1039/C39770000062.
[2] Harry B. Gray, Stanislav Z´aliˇs, and Anton´ın Vlˇcek. Electronic structures and photo-
physics of d8-d8 complexes. Coordination Chemistry Reviews, 345:297–317, 8 2017.
doi:10.1016/J.CCR.2017.01.008.
[3] Robert J. Sweeney, Erica L. Harvey, and Harry B. Gray.
Photoreactions of
tetrakis(µ-pyrophosphito)diplatinate(II) with alcohols and hydrocarbons. Coordi-
nation Chemistry Reviews, 105(C):23–34, 11 1990. doi:10.1016/0010-8545(90)
80016-M.
[4] M. A. Filomena Dos Remedios Pinto, Peter J. Sadler, Stephen Neidle, Mark R.
Sanderson, Arun Subbiah, and Reiko Kuroda. A novel di-platinum(II) octaphos-
phite complex showing metal–metal bonding and intense luminescence; a poten-
tial probe for basic proteins. X-Ray crystal and molecular structure.
Journal
of the Chemical Society, Chemical Communications, (1):13–15, 1 1980.
doi:
10.1039/C39800000013.
[5] Daniel J. Thiel, Peteris Livi¸nˇs, Edward A. Stern, and Aaron Lewis. Microsecond-
resolved XAFS of the triplet excited state of Pt2(P2O5H2)4–4.
Nature 1993
362:6415, 362(6415):40–43, 3 1993. doi:10.1038/362040a0.
[6] D. Max Roundhill, Harry B. Gray, and Chi Ming Che.
Pyrophosphito-bridged
diplatinum chemistry. Accounts of Chemical Research, 22(2):55–61, 1989. doi:
10.1021/AR00158A002.
[7] Irina V. Novozhilova, Anatoliy V. Volkov, and Philip Coppens. Theoretical analysis
of the triplet excited state of the [Pt2(H2P2 O5)4]4- ion and comparison with time-
resolved x-ray and spectroscopic results. Journal of the American Chemical Society,
125(4):1079–1087, 1 2003. doi:10.1021/JA027857B.
[8] Morten Christensen, Kristoﬀer Haldrup, Klaus Bechgaard, Robert Feidenhans’l,
Qingyu Kong, Marco Cammarata, Manuela Lo Russo, Michael Wulﬀ, Niels Har-
==PAGE:85==
81
REFERENCES
rit, and Martin Meedom Nielsen.
Time-Resolved X-ray Scattering of an Elec-
tronically Excited State in Solution. Structure of the 3A2u State of Tetrakis-
µ-pyrophosphitodiplatinate(II).
Journal of the American Chemical Society,
131(2):502–508, 1 2008. doi:10.1021/JA804485D.
[9] Renske M. van der Veen, Andrea Cannizzo, Frank van Mourik, Jr. Anton´ın Vlˇcek,
and Majed Chergui.
Vibrational Relaxation and Intersystem Crossing of Binu-
clear Metal Complexes in Solution.
Journal of the American Chemical Society,
133(2):305–315, 1 2010. doi:10.1021/JA106769W.
[10] Albert
E.
Stiegman,
Steven
F.
Rice,
Harry
B.
Gray,
and
Vincent
M.
Miskowski.
Electronic spectroscopy of d8-d8 diplatinum complexes. 1A2u (dσ*
→pσ), 3Eu (dxz,dyz →pσ), and 3,1B2u (dσ* →dx2-y2) excited states of
tetrakis(diphosphonato)diplatinate(4-), [Pt2(P2O5H2)4]4-.
Inorganic Chemistry,
26(7):1112–1116, 4 1987. doi:10.1021/IC00254A029.
[11] Jeﬀrey K. Nagle and Bridget A. Brennan.
Luminescent exciplex formation in-
volving tetrakis(µ-diphosphito)diplatinate(II) and -thallium(I) in aqueous solu-
tion. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 110(17):5931–5932, 2002. doi:
10.1021/JA00225A071.
[12] Sarah A. Clodfelter, Tina M. Doede, Bridget A. Brennan, Jeﬀrey K. Nagle, David P.
Bender, Warren A. Turner, and Paul M. LaPunzina. Luminescent metal-metal-
bonded exciplexes involving tetrakis(µ-diphosphito)diplatinate(II) and thallium(I).
Journal of the American Chemical Society, 116(25):11379–11386, 12 1994. doi:
10.1021/JA00104A018.
[13] Cheryl N. Pettijohn, Evan B. Jochnowitz, Bao Chuong, Jeﬀrey K. Nagle, and Arnd
Vogler.
Luminescent excimers and exciplexes of PtII compounds.
Coordination
Chemistry Reviews, 171(1):85–92, 4 1998. doi:10.1016/S0010-8545(98)90015-7.
[14] Morten Christensen, Kristoﬀer Haldrup, Kasper S. Kjær, Marco Cammarata,
Michael Wulﬀ, Klaus Bechgaard, Høgni Weihe, Niels H. Harrit, and Martin M.
Nielsen. Structure of a short-lived excited state trinuclear Ag–Pt–Pt complex in
aqueous solution by time resolved X-ray scattering. Physical Chemistry Chemical
Physics, 12(26):6921–6923, 6 2010. doi:10.1039/C002070B.
[15] Qingyu Kong, Kasper S. Kjaer, Kristoﬀer Haldrup, Stephan P.A. Sauer, Tim Brandt
Van Driel, Morten Christensen, Martin M. Nielsen, and Michael Wulﬀ. Theoretical
==PAGE:86==
82
REFERENCES
study of the triplet excited state of PtPOP and the exciplexes M-PtPOP (M = Tl,
Ag) in solution and comparison with ultrafast X-ray scattering results. Chemical
Physics, 393(1):117–122, 1 2012. doi:10.1016/J.CHEMPHYS.2011.11.034.
[16] Sebastian V. Kruppa, Yevgeniy Nosenko, Marc Oliver Winghart, Simon P. Walg,
Manfred M. Kappes, and Christoph Riehn. Fragmentation pathways of dianionic
[Pt2(µ-P2O5H2)4 + X,Y]2- (X,Y = H, K, Ag) species in an ion trap induced by
collisions and UV photoexcitation.
International Journal of Mass Spectrometry,
395:7–19, 2 2016. doi:10.1016/j.ijms.2015.11.007.
[17] Mikkel Theis Hansen.
ab-initio Simulations of bond dynamics in solvated metal
complexes. Master Thesis. DTU Department of Physics, 2021.
[18] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn.
Inhomogeneous electron gas.
Physical Review,
136(3B):B864, 11 1964. doi:10.1103/PHYSREV.136.B864.
[19] Jorge Kohanoﬀ. Electronic structure calculations for solids and molecules: Theory
and computational methods. Cambridge University Press, ISBN: 978-0-521-81591-8,
2006.
[20] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham. Self-consistent equations including exchange and corre-
lation eﬀects. Physical Review, 140(4A):A1133, 11 1965. doi:10.1103/PHYSREV.
140.A1133.
[21] John P. Perdew and Karla Schmidt. Jacob’s ladder of density functional approxi-
mations for the exchange-correlation energy. AIP Conference Proceedings, 577(1):1,
8 2001. doi:10.1063/1.1390175.
[22] A. Warshel and M. Levitt.
Theoretical studies of enzymic reactions:
Dielec-
tric, electrostatic and steric stabilization of the carbonium ion in the reaction of
lysozyme. Journal of Molecular Biology, 103(2):227–249, 5 1976. doi:10.1016/
0022-2836(76)90311-9.
[23] Asmus O. Dohn. Multiscale electrostatic embedding simulations for modeling struc-
ture and dynamics of molecules in solution: A tutorial review. International Journal
of Quantum Chemistry, 120(21):e26343, 11 2020. doi:10.1002/QUA.26343.
[24] A. K. Rapp´e, C. J. Casewit, K. S. Colwell, W. A. Goddard, and W. M. Skiﬀ. UFF,
a Full Periodic Table Force Field for Molecular Mechanics and Molecular Dynamics
==PAGE:87==
83
REFERENCES
Simulations. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 114(25):10024–10035, 12
1992. doi:10.1021/JA00051A040.
[25] In Suk Joung and Thomas E. Cheatham. Determination of alkali and halide monova-
lent ion parameters for use in explicitly solvated biomolecular simulations. Journal
of Physical Chemistry B, 112(30):9020–9041, 7 2008. doi:10.1021/JP8001614.
[26] Johannes K¨astner. Umbrella sampling, 2011. doi:10.1002/wcms.66.
[27] G. M. Torrie and J. P. Valleau. Nonphysical sampling distributions in Monte Carlo
free-energy estimation: Umbrella sampling.
Journal of Computational Physics,
23(2):187–199, 2 1977. doi:10.1016/0021-9991(77)90121-8.
[28] Shankar Kumar, Djamal Bouzida, Robert H Swendsen, Peter A Kollman, and
John M Rosenbergl. The Weighted Histogram Analysis Method for Free-Energy
Calculations on Biomolecules. I. The Method. Journal of Computational Chem-
istry, 13(8):1011–1021, 1992. doi:10.1002/jcc.540130812.
[29] Johannes K¨astner and Walter Thiel.
Bridging the gap between thermodynamic
integration and umbrella sampling provides a novel analysis method: “Umbrella
integration”.
The Journal of Chemical Physics, 123(14):144104, 10 2005.
doi:
10.1063/1.2052648.
[30] Ask Hjorth Larsen, Jens Jørgen Mortensen, Jakob Blomqvist, Ivano E. Castelli,
Rune Christensen, Marcin Du lak, Jesper Friis, Michael N. Groves, Bjørk Hammer,
Cory Hargus, Eric D. Hermes, Paul C. Jennings, Peter Bjerre Jensen, James Ker-
mode, John R. Kitchin, Esben Leonhard Kolsbjerg, Joseph Kubal, Kristen Kaasb-
jerg, Steen Lysgaard, J´on Bergmann Maronsson, Tristan Maxson, Thomas Olsen,
Lars Pastewka, Andrew Peterson, Carsten Rostgaard, Jakob Schiøtz, Ole Sch¨utt,
Mikkel Strange, Kristian S. Thygesen, Tejs Vegge, Lasse Vilhelmsen, Michael Wal-
ter, Zhenhua Zeng, and Karsten W. Jacobsen.
The atomic simulation environ-
ment—a Python library for working with atoms. Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter, 29(27):273002, 6 2017. doi:10.1088/1361-648X/aa680e.
[31] J. J. Mortensen, L. B. Hansen, and K. W. Jacobsen. Real-space grid implementation
of the projector augmented wave method. Physical Review B - Condensed Matter
and Materials Physics, 71(3):035109, 1 2005. doi:10.1103/PHYSREVB.71.035109.
[32] J. Enkovaara, C. Rostgaard, J. J. Mortensen, J. Chen, M. Du lak, L. Ferrighi,
J. Gavnholt, C. Glinsvad, V. Haikola, H. A. Hansen, H. H. Kristoﬀersen, M. Kuisma,
==PAGE:88==
84
REFERENCES
A. H. Larsen, L. Lehtovaara, M. Ljungberg, O. Lopez-Acevedo, P. G. Moses, J. Oja-
nen, T. Olsen, V. Petzold, N. A. Romero, J. Stausholm-Møller, M. Strange, G. A.
Tritsaris, M. Vanin, M. Walter, B. Hammer, H. H¨akkinen, G. K.H. Madsen, R. M.
Nieminen, J. K. Nørskov, M. Puska, T. T. Rantala, J. Schiøtz, K. S. Thygesen, and
K. W. Jacobsen. Electronic structure calculations with GPAW: a real-space imple-
mentation of the projector augmented-wave method. Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter, 22(25):253202, 6 2010. doi:10.1088/0953-8984/22/25/253202.
[33] P. E. Bl¨ochl. Projector augmented-wave method. Physical Review B, 50(24):17953,
12 1994. doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.50.17953.
[34] Gianluca Levi.
Photoinduced Molecular Dynamics in Solution: Multiscale Mod-
elling and the Link to Ultrafast Experiments. PhD Thesis. Technical University of
Denmark, 2018.
[35] A. O. Dohn, E. O. J´onsson, G. Levi, J. J. Mortensen, O. Lopez-Acevedo, K. S.
Thygesen, K. W. Jacobsen, J. Ulstrup, N. E. Henriksen, K. B. Møller, and
H. J´onsson.
Grid-Based Projector Augmented Wave (GPAW) Implementation
of Quantum Mechanics/Molecular Mechanics (QM/MM) Electrostatic Embedding
and Application to a Solvated Diplatinum Complex. Journal of Chemical Theory
and Computation, 13(12):6010–6022, 12 2017. doi:10.1021/ACS.JCTC.7B00621.
[36] A. D. Becke.
Density-functional exchange-energy approximation with correct
asymptotic behavior.
Physical Review A, 38(6):3098, 9 1988.
doi:10.1103/
PhysRevA.38.3098.
[37] Chengteh Lee, Weitao Yang, and Robert G. Parr. Development of the Colle-Salvetti
correlation-energy formula into a functional of the electron density. Physical Review
B, 37(2):785, 1 1988. doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.37.785.
[38] Renato Colle and Oriano Salvetti. Approximate calculation of the correlation energy
for the closed and open shells. Theoretica chimica acta 1979 53:1, 53(1):55–63, 3
1979. doi:10.1007/BF00547606.
[39] A. H. Larsen, M. Vanin, J. J. Mortensen, K. S. Thygesen, and K. W. Jacobsen.
Localized atomic basis set in the projector augmented wave method. Physical Review
B - Condensed Matter and Materials Physics, 80(19):195112, 11 2009. doi:10.
1103/PHYSREVB.80.195112.
==PAGE:89==
85
REFERENCES
[40] Frank Jensen.
Introduction to Computational Chemistry.
John Wiley & Sons,
Limited, ISBN: 978-0-470-05804-6, 2007.
[41] Benjamin P. Pritchard, Doaa Altarawy, Brett Didier, Tara D. Gibson, and
Theresa L. Windus.
New Basis Set Exchange: An Open, Up-to-Date Resource
for the Molecular Sciences Community. Journal of Chemical Information and Mod-
eling, 59(11):4814–4820, 11 2019. doi:10.1021/ACS.JCIM.9B00725.
[42] Florian Weigend and Reinhart Ahlrichs. Balanced basis sets of split valence, triple
zeta valence and quadruple zeta valence quality for H to Rn: Design and assessment
of accuracy. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 7(18):3297–3305, 8 2005. doi:
10.1039/B508541A.
[43] Quan Manh Phung, Masaya Hagai, Xiao Gen Xiong, and Takeshi Yanai. Polariza-
tion consistent basis sets using the projector augmented wave method: a renovation
brought by PAW into Gaussian basis sets. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics,
22(46):27037–27052, 12 2020. doi:10.1039/D0CP05229A.
[44] Tuomas P. Rossi, Susi Lehtola, Arto Sakko, Martti J. Puska, and Risto M. Nieminen.
Nanoplasmonics simulations at the basis set limit through completeness-optimized,
local numerical basis sets. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 142(9):094114, 3 2015.
doi:10.1063/1.4913739.
[45] Stefan Grimme, Jens Antony, Stephan Ehrlich, and Helge Krieg. A consistent and
accurate ab initio parametrization of density functional dispersion correction (DFT-
D) for the 94 elements H-Pu. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 132(15):154104, 4
2010. doi:10.1063/1.3382344.
[46] Aleksei V. Ivanov, Gianluca Levi, Elvar J´onsson, and Hannes J´onsson. Method
for Calculating Excited Electronic States Using Density Functionals and Direct
Orbital Optimization with Real Space Grid or Plane-Wave Basis Set. Journal of
Chemical Theory and Computation, 17(8):5034–5049, 8 2021. doi:10.1021/ACS.
JCTC.1C00157.
[47] Andrew T.B. Gilbert, Nicholas A. Besley, and Peter M.W. Gill. Self-Consistent
Field Calculations of Excited States Using the Maximum Overlap Method (MOM)†.
Journal of Physical Chemistry A, 112(50):13164–13171, 12 2008. doi:10.1021/
JP801738F.
==PAGE:90==
86
REFERENCES
[48] Gianluca Levi, Aleksei V. Ivanov, and Hannes J´onsson. Variational Density Func-
tional Calculations of Excited States via Direct Optimization. Journal of Chemical
Theory and Computation, 16(11):6968–6982, 11 2020.
doi:10.1021/ACS.JCTC.
0C00597.
[49] Alexander Held and Michael Walter.
Simpliﬁed continuum solvent model with
a smooth cavity based on volumetric data.
The Journal of Chemical Physics,
141(17):174108, 11 2014. doi:10.1063/1.4900838.
[50] Ver´onica M. S´anchez, Mariela Sued, and Dami´an A. Scherlis. First-principles molec-
ular dynamics simulations at solid-liquid interfaces with a continuum solvent. The
Journal of Chemical Physics, 131(17):174108, 11 2009. doi:10.1063/1.3254385.
[51] Wonpil Im, Dmitrii Beglov, and Benoˆıt Roux. Continuum solvation model: Com-
putation of electrostatic forces from numerical solutions to the Poisson-Boltzmann
equation.
Computer Physics Communications, 111(1-3):59–75, 6 1998.
doi:
10.1016/S0010-4655(98)00016-2.
[52] Casey P. Kelly, Christopher J. Cramer, and Donald G. Truhlar. Aqueous solvation
free energies of ions and ion-water clusters based on an accurate value for the abso-
lute aqueous solvation free energy of the proton. Journal of Physical Chemistry B,
110(32):16066–16081, 8 2006. doi:10.1021/JP063552Y.
[53] William L. Jorgensen. Quantum and statistical mechanical studies of liquids. 10.
Transferable intermolecular potential functions for water, alcohols, and ethers. Ap-
plication to liquid water. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 103(2):335–340,
2002. doi:10.1021/JA00392A016.
[54] C. Vega, J. L.F. Abascal, M. M. Conde, and J. L. Aragones. What ice can teach us
about water interactions: a critical comparison of the performance of diﬀerent water
models. Faraday Discussions, 141(0):251–276, 11 2008. doi:10.1039/B805531A.
[55] Erin R. Johnson, Ross M. Dickson, and Axel D. Becke. Density functionals and
transition-metal atoms. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 126(18):184104, 5 2007.
doi:10.1063/1.2723118.
[56] Han Zheng, Shenglong Wang, and Yingkai Zhang.
Increasing the time step
with mass scaling in Born-Oppenheimer ab initio QM/MM molecular dynamics
simulations.
Journal of Computational Chemistry, 30(16):2706–2711, 12 2009.
doi:10.1002/JCC.21296.
==PAGE:91==
87
REFERENCES
[57] F. L. Hirshfeld.
Bonded-atom fragments for describing molecular charge densi-
ties.
Theoretica chimica acta 1977 44:2, 44(2):129–138, 6 1977.
doi:10.1007/
BF00549096.
[58] Harvey Gould and Jan Tobochnik.
Statistical and Thermal Physics.
Princeton
University Press, ISBN: 978-0-691-13744-5, 2010.
[59] JeﬀTimko, Denis Bucher, and Serdar Kuyucak.
Dissociation of NaCl in water
from ab initio molecular dynamics simulations. The Journal of Chemical Physics,
132(11):114510, 3 2010. doi:10.1063/1.3360310.
