==PAGE:1==
Learning-Based Model Predictive Control
of Wind Turbines
Vibhor Jain (s192283)
Master of Science in Engineering
2022
==PAGE:2==
Learning-Based Model Predictive Control of Wind Turbines
Report written by:
Vibhor Jain (s192283)
Advisor(s):
Roberto Galeazzi, Associate Professor at DTU Elektro
John Bagterp Jørgensen, Professor at DTU Compute
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
1 February 2021- 18 January 2022
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.Eng.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Vibhor Jain, 2022
==PAGE:3==
Foreword
This study presents a work of nearly twelve months of research on the economical oper-
ation of wind turbines from a control theory point of view. While various theories have
been explored and numerous experiments have been conducted, not everything has been
documented in the report. This is done to provide reader with a truncated study of
useful methodology and results that can be discussed further. With that in mind, the
best attempt has been made to present a study with every detail required being there
in the study with added references in case reader wishes to explore further. The reader
is expected to have basic knowledge in the areas of control theory to further read this
thesis.
It should also be noted that the controller presented here is designed by the wind energy
research team at Tu Delft. Here, being an integral part of the otherwise designed control
system, it is discussed at length.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This study addresses the challenges in wind speed estimation for control purposes as well
as control itself for the non-linear model of a wind turbine. A novel data-driven EKF
has been presented to capture the wind speed dynamics which is coupled with the given
controller design to establish a firm and effective control architecture. The controller
presented here incorporates convex optimization as a way to optimize parameters within
the non-linear wind turbine model.
All simulations are done on MATLAB using the in-built NREL FASTv8 model of 5MW
wind turbine.
FASTv8 is a computational model of a wind turbine providing high-
fidelity simulations.
Along with that, Mosek is used as a solver for computation of
model predictive control of the wind turbine.
Keywords: MPC, Economic MPC, Wind turbine control system, Learning-based con-
trol, Data-driven control
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank DTU for providing with the right resources and opportunities, and
a safe environment to pursue my master studies especially with the ongoing pandemic.
Without the help of my supervisors, Roberto Galeazzi and John Bagterp Jørgensen, the
completion of this project would have been impossible and I would like to thank them
from the bottom of my heart
It was an interesting, intellectual and very fun journey. Finally a thanks to my family
and my friends for their support and I apologize to all the people I might have forgotten
to mention here.
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Foreword
i
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Scope Of The Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Mathematical Modelling of Wind Turbine
5
2.1
The Wind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Blade Element Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Plotting coeﬀicients 𝐶𝑃, 𝐶𝑇and 𝐶𝑄. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Control Oriented Model of Wind Turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Controller Design Of Wind Turbine
13
3.1
Literature Review For Controllers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Model Predictive Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Economic Model Predictive Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
EMPC Designed For Wind Turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Wind Speed Estimator
23
4.1
Wind Speed Estimator Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Estimator : Proposed And Developed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Learning Based Prediction Model
31
5.1
Prediction Model: Proposed and Designed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Simulation Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Conclusion And Future Work
43
6.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
Appendices
45
A FASTv8
47
B GP Regressor Specifications
49
C Simulation Guide
51
C.1 MATLAB Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
C.2 Python Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Bibliography
53
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
2.1
Anatomy of a horizontal-axis Wind Turbine[insert WT book reference]
. . .
5
2.2
Illustration of the cross-section of a blade element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Power Coeﬀicient (𝐶𝑃) Mapping [K P+20] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Power Coeﬀicient (𝐶𝑄) Mapping [K P+20] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Power Coeﬀicient (𝐶𝑇) Mapping [K P+20] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Block Implementation of Wind Turbine Subsystems . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1
Variable speed wind turbine operation regions [Kon+20]
. . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Traditional paradigm for process optimization and control [EDD14] . . . . .
16
3.3
Simulation results showcasing EMPC control action . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1
Wind Turbine Control System representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Wind Speed Estimation using EKF (yellow line is actual and blue line is
estimated wind speed) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Variation in Wind Turbine Parameters with changing wind speed
. . . . . .
29
4.4
Wind Speed Estimation using EKF (yellow line is actual and blue line is
estimated wind speed) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
Variation in Wind Turbine Parameters with changing wind speed
. . . . . .
30
5.1
𝐶𝑃surface mapped using GP regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Block Diagram of the Learning-based Control System . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
𝐶𝑃surface computed from GP Regressor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Variation in Wind Turbine Parameters for compromised model . . . . . . . .
38
5.5
Wind speed estimation under model compromise (yellow line is actual and
blue line is estimated wind speed) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.6
Variation in Wind Turbine Parameters under model compromise . . . . . . .
40
5.7
Wind speed estimation under model compromise (yellow line is actual and
blue line is estimated wind speed) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Driven by the demand of renewable energy to avoid global warming and preserve pollution-
free environment, a large number of wind power generators have been constructed over
the past decade. Today, wind energy is one of the most important renewable energy
resources. For the years to come, many countries and big industries have set goals for fur-
ther reduction of 𝐶𝑂2 emission, increased utilization of renewable energy and complete
avoidance of fossil fuels. In Denmark, one of the means to achieve this is to increase the
share of wind power to 50% of the electricity consumption by 2025 (in 2012, this number
was 30%) and to fully cover the energy supply by renewable energies in general by 2050.
Installing this massive amount of wind turbine capacity introduces several challenges to
reliable operation of power systems due to the fluctuating nature of wind power causing
uncertainty in the wind power production.
Two of those challenges are to predict the incoming wind and adjust the wind turbine
alignment accordingly. Wind, the fuel to produce the wind power, if not handled cor-
rectly, can cause ultimate harm to the wind turbine as well as hamper the quality of
the wind power . While wind energy is cheap, the installation cost of a single wind tur-
bine is so high, that if it is not able to operate over a long time, ironically, wind power
production will end up being one of the costliest resource of energy. Demystifying the
latter challenge, it is equally important for the turbine to to shield itself from excessively
high-speed winds in order avoid mechanical failure as it is to extract maximum amount
of power. Through mechanical simulations and practical experiments, and analysis in
depth, the trade-off between the two sub-challenges is predefined. Subsequently, the
bigger task is make sure that the wind turbine follows the trade-off.
The aim of this thesis is to, firstly, present the reader with the challenges in maintaining
this trade-off and a strategy to operate the wind turbine within the norms that stick
to the trade-off. To further apply this strategy, the knowledge of the wind is partic-
ularly valuable which is the first challenge mentioned above. The second part of the
thesis provides research and simulation-based solution for that. Eventually, it is shown
how certain characteristics of the wind turbine change with time while operating under
changing climate condition and how the operation is needed to be changed as well using
a data-driven optimization.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Objectives
The overall project objectives are the following:
• Explaining the validity and importance of the proposed controller.
• Designing an estimator to be used with the given controller.
• Introducing a learning-based mathematical model to further the control action if
and/or when the given parameters become invalid.
• Implement the complete control architecture and assess the performance based on
simulation results.
1.2
Scope Of The Project
Initially, a model of the wind turbine has been explained from a control point of view.
It pinpoints all the necessary subsystems and parameters required to understand the
wind turbine control system explained in later sections. It also shows the mapping of
the coeﬀicients of wind turbine which are susceptible to change with variation in wind
speed and other parameters.
Next, emphasis has been placed on the controller given during the start of the project.
It’s operation is explained succinctly and, its validity and performance have been dis-
cussed through theoretical explanation and research corpus. On the foundation of the
controller, a wind speed estimator has been proposed and designed. Its methodology is
provided owing to previous researches and simulation results of the whole setup have
been presented and discussed.
Finally, the expiration of the validity of the model is discussed along with the reasons
behind it. A data-driven approach is introduced and applied. Its operation is discussed
and the simulation results of the same are documented to assess its performance.
1.3
Thesis outline
In a nutshell, the entire thesis can be broken down as:
• Chapter 2 describes a model of the wind turbine within the scope of control
strategy along with the mapping of aerodynamic coeﬀicients.
• Chapter 3 discusses the given controller strategy, giving a thorough explanation
on it and its validity under all operating conditions.
• Chapter 4 dives into the proposed estimator and its significance for accurate
control actions.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Thesis outline
3
• Chapter 5 shows a novel operation design incorporating a learning-based element
within the above mentioned control design.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Mathematical Modelling of
Wind Turbine
Looking at a glance, a wind turbine operation looks straight forward with the flowing
wind rotating the turbine and then later on this rotational energy is converted to electri-
cal energy. While this statement holds some truth to it, there are many parameters and
constraints involved in a wind turbine operation like the direction of the flowing wind,
angle of the rotor at top of the tower, the strength of the tower and many other safety
factors that are need to be considered while designing a wind turbine to ensure its safe
and eﬀicient operation.
Figure 2.1: Anatomy of a horizontal-axis Wind Turbine[insert WT book reference]
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Mathematical Modelling of Wind Turbine
In this section, not all but required parameters and sub-processes have been discussed
at length to support the proposed control strategy.
2.1
The Wind
The main component or the fuel required to drive the whole wind turbine is the wind
itself. Theoretically, winds are movements of air masses in the atmosphere mainly orig-
inated by temporal differences.
The knowledge of quasi-steady mean wind speeds expected at a site is essential to de-
termine if setting up a wind energy project at that site will be an economically sound
decision. One way to categorise wind turbines is by the maximum amount of power it
can extract from the wind. For this study, a 5 MW stand alone wind turbine has been
considered.
2.2
Blade Element Model
To analyse the aerodynamic forces on wind turbine, the blade element theory comes in
handy providing derivation for the expressions of developed torque, captured power and
axial thrust force experienced by the turbine.
To carry out the analysis, a cross-section of a wind turbine blade element is considered
as shown in figure 2.2. The figure shows velocities at the rotor plane where a is the axial
flow interference factor and a’ is the tangential flow factor. Here, 𝑉𝑟𝑒𝑙is the speed with
which the blade element moves in the airflow. This can be viewed as the composition
of upstream wind speed V and the tangential blade element speed 𝑟𝜔𝑟(r and 𝜔𝑟being
the length and the rotational velocity of the blade element respectively). The angles 𝛽
and represent the blade-pitch angle, and angle between the local flow direction and the
rotor plane.
Due to the incoming wind, there are two forces acting on the blade element, namely,
lift force 𝑓𝐿acting perpendicular to the local air movement direction and drag force 𝑓𝐷
acting along the flow direction. They are given as:
𝑓𝐿= 𝜌𝑐
2 𝑉2
𝑟𝑒𝑙𝐶𝐿(𝛼)
(2.1)
𝑓𝐷= 𝜌𝑐
2 𝑉2
𝑟𝑒𝑙𝐶𝐷(𝛼)
(2.2)
where 𝐶𝐿and 𝐶𝐷are the lift and drag coeﬀicients respectively, c is the length of
blade element and 𝜌is the air density.
Equations 2.1 and 2.2 are resolved into axial and tangential components and on inte-
grating those along the blade length c, expressions for thrust force (𝐹𝑇) acting on the
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Blade Element Model
7
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the cross-section of a blade element
rotor and the total useful torque (𝑇𝑟) developed by the turbine are derived. For complete
derivations, refer [DDJ06].
𝐹𝑇= 1
2𝜌𝜋𝑅2𝐶𝑇(𝜆, 𝛽)𝑉2
(2.3)
𝑇𝑟= 1
2𝜌𝜋𝑅3𝐶𝑄(𝜆, 𝛽)𝑉2
(2.4)
where 𝐶𝑇and 𝐶𝑄are dimensionless thrust and torque coeﬀicients respectively.
Another parameter of wind turbine is the tip-speed ratio (𝜆) and is given as
𝜆= 𝜔𝑟𝑅
𝑉
(2.5)
It is important to note here that available power from the wind 𝑃𝑎differs from the
aerodynamic power extracted by the turbine 𝑃𝑟by the factor of power coeﬀicient 𝐶𝑃as
𝑃𝑎= 1
2𝜌𝜋𝑅2𝑉3
(2.6)
𝑃𝑟= 𝐶𝑃(𝜆, 𝛽)𝑃𝑎= 1
2𝜌𝜋𝑅2𝐶𝑃(𝜆, 𝛽)𝑉3
(2.7)
Coeﬀicients 𝐶𝑃and 𝐶𝑄satisfy the relation:
𝐶𝑄= 𝐶𝑃
𝜆
(2.8)
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Mathematical Modelling of Wind Turbine
2.3
Plotting coeﬀicients 𝐶𝑃, 𝐶𝑇and 𝐶𝑄
The coeﬀicients 𝐶𝑃, 𝐶𝑇and 𝐶𝑄are all dependant on tip-speed ratio (𝜆) and pitch angle
(𝛽), i.e., they vary with different values of 𝜆and 𝛽. 𝐶𝑃is an important variable in
determining the power generated by the wind turbine and it is maximum when optimal
𝛽= -2.5￿and 𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑏𝑑𝑎= 6.5 as highlighted in figure 2.3. This means that a fixed-speed
wind turbine can operate with maximum eﬀiciency at a particular wind speed where as
a variable-speed wind turbine can operate eﬀiciently over a wider wind speed range.
There are more than one way to derive the mapping of these aerodynamic coeﬀicients. In
[Martin O. L. Hansen. Aerodynamics of Wind Turbines. Earthscan, 2008], contributions
of torque and thrust forces on the blades are calculated. This algorithm takes number of
stations as the input from user. Higher the number of stations, higher is the precision and
higher is the computational time. For the turbine used in this study, these coeﬀicients
are given through the look-up tables which are predefined. Their 3-D mapping is derived
using cubic spline interpolation using not-a-knot end conditions, which means that, at
the first and last interior break, even the third derivative is continuous.
Figure 2.3: Power Coeﬀicient (𝐶𝑃) Mapping [K P+20]
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Plotting coeﬀicients 𝐶𝑃, 𝐶𝑇and 𝐶𝑄
9
Figure 2.4: Power Coeﬀicient (𝐶𝑄) Mapping [K P+20]
Figure 2.5: Power Coeﬀicient (𝐶𝑇) Mapping [K P+20]
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Mathematical Modelling of Wind Turbine
2.4
Control Oriented Model of Wind Turbine
From an operation point of view, a Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS) consists
of four subsystems, namely, the aerodynamic, mechanical, electrical and pitch actuator
subsystems.
The Aerodynamic Subsystem captures the flowing wind and make the turbine rotate,
thereby, converting wind energy to mechanical energy. The Mechanical Subsystem
describes the transfer of aerodynamic torque on the blades to the generator shaft through
a drive-train as well as the support structure of the tower that withstand the thrust force
of the incoming wind. The Electrical Subsystem is responsible for the conversion of
mechanical power at the generator shaft into electricity. Lastly, the Pitch Actuator
subsystem is an assembly of hydraulic or electromechanical device that rotates the blades
along the longitudinal axes, thus changing their pitch angle and ultimately affecting the
rotating speed of the rotor.
Figure 2.6: Block Implementation of Wind Turbine Subsystems
2.4.1
Aerodynamic Subsystem
In mathematical terms, aerodynamic system consists of the rotor torque and thrust force
mentioned above (equations 2.3 and 2.4). It describes how the three-dimensional wind
field initiate the rotational movement of the blades. Combining equations 2.4, 2.5 and
2.8, the result is given as
𝑇𝑟= 1
2𝜌𝜋𝑅2𝐶𝑃(𝜆, 𝛽)𝑉3
(2.9)
which will be more commonly used later on for calculating rotor torque.
2.4.2
Mechanical Subsystem
For modelling of the WECS, the mechanical subsystem sums up a large amount of the
operation of a wind turbine. Starting with the working of drive-train which transfers
the rotational energy from rotor shaft to the generator shaft can be mathematically
represented as:
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Control Oriented Model of Wind Turbine
11
𝜔𝑔= 𝜔𝑟/𝑁
(2.10)
𝐽= 𝐽𝑔+ 𝐽𝑟/𝑁2
(2.11)
Table 3.1. Parameters for the mechanical subsystem
Symbol Description
𝐽𝑟
Inertia of the rotor
𝐽𝑔
Inertia of the generator
𝐽
Equivalent inertia of the generator shaft
𝑁
Number of blades
𝐽
̇𝜔𝑔= 𝑇𝑟(𝑡)/𝑁−𝑇𝑔(𝑡)
(2.12)
𝐽𝑟̇𝜔𝑟= 𝑇𝑟−𝑇𝑔
(2.13)
The above mentioned equations can be interpreted as representation of same parameters
in different ways but they have been mentioned here as these different representations
of parameters have been used in the controller and estimator designs. Note that for
the sake of simplicity, friction factor between rotor shaft and generator shaft has been
assumed to be zero, that is, transfer of energy is smooth without any loss. In a practical
setting, this will not be the case.
In the wind turbine model that has been used for further analysis in this study, the loads
on the tower due to incoming wind are not considered. To learn more about the forces
and deflections in the tower, the reader is referred to chapter 3 of [DDJ06].
2.4.3
Electrical Subsystem
The Electrical subsystem of the wind turbine under analysis comprises of induction gen-
erators which are commonly found in grid-connected wind turbines [Han01]. There are
three categories of wind-driven induction generators. namely, Directly Coupled Squirrel-
cage Induction Generator (SQIG), Stator-controlled Squirrel-cage Induction Generator
(SCIG) and Rotor-controlled Doubly-fed Induction Generator (DFIG). In all modern
Vestas manufactured wind turbines, DFIG is installed along with a PWM frequency
converter acting as an interface between the AC grid and the rotor windings.
Although, with the presence of rotor windings, slip rings and brushes, DFIG has compar-
atively more complex design as compared to SQIG and SCIG, its significant advantage
is that, with it being installed, the power electronics devices have to manage just one-
fourth of the captured power irrespective of the converter used. The electrical subsystem
utilises a control strategy of its own to control the generator torque, 𝑇𝑔by manipulating
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Mathematical Modelling of Wind Turbine
zero-torque speed (also called as no-load speed). The linear approximation of generator
torque is given as
𝑇𝑔= 𝐵𝑔(𝜔𝑔−𝜔𝑧)
(2.14)
where 𝐵𝑔is the slope of the real curve at synchronous speed referred to the low-speed
side of the drive-train.
This zero-torque speed, 𝜔𝑧is calculated using quadrature rotor current variations. In the
control design of wind turbine, this generator torque is used as a manipulated variable
to limit the rotor velocity at the rated rotor velocity, as will be discussed in detail in
later sections.
2.4.4
Pitch Actuator Subsystem
The pitch angle of a blade, 𝛽is defined as the angle of rotation of turbine blades along
the longitudinal axis. This rotary action is achieved using hydraulic or electromechanical
devices. Their higher flexibility permits the implementation of eﬀicient control strategy
to encounter the stochastic nature of the wind.
The pitch actuator is a non-linear system but in NREL FAST simulation environment,
its dynamic behaviour is described in its linear region using a first order equation.
̇𝛽= −1
𝜏𝛽+ 1
𝜏𝛽𝑑
(2.15)
where 𝛽𝑑is the desired pitch angle and 𝜏is the time constant taken as 0.2 [JMS09].
The value of 𝛽ranges between -2° and 30°, with a maximum variation of ±10°/s [DDJ06].
Refer appendix A for more information on FASTv8. In the look-up table data, 𝛽ranges
from -5° to 20° and this range is adapted for the simulations as well.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Controller Design Of Wind
Turbine
In this chapter, some light has been shed upon various controllers that have been used
for WECS with detail explanation on the particular type of model predictive controller
designed for this analysis. As outlined in the previous chapter, there are more than
one subsystem requiring control of some kind but, the main purpose of the WECS is
to extract maximum amount of power from the incoming wind while maintaining safe
operation of a wind turbine.
For a wind turbine, the rate of power generation is different for different wind speeds. To
highlight this point more, the generator power is plotted against varying wind speed and
divided into regions as shown in figure 3.1. In region I, the wind turbine rotor does not
rotate at all as it costs more energy to rotate as compared to the energy generated. When
wind speed is increased to a certain point 𝑉𝑐𝑢𝑡−𝑖𝑛, the turbine starts rotating. From 𝑉𝑐𝑢𝑡−𝑖𝑛
to 𝑉𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑, the generator power, 𝑃𝑔increases non-linearly up to the maximum generator
power 𝑃𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑with increasing wind speed as can be seen in region II. In this region, the
controller controls only generator torque, 𝑇𝑔for eﬀicient power generation. 𝑉𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑is the
maximum velocity at which fixed-pitch wind turbine can generate power. To extract the
power 𝑃𝑔beyond this velocity, the controller controls both the pitch angle (𝛽) and the
generator torque (𝑇𝑔) to limit the rotor angular velocity (𝜔𝑟) with increasing wind speed.
In region III, the constant power 𝑃𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑is produced as a result of perfect control action
with increasing wind speed from 𝑉𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑to 𝑉𝑐𝑢𝑡−𝑜𝑓𝑓.
At 𝑉𝑐𝑢𝑡−𝑜𝑓𝑓and beyond (region
IV), the turbine is stopped from rotating as control action becomes inactive beyond this
point and wind turbine operation under such conditions can cause critical damage to
rotor and tower assemblies of the wind turbine.
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Controller Design Of Wind Turbine
Figure 3.1: Variable speed wind turbine operation regions [Kon+20]
3.1
Literature Review For Controllers
High-performance wind turbine control (WTC) has become a diﬀicult challenge due to
several constraints, numerous variables, and the stochastic nature of wind speed input.
Over the years, many control schemes have been applied to the WTC problem like artifi-
cial neural-network technique for pitch control [YÖ09], gain scheduling control [DDJ06],
a fuzzy logic pitch controller [VNL15], a multiple feedback pitch controller [WYY17],
an adaptive neural pitch controller [Jia+19]. However, these control algorithms do not
consider wind turbine actuator constraints in the controller designs which may cause
a wind-up phenomenon and significant performance degradation if the actuator inputs
reach maximum limits [Xia+20].
For this particular reason, model predictive control (MPC) has been the most effective
methodology for control of industrial processes pertaining to its capacity to handle all
the system constraints directly, such as physical limitations and operational constraints.
Physical limitations include the limits of the pitch angle while simplified fatigue models
of selected key components can be categorised as an operational constraint.
3.2
Model Predictive Control
Within the context of energy industries, room for improvement in process operations
will always exist given that it is unlikely for any process to operate at ideal operating
conditions for any substantial time span. MPC attempts to do it by employing itself
on-line.
To put it another way, control actions for manipulated inputs in a process
are calculated by formulating and solving an online dynamic optimization problem that
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Economic Model Predictive Control
15
takes advantage of a dynamic process model while accounting for process constraints.
This way MPC predicts the future evolution of the dynamic process over a finite time
horizon to determine the optimal input trajectory with respect to a specified performance
index, while simultaneously, accounting for the process constraints and multi-variable
interactions in the optimization problem. To oversee the trade-off between the speed of
reaction of the closed-loop framework and the sum of control energy required to produce
the reaction, MPC is incorporated with a quadratic objective function that compensates
for the deviations of the state and inputs from their corresponding optimal steady-state
values over the prediction horizon.
In a standard industrial practice, optimization is split into multi-layer hierarchical struc-
ture. The first layer is Real-time Optimization or RTO. As the name suggests, it takes
into consideration all the constraints and determines the most suitable operating condi-
tions or set-points using an operating cost function or operating profit function among
all feasible steady-state plant operating conditions. These set-points are used by the
supervisory control layer which implements the model predictive control strategy. It is
responsible for deciding the appropriate dynamic control actions that steer the plant’s
operation to determined set-points within a realistic time frame. These computed con-
trol actions are then passed on to another rarely known layer called as regulatory control
layer which implements them using single-input single-output control loops.
Although, this whole paradigm has been useful in the past, steady state operation for a
wind turbine is not the economically best operation strategy. This is because of highly
dynamic (off steady-state) wind turbine operation and a control strategy focused on
bringing the operation around steady state will not be eﬀicient enough. Moreover, a
hierarchical architecture as such is flawed with time difference in execution of different
layers where RTO layer is executed at a rate of hours-days while regulatory control
layer processes control actions at a rate of seconds-minutes. This is because the RTO
layer optimizes over accurate process models which are complex nonlinear steady state
models to yield good performance. Furthermore, in lower feedback control layers, linear
models are used. Due to the differences in these models, the RTO layer may generate
an operating point that is unreachable by the feedback control layer causing an offset
between the actual operating steady-state and the desired operating steady state.
3.3
Economic Model Predictive Control
To overcome the problem of time difference among control layers and to realise the
possible process performance improvement for dynamic or time-varying operation, by
not forcing it to operate at a pre-computed steady state, economic model predictive
control (EMPC) has been proposed which comprises a general cost function or objective
function in its formulation. This cost function usually represents the operation economics
and for a wind turbine operation, this can be taken as the total power generated. In this
regard, EMPC is not an upgrade of MPC but rather a variant of it, designed specifically
to encounter time-varying processes and may not be suitable for processes which are
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Controller Design Of Wind Turbine
Figure 3.2: Traditional paradigm for process optimization and control [EDD14]
not too dynamic and can achieve tunable closed-loop response using quadratic cost of
conventional MPC.
The implementation of EMPC is parallel to a conventional MPC, with it being solved
in a receding horizon fashion. It comprises of economic cost function as the objective
function which is optimized through dynamic operation of the process. Its constraints
include the dynamic model of the process, initial state measurements obtained at a
sampling instance and the process constraints (input and state constraints).
At an
initial sampling instance, a state measurement of the current process state is sent to
EMPC. Using the objective function and the constraints, an optimal input trajectory
is calculated over the prediction horizon in real time. The computed control action,
==PAGE:27==
3.4 EMPC Designed For Wind Turbine
17
based on this trajectory, is then fed to the control actuators to be implemented from
this sampling instance until next sampling instance. At the next sampling instance, the
EMPC is resolved and whole phenomenon is repeated.
There are various EMPC schemes to handle different problems and unique kinds of
systems. To name a few of these formulations that address the closed loop stability, there
are infinite-horizon EMPC, EMPC with terminal constraints and EMPC with Lyapunov-
based constraints [EDC14]. In infinite-horizon EMPC, the EMPC is employed over an
infinite horizon. This scheme is highly suited for chemical processes which are operated
continuously for long periods of time. The stability in the sense of boundedness of the
closed loop state is guaranteed as the state of the system is maintained in the set of
admissible states in case a solution is returned. EMPC with terminal constraints is a
finite-time prediction horizon approach, typically used due to diﬀiculty of solving an
infinite-horizon EMPC for a general nonlinear system. This class of EMPC schemes is
generally applied in discrete time. It is considered as an extension of a tracking MPC
with terminal constraint added for performance and stability. Its objective function is
given as :
𝐿𝑒(𝑥(𝑡), 𝑢(𝑡)) = ∫
𝑇𝑁
0
𝑙𝑒(𝑥(𝑡), 𝑢(𝑡))𝑑𝑡
(3.1)
where 𝑙𝑒is the measure of the instantaneous process operating cost and 𝑇𝑁is finite time
prediction horizon. Another methodology of designing EMPC with stability properties
is by using an auxiliary stabilizing controller. This method is called as EMPC with
Lyapunov-based constraints. To explicitly handle noise and uncertainty, more EMPC
schemes have been proposed. An adaptive EMPC formulation is represented in [GA13] to
handle a class of constrained nonlinear uncertain systems subject to parametric and dis-
turbance uncertainties. The design is based on the single-step approach of the adaptive
MPC technique proposed for uncertain nonlinear systems subject to parametric uncer-
tainties and exogenous variables. This framework assumes that the objective function
is a known function of constrained system’s states, accompanied by unknown parame-
ters. Moreover, this method is applicable to both dynamic and steady-state economic
optimization as the objective and constraint functions depend on time. In [DKA12],
a stochastic optimization technique is coupled with EMPC to determine the optimal
set-point values of control loops with respect to predetermined risk levels, uncertainties,
and costs of violation of process constraints. The EMPC designed for the wind turbine
under study is inspired from EMPC with terminal constraints scheme.
3.4
EMPC Designed For Wind Turbine
The EMPC used in this study is originally modelled by researchers at TU Delft based
on the works of [GBB14]. Here, it is explained in brief with necessary details. For the
designed EMPC, the cost function considered is the power generated while respecting
limits on the time derivative of power delivered to the grid. The control variables are
the blade pitch angle, generator torque and charge/discharge rates of the storage device.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Controller Design Of Wind Turbine
A novel idea of representing all parameters in terms of power flows has been introduced.
This way, the control problem is transformed to one with linear dynamics and convex
constraints.
The nominal constraints on generator speed, torque, blade pitch angle and generator
power are given as:
𝜔𝑔,𝑚𝑖𝑛≤𝜔𝑔(𝑡) ≤𝜔𝑔,𝑚𝑎𝑥,
0 ≤𝑇𝑔(𝑡) ≤𝑇𝑔,𝑚𝑎𝑥,
𝛽𝑚𝑖𝑛≤𝛽(𝑡) ≤𝛽𝑚𝑎𝑥,
𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑛≤𝑃𝑔(𝑡) ≤𝑃𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑,
(3.2)
It is assumed that the limits on quantities, constants such as gear ratio, N and equivalent
inertia at the generator shaft, J are known along with the initial rotor speed. The goal
of the controller is to choose blade pitch angle (𝛽(𝑡)) and generator torque (𝑇𝑔(𝑡)) over
the time interval 0 ≤𝑡≤𝑇subject to all the constraints described above. To form an
algebraic expression of the objective function, the constraints and system limitations are
written in the form of mathematical objectives. Starting with the total energy E which
is to be maximized over the period:
𝐸= ∫
𝑇
0
𝑃𝑔(𝑡)𝑑𝑡,
The second objective which is to be maximized is a measure of variation power over
time:
𝑅𝑣𝑎𝑟= ∫
𝑇
0
̇𝑃𝑔(𝑡)2𝑑𝑡
The third objective is a penalty on rotational speeds above the rated speed 𝜔𝑔,𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑which
is to be minimized:
𝑅𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑑= ∫
𝑇
0
(𝜔𝑔(𝑡) −𝜔𝑔,𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑)+𝑑𝑡,
where (𝑥)+ = max(x,0). The fourth objective is to limit the generator torque by
increasing the rotational speed to the rated speed when more power is available in wind
than the rated power:
𝑅𝑇= ∫
𝑇
0
1
2𝜌𝐴𝐶𝑝(𝑣(𝑡), 𝜔𝑟(𝑡), 𝛽(𝑡))
The fifth objective is to penalise the violation of maximum value of power rate of change,
G, which resembles the quality of power:
𝑅𝑝𝑒𝑛= ∫
𝑇
0
(𝑃𝐺(𝑡) −𝐺)+𝑑𝑡
==PAGE:29==
3.4 EMPC Designed For Wind Turbine
19
At the end, subtracting the penalties and adding up other objectives, the expression is
formed as:
𝐸−𝜆𝑅𝑝𝑒𝑛−𝜇𝑅𝑣𝑎𝑟−𝜌𝑅𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑑+ 𝛾𝑅𝑇,
(3.3)
where 𝜆, 𝜇, 𝜌and 𝛾are positive constants that determine the trade-offs among the
above mentioned objectives. This makes it a classical continuous optimal problem, with
non-linear dynamics as well as non-linear objective function. To tackle this problem,
convex optimization has been used.
3.4.1
Control Problem Formulation using Convex
Optimization
In this section, it is shown how previously discussed optimization problem has been
converted to convex optimal control problem with linear dynamics, convex constraints,
concave objective function which is to be maximized. The trick is to convert aforemen-
tioned objectives into power flows and energies and using control variables 𝛽and 𝑇𝑔for
formulation.
For the time interval 0 ≤𝑡≤𝑇, kinetic energy at the rotor shaft of the drive train is
given as:
𝐾(𝑡) = 𝐽
2 𝜔𝑔(𝑡)2,
(3.4)
then, rotor speed in terms of kinetic energy can be written as:
𝜔𝑟(𝑡) = 1
𝑁√
2
𝐽𝐾(𝑡)
(3.5)
Also, combining equations 2.4 and 2.7, total power extracted from the wind is given as:
𝑃𝑤(𝑡) = 𝑇𝑟(𝑡)𝜔𝑟(𝑡)
(3.6)
As can be seen from figure 3.1, E is a concave function, while the objectives 𝑅𝑝𝑒𝑛and
𝑅𝑣𝑎𝑟to be minimized are convex functions. Using the expression of kinetic energy from
equation 3.4, 𝑅𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑑is expressed as:
𝑅𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑑= ∫
𝑇
0
(𝐾(𝑡) −𝐽
2 𝜔2
𝑔,𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑)+𝑑𝑡,
which is a convex function of kinetic energy.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Controller Design Of Wind Turbine
Using the limits on generator speed from equation 3.2, the limits on kinetic energy are
given as:
𝐽
2 𝜔2
𝑔,𝑚𝑖𝑛≤𝐾(𝑡) ≤𝐽
2 𝜔2
𝑔,𝑚𝑎𝑥,
which are convex inequalities.
Similarly, generator torque can be expressed in terms of generator power and kinetic
energy as:
𝑇𝑔(𝑡) =
𝑃𝑔(𝑡)
𝜂𝑔√
2
𝐽𝐾(𝑡)
And hence, generator torque constraints can be modified in as:
0 ≤𝑃𝑔(𝑡) ≤𝑇𝑔,𝑚𝑎𝑥𝜂𝑔√
2
𝐽𝐾(𝑡),
which again is a convex constraint on 𝑃𝑔(𝑡) and K(t) as √
2
𝐽𝐾(𝑡) is a concave function
of K(t).
Furthermore, available wind power can be expressed in terms of wind speed and kinetic
energy as:
𝑃𝑎𝑣(𝑉, 𝐾) =
max
𝛽𝑚𝑖𝑛≤𝛽≤𝛽𝑚𝑎𝑥
1
2𝜌𝐴𝐶𝑃(𝑉, 1
𝑁√
2
𝐽𝐾, 𝛽)𝑉3
Since, extracted wind power cannot exceed the maximum available power at any given
time instant t,
𝑃𝑟(𝑡) ≤𝑃𝑎𝑣(𝑉(𝑡), 𝐾(𝑡))
Finally, the fourth objective 𝑅𝑇is expressed as:
𝑅𝑇= ∫
𝑇
0
𝑃𝑎𝑣(𝑉(𝑡), 𝐾(𝑡))𝑑𝑡
where 𝑃𝑎𝑣is nearly a concave function of K for each wind speed. It’s proof is out
of scope of the report but the reader is advised to check the [GBB14] to see the whole
proof.
Eventually, the optimal control problem in equation 3.3 subject to the updated con-
straints is solved using NREL 5MW wind turbine model. The dimensionless tuning
parameters are chosen by trial and error approach to achieve desired results, which are
rare violation of the power gradient constraint, small irregularities in the power output
==PAGE:31==
3.4 EMPC Designed For Wind Turbine
21
and limited use of overspeed. The wind turbine has been simulated using NREL FAST
environment incorporating the discussed EMPC for 1000 seconds. The simulation plots
of the controller can be seen in figure 3.3. The rise at the beginning in 𝑃𝑔, 𝑇𝑔, and 𝛽
is because of the initial large value of 𝜔𝑟to facilitate the initial push provided by the
electrical subsystem to start rotating the turbine.
Figure 3.3: Simulation results showcasing EMPC control action
The figure shows how the input parameters are changing with changing wind speed.
Comparing it with figure 3.1, it can be observed how in below rated power, i.e., region
II, only generator torque is changing and at 500 seconds, where the system enters full load
region with wind speed approximately 12 m/s, the controller also starts manipulating
the blade pitch angle. This simulation uses Immersion & Invariance (I&I) estimator as a
means for measuring the incoming wind speed. The successful operation of the controller
is directly related to the value of wind speed being fed to it. The types of various wind
speed estimators have been discussed in the next section which also introduces the design
of the estimator developed for this study.
==PAGE:32==
22
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Wind Speed Estimator
The principal algorithm used for maximum power extraction is maximum power point
tracking which has been discussed at length in the last chapter.
In case of a wind
turbine, maximum power point tracking means optimal pitch angle as well as optimal
tip speed ratio resulting in maximum power coeﬀicient. The highly stochastic nature
of the wind is what makes whole wind turbine operation time-varying and non-linear.
From a control perspective, it is very important to capture the stochasticity of the wind
for the control action to be most effective. To simplify a little, the plane of interest is
treated to be the speed of the wind flowing over the area of the wind turbine rotor and is
called as Effective Wind Speed (EWS), a fictitious variable defined as weighted sum or
uniformly average of wind speeds across the rotor. Modern wind turbines are fitted with
an anemometer at the nacelle to measure the wind speed. However, its measurements
are imprecise owing to the facts that it fails to capture the dynamic nature of the wind
and its design of single-point measurement.
4.1
Wind Speed Estimator Literature Review
Over the years, many theories have been developed either to estimate the wind speed or
to implement control strategies without the knowledge of the wind speed. An example
of the latter one would be [K+06], where the proposed adaptive controller can directly
adjust the torque gains without estimating wind speed. This was not much effective
due to injecting high gain in the loops adapting the gain of a switching torque. For
effective wind speed estimation, Kalman Filter (KF) and Extended Kalman Filter (EKF)
schemes have been cited quite commonly in the research materials. While, KF estimates
the aerodynamic torque to numerically calculate EWS, EKF directly estimates EWS
by augmenting it as a system state. The comparison of their performance has been
presented in [Son+17a] where it is shown that KF performs better than EKF at lower
wind speed but gives unsatisfactory results at higher wind speeds. To improve EKF,
an estimator specifically used for non-linear systems, more complex EWS models have
been proposed to fed to it. In [Son+17b], the EWS model includes the tower shadow
effect in addition to the available information from the anemometer readings. Then,
there is power balance estimator, another widely used method in the wind industry and
research community. It is based on the static relationship between the generator power
and EWS([BS98],[Boz+14]). In the recent years, use of Light Detection And Ranging
(LiDAR) has received much attention.
A LiDAR can provide both estimation and
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Wind Speed Estimator
forecast allowing wind turbine to be less affected by various anomalies like extreme gust
reducing the mechanical life of a wind turbine ([Mik14],[BEK20]). However, despite their
accurate results, LiDAR systems are still considered expensive. To avoid such costs, a
prediction methodology combining EKF with machine learning was proposed in [Hur21].
Here, estimation is performed using EKF and prediction ahead of 2 to 3 seconds is
done through extrapolation and neural networks. Due to highly uncertain model of the
wind, more data based strategies have been developed in the past decade. In [LJS18],
Gaussian Process (GP) regression is used for short-term wind speed prediction which is
fed to an MPC performing individual pitch control. Another example of such work is
[Cai+20], where a Support Vector Regressor (SVR) enhanced with Multi-Task GP has
been used for predicting EWS from Numerical Weather Predictors (NWP). These NWP
consist of large datasets and, although, relatively accurate, their results require complex
computations and more time. More works have been come across where hybrid schemes
of estimation and prediction are used.
According to the extensive literature review done during this research, no scheme has
been proposed that guarantees a consistent accurate estimation at all points as well as
is not required necessarily for high performance controller design. Among all techniques
mentioned above, model based estimation of EWS is tend to be more accurate over wide
range of the blowing wind. Since, mathematical modelling based techniques generally
assume wind to be contaminated by Gaussian noise but in real-time, there may be
outliers which differentiate from Gaussian assumption, the estimation may be wrong.
The estimation method of immersion and invariance (I&I estimator) is used in the given
simulations([OMJ12]). The I&I estimator for wind turbine require the following inequal-
ity condition[Nou+12]:
3𝐶𝑃(𝜆)
𝜆
≥𝛿𝐶𝑃
𝛿𝜆,
which may not hold for all values of 𝜆at all pitch angles and, hence, not ensuring
global stability. One advantage of using I&I estimator is that it requires less information
from the system and has just one parameter to be tuned for desired performance.
4.2
Estimator : Proposed And Developed
To account for the general Gaussian nature of the incoming wind, EKF is the most
promising strategy, given that, a good dynamic model has been used. An extension of
the Kalman Filter, EKF is designed specifically for non-linear models, which has the
ability to capture all the given dynamics of the model by linearizing at every sample
instance. Inspired from the works of [KBS11] and [HLM21], a wind estimation model
has been proposed using a similar but new predictor model on which EKF strategy has
been applied. The states (x), inputs (u) and measurements (y) are given as:
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Estimator : Proposed And Developed
25
𝑥=
⎡⎢⎢⎣
𝜔𝑟
𝑣𝑡
𝑣𝑚
⎤⎥⎥⎦
𝑢= [
𝛽
𝑇𝑔]
𝑦= [
𝜔𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑
𝑣𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑]
(4.1)
The wind model where wind speed is taken as a state is given as:
̇𝑣𝑡= −𝜋𝑣𝑚
2𝐿𝑣𝑡+ 𝑊1,
̇𝑣𝑚= 𝑊2,
(4.2)
where 𝑣𝑡is the turbulent part of the wind speed, 𝑣𝑚is the mean wind speed, and
L is the turbulence length scale parameter. The turbulent wind speed, containing the
stochastic part of EWS is expressed through Brownian motion and mean wind speed
is given through nacelle measurements containing the non-stochastic part of the EWS
and here it is expressed with simple random walk. 𝑊1 and 𝑊2 are the continuous white
noises corresponding to a Wiener process w = ∫𝑊𝑖𝑑𝑡, i = 1,2 and the total incoming
wind speed, 𝑣𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙at the turbine is the sum of these two parts.
𝑣𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙= 𝑣𝑡+ 𝑣𝑚
(4.3)
The noises 𝑊1 and 𝑊2 are given by V which is the incremental covariance of w.
𝑉= [
𝑉11
0
0
𝑉22]
𝑉11 =
𝜋𝑣3
𝑚𝑡2
𝑖
𝐿
,
𝑉22 = 22
600,
(4.4)
where 𝑡𝑖is the turbulence intensity. Although, the term 𝑣𝑡is scaled with 𝑣𝑚, there is
still a possibility for negative wind speeds from equation 4.3. To minimize the probability
of it happening, turbulence intensity is chosen as 0.1 for further calculations. For required
simulations, the mean wind speed is supposed to be slowly varying starting at zero to
at least 30 m/s as is obtained in equation 4.2. The covariance 𝑉22 is given assuming
standard deviation in the change in mean wind speed over ten minutes is 2 m/s.
The biggest advantage of this wind model is that it brings adaptivity to the estimator
such that it will adapt to changes in ten minutes average wind speeds. So, if the average
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Wind Speed Estimator
wind speed increases, the turbulence time constant decreases, and the variance increases,
resulting in a faster estimation.
The measurement model is given by adding white measurement noise to the rotor speed
and wind speed :
𝜔𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑= 𝜔𝑟+ 𝑛1,
𝑣𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑= 𝑣𝑟+ 𝑛2,
(4.5)
where 𝑛1 and 𝑛2 are white Gaussian noise with constant diagonal covariance. Through
experimental results, these constants are chosen on sound judgement [KBS11]. Assuming
error on rotor speed to be around 1 to 2 % and the uncertainty in nacelle measurement
is large, the measurement noise intensity is:
𝑛1 = 0.02,
𝑛2 = 1
The measurement noise covariance can also be estimated but rather a rough approximate
is given to show the success of proposed EKF when subjected to the under-modelled wind
turbine. The major difference between the working of EKF and KF is that in case of
EKF, the linearization takes place at every time step determining the state estimation
error covariance matrix 𝑃𝑘at around every state estimate one at a time. In this regard,
the KF assumes linearity over the range of trajectory pertubations along with state
estimation errors while EKF assumes linearity only over the range of state estimation
erorrs. Although, EKF filter also uses linear approximation, the range of state space is
smaller resulting in better robustness.
The EKF filter is executed in two steps at every time step, namely prediction and update.
At a particular time instance k, in the prediction step, the system state is predicted on
the basis of system model and the state estimate in the previous time state without
accounting for the measurement at time instance k. This is called as a priori system
state ( ̂𝑥−
𝑘) and the state estimation error covariance at this step is 𝑃−
𝑘. After this, update
step (also called as correction step) is executed where this predicted state is updated
by the system measurement at time instance k and optimal Kalman filter gain K which
minimizes the error covariance. This updated state is called as a posteriori system state
( ̂𝑥+
𝑘) and the state estimation error covariance at this step is 𝑃+
𝑘. A succinct tabular
representation of EKF operation is as follows:
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Estimator : Proposed And Developed
27
Step 1: Filter Initialization
̂𝑥+
0 = 𝑥0, 𝑃+
0 = V
Step 2: Prediction
̂𝑥−
𝑘= 𝑓( ̂𝑥+
𝑘−1, 𝑢𝑘), 𝑃−
𝑘= 𝐹𝑘𝑃+
𝑘−1𝐹𝑇
𝑘+ V,
where 𝐹𝑘=
𝛿𝑓̂𝑥+
𝑘−1
𝛿𝑥
Step 3: Update
̂𝑦𝑘= ℎ( ̂𝑥−
𝑘, 𝑢𝑘), 𝑥+
𝑘= 𝑥−
𝑘+ 𝐾𝑘(𝑦𝑘−̂𝑦𝑘),
where 𝑃+
𝑘= (𝐼−𝐾𝑘𝐻𝑘)𝑃−
𝑘, 𝐻𝑘=
𝛿ℎ(𝑥−
𝑘)
𝛿𝑥
Step 4:
̂𝑥𝑘=
̂𝑥+
𝑘; repeat steps 2 and 3 at k+1.
Figure 4.1: Wind Turbine Control System representation
In figure 4.1, a simplified block diagram is presented to show the wind turbine operation
in conjunction with estimator and controller in a closed-loop system with necessary
delays.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Wind Speed Estimator
Figure 4.2: Wind Speed Estimation using EKF (yellow line is actual and blue line is
estimated wind speed)
Figure 4.2 shows the how the EKF is estimating the wind speed which has step change in
it. Using this estimator and same wind speed profile, simulations have been conducted
for 1000 seconds along with the EMPC discussed in above section. The results are shown
in figure 4.3.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Estimator : Proposed And Developed
29
Figure 4.3: Variation in Wind Turbine Parameters with changing wind speed
Figure 4.4: Wind Speed Estimation using EKF (yellow line is actual and blue line is
estimated wind speed)
To analyse the EKF performance further, less variable wind profile has been fed to the
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Wind Speed Estimator
system. In figure 4.5, fluctuations in 𝜔𝑟, 𝑃𝑔and, 𝑇𝑔are observed as the estimated wind
speed is fluctuating because the above mentioned disturbances have been modeled into
the EKF. It is also observed that higher speeds, estimation may display a slight offset.
Although, showing some flickering in the EWS, it is predicted that the estimator will
return good estimations for a stochastic wind profile.
Figure 4.5: Variation in Wind Turbine Parameters with changing wind speed
As evident from the simulations, this model has been suﬀicient for effective control action
resulting in eﬀicient power output with good quality as well as keeping the wind turbine
safe from mechanical failures. However, it is noted that with time, this design may not
hold. This is because, with time, the wind turbine material starts deteriorating naturally
due to operation in changing weather conditions and general decrease in mechanical
quality over time.
This problem is discussed in detail in the next section with the
solution developed to tackle it based on mathematical modelling. Although, theoretical
explanation has been given for the estimation of stochastic wind profile, simulations for
the same have not been conducted for it due to time constraints.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Learning Based Prediction
Model
Normally, wind speed estimation methods rely on power coeﬀicient 𝐶𝑃mapping as
given in figure 2.3. Most research on wind speed estimators including the given I&I
estimator assumed that the power coeﬀicient surface is accurate which is seldom the
case, especially for turbines with large rotor. Typical 𝐶𝑃mapping is calculated from
the look-up table using the Blade Element Momentum (BEM) theory. This look-up
table is based on the airfoil data, which is derived from either the numerical simulations
or from wind tunnel measurements at steady inflow conditions as well as sometimes at
unsteady aerodynamics such as dynamic stall and dynamic inflow [Aag+20]. Regardless,
in practical operation, the true power coeﬀicient is not well known and vary significantly.
Although, as evident from figure 4.3, the 𝐶𝑃mapping based on the given look-up table
fits accurately with the closed-loop system, it is liable to become invalid with time. Due
to debris buildup and blade erosion, the actual 𝐶𝑃surface changes slowly over time.
Hence, using a consistent 𝐶𝑃mapping, which becomes biased and inaccurate over time,
leads to poor performance of the wind speed estimator. Since the goal of the controller
is to directly or indirectly calculate the optimal values of pitch angle and tip speed ratio
resulting in maximum value of 𝐶𝑃feasible at a point, the 5% error in 𝐶𝑃can cause
a drastic energy loss of 1-3% just in region two (3.1). As per the metrics provided by
Wind Denmark, a 3% loss in 10,000 MW power would be equal to roughly €30 million
per year.
To avoid this biased 𝐶𝑃mapping from tampering with the over all control algorithm,
many attempts have been made. [ODN08] disqualifies the precomputed 𝐶𝑃mapping and
estimate 𝐶𝑃and wind speed simultaneously in real time by considering 𝐶𝑃as a slow time-
varying state and wind speed as a fast time-varying state. Though, being an ingenious
approach, the estimator fails to separate 𝐶𝑃and wind speed in cases where 𝐶𝑃changes
as fast as the wind speed which is quite common at above-rated wind conditions (region
III in figure 3.1). In [HLM21], the 𝐶𝑃surface is reconstructed using a learning-based
mathematical model, namely Gaussian process (GP) regression which calibrates the 𝐶𝑃
surface based on small samples of real-time turbine measurements. This 𝐶𝑃surface is
further used by EKF to predict EWS. All learning based techniques mentioned in section
4.1 are proposed and/or developed as a solution for estimating wind speed independent
of any precomputed parameter. In [MK08], a GP based method is used with kernel
machine learning technique and Bayesian estimation. It used station pressure, sea-level
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Learning Based Prediction Model
pressure, average temperature, humidity, rainfall level, and wind speed over a period
of one year as learning data. While it performed relatively better than other learning
methods, namely multi-layer perceptron (MLP) and the radial basis function network
(RBFN), the time-consuming computations require large datasets and advanced systems.
5.1
Prediction Model: Proposed and
Designed
Looking at figure 4.3, it has been deduced that the predefined look-up table holds com-
plete validity of the model. For the reasons and the studies discussed earlier, the look-
up table is viable to become progressively invalid with time but initially, is perfectly
calibrated with the model. To tackle the problem of look-up table becoming biased
periodically, the data recorded whilst this bias is absent has been used as the training
dataset for the mathematical regression model which, in this case, is GP regression. As
a check to see whether the 𝐶𝑃mapping is become biased, the difference between the
estimated wind speed and speed recorded by anemometer is compared with an arbitrary
constant chosen through computer-controlled diagnosis. When this difference becomes
greater than the said constant value then, the regression model stops recording any new
data and used the previously recorded data to train itself. The trained model, when fed
with new readings of pitch angle, estimated wind speed, and rotor rotational speed, will
calculate a value based on GP regression. In simple words, a switching action has been
introduced in the system based on the residual in the estimated wind speed. When the
residual is large enough, the system will switch from using a precomputed 𝐶𝑃surface to
the GP regressor which is trained on a supposedly ideal system.
5.1.1
GP Regression: Introduction & Literature Review
The first and foremost reason for choosing GP regression as the learning based mathemat-
ical model is because it is a non-linear regression method and the relationship between
wind speed, rotor speed and pitch angle is highly non-linear. Moreover, in predictive
control, GPs have been successfully applied to improve control performance when learn-
ing periodic time-varying disturbances [Kle+16]. Furthermore, for the proposed design,
there is the issue of an uncertain size of the training set ranging plethora values of the
parameters. For such a dataset, GP regression is the most suitable learning method
as it is non-parametric and a Bayesian framework [Edw06], i.e., it does not imbibe any
assumptions to simplify learning during the training process and hence, has no or very
few outliers, and also gives out a probabilistic based result.
There have been many instances when control algorithms have been influenced with
GP based regression. In [Koc+04], predictive control with GP dynamics, by employing
approximations at each prediction time step, has been presented. In [HKZ19], a novel
MPC approach that integrates a nominal system with an additive non-linear part of the
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Prediction Model: Proposed and Designed
33
dynamics modeled as a GP is proposed. Using this methodology, a non-linear MPC that
learns to improve its dynamics model from data is addressed specifically for autonomous
race cars in [HLZ18].
5.1.2
GP Regression: Methodology
A Gaussian process is fully defined by its mean function and covariance function unlike a
Gaussian distribution whose mean is a vector and covariance is a matrix. For a given set
of data or observations, the main task of a regressor is to formulate a model or function
that maps the input vector to the target value.
For a GP regressor, this unknown
function is modeled as a gaussian process by treating the the difference between the
target value and function to be Gaussian noise.
Mathematically, if X is a set of n parameters with y as its set of results or target values
and g(X) is the function modeled by GP regressor then, at a particular instance i,
𝑦𝑖= 𝑔(𝑋𝑖) + 𝜖𝑖,
(5.1)
where, 𝜖𝑖∼𝒩(0, 𝜎2
𝜀) is gaussian noise with zero mean and variance 𝜎2
𝜖. The GP
regressor function 𝑔(𝑋𝑖) is Gaussian distributed with mean function 𝑚(𝑋𝑖) and covariance
function 𝐾(𝑋𝑖, 𝑋𝑗) is defined as:
𝑔(𝑋𝑖) ∼𝒢𝒫(𝑚(𝑋𝑖), 𝐾(𝑋𝑖, 𝑋𝑗)),
𝑚(𝑋𝑖) = ℰ𝑔(𝑋𝑖),
𝐾(𝑋𝑖, 𝑋𝑗) = [
𝑘(𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝑖)
𝑘(𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝑗)
𝑘(𝑥𝑗, 𝑥𝑖)
𝑘(𝑥𝑗, 𝑥𝑗)]
(5.2)
The covariance 𝑘(𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝑖) is equal to one while the covariance 𝑘(𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝑗) = 𝑘(𝑥𝑗, 𝑥𝑖) is the
covariance between two functions defined at i and j and it is calculated using a kernel
function. For the proposed prediction model, squared exponential kernel function (also
called as Radial Basis Function) has been used and is given as:
𝑘(𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝑗) = 𝑒𝑥𝑝( −
||𝑥𝑖−𝑥𝑗||2
2𝑙2𝑠𝑒
),
(5.3)
where 𝑙𝑠𝑒is the length-scale of the kernel function which specifies the kernel size and
smoothness of the model g(X). The squared exponential kernel function is a commonly
used Gaussian kernel because of its smoothness and continuity properties indicating
that the function is infinitely differentiable. Also, due to Gaussian distribution property,
combining equations 5.1 and 5.2, the set of target values can be given as:
𝑦∼𝒩(𝑚(𝑋), 𝐾(𝑋, 𝑋n) + 𝐼𝜎2
𝜖)
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Learning Based Prediction Model
The variance and the length-scale are called as the hyper-parameters, 𝜃ℎ𝑝of the GP and
can be calculated by maximizing the log marginal likelihood 𝑝(𝑦|𝜃ℎ𝑝):
𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑝(𝑦|𝜃ℎ𝑝) = −1
2(𝑙𝑜𝑔|𝐾(𝑋, 𝑋n)| + 𝑦𝑇𝐾(𝑋, 𝑋n)−1𝑦+ 𝑁𝑙𝑜𝑔(2𝜋))
(5.4)
Now, assuming 𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤are the new observations of the same process, then they can be
combined with the already known data as
[
𝑦
𝑔(𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤)] ∼𝒩( [
𝑚(𝑋)
𝑚(𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤)] , [
𝐾(𝑋1, 𝑋N) + 𝐼𝜎2
𝑘(𝑋, 𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤)
𝑘(𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤, 𝑋)
𝑘(𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤, 𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤)] )
(5.5)
where, 𝑘(𝑋, 𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤) = 𝑘(𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤, 𝑋) = [𝑘(𝑋1, 𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤, ..., 𝑘(𝑋N, 𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤] = 𝑘𝑛𝑒𝑤(for simplifica-
tion) and 𝑘(𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤, 𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤) are calculated using equation 5.3. Consequently, the predicted
value 𝑔(𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤) has corresponding mean and variance as:
𝑚(𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤) = 𝑘𝑇
𝑛𝑒𝑤(𝐾(𝑋, 𝑋n) + 𝐼𝜎2
𝜖)−1𝑦
(5.6)
𝜎(𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤) = 𝑘(𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤, 𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤) −𝑘𝑇
𝑛𝑒𝑤(𝐾(𝑋, 𝑋n) + 𝐼𝜎2
𝜖)−1𝑘𝑛𝑒𝑤
(5.7)
For a given input 𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤, the mean 𝑚(𝑋𝑛𝑒𝑤) can be used as the prediction of its GP. More-
over, the research shows that there are many ways to calculate the hyper-parameters.
In earlier times, Laplace approximation was used and after that marginal likelihood
approach was developed which is found to be a more analytical way for estimating
hyper-parameters given the Gaussian nature of the problem [KI 97]. Two commonly
used marginal likelihood methods are log marginal likelihood and negative log marginal
likelihood methods. In the simulations, log marginal likelihood method is used because
the quantity to be estimated, 𝐶𝑃, is supposed to be maximum at a given time instance
and the latter method uses a minimization expression, hence, requiring more computa-
tion. Monte Carlo, a more advanced approach, can also be used but is more complex
and suitable for hierarchical regression model.
5.1.3
GP Regression Used in Wind Turbine
To train the GP regressor, it is fed with the set of estimated wind speed, rotor speed
and pitch angle and the 𝐶𝑃which is calculated by the controller. This data is treated
as valid because the residual between the estimated wind speed and wind speed sensed
by the anemometer is within the arbitrary bounds.
Typically, when employing a data-driven mathematical model, there are three datasets,
namely
• Training set, which is used to train the model.
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Prediction Model: Proposed and Designed
35
• Validation set, a small dataset to check if the model is not becoming sensitive
to a certain dataset pattern.
• Test set, which is used to finally test the trained mathematical model.
Validation set is used to validate the model performance during training by giving out
information on the basis of which, model’s hyperparameters and configurations can be
tuned accordingly. Training on the same set of data can cause bias and sampling error
in a learning-based mathematical model. To avoid the regressor from becoming sensitive
to the data or overfitting, leave-one-out cross validation was employed. In leave-one-out
cross validation, one sample from the available dataset is considered as a validation
set and the remaining samples as the training set. Then, the Root-Mean-Square-Error
(RMSE) is calculated on the validation set, which, in this case, is the left out sample.
Consequently, this step is repeated until all samples of the training set have been used
as a validation set one at a time.
To display the validity of the proposed method of GP regression, a small subset of look-
up table data has been used as the training set for the predictor. To test the results,
all the input parameters of the look-up table, which are the blade-pitch angles and tip-
speed ratio are fed into the predictor. The resultant look-up table when mapped using
interpolation, gives out the almost accurate results.
Figure 5.1: 𝐶𝑃surface mapped using GP regression
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Learning Based Prediction Model
Comparing figures 2.3 and 5.1, the mappings are observed to be similar with a small
change in optimal value of pitch angle from −2.5∘to −3∘. The calculated RMSE between
the two is 0.01576 highlighting the accuracy of the GP regressor designed. Figure 5.2
shows the simplified block representation of the learning-based control system of the
wind turbine.
Here, the block ”Conditional Switch” represents the switching action
based on the condition if the residual is greater or less than the arbitrary constant.
Figure 5.2: Block Diagram of the Learning-based Control System
5.2
Simulation Results
Due to computational and time limitations, the combined simulation showcasing the
nominal operation and the switching action utilising the 𝐶𝑃calculated by GP regressor
has not been calculated. Rather, it is assumed that the conditional switch will happen,
i.e., the wind turbine will attain a point in time-space when the nominal precomputed
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Simulation Results
37
𝐶𝑃corresponding to the certain blade-pitch angle, wind speed and rotor speed will stop
being valid. Following this assumption, a new 𝐶𝑃surface has been mapped using the
new 𝐶𝑃table computed from the GP regressor in figure 5.3. The data used includes
blade-pitch angles and tip-speed ratios over the range of wind speed from 6 m/s to 20
m/s. More details on it can be found in the appendix B.
Figure 5.3: 𝐶𝑃surface computed from GP Regressor
Ultimately, the following simulations have been performed presuming the above assump-
tion. From this point forward, model subjected to this assumption is referred as com-
promised model
5.2.1
Case A
In this case, the turbine is shown to be operating under wind speeds between 6 m/s and
20 m/s gradually increasing in step formulation.
In the EMPC, the optimized pitch angle is computed by calculating the 𝐶𝑃at a certain
time instant using formula
𝐶𝑃=
𝑃𝑟
0.5𝜌2𝑉3
(5.8)
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Learning Based Prediction Model
Figure 5.4: Variation in Wind Turbine Parameters for compromised model
This 𝐶𝑃is then compared to the entire range of 𝐶𝑃from the mapping pertaining to the
single value of tip-speed ratio across all values of pitch angle. For the value 𝐶𝑃from the
mapping which matches most closely to the 𝐶𝑃, the index of it is taken and the value of
blade-pitch angle at this index is determined to be the optimal value of the blade-pitch
angle. Now, when the new mapping of 𝐶𝑃is used [figure 5.3], this method of EMPC
for computing optimal blade-pitch angle finds a new value of blade-pitch angle for really
small deflections owing to the dynamic surface of the new 𝐶𝑃map.
Similarly, 𝑇𝑔is calculated from generator speed. Change in 𝐶𝑃causes rotor speed to
oscillate and hence, 𝑇𝑔also shows oscillations. At times 300 seconds to approximately
380 seconds and 400 seconds to approximately 470 seconds, the EMPC is almost tracking
the whole range of blade-pitch angle. This evidences the existence of outliers in the test
data. These outliers exhibit behaviours outside the norms of the training set and are
not accounted for.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Simulation Results
39
Figure 5.5: Wind speed estimation under model compromise (yellow line is actual and
blue line is estimated wind speed)
From 5.5, it is observed that the EKF performance is almost unaffected. Since, 𝐶𝑃
and blade-pitch angle are small quantities, it is easier for the designed estimator to
compensate for as long as the previous wind speed coming from anemometer is not
affected which sums up the major part of the estimator state space.
5.2.2
Case B
In this case, the turbine is shown to be operating under longer steps of wind speeds at
10 m/s, 15 m/s and 20 m/s. The general nature of the algorithm remains the same.
The larger steps of wind speed over longer time period are used to highlight how the
blade-pitch angle is flickering at the start of the simulation. Comparing with figure 5.4,
this is the region where outliers were detected. The blade-pitch angle stops flickering
once the estimator has got to the stable speed, showcasing that the outliers are existing
for the speed range from 0 to just below 10 m/s [figure 5.7]. Additionally, the range of
variation for 𝑇𝑔and blade-pitch angle is relatively smaller for wind speed 15 m/s.
The nominal behavior of the blade-pitch angle and 𝑇𝑔plots during 10 m/s and 20 m/s
wind speed is observed as the result of basic outlier elimination technique. Since, there
were many outliers, specifically, values of 𝐶𝑃existing outside the bounds of 0 and 1,
from time 0 to 300 seconds and 700 to 1000 seconds, these values were substituted
with the neighbourhood average of the original values from precomputed 𝐶𝑃look-up
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Learning Based Prediction Model
Figure 5.6: Variation in Wind Turbine Parameters under model compromise
table. Although, the overall simulation results provide maximum power at all times, the
controller is pushing the mechanics of the wind turbine to their extreme limits.
Hypothetically, if a wind turbine turbine were supposed to be operated in such a fashion,
the life of the turbine would not last long at all. Anytime the control actions are changed,
stresses are introduced in the turbine tower as can be seen in all simulation figures. In the
cases discussed above, the loads are quite high due to variations in control parameters,
i.e., 𝑇𝑔and 𝛽. Even, assuming, that turbine’s mechanical structure somehow managed
to withstand such loads, the wind turbine will not be giving the maximum power output
as shown in simulations because an actual turbine in real time will always lag behind
such an elaborated control action.
During initial analysis, there were many more outliers. The reason for these outliers is
the gradual changes in EWS and 𝐶𝑃which are recorded by the regressor. These changes
are in the fourth pointer of the valued parameters for some data segements making the
regressor highly sensitive. They have been eliminated by considering one in ten of such
values. This was made possible by using cross-validation technique as discussed above.
Another attempt was made using the training set as the test set to analyse the how data
is affecting the predictions. In other words, contemplating figure 5.2, the wind turbine
is subjected to the same wind profile both in nominal state and in compromised state
to check if the outliers still exist. The simulation results are not shown here for brevity,
but they had many more outliers than the ones shared above for the two cases.
On a strictly, theoretical basis, this control action can be improved by giving a more
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Simulation Results
41
Figure 5.7: Wind speed estimation under model compromise (yellow line is actual and
blue line is estimated wind speed)
distributed training set. Moreover, a better way to eliminate the outliers can also be
introduced along with the constraints on 𝐶𝑃during computational training. A more
detailed analysis would have been conducted, given that the real-time wind speed data
were available or accessible. Needless to point out that any kind of required data can
be generated in simulations, but developing a dataset only for the sake of proving an
algorithm right would not seem right as it will still generate similar or any other infeasible
results when subjected to the unknown real-time wind speed data.
==PAGE:52==
42
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion And Future
Work
6.1
Conclusion
This project has revolved around the control oriented operation of the wind turbine
contributing to the extraction of maximum power while maintaining safe operation. To
form the foundation of the research, the model of the wind turbine has been explained.
Later, the controller algorithm used in the study has been explored. A novel EKF based
estimator is designed and coupled with the controller providing accurate results as shown
in the simulations.
Provided with a sophisticated controller and wind speed estimator working in sync to
give out effective results, the research in this project focused on the bigger picture of
maintaining the similar control action over time when the wind turbine parameters start
deviating and the whole system behavior starts shifting towards a new normal owing to
the deterioration of wind turbine material from whether impact and mechanical wear
and tear. Due to the fact that system is not completely known under the said conditions,
a hybrid of data-driven and model-based approach has been introduced to be used in
place of the initial model-based approach.
With various new mathematical models to process data being developed, more and
more use of data is expected to be seen in advanced control methodology in the future.
Although, the final results in the research are unsatisfactory or rather incomplete, this
project represents a small step in the right direction. As stated in previous chapter, to
conduct further analysis, a data with more excitation of the parameters can be developed.
Moreover, a GP regressor treats the system to be gaussian and hence, there can still be
some outliers in the stochastic wind speed even if the regressor is trained on the right kind
of data. A reinforcement-learning based regressor utilising monte carlo methodology can
be utilised.
==PAGE:54==
44
6 Conclusion And Future Work
6.2
Future Work
This study has explored the control of blade-pitch angle and generator torque in detail
as a way to achieve safe operation conditions and maximum power extraction from the
wind. Since, stochastic wind profile has not been tested on this control architecture,
feeding a stochastic wind profile with shear and gust to the control algorithm will be a
successive future work. The load on the wind turbine tower is not discussed and analysed
but has been only shown in simulations for the reader to see how it varies with wind
and other parameters. An initial extension to this study can be the inclusion of tower
loads and stresses in the control algorithm which have not been considered in this thesis
due to time constraints, and further analysis on it based on the simulation results.
Moreover, reinforcement learning-based control algorithm will also be developed adopt-
ing the proposed control architecture. Being a modern learning technique, it has been
proved quite useful for such systems and can also accommodate a stochastic wind profile.
The proposed algorithm used wind speed residual only as a check for system deviation
but it holds more information like the amount of deviation or the rate of deviation (when
considered as a time series) can be utilised in future algorithm development.
Furthermore, there is another controller to govern the rotor angle of the wind turbine.
Although, it does not account for much in smaller turbines, synchronous operation of
it with the given control is another problem to be construed on which there is minimal
literature at present.
Finally, most of the times, wind turbines are placed and operate in a bunch over a large
area called as wind farm. The wind farm operation is carried forward on the basis of
target collective wind power per time unit and it will be interesting to see how this
control design, with certain modifications, will operate over a wind farm and how it
reacts to the wake effect, which happens due to the change in incoming wind speed
caused by the impact of turbines on each other.
==PAGE:55==
Appendices
==PAGE:56==
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX A
FASTv8
FASTv8 is a computational model of an individual 5MW wind turbine providing high-
fidelity simulation. It is developed by National Renewable Energy Laboratory and is
openly available.
It is based on the works of [JMS09] and [Gru+10].
The turbine
specifications are as follows
Wind Turbine Specifications
𝑃𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑
5 MW
𝑉𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑
11.4 m/s
𝑉𝑐𝑢𝑡−𝑖𝑛
3 m/s
𝑉𝑐𝑢𝑡−𝑜𝑓𝑓
25 m/s
==PAGE:58==
48
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX B
GP Regressor Specifications
To train the GP regressor, a total of 5126 readings were taken which included estimated
wind speed and blade-pitch angle as input and their respective 𝐶𝑃values from the
original look-up table as target values. All the data was recorded over the range of wind
speed from 6 m/s to 20 m/s. To make the data more refine, repetitive data readings were
omitted by taking one in 20 readings. This was done for wind profile as seen in figure
5.7. To further reduce the outliers, the invalid values of 𝐶𝑃in the resultant set were
replaced by the k-mean average sum of neighbours from the original set of 𝐶𝑃values.
Here, k is taken as 5.
==PAGE:60==
50
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX C
Simulation Guide
C.1
MATLAB Code
To run the code successfully, the reader should have a intel i5 or advanced desktop or
laptop computer with 8 GB RAM, 500 MB of disc space, and MATALB 2020, Mosek
and Yalmip preinstalled with a valid license.
To run the code under nominal operation conditions, open the file Main_Script_interactive.mlx
and run it in one go.
To run the code for compromised model,
• Open file Init.m.
• There, comment out line 14 and uncomment line 15.
• Similarly, comment out line 111 and uncomment line 112.
• Manually, add file CPPout.dat and OUTCPFINAL.dat to workspace.
• Open file Main_Script_interactive.mlx and run it in one go.
To change the wind profile, open inputfile->InflowWind.dat. For wind profile 10-15-
20 m/s, write digit 2 in line 5 before WindType and for many more steps between 6 m/s
to 20 m/s, write digit 4 in the same place. All necessary simulations can be accessed in
the SIMULINK model FAST_EMPC_VIBHOR.slx
C.2
Python Code
The python code is to compute the gaussian process regressor. Along with the system
characteristics from above, the reader should have jupyter notebook with the following
libraries:
• numpy
• matplotlib
• sklearn
==PAGE:62==
52
C Simulation Guide
• pandas
• sklearn.gaussian_process
• sklearn.gaussian_process.kernel
• sklearn.preprocessing
• sklearn.model_selection
Files PITCH1.xlsx, Pitch_out.xlsx, LAMBDA1.xlsx, Lambda_out.xlsx, CP1.xlsx
and CP_out.xlsx are the training set.
For test set, Pitch.xlsx and TSR.xlsx are used and the final result is stored in
OUT_CPFINAL.XLSX
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[Aag+20]
Helge Aagaard Madsen et al. Implementation of the blade element momen-
tum model on a polar grid and its aeroelastic load impact. January 2020.
[BEK20]
Rafael Barcena, Ainhoa Etxebarria, and Inigo Kortabarria. LIDAR-Assisted
Wind Turbine Structural Load Reduction by Linear Single Model Predictive
Control. August 2020.
[Boz+14]
T.G Bozkurt et al. Wind speed estimation and parametrization of wake
models for down regulated offshore wind farms within the scope of PossPOW
project. 2014.
[BS98]
S Bhomwik and R Spee. Wind speed estimation based variable speed wind
power generation. 1998.
[Cai+20]
Haoshu Cai et al. Gaussian Process Regression for numerical wind speed
prediction enhancement. February 2020.
[DDJ06]
Fernando D.Bianchi, Hernan De Battista, and Ricardo J. Mantz. Wind
Turbine Control Systems. Springer, 2006. isbn: 9781846284922.
[DKA12]
László Dobos, András Király, and János Abonyi. Economic-Oriented Stochas-
tic Optimization in Advanced Process Control of Chemical Processes. Novem-
ber 2012.
[EDC14]
Matthew Ellisa, Helen Duranda, and Panagiotis D. Christofidesa. A tutorial
review of economic model predictive control methods. March 2014.
[EDD14]
Matthew Ellis, Helen Durand, and Panagiotis D. Christofides. A tutorial
review of economic model predictive control methods. April 2014.
[Edw06]
Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian Processes in Machine Learning. 2006.
[GA13]
M. Guay and V. Adetola. Adaptive economic optimising model predictive
control of uncertain nonlinear systems. July 2013.
[GBB14]
Tobias Gybel Hovgaard, Stephen Boyd, and John Bagterp Jørgensen. Model
Predictive Control for Wind Power Gradients. April 2014.
[Gru+10]
JD Grunnet et al. Aeolus toolbox for dynamics wind farm model, simulation
and control. February 2010.
[Han01]
L. Hansen. Conceptual survey of generators and power electronics for wind
turbines. 2001.
==PAGE:64==
54
Bibliography
[HKZ19]
Lukas Hewing, Juraj Kabzan, and Melanie N. Zeilinger. Cautious Model
Predictive Control using Gaussian Process Regression. December 2019.
[HLM21]
Wai Hou Lio, Ang Li, and Fanzhong Meng. Real-time rotor effective wind
speed estimation using Gaussian process regression and Kalman filtering.
January 2021.
[HLZ18]
Lukas Hewing, Alexander Liniger, and Melanie N. Zeilinger. Cautious NMPC
with Gaussian Process Dynamics for Autonomous Miniature Race Cars.
June 2018.
[Hur21]
Sung-ho Hur. Short-term wind speed prediction using Extended Kalman filter
and machine learning. 2021.
[Jia+19]
X. Jiao et al. Adaptive Continuous Neural Pitch Angle Control for Variable-
Speed Wind Turbines. 2019.
[JMS09]
S. Jonkman J.and Butterfield, W. Musial, and G. Scott. Definition of a 5-
MW Reference Wind Turbine for Offshore System Development. February
2009.
[K P+20]
Atindriyo K. Pamososuryo et al. Convex Economic MPC Interactive Main
Script. 2020.
[K+06]
Johnson K et al. Control of variable speed wind turbines. March 2006.
[KBS11]
Torben Knudsen, Thomas Bak, and Mohsen Soltani. Prediction models for
wind speed at turbine locations in a wind farm. August 2011.
[KI 97]
C. K.I. Williams. Prediction with Gaussian Process from Linear Regression
to Linear Prediction and Beyond. October 1997.
[Kle+16]
E.D. Klenske et al. Gaussian process-based predictive control for periodic
error correction. 2016.
[Koc+04]
J. Kocijan et al. Gaussian process model based predictive control. June 2004.
[Kon+20]
Xiaobing Kong et al. Wind Turbine Control Using Nonlinear Economic
Model Predictive Control over All Operating Regions. January 2020.
[LJS18]
Yanhua Liu, Ron J. Patton, and Shuo Shu. Wind Turbine Load Mitigation
using MPC with Gaussian Wind Speed Prediction. September 2018.
[Mik14]
T Mikkelsen. Lidar-based research and innovation at DTU Wind Energy -
a review. 2014.
[MK08]
Hiroyuki Mori and Eitaro Kurata. Application of Gaussian Process to Wind
Speed Forecasting for Wind Power Generation. 2008.
[Nou+12]
Mohsen Nourbakhsh Soltani et al. Estimation of Rotor Effective Wind Speed:
A Comparison. 2012.
[ODN08]
Peter F. Odgaard, Chris Damgaard, and Rasmus Nielsen. On-Line Estima-
tion of Wind Turbine Power Coeﬀicients Using Unknown Input Observers.
July 2008.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
55
[OMJ12]
Romeo Ortega, Fernando Mancilla-David, and Fernando Jaramillo. A glob-
ally convergent wind speed estimator for wind turbine systems. 2012.
[Son+17a]
Dongran Song et al. Kalman Filter-based Wind Speed Estimation for Wind
Turbine Control. March 2017.
[Son+17b]
Dongran Song et al. Wind estimation with a non-standard extended Kalman
filter and its application on maximum power extraction for variable speed
wind turbines. January 2017.
[VNL15]
T.L. Van, T.H. Nguyen, and D.C. Lee. Advanced Pitch Angle Control Based
on Fuzzy Logic for Variable-Speed Wind Turbine Systems. 2015.
[WYY17]
T. Wakui, M. Yoshimura, and R. Yokoyama. Multiple-feedback control of
power output and platform pitching motion for a floating offshore wind
turbine-generator system. 2017.
[Xia+20]
Kong Xiaobing et al. Wind Turbine Control Using Nonlinear Economic
Model Predictive Control over All Operating Regions. January 2020.
[YÖ09]
A.S. Yilmaz and Z. Özer. Pitch angle control in wind turbines above the
rated wind speed by multi-layer perceptron and radial basis function neural
networks. 2009.
==PAGE:66==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 326
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
