==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Computer Science and Engineering
Master’s Thesis
Mobile-First Cognitive Test Battery
Ossi Kallunki (s200386)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Early screening of cognitive impairments can provide valuable information about
individuals’ mental state. It can, in cases, reveal underlying illnesses, predict fu-
ture complications, and even detect Alzheimer’s Disease and Parkinson’s Disease
years before an oﬀicial diagnosis by a physician.
The Cognition Package was developed to offer researchers and developers a
patient-administered cognitive screening tool. In this thesis, the process of identi-
fying the tests, designing, and implementing the Cognition Package is described
alongside the choices made for the package to fit into the Research Package
domain. The first version of the Cognition Package was released, including 14
validated gold-standard cognitive tests spanning all eight neurocognitive domains
as open-source on ‘pub.dev’ as
https://pub.dev/packages/cognition_package.
The source code for the Cognition Package is available https://github.com/
cph-cachet/cognition_package with documentation and tutorial on how to use
the package and implement new tests at https://carp.cachet.dk/cognition-
package/
The validity of the implemented cognitive tests has been evaluated against the
gold-standard cognitive assessment tool Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)
in a small-scale validation study. The validation study concluded a significant
correlation between the total number of correct responses obtained from the
cognitive tests in the Cognition Package and MoCA assessment (r = .72, p <
0.05).
By implementing these cognitive tests, a contribution has been made to the
field of mobile patient-administered cognitive assessment tools, which is still in its
infancy. The Cognition Package provides researchers with a battery of patient-
administered, in the wild validated cognitive tests. These tests allow researchers
to assess the cognitive performance of their participants out of the clinic in longi-
tudinal studies to see the plasticity of human cognitive performance in everyday
conditions.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
Kongens Lyngby, January 23, 2022
Ossi Kallunki (s200386)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my supervisor Jakob Bardram for guiding me through the
project with regular supervision sessions, always ensuring that I am going down a
relevant path, and providing valuable input throughout the entire process. Also,
a big thank you to Mads V.S. Christensen for his help and expertise in Flutter
programming and, more importantly, in the Research Package. Finally, I would
like to thank everyone at CACHET who helped me test my early designs, code,
and the demo application.
For conducting the validation study, I would like to thank all the participants
who allowed me to test their cognitive performance by taking the MoCA and
trying out my demo application. And finally, I would like to express my gratitude
to my amazing family and friends for their support over the months of working
on this thesis.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
CACHET Copenhagen Center for Health Technology
CARP CACHET Research Platform
CAWS CARP Web Services
MCI
Mild Cognitive Impairment
AD
Alzheimer’s Disease
CANTAB Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery
MoCA Montreal Cognitive Assessment
MMSE Mini Mental State Examination
MOT
Multiple Object Tracking
PSM
Picture Sequence Memory
CNSVS CNS Vital Signs
CANS-MCI Computer-Administered Neuropsychological Screen for Mild
Cognitive Impairment
MTB
Mobile ToolBox
ISLT
International Shopping List Test
MCAT Mobile Cognitive Assessment Tool
NIH
National Institutes of Health
NIHTB National Institutes of Health Toolbox
NIHTB-CB NIHTB-Cognition Battery
CRCI
Cancer-related Cognitive Impairment
==PAGE:10==
viii
Acronyms
ROC
Receiver operating characteristic
VAC
Visual Array Change
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgments
v
Acronyms
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement & Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Goals and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis Objective and Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Related Work
7
2.1
Cognitive Assessments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Computerized Cognitive Assessments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
State-Of-The-Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
System Analysis
17
3.1
Inclusion Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Cognitive Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
CARP Research Package . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Analysis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Design
29
4.1
Cognitive Test Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Software Architecture Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Design Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
5
Implementation
39
5.1
Package Separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Cognitive Test Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Availability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4
Implementation Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Evaluation
53
6.1
Demo App . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.4
Evaluation Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7
Discussion
61
7.1
Goals and Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.2
Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.4
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8
Conclusion
67
Bibliography
69
A
Appendix
77
A.1 Cognitive Test Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.2 Use case scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
A.3 Test Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
A.4 Functional Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
A.5 Demo App configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
A.6 Publishing a Flutter package
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
A.7 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
A.8 Package Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
A.9 Research Package Additions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
A.10 Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
A.11 Data format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
A.12 Data storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
A.13 Test Design Decisions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is a clinical diagnosis representing a medical
doctor’s best professional judgment about a person’s cognitive functions that
reside in an intermediate stage beyond normal aging. MCI can suggest deficits
in cognitive areas or domains but does not meet the criteria for classification as
dementia or Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) [1]. Long-Term studies have shown that
patients diagnosed with MCI may progress to AD at a higher rate than those
without earlier cognitive impairments. AD indicators, such as dementia, are still
underdiagnosed in the primary care setting, and MCI is even more so [2].
Early recognition of cognitive impairments may allow clinicians and patients
to address possible reversible factors and plan for future care decisions [3]. Nowa-
days, psychiatrists administer computerized cognitive test batteries like the
Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB) [4] and the
CogState [5] to assess patients’ cognitive impairment. In these tests, participants
perform specific tasks while the study leader observes and records their inter-
action.
However, these neuropsychological tests are resource-demanding, and
the laboratory setting presents a controlled environment, which is an influential
factor in determining the validity of these cognitive test scores [6].
In addition, previous research suggests that individuals’ cognitive skills vary
within a single day with changes in tiredness, stress, and testing environment.
Thus, frequent assessment of the cognitive functioning within a day is crucial in
achieving reliable results.
As Neurocognitive Assessments have become more commonplace in early de-
tection and diagnosis of cognitive impairments, there is a clear need for more
accurate and less resource-intensive assessment tools. Currently, neuropsycholog-
ical test batteries are administered (usually on pen and paper) to patients during
clinical visits by psychiatrists. Despite their reasonable accuracy in identifying
cognitive impairments, the resources this requires, including trained clinical staff
and quiet rooms to administer tests are slowing down screening efforts as the
number of patients exceeds the available resources.
This high strain on resources is an influential factor in why the State-of-the-art
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
in cognitive assessment is moving towards patient-administered cognitive assess-
ment tools that can be done outside the clinics to assess cognitive functioning
more frequently and in individuals’ free-living conditions.[7]
Current computerized cognitive assessment tools are being developed by con-
verting the known and validated cognitive testing batteries directly from pen-
and-paper to the interactive screens of tablets [8, 9, 10]. However, converting the
tests to a digital format does not solve the administration problem. Many new
tools still require a technician present to administer the assessment.
Previous work suggests that introducing these new computerized assessment
tools yield cognitive test scores that correlate significantly with the baseline test
scores from the pen-and-paper test batteries [9].
However, a limitation reported in the papers reviewed is that the current cog-
nitive tests are explicitly developed to test the feasibility of taking the cognitive
assessments on interactive screens, with minimal research exploring how these
assessments fair outside the clinic when patient-administered.
Developing explicitly remote patient-administered cognitive test batteries could
provide insight into the plasticity of cognitive performance in daily life. In ad-
dition, it could provide more granular and more detailed data that would allow
for even earlier detection of developing MCI in individuals not currently being
tested by the traditional testing efforts.
1.2
Problem statement & Research Questions
This thesis focuses on answering the following Research Questions:
• RQ1: What is the current state-of-the-art in patient-administered cogni-
tive assessment tools?
• RQ2: What is the design of a patient-administered cognitive test battery
explicitly built for smartphone assessment in the wild?
• RQ3: Does a mobile cognitive test battery yield scores that correlate with
the gold-standard validated cognitive test batteries?
1.3
Goals and Methods
The research goals closely match the research questions and explain how the
different sub-questions are answered and which methods were used.
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Goals and Methods
3
1.3.1
Goals
Goal 1: Analysis of state-of-the-art The state-of-the-art analysis was con-
ducted using a literature review of the current state-of-the-art computerized cog-
nitive assessment tools. Looking specifically at the administration method they
use, on which platforms the tools are available, their features, and their costs. The
analysis resulted in a feature matrix showing the analyzed cognitive assessment
tools on the y-axis with all the features, pros, and cons on the x-axis.
Goal 2: Design and implement the mobile cognitive tests Through the
literature review, a set of features and limitations in the current state-of-the-art
were found. These findings were then considered when translating and designing
the validated cognitive tests to the smartphone screen. The design phase was
carried out through a user-centered design process. The designed tests were then
implemented in Flutter using the Dart programming language.
Goal 3: Design and release Flutter software package The Cognition
Package was designed and implemented such that the included cognitive tests are
easy for researchers and developers to use and extend. In addition, the software
package has proper documentation, examples, and unit tests and is available at
https://pub.dev/packages/cognition_package.
Goal 4: Develop a demo mobile application A Flutter demo application
was developed in parallel with the cognitive test battery to validate and test the
cognitive tests implemented.
Goal 5: Conduct a validation study of the cognitive tests imple-
mented A small-scale validation study of 20 participants was done to test and
validate the Cognition Package.
First, the participants used the demo appli-
cation to complete the cognitive assessment and get a computed score. Then
participants completed a gold-standard pen and paper cognitive assessment tool.
Finally, the scores of the two tests were analyzed to validate the cognitive tests
implemented in the Cognition Package.
1.3.2
Methods
The design of the cognitive tests was done through a user-centered design process.
User-centered design is a term that describes a practice for developers who care
about the user of their digital tool. The process enhances user satisfaction with a
product by improving usability and accessibility. Each cognitive test was designed
iteratively through the five step process, which moves through research, concept,
design, development, and testing [11].
The research phase consisted of the analysis done in chapter 3 on each of the
conventional validated cognitive tests, looking into the elements needed for the
test to run.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
The concept phase included preliminary ideas and brainstorming on what
changes are necessary to translate the test from either pen-and-paper or a much
larger computer screen to smaller smartphone screens.
The design phase was done in Figma, an interface design tool that allows
the rapid iterative design of user interfaces. First, a low-fidelity prototype was
created with the screens needed for each test to run. These low-fidelity prototypes
were then shown and brainstormed around with potential users.
The development phase consisted of implementing a high-fidelity prototype
of each test in Flutter. The test phase then allowed real users to test the high
fidelity prototypes on an iPhone Xs, emphasizing usability problem discovery and
resolution. The usability testing was done as a modified Think-Aloud [12] test.
Users were asked to complete the cognitive assessment set up in the high fidelity
prototype while the developer was present. Users were not constantly reminded to
talk while completing the tasks but were encouraged to express verbally whenever
they encountered diﬀiculties accomplishing the current task. Notes were taken
whenever this happened and whenever the developer observed the user faltering
in the use of the application.
After each test, the notes were then used to develop problem reports which
were used to return to the development phase and fix the problems in the high
fidelity prototype application to improve the usability of the Cognition package.
An example of how the iterative process from the user-centered design influ-
enced the design of the cognitive test directly can be seen in the Picture Sequence
Memory (PSM) test design in Appendix A.1. The first iteration grouped the im-
ages in a vertical list on the screen. However, after initial user testing, an issue
was found when the number of images was above four. After the first four, any
images were obscured from the screen, and scrolling was needed to access them.
This meant that some participants did not notice the images. A second iteration
was designed, where the images were placed in a grid on the screen. The order
of images was still evident, but the size of images was significantly smaller. How-
ever no issues were found in further testing that the images were not instantly
recognizable. Both versions of the picture sequence memory test can be seen in
fig 1.1 below:
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Thesis Objective and Outline
5
Figure 1.1: The two iterations of the design of the PSM test.
The implementation of the tests in Flutter was done through user testing and
iterative and incremental development. Throughout the development and testing
phase of the user-centered design process, the low-fidelity prototypes of each test
were developed into high-fidelity prototypes in Flutter.
The iterative process
included testing the cognitive tests implemented on real users with exit-interviews
asking users if they found any ambiguity, confusion, or had any improvements or
potential features in mind.
1.4
Thesis Objective and Outline
This thesis aimed to provide researchers the tools to quickly and eﬀiciently imple-
ment mobile study applications involving validated cognitive tests for their study
participants that can be run remotely and self-administered. The research ques-
tions have many aspects. Such as the research into which cognitive tests best
lend themselves for being run remotely and on mobile devices with relatively
small screens compared to those carried out with in-clinic tablets or computers.
The design challenges of how the gold-standard validated tests can be converted
and adapted for mobile use. And the technical challenges of implementing the
tests to work on mobile screens while being easy to extend by developers in the
future were assessed in this thesis.
From a software development perspective, building a mobile application for
remote patient-administered cognitive tests proved to be challenging, not because
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
the implementation of the application itself was complex, but rather because the
research into the topic of cognitive testing on mobile devices is in its infancy.
The development and validation of cognitive test batteries for mobile devices is a
relatively new field of research. Therefore a straightforward way to go about the
problem of how to convert validated tests from pen-and-paper in-clinic adminis-
tration to remote patient-administration has yet to be found.
Therefore, choosing the proper tests to implement and taking advantage of
smartphones while still having the test scores correlate to the results obtained
in-clinic when using validated assessments have a massive impact on how effective
the final product can be. Thus, this thesis focuses on the steps necessary to design
and build a remote patient-administered cognitive test battery successfully.
The thesis is structured in 7 chapters, where chapter 2 is a comparative anal-
ysis of the related work in mobile cognitive testing tools.
Chapter 3 presents the selection and analysis of the original validated cognitive
tests to find the Cognition Package’s requirements and use cases.
And then
analyzes the platform and frameworks needed to fulfill the requirements found.
Chapter 4 describes the design process of choosing and adapting the validated
tests to implement into the test battery and how they will run on the interactive
screen of smartphones.
Chapter 5 describes the implementation of the chosen tests on the mobile
platform and the final solution.
The solution was then evaluated in chapter 6, with the help of a study against
the gold-standard conventional cognitive tests on which the Cognition Package
is based.
Chapter 7 discusses the evaluation results and compares the final solution to
the requirements and related work described earlier and ends with the challenges
faced and future ideas and limitations of the final solution.
Finally, chapter 8 will conclude this thesis’s most important findings and
results.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
This chapter describes the related work regarding today’s computerized and mo-
bile cognitive assessment tools.
First, the historical background on cognitive
assessments and their importance is presented. This is followed by an in-depth
analysis of the current state-of-the-art solutions, comparing the different assess-
ment tools.
Lastly, a brief introduction to how this thesis’s mobile cognitive
test battery will potentially improve the landscape. Common for all solutions
described in this chapter is their purpose of computerizing previously validated
gold-standard in-clinic pen-and-paper cognitive assessment tools.
2.1
Cognitive Assessments
Psychology, cognitive neuroscience, and general medicine have been interested
in cognitive assessment for more than 150 years. The earliest cognitive ’assess-
ments’ were based on observation and subjective reports of the behavioral changes
in patients with a brain injury. In the early 1900s, there had been attempts to
standardize cognitive assessments, for example, by James Cattell [13] and Alfred
Binet [14]. However, these were not particularly prevalent, often based on only
a subset of cognitive functioning. It was not until the 1950s-70s that the field of
cognitive assessment exploded, and dozens of test batteries were developed and
made widely available [15]. The standardization of cognitive assessment allowed
clinicians to share and discuss results of these tests to find correlations between
cognitive test scores in the aging population.
Cognitive performance is generally divided into the eight domains of function-
ing. These domains range from more basic sensory and perceptual processes to
executive functioning and cognitive control elements. These domains are not inde-
pendent of each other, and executive functioning controls the more fundamental
processes.
Cognitive Assessment tools are typically targeted at each of these subdomains,
and a combination of cognitive tests can reveal impairments in performance con-
sistent with a variety of different neurological conditions [16].
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Related Work
In the 1980s, a shift occurred, as computers became more accessible and the
existing pen-and-paper cognitive assessments began to be computerized. With
the turn of the century and the internet allowed internet-based testing to be a
reality, resulting in cognitive assessments becoming even more standardized as
more reliable and eﬀicient tests could be administered and distributed between
clinicians worldwide.
2.2
Computerized Cognitive Assessments
The digitization of cognitive assessments has commonly fallen into one of two
categories: First, the translation of existing validated tests to the computerized
format. Second, the development of cognitive tests explicitly designed to be ad-
ministered on computers. Between these two categories lie the assessment tools
that have adapted an existing validated pen-and-paper test in a way that takes
advantage of computerized administration [17].
Among the advantages that have been cited, computerized tests can cover a
broader range of abilities and minimize subjective scoring as tests are given in a
standardized format with precisely recorded accuracy and speed of response at a
level of sensitivity not previously possible.
Moreover, compared to traditional cognitive assessment tools, computerized
assessments might also represent potential cost savings concerning materials and
supplies and the time required from test administrators. In addition, the comput-
erized tools might the allow administration to be completely patient-administered,
drastically reducing the expensive and scarce time of clinicians [17].
2.3
State-Of-The-Art
2.3.1
CANTAB
The CANTAB is a computerized cognitive test battery initially developed to diag-
nose dementia in elderly individuals [18]. The current version is a Windows-based
program that operates on a PC platform and utilizes touch screen technology.
The battery consists of 13 sub-tests that include measures of motor skill, visual
attention, and working memory [19]. The validity of the CANTAB for assessing
brain-behavior relations in adults has been supported by numerous studies of
patients with brain lesions, degenerative disorders, and psychiatric illness [20].
These findings indicate that the CANTAB is sensitive to brain dysfunction in
==PAGE:21==
2.3 State-Of-The-Art
9
adults and that discrimination among subtypes of brain disorder is possible us-
ing profile interpretation. For example, patients with frontal versus temporal
lobe pathology differs in their performance on CANTAB’s working and recogni-
tion memory measures, respectively [21].
Some of the limitations of the CANTAB are pragmatic, while others are more
theoretical. First, the CANTAB is relatively expensive to purchase(at the cost of
roughly US $11,000) [19], and a single purchase allows the user to run the battery
on one computer. Second, the source code is not readily available, so developers
cannot modify the battery with their own stimuli. Third, the CANTAB is de-
signed to run on particular versions of the Windows operating system, which is
upgraded every several years. Thus, implementing the battery in clinical settings
will require practitioners to periodically upgrade their software to stay ahead of
technological and scientific advances. As a result, computer maintenance and
technical expertise would become an area of new responsibility.
The CANTAB can not serve as a replacement for a clinician [19]. A psy-
chometrist must individually supervise each testing session and must pace each
subtest.
This feature is not necessarily a limitation.
It may be attractive to
clinicians who wish to observe step-by-step aspects of performance or who wish
to maintain control over the assessment process.
Some populations may also have issues in how well the computerized adminis-
tration format captures ability (or levels of disability). These issues are distinct
depending on whether existing tests are modified for automated administration
or whether new measures are developed. As computerized test administration
is implemented in clinical settings using existing tests, equivalence between the
computerized and traditional versions of the tests must be demonstrated.
2.3.2
MicroCog
The MicroCog Assessment of Cognitive Functioning is a commercially developed,
computer-administered, self-scoring test of cognitive functions primarily intended
to screen for cognitive impairment. It is one of the first commercially marketed,
computer-administered test batteries to measure multiple cognitive functions [22].
Users can administer either a standard or short form of it to each client.
The standard administration consists of 18 subtests and typically requires 50–60
minutes. The short form uses only 12 subtests and takes about half an hour. The
standard and short forms of MicroCog assess five domains of cognitive functioning:
attention, memory, reasoning, spatial ability, and reaction time [22].
MicroCog can only be administered and scored through the PsyTest: Assess-
ment Management System, sold by the Psychological Corporation. The start-up
cost for MicroCog, PsyTest, and ten test credits is $170.00. Standard form cred-
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Related Work
its cost $7.67–11.50 depending on whether they are purchased in 10, 25, or 100
lots [22].
The standardization sample is comprised of 810 adults between 18 and 89
years old, which are recruited from five large metropolitan areas. Overall, Mi-
croCog was normed better than most neuropsychological tests when it was intro-
duced in 1993 and, despite minor criticisms, still compares favorably with current
neuropsychological test batteries [22].
2.3.3
CNS Vital Signs
CNS Vital Signs (CNSVS) is a computerized cognitive assessment tool developed
as a quick screening instrument for clinicians. It includes seven individual tests:
the Stroop Test, verbal and visual memory, symbol digit coding, finger tapping, a
test of shifting attention, and a continuous performance test. As CNSVS is a dig-
ital test battery of existing validated cognitive tests, its psychometric properties
resemble the original tests on which it is based [23].
1069 subjects aged 7–90 participated in establishing the normative database
for the CNSVS. Researchers evaluated Test-retest reliability in 99 subjects who
took the battery on two separate occasions.
The results of the CNSVS were
comparable to those achieved by the equivalent conventional tests[23].
The CNSVS is administered on a PC running Windows, and an automatic
report is generated by the tool as soon as the assessment is completed.
The
CNSVS is $35 US dollars per test session.
With volume purchases receiving
substantial discounts [24]. The time it takes to do the CNSVS assessment may
vary based on the number of subtests selected, but on average, it takes about
half an hour to complete [25].
What computerized tests like CNSVS afford clinicians is an intermediate tool
that is more precise than the patients’ subjective complaints but less definitive
than a diagnostic cognitive test battery. As the CNSVS is automated, it is more
well-suited for frequent testing than the conventional pen-and-paper assessment
tools. This makes it ideal for longitudinal studies of patients recovering from a
stroke or brain injury [23].
2.3.4
CANS-MCI
The Computer-Administered Neuropsychological Screen for Mild Cognitive Im-
pairment (CANS-MCI) is a computerized cognitive screening tool that includes
automated administration and scoring and immediate analysis of test results
after completion.
The CANS-MCI was designed to be sensitive to the subtle
changes between MCI and AD to differentiate mildly impaired individuals from
normal controls. The CANS-MCI assesses multiple cognitive domains based on a
==PAGE:23==
2.3 State-Of-The-Art
11
three-factor model of cognition (memory, language/spatial fluency, and executive
function/cognitive control) [26].
The CANS-MCI test sessions are supposed to last for approximately half an
hour in healthy individuals; longer sessions may be required in the presence of
more severe cognitive impairment.
The CANS-MCI test addresses three ma-
jor cognitive domains: executive function, language fluency, and memory. The
executive function part assesses mental control and spatial ability using eight
self-administered tests.
The CANS-MCI is a Windows application installed on the medical clinic
computers with internal or connected touch-enabled monitors. The CANS-MCI
only requires response through finger touch and can be run without a trained
test administrator [27].
Researchers determined the CANS-MCI’s validity in a study where the CANS-MCI
was administered to 97 older adults with moderate to high education alongside
the conventional neuropsychological test like the MoCA. They found significant
correlations between the CANS-MCI subtests and other neuropsychological tests,
namely Digit Symbol, RAVLT (learning curve and the last delayed recall), se-
mantic verbal fluency as well as the MoCA [26].
2.3.5
MMSE
The Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) was developed in 1975 and has
since become a widely used and accepted screening method for monitoring the
progression of cognitive disorders[28].
It is a 30-point survey used in clinical
settings to assess cognitive impairment [29]. Health professionals commonly use
it to screen for dementia and estimate the severity and progression of cognitive
impairment following individuals over time.
Administration of the test takes between five and ten minutes, and it examines
cognitive functions including attention, calculation, orientation, recall, language,
and the ability to follow simple commands [28].
Despite its wide use and acceptance, the MMSE has low sensitivity for in-
dividuals with MCI, with about 80% of the latter scoring above 26 points on
the MMSE. Several studies have shown that a large proportion of patients with
dementia, including those in the early stages of AD, often score above-recognized
cut-off points on the MMSE (that is, a score of more than 24 points). As a result,
clinicians will often obtain more detailed neuropsychiatric testing if available or
repeat the MMSE at a later date [30].
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Related Work
2.3.6
MoCA
The MoCA was developed as a quick screening tool for MCI and mild AD to
address limitations of the then gold-standard cognitive test, the MMSE. The
MoCA is divided into seven subscores: visuospatial/executive (5 points); naming
(3 points); memory (5 points for delayed recall); attention (6 points); language
(3 points); abstraction (2 points); and orientation (6 points).
The MoCA is a 10-minute, 30-point cognitive screening test designed to assist
clinicians in detecting MCI in patients who scored between 24 and 30 points on
the MMSE test. The suggested cut-off point on the MoCA is 26. In addition, the
MoCA emphasizes tasks of frontal executive functioning and attention more than
the MMSE, which may make it more sensitive in detecting non-AD dementia[30].
A MoCA application was developed in 2017 and replicated the paper version.
It includes the same tests as the original and takes about 10 minutes. The cost
for the MoCA application is 10 USD per month per rater [31].
With a cut-off score set at 26, the MMSE had a sensitivity of 17% in detecting
participants with MCI, whereas the MoCA had 83%. Likewise, the MMSE had a
sensitivity of 25% to detect participants with dementia, while the MoCA detected
94%. However, the specificity of the MMSE was 100%, while it was at only 50%
for the MoCA [30].
2.3.7
CogState Brief Battery
The CogState Brief Battery comprises a subset of tasks from the general CogState
Battery.
The larger battery includes measures of visuomotor function, psy-
chomotor/processing speed, visual attention/vigilance, attention/working mem-
ory, verbal learning and memory, executive function (spatial problem-solving,
set-shifting), and social cognition [32]. All tasks in the CogState Battery have
been specifically developed to assist with decisions about the presence or absence
of cognitive change.
Researchers pre-selected the set of tasks included in the
brief battery. Together, they require about 8–10 minutes for administration, use
simple stimuli, and need simple decisions in response to simple rules [33].
The CogState Brief Battery measures four of the eight cognitive domains:
processing speed, attention, visual learning, and working memory. Researchers
who only wish to measure a subset of these domains can pick and choose the
tests from the test battery that best suit their research goals.
Each test has
been used previously in clinical trials and maintains excellent reliability across
repeated testing [32].
The CogState Brief Battery has been used broadly as a fast and reliable
screening tool in various studies, including AD, depression, schizophrenia, AIDS,
==PAGE:25==
2.3 State-Of-The-Art
13
dementia, and as an assessment of cognitive decline following a mild brain injury
or suspected concussion [32].
2.3.7.1
CogState Lila
CogState is currently translating a well-established cognitive memory test called
the International Shopping List Test (ISLT) for smartphone administration [34].
The ISLT is a validated memory test that uses a real-world scenario of remem-
bering a grocery list. The test has been designed for repeat testing to identify
changes in memory over time [35].
The technology adaptation will be purpose-designed to enable independent
assessment of memory by individuals out of the clinic.
Improved access to a
sensitive measure of memory is expected to help in the identification of cognitive
impairment earlier, thereby supporting earlier diagnosis and access to potential
interventions before it develops further [34].
There is no set release date for the LILA app, and no validation results have
been shown as of this date (January 2022).
2.3.8
NIHTB-CB
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) for the Assessment of Neurological Be-
havior and Function Cognition is designed to be comprised of sensitive measures
to evaluate cognitive, social, emotional, and motor functioning across the lifes-
pan. In particular, the NIHTB-Cognition Battery (NIHTB-CB) was designed to
assess processing speed, executive function, episodic memory, working memory,
and language in less than 30 minutes [36].
The NIHTB-CB measures were translated to an iPad app-administered for-
mat, making their use more convenient for clinical and research settings. The
NIH Toolbox application is available through the application store and can be
downloaded for free. However, to use the instruments, users will be asked to
purchase a 12-month auto-renewing subscription for $499.99 + tax (USD) [37].
The National Institutes of Health Toolbox (NIHTB) application provides ac-
cess to validated, reliable tools for assessing cognitive function. It is especially
applicable for assessing cognitive functioning in longitudinal studies and preven-
tion or intervention trials. The NIHTB measures have been normed and validated
across the lifespan in participants ages 3-85 [38].
2.3.9
MTB
The Mobile ToolBox (MTB) is a subset of cognitive tests adapted to smartphones
from the NIHTB-CB. The MTB is still under development and has not been
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Related Work
validated yet but it will include the same tests as the NIHTB-CB together with
many more gold-standard validated cognitive assessment tests adapted for the
small interactive screens of Smartphones [39].
Sage Bionetworks develops and validates the Mobile Toolbox collection of cog-
nitive assessments in collaboration with Northwestern University. The MTB is
a library of cognitive assessments for at-home smartphone administration. The
MTB offers app-based validated cognitive tests, supplemental scales, and a com-
prehensive research platform [39].
When released the MTB library will include cognitive assessments for remote
smartphone administration for adults aged 20 to 85. The assessments will be
open source and customizable [39].
The MTB will include 19 measures based on validated cognitive tests to assess
working memory, paired associative learning, psychomotor function, executive
function, attention, processing speed, and visual learning.
These app-based cognitive assessment tools will help differentiate normal from
abnormal cognitive change, furthering our understanding of pathological cogni-
tive decline and facilitating the development of effective prevention and treatment
strategies [39].
Validation testing in healthy and clinical samples, including persons at risk for
MCI or AD, cognitively impaired, and those with Parkinson’s disease is planned
for 2021, with the generation of population norms in 2022 and public dissemina-
tion in 2023, according to their website [39].
2.4
Summary
The current state-of-the-art in computerized cognitive assessment tools is summa-
rized in table 2.1 below, describing the features of each assessment tool (platform,
administration method, cognitive domains assessed, time to complete, most sig-
nificant sample the tool is validated on, price of the software and its publication
date).
==PAGE:27==
Cognitive
Assessment Tool
Platform
Administration
Cognitive Domains
Time to
Complete
Largest
sample
Price
Publication
date
CANTAB
PC
Technician
administered
Motor skill, Visual attention,
and Working memory
30-90 minutes
771
$11,000 for the tool
2003
MicroCog
PC
Self
administered
Attention, Memory, Reasoning,
Spatial ability, and Reaction time
30-90 minutes
810
$170 for tools
and 10 tests
2004
CNS
Vital Signs
PC
Self
administered
Memory, Spychomotor speed,
Reaction time, Attention,
Cognitive flexibility,
Processing speed,
Executive function
30 minutes
1069
$35 per test
2006
CANS-MCI
Tablet
Self
administered
Executive function,
Visuospatial ability,
Memory, Language,
Reaction time
30 minutes
310
Quota on
request
2005
MOCA
Tablet
Technician
administered
Visuospatial, Executive function,
Language Memory, Attention,
Orientation
10 minutes
277
$10 per
participant
2017
CogState
Tablet
Self
administered
Memory, Paired associative learning,
Psychomotor function,
Executive function, Attention,
Processing speed, Visual learning
10-15 minutes
113
Quota on
request
2006
NIHTB-CB
Tablet
Technician
administered
Executive function,
Cognitive flexibility,
Working memory
<5 minutes
268
499.99$
annual
subscription
2014
Mobile
Toolbox
Phone
Self
administered
Memory, Paired associative learning,
Psychomotor function,
Executive function, Attention,
Processing speed, Visual learning
Not announced
0
Not announced
Coming
2023
Cogstate
Lila
Phone
Self
administered
Working memory
5-10 minutes
0
Not announced
Not
announced
*Cognition
Package
Phone
Self
administered
Memory, Paired associative learning,
Psychomotor function, Attention,
Executive function,
Processing speed, Visual learning
5-10 minutes
0
Free &
open-source
January
2022
Table 2.1: *Cognition Package developed in this thesis.
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Related Work
Based on the review of the current state-of-the-art solutions to the problem of
assessing cognitive function reliably and scalably in an aging population, several
characteristics were identified:
• Cognitive assessment using standardized tests is not a new concept and has
been extensively researched and validated.
• Most computerized cognitive tests developed are translated directly from
the gold-standard pen-and-paper assessment tools.
• The current state-of-the-art computerized cognitive assessment tools are
made for tablets and then administered by a clinician or self-administered
in the clinic.
• The area of remote patient-administered cognitive assessment tools devel-
oped for mobile smartphones is still in its infancy and is currently being
developed and validated.
This project’s remote patient-administered cognitive test battery (Cognition
Package) will take these findings into account by building the cognitive test bat-
tery to work on participants’ smartphones and develop the cognitive tests to be
patient-administered, easy to understand, quick to execute, and repeatable in the
wild.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
System Analysis
This chapter contains a complete analysis of the cognitive tests included in the
Cognition Package and the CACHET Research Platform (CARP) Research Pack-
age. First, a set of conventional validated cognitive tests was selected to be im-
plemented as part of the cognitive test battery in the Cognition Package. An in-
depth analysis of the conventional validated cognitive tests was then done. Then,
the relevant technologies and software domain where the Cognition Package will
be implemented is presented, and finally, the requirements for the Cognition
Package are established.
3.1
Inclusion Criteria
This thesis is carried out in collaboration with Copenhagen Center for Health
Technology (CACHET), Who has developed CARP, a set of open-source software
components and frameworks that enable the design and development of mobile
health (mHealth) applications [40].
The CARP Research Package is a Flutter package for building research study
applications on Android and iOS. The package contains flutter components for
obtaining informed consent from participants, including support for a digital
signature. As well as the features to create surveys and questionnaires with a
wide range of answer formats (e.g., liker scale, date pickers, image pickers) [40].
In 2019 an expansion featuring a range of cognitive tests was added to the
Research Package by Mads V. S. Christensen and Simon Strandly Brandt as part
of their Bachelors Thesis [41]. In total, eight cognitive tests were translated from
gold-standard pen-and-paper-based cognitive assessment tools and implemented
as Research Package steps in Flutter. Each test was adapted from the most vali-
dated cognitive assessment tools and has been proven to assess specific cognitive
domains. We can see what domains are assessed in the original expansion by
collecting them in the table below 3.1.
==PAGE:30==
18
3 System Analysis
Cognitive domain
Assessment
Sensation
Perception
Paired Associative Learning,
Stroop Effect,
Motor skills and construction
Finger Tapping,
Corsi Block Tapping
Attention and concentration
Letter A Tapping,
Memory
Executive functioning
Trail Making
Processing speed
Rapid Visual Information Processing,
Reaction Time
Language and verbal skills
Table 3.1: Domains of cognitive functioning, with accompanying cognitive as-
sessments.
The table above shows how most cognitive domains are accounted for, and
some are well-represented and assessed by multiple cognitive tests implemented.
In contrast, some others are left out altogether. Mainly sensation, memory, lan-
guage, and verbal skills are completely unassessable with the expansion made in
2019.
Based on this, the inclusion criteria for cognitive assessments to adapt for the
Cognition Package is to assess the last few cognitive domains left out and add
some more assessments to some of the less assessed domains like memory, sensa-
tion, language and verbal skills.
Another criteria for the included tests is to keep adapting gold-standard cog-
nitive assessments validated to measure the cognitive domains they are designed
to assess. This way, the Cognition Package will only consist of validated cognitive
tests whose scores can be compared and correlated to their validated counterparts.
The last criteria for the cognitive tests in the Cognition Package is that the
tests need to be patient-administered, easy to understand, fast to complete, and
repeatable.
As we saw earlier in the related work section in table 2.1, all current state-
of-the-art cognitive assessment tools made specifically for smartphones are self-
administered and easy to complete anywhere in under 10 minutes. The Cognition
Package will follow this trend as it allows for more frequent cognitive testing out
of the clinic to get a more complete picture of the decline in cognitive performance
with age. In addition, the limited number of tests that can be implemented and
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Inclusion Criteria
19
included in the Cognition Package requires each of the individual tests to be
repeatable with pseudo-random stimuli to minimize the learning factor, allowing
the same type of test to run multiple times.
The inspiration for the test selection was found in the MoCA test, a screening
tool for MCI. Instead of testing a single area exhaustively, it contains a few small
tests for each domain and indicates cognitive impairment based on more general
information. The implemented cognitive tests would never substitute medical
assessment tests for affected cognition, and the selection was chosen to mimic a
screening tool rather than a diagnostics tool. Based on this, the tests that were
selected for the Cognition Package were:
Multiple objects tracking: A continuous monitoring visual tracking test where
participants are asked to track specific moving objects (while ignoring distract-
ing objects). The Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) measures both visuomotor
coordination and attention in participants and was chosen as it naturally leans
towards computerized testing with its pseudo-random moving objects.
Visual Array Change: A visual working memory test that asks partici-
pants to remember colors of distinct unique shapes and to report any changes
after a delay period.
The Visual Array Change (VAC) task was selected for
measuring visual perception, feature binding, and working memory, making it a
highly encompassing test that is easy to understand and quick to run.
Flanker: An attention and inhibitory control test which asks participants
to indicate the direction of a central stimulus while inhibiting attention to the
surrounding stimuli. The Flanker test was chosen for the Cognition Package as
it is one of the original gold-standard attention and inhibitory control tests and
uses reaction time to measure the score. This makes it perfect for a computerized
cognitive test as the recording of reaction time can be programmed into the test
and therefore be recorded accurately down to milliseconds.
Picture Sequence Memory (PSM): An episodic memory test where par-
ticipants are presented with a sequence of images, and then after a delay, the
participants are asked to recall and recreate the picture sequence in the same
order. The PSM was selected as it has proven good test-retest reliability, and
performance on the PSM is strongly related to well-established gold-standard
measures of episodic memory [42].
Verbal Recognition Memory: A test that assesses verbal memory, new
learning, and language by presenting participants with a list of words and then
asking them to repeat it immediately. It assesses the ability to store and subse-
quently retrieve verbal information. The Verbal Recognition Memory test was
chosen because it assesses multiple facets of cognitive language skills and enables
using the Delayed Recall test in assessments.
Delayed Recall: A test of working memory which asks participants to re-
==PAGE:32==
20
3 System Analysis
call the list of words previously presented in the Verbal Recognition Memory
test. While the Verbal Recognition Memory test measures the ability to encode
and subsequently retrieve verbal information, Delayed Recall taps more into fron-
totemporal networks and assesses hippocampal areas [43].
3.2
Cognitive Tests
3.2.1
Picture Sequence Memory (PSM)
Episodic memory is the cognitive domain that involves acquiring, storing, and
recalling new information [42]. Episodic memory problems are the most common
and sensitive indicators of injury or disease of the brain in general. The PSM
involves presenting a sequence of pictures of objects and activities on a computer
screen while being verbally described. The participant must remember and then
reproduce this sequence over three learning trials. An example of a PSM sequence
can be seen in Fig 3.1 below.
Figure 3.1: Four-step practice sequence in the conventional PSM test.
The original PSM test is run on a computer touch screen or tablet and in-
volves showing each image in the center of the screen one at a time before moving
into their ordered slot outside the center. As each picture appears, a recording
briefly describes its content. Once described, the image reduces in size and is
moved to its fixed position in the sequence, making way for the following picture.
This continues until all images in the sequence have been displayed and placed
in their positions. Once the images sequence has been displayed, the images are
placed in a stack at the center. The subject’s task is to move each picture from
the center to its original location to replicate the shown sequence [42].
Task diﬀiculty is determined by an appropriate sequence length (number of items
within a sequence) for the various age groups to exceed immediate working mem-
ory span and not overwhelm the youngest and oldest participants. For ages 3–4
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Cognitive Tests
21
years: 6 images; 5–7 years: 9 images; 8 years: 12 images; 9–60 years: 15 images,
and 61–85 years: 9 images are shown. Performance is then measured by the num-
ber of correct adjacent pairs reproduced, not by its time to complete the task [44].
In their validation study, Sureyya S. Dikmen et al. found that the results in-
dicate good test-retest reliability and construct validity. Performance is strongly
related to well-established gold-standard measures of episodic memory. It shows
an apparent decline with aging in parallel with a gold-standard summary measure
and relates to several other demographic factors and self-reported general health
status [42].
3.2.2
Flanker
The Eriksen Flanker Paradigm measures the ability to retain attention while
ignoring conflicting information in the stimuli.
The subject must focus on a
single target while ignoring the adjacent objects in the stimuli set. The Eriksen
Flanker paradigm is one of three validated and popular assessments used to study
the effects of conflicting stimulus information together with the Stroop and Simon
paradigm assessments [45].
The Flanker measures executive attention and inhibitory control, encom-
passing endogenous attentional processes under cognitive control.
Dual-task
paradigms like Flanker have shown impairments in asymptomatic carriers of fa-
milial AD and individuals with Cancer-related Cognitive Impairment (CRCI).
The Flanker asks participants to indicate the left-right orientation of a centrally
presented stimulus while inhibiting attention to potentially incongruent stimuli
that surround it.
The computerized Flanker test is done by showing participants a row of arrows
on-screen pointing in different directions [46], where participants are supposed to
identify the middle arrow in the row and indicate which direction it is pointing,
on the arrow keys on the keyboard of the computer.
Figure 3.2: The three flanker compatibility conditions (congruent, neutral, in-
congruent)[46].
==PAGE:34==
22
3 System Analysis
The measure from the flanker task is the difference in reaction time between
congruent and incongruent trials, referred to as flanker interference [45].
For
example, suppose the mean time to correctly identify the incongruent trials’ di-
rection is significantly higher (double) than the congruent trials. Then the task
rewards zero points, but if the times are closer than the chosen threshold, a score
of one is given.
3.2.3
Visual Array Change (VAC)
The change-detection paradigm was introduced by Phillips [47] and more recently
popularized by Luck and Vogel [48], is often used as a gold-standard tool for assess-
ing working memory. In the VAC test, participants are presented with an array
of objects. Then, after a short retention period, participants are presented with
another array of objects. Then, participants are instructed to indicate whether
the displayed array matches the previously-viewed array or whether any of the
objects have changed [49].
The task measures intra-item feature binding, where participants determine if
the stimuli changes across two sequential presentations. Intra-item feature bind-
ing is a fundamental process within human memory that associates the relevant
features of an event or object together, which is impaired with early stages of
AD.
Figure 3.3: The conventional change-detection paradigm.
The participant’s
task is to indicate whether an object has changed or not during
the retention period [50]..
Evidence that an impairment in the relational binding in working memory
when the hippocampal system is compromised suggests that the long-term mem-
ory deficit observed in amnesic patients may be related to an impairment in
the short-term relational binding. These findings can inform clinicians and help
with the early detection of AD as patients demonstrate impaired performance in
relational binding early in the disease. [51]
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Cognitive Tests
23
The task is scored based on the participant’s accuracy in identifying a change
in the shapes. Each correct identified change during the wait time is rewarded
with a score of 1, meaning a perfect score on the VAC test is based on the number
of trials run.
3.2.4
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT)
A continuous monitoring visual tracking task where participants track specific
moving objects (ignoring distracting objects) with their eyes and report the lo-
cation after all objects have stopped moving. The MOT measures visuomotor
coordination and attention in participants.
Pylyshyn and Storm proposed that tracking is accomplished via a limited number
of visual indexes that are preattentive. Visual indexes that individuate objects
with visual mechanisms and track the locations of objects without attention [52].
These indexes act like addresses or pointers, similar to a demonstrative reference
in a language like ”this” or ”that.” They give a reliable reference for the object
yet do not include its semantic category or visual properties beyond location [53].
The most validated version of the multiple-object tracking task is run as a Dot
Motion test, where several dots move about a box in a pseudo-random manner,
constrained such that dots do not move out of the box see Fig3.4.
Figure 3.4: Depiction of visual displays used in MOT [54].
At the beginning of each trial, eight static red dots appear on the screen. Next,
four dots are cued with green rings to indicate them as targets. Cues disappear,
and all the dots start moving, initiating the tracking period. During tracking,
==PAGE:36==
24
3 System Analysis
attraction manipulation was applied for 1 second, resulting in dots speeding up
and moving closer together.
After the attraction period, dots move normally
until the end of the trial. Static dots are displayed until participants select four
dots with the computer mouse [54].
Reaction time and accuracy are recorded during the trials to calculate the fi-
nal score. In a study by Pylyshyn and Storm, they found that the accuracy of
responding fell with the increase in targets but remained relatively stable with
an increase in distractors. Furthermore, the results showed that subjects were
able to perform the task of tracking multiple independently-moving targets quite
well under the conditions of this study, even when there were five such targets
(in which case the performance level was still at 85.6%) [52].
3.2.5
Verbal Recognition Memory and Delayed Recall
Verbal Recognition Memory and Delayed Recall work together to assess cognitive
performance. The first part (Verbal Recognition Memory) presents the partici-
pant with the stimuli list of 5 words, read aloud. The participant is then supposed
to repeat the list of 5 words in any order. No score is rewarded for the number
of words immediately recalled. After a delay, the delayed recall test is run where
participants are asked to recall the words from the Verbal Recognition Memory
task where the stimuli were presented. A score is then given based on the number
of words correctly recalled [55].
The Verbal Recognition Memory test assesses verbal encoding and memory, while
the Delayed Recall test taps more into frontotemporal networks and assesses hip-
pocampal areas [43].
With the six selected cognitive tests, the cognitive domains of attention, mem-
ory, language and verbal skills are added to Cognition Package. This combined
with the cognitive tests previously part of Research Package in 2019, makes the
Cognition Package a tool that can give an almost complete picture of cognitive
performance in all eight domains (see table 3.2).
==PAGE:37==
3.3 CARP Research Package
25
Cognitive domain
Assessment
Sensation
Multiple Object Tracking
Perception
Paired Associative Learning,
Stroop Effect,
Visual Array Change
Motor skills and construction
Finger Tapping,
Corsi Block Tapping
Attention and concentration
Letter A Tapping,
Flanker
Memory
Delayed Recall,
Picture Sequence Memory,
Executive functioning
Trail Making
Processing speed
Rapid Visual Information Processing,
Reaction Time
Language and verbal skills
Verbal Recognition Memory
Table 3.2: Domains of cognitive functioning accompany cognitive assessments
with the newly added assessments in bold.
.
3.3
CARP Research Package
As mentioned earlier, this thesis is carried out in collaboration with CACHET,
and the new Cognition Package is designed to be an extension of the CARP Re-
search Package.
The Research Package uses a Task to hold the individual steps the user must go
through. A step can be either RPQuestionStep, RPInstructionStep, RPFormStep,
RPCompletionStep, RPVisualConsentStep or RPConsentReviewStep, depend-
ing on what is needed.
A survey is modeled as a task with five steps in the figure below 3.5.
The
task is an RPOrderedTask object, and the steps are RPQuestionStep with a
RPInstructionStep after the first question. Each RPQuestionStep is created
with an RPAnswerFormat which decides how the question can be answered [56].
==PAGE:38==
26
3 System Analysis
Figure 3.5: Example Task [56].
Once the task is completed, the answers (results) from each step are saved as
RPStepResult objects and compiled to an RPTaskResult object in the end.
To fit the new cognitive tests in the Cognition Package into the existing domain
of the Research Package, the choice was made to implement each cognitive test
as the new RPActivityStep, which extends RPStep. This allows the cognitive
tests to be implemented directly into the domain between all the other RPSteps
available and allows researchers and developers to pick and choose a combination
of questions, forms, informed consent, and cognitive tests to build their study
applications.
3.4
Requirements
The following requirements for the system have been identified.
The require-
ments are split into non-functional requirements from CACHET required for the
new Cognition Package to fit into the CARP domain and work together with
the CARP Research Package.
The functional requirements are chosen design
decisions based on the related work of other state-of-the-art cognitive assessment
tools and the analysis of the individual tests included in the Cognition Package
based on the inclusion criteria chosen earlier.
3.4.1
Functional Requirements
• FR1 The cognitive tests included in Cognition Package will be self-administered
and easy to understand.
• FR2 The cognitive tests included in Cognition Package will be fast to
complete and repeatable.
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Analysis overview
27
• FR3 The Cognition Package will be extensible by researchers or developers
wanting to expand the test battery with new cognitive tests.
3.4.2
Non-functional Requirements
• NFR1 The cognitive tests included in Cognition Package will encompass
the complete domain of cognitive performance.
• NFR2 The cognitive tests included will be adapted from validated gold-
standard cognitive assessment tools in their respective cognitive domains.
• NFR3 The Cognition Package will work together with the existing CARP
Research Package.
• NFR4 Cognition Package will be released as an open-source Flutter pack-
age under CACHET.
Based on the identified requirements, some use case scenarios were made and
described in Appendix A.2.
3.5
Analysis overview
This section provides an overview of the analysis carried out in this chapter and
outlines the main conclusions. As a conclusion of the analysis of the related work,
a set of six conventional validated cognitive tests were chosen to be implemented
in Cognition Package along with the eight cognitive tests previously part of the
Research Package:
• Multiple Object Tracking
• Visual Array Change
• Flanker
• Verbal Recognition Memory
• Delayed Recall
• Picture Sequence Memory
Then the problem domain was presented, RPSteps was identified as the opti-
mal way to implement the cognitive test for them to fit in perfectly into CARP
Research Package tasks.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 System Analysis
Thus the resulting product of this thesis is the Cognition Package. The Cog-
nition Package will extend the currently available CARP Research Package with
14 gold-standard validated cognitive tests that can seamlessly integrate into any
application built using the Research Package. The Cognition Package allows re-
searchers to create study applications that can measure and assess participants’
cognitive performance on all eight cognitive domains in the wild on the partici-
pant’s smartphones without an examiner present. The conclusion of the analysis
phase forms the foundation for the design phase, in which the technical design
decisions are made before implementation.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Design
This chapter presents the design of the cognitive test battery. First, the design
process of designing the individual cognitive tests is explained. This is followed
by an overview of the software architecture needed to fulfill the requirements
found in the previous chapter. Lastly, the class design shared by all the cognitive
tests is presented.
4.1
Cognitive Test Design
The six new cognitive tests selected for inclusion alongside the original eight from
2019 in the first release of the Cognition Package can be seen below in figure 4.1.
From left to right: PSM, Flanker, VAC, MOT, Verbal Recognition memory, and
Delayed Recall (the last two share UI design).
Figure 4.1: New cognitive test designs for the Cognition Package.
The design of the cognitive tests was done through a user-centered design
process with the real user testing and iterative designs going from low fidelity
prototypes in Figma to high fidelity interactive prototypes in Flutter.
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Design
Each cognitive test was designed with the required parameters, the instruc-
tions for the participants, the test run itself, and finally, how each test would be
scored. These were all designed to keep the tests as close to the validated state of
the conventional tests, they adapt. This included looking at how the diﬀiculty is
changed in the original tests and translating the parameters in the mobile version
to allow the same, and designing how the UI would need to adapt to fit the much
smaller format of smartphone screens. Lastly, the results calculation algorithms
were designed according to the original scoring mechanisms of the tests to keep
the mobile scores as close to the validated scores as possible. This allows the
tests to be evaluated later against some of the gold-standard conventional cogni-
tive tests and enables researchers to know how the tests are scored from previous
experience with the gold-standard tools available.
4.1.1
Picture Sequence memory (PSM)
From the analysis in the previous section, we analyzed that the PSM starts with
a series of images depicting independent, non-sequential activities shown in a
specific order and placed in precise, ordered locations on the screen.
Translating this cognitive task from the tablet to the much smaller screen of
smartphones meant that pictures had to be smaller while still retaining a clear
order.
Figure 4.2: PSM test design.
The design in the Cognition Pack-
age places the images in a grid on the
screen.
Users can then drag and drop
the images in the grid, and the other im-
ages would move out of the way.
The
drag and drop technique is the same as
the original NIHTB tablet version of the
test.
Based on the NIHTB test analysis, the
PSM test’s diﬀiculty is based on the dif-
ferent sequence lengths for different age
groups. For ages 3-4 years: 6 pictures; 5-
7 years: 9 pictures; 8 years: 12 pictures;
9-60 years: 15 pictures, and 61-85 years:
9 pictures [57]. Thus, researchers can set
the number of images in a trial of the PSM
when including the test in their study apps.
As in the original PSM test [42], the par-
ticipant’s score on the mobile PSM is the
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Cognitive Test Design
31
number of adjacent pictures recalled correctly regardless of the number of pic-
tures in the sequence. Thus, the possible number of adjacent pairs for each trial is
one less than the number of pictures in the sequence. Even though performance
in the test is measured by the number of correct adjacent pairs reproduced and
not by the time it takes participants to complete, the time taken to complete each
trial as well as the time taken to memorize each sequence of images is recorded
and saved in the result to give researchers more data to guide their data analysis
later.
4.1.2
Flanker
Figure 4.3: Flanker test design.
After
analyzing
the
Flanker
test
de-
veloped
by
Eriksen
[45]
in
1974,
it
was decided that the two direction in-
dicator buttons of the computer-based
test
would
not
work
strictly
as
in-
tended on mobile.
This is translated
into
a
swiping
motion
on
the
phone
screen
in
the
desired
direction.
So
a
swipe
from
left
to
right
for
the
right direction and a swipe from right
to
left
for
the
left
direction.
This
is done so that participants can keep
their
eyes
on
the
stimuli.
Find-
ing
non-physical
buttons
on-screen
re-
quires attention from the participant to
switch
to
the
part
of
the
screen
to
see the buttons on the screen as they
have no physical feedback when they
find
them
as
opposed
to
tactile
but-
tons.
The swiping gesture provides an eyes-free
alternative to button tapping, and in the
case where the buttons represent directions, the swiping motion in each direction
is a straightforward substitute. In addition, swiping does not have any higher
cognitive cost as an action than button tapping and requires fewer looks at the
screen to confirm that the participants’ fingers hit the buttons on-screen and reg-
ister [58].
The stimuli are represented on screen as a deck of cards to further emphasize
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Design
and make the swiping gesture more recognizable to participants. The card pat-
tern has recently emerged as an elegant way to display content [59]. The card
pattern is also straightforward for older adults to navigate, as it is taken from
the physical world, facilitating older adults’ mental models through previous ex-
perience [60].
The diﬀiculty in the Flanker task is not adjustable as in the PSM. However,
a more accurate score is reached with more prolonged testing and more trials.
The score is calculated based on the difference in reaction time between con-
gruent and incongruent trials, referred to as flanker interference [45]. To allow
researchers and developers to pick the number of trials and the accuracy they
want to achieve, the number of stimuli cards in the stack for participants to
swipe is added as a changeable parameter.
4.1.3
Visual Array Change (VAC)
Figure 4.4: VAC test design.
The VAC task bears similarities to the PSM
as it involves a presentation followed by a de-
lay and a recall stage. The VAC presents the
shapes in random locations on the screen, as
arranging the shapes in a list or a grid like in
the PSM would give an unfair advantage.
The diﬀiculty in the VAC test is based
on the number of shapes that the participant
must remember and the time delay between
the presentation and the recall stage. Thus
the number of shapes in the VAC test is a
parameter that researchers can set along with
the delay time between the steps.
The task is scored based on the number of
correct answers to specify whether a change
occurred between the presentation and the re-
call stage, not by identifying where or what
shape changed color [50]. Based on this, the
VAC test design includes two buttons at the
bottom of the screen to indicate a change or
no change instead of having the participants
indicate the shape they think changed.
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Cognitive Test Design
33
4.1.4
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT)
The MOT test is one of the newer cognitive tests designed with and for computer
screens. Thus the translation from the original test developed by Pylyshyn and
Storm back in 1988 [52] to the mobile screen is less complicated than for some of
the previous tests.
Figure 4.5: MOT test design.
The entire screen acts as the bound-
ary box to which the moving dots are con-
strained for the mobile version.
Before
moving, the targets are set to a specified
color to cue them, while all distracting dots
are colored gray (see fig 4.5). Once the tar-
gets are identified, the target dots change
to the same gray color as the distractor
dots, and all the dots start moving in ran-
dom directions. After a set time, all the
dots stop moving, and the participant is
asked to click on the target dots. If the dot
clicked on is one of the cued targets, it will
change back to its original color. After all
cued targets are found, the test can reset
for another trial or end. The score is then
based on the accuracy of following and in-
dicating the cued targets, with the number
of distractor dots clicked as the number of
mistakes.
The results from the study done by
Pylyshyn and Storm [52] showed that the
accuracy of responding fell with the in-
crease in the number of targets but remained reasonably stable with an increase
in distractors. Based on this, the number of targets is an essential parameter
that researchers want to change based on the study they wish to perform and the
participant population recruited.
Through preliminary testing, the participants’ performance was divided into
three categories.
1. Participants lost track of one or more of the targets entirely and had to
click a series of dots randomly until the target was found.
2. Participants kept track of the location of targets but clicked a distractor
near the target, followed by clicking the target.
3. Participants kept track of the targets and clicked them correctly.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Design
Based on the testing, the cutoff proportion of mistakes was chosen as the
number of tracked targets. Meaning that if the test is run with two targets being
tracked, it is allowed to have two mistakes in the trial before finding both targets
correctly. Any more mistakes indicated that the targets had been lost, and the
target was found by chance.
4.1.5
Verbal Recognition Memory
Figure 4.6: Verbal
Recognition
Memory test design.
The Verbal Recognition Memory test is the
first part of the Delayed Recall test. The
original test is usually performed in the
clinic by an examiner reading a list of five
words aloud, then asking the participant to
recall the list in any order. In the mobile
version, the examiner is replaced with a
recording reading the five words aloud. For
the participant to recall the list, there were
two options. Having the participant write
down the five words using the smartphone
keyboard or having the participant recall
the words and have the smartphone record
the participant. The recording could then
be sent to the researchers, who could ana-
lyze it and give a score for the task, or the
smartphone could use voice recognition to
recognize the said words and then calculate
the score itself.
After testing the available voice recog-
nition algorithms, it was decided that the
accuracy of the words that were recognized
correctly was insuﬀicient for the cognitive
test. More often than not, the voice recog-
nition algorithm provided a list of words where at least one, but often more words
were recognized incorrectly as other words or omitted entirely. Thus, having the
participants type out the five words on the keyboard was preferable to having
the researchers analyze the data later to get the final results.
As with the original test in the MoCA [61], the Verbal Recognition Memory
test does not get scored. Instead, the score is calculated in the Delayed Recall part.
Suppose researchers or developers want the scores from the Verbal Recognition
Memory. In that case, the lists of words the participant inputted are still recorded,
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Software Architecture Design
35
and the time it took to recall the list. These are available in the data, but a score
of 0 is added to the total score of the task.
4.1.6
Delayed Recall
The second part of the Delayed Recall test involves asking the participant to
recall as many words as possible from the original list of five words presented
earlier in the Verbal Recognition Memory test. Thus it is required to use both
parts of the test in the order provided, Verbal Recognition Memory before the
Delayed Recall with a delay between them. The test is then run similarly to the
Verbal Recognition Memory, just with the presentation stage where the list of
words is read aloud omitted.
The original MoCA version gives participants 3 trials to recall the five words
from the Verbal Recognition Memory task [55], free recall, semantic category cue,
and multiple-choice cue.
However, only the words recalled in the free recall trial are awarded any points.
For the mobile version, the two later trials are thus omitted. Instead, only one
trial is done, and this then rewards a single point for each word correctly recalled
up to the maximum of five points for the five words recalled perfectly.
A detailed explanation of the design of each of the cognitive tests can be found
in Appendix A.1, including instructions, parameters, how the tests are run and
scored once completed.
4.2
Software Architecture Design
The Cognition Package extends the steps in Research Package with the new
step type RPActivityStep.
The RPActivityStep represents a step in which
a single cognitive test is presented to the user. The new ActivitySteps can
be used in RPTasks, where they can be combined with all the other Step types
(RPInstructionStep, RPQuestionStep, RPCompletionStep etc.). This allows
researchers to create their instructions for tests combine them with questions,
surveys, and informed consent for complete mobile cognitive assessment tools.
ActivitySteps implement three stages of each test - Instruction, Task, Re-
sult - which controls the flow of the test.
RPActivitySteps include optional
parameters for including or excluding the instruction and the result, respectively.
In addition, each test has additional optional parameters, which can be used for
customizing the tests.
A survey is modeled as a task with five steps in figure 4.7 below. The task is an
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Design
RPOrderedTask object, and the steps are RPQuestionStep with and RPInstructionStep
after the first question. Each RPQuestionStep is created with an RPAnswerFormat
which decides how the the question can be answered. The last step is a RPActivityStep
with a Flanker cognitive test for the user to complete before finishing the task.
Figure 4.7: Example Task with the added RPActivityStep with a Flanker task.
4.2.1
Class Design
Class diagrams of the various modules required were established to implement
the cognitive tests to extend the CARP Research Package.
As a result, the
following modules were identified to integrate the Cognition Package and the
CARP Research Package. Each cognitive test is split into three classes:
• Activity class extends RPActivityStep and handles the parameters and
logic in the cognitive test.
• Body class, which handles the UI representation of the specified RPActivityStep.
• Result class, which is the result object the RPActivityStep creates.
The Activity class of each cognitive test extends RPActivityStep and handles
the parameters and logic to serve the user the specified cognitive test UI correctly.
It also holds the calculateScore() function that determines how the cognitive
test calculates the final score based on the users performance in the trials.
The Body class is a Flutter StatefulWidget which builds a container that is
then filled with the UI of the cognitive test. The individual tests build the UI
differently based on which test is chosen and the parameters set in the Activity
class. Once the test is finished, the onResultsChange() function is called, and
the result is calculated and sent to the Result class.
The Result class creates a result populated with results, step times, and in-
teractions recorded during the test. Once finished, the results from each results
step in the task are compiled to a single RPTaskResult.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Design Summary
37
Figure 4.8: Class Diagram.
4.3
Design Summary
This chapter presented the design choices made for the Cognition Package using
design diagrams and UI mock-ups. Furthermore, the cognitive tests in the Cog-
nition Package were translated and designed to fit the new format of interactive
smartphone screens and the new administration method of patient administra-
tion out of the clinic.
First, the design methods used to translate the validated cognitive tests from
their original format to the interactive screen of smartphones were presented.
The design was completed through a user-centered design process which included
multiple users testing the interactive prototypes until a final version was designed.
The design decisions for each test had the new parameters researchers could use
to change the diﬀiculty of the tests. The new instructions and how the tests are
run and completed on the phone, which measures are recorded, and how they are
used to give a final score to the participant.
Second, the Software Architecture was explained, including how the new Cogni-
tion Package would fit into the existing CARP ecosystem and how the cognitive
tests would integrate into the CARP Research Package.
Lastly, the class design of the base classes for the cognitive tests was presented,
with the three classes, each cognitive test extends; the Activity model class, the
UI body class and the Result class.
==PAGE:50==
38
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
This chapter presents the implementation details of the Cognition Package. First,
the starting point of the Cognition Package had to be extracted and separated
from an earlier version of the Research Package where it was previously included,
then upgrading to the newest version of Flutter, which includes upgrading all
classes to null safety. After which, minor changes to the Research Package had
to be made to make it work together with the new Cognition Package. Lastly,
the individual cognitive tests designed in chapter 4 were implemented in Flutter.
5.1
Package Separation
As stated earlier in the Analysis section 3.1, the CARP Research Package did
at one point include a set of 8 cognitive tests.
These were included directly
into the Research Package extending the implemented RPStep. Each cognitive
test extended the RPStep with a unique identifier and the parameters available
for researchers to set for their study applications using the cognitive tests. An
example of the Corsi Block Tapping test is shown below:
1 class RPCorsiBlockTappingActivity extends RPActivityStep {
2
RPCorsiBlockTappingActivity(String identifier,
3
{includeInstructions = true, includeResults = true})
4
: super(identifier,
5
includeInstructions: includeInstructions ,
6
includeResults: includeResults);
7 }
Listing 5.1: RPCorsiBlockTappingActivity class in the Research Package from
2019.
The code snippet in listing 5.1 is the researcher-facing constructor for creating
a Corsi Block Tapping test. Each cognitive test included a UI class that handled
the presentation and recording of the user input. The connection between the
activity and its UI body was done in the UI base class RPUIActivityStep. When
a RPActivityStep was added to a RPTask the step was presented based on which
UI body the RPUIActivityStep sent to be rendered on screen. This choice was
made through a switch case based on the type of the RPActivityStep.
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Implementation
1 Widget stepBody(RPActivityStep activityStep) {
2
switch (activityStep.runtimeType) {
3
case RPTrailMakingActivity:
4
return RPUITrailMakingActivityBody(activityStep , eventLogger , (result) {
5
this.currentActivityBodyResult = result;
6
});
7
case RPTappingActivity:
8
return RPUITappingActivityBody(activityStep , eventLogger , (result) {
9
this.currentActivityBodyResult = result;
10
});
...
...
...
15
case RPStroopEffectActivity:
16
return RPUIStroopEffectActivityBody(activityStep , eventLogger , (result) {
17
this.currentActivityBodyResult = result;
18
});
19
default:
20
return Container();
21
}
22 }
Listing 5.2: Switchcase from the RPUIActivityStep class in the Research
Package from 2019.
The code snippet in listing 5.2 is the switch case in question. It included a case for
all the then available cognitive tests. It would handle the activity connection to
return the corresponding UI class for the specified test. This switch case worked
in 2019 as the code for the cognitive tests and the RPActivityBody were in the
same codebase. However, the cognitive tests were later removed from the CARP
Research Package together with the RPUIActivityStep class that handled them.
For the Cognition Package to be implemented as a separate Flutter package,
this switch case to connect the RPActivityStep with their corresponding
RPActivityBody does not work anymore as the codebase is split into the cur-
rently available CARP Research Package and the new CARP CognitionPackage.
In the new Cognition Package, activities handle connecting to their correspond-
ing UI body on their own.
The RPActivityStep base class for each of the cognitive test activities was mod-
ified to include the base case of the previous switch case in listing 5.2 from
the RPUIActivityStep class. As before, it returns an empty container if the
RPActivityStep base class is used directly instead of any of the cognitive test
activities that extend it. This was done to prevent complete application failures
when an error occurred in one of the steps. This way, activity steps fail silently,
allowing the rest of the task to continue as planned, and minimal data is lost.
1
Widget stepBody(dynamic Function(dynamic) onResultChange ,
2
RPActivityEventLogger eventLogger) =>
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Cognitive Test Implementation
41
3
Container();
Listing 5.3: new base case for returning a UI body in the RPActivityStep.
All the implemented cognitive tests extend this base class and override the
stepBody with their corresponding UI body class (see the example from the
Flanker test below in listing 5.4).
1
@override
2
Widget stepBody(dynamic Function(dynamic) onResultChange ,
3
RPActivityEventLogger eventLogger) {
4
return RPUIFlankerActivityBody(this, eventLogger , onResultChange);
5
}
Listing 5.4: Flanker activity overrides the stepBody of the base class.
With this, the switchcase in RPUIActivityStep is no longer needed as each ac-
tivity handles their UI body class and the new way to serve the correct stepBody
is to return the stepBody the activity holds itself.
1
Widget stepBody(RPActivityStep activityStep) {
2
return activityStep.stepBody((result) {
3
this.currentActivityBodyResult = result;
4
}, eventLogger!);
5
}
Listing 5.5: new way to serve the corresponding UI body for each activity in
RPUIActivityStep.
The RPActivityStep base class is also extended with a base function for the
score calculations that each of the activities will then override with their score
calculation algorithms. The base score calculation always returns 0 so that it also
fails silently without affecting the rest of the scoring for the task being completed.
With these changes to the RPActivityStep and RPUIActivityStep, the ac-
tivity step can be added back into the CARP Research Package without the
cognitive tests. Then by overriding the new stepBody widget in each of the ex-
isting cognitive test activities with the corresponding UI body, they also work
perfectly as an independent codebase that imports the CARP Research Package
from pub.dev.
With the cognitive tests working and separated from the CARP Research Pack-
age, the new cognitive tests designed in the previous chapter can be implemented
to extend the new Cognition Package.
5.2
Cognitive Test Implementation
This subsection describes how the new cognitive tests were implemented. The six
cognitive tests implemented can be seen below in figure 5.1. From left to right:
==PAGE:54==
42
5 Implementation
PSM, Flanker, VAC, MOT, Verbal Recognition memory, and Delayed Recall (the
last two share UI design).
Figure 5.1: Cognition Package cognitive test implemented and running on an
iPhone 13 simulator.
.
Each of the cognitive tests designed in the previous chapter requires three
classes to run in the CARP Research Package environment:
1. The Activity class, which extends RPActivityStep and defines the param-
eters available for the specific test (e.g., length of the trial, the amount of
repetitions), Handles the connection between the activity and the UI body
class as well as the function to calculate the final score of the test after it
is run.
2. The UI Body class describes how the test is rendered on screen and the
logic of running the test.
3. The Results class describes the data collected from the test and adds it to
the total results from the task.
The UI body class handles all the logic of serving the activity to the user.
This includes initializing the cognitive test with the parameters set in the activ-
ity class, rendering the widgets, and the instructions. With the logic and UI of
the cognitive test, the UI body handles the entire running of a single cognitive
test with the participant, and records all the interactions made during the test.
Finally, the Results class handles the calculated results, measures, and inter-
actions. It compiles them to a RPStepResult to be added to the total results in
the RPTaskResult.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Cognitive Test Implementation
43
5.2.1
Picture Sequence Memory (PSM)
The static grid of images for the PSM is built using the Wrap class in Flutter,
a widget that displays its children in multiple horizontal or vertical runs. Each
child of the Wrap is then built as a picture with a width, height, URL image, left
and right neighbors, and an index. In the design section, it was decided that
the picture sequence memory test would be implemented with a set number of
available images. These images are pulled from an URL to keep the size of the
package small.
1
class _Picture {
2
String name;
3
String urlImage;
4
String left;
5
String right;
6
7
_Picture({
8
required this.name,
9
required this.urlImage,
10
this.left = "",
11
this.right = "",
12
});
13
}
Listing 5.6: Picture class from the PSM test.
The orderable grid of images on the second presentation of the images is imple-
mented using the ReorderableWrap class from Flutter. The ReorderableWrap
class is a widget that displays its children like the normal Wrap class, but allows
for re-ordering of the children using drag and drop. While the wait screen shows,
the original order of the images from the first screen is saved in a list before the
image order is shuffled.
Once the user finishes re-ordering the images, the makeGuess() method loops
through the list of images in the new order set by the participant and calculates
the number of image pairs that are in the same order as the original list of images
presented initially by looking at the neighbors of each image and comparing them
to their actual neighbors in the ReorderableWrap:
5.2.2
Flanker
The card pattern described in Section 4.1.2 is a popular way to display informa-
tion that allows users to interact differently. There are plenty of available options
for Flutter packages that allow the implementation of a stack of swipable cards.
The Flutter package flutter_swipable [62] was chosen for this project. It has
the highest number of pub points on pub.dev which scores Flutter packages on the
documentation, following Dart file convention, formatting, and sound null safety.
==PAGE:56==
44
5 Implementation
Other packages that provide the same features include the flutter_tindercard
[63] and swipe_cards [64]. However, these packages were very early versions,
0.2.0 and 0.1.0, respectively and were missing vital parts according to pub.dev.
Each FlankerCard is built up with a chosen target direction and color of the
card. The distracting stimuli for each card are then randomly chosen to be either
congruent to the target direction or incongruent. These cards are then built into
a list of FlankerCards when the flanker test is initiated:
1
class _FlankerState extends State<_Flanker> {
2
final int numberOfCards;
3
bool even = false;
4
List<Widget> flankerCards = [];
5
List<_FlankerCard > cards(amount) {
6
List<_FlankerCard > cards = [];
7
for (var i = 0; i < amount; i++) {
8
even = !even;
9
if (Random().nextBool()) {
10
cards.add(
11
_FlankerCard('→', even ? 0xff003F6E : 0xffC32C39),
12
);
13
} else {
14
cards.add(_FlankerCard('←', even ? 0xff003F6E : 0xffC32C39));
15
}
16
}
17
return cards;
18
}
Listing 5.7: list of FlankerCards initiated in the flanker test.
The code snippet in listing 5.7 shows how the list of FlankerCards is filled to the
amount chosen in the parameters set for the flanker test. In addition, each card’s
direction is randomly selected, and the color of the cards changes with every card
to make it more clear that the card was swiped away in the case where two cards
right under each other in the stack are similar in stimuli.
To calculate the score of the flanker test, a timer is started each time a card
is displayed.
The timer is then stopped when the card is swiped away.
The
times recorded are added to two lists, one for the congruent stimuli and one for
incongruent stimuli. When the test ends, the mean value of each of the two lists
is calculated and compared. If the difference between the mean time for the con-
gruent stimuli and the incongruent stimuli is greater than 0.5 seconds, the task
score is 0.
Of course, reaction time to the stimuli means nothing if the cards are swiped
in the wrong direction. Thus if the accuracy is below the cutoff found at 0.75,
the score of the flanker test is also 0.
The number of mistakes made in the
task is thus recorded and compared with the total number of stimuli to find the
accuracy of the participant in the test. These score calculations are done in the
RPFlankerActivity class and shown below in listing 5.8:
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Cognitive Test Implementation
45
1
calculateScore(dynamic result) {
2
var accuracy = result['correct'] / (result['correct'] + result['mistakes']);
3
4
int conSum = result['congruentTimes'].fold(0, (p, c) => p + c);
5
var meanCongruent = conSum / result['congruentTimes'].length;
6
7
int inconSum = result['incongruentTimes'].fold(0, (p, c) => p + c);
8
var meanIncongruent = inconSum / result['incongruentTimes'].length;
9
10
var sum = 0;
11
if (meanIncongruent - meanCongruent < 500) {
12
sum = 1;
13
}
14
if (accuracy < 0.75) {
15
sum = 0;
16
}
17
18
print('flanker score: ' + sum.toString());
19
return sum;
20
}
Listing 5.8: calculateScore() method of the flanker test.
5.2.3
Visual Array Change
The code snippet in listing 5.9 below shows how the VAC test shapes are made.
First, each shape is a child of the positioned element, with the position pulled
from the list of randomized coordinates on the screen. This was chosen as the
simplest way to randomize any number of shapes selected. As all shapes pull
their position from the list, randomizing positions for the shapes during the delay
screen is then done by shuffling the positions list, and all shapes change positions
according to their new coordinates. The case is the same for the rotation, and
color of the shapes, as shown on line 18 in listing 5.9.
1
for (int i = 0; i < numberOfShapes; i++) {
2
shapes.add(
3
Positioned(
4
left: avatarSize +
5
(constraints.biggest.width - 2 * avatarSize) /
6
100.0 *
7
positions[i],
8
top: avatarSize +
9
(constraints.biggest.height - 2 * avatarSize) /
10
100.0 *
11
positions[i + 1],
12
child: CircleAvatar(
13
radius: avatarSize / 2,
14
child: Container(
15
decoration: BoxDecoration(
16
borderRadius: BorderRadius.all(Radius.circular(20)),
17
image: DecorationImage(
18
image: AssetImage(shape[i][color[i]].urlImage),
19
fit: BoxFit.scaleDown)),
20
),
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Implementation
21
backgroundColor: Colors.transparent)),
22
);
23
}
Listing 5.9: adding shapes in VAC task.
Once the user has the shapes memorized, the test is started, and a random
boolean is generated to see if the shapes should change color during the delay
or not. If the boolean is true, the colors list is shuffled, meaning any number of
shapes can change color, either to a color previously on another shape or a new
color entirely from the five available colors for each shape.
Once the screen with the newly positioned shapes is shown again, the partici-
pant has two buttons: ”same” and ”different,” to indicate whether they think
any of the shapes changed colors during the transition screen. Both buttons act
the same, stopping the timer that times the participant’s reaction time before in-
dicating a change or no change. Then depending on if the colors list was shuffled,
the time is added to the correct reactions times or the incorrect reaction times
list, and the test is reset.
After the last trial, the number of correct and incorrect trials are recorded, and
the reaction times of each trial. However, the final score is based on the number
of correctly identified shape color changes during the trials as in the conventional
cognitive test [50].
5.2.4
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT)
The dots for the MOT test are implemented as child widgets of AnimatedPositioned
widgets which work much like the Positioned from the VAC test where the dots
can be positioned anywhere within the screen based on their parameters. How-
ever, instead of just changing positions instantly, if the parameters change, the
AnimatedPositioned widget animates a smooth transition from the original po-
sition to the new position over a specified duration of time.
The dots are split into two different classes, target dots, and distractor dots,
which work similarly moving around the screen, but behave differently when
clicked. For example, the target dots start the test colored while the distractors
are grey. The color of the target dots is decided using a list of booleans, one for
each target. The dot’s color is blue when the boolean is true and grey when false.
When the test is initiated, all the target dots start with true values, and then
when ready, the participant clicks the ready button, and the list of booleans is
filled with false values, coloring all the targets grey to blend in with the distractor
dots.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Cognitive Test Implementation
47
The targets have a gesture detector detecting clicks on the dots changing their
corresponding value in the boolean list to true and changing color to the original
blue. Whenever a target dot is clicked and changes its boolean value and color,
a check is done to see if all the targets have been found by checking the list of
booleans (see lines 16-17 in listing 5.10). If all targets have been found, the test
timer stops and another trial can begin, or the test ends depending on if the
number of trials is finished.
1
AnimatedPositioned(
2
duration: trackingSpeed ,
3
left: avatarSize +
4
(constraints.biggest.width - 2 * avatarSize) /
5
100.0 *
6
positions[i + amount],
7
top: avatarSize +
8
(constraints.biggest.height - 2 * avatarSize) /
9
100.0 *
10
positions[i + amount + 5],
11
child: GestureDetector(
12
onTap: () {
13
if (guess) {
14
setState(() {
15
dots[i] = true;
16
var targetsFound = dots.where((item) => item == true).length;
17
if (targetsFound == targetAmount) {
18
makeGuess();
19
}
20
});
21
}
22
},
23
child: CircleAvatar(
24
radius: avatarSize / 2,
25
backgroundColor: dots[i] ? Color(0xff1F669B) : Colors.grey,
26
)),
27
));
Listing 5.10: target dot from MOT.
Instead of changing color to blue, the distractor dots flash red when clicked before
changing back to grey. This color change is done the same way as the target dots,
with a list of booleans controlling which dots are colored.
Once all the targets have been found and the trials run, the test ends. The
score is calculated as the number of trials finished where the number of mistakes
made (distractors clicked) is lower than the number of targets set in the trial, as
decided in the design for the MOT test in Section 4.1.4.
5.2.5
Verbal Recognition Memory (VRM)
The word list for the test contains five pre-recorded sound files with a word in
each. The words are read aloud by a computer-generated text to speech engine
and saved as mp3 files. The text to speech engine used is ttstool.com, as it provides
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Implementation
the service for free with unlimited downloads. Using computer-generated voice
lines for the words in the test makes it easy to replace single words if needed or
extend the list of words later if required.
The presentation screen plays the audio files with 1,2 seconds in between
words while displaying a blank screen with only the word ”listen” for minimal
distraction. The audio is played using the phone speakers and is implemented
using the audioplayers [65] Flutter package, which is a simple to implement,
easy-to-use audio player for Flutter.
Once all the words have been played, the screen changes to the input screen,
where the participant can type in the words they recall.
The input screen is
implemented as a TextField widget for each word in a form. The TextFields
each corresponds to a position in a list that holds all the words recalled.
1
TextField(
2
textInputAction: TextInputAction.next,
3
onChanged: (text) {
4
wordlist[0] = text;
5
},
6
decoration: const InputDecoration(
7
border: OutlineInputBorder())
8
)
Listing 5.11: input field for the Verbal Recognition Memory test.
The verbal recognition memory test does not give any score as per the con-
ventional pen-and-paper test it is designed after but saves the resulting list if the
researchers want to look at the results for data analysis later.
5.2.6
Delayed Recall
The Delayed recall test is almost identical to the verbal recognition memory test.
The only significant difference is the omitted presentation screen.
The input
screen is implemented in the same way with a TextField for each word saved in a
list. Once the participant has written the words they recall from the presentation
in the verbal recognition memory test earlier, the list of recalled words is sent
to the calculateScore() method, where the list of words is compared to the
original list presented.
1
calculateScore(dynamic result) {
2
List<String> wordList = result['wordsList'];
3
List<String> resultsList = result['resultsList'];
4
resultsList = resultsList.map((result) => result.toLowerCase()).toList();
5
var sum = 0;
6
for (int i = 0; i < resultsList.length; i++) {
7
if (wordList.contains(resultsList[i])) {
8
sum++;
9
}
10
}
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Availability
49
11
print('delayed recall score: ' + sum.toString());
12
return sum;
13
}
Listing 5.12: calculateScore() method from the delayed recall test.
The code snippet in listing 5.12 shows the calculateScore() method from
the delayed recall test. The resultsList object holds the words that the par-
ticipant has typed in the TextFields in the delayed recall task and is sanitized
to lower case before being compared to the original word list set. This is done
as participants may type in the words they recall with capitalized letters out of
preference, registering as incorrect compared to the original list typed in lower
case. The number of words in both lists is the task’s score, e.g., a maximum score
of 5 for a five-word list.
A detailed explanation of the implementation of each of the specific cognitive
tests can be found in Appendix A.3 with Appendix A.4 presenting several test
cases used to verify a correct realization of the functional requirements presented
in Section 3.4.1.
5.3
Availability
The Cognition Package is released publicly at:
https://pub.dev/packages/cognition_package
With the open-source code available at:
https://github.com/cph-cachet/cognition_package
The Cognition Package has a dedicated page on the CARP website at:
https://carp.cachet.dk/cognition-package/
With a tutorial for how to use the package to create mobile cognitive tests is
available at:
https://carp.cachet.dk/creating-a-cognitive-tests/
Documentation for the Cognition Package is split between Dart API documenta-
tion, a README.md, and an example application following the recommendations
by the Flutter team [66]. The example application is described in more detail in
Section 6.1.
The Cognition Package has received 120 pub points on pub.dev and a detailed
description of the process done to publish the cognitive test battery as a Flutter
package is described in Appendix A.6.
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Implementation
5.3.1
Using the Package
This Section mirrors the oﬀicial instructions at
https://carp.cachet.dk/creating-a-cognitive-tests/.
Creating cognitive assessments is one of the core features of the Cognition
Package. This tutorial will guide you through how to create the needed domain
model objects for a cognitive assessment task, present them in the UI, combine
different cognitive tests into a single assessment, and finally, collect the results.
The cognitive tests are a new type of step called the ActivityStep. The new
ActivitySteps can be used in RPTasks, where they can be combined with all
the other step types (InstructionStep, QuestionStep, CompletionStep, etc.).
This allows you to create your own instructions for tests combine them with
questions or any other use case you desire.
ActivitySteps implement three stages of each test – Instruction, Task, Re-
sult – which control the test flow. RPActivitySteps include optional parameters
for including or excluding the instruction and the result. In addition, each test
has additional optional parameters, which can be used for customizing the tests
better.
Installing the Cognition Package:
Run this command:
1 $ flutter pub add cognition_package
.
This will add a line like this to your package’s pubspec.yaml (and run an
implicit dart pub get):
1 dependencies:
2
cognition_package: ^1.0.1
.
Alternatively, your editor might support dart pub get or flutter pub get.
Check the docs for your editor to learn more.
Import it:
Now in your Dart code, you can use:
1 import 'package:cognition_package/model.dart';
.
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Implementation Summary
51
Example Cognition Test:
Below is an example of how to create a test. The example is the MOT Test,
and we have selected the length of the test to be extended to 180 seconds, set
some parameters for the number of distracting dots, and excluded the results
section from the test.
Creating the ActivityStep is very similar to creating a survey question:
1 RPActivityStep continuousVisualTracking = RPContinuousVisualTrackingActivity(
2
'ContinuousVisualTracking step ID',
3
amountOfDots: 15,
4
lengthOfTest: 180,
5
includeResults: false);
.
The test can then be put inside an RPTask in the same way questions can.
1 RPOrderedTask surveyTask = RPOrderedTask(
2
identifier: 'surveyTaskID',
3
steps: [
4
instructionStep ,
5
continuousVisualTracking ,
6
completionStep ,
7
],
8 );
.
Once the task is used in an RPUITask, it recognizes the ActivitySteps and
will display the UI of the test – here an RPUIActivityStep with a body of
RPUIContinuousVisualTrackingActivityBody.
5.4
Implementation Summary
This chapter presented the implementation and classes of the Cognition Package.
First, the necessary changes made to the CARP Research Package were explained
and how the cognitive tests previously in Research Package were extracted. Then
the cognitive tests implemented in Flutter were described. Lastly, how the Cog-
nition Package was released on pub.dev and how developers can use it in the
future was explained.
The implementation and the functional choices made for each cognitive test
are described in detail in Appendix A.3.
==PAGE:64==
52
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation
This chapter outlines the evaluation of the Cognition Package. The evaluation is
done in two parts; the first part evaluates the Cognition Package as a software
package by building a demo flutter application using the package. The second
part evaluates the individual cognitive tests in the Cognition Package by running
a validation study comparing the scores from the Cognition Package to a gold-
standard validated conventional cognitive assessment tool. After the validation
study, a statistical analysis is performed on the results. Finally, a cut-off score
was chosen for the cognitive assessment in the demo application based on the
analysis done.
6.1
Demo App
The demo application was developed to test and validate the Cognition Package
implemented.
The application imports the CARP Research Package and the
newly developed Cognition Package. This was done to test how the cognitive
tests are set up and send the results to the CARP study management portal.
The app includes a survey page from the Research Package to collect the name,
biological sex, and age of participants and a subset of cognitive tests from the
Cognition Package. Once all steps in the application are completed, scores are
collected and sent to a study created in the CARP study management portal,
from where they can be downloaded and analyzed later.
The new cognitive tests implemented into the Cognition Package were chosen
based on the inclusion criteria that the Cognition Package would encompass a full
cognitive assessment suite capable of testing all parts of cognitive performance.
Of the many gold-standard cognitive assessment tools currently available, only a
few are all-encompassing. Of these, most take between 30-90 minutes to complete
and provide a wealth of results and data for clinicians to study (see table 2.1 for
more information). However, the Cognition Package aims to provide a way to
screen for cognitive impairments quickly and easily by providing a screening tool
that takes between 5 and 10 minutes to complete and can be done out of the
clinic. The two cognitive assessment tools that offer a comprehensive overview of
==PAGE:66==
54
6 Evaluation
the participants’ cognitive performance in about 10 minutes are the MMSE [67]
and the MoCA [30].
The MMSE is a universally used cognitive screening tool for identifying demen-
tia, with a diagnostic threshold usually set at less than 25 points [67]. However,
the MMSE has low sensitivity for individuals with MCI, with about 80% of the
latter scoring above 25 points on the MMSE [61]. Several studies have shown
that a large proportion of patients with dementia, including those in the early
stages of AD those with a high premorbid IQ score, often score above-recognized
cut-off points on the MMSE (that is, a score of more than 25 points). As a result,
clinicians will often obtain more detailed neuropsychiatric testing if available or
repeat the MMSE later.
The MoCA is a 10-minute, 30-point cognitive screening test designed to assist
health professionals in detecting MCI in participants who scored between 24 and
30 points on the MMSE [61]. The suggested cut-off point on the MoCA is 25 [61].
In addition, the MoCA emphasizes tasks of frontal executive functioning and at-
tention more than the MMSE, which makes it more sensitive in detecting non-AD
dementia.
The Cognition Package aims to be an early screening tool for MCI. Therefore,
the more sensitive MoCA test was chosen as the gold-standard assessment tool
the Cognition Package was validated against in the validation study. The cogni-
tive tests included in the demo application and the order of these were selected
to fit the length, order, and test capacity of the MoCA, which takes between
5-10 minutes to complete. The MoCA assesses six cognitive domains through 13
different sub-tasks, resulting in an overall score out of 30 points where anyone
obtaining above 25 is considered of normal cognitive abilities.
The cognitive domains of the MoCA test include the Visuospatial construc-
tion, Executive functioning, Episodic memory, Attention, Language, and Ori-
entation. The MoCA assesses these domains with the following tests in table
6.1:
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Demo App
55
Cognitive Domain
Task
Score
Visuospatial Construction
Shape Copying, Clock Drawing
4
Executive Function
Trail-Making, Word mobilization,
4
Episodic Memory
Delayed Recall of 5 words
5
Attention
Auditory monitoring, Serial Subtraction,
Number recall
6
Language
Naming, Sentence repetition
5
Orientation
Time and Place orientation
6
Total
30
Table 6.1: Tests included in the MoCA and the cognitive domains they assess.
A subset of the implemented cognitive tests was chosen to represent a range
of tests in the same cognitive domains to compare scores between the MoCA and
the Cognition Package.
Cognitive Domain
Task
Score
Visuospatial Construction
Multiple Object tracking
3
Executive Function
Trail-Making
5
Episodic Memory
Picture Sequence, Delayed Recall
10
Attention
Letter tapping, Flanker
3
Abstraction
Color Shapes
3
Orientation
Time and Place orientation
6
Total
30
Table 6.2: Tests included in the demo application with the cognitive domains
they assess.
Examples of the implemented tests running can be seen below in fig 6.1. De-
tailed descriptions of each test, including scoring, instructions, and how each test
is run, can be found in Appendix A.1.
==PAGE:68==
56
6 Evaluation
Figure 6.1: Example tests from the demo app.
6.2
Methods
The validation study aimed to validate that the resulting scores obtained from
the demo application aligned with the actual cognitive performance of its partic-
ipants. This was done by comparing the newly implemented Cognition Package
demo application scores against a validated gold standard cognitive assessment
tool. The MoCA test was chosen as the validated cognitive assessment tool the
Cognition Package was validated against. This was done as it has many of the
same features as the cognitive test battery, with the main similarities being their
time to complete is relatively short (around 10 minutes) while fully encompass-
ing the cognitive domains explained in section 3.1. This, plus the fact that the
MoCA test has been shown to have a very high sensitivity to MCI at an early
stage makes it a good candidate for validating the cognitive test battery.
6.2.1
Participants
Participants were recruited from DTU and through family and friends. No par-
ticipants had any diagnosed cognitive disorders, and Informed Consent for all
participants had been obtained before beginning the study.
6.2.2
Procedure
Participants were asked to participate in the study at their own homes or work
oﬀice, whichever was most convenient. All participants were administered one of
the three MoCA pen and paper test variations. In addition, they completed the
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Results
57
demo application lasting approximately 10 minutes. In total, about 20 minutes
(10 minutes for MoCA and 10 minutes for the demo app). The individual cogni-
tive tests included in each cognitive assessment tool are described in tables 6.1
and 6.2.
The MoCA was administered with pen and paper using a printed version of
one of the three variations of the MoCA test chosen randomly for each participant.
All MoCA tests were administered and scored by the author following the scoring
guide included in the MoCA manual [68].
The demo application was administered on an iPhone Xs running iOS 15.1.
Participants read all instructions and responded using the iPhone’s touch screen.
No other devices or manuals were given to complete the test. The Cognition
Package was designed to be self-administered, and participants completed all
testing without assistance. However, the author remained in the room during
testing to monitor the use of the app.
The administration order of the assessment tools was counterbalanced across
the participant sample. In addition, a subgroup of 5 participants was retested
under the conditions described after one month for test-retest reliability measures.
6.2.3
Statistical Analysis
The data was collected to a study created in the CARP study management portal
and analyzed using Microsoft Excel. First, differences and correlation between
the scores on the cognitive screening tools were analyzed by computing Pear-
son correlation and non-parametric Mann–Whitney U-tests on the total scores
achieved. Then, Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was done
to select an appropriate cut-off score for the Cognition Package demo application,
where a good balance between sensitivity and specificity was found. Lastly, test-
retest reliability was assessed by computing paired T-tests to compare test and
retest means.
6.3
Results
Detailed anonymized results from each test can be seen in Appendix A.8.
6.3.1
Participant demographics
Participants were aged between 18 and 67 (mean 33.3, SD 14.9), and 8 out of
20 participants (40%) were female. On average, participants spent 3.75 years
studying at a higher-education level. Participants had diverse occupational back-
grounds, including students, computer scientists, designers, laboratory techni-
==PAGE:70==
58
6 Evaluation
cians, electricians, and carpenters. All 20 participants owned smartphones as
their daily devices.
6.3.2
Overall Analysis
Pearson correlation analysis showed a significant correlation between the total
number of correct responses obtained from the Cognition Package demo appli-
cation and MoCA assessment (r = .72, p < 0.05).
Figure 6.2 shows the full
participant scores obtained from the demo application versus the MoCA along
with the regression line.
Non-parametric Mann–Whitney U-tests also revealed a significant correlation
between the assessment tools. Similarities between the scores were highly signif-
icant (p > .769). Since the p-value of the test is (0.769698) is not smaller than
our significance level of 0.05, we do not reject the null hypothesis meaning that
there is insuﬀicient evidence to say that the true mean score is different between
the two tests.
Figure 6.2: Overall participant scores in the two cognitive assessments. Each
black dot represents results from one participant. The blue line is
the regression line..
6.3.3
Sensitivity and specificity of screening tests
ROC curve analysis showed that both tests had similar performance, with the
MoCA (AUC = 0.771) coming slightly ahead of the Mobile Cognitive Assessment
Tool (MCAT) (AUC = 0.734) see figure 6.3.
==PAGE:71==
6.3 Results
59
Figure 6.3: ROC curves demonstrate the ability of the screening tests to dis-
criminate for cognitive impairments.
For the Cognition Package demo app, a cut-off score was selected to give
the highest sensitivity for participants who scored under the threshold in the
MoCA, balanced with optimum specificity for the participants who scored over
the threshold in the MoCA (see table 6.3). The cut-off score selected for the
Cognition Package was 26 out of a maximum score of 30. This score is similar
to the score of 25 cited in the literature for the MoCA [61]. Still, in this case, a
cut-off of 26 revealed better discrimination between the participants who scored
over the threshold in the MoCA and the participants who did not. The complete
ROC curve analysis is shown in table 6.3 and shows the sensitivity and specificity
scores achieved with the chosen cut-off of 26 (sensitivity 90%, and specificity 71%;
AUC = 0.734)
AUC
p
95%
CI
Cut
off
Sensitivity%
Specificity%
PPV%
NPV%
0.734
0.77
23.96
- 26.67
26
90%
71%
82%
83%
Table 6.3: PPV, Positive Predictive Value, Negative Predictive Value.
6.3.4
Test-retest reliability
One-month test-retest reliability was assessed using paired t-test between test and
retest means for total scores on the Cognition Package demo app, administered
at the two time points with 5 participants. The p-value was found to be greater
than .05, confirming the test-retest stability (see table 6.4).
==PAGE:72==
60
6 Evaluation
Time 1
Time 2
Paired
t-test
Assessment tool
M
SD
M
SD
t
p
Cognition Package
26.4
0.54
26.6
0.76
-0.302
0.778
Table 6.4: Test-retest reliability of demo application over one month, computed
using paired t-tests.
.
6.4
Evaluation Summary
This chapter has provided an overview of the evaluation of the Cognition Pack-
age. First, the technical aspects and design decisions were covered by describing
the demo application designed to validate the cognitive tests in the Cognition
Package. This consisted of a description of the technical setup, including which
tests were included and the cognitive domains they assessed.
Then the validation study was presented, including the method and procedure
of how participants were administered the validated MoCA test and the new demo
application developed.
Finally, the results from the validation study were analyzed using the Pearson
correlation analysis, Mann-Whitney U-test, and a ROC curve analysis to find the
correlation between the two assessment tools and the sensitivity and specificity
of the Cognition Package.
In summary, the validation study shows that the scores achieved from the
Cognition Package demo application and the scores achieved from the MoCA test
are not statistically different. Furthermore, the validation study demonstrates
that the Cognition Package tests can be patient-administered in the wild.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
This chapter discusses the product and results of this thesis and reviews how they
satisfy the research questions presented in Section 1.2. Then the implications
and limitations of the Cognition Package and the possible future extensions of
the package are reviewed and discussed.
7.1
Goals and Results
In this Section, the evaluation study results from Chapter 6 are discussed. This
also includes how they answer the research questions. The research questions
were identified and presented in detail in Section 1.2:
• RQ1: What is the current state-of-the-art in patient-administered cogni-
tive assessment tools?
• RQ2: What is the design of a patient-administered cognitive test battery
explicitly built for smartphone assessment in the wild?
• RQ3: Does a mobile cognitive test battery yield scores that correlate with
the gold-standard validated cognitive test batteries?
The analysis of related work in the domain of computerized cognitive assess-
ment tools done in chapter 2 revealed that most of the current state-of-the-art
computerized cognitive assessment tools are developed for tablets and in-clinic
use with a clinician present (See table 2.1 for more details). This was the case
for seven out of the ten cognitive assessment tools analyzed. The three cognitive
assessments that deviate from this statistic were designed according to a recent
trend to move cognitive assessments away from the clinic. This is based on the
latest studies showing that cognitive performance is not static but depends on
multiple outside factors [69]. To study this phenomenon, cognitive tests designed
to be run on smartphones in the wild are becoming more prevalent. However,
the area of remote patient-administered cognitive assessment tools developed for
smartphones is still in its infancy and is currently being developed and validated.
==PAGE:74==
62
7 Discussion
This answers the research question RQ1: What is the current state of the art in
patient-administered cognitive assessment tools?
The design process presented in chapter 4 showed that translating the cogni-
tive tests from their original validated versions to the screen of smartphones is
no easy task. It requires significant changes in how stimuli is presented to the
participants and how they interact with the screen to complete the tests. There-
fore, special care was taken to keep the mobile cognitive tests in the Cognition
Package as close to the original as possible, only making the necessary changes
to the test to make them work on the smartphone screen.
This answers the
research question RQ2: What is the design of a patient-administered cognitive
test battery explicitly built for smartphone assessment in the wild?
The results in Chapter 6 indicate that the changes made when translating
the tests to the phone screen did not alter the assessment capabilities of the
conventional cognitive tests. Furthermore, the Pearson correlation analysis in
the validation study revealed a significant correlation between the total number
of correct responses obtained from the cognitive tests in the Cognition Package
demo application and MoCA assessment (r = .72, p < 0.05). This answers the
research question RQ3: Does a mobile cognitive test battery yield scores that
correlate with the gold-standard validated cognitive test batteries? This is also
in line with the hypothesis that validated cognitive tests can be translated to the
interactive screens of smartphones while retaining their assessment capabilities.
7.2
Implications
The validation study showed that the Cognition Package and the demo applica-
tion developed could be done out of the clinic and be patient-administered, and
that cognitive performance can reliably be assessed using a smartphone, even
in an uncontrolled environment. This builds on existing evidence and has been
proven in several studies [70, 71, 72].
Concluding that the test can be used in a patient-administered uncontrolled
setting relies on two assumptions:
First, the participants’ performance was similar in the patient-administered
and examiner-administered assessments. Thus, the performance is not different
from a more examiner-administered and standardized evaluation even without
having an examiner present.
Second, it was found that the correlation between participants’ performance
in the Cognition Package demo application and the paper-based MoCA test was
strong. This indicates that the participants performed comparably in the two
successive assessments, even with the format change.
==PAGE:75==
7.3 Limitations
63
In practice, this suggests that the Cognition Package of mobile patient-administered
cognitive tests could be run out of the clinic without an examiner present for con-
ducting studies of participants’ cognitive performance in the wild. In addition,
utilizing this technology could be considered for more longitudinal assessments
throughout cognitive decline or remediation interventions along with the in-clinic
gold standard assessments (like the MoCA). Of course, more work will be needed
first to validate these smartphone-based cognitive assessments. But the potential
to use this application to monitor relative changes in cognition in participants’
everyday routines is quite compelling.
7.3
Limitations
The results demonstrate that the package can do overall what it was set out to
do. However, there were some limitations in the validation study done and its
results.
The small sample size limits the reliability of the results presented in the
validation study. More data from more participants could give a more detailed
look into how the two screening tools assess the specific cognitive domains.
Due to the lack of data on the specific cognitive domains assessed by each
cognitive test, the results cannot confirm that each test is a good adaptation
of the original validated test. Nevertheless, the tests implemented offer a quick
screening tool for full spectrum cognitive performance when combined. In addi-
tion, the scores of an assessment tool made using a combination of the tests have
been shown to correlate to participants’ scores on a validated pen-and-paper test.
However, every single test is not validated as a single assessment tool in itself.
Another limitation of the validation study is that it is only tested on healthy
individuals. This limits the range of the study done, and how the Cognition Pack-
age handles participants with diagnosed cognitive impairments is still unknown.
It was beyond the scope of this thesis to test and validate the Cognition
Package against more gold-standard validated cognitive assessment tools. Still,
the results from such studies could prove extremely valuable in the validation of
the Cognition Package as a versatile cognitive test battery.
7.4
Future Work
As the thesis progressed, some features and improvements were discovered through
the user interviews and validation study, which were not within the time frame
for this thesis. This section describes the features that could be implemented in
the future but which at this stage are not part of the Cognition Package.
==PAGE:76==
64
7 Discussion
7.4.1
Improvements to the individual tests
After the trials of both cognitive assessment tools throughout the validation study,
participants were asked for any confusion or input on the demo application devel-
oped using the Cognition Package. Most of the concerns were about the instruc-
tions for each test. A subset of participants said that completely understanding
the instructions was diﬀicult, however, once the test started, the goal of the test
became more apparent.
In a future update, this could be remedied by replacing the static instruction
images before each test with a video or a GIF. This could provide a clearer view
of how the test is run before participants start the test. A video would also allow
for more information to be displayed to participants on the single screen that the
current instructions are on.
Some participants expressed initial confusion on how the test was run. How-
ever, they understood how the test was run after the first trial, and the subsequent
trials were easier and more straightforward. This fueled the idea that each test
could include practice trials. These could be added to each test that can run
in trials. Adding practice trials would allow participants to try and learn the
cognitive test ahead without affecting their score on the assessment. In addition,
the practice trials could be included as parameters, much like instructions and
results in each test, so they are available but not necessary for the tests to run.
7.4.2
Improvements to the package
An easy improvement to the usability of the package out of the box would be
the addition of more cognitive tests. With more validated cognitive tests in the
Cognition Package, the versatility, and usability of the package improve out of
the box without further development. These tests should still be translated from
validated cognitive assessment tools to keep with the spirit that the package is a
battery of validated cognitive tests.
To improve the reach of the package, it could prove helpful to include exam-
ple applications using combinations of the included cognitive tests that match
the gold-standard validated cognitive assessment tools currently in use. Like the
current demo application, which is designed to match the score of the MoCA
test, more demo applications could be designed and added to validate the Cogni-
tion Package against the other gold-standard cognitive assessments (e.g., MMSE,
CANS-MCI, or CANTAB).
This would allow more accessible validation against those gold-standard tools
and provide researchers with already setup up out-of-the-box solutions for run-
ning a study with a gold-standard validated cognitive assessment, now on mobile
devices in the wild.
==PAGE:77==
7.4 Future Work
65
7.4.3
More validation studies
As discussed in the limitations, the validation study done in this thesis was rela-
tively short. It had a reasonably low sample size, and further research is needed
to establish the Cognition Package as a validated tool for patient-administered
in the wild cognitive assessment. Future studies with larger samples could also
include participants diagnosed with cognitive impairments and healthy controls
to see how the Cognition Package handles actual cognitive impairments.
More studies validating the individual cognitive tests in the package against
their gold-standard validated counterparts could reveal findings not found in this
study. This would improve and validate the tests in the package to be closer to
their validated counterparts and improve the results collected from the Cognition
Package.
Future studies could also look into the effectiveness and test-retest ability of
the cognitive tests in the application for a more longitudinal study. For example,
have participants install the application on their phones and complete a test
multiple times at home or develop a few different applications with different
combinations of cognitive tests to find which ones offer the best results and data
to distinguish MCI patients from healthy controls.
==PAGE:78==
66
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
Cognition Package has successfully been designed, implemented, evaluated, and
released as open-source on ‘pub.dev’ as https://pub.dev/packages/cognition_
package. All the cognitive tests included in the package are designed based on
validated cognitive assessment tools. Furthermore, implementation of the tests
was done with a focus on easy addition to applications built using the CARP
Research Package. As a result, the Cognition Package is deeply anchored in the
CARP ecosystem and the Research Package.
Six cognitive tests were selected and implemented as part of the Cognition
Package based on parameters, media limitations, and inclusion criteria. The tests
were carefully selected and adapted from validated cognitive assessment tools,
easy to understand, fast to complete, and repeatable.
With the chosen tests
implemented alongside the eight cognitive tests previously part of the Research
Package, the first version of the Cognition Package was released, including 14
validated gold-standard cognitive tests spanning all eight neurocognitive domains.
The tests have been evaluated in a small-scale study, where 20 participants
completed the pen-and-paper version of the MoCA, a gold-standard validated
cognitive assessment tool, and a subset of the implemented cognitive tests in
the Cognition Package deployed in a demo application. The validation study
concluded a significant correlation between the total number of correct responses
obtained from the cognitive tests in the Cognition Package demo application and
MoCA assessment (r = .72, p < 0.05).
Researchers and developers can now include any number of cognitive tests
with the Research Package and the Cognition Package when making their appli-
cations. The tests extend a free-to-use tool and provide a way to help evaluate
subjects’ cognitive performance in various studies.
By implementing these cognitive tests, a contribution has been made to the
field of mobile patient-administered cognitive assessment tools, which is still in its
infancy. The Cognition Package provides researchers with a battery of patient-
administered, in the wild validated cognitive tests. These tests allow studies to
test the cognitive performance of their participants out of the clinic in longitu-
dinal studies to see the plasticity of human cognitive performance in everyday
conditions.
==PAGE:80==
68
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
R. C. Petersen et al. “Mild cognitive impairment: A concept in evolu-
tion.” In: Journal of Internal Medicine 275 (3 2014), pages 214–228. issn:
13652796. doi: 10.1111/joim.12190.
[2]
Hailin Qiu Boniface, Janis Chang, and Chih-Peng Chang. “The value of
routine screening for cognitive impairment in a primary care setting: a retro-
spective cross-sectional study.” In: (). doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-151864/v1.
url: https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-151864/v1.
[3]
Louise Robinson, Eugene Tang, and John Paul Taylor. “Dementia timely
diagnosis and early intervention.” In: ().
[4]
LTD Cambridge Cognition. “Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated
Battery.” In: (1996).
[5]
Margaret T. Davis et al. “Preliminary evidence concerning the pattern
and magnitude of cognitive dysfunction in major depressive disorder using
cogstate measures.” In: Journal of Affective Disorders 218 (August 2017),
pages 82–85. issn: 15732517. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2017.04.064.
[6]
Naomi Chaytor and Maureen Schmitter-Edgecombe. “The ecological valid-
ity of neuropsychological tests: A review of the literature on everyday cog-
nitive skills.” In: Neuropsychology Review 13 (4 December 2003), pages 181–
197. issn: 10407308. doi: 10.1023/B:NERV.0000009483.91468.fb.
[7]
Semion Kertzman et al. (5) Antipsychotic treatment in schizophrenia: The
role of computerized neuropsychological assessment | Request PDF.
[8]
Robert M. Brouillette et al. “Feasibility, Reliability, and Validity of a Smart-
phone Based Application for the Assessment of Cognitive Function in the
Elderly.” In: PLoS ONE 8 (6 June 2013). issn: 19326203. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0065925.
[9]
Pierre Schweitzer et al. “Feasibility and validity of mobile cognitive testing
in the investigation of age‐related cognitive decline.” In: International Jour-
nal of Methods in Psychiatric Research 26 (3 September 2017), page 1521.
doi: 10.1002/MPR.1521. url: /pmc/articles/PMC6877256/%20/pmc/
==PAGE:82==
70
Bibliography
articles/PMC6877256/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6877256/.
[10]
John Michael Templeton, Christian Poellabauer, and Sandra Schneider.
“Enhancement of neurocognitive assessments using smartphone capabilities:
Systematic review.” In: JMIR mHealth and uHealth 8 (6 June 2020). issn:
22915222. doi: 10.2196/15517.
[11]
James R Lewis. “Usability testing.” In: Handbook of human factors and
ergonomics 12 (2006), e30.
[12]
Elizabeth Charters. “The use of think-aloud methods in qualitative research
an introduction to think-aloud methods.” In: Brock Education Journal 12.2
(2003).
[13]
J. Mckeen Cattell and Livingstone Farrand. “Physical and mental mea-
surements of the students of Columbia University.” In: Psychological Re-
view 3 (6 November 1896), pages 618–648. doi: 10.1037/H0070786. url:
/record/1926-02863-001.
[14]
BERNARD ANDRIEU. “Les notes d’Alfred Binet sur L’étude expérimen-
tale de l’intelligence (1899-1902).” In: (HS July 2011), pages 5–24. issn:
1760-7760. doi: 10 . 4000 / RECHERCHESEDUCATIONS . 851. url: http : / /
journals.openedition.org/rechercheseducations/851.
[15]
Avital Sternin, Alistair Burns, and Adrian M. Owen. “Thirty-five years
of computerized cognitive assessment of aging — Where are we now?”
In: Diagnostics 9 (3 September 2019). issn: 20754418. doi: 10 . 3390 /
diagnostics9030114.
[16]
Philip D. Harvey. “Domains of cognition and their assessment.” In: Dia-
logues in Clinical Neuroscience 21 (3 2019), pages 227–237. issn: 12948322.
doi: 10.31887/DCNS.2019.21.3/pharvey.
[17]
Katherine Wild et al. “Status of computerized cognitive testing in aging:
A systematic review.” In: Alzheimer’s and Dementia 4 (6 November 2008),
pages 428–437. issn: 15525260. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2008.07.003.
[18]
Paul J Fray, Trevor W Robbins, and Barbara J Sahakian. “Neuorpsychi-
atyric applications of CANTAB.” In: International journal of geriatric psy-
chiatry (1996).
[19]
Monica Luciana. “Practitioner review: computerized assessment of neu-
ropsychological function in children: clinical and research applications of the
Cambridge Neuropsychological Testing Automated Battery (CANTAB).”
In: Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 44.5 (2003), pages 649–663.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
71
[20]
Kylie S Fowler et al. “Computerized neuropsychological tests in the early
detection of dementia: prospective findings.” In: Journal of the International
Neuropsychological Society 3.2 (1997), pages 139–146.
[21]
Adrian M Owen et al. “Double dissociations of memory and executive func-
tions in working memory tasks following frontal lobe excisions, temporal
lobe excisions or amygdalo-hippocampectomy in man.” In: Brain 119.5
(1996), pages 1597–1615.
[22]
Richard W Elwood. “MicroCog: assessment of cognitive functioning.” In:
Neuropsychology review 11.2 (2001), pages 89–100.
[23]
C Thomas Gualtieri and Lynda G Johnson. “Reliability and validity of a
computerized neurocognitive test battery, CNS Vital Signs.” In: Archives
of Clinical Neuropsychology 21.7 (2006), pages 623–643.
[24]
Frequently-Asked Questions. url: https://www.cnsvs.com/FAQs.html.
[25]
S R Heaton and R K Heaton. Test Administration Guide ”Do Your Best”
Patient Guide: The KIT contains a GUIDE that allows you to review the
salient points that can help patients obtain their BEST RESULTS. (Tech-
nician Administration Script Example).
[26]
Cláudia M Memória et al. “Contributions of the computer-administered
neuropsychological screen for mild cognitive impairment (CANS-MCI) for
the diagnosis of MCI in Brazil.” In: International psychogeriatrics 26.9
(2014), pages 1483–1491.
[27]
Emory Hill et al. Self-Administered Screening for Mild Cognitive Impair-
ment: Validation of a Computerized Test Battery. 2000, pages 1483–1491.
[28]
Jolien P Tuijl et al. “Screening for cognitive impairment in older general
hospital patients: comparison of the Six-Item Cognitive Impairment Test
with the Mini-Mental State Examination.” In: International journal of geri-
atric psychiatry 27.7 (2012), pages 755–762.
[29]
Verna C Pangman, Jeff Sloan, and Lorna Guse. “An examination of psycho-
metric properties of the mini-mental state examination and the standard-
ized mini-mental state examination: implications for clinical practice.” In:
Applied Nursing Research 13.4 (2000), pages 209–213.
[30]
Tasha Smith, Nadia Gildeh, and Clive Holmes. “The Montreal Cognitive
Assessment: validity and utility in a memory clinic setting.” In: The Cana-
dian Journal of Psychiatry 52.5 (2007), pages 329–332.
[31]
MoCA App. url: https://www.mocatest.org/app/.
[32]
cogstate.com. url: https://www.cogstate.com/.
==PAGE:84==
72
Bibliography
[33]
Paul Maruff et al. “Validity of the CogState brief battery: relationship to
standardized tests and sensitivity to cognitive impairment in mild traumatic
brain injury, schizophrenia, and AIDS dementia complex.” In: Archives of
Clinical Neuropsychology 24.2 (2009), pages 165–178.
[34]
Cogstate Receives Digital Biomarker Award from ADDF to Develop Mo-
bile App for Early Detection of Memory Impairment. url: https://www.
cogstate.com/cogstate-receives-addf-digital-biomarker-award/.
[35]
The International Shopping List Test in Alzheimer’s Disease Clinical Trials.
url: https://www.cogstate.com/blog/internal- shopping- list-
test-alzheimers-disease-clinical-trials/.
[36]
Noelle E Carlozzi et al. “NIH toolbox cognitive battery (NIHTB-CB): the
NIHTB pattern comparison processing speed test.” In: Journal of the Inter-
national Neuropsychological Society 20.6 (2014), pages 630–641.
[37]
NIH Toolbox Subscription costs. url: https://nihtoolbox.force.com/
s/article/subscription-costs.
[38]
NIH Toolbox® for Assessment of Neurological and Behavioral Function Ad-
ministrator’s Manual iPad App Version 1.23 and up. 2006.
[39]
Mobile Toolbox - Upcoming Measures. https://www.mobiletoolbox.org/
upcoming-measures. Accessed: 2021-10-25.
[40]
CARP Research Package. https://carp.cachet.dk/research-package/.
Accessed: 2021-10-27.
[41]
Mads Vedel Saaby Christensen and Simon Strandly Brandt. “unpublished
bachelor thesis.” In: (2019).
[42]
Sureyya S. Dikmen et al. “Measuring episodic memory across the lifespan:
NIH toolbox picture sequence memory test.” In: Journal of the International
Neuropsychological Society 20 (6 2014), pages 611–619. issn: 14697661. doi:
10.1017/S1355617714000460.
[43]
Verbal Recognition Memory (VRM). url: https://www.cambridgecognition.
com/cantab/cognitive-tests/memory/verbal-recognition-memory-
vrm/.
[44]
Esther Strauss, Elisabeth MS Sherman, Otfried Spreen, et al. A compendium
of neuropsychological tests: Administration, norms, and commentary. Amer-
ican Chemical Society, 2006.
[45]
Eriksen Flanker Task. https://cognitionlab.com/project/flanker-
task/. Accessed: 2021-12-14.
[46]
Fred Rist Bruno Kopp and Uwe Mattler. “Psychophysiology - May 1996 -
KOPP - N200 in the flanker task as a neurobehavioral tool for investigating
executive control.” In: ().
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
73
[47]
WA Phillips. “On the distinction between sensory storage and short-term
visual memory.” In: Perception & Psychophysics 16.2 (1974), pages 283–
290.
[48]
Steven J Luck and Edward K Vogel. “The capacity of visual working mem-
ory for features and conjunctions.” In: Nature 390.6657 (1997), pages 279–
281.
[49]
Amanda L. Gilchrist and Nelson Cowan. “A two-stage search of visual
working memory: investigating speed in the change-detection paradigm.”
In: Attention, Perception, and Psychophysics 76 (7 2014), pages 2031–2050.
issn: 1943393X. doi: 10.3758/s13414-014-0704-5.
[50]
Bert Timmermans, Bert Windey, and Axel Cleeremans. “Experiencing more
complexity than we can tell.” In: Cognitive Neuroscience 1 (3 2010), pages 229–
230. issn: 17588928. doi: 10.1080/17588928.2010.497586.
[51]
Pierre-Yves Jonin et al. “Refining understanding of working memory buffers
through the construct of binding: Evidence from a single case informs theory
and clinical practise.” In: Cortex 112 (2019). Impairments of short-term
memory buffers: do they exist? Pages 37–57. issn: 0010-9452. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2018.08.011. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010945218302612.
[52]
Zenon W. Pylyshyn and Raymond Storm. “Tracking multiple independent
targets: evidence for a parallel tracking mechanism.” In: Spatial vision 3 3
(1988), pages 179–97.
[53]
Zenon W. Pylyshyn. “Visual indexes, preconceptual objects, and situated
vision.” In: Cognition 80 (2001), pages 127–158.
[54]
Michael N. Tombu and Adriane E. Seiffert. “Attentional costs in multiple-
object tracking.” In: Cognition 108 (2008), pages 1–25.
[55]
Delayed Recall. url: https://www.psychdb.com/cognitive-testing/
moca#delayed-recall.
[56]
MADS CHRISTENSEN. Research Package API. url: https : / / carp .
cachet.dk/research-package-api/.
[57]
NIH Toolbox Picture Sequence Memory Test. url: https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=jAkyotghH3c.
[58]
Matei Negulescu et al. “Tap, swipe, or move: attentional demands for dis-
tracted smartphone input.” In: Proceedings of the International Working
Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces. New York, NY, USA, 2012,
pages 173–180. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2254556.2254589.
==PAGE:86==
74
Bibliography
[59]
Qingchuan Li and Yan Luximon. “Older adults’ use of mobile device: us-
ability challenges while navigating various interfaces.” In: Behaviour & In-
formation Technology 39.8 (2020), pages 837–861.
[60]
Jia Zhou, Amrish Chourasia, and Gregg Vanderheiden. “Interface adapta-
tion to novice older adults’ mental models through concrete metaphors.”
In: International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 33.7 (2017),
pages 592–606.
[61]
Ziad S Nasreddine et al. “The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a
brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment.” In: Journal of the Amer-
ican Geriatrics Society 53.4 (2005), pages 695–699.
[62]
flutter_swipable 1.2.1. url: https://pub.dev/packages/flutter%7B%
5C_%7Dswipable.
[63]
flutter_tindercard 0.2.0. url: https://pub.dev/packages/flutter%7B%
5C_%7Dtindercard.
[64]
swipe_cards 0.1.0. url: https://pub.dev/packages/swipe%7B%5C_
%7Dcards.
[65]
audioplayers 0.20.1. url: https://pub.dev/packages/audioplayers.
[66]
Creating packages. url: https://dart.dev/guides/libraries/create-
library-packages.
[67]
Marshal F Folstein, Susan E Folstein, and Paul R McHugh. ““Mini-mental
state”: a practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the
clinician.” In: Journal of psychiatric research 12.3 (1975), pages 189–198.
[68]
Montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA) Administrations og scoringsinstruk-
tion.
[69]
Maxime Cauchoix, Alexis S. Chaine, and Gladys Barragan-Jason. “Cogni-
tion in Context: Plasticity in Cognitive Performance in Response to On-
going Environmental Variables.” In: Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution 8
(2020), page 106. issn: 2296-701X. doi: 10.3389/fevo.2020.00106. url:
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fevo.2020.00106.
[70]
Corrie Timmers et al. “Ambulant cognitive assessment using a smartphone.”
In: Applied Neuropsychology: Adult 21.2 (2014), pages 136–142.
[71]
Gang Liu et al. “Assessing the potential of longitudinal smartphone based
cognitive assessment in schizophrenia: A naturalistic pilot study.” In: Schizophre-
nia Research: Cognition 17 (2019), page 100144.
[72]
Claire Lancaster et al. “Evaluating the feasibility of frequent cognitive as-
sessment using the Mezurio smartphone app: observational and interview
study in adults with elevated dementia risk.” In: JMIR mHealth and uHealth
8.4 (2020), e16142.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
75
[73]
Tinder Revenue and Usage Statistics (2021). url: https://www.businessofapps.
com/data/tinder-statistics/.
[74]
Lianne MJ Sanders et al. “Psychometric properties of a flanker task in a
sample of patients with dementia: A pilot study.” In: Dementia and geriatric
cognitive disorders extra 8.3 (2018), pages 382–392.
[75]
Lauri Oksama and Jukka Hyönä. “Is multiple object tracking carried out
automatically by an early vision mechanism independent of higher-order
cognition? An individual difference approach.” In: Visual cognition 11.5
(2004), pages 631–671.
[76]
speech_to_text 5.4.2. url: https://pub.dev/packages/speech%7B%5C%
7B%5C_%7D%7Dto%7B%5C%7B%5C_%7D%7Dtext.
[77]
Package scores & pub points. url: https://pub.dev/help/scoring.
[78]
Michael Heron, Vicki L Hanson, and Ian Ricketts. “Open source and acces-
sibility: advantages and limitations.” In: Journal of interaction Science 1.1
(2013), pages 1–10.
[79]
Sagar Suri. Architect your Flutter project using BLOC pattern. url: https:
//medium.com/codechai/architecting-your-flutter-project-bd04e144a8f1.
[80]
Kanika Ratra. BLOC Architecture in Flutter Explained. url: https://
medium.com/gradeup/bloc-architecture-explained-10d54c236df4.
==PAGE:88==
76
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Cognitive Test Designs
Each cognitive test was designed with the required parameters, the instructions
to the participants, the test run itself and finally how each test would be scored.
These were all designed as to keep the tests as close to the validated state of
the original tests they adapt. This included looking at how the test diﬀiculty is
changed in the original tests and adapting this parameters that researchers can
change to modulate the diﬀiculty of the tests. Then designing how the UI of some
of these tests originally designed for big computer screens would need to adapt to
fit the much smaller format of smartphone screens. Lastly the results calculation
algorithms were designed according to the original scoring mechanisms of the tests
as to keep the mobile scores close to the validated scores as possible. This will
allow the tests to be evaluated later against some of the gold standard validated
tests, but also allows researchers to have some previous knowledge on how the
tests are scored from previous experience with the gold-standard tools available.
A.1.1
Picture Sequence memory (PSM)
From the analysis in the previous section we analysed that the PSM starts with
a series of images depicting independent, non-sequential activities shown in a
specific order and placed in specific, ordered locations on the screen.
Translating this cognitive task from the tablet to the much smaller screen of
smartphones meant that the size of pictures had to be smaller while still keeping
a clear ordering of the images. The first iteration grouped the images in a vertical
list on the screen. This design allowed the images to occupy the entire width of
the screen meaning with 4 images the entire screen space would be taken up of
images maximising screen real estate.
Users could then drag and drop the images in the list the the other images
moving out of the way when moving an image into their previously occupied
spot.
The drag and drop technique is the same used in the original NIHTB
tablet version of the test.
==PAGE:90==
78
A Appendix
After initial testing on an iPhone XS with a screen-size of 143.6 mm by 70.9
mm no issues were found with the readability of images, but once the amount
of images was above 4, any images after this were obscured out of screen and
scrolling was needed to access them. This both disrupts the test as some partici-
pants may not notice that there is more images below and the ones that do have
to scroll to find them, which causes extra steps for the episodic memory as all
images can’t stay in the field of view at a time.
A second iteration of the design was created where the images are placed
in a grid on screen instead. The order of images is still clear, but the size of
images is significantly smaller, but no issues were found in further testing that
the images were not instantly recognizable. This allowed more images on screen
for more diﬀicult picture sequence memory testing. With the new layout a total
of 18 images could be seen on screen at the same time, significantly increasing
the variability in diﬀiculty that could be chosen by researchers.
Based on the NIHTB findings when developing the Picture Sequence Memory
test, they selected different sequence lengths for different age groups. For ages
3-4 years: 6 pictures; 5-7 years: 9 pictures; 8 years: 12 pictures; 9-60 years: 15
pictures, and 61-85 years: 9 pictures [57]. This invalidates the initial design made
for the Picture Sequence Memory test on smartphones, as the number of images
required to test all age groups greatly exceeds the maximum number of images
on screen at a time.
Both versions of the picture sequence memory test can be seen in fig A.1
below:
Figure A.1: Picture Sequence Memory test on smartphone.
==PAGE:91==
A.1 Cognitive Test Designs
79
A.1.1.1
Parameters
For the PSM to be repeatable (FR5) the images in the test need to be changeable
to fit new tests so that learning effects are minimal. This means either having
an extensive list of images that are randomized each time, or giving the option
to researchers where they provide their own images to the test. From the analy-
sis previously it was found that using images of low connectivity, meaning a low
degree of logical or meaningful order in the images (e.g. bake a cake, before apply-
ing icing) was preferential as this allowed for greater variability in performance
among participants [42]. According to this the design decision to implement the
PSM test with a randomized list of images was chosen, as this allows for an easier
implementation by researchers, as they don’t need to go out and find images to
use, making the test ready out of the box.
For the diﬀiculty of the test, as with the NIHTB original, different age groups get
differing amounts of images, so this parameter is of course given to the researchers
so they can choose a diﬀiculty they want the test to run at, or even develop the
study app with a question step before the PSM step, asking participants their
age, and setting up the PSM step afterwards to fit the age group and diﬀiculty
required. Anything between 6 and 15 pictures allows the test to work with any
age group between 3-85 years.
In the analysis of the NIHTB original version of the PSM test, the test was
validated using 3 trials to improve test score variability and test-retest reliability.
The option to set the number of trials is therefore manageable by researchers
when setting up the test.
As with the original cognitive tests run in clinic with an examiner present, any
test can be cut short if the participant seems to be stuck. The same was imple-
mented by Mads Vedel Saaby Christensen and Simon Strandly Brandt as part of
their Bachelors Thesis [41]. In the original implementation a timer starts with
each cognitive test step and a maximum time is allowed before the test auto-
matically ends and leads to the next step in the task. This maximum amount of
time is of course a parameter that researchers can set for each test independently.
As with any RPActiveTask the parameters to include the tests own instructions
or write their own are available for the PSM, as well as the option to include the
result of the test to show the participant or keep it hidden. With these included
the parameters researchers can set for the PSM test are thus:
• The length of time before the test automatically ends.
• The number of trials the test should run.
==PAGE:92==
80
A Appendix
• The number of images each trial should contain.
• If the test should include instructions.
• If the test should include results.
A.1.1.2
How is the test introduced
If instructions are included the test instructions includes a screen that shows
a short description of the test as well as an image that imitates the motion of
dragging and dropping the image around in the grid, see fig A.2. This is both to
guide the participant in how the test is completed as well as the gestures required
to move the images into the correct order once memorized.
The instructions written above the guide image are similar to the instructions
given by the examiner in the original NIHTB PSM test: You will see some
pictures on the screen. You should remember them and show them back to me in
the same way you saw them on the screen [57].
The instructions include a reference to the drag and drop procedure which a
lot of smartphone users are familiar with from other apps:
Memorize the order of the images.
Once memorized click the ’Ready’ button and the images will change positions.
Drag and drop the images to their original positions before pressing ’guess’
Figure A.2: Picture Sequence Memory instruction image.
A.1.1.3
How is the test run
1. After the instructions, like the original, running the PSM on the phone
starts with a sequence of images depicting independent, non-sequential ac-
tivities shown in a specific order and placed in a specific, ordered grid on
the screen.
2. Once the participants click ready, once they have memorized the list of
images as best they can, a delay screen is shown with no images.
==PAGE:93==
A.1 Cognitive Test Designs
81
3. Following this delay, the images are scrambled shown on screen. The par-
ticipant is then asked to recall the original order and place the images ac-
cordingly, by dragging and dropping the images in the grid to their original
positions.
4. If more than 1 trial is done, the test restarts with another sequence of
images in a grid that the participant is asked to memorize, and the rest of
the steps are identical to the first trial.
A.1.1.4
how is the test scored
The participant’s score on the PSM is the cumulative number of adjacent pairs
of pictures remembered correctly regardless of the number of pictures in the
sequence [42].
Adjacent pairs are two adjacent pictures placed in the correct
consecutive, ascending order. Thus, pictures placed in the orders 3–4 and 5–6
would receive credit, whereas pictures placed in the orders 1–5 and 3–9 would
not receive credit. For each trial, the possible number of adjacent pairs is one
less than the number of pictures in the sequence.
On the phone this is copied exactly as to keep with the validity of the origi-
nal PSM test. Even though performance in the test is measured by the number
of correct adjacent pairs reproduced and not by the time it takes participants
to complete, the time taken to complete each trial as well as the time taken to
memorize each sequence of images is recorded and saved in the result to give
researchers more data to guide their data analysis later.
A.1.2
Flanker
After analysing the Flanker test develop by Eriksen [45] in 1974, it was decided
that the two direction indicator buttons of the computer based test would not
work exactly as intended on mobile.
On the computer the test is originally
administered on, participants have one button in each hand for each direction
and sit 1,2 meters from the screen displaying the stimuli. On the phone screen
this is translated to a swiping motion in the desired direction. So a swipe from
left to right for the right direction and a swipe from right to left for the left
direction. This is done so that participants can keep their eyes on the stimuli,
as finding non-physical buttons on screen requires attention from the participant
to switch to the part of the screen to find the buttons on screen as they have no
physical feedback when found, like tactile buttons do.
Swiping gesture provides an eyes free alternative to button tapping, and in
the case of where the buttons represent directions, the swiping motion in each
direction is a clear substitute. Swiping does not have any higher cognitive cost
==PAGE:94==
82
A Appendix
as an action than button tapping and requires less looks at the screen to confirm
that the participants fingers hit the buttons on screen and register [58].
To further emphasize and make the swiping gesture more recognizable to partic-
ipants the stimuli is represented on screen as a deck of cards from which partici-
pants can swipe the cards either in the left or right direction. The card patterns
have recently emerged as an elegant way to display content. Using swiping, flip-
ping, and stacking gestures, they can easily create a visual hierarchy [59]. The
pattern of card flipping and swiping is clear and easy for older adults to navigate.
This may be because it is a metaphor design taken from the physical world, which
may facilitate older adult’s mental model through previous experience [60]. In
addition the cards pattern enables simple interaction techniques and allows for a
large interactive area on screen, which is easy and convenient for older adults to
learn and execute [59]. The cards pattern is also very recognisable to the younger
generation from apps like Tinder with over 400 million downloads and 75 million
active monthly users, where the card pattern is a central part of the interaction
in the app [73].
Based on this the design of the flanker test on mobile uses the cards pattern
with a deck of cards with the stimuli and the distractors on each card. These are
then placed in a stack where the next stimuli is revealed automatically once the
participant swipes the current card in either direction off screen (see fig A.3.
Figure A.3: Flanker task on smartphone.
==PAGE:95==
A.1 Cognitive Test Designs
83
A.1.2.1
Parameters
The diﬀiculty in the flanker task isn’t adjustable as in the PSM, however a more
accurate score is reached with longer testing and more trials, as the score is calcu-
lated based on the difference in reaction time between congruent and incongruent
trials, referred to as flanker interference [45]. This means that the more trials
done the more accurate the average score is for each of the two types of trials.
However, the more trials done the more time it takes to complete the flanker
task. Thus the number of trials is a vital parameter for researchers to be able to
choose.
As for the PSM if the test isn’t finished in the allocated time the task continues
to the next step. This again is changeable by the researcher in the parameters,
such that researchers can choose the maximum completion time they want their
cognitive assessments to take.
With the included parameters from RPActiveTask the parameters for the
flanker task are:
• The length of time before the test automatically ends.
• The number of trials (number of cards in the stack of stimuli).
• If the test should include instructions.
• If the test should include results.
A.1.2.2
How is the test introduced
The instructions for the flanker task include a short description of the task as
well as an explanation of the card pattern and the required swiping gesture also
shown in the illustration below the instructions (see fig A.4).
Figure A.4: Flanker instruction image.
The instructions read:
==PAGE:96==
84
A Appendix
Each card has 5 arrows on it.
Swipe the cards in the direction of the middle arrow on each card.
Ignore all other arrows on the card, they are only there to distract you.
A.1.2.3
How is the test run
1. After the instructions the test starts immediately with the first stimuli card
shown.
2. Once the participant swipes the stimuli card in the direction they decide,
another stimuli card lies beneath ready to be swiped.
3. Once all stimuli cards have been swiped or the maximum time is up the
test ends.
A.1.2.4
How is the test scored
The participants score on the flanker task is the difference in reaction time be-
tween congruent and incongruent trials, referred to as flanker interference [45].
Subtracting the mean reaction time for the correct congruent stimuli from the
mean reaction time for the correct incongruent stimuli gives the flanker interfer-
ence score of the reaction times [74]. If the flanker interference score is below
0.5 seconds the task is considered as complete with a score of 1, however if the
flanker interference score reaction time is above 0.5 seconds a score of 0 is given.
Another measure of the flanker task is the accuracy in correct answers. Accu-
racy scores were deemed better than chance if accuracy was ￿0.73. This cut-off
score of ￿0.73 is based on a binomial distribution with the probability of correctly
guessing being 0.5 and 25 trials [74]. If the accuracy score is below the cutoff
point a score of 0 is given for the flanker task, as this could be reached by chance.
A.1.3
Visual Array Change
The visual array change task bares similarities to the PSM as it involves a pre-
sentation followed by a delay followed by a recall stage. In the PSM this was
presenting the original sequence of images, then a delay, then the same array of
images shuffled around. In the visual array change, this is the presentation of
the shapes, a delay, followed by the same set of shapes, but maybe with different
colors. The task of the participant is then to indicate weather the any of the
shapes changed colors or all shapes remained the same [50].
As the location and rotation of the shapes in the visual array change task are also
==PAGE:97==
A.1 Cognitive Test Designs
85
scrambled between the presentation and interaction stage, arranging the shapes
in a list or a grid like in the PSM would give an unfair advantage as this give
participants a logical order of the shapes which can help in the recall stage. Ran-
domly placing the shapes on the screen such that no shape is cut off of screen
then is the logical design choice for the visual array change (see fig A.5).
Figure A.5: visual array change.
A.1.3.1
Parameters
The diﬀiculty in the visual array change test is based on the number of shapes that
the participant is required to remember, as well as the time delay between the
presentation and the recall stage. Thus the number of shapes in the visual array
change test is a parameter that researchers can set along with the delay time
between the stages. As the scoring of the visual array change is the accuracy
achieved by participants during all trials, the number of trials is also a vital
parameter available to researchers.
With the included parameters from RPActiveTask the parameters for the
visual array change task are:
• The length of time before the test automatically ends.
• The number of trials.
• The number of shapes in each trial.
==PAGE:98==
86
A Appendix
• The time delay between presentation and recall stage.
• If the test should include instructions.
• If the test should include results.
A.1.3.2
How is the test introduced
Like the previous tests the visual array change instructions are based on the
original test instructions on how to complete the task read aloud by examiners
in clinic adapted for the new format, followed by an image illustrating how to
interact with the UI to complete the task.
Memorize the colors of the shapes.
Once ready, press the button and the shapes will change positions, and maybe
change color.
Indicate if ANY of the shapes changed color or if ALL shapes remained the
same, with the buttons at the bottom.
Figure A.6: visual array change instruction image.
The emphasis on ANY and ALL was added after some preliminary think-
aloud testing of the test where participants indicated that they thought they
needed to press the shapes they thought changed color and not the buttons at
the button of the screen.
A.1.3.3
How is the test run
1. After the instructions, like the original, the visual array change on the
phone starts with a screen presenting the shapes and their colors.
==PAGE:99==
A.1 Cognitive Test Designs
87
2. Once the participants click ready, once they have memorized the shapes as
best they can, a delay screen is shown with no shapes.
3. Following this delay, the shapes are scrambled and shown on screen. The
participant is then asked to recall the shape colors.
4. If any of the shapes changed color during the delay period. The participant
indicates different using the button that says ”different”. If the participant
thinks all shapes stayed the same color as they were before the delay period,
they indicate so using the button that says ”same” at the bottom of the
screen.
5. if multiple trials are chosen in the test parameters, the test resets with a
new set of shapes for the participant to memorize the colors of.
A.1.3.4
How is the test scored
The task is scored based on if participants identified A change, not specifying
where the change happened or what was changed, but rather if there occurred
any change at all. The score is then calculated as the number of correct answers
[50]. This also means that the more trials that are chosen by the researchers the
higher the the score will be in this task.
A.1.4
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT)
The multiple object tracking test is one of the newer cognitive tests as it was
designed with and for computer screens. The moving of objects in a predictable
manner requires the use of computer screens. The translation from the original
test developed by Pylyshyn and Storm back in 1988 [52] to the mobile screen
then is less complicated as some of the previous tests.
The original test used (+) signs as the moving objects, but later iterations have
used white squares [75] and red dots [54]. For the mobile version a set number
of moving dots was decided. The entire mobile screen acts as the boundary box
which the moving dots are constrained to. Before moving the targets are set to
a specified color to cue them as the targets while all distracting dots are colored
gray (see fig A.7). Then once ready the participant indicates so on the ”ready”
button and the cued dots change to the same gray color and all the dots start
moving in random directions.
After a set time all the dots stop moving the
participant is asked to click on the target dots they followed. If the dot clicked
on is indeed one of the cued targets it will change back to its original cued color.
After all cued targets are found the test can either reset for another trial or end.
The score is then based on the accuracy of following and indicating the cued
targets, with the number of distractor dots clicked as the number of errors.
==PAGE:100==
88
A Appendix
Figure A.7: multiple object tracking.
A.1.4.1
Parameters
On mobile screens the size of objects to track should be changeable as screen
sizes can differ widely in participants smartphones, a bigger screen with smaller
moving objects is clearly a disadvantage with multiple objects as they occupy
less of the screen compared to a small screen with bigger objects where tracking
becomes easier. For this the object size is automatically set to a percentage size
of the available screen area, with the option for researchers to set the dot-size
statically if preferred.
The results from the study done by Pylyshyn and Storm showed that the ac-
curacy of responding fell with the increase in number of targets, but remained
fairly stable with increase in distractors. The results showed that subjects were
able to perform the task of tracking multiple independently-moving targets quite
well under the conditions of this study, even when there were five such targets
(in which case the performance level was still at 85.6%) [52]. Based on this the
number of targets is an essential parameter that researchers want to be able to
change based on the study they want to perform and the participant population
recruited.
M. Tombu et al.
studied the effects of speed on the attentional cost of the
multiple object tracking task. They found that increasing dot speed increases
the attentional demands of tracking the moving objects significantly. They con-
==PAGE:101==
A.1 Cognitive Test Designs
89
cluded that the speed of the dots in the display increases the attentional demands
of tracking. The main effect of speed showed that participants were better able
to track when the speed of the dots in the display remained constant (78% cor-
rect) compared to when they sped up (70%). This result suggests that changes
in speed modulate the attentional demands of tracking [54]. Thus the speed of
dots moving on the mobile screen is also an important parameter for reserachers
to be able to choose.
With the included parameters from RPActiveTask the parameters for the
multiple object tracking task are:
• The length of time before the test automatically ends.
• The number of trials.
• The number of target dots in each trial.
• The number of distractor dots in each trial.
• The speed of the moving dots on screen.
• If the test should include instructions.
• If the test should include results.
A.1.4.2
How is the test introduced
The test is introduced by telling participants to locate the target dots that are
colored and that these are the ones to be followed. Then the procedure of the
test is explained and when its time for the participant to interact again and click
the target dots.
Find the blue colored dots on the next screen, these are the target dots.
Once ready, press ”START” and the dots will turn grey and all the dots will
start moving.
Follow the target dots around the screen.
Once all the dots stop moving, click the target dots and they will turn the
original color.
This is followed by an illustration of a click on a dot making it colorful (see
fig A.8).
==PAGE:102==
90
A Appendix
Figure A.8: multiple object tracking instruction image.
A.1.4.3
How is the test run
1. Firstly participants are asked to locate the colored target dots.
2. Once they have found the target dots, the participants click the ”Ready”
button and all the dots turn grey and start moving in random directions.
3. During the movement, participants are asked to follow the target dots.
4. After a set time, all the dots stop moving.
5. The participant is then asked to click on the target dots.
6. If a target dot is clicked it changes color back to the original cue color from
the beginning.
7. If any of the distractor dots is clicked they turn color the dot blinks red to
indicate that an incorrect dot is clicked.
8. Once all the target dots have been found, if the test has more trials the
”ready” button re-appears and the participant is told to repeat the test. If
the test has no more trials, the test ends allowing participants to go to the
next step in the task.
A.1.4.4
How is the test scored
The participant’s score in the multiple object tracking task is measured as in
the original test developed for the computer screen. The proportion of correctly
tracking the target dots throughout the movement phase of the task. This means
that the number of mistakes made (distractor dots clicked) is recorded and the
==PAGE:103==
A.1 Cognitive Test Designs
91
proportion is then calculated [54]. Through preliminary testing, the participants
performance was divided into three categories.
1. Participants lost track of one or more of the targets completely and had to
click a series of dots randomly until the target was found.
2. Participants kept track of the location of the targets, but clicked a distractor
in close proximity to the target after which the target was clicked with ease.
3. Participants kept track of the targets and clicked them correctly.
Based on the testing the cutoff proportion of mistakes was chosen as the
number of targets being tracked. Meaning that if the test is run with 2 targets
being tracked, it is allowed to have 2 mistakes in the test before finding both
targets correctly. Any more mistakes than that was a clear indicator that the
targets had been lost and the finding of the target was done by chance.
This means that a score of 1 is given for each trial that is completed with less
mistakes than targets.
A.1.5
Verbal Recognition Memory
The verbal recognition memory test is the first part of the Delayed Recall test.
It measures the ability to encode and subsequently retrieve verbal information,
with the second part, the recall tapping into fronto-temporal networks and recog-
nition assessing hippocampal areas. The original test is usually performed in
clinic by an examiner reading a list of 5 words aloud, then asking the participant
to recall the list in any order. For the mobile version we replace the examiner
with a recording reading aloud the 5 words to recall. And for the participant to
recall the list, there were two options. Having the participant write down the 5
words using the smartphone keyboard or having the participant recall the words
and having the smartphone record the participant. The recording could then
be sent to the researchers who could analyse it and give a score for the task, or
the smartphone could use voice recognition to recognize the said words and then
calculate the score itself.
After testing the voice recognition algorithms available for Flutter using the
speech_to_text package [76] it was decided that the accuracy at which the
words were recognized correctly was insuﬀicient for the test. More often than
not a list of 5 words recalled very patiently and correctly for any person to rec-
ognize, the package provided a list of words where at least one, but often more
words were recognized incorrectly as other words or omitted entirely. Thus it
was decided that having the participants type out the 5 words on the keyboard
was preferable to having the researchers analyse the data at a later date to get
==PAGE:104==
92
A Appendix
the final results. This keeps the cognitive test package as a complete assessment
tool that gives an instant result without further data analysis required.
Figure A.9: Verbal Recognition Memory.
A.1.5.1
Parameters
For the parameters of the verbal recognition memory test, giving the researchers
the option to provide their own lists of words and voice recordings was considered.
However it was ultimately decided not to provide this feature out of the box as it
would make the cognitive test battery less of a complete out of the box assessment
tool. It was thus decided to have the verbal recognition test come with a set 5
word list chosen from the validated list of words used in the MoCA test [61].
Researchers still have the option to provide their own lists of words and voice-
recordings if preferred just as the picture sequence memory test allows researchers
to provide their own images.
This leaves the list of parameters for the verbal recognition memory test to:
• The length of time before the test automatically ends.
• The number of trials.
• If the test should include instructions.
• If the test should include results.
==PAGE:105==
A.1 Cognitive Test Designs
93
A.1.5.2
How is the test introduced
The test is introduced according to the guide provided with the MoCA test:
“This is a memory test. I am going to read a list of words that you will have
to remember now and later on. Listen carefully. When I am through, tell me
as many words as you can remember. It doesn’t matter in what order you say
them.”
First it reminds participants that the test uses the speakers of the phone, such
that the participants will turn on the sound on their phones so they can hear the
words being read aloud.
Turn on sound for this task.
A list of words will be read aloud, try to memorize the list of words.
After the words have been read aloud you will be asked to recall them.
write the words you can recall in the boxes in any order before clicking ”guess”
Followed by an illustration of a speaker speaking the words, as a last reminder
to participants that the words will be read aloud from the phone speaker so they
are ready to start listening (see fig A.10).
Figure A.10: verbal recognition memory instruction image.
A.1.5.3
How is the test run
The test is run very similarly to the original in-clinic version:
1. The list of 5 words is read aloud by the smartphone while a blank screen is
shown only with the word ”listen”
2. 5 input fields are shown with the tagline ”enter the words you recall in any
order.”
3. The participant is asked to fill in a word in each of the input fields.
4. Once a input field is clicked by the participant, the smartphone keyboard
pops up allowing the participant to type the words they desire.
==PAGE:106==
94
A Appendix
5. Once the participant has filled in as many fields with words as they recall,
they click the ”guess” button and their answers are recorded.
6. If multiple trials have been chosen to run, the first screen is shown again
and the test repeats.
A.1.5.4
How is the test scored
As with the original test in the MOCA [61] the verbal recognition memory test
does not get scored. The score is calculated in the second part of the test in the
delayed recall part of the test. If researchers or developers want the scores from
the verbal recognition memory, the lists of words the participant inputted are
still recorded as well as the time it took to recall the list. These are available in
the data, but a score of 0 is added to the total score of the task.
A.1.6
Delayed Recall
The second part of the delayed recall test involves asking the participant to
recall as many words as they can from the original list presented in the verbal
recognition memory test earlier. Thus it is required to use both parts of the test
in the order provided, verbal recognition memory before delayed recall. These
tests should also be separated by a delay, either by including other cognitive tests
from the battery or a time delay for when the participant is asked to complete
the tests.
A.1.6.1
Parameters
The parameters for the delayed recall test are the same as for the verbal recogni-
tion memory.
• The length of time before the test automatically ends.
• The number of trials.
• If the test should include instructions.
• If the test should include results.
A.1.6.2
How is the test introduced
The test is introduced with the instructions from the original MOCA delayed
recall test:
“I read some words to you earlier, which I asked you to remember. Tell me
as many of those words as you can remember.“
==PAGE:107==
A.1 Cognitive Test Designs
95
In a task earlier you were asked to remember some words.
Now try to recall as many as you can.
Write the words you recall in the fields and click ”guess”
An illustration similar to the one in the verbal recognition memory is shown,
this time instead of a speaker the words come from the memory of the participant
(see fig A.11).
Figure A.11: delayed recall instruction image.
A.1.6.3
How is the test run
The test is run similarly to the verbal recognition memory, just with the presen-
tation omitted.
1. 5 input fields are shown with the tagline ”enter the words you recall in any
order.”
2. The participant is asked to fill in a word in each of the input fields.
3. Once a input field is clicked by the participant, the smartphone keyboard
pops up allowing the participant to type the words they desire.
4. Once the participant has filled in as many fields with words as they recall,
they click the ”guess” button and their answers are recorded.
5. If multiple trials have been chosen to run, the first screen is shown again
and the test repeats.
==PAGE:108==
96
A Appendix
A.1.6.4
How is the test scored
The original MOCA version of the test gives participant 3 trials to recall the 5
words from the verbal recognition memory task [55]:
1. Free recall
2. Semantic category cue
3. Multiple-choice cue
However only the words recalled in the free recall trial are awarded any points.
For the mobile version the two later trials are thus omitted. Only one trial is
done and this then rewards a single point for each word correctly recalled up to
the maximum of 5 points for 5 the 5 words recalled perfectly.
A.2
Use case scenarios
appendix: With the requirements listed in the previous section, a number of use
case scenarios will be presented and described. Each use case refers to a specific
requirement and will be presented in a table.
The use case for a study owner to set up a mobile study and including a
number of cognitive test steps is shown in table A.1. It refers to the functional
requirement FR1 presented in section 3.4.1.
==PAGE:109==
A.2 Use case scenarios
97
Table A.1: Use case details 1.
Use Case ID
1
Use Case Name
Study owner cognitive assessment set up
Actor
Study owner
Description
The study owner is preparing a study.
The study needs cognitive assessment data
from the participants of the study.
The participants need a study app that can
assess their cognitive performance and send
the data back to the study owner.
Preconditions
The study owner has a study in the CARP study
management portal.
The study owner has the CARP ResearchPackage
and the CARP CognitionPackage installed
Postconditions
The study owner has a study app ready to be
released to the participant’s smartphones.
Trigger
The study owner wants to assess the cognitive
performance of their study participants.
Main Scenario
1. The study owner decides which cognitive
tests they want to include in their study.
2. The study owner chooses the tests from the
cognitive test battery.
3. The study owner sets the parameters the tests
should run with.
4. The study owner releases the study app
to the participants of the study.
Alternative Scenario
1. The study owner decides which cognitive
tests they want to include in their study.
2. The study owner hires a developer to develop
the cognitive test they want to include.
3. The developer develops the cognitive test with
parameters for the study owner to set.
4. The study owner sets the parameters the tests
in the study should run with.
5. The study owner releases the study app to the
participants of the study.
Notes and issues
In the main scenario, the study owner is preparing a study in which they want
to assess the cognitive performance of their study participants. They decide on
==PAGE:110==
98
A Appendix
the cognitive domains they want to assess and choose the cognitive tests from the
available tests in the cognitive test battery. They set the parameters for the tests
and release the study app to their participants with the cognitive assessments for
their participants to use.
The alternative scenario describes the case where the cognitive assessment
the study owner wants to include isn’t available in the cognitive test battery and
hires a developer to extend the cognitive test battery with a new test that fits
the needs of the study. The study owner then sets the parameters and releases
the app just like in the main scenario.
The use case in table A.2 describes how a participant with the study app on
their smartphone completes a cognitive task. This is the main use case for the
cognitive test battery. It refers to the functional requirement FR4 presented in
section 3.4.1
==PAGE:111==
A.2 Use case scenarios
99
Table A.2: Use case details 2.
Use Case ID
2
Use Case Name
Participant Cognitive Assessment
Actor
Study participant
Description
The participant is attending a study.
The study needs data from the participant
and the participant has the study app on their phone.
The participant needs to complete
the cognitive task in the study app.
Preconditions
The participant has the study app on their phone.
The study owner has set up a cognitive task in the
study protocol.
Postconditions
The participant has completed the cognitive task in
the study app.
The data from the participant is sent to the server.
Trigger
The study app notifies the participant that a
cognitive task is ready to be completed.
Main Scenario
1. The participant opens the study app
on their smartphone.
2. The participant reads the instructions for the
cognitive task
3. The participant completes the cognitive task.
4. The data from the cognitive task
is sent to the server.
5. The participant closes the study app.
Alternative Scenario
1. The participant does not open the study app.
2. The study owner can see that no data
from the participant has been uploaded.
Notes and issues
In the main scenario, the study owner has set up a study app with a specified
sequence of steps for the participants of the study to complete on their smart-
phones. This sequence of steps includes any number of the available cognitive
tests in the cognitive test battery in any order. The participant opens their study
app and completes the sequence of steps set for them by the study owner. This
includes all instructions for the self-administered cognitive tests as well as the
tests themselves. Once finished the data from the assessment is automatically
sent to the server for the study owner to analyse later.
The alternative scenario has the participant dismiss the request to complete
the cognitive assessment by the study app, leading to the study owner missing
==PAGE:112==
100
A Appendix
data in their study and the participant missing their score for the cognitive as-
sessment they signed up for.
The use case for a developer to extend the cognitive test battery with a new
cognitive test is shown in table A.3. It refers to the functional requirement FR6
presented in section 3.4.1
Table A.3: Use case details 3.
Use Case ID
3
Use Case Name
Developer extends the cognitive test battery with
a new cognitive test.
Actor
Flutter Developer
Description
The study owner needs a new cognitive test to
assess the cognitive performance
of their participants.
The developer implements the new test with
instructions, the test and results class in Flutter.
The new test can be added to any study app built
using the CARP ResearchPackage and CARP
CognitionPackage.
Preconditions
The study owner has a study in the CARP study
management portal.
The developer has the CARP ResearchPackage
and the CARP CognitionPackage installed
Postconditions
A new cognitive test is developed which can be
added to the study app.
==PAGE:113==
A.2 Use case scenarios
101
Table A.4: Continued from previous page.
Trigger
The study owner wants to assess the cognitive
performance of their study participants,
and requests a new cognitive test to be added
to the cognitive test battery
Main Scenario
1. The study owner decides which cognitive
tests they want to include in their study.
2. The developer implements the cognitive test
in Flutter using the provided documentation.
3. The developer creates a results class for the
cognitive test and desribes how the test is scored.
4. The developer writes the instructions for how
the test should be run.
5. The developer decides which properties of the
test should be parameters set by the study owner.
6. The test is finished and can be added as a step
in the study app.
Alternative Scenario
1. The study owner decides which cognitive test
they want to include in their study.
2. The developer finds a suitable test on the internet
that someone has developed and released as a
open-source project.
3. The developer slightly modifies the test to fit the
requirements set by the studyowner.
4. The test is ready to be deployed in the study app.
Notes and issues
In the main scenario, the developer gets the requirements for a new test the
study owner wants in their study app. The developer then, with the help of the
documentation for the Cognitive test battery implements a new test in Flutter
which can be added to the existing list of tests in the cognitive test battery and
then used in any study app develop using the CARP ResearchPackage and CARP
CognitionPackage.
In the alternative scenario, the community on the open-source project has
already developed a similar test which can be easily adapted to fit into the study
app to fit the requirements of the study owner.
==PAGE:114==
102
A Appendix
A.3
Test Implementation
A.3.1
Picture Sequence Memory (PSM)
The static grid of images for the PSM is built using the Wrap class in Flutter
which is a widget that displays its children in multiple horizontal or vertical runs.
Each child of the wrap is then built as a picture with a width, height, urlImage,
left and right neighbors and an index. In the design section it was decided that
the picture sequence memory test would be implemented with a set number of
available images. These images are pulled from an URL to keep the size of the
package small.
The orderable grid of images are implemented using the ReorderableWrap class
from Flutter. The ReorderableWrap class is a widget that displays its children
in multiple horizontal or vertical runs and allows for re-ordering using drag and
drop. While the wait screen was showing the original order of the images from
the first screen is saved in a list before the image order is shuffled.
The ReorderableWrap allows the participant to drag and drop the images
until the images are in the desired order as close to the original order as they
recall. Once in the order desired by the participant, they click the ”guess” button
at the bottom of the screen and the makeGuess() method is called.
The makeGuess() method loops through the list of images in the new order
set by the participant and calculates the number of image pairs that are in the
same order as the original list of images originally presented by looking at their
neighbors:
1
for (var i = 0; i < pictures.length; i++) {
2
if (i > 0 && i < pictures.length - 1) {
3
if (pictures[i].left == pictures[i - 1].name) {
4
print("left neighbor correct: " + i.toString());
5
newScore += 1;
6
}
7
if (pictures[i].right == pictures[i + 1].name) {
8
print("right neighbor correct: " + i.toString());
9
newScore += 1;
10
}
11
} else if (i == 0) {
12
if (pictures[i].right == pictures[i + 1].name) {
13
print("left neighbor correct: " + i.toString());
14
newScore += 1;
15
}
16
} else if (i == pictures.length - 1) {
17
if (pictures[i].left == pictures[i - 1].name) {
18
print("right neighbor correct: " + i.toString());
19
newScore += 1;
20
}
21
}
22
}
==PAGE:115==
A.3 Test Implementation
103
Listing A.1: makeGuess() method from the picture sequence memory test.
A.3.2
Flanker
The card pattern described in section A.1.2 is a very popular way to display in-
formation that allows users to interact with it in different ways, and there are
plenty of available options for Flutter packages that allow the implementation
of a stack of swipable cards. The Flutter package flutter_swipable [62] was
chosen for this project as it has the highest number of pub points on pub.dev
which scores Flutter packages on the documentation, following Dart file conven-
tion, formatting and sound null safety. Other packages that provide the same
features include the flutter_tindercard [63] and swipe_cards [64]. However
both of these packages are very early versions 0.2.0 and 0.1.0 respectively and are
missing vital parts according to pub.dev like providing documentation, following
the Dart file convention or null safety.
Each FlankerCard is built up with a chosen direction and color of the card.
The distracting stimuli for each card is then randomly chosen to be either con-
gruent to the target direction or incongruent. These cards are then built into a
list of FlankerCards when the flanker test is initiated:
1
class _FlankerState extends State<_Flanker> {
2
final int numberOfCards;
3
bool even = false;
4
List<Widget> flankerCards = [];
5
List<_FlankerCard > cards(amount) {
6
List<_FlankerCard > cards = [];
7
for (var i = 0; i < amount; i++) {
8
even = !even;
9
if (Random().nextBool()) {
10
cards.add(
11
_FlankerCard('→', even ? 0xff003F6E : 0xffC32C39),
12
);
13
} else {
14
cards.add(_FlankerCard('←', even ? 0xff003F6E : 0xffC32C39));
15
}
16
}
17
return cards;
18
}
Listing A.2: list of FlankerCards initiated in the flanker test.
The code snippet in listing A.2 shows how the list of FlankerCards is filled to the
amount chosen in the parameters set for the flanker test. Each card’s direction
is randomly chosen and the color of the cards change with every card to make
it more clear that the card was swiped away in the case where two cards right
==PAGE:116==
104
A Appendix
under each other in the stack are similar in stimuli.
To calculate the score of the flanker test a timer is started each time a card
is displayed, the timer is then stopped when the card is swiped away. The times
recorded are added to two lists, one for the congruent stimuli and one for incon-
gruent stimuli. When the test ends, the mean value of each of the two lists is
calculated and compared. If difference between the mean time for the congruent
stimuli and the incongruent stimuli is greater than 0.5 seconds the task score is
0. Of course reaction time to the stimuli means nothing if the cards are swiped
in the wrong direction. Thus if the accuracy is below the cutoff found at 0.73 the
score of the flanker test is also 0. The number of mistakes made in the task is
thus recorded and compared with the total number of stimuli to find the accuracy
of the participant in the test. These score calculations are done in the Activity
class of the flanker test and shown below:
1
calculateScore(dynamic result) {
2
var accuracy = result['correct'] / (result['correct'] + result['mistakes']);
3
4
int conSum = result['congruentTimes'].fold(0, (p, c) => p + c);
5
var meanCongruent = conSum / result['congruentTimes'].length;
6
7
int inconSum = result['incongruentTimes'].fold(0, (p, c) => p + c);
8
var meanIncongruent = inconSum / result['incongruentTimes'].length;
9
10
var sum = 0;
11
if (meanIncongruent - meanCongruent < 500) {
12
sum = 1;
13
}
14
if (accuracy < 0.73) {
15
sum = 0;
16
}
17
18
print('flanker score: ' + sum.toString());
19
return sum;
20
}
Listing A.3: calculateScore() method of the flanker test.
A.3.3
Visual Array Change
The code snippet in listing A.4 shows how the shapes in the visual array change
test are made. Each shape as a child of the positioned element with the position
pulled from the list of randomized coordinates on the screen. This was chosen
as the simplest way to randomize the positions of any number of shapes chosen.
As all shapes pull their position from the list, the job of randomizing positions
for the shapes during the delay screen is then to shuffle the positions list and all
shapes change positions according to their new coordinates. The case is the same
==PAGE:117==
A.3 Test Implementation
105
for the rotation of all the shapes as well as the color as can be seen on line 18 in
listing A.4.
1
for (int i = 0; i < numberOfShapes; i++) {
2
shapes.add(
3
Positioned(
4
left: avatarSize +
5
(constraints.biggest.width - 2 * avatarSize) /
6
100.0 *
7
positions[i],
8
top: avatarSize +
9
(constraints.biggest.height - 2 * avatarSize) /
10
100.0 *
11
positions[i + 1],
12
child: CircleAvatar(
13
radius: avatarSize / 2,
14
child: Container(
15
decoration: BoxDecoration(
16
borderRadius: BorderRadius.all(Radius.circular(20)),
17
image: DecorationImage(
18
image: AssetImage(shape[i][color[i]].urlImage),
19
fit: BoxFit.scaleDown)),
20
),
21
backgroundColor: Colors.transparent)),
22
);
23
}
Listing A.4: adding shapes in visual array change task.
When the participant has memorized the colors of each shape and press the
”ready” button, the test is started and a random boolean is generated to see if
the shapes should change color during the delay or not. If the boolean is true
the colors list is shuffled meaning any number of of the shapes can change color,
either to a color previously on another shape, or a new color entirely from the 5
available colors for each shape.
Once the screen with the newly positioned shapes is shown again, the partici-
pant then has 2 buttons: ”same” and ”different” to indicate weather they think
any of the shapes changed colors during the transition screen. Both buttons act
the same, stopping the timer that times the reaction time the participant has
before indicating a change or no change. Then depending on if the colors list was
shuffled the time is added to the correct reactions times or the incorrect reaction
times list and the test is reset.
After the last trial the number of correct and incorrect trials are recorded as
well as the reaction times of each trial, however the final score is given based
on the number of correctly identified color changes during the trials as in the
original task [50].
==PAGE:118==
106
A Appendix
A.3.4
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT)
The dots for the MOT test are implemented as child widgets of AnimatedPositioned
widgets which work much like the Positioned from the visual array change test
where the dots can be positioned anywhere within the Stack widget based on
their own parameters. However, instead of just changing positions instantly if the
parameters change, the AnimatedPositioned widget animates a smooth transi-
tion from the original position to the new position over a specified duration of
time.
The dots are split into two different classes, target dots and distractor dots which
work similarly moving around the screen, but behave differently when clicked.
The target dots start off the test colored while the distractors are grey.
The
once the test starts all the target dots turn grey to blend in with the distractor
dots. The color of the target dots is decided using a list of booleans, one for each
target. The color of the dot is then blue when the boolean is true and grey when
its false. When the test is initiated all the target dots start with true values, and
then when ready the participant clicks the ready button and the list of booleans
is filled with false values, coloring all the targets grey.
The targets have a gesture detector detecting clicks on the dots and change
their corresponding value in the boolean list to true and changing color to the
original blue. Whenever a target dots is clicked and changes its boolean value
and color, a check is done to see if all the targets have been found by checking
the list of booleans (see lines 16-17 in listing A.5). If all targets have been found
the test timer stops and another trial can begin or the test ends depending if the
number of trials is finished.
1
AnimatedPositioned(
2
duration: trackingSpeed ,
3
left: avatarSize +
4
(constraints.biggest.width - 2 * avatarSize) /
5
100.0 *
6
positions[i + amount],
7
top: avatarSize +
8
(constraints.biggest.height - 2 * avatarSize) /
9
100.0 *
10
positions[i + amount + 5],
11
child: GestureDetector(
12
onTap: () {
13
if (guess) {
14
setState(() {
15
dots[i] = true;
16
var targetsFound = dots.where((item) => item == true).length;
17
if (targetsFound == targetAmount) {
18
makeGuess();
19
}
20
});
21
}
22
},
23
child: CircleAvatar(
==PAGE:119==
A.3 Test Implementation
107
24
radius: avatarSize / 2,
25
backgroundColor: dots[i] ? Color(0xff1F669B) : Colors.grey,
26
)),
27
));
Listing A.5: target dot from multiple object tracking.
Instead of changing color to blue, the distractor dots flash red when clicked, before
changing back to grey. This color change is done in the same way as the target
dots with a list of booleans controlling which dots are colored.
Once all the targets have been found and all the trials have been run the test
ends and the score is calculated as the number of trials finished where the number
of mistakes made (distractors clicked) is higher than the number of targets set in
the trial, as decided in the design for the multiple object tracking test in section
A.1.4.4. The number of mistakes in each trial is recorded and saved in a list.
The calculateScore() method goes through this list of trials and compares
the number of mistakes in each trial to the amountOfTargets parameter set by
researchers.
A.3.5
Verbal Recognition Memory (VRM)
The word list for the test contains 5 pre-recorded sound files with a word in
each. The words are read aloud by a computer generated text to speech engine
and saved as mp3 files. The text to speech engine used is the ttstool.com as it
provides the service for free with unlimited downloads. Using computer generated
voice lines for the words in the test makes it easy to replace single words if needed
or extend the list of words later if needed.
The presentation screen plays the audio files with 1,2 seconds in between
words while displaying a blanks screen with only the word ”listen” on it for mini-
mal distraction. The audio is played using the phone speakers and is implemented
using the audioplayers [65] Flutter package which is an simple to implement,
easy to use audio player for Flutter.
Once all the words have been played, the screen changes to the input screen
where the participant can type in the words they recall.
The input screen is
implemented as a TextField widget for each word in a form. The TextFields
each correspond to a position in a list which holds all the words recalled.
1
TextField(
2
textInputAction: TextInputAction.next,
3
onChanged: (text) {
4
wordlist[0] = text;
5
},
6
decoration: const InputDecoration(
7
border: OutlineInputBorder())
8
)
==PAGE:120==
108
A Appendix
Listing A.6: input field for the Verbal Recognition Memory test.
The verbal recognition memory test doesn’t give any score as per the original
test it is designed after, but saves the resulting list in case the researchers want
to look at the results for data analysis later.
A.3.6
Delayed Recall
The Delayed recall test is almost identical to the verbal recognition memory test.
The only major difference is the omitted presentation screen. The input screen
is implemented in the same way with a TextField for each word saved in a list.
Once the participant has written the words they recall from the presentation in
the verbal recognition memory test earlier the list of recalled words is sent to the
calculateScore() method where the list of words is compared to the original
list presented.
1
calculateScore(dynamic result) {
2
List<String> wordList = result['wordsList'];
3
List<String> resultsList = result['resultsList'];
4
resultsList = resultsList.map((result) => result.toLowerCase()).toList();
5
var sum = 0;
6
for (int i = 0; i < resultsList.length; i++) {
7
if (wordList.contains(resultsList[i])) {
8
sum++;
9
}
10
}
11
print('delayed recall score: ' + sum.toString());
12
return sum;
13
}
Listing A.7: calculateScore() method from the delayed recall test.
The code snippet in listing A.7 shows the calculateScore() method from the
delayed recall test. The resultsList object holds the words that the participant
has typed in the TextFields in the delayed recall task, and is sanitized to lower
case before being compared to the original word list set by researchers. This is
done as participants may type in the words they recall with capitalized letters
out of preference, which would register as incorrect if compared to the original
list typed in lower case. The number of words that are contained in both lists is
then the score of the task to a maximum score of 5 for a 5 word list.
A.4
Functional Tests
The following section presents a number of test cases used to verify a correct
realisation of the functional requirements presented in Section 3.4.1.
==PAGE:121==
A.4 Functional Tests
109
A.4.1
Test Case: Cognitive tests can be self-administered
table A.5 describes the test case of participants self administering the set of
cognitive tests using the test app.
Test Case ID
TC01
Test Case Summary
Verify that the tests implemented can be self-administered.
Related Requirement
FR1
Prerequisites
1. The user has the test app.
2. The user reads and understands English.
Test Procedure
1. The user opens the test app.
2. The user enters their personal data and starts the test.
3. The user goes through the set of tests set up in the app.
4. The user finishes all tests and their results are saved in
the database without any help or interference.
Test Data
1. User identifier: full name and age.
2. Test results from the cognitive tests completed.
Expected Result
A valid CARP results object in JSON.
Actual Result
A valid CARP results object is added to the
data points of the study. The data within the object reflects
the score obtained by the participant.
Status
Success
Date of Execution
02/01/2022
Table A.5: Test Case 1.
A.4.2
Test Case: Cognitive tests are repeatable
table A.6 describes the test case of participants repeating the tests in the cognitive
test app.
==PAGE:122==
110
A Appendix
Test Case ID
TC02
Test Case Summary
Verify that the tests implemented are repeatable.
Related Requirement
FR2
Prerequisites
1. The user has the test app.
2. The user reads and understands English.
3. The user has completed the assessment
in the test app 1 month prior.
Test Procedure
1. The user opens the test app.
2. The user enters their personal data and starts the test.
3. The user goes through the set of tests set up in the app.
4. The user finishes all tests and their results are saved in
the database.
Test Data
1. User identifier: full name and age.
2. Test results from the cognitive tests completed previously.
3. Test results from the cognitive tests completed.
Expected Result
The results of the cognitive tests are similar to the results
previously obtained
Actual Result
The results of the participants that had completed the
cognitive tests previously deviated only slightly.
Results of a second trial 1 month after had an average score
1.3 points higher than in the original trial.
Status
Success
Date of Execution
02/01/2022
Table A.6: Test Case 2.
A.4.3
Test Case: Cognition package is extendable by
researchers
table A.7 describes the test case of researchers extending the cognition package
with new cognitive tests.
==PAGE:123==
A.5 Demo App configuration
111
Test Case ID
TC03
Test Case Summary
Verify that the tests implemented are repeatable.
Related Requirement
FR3
Prerequisites
1. The researcher has imported the CARP ResearchPackage
2. The researcher has the source code for the cognition package
Test Procedure
1. The researcher adds the files for the Activity, UI, and Results
of the test, they want to implement.
2. The researcher implements the parameters and
score calculation for the test.
3. The researcher implements the logic and UI of the new test.
4. The researcher implements the results object for the test.
5. The researcher adds the new test to the task in their study app.
Test Data
1. New cognitive test implemented in Flutter.
2. Study app using the new cognitive test.
Expected Result
The new cognitive test seamlessly works as
a single step in the study app.
Actual Result
The newly implemented test works as intended as a single step,
and can be added to any study app built using the
CARP ResearchPackage and cognition package.
Status
Success
Date of Execution
04/01/2022
Table A.7: Test Case 3.
A.5
Demo App configuration
1
RPActivityStep activityStepTrail = RPTrailMakingActivity(
2
'Trail Making step ID',
3
trailType: TrailType.B,
4
includeResults: false
5
);
6
7
RPActivityStep continuousVisualTracking = RPContinuousVisualTrackingActivity(
8
'ContinuousVisualTracking step ID',
9
numberOfTests: 3,
10
amountOfDots: 15,
11
dotSize: 40,
12
lengthOfTest: 180,
13
trackingSpeed: Duration(seconds: 5),
14
includeResults: false
15
);
16
17
RPActivityStep wordRecall = RPWordRecallActivity(
18
'WordRecall step ID',
==PAGE:124==
112
A Appendix
19
lengthOfTest: 180,
20
numberOfTests: 3,
21
includeResults: false
22
);
23
24
RPActivityStep pictureSequenceMemory = RPPictureSequenceMemoryActivity(
25
'PictureSequenceMemory step ID',
26
lengthOfTest: 180,
27
numberOfTests: 1,
28
numberOfPics: 6,
29
includeResults: false
30
);
31
32
RPActivityStep activityStepLetterTapping = RPLetterTappingActivity(
33
'Letter Tapping step ID',
34
includeResults: false
35
);
36
37
RPActivityStep flanker = RPFlankerActivity('Flanker step ID',
38
lengthOfTest: 300,
39
numberOfCards: 10,
40
includeResults: false
41
);
42
43
RPActivityStep visualArrayChange = RPVisualArrayChangeActivity(
44
'VisualArrayChange step ID',
45
lengthOfTest: 180,
46
numberOfTests: 3,
47
waitTime: 3,
48
includeResults: false
49
);
50
51
RPActivityStep delayedRecall = RPDelayedRecallActivity(
52
'DelayedRecall step ID',
53
lengthOfTest: 180,
54
numberOfTests: 3,
55
includeResults: false
56
);
Listing A.8: demo app configuration.
A.6
Publishing a Flutter package
With all the new cognitive tests implemented with, activity, UI and results classes,
and the previously implemented cognitive tests modified to fit into the new cog-
nitition package the cognitive test battery is complete.
Publishing a Flutter
package to pub.dev requires more than implementing the classes. It requires doc-
umentation, an example app and unit tests. These ensure that the package works
as intended and is usable in the future by anyone that imports it from pub.dev.
pub.dev scores any package uploaded to it out of 130 points. These points are
awarded for 6 different categories [77]:
==PAGE:125==
A.6 Publishing a Flutter package
113
• Following Dart file conventions
• Providing documentation
• Supporting multiple platforms
• Passing static analysis
• Supporting up-to-date dependencies
• Supporting sound null safety
Following Dart file convention requires packages to contain a valid pubspec.yaml
file which contains the dependencies the package needs and exposes the classes
within the package. A valid README.md which explains how the package is used
and implemented, and a valid CHANGELOG.md which presents all the previous ver-
sions of the package and which changes were made.
Providing documentation for the package is done in 2 ways. Having valid
dartdoc comments in the code explaining public API, classes and methods, and
providing an example app that shows how to use the package.
The example app includes the CARP research package, CARP Mobile Sens-
ing package and the newly developed Cognition package, to create a survey to
collect the names, biological sex and age of participants before they complete a
subset of implemented cognitive tests in the app. Scores are then collected and
sent to the CARP database for data analysis later. The example app was built to
test the package and validate the new cognitive test in the cognitive test battery.
Supporting multiple platforms recommends that packages in Flutter work on
all its platforms, iOS Android and Web. The cognition package is developed
specifically as a mobile cognitive test battery and thus support for web based
platforms is not tested may not work as intended. But the cognition package is
tested and fully supported for iOS and Android smartphones.
Static analysis is used to determine of the package contains any errors, warn-
ings, and lints (code style issues). This is done to ensure that code uploaded
to pub.dev is as clean and readable as possible. This ensures that packages are
easier to understand and extend in the future.
Supporting up-to-date dependencies is done to ensure that the package works
as intended in three areas:
• The latest stable Dart SDK.
• The latest stable Flutter SDK (if applicable).
==PAGE:126==
114
A Appendix
• The latest versions of all dependencies.
Supporting sound null safety means that types in the code are non-nullable
by default, meaning that variables can’t contain null unless specified. With null
safety, any runtime null-dereference errors turn into edit-time analysis errors.
Google also encourages developers to test the plugin with automated tests, this
is done to ensure that the code works as intended and doesn’t cause any errors
in any code their imported into.
A.6.1
Unit Tests
The Unit tests for the cognition package test the score calculation methods of
each test to see if given the recorded information from the UI a correct score is
given for any input. The Unit tests also test that the JSON serialization works
for the classes that support it.
Three example test for the delayed recall task can be seen below in listing
A.9:
1
test('delayedRecall -> JSON', () {
2
RPActivityStep delayedRecall = RPDelayedRecallActivity(
3
'DelayedRecall step ID',
4
lengthOfTest: 180,
5
numberOfTests: 3,
6
includeResults: false);
7
print(_encode(delayedRecall));
8
});
9
test('delayedRecall score should be calculated correctly : 5', () {
10
RPActivityStep delayedRecall = RPDelayedRecallActivity(
11
'DelayedRecall step ID',
12
lengthOfTest: 180,
13
numberOfTests: 3,
14
includeResults: false);
15
16
List<String> wordlist = ['banana', 'icecream', 'violin', 'desk', 'green'];
17
List<String> resultList = [
18
'banana',
19
'icecream',
20
'violin',
21
'desk',
22
'green'
23
];
24
var score = delayedRecall
25
.calculateScore({'wordsList': wordlist, 'resultsList': resultList});
26
expect(score, 5);
27
});
28
29
test('delayedRecall score should be calculated correctly : 1', () {
30
RPActivityStep delayedRecall = RPDelayedRecallActivity(
31
'DelayedRecall step ID',
32
lengthOfTest: 180,
33
numberOfTests: 3,
34
includeResults: false);
==PAGE:127==
A.7 Results
115
35
List<String> wordlist = ['banana', 'icecream', 'violin', 'desk', 'green'];
36
List<String> resultList = ['wrong', 'wrong', 'banana', 'wrong', 'wrong'];
37
var score = delayedRecall
38
.calculateScore({'wordsList': wordlist, 'resultsList': resultList});
39
expect(score, 1);
40
});
Listing A.9: Unit test of the delayed recall test.
The first test tests that the JSON serialization of the RPActivityStep for the
delayed recall test works. The second test tests the score calculation method of
the delayed recall test with a perfectly recalled resultsList and the third test
tests the same but with only 1 correctly recalled word in the resultsList.
A.7
Results
==PAGE:128==
Id
Age
Gender
Education
Trailmaking
visual
tracking
Picture
sequence
word
recall
letter
tapping
flanker
color
shapes
delayed
recall
Orientation
Final
Score
MOCA
score
1
59
m
8
4
0
2
0
1
1
1
4
6
19
22
2
45
m
3
1
0
5
0
1
1
3
3
6
20
21
3
39
m
8
3
1
2
0
1
1
2
4
6
20
23
4
67
m
3
5
3
5
0
0
0
1
1
6
21
22
5
55
m
3
2
2
5
0
0
1
3
3
6
22
24
6
58
f
8
5
1
5
0
0
0
3
3
6
23
26
7
26
f
5
3
3
3
0
1
1
3
4
6
24
26
8
50
m
3
4
3
3
0
1
1
3
4
6
25
24
9
55
f
3
5
3
2
0
1
1
3
5
6
26
22
10
24
f
3
4
2
5
0
0
1
3
5
6
26
26
11
26
f
5
5
1
5
0
1
1
2
5
6
26
27
12
22
m
4
3
3
5
0
1
1
3
4
6
26
28
13
26
m
5
3
4
5
0
1
1
3
4
6
27
25
14
23
m
3
5
4
3
0
1
1
2
5
6
27
27
15
24
m
5
5
2
5
0
1
1
2
5
6
27
28
16
27
m
3
5
4
4
0
1
1
3
4
6
28
24
17
24
m
4
5
3
5
0
1
1
2
5
6
28
25
18
23
f
3
5
2
5
0
1
1
3
5
6
28
28
19
18
f
0
5
2
5
0
1
1
4
4
6
28
27
20
22
f
0
5
3
5
0
1
1
3
5
6
29
29
Table A.8: Resulting scores from the validation study .
==PAGE:129==
A.8 Package Design
117
A.8
Package Design
As we found in the analysis section, releasing the cognitive test battery as an
open-source component in the CARP ecosystem allows the cognitive test battery
to be extensible by researchers and developers in the future, increasing the tool’s
long-term sustainability. A bigger pool of interested parties often results in fur-
ther improvements to the software. Each party may be acting in their self-interest
by contributing, but all benefit exponentially from the process [78]. Leaving the
product of this thesis not as academic research software, where long-term support
is not feasible to provide, but rather a community project where the software is
constantly evolving.
The Cognition Package is released alongside CARP Research Package as a Flut-
ter package on pub.dev from where developers can directly import it into flutter
applications anywhere in the world. pub.dev is the oﬀicial package repository for
Dart and Flutter applications and also serves as the place to find documentation
on the packages developers want to use.
Flutter packages enable the creation of modular code that can be shared eas-
ily. A minimal package consists of the following. A pubspec.yaml: A metadata
file that declares the package name, version, author, and a lib. The lib directory
contains the public code in the package. This includes all the classes, properties,
and functions needed for the modules the package delivers. The Cognition Pack-
age is organized in a structure that is commonly used for Dart library packages
to keep the code more readable and easily navigable by future developers wishing
to extend the package:
Figure A.12: Overview of the Cognition Package.
Directly under lib, the main library file, cognition_package.dart, exports
API from several files in lib/src. The libraries inside the lib are publicly visible:
other packages are free to import them. But much of the package’s code is in-
ternal implementation libraries that should only be imported and used by the
==PAGE:130==
118
A Appendix
package itself. Those go inside a sub-directory of lib called src.
Google recommends writing tests using the test package, placing the test code
in the test directory at the top of the package [66]. It is also recommended to
include an example of using the library. This is put into the example directory
at the top of the package. This is a standalone example application that imports
the package it examples. This ensures that the example code in the package looks
exactly like the code outside the package would look.
A.9
Research Package Additions
A.9.1
RPActivityStep
The model superclass for all the cognitive tests holds the UI pointer of the test and
the calculation of scores based on the measurements done through the UI class.
Each cognitive test model class extends this superclass with their pointer to their
respective UI class and Results class and overrides the generic calculateScore()
function with the scoring algorithm used for the cognitive test implemented.
Inside RPActivityStep two variables are stored; includeInstructions and
includeResults.
These were introduced in the model as developers creating
RPActivitySteps might wish to run the tests without displaying the instruc-
tions or results. This carried over to all the tests as subclasses. The tests are
capable of additional customization and can extend this list of variables with
more parameters for the individual test.
The calculateScore() method in the RPActivityStep serves as the base method,
which calculates the score of the completed cognitive test based on the measure-
ments made in the UI class. Each cognitive test that extends the RPActivityStep
overrides this function with their scoring algorithm based on the validated origi-
nal scoring analyzed in Section 3.1.
An example calculateScore() method from the RPFlankerActivity is shown
below:
1
@override
2
calculateScore(dynamic result) {
3
var accuracy = result['correct'] / (result['correct']+result['mistakes']);
4
5
int conSum = result['congruentTimes'].fold(0, (p, c) => p + c);
6
var meanCongruent = conSum / result['congruentTimes'].length;
7
int inconSum = result['incongruentTimes'].fold(0, (p, c) => p + c);
8
var meanIncongruent = inconSum / result['incongruentTimes'].length;
9
var sum = 0;
10
if (meanIncongruent - meanCongruent < 500) {
11
sum = 1;
12
}
==PAGE:131==
A.9 Research Package Additions
119
13
if (accuracy < 0.75) {
14
sum = 0;
15
}
16
17
print('flanker score: ' + sum.toString());
18
return sum;
19
}
Listing A.10: calculateScore() method from the RPFlankerActivity.
To calculate the score of the flanker test, a timer is started each time a card is
displayed. The timer is then stopped when the card is swiped away. Next, the
times recorded are added to two lists, one for the congruent stimuli and one for
incongruent stimuli.
When the test ends, the mean value of each of the two lists is calculated and
compared. If the difference between the mean time for the congruent stimuli and
the incongruent stimuli is greater than 0.5 seconds, the task score is 0.
However, reaction time to the stimuli means nothing if the cards are swiped
in the wrong direction. Thus if the accuracy is below the cutoff found at 0.75,
the score of the flanker test is also 0. The number of mistakes made in the task
is recorded and compared to the total number of stimuli to find the accuracy of
the participant.
A benefit of implementing the cognitive tests as RPActivitySteps from the
CARP Research Package is that RPActivityStep extend upon RPStep. This
allows the tests to fit in a RPTask and take advantage of the existing features of
the Research Package. Primarily, the tests were automatically translated from
an object to being part of the Research Package flow of Steps. Secondly, it makes
transferring results to the RPTaskResult straightforward.
==PAGE:132==
120
A Appendix
Figure A.13: The inheritance of activity steps.
All tests are extended upon the RPActivityStep, and the structure within
Research Package can be seen in figure 4.2. In addition, each activity model is
implemented in RPActivitySteps. A detailed explanation of the implementation
of each of the specific cognitive tests can be found in Appendix A.3 and the imple-
mented tests models can be found at github.com/cph-cachet/cognition_package.
The six cognitive test types implemented can be seen below:
• RPContinuousVisualTrackingActivity
• RPFlankerActivity
• RPPictureSequenceMemoryActivity
• RPVisualArrayChangeActivity
• RPWordRecallActivity
• RPDelayedRecallActivity
A.9.2
RPUIActivityStep
The UI of the activities was separated into two segments - the test elements
common to every test and the elements specific to each test. The general elements
==PAGE:133==
A.9 Research Package Additions
121
were encapsulated inside RPUIActivityStep, and the test-specific elements are
held in the test-specific UI body: RPUIActivityBody.
RPUIActivityStep surrounds the UI as UI wrapper and controls the commu-
nications between the UI and the framework. It implements a call-back function
that transmits the current result to the necessary listeners, such as the BlocTask
and transitively the RPTaskResult. The call-back is passed down to the UI when
the participant has completed the test’s actions.
The RPUIActivityStep implements an enumeration used for controlling the
flow of an activity. This enumeration is called” ActivityStatus” and has the option
of being either Instruction, Test, or Result. The ActivityStatus is changed
depending on what part of an activity should be displayed to the user. In the
RPUIActivityBody, this is used to display the correct Section of the activity.
Each Section has a different UI, and the enumeration dictates the selection as in
listing A.11.
1
switch (activityStatus) {
2
case ActivityStatus.Instruction:
3
return <UI for Instructions >
4
case ActivityStatus.Test:
5
return <UI for Test >
6
case ActivityStatus.Result:
7
return <UI for Result >
8
}
Listing A.11: Controlling the UI section with enumerations.
A.9.3
RPUIActivityBody
The RPUIActivityBody consists of all the elements shown on the screen when tak-
ing a test. As it is in Flutter, it extends the StatefulWidget. The StatefulWidget
has a build method, where all the small elements of the screen are gathered and
sorted in a tree. The tree dictates how the UI elements are placed on the phone’s
screen.
Additionally, the StatefulWidget provides a State that contains all
control variables of the UI.
In the specific cognitive tests implemented, the State contains all the variables
to run the cognitive test, such as the number of cards, swiped cards in each
direction, and the reaction times to each card for the Flanker test. These variables
track and control the progress of the UI in the test. The interactions with the UI
affect these variables and update the tests based upon the interaction.
The UI is built up of widgets that interact directly with the user or other
widgets in the test. Most widgets used are based on the standard components and
widgets which Flutter offers such as Text-fields, BoxDecorations, Containers
and Stacks.
However, some of the tests require more advanced features and
==PAGE:134==
122
A Appendix
therefore use imported Flutter packages for these widgets. The Flutter packages
used were chosen based on the criteria:
• High score on pub.dev (preferrably above 120).
• Null safe is a requirement as the Cognition Package is null safe.
• Well documented and relatively popular, as this means that most bugs are
ironed out.
When the test is completed, the RPUIActivityBody applies the call-back func-
tion onResultChange with the result of the test. It sends the result back to the
RPUIActivityStep where it can be calculated to a final score for the test.
A.9.4
RPActivityResult
As part of a test, every activity has some result.
Every test has its results
class which extends RPActivityResult. In a RPActivityResult, all information
relevant to the activity is stored.
As the RPActivityResult is a subclass of
RPResult, it is already equipped with an identifier (ID), a start date, and an end
date.
What pieces of information are sent to the Results class primarily depends on
the parameters tracked in the specific cognitive test to evaluate the participant’s
performance. For example, for a test such as the Flanker test, it is the time it
took to decide the direction of each card and the number of directions correctly
identified. These evaluation metrics are then sent to the RPActivityStep for
the Flanker test to calculate the final score of the participant in the Flanker test
and are the main pieces of information received from the test. How long time is
spent on each Section and how the activity is completed makes up the passive
information, which is tracked and logged.
A.10
Architecture
Research Package follows the BLoC architecture, which the Flutter Team
recom-
mends[79].
Overall, the BLoC pattern is a state management technique that provides a sim-
ple way to manage the state during the app’s life cycle. BLoC is an acronym for
Business Logic and Component. The components are divided into three major
sections: the data layer, BLoC layer, and UI/Presentation layer. Based on the
events from UI, calls to the Data layer are made. Depending on the responses to
==PAGE:135==
A.11 Data format
123
these calls, the state is returned, which updates the UI [80].
Following the BLoC architecture, Research Package uses streams and callbacks
for internal communication (e.g., between Task and Steps). There is a BLoC class
responsible for the communication between the task and the steps it contains
(BlocTask). Communication between the question container and their question
body is made possible via callback functions.[56]
As the Cognition Package extends the Research Package, it follows the BLoC
architecture as well. The cognitive tests are split into a UI class that handles
all the user interactions. A model that manages the properties researchers can
set (e.g., Length of the trial, how many repetitions are done, and some test-
specific properties) and a results class which extends RPStepResult and handles
the results and data management.
A.11
Data format
The CARP Research Package collects and handles data as a RPTaskResult.
When the user does a step, it produces a corresponding result object. These
are all RPStepResult objects. Results from a task are stored in a RPTaskResult
object. Each time a RPStepResult is produced by the user answering a question,
it is stored immediately in the RPTaskResult [56]. Every result (classes that
extend the RPResult) has an identifier that connects it to the task or step which
produced it. The identifier of the result is identical to the identifier of its task or
step.
As mentioned in the architecture section above, every cognitive test task has
its results class which extends RPStepResult with a function that takes the spe-
cific parameters measured in the cognitive test and compiles them to a result
which can then be appended to the RPTaskResult.
Standardizing how data is formatted and handled ensures that the cognitive
tests are easily modified or extended by developers future-proofing the Cognition
Package. Using the same data format as the Research Package is also beneficial
as it allows the cognitive tests to fit in seamlessly into the applications already
built using the Research Package and the data collected from them to seamlessly
integrate into a RPTaskResult.
==PAGE:136==
124
A Appendix
A.12
Data storage
A benefit of using and extending the CARP Research Package is that it allows
the data collected in the tasks to be directly serialized and uploaded to the
CARP Web Services (CAWS). CAWS is a cloud-based run-time infrastructure
for managing research studies collecting data from participants. CAWS supports
recruiting and managing users, multiple concurrent studies, and data collection
from all enrolled user devices.
CAWS includes an integrated Study Management Portal. The Study Man-
agement Portal is a web application for accessing CAWS.
The portal allows
researchers to create and manage their studies, recruit and manage users, and
their data all from a single web application from anywhere in the world.
CACHET hosts and operates a version of CAWS. Researchers aﬀiliated with
CACHET can use this service to create CARP-based research projects. The data
is stored at Computerome, a data center located at DTU for GDPR certified
patient data administration in Denmark.
For this thesis and specifically the evaluation study described later, the data
will be stored using the CAWS version hosted by CACHET at Computerome.
==PAGE:137==
A.13 Test Design Decisions
125
Figure A.14: The CARP Research Package domain model extended with the
new cognitive test battery.
.
A.13
Test Design Decisions
With the base classes for the cognitive test steps set, we can compose each test
with their respective parameters, UI, and scoring functions based on the design
decisions made through a user-centered design process.
User-centered design is a term that describes a practice for developers who
care about the user of their digital tool. The process centers around enhancing
user satisfaction with a product by improving the usability and accessibility of
the product. Each cognitive test was designed through the 5 step process, which
moves through research, concept, design, develop and testing [11].
The research phase consisted of the analysis done in the previous chapter on
each of the original cognitive tests, looking into the elements needed for the test
to run.
The concept phase included preliminary ideas and brainstorming on what
changes are necessary to translate the test from either pen-and-paper or a much
==PAGE:138==
126
A Appendix
larger computer screen to smaller smartphones.
The design phase was done in Figma, an interface design tool that allows
the rapid iterative design of user interfaces. First, a low-fidelity prototype was
created with the screens needed for each test to run. These low-fidelity prototypes
were then shown and brainstormed around with potential users.
The development phase consisted of implementing a high-fidelity prototype
of each test in Flutter.
The test phase then allowed users to test the high fidelity prototypes on smart-
phones, emphasizing usability problem discovery and resolution. The usability
testing was done as a modified Think-Aloud [12] test where users were asked to
complete the cognitive assessment set up in the high fidelity prototype while the
developer is present. The user is not constantly reminded to talk while they work
but is instead encouraged to express verbally whenever they encounter diﬀicul-
ties accomplishing the current task. Notes are taken whenever this happens and
whenever the developer observes the user faltering in the use of the application.
After each test, the notes are then used to develop problem reports which are
then used to return to the development phase and fix the problems in the high
fidelity prototype application to improve the usability and the final application.
A.13.1
Translating the test
Designing the mobile versions of the validated cognitive tests required direct
translation of some of the core features of each test. This included creating the
parameters researchers use to change the tests’ diﬀiculty, translating the verbal
instructions given by clinicians to on-screen instructions, as well as how the test
is run and completed on the phone and what is measured during the test.
A.13.2
Parameters
A lot of the validated cognitive tests are adaptable to the age of participants
by changing the diﬀiculty of the test stimuli. These diﬀiculty changes are thus
also necessary for the mobile cognitive test battery. Selecting the parameters
for the individual tests was done based on the analysis of the original validated
test. Some tests also required additional parameters that researchers can change,
such as the size of the images on the screen in the PSM or the stimuli words in
the verbal recognition memory test to make the test repeatable by participants
relating to the functional requirement (FR5).
An example of the parameters chosen for the PSM test are:
• The length of time before the test automatically ends.
• The number of trials the test should run.
==PAGE:139==
A.13 Test Design Decisions
127
• The number of images each trial should contain.
• If the test should include instructions.
• If the test should include results.
A.13.3
Instructions
The validated cognitive tests were originally administered by a clinician or a
technician, who explains and guides the participant through the test. For the
Cognition Package, a requirement set was that the cognitive test battery would
be patient-administered as this would increase its utility allowing researchers to
study cognitive performance out of the clinic. Thus instructions that explain
the test to the participants are necessary. Through an evaluation of the related
work, particularly the patient-administered tools like Cogstate Lila or the Mobile
Toolbox [34] [39], it was deemed most effective to have a written explanation of
the test and a visual illustration. A written description can provide the critical
information and details of executing a test but was shown to be insuﬀicient to un-
derstand the flow of the test in the user tests of the high fidelity prototype. The
instructions would give a better understanding, paired with a visual illustration.
The illustration explains how the test looks, which helps participants understand
how the test is supposed to be completed and what interactions are necessary.
Instructions were found for each of the original validated tests and adapted to
the new format. The instructions were kept as close to the original validated ver-
sions with a few added instructions explaining the user interactions required to
complete the test (e.g., swipe this, tap that). The instructions for each cognitive
test is the final product of a long iterative process of think-aloud tests and user
interviews after trials of the high-fidelity prototype. This was done to remove as
much ambiguity as possible from the cognitive tests before the test is begun. An
example from the Picture Sequence Memory test can be seen below:
Original instructions:
You will see some pictures on the screen. You should remember them and show
them back to me in the same way you saw them on the screen [57]
The new instructions include a reference to the drag and drop procedure
which a lot of smartphone users are familiar with from other apps, as well as an
illustration of the grid of images in the test with the drag and drop interaction:
First, memorize the order of the images.
Once memorized, click the ’Ready’ button, and the images will change positions.
Drag and drop the images to their original positions before pressing ’guess.’
==PAGE:140==
128
A Appendix
Figure A.15: Picture Sequence Memory instruction image.
A.13.4
Running the test
How each test is run is designed to translate the cognitive challenge in the original
validated cognitive test they are based on. Although the changes made are purely
interaction-based, the audiovisual stimuli are kept as close to the original as
possible. These changes include changing the interactive media from a keyboard
to a swipe for the flanker test or changing the repeating of words back to the
clinician in the Word Recall Memory or the Delayed Recall memory to type the
recalled words in text-fields using the integrated UI keyboard on the smartphone.
All cognitive tests went through multiple iterations where the buttons, stimuli
and interactions were changed based on the think-aloud tests done on the high
fidelity prototype. An example of this iterative process from the PSM test was
where the first iteration grouped the images in a vertical list on the screen. This
design allowed the images to occupy the entire width of the screen meaning with
4 images the entire screen space would be taken up of images maximising screen
real estate.
==PAGE:141==
A.13 Test Design Decisions
129
Figure A.16: Both versions of the picture sequence memory test.
However after initial testing no issues were found with the readability of im-
ages, but once the amount of images was above 4, any images after this were
obscured out of screen and scrolling was needed to access them. This resulted in
some participants missing the images off-screen completely.
A second iteration of the design was created where the images were placed
in a grid on screen instead. The order of images was still clear, but the size of
images was significantly smaller. However no issues were found in further testing
that the images were not instantly recognizable by participants.
A.13.5
Scoring the test
Just as the instructions, the scoring is kept as close to the original validated
test scoring as possible. This meant designing the scoring function for each test
required deep analysis of how the original tests were created and what they mea-
sured to calculate a score.
In the original PSM test, the participant’s score is the cumulative number of
adjacent pairs of pictures remembered correctly regardless of the number of im-
ages in the sequence [42]. Adjacent pairs are two adjacent pictures placed in the
correct consecutive, ascending order. Thus, images placed in orders 3–4 and 5–6
would receive credit, whereas pictures placed in orders 1–5 and 3–9 would not
receive credit. The possible number of adjacent pairs for each trial is less than
the number of pictures in the sequence. On the phone this is copied exactly as
==PAGE:142==
130
A Appendix
to keep with the validity of the original PSM test. Even though performance in
the test is measured by the number of correct adjacent pairs reproduced and not
by the time it takes participants to complete the test, the time taken to com-
plete each trial as well as the time taken to memorize each sequence of images
is recorded and saved in the result to give researchers more data to guide their
data analysis later.
==PAGE:143==
==PAGE:144==
