==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Prediction of protein O–glycosylation using
language models
Deep Learning
Jakob Hartvig Stiesmark
(s163698@student.dtu.dk)
Supervisors:
Henrik Nielsen
(henni@dtu.dk)
Ole Winther
(olwi@dtu.dk)
External Supervisors:
Hiren Jitendra Joshi
(joshi@sund.ku.dk)
Kongens Lyngby
January 2022
==PAGE:2==
English Project Title: Prediction of protein O-glycosylation using language models
Danish Project Title: Forudsigelse af O-glykosylering af proteiner ved hjælp af sprogmodeller
Duration: 2021-08-23 - 2022-01-23
ECTS Points: 30
Project carried out in: Denmark
Institute: Department of Health Technology (DTU)
Collaborative institutes: Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science (DTU); Copen-
hagen Center for Glycomics (KU)
Supervisors: Assoc. Prof. Henrik Nielsen (henni@dtu.dk), Prof. Ole Winther (olwi@dtu.dk)
External supervisors: Assoc. Prof. Hiren Jitendra Joshi (joshi@sund.ku.dk)
Student: Stud. Polyt. Jakob Hartvig Stiesmark (s163698@student.dtu.dk / jakob@stiesmark.dk)
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In GalNAc-type O-glycosylation (also known as Mucin-type glycosylation), N-Acetyl-D-
Galactosamine (GalNAc) glycans are conjugated to Serine, Threonine and rarely Tyro-
sine residues in the majority of secreted proteins. Prediction of this type of glycosylation
has been notoriously diﬀicult, since no simple consensus motif has been described, but
two relatively recent predictors exist: NetOGlyc-4.0 from 2013 (DTU and KU) and
ISOGlyP-2.2 from 2020 (University of Texas at El Paso). NetOGlyc-4.0 relies on com-
puting sequence profiles through alignment, and is therefore a significantly slow process
for predicting glycosylation.
Language Models (LMs) are pretrained Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) originally
developed for natural language processing tasks such as machine translation or text clas-
sification. In recent years, LMs applied to amino acid sequences have shown promising
performances in predicting protein properties such as structure, subcellular location, or
signal peptides. In this project, it was investigated whether it is possible, using LMs, to
better model the complex process of O-GalNAc glycosylation, remove external depen-
dencies and improve prediction speed compared to NetOGlyc-4.0.
The results of the investigation showed that it was not trivial to predict global O-GalNAc
glycosylation patterns using only LM embeddings, as simple linear models predicting di-
rectly from the embeddings had diﬀiculty generalizing to patterns in the data. However,
by utilizing transfer learning of protein structure from NetSurfP-3.0, a new predictor
based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and transformers was able to obtain
significantly higher performance compared to NetOGlyc-4.0. The new predictor addi-
tionally increases prediction throughput by 17 times when compared to NetOGlyc-4.0,
without any dependencies on sequence alignments or other external tools.
Page i of 64
==PAGE:4==
Preface &
Acknowledgements
This Master thesis has been prepared at the department of Health Technology at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master
of Science in Engineering degree in Bioinformatics & Systems Biology.
I would especially like to thank my supervisor Assoc. Prof. Henrik Nielsen from the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) for the opportunity to work on this interesting
project and for his guidance and tips when I had trouble with the data. I would also like
to thank Assoc. Prof. Hiren Jitendra Joshi from the University of Copenhagen (KU)
for the great feedback and ideas he provided when doing data exploration during the
project, and for facilitating my work at Panum Institute in Copenhagen. In addition, I
would like to thank Erik Nicolas Kiehl & Assoc. Prof. Paolo Marcatelli from DTU for
their work on NetSurfP-3.0, which laid the foundation for the code used in this project.
Kongens Lyngby, 2022-01-23
Jakob Hartvig Stiesmark (s163698@student.dtu.dk)
Page ii of 64
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface & Acknowledgements
ii
1
Theory
1
1.1
Proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Protein Glycosylation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2.1
Glycosylation Sites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
O-linked GalNAc Glycosylation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3.1
Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.2
Pathways
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.3
Glycosyltransferases (GalNAc-Ts) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.4
Protein Structural Features & Glycosylation . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.5
Determining O-GalNAc glycosylation patterns . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4.1
Artificial Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4.2
Activation functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4.3
Loss functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4.4
Backpropagation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.4.5
Optimizers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4.6
Regularization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4.7
Performance metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.4.8
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.4.9
Recurrent Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.4.10 Transformer Language Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.4.11 Multi-task learning for better generalization . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.4.12 Transfer Learning & ’Soft’ Labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Aims of the Project
17
3
Materials & Methods
18
3.1
Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.1
Programming Languages, Libraries & Frameworks . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.2
Utilized Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.1
O-GalNAc Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Page iii of 64
==PAGE:6==
3.2.2
Mass-Spectrometry (MS) Peptide Data Standardization Library .
21
3.2.3
Exploratory Analysis of Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.4
Augmenting with Non-glycosylated Peptide Data
. . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.5
Data Labeling & Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.6
Homology partitioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.7
Training Data Format
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Language Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Data Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5
Adaption and Improvement of NetSurfP 3.0 ANN framework . . . . . . .
30
3.5.1
Improved Embedding Concatenations for Long Sequences . . . . .
30
3.6
Training Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.6.1
Splitting up Embedding and Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.6.2
Hyper-parameter Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.6.3
Seeding for Reproducibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.7
Evaluating models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.7.1
Performance metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.7.2
Augmentation of Models with NetSurfP-3.0 Predictions . . . . . .
33
3.8
Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.8.1
NetOGlyc-4.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.8.2
ESM-1b based Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Results
39
4.1
Baseline Performance of Majority Predictor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Model Performance Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Model Runtime Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Discussion
42
5.1
Low MCC scores on O-GalNAc Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Model Performance on Ambiguous Sites
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
Including Inconsistent & Ambiguous Glycosylation Sites
. . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
Test Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.5
Language Model Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.6
Embedding Length Limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.7
Re-training NetSurfP-3.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.8
Model Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.9
Ideas for further studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.9.1
Further Hyper-parameter optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.9.2
Fine-tuning the language model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.9.3
GalNAc-T repertoire-specific predictor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.9.4
Integration with other tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Conclusion
50
References
52
Page iv of 64
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
56
List of Tables
56
Abbreviations
58
A
Project Code
59
B
Dataset Statistic Plots
61
C
List of Supplementary Materials
64
Page v of 64
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Theory
This chapter provides relevant theory for data and methods used in the project. To
understand the paper in full, basic knowledge of both relevant Machine Learning (ML)
terms and protein O-GalNAc glycosylation is required.
1.1
Proteins
Proteins are large biological molecules consisting of amino acid residues linked by pep-
tide bonds. In all living organisms on earth, proteins play a vital role in everything from
catalysts of metabolic reactions to providing structure and replicating DeoxyriboNucleic
Acid (DNA). Despite billions of years of evolution, the language and structure of pro-
teins seen in different organisms today are still similar enough that we can genetically
transplant protein sequences across domains of life and still have them function. This
universal nature of the protein language stems from the vast functional and structural di-
versity afforded by combinations of amino acids as the basic building block. The amino
acid residues in proteins are typically derived from a universal set of 20 amino acids,
though a few more have been identified. Each amino acid has different properties with
regard to shape, polarity and charge of their side-chains which point outwards from the
backbone of the protein.
Proteins are a highly studied branch of biology, and large databases such as UniProt [1]
contain hundreds of millions of protein sequences. However, only a small subset of this
data is well-annotated with information such as protein structure or Post-Translational
Modifications (PTMs).
1.2
Protein Glycosylation
There are a multitude of different modifications which can take place co- or post-protein
translation. Glycosylation is one of the most common forms of PTM, in which carbohy-
drates are enzymatically attached by covalent bonds to protein residues in a step-wise
process. Glycosylation is seen on the majority of secreted and membrane-bound pro-
teins, but is also present in the nucleus and cytoplasm.
It serves a variety of both
functional and structural roles, such as modulating binding aﬀinity and receptor func-
Page 1 of 64
==PAGE:9==
tion, or protecting from proteolytic cleavage [2]. It has also been shown that glycans
can play a significant role in protein folding by altering their thermodynamic stability,
thus significantly impacting their folded state, oligomerization and function. Impair-
ment of glycosylation results in congenital disorders, and has been implicated in a range
of diseases from diabetes to degenerative disorders [2, 3].
Figure 1.1: Step-wise protein glycosylation in Golgi apparatus. Adapted from [4] &
Obtained from PDB-ID 2FFU.
Glycosylation starts in the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) or Golgi Apparatus, where this
modification process already influences the biosynthesis of proteins through the secretory
pathway in the ER, tagging proteins for degradation to terminate futile folding cycles [3],
or assists in the folding of domains requiring precise patterns of disulfide bond formation.
Enzymatic protein glycosylation can be classified into four different types depending on
the linkage between the protein and glycan. In animals they are chiefly: N-linked, O-
linked, C-linked, and protein anchoring via a Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchor.
The modification sites for each type depends on factors such as the residue, glycosylation
consensus sequences, protein sub-cellular localization and site surface accessibility [2].
For this project, the type of interest is O-linked glycosylation, specifically of the O-linked
GalNAc-type protein glycosylation, which is less well understood due to the high number
of enzymes involved compared to other forms of glycosylation.
Page 2 of 64
==PAGE:10==
1.2.1
Glycosylation Sites
When referring to the term ’sites’ regarding protein glycosylation in this paper, the mean-
ing of the term is the protein residue side-chain onto which a glycan can be conjugated
via a covalent bond. These residues are also called ’glycosites’, and in this project refers
to any protein residue that could potentially be glycosylated. When used regarding
protein glycosylation datasets, it specifically refers only to residues seen in the dataset.
1.3
O-linked GalNAc Glycosylation
O-linked glycosylation of proteins is most commonly seen in proteins with signal peptides
that pass through the secretory pathway, but also can be found on many proteins in
the nucleocytoplasm. The glycosylation process in the secretory pathway can be divided
into distinct pathways that produce glycan modifications differing in the protein sub-
strates, sites and elaborated glycan composition, and in vertebrates we currently know
of ten different ones (3 types of O-Mannose, 2 types of O-Fucose respectively, O-GalNAc,
extracellular O-GlcNac, O-Glucose, O-Xylose & O-Galactose). Most of these pathways
start with conjugation in the ER and continue with chain elongation, branching and
capping in the Golgi Apparatus, although O-GalNAc and O-Xylose are initiated in the
Golgi Apparatus. Outside of the secretory machinery, O-GlcNAc cycling takes place in
the nucleocytosol. In vertebrates, O-linked glycosylation is frequently seen on serine (S)
and threonine (T) residues, with different pathway exhibiting different specificities for
these two amino acids (e.g., O-Xylose is only found on serine residues), O-GalNAc type
glycosylation is less commonly found on tyrosine (Y) residues and specifically for the
collagen modification pathway, hydroxylysine (HyL) is glycosylated by the O-Galactose
pathway. Some types of O-linked glycosylation are relatively restricted to certain pro-
tein families, such as cadherins and protocadherins for the O-Mannosylation performed
by the TMTC family of enzymes, and the epidermal growth-factor-like repeats-specific
glycosylation for O-Fucose, O-Glucose and extracellular O-GlcNAc modification [5–7].
O-GalNAc glycosylation is initiated in the cis compartments of the Golgi Apparatus and
is the most abundant type of O-linked glycosylation, found in well over 80% of all proteins
that go through the secretory pathway. It is highly differentially regulated, with up to
twenty distinct transferase isoenzymes (GalNAc-Ts) influencing the glycan structures,
modification sites and glycosylation patterns depending on the tissue. Due to this, we
still don’t have a comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms behind O-GalNAc
glycosylation compared to other types of O-glycosylation and other well-characterized
glycosylation types such as N-linked glycosylation, which are initiated by just one or a
few isoenzymes [5, 6, 8].
Page 3 of 64
==PAGE:11==
1.3.1
Function
O-GalNAc glycosylation is also known as mucin-type O-glycosylation, as it was first
described in mucins such as MUC1 which has extensive O-GalNAc glycosylation on its
extracellular domain. Mucins are a family of large proteins produced mainly by epithelial
cells, whose main characteristic is their ability to serve barrier functions. Mucins line the
mucus membranes and protect the body from infection through highly clustered regions
of O-GalNAc glycans which prevent pathogens from invading epithelial cells [9]. They
are also found in the stem regions of membrane-bound proteins, where they likely serve
a similar role, and it has been known that O-GalNAc glycans also provide structural
support for these proteins. O-GalNAc glycans are also known to have functions in cell-to-
cell receptor interactions and adhesion of immune cells, as well as in regulating protection
of pro-proteins from proteolytic cleavage before proper maturation. O-GalNAc glycans
are however not only found highly clustered in mucin-type domains, but also as single
sites [5–7].
1.3.2
Pathways
The biosynthesis of O-GalNAc glycans takes place in the Golgi Apparatus, where a
protein enters as part of the secretory pathway after folding in the ER. As the protein
moves through the Golgi stacks, it gradually gets O-GalNAc glycans added and elongated
in multiple steps. At first, a GalNAc monosaccharide is attached to a serine, threonine
or tyrosine residue to form the simplest O-GalNAc glycan by enzymes GALNT1-20
(GalNAc-Ts). There are five primary isoforms of GalNAc transferase that perform this
initial glycosylation step (GALNT1, 2, 7, 10 and 11), although theoretically, any of
the members of this family could perform it (however, protein glycosylation activity
for all the genes has not been shown).
The initial glycan residue is then typically
elongated by the Core1 synthase (C1GALT1), but can also be elongated by the Core3
synthase (B3GNT6). These glycans can then be further branched, elongated and capped
by terminal modifications such as sialic acids (NeuAc in humans), the combination of
which define the effect that the glycosylation has upon the protein, or the recognition
epitopes that are presented on the protein [5–7].
1.3.3
Glycosyltransferases (GalNAc-Ts)
In humans, twenty different GalNAc-transferases (GalNAc-Ts) named GALNT1-20 con-
trol the first attachment of GalNAc monosaccharides to residues. These GalNAc-Ts are
isoenzymes that have been shown to exhibit overlapping, but distinct substrate speci-
ficities and kinetics. GALNTs have been shown to be differentially expressed depending
on cell maturation and differentiation, which makes O-GalNAc glycosylation especially
suited for dynamic regulation of the glycoproteome and thereby protein function [10,
11].
Page 4 of 64
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.2: Crystal structure of the active form of GalNAc-T2 in complex with a
glycopeptide.
Green: GalNAc-T2 catalytic domain, Red: GalNAc-T2
lectin domain, Cyan: GalNAc-T2 flexible linker, Magenta: Glycopeptide
MUC5AC-13. Obtained from PDB-ID 5AJP [8].
GalNAc-Ts consist of a catalytic and lectin domain, connected by a flexible linker. Sub-
strate specificity and glycosylation of non-glycosylated protein residues as well as neigh-
boring residues seems to be driven by the catalytic domain, while long-range glycosyla-
tion of residues is driven by the lectin domain. The lectin domain seems to regulate the
catalytic domain and coordinate further glycosylation of glycoprotein substrates. For
instance, GalNAc-T2 has been found to selectively glycosylate residues located about
ten residues apart from existing O-GalNAc glycosites. These preferences differ between
the GalNAc-Ts, partially driven by differences in the length and conformations of the
flexible linker [8].
1.3.4
Protein Structural Features & Glycosylation
1.3.4.1
Amino acids
When considering the effect of protein structural features on which residues can be
glycosylated, the most important feature is of course the amino acids. In O-GalNAc
glycosylation, GalNAc-Ts only show substrate specificity for Serine, Threonine and Ty-
rosine as glycosites, while N-linked glycans can be attached to Arginine or Asparagine
and C-linked glycans can be attached to Tryptophan [7, 11].
Page 5 of 64
==PAGE:13==
1.3.4.2
Surface accessibility
The surface accessibility of the protein residues is equally important, as the glycosite
must be accessible by glycosyltransferases. In types of glycosylation that take place co-
translationally, it might also be possible for residues that would be buried if glycosylation
was inhibited to be glycosylated as the glycans stabilize the protein folding.
The Relative Surface Accesibility (RSA) is a metric used for assessing how exposed a
residue is to a solvent. It is calculated from the Absolute Surface Accesibility (ASA),
which is the solvent accessible surface area commonly measured in square-angstroms
(Å
2). The maximum possible solvent accessible surface area for the residue MaxASA is
used to convert ASA to RSA by the formula RSA = ASA/MaxASA.
1.3.4.3
Intrinsically disordered regions
While proteins tend to fold into fairly thermodynamically stable shapes with well-defined
secondary structures such as alpha-helices and beta-sheets, some proteins or protein re-
gions lack a stable three-dimensional structure. These are known as Intrinsically Disor-
dered Proteins (IDPs) and Intrinsically Disordered Regions (IDRs), and are generally
composed of sequences with low complexity and a low number of hydrophobic residues.
This lack of hydrophobicity prevents the formation of a core domain as found in more
rigid proteins [12]. IDRs have been found to correlate with multiple types of PTMs,
such as phosphorylation and glycosylation. In O-linked glycosylation, glycosites have
been found to be preferentially located within IDRs in extracellular proteins [13].
1.3.5
Determining O-GalNAc glycosylation patterns
Due to the high number of different GalNAc-Ts with overlapping substrate specificities
and varying expression levels, determining a global pattern for O-GalNAc glycosylation
is diﬀicult when compared to other forms of PTMs. Nonetheless, with the development
of easier and more sophisticated methods for sampling the glycoproteome, such as high-
throughput peptide Mass-Spectrometry (MS), as well as tools for genetic engineering of
cell lines, it has become much easier to obtain high-quality site-specific peptide glycosy-
lation data. However, to best make use of this data, more powerful prediction models
are necessary. One of the most promising avenues is the fast-growing field of machine-
learning, which has seen a resurgence in recent years with the exponential increase in
available computational power and advancements in image and language processing.
1.4
Machine Learning
In the human brain, billions of neurons form a densely connected network, in which
information is passed along in the shape of electrical potentials. This type of structure
Page 6 of 64
==PAGE:14==
is able to form specialized networks capable of storing and retrieving memories, learning
complex patterns, generalize and reason. The inter-connectedness and ability of neurons
to adapt to new stimuli was the inspiration for creating Artificial Neural Network (ANN),
in which the neurons learn-ability and electrical potentials are replaced with weights and
mathematical functions. Due to the rise in computational power and data at our disposal,
ANNs are today capable of learning many types of tasks such as image recognition and
Natural Language Processing (NLP) with high accuracy.
In this section, a short introduction to machine learning nomenclature and architectures
will be presented to further understanding of the deep learning models and methods
used in this paper.
In machine learning, patterns in data are learned without explicit programming of a
model, unlike in other branches of computational learning where predictors are created
after our human understanding of the data.
While simple machine learning models
can consist of single layer ANNs, the subset of machine learning known as deep neural
networks are characterized by very complex multi-layered architectures with hundreds
to billions of parameters. These models stack multiple layers of networks on top of each
other which increases their ability to extract more complex features from data.
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a field in which machines break down and in-
terpret languages. In recent years, Deep neural networks have demonstrated successful
application to NLP tasks, including producing representations of protein structural and
biological features solely from sequence information.
Machine learning models can be trained for both classification tasks where the goal is
to predict the right label(s) from a finite set of categorical values, as well as regression
tasks where the goal is to predict numeric values.
1.4.1
Artificial Neural Networks
The Feed-Forward Network (FFN) (fig. 1.3) was the first and simplest type of ANN. It
consists of multiple layers of nodes, where each node is connected to every node in the
next layer. Hence the name ”feed-forward”, since information only moves in a single
direction with no cycles. Each node sums together its inputs, and passes this value
through a activation function which constrains the node output in a non-linear matter.
The output is then multiplied by a weight value for the node before being passed to
every node in the next layer. This type of network is still in use as the final module of
almost every ANN, as it allows conversion from one data shape to another by varying
the number of nodes in the input and output layers.
Page 7 of 64
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.3: Feed-Forward Network.
1.4.2
Activation functions
The activation function in an ANN is used to add non-linearity to the output of individual
nodes. It is this non-linearity which in essence allows the network to be a universal
function approximator by adjusting the node weights to fit the patterns in the training
data. Without it, the network could simply be reduced to a linear function of the input.
There are many types of activation functions in use, but only the ones used in this
project will be introduced:
Figure 1.4: Activation functions.
Page 8 of 64
==PAGE:16==
f(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(1.1)
The sigmoid activation function (eqn. 1.1) transforms values by squeezing them to
values between [0, 1]. This function is often used to transform the model output to a
probability.
f(x) = tanh x = ex −e−x
ex + e−x
(1.2)
The hyperbolic tangent function (Tanh) activation function (eqn. 1.2) is similar to
the sigmoid activation function, but instead squeezes values to between [-1, 1].
f(xi) =
exi
∑k
j=i exj
(1.3)
The softmax activation function (eqn. 1.3) is similar to the sigmoid in that it transforms
values by squeezing them to values between [0, 1]. However, while sigmoid operates on
individual values, softmax instead operates on a set of values, and produces a discrete
probability distribution over them according to their relative magnitudes. It is often
used as the output for classification models to obtain a probability distribution over all
possible classes k.
f(x) = max(0, x)
(1.4)
The Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function (eqn. 1.4) does not transform
values like the other activation functions shown, but simply clips negative values to zero.
This maintains the requirement of non-linearity for activation functions, while being
very computationally eﬀicient.
1.4.3
Loss functions
For an ANN to learn from input training data it must compare the output predictions ˆy
to the target values y. This is accomplished by defining a loss function, that outputs a
distance metric between the two vectors E(y, ˆy). There are many possible loss functions
in use, but usually some common functions are used depending on the type of output
from the model.
Page 9 of 64
==PAGE:17==
E(y, ˆy) = −
∑
i
yi log(ˆyi)
(1.5)
For classification tasks the usual loss function is categorical cross-entropy (eqn. 1.5),
which measures how far two discrete probability distributions are from each other. As
such, it should be used after applying softmax to the prediction class outputs.
E(y, ˆy) = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(y −ˆy)2
(1.6)
For regression tasks an oft-used loss function in the mean squared error (eqn. 1.6),
which calculates the average squared loss between the predicted and target values.
1.4.4
Backpropagation
The way in which an ANN learns from data is by updating its weights to better extract
features from the input and match the target values. When a network is initialized,
the weights W are assigned random values, resulting in inaccurate predictions. When
training data passes through the network and the predictions ˆy are compared to the
target values y by the loss function, an error E is obtained. By minimizing E, the
network accuracy improves. This is done by calculating the gradients of all the weights
∆W in the network, and then updating them in the direction and magnitude that
minimizes E. This is called gradient descent. As the network consists of many layers of
functions, computing the weight gradients involves taking the partial derivatives of each
function in the network, backwards from the loss function. The training loss can then
be propagated back through each partial derivative to obtain gradients, which is why
this method is called backpropagation.
As the weight gradients ∆W only suggest the direction and magnitude to change each
weight, and we want the network to learn to generalize to predict on unseen data, we
don’t want to immediately update the weights W by ∆W to get E to zero. Instead,
we use a learning rate γ <= 1, which is ∆W is multiplied by. The weights are then
updated as W = W −γ ∗∆W to nudge the network towards better predictions for the
data. This process is repeated across multiple ’epochs’ to allow the network to gradually
learn more accurate predictions.
For gradient descent the full training dataset is processed before updating the weights.
However, this method does not work well for deep neural networks, since storing a large
number of gradients in memory is infeasible for large networks and datasets. In practice
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is used, where the dataset is divided into a number
of smaller batches and weights are updated for each batch.
Page 10 of 64
==PAGE:18==
1.4.5
Optimizers
While plain SGD can be used to backpropagate loss through the network, there are a
plethora of different techniques used in optimizers to speed up the convergence of the
model. One of the most popular optimizers in use today is Adaptive Moment Estima-
tion (Adam). Adam uses stochastic gradient descent, but maintains a separate learning
rate for each parameter in the network. This improves performance on problems with
sparse gradients, such as natural language and sequence processing. Adam also adapts
each parameters learning rate based on how quickly it is changing, which means it does
well on noisy data [14]. It also includes a weight decay regularization term, which dis-
courages network weight from growing too large to avoid over-fitting. Adaptive Moment
Estimation w. Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization (AdamW) is an improvement on
Adam, in which the weight decay term is decoupled from the learning rate optimization
to substantially improve generalization performance when using weight decay [15].
1.4.6
Regularization
Regularization is a cornerstone of machine-learning, and describes methods used to
prevent networks from over-fitting on their training data and improve their generalization
ability. Besides weight decay regularization, one of the most common methods is dropout.
In dropout, a specified percentage of input features are randomly set to zero before each
training batch. This helps the network to generalize better by learning to predict without
full knowledge of the input data. Another method is batch normalization, which makes
network training more stable through normalization of layers inputs by re-centering and
re-scaling them.
Figure 1.5: Stochastic Gradient Descent.
Page 11 of 64
==PAGE:19==
1.4.7
Performance metrics
Various metrics can be used to measure the performance of a predictor, but a few metrics
are most commonly used:
Accuracy (ACC) is a metric used for classification tasks, that thresholds the class
predictions (usually at 0.5) and compares to the class labels. The score is the average
fraction of correct predictions, and lies between [0, 1] where a higher score is better.
This metric is not well suited for comparing model performance on imbalanced datasets.
True Positive Rate (TPR) & True Negative Rate (TNR) are metrics for binary
classification tasks. TPR (also known as Sensitivity) measures the proportion of posi-
tive labels were correctly predicted, and TNR (also known as Specificity) measures the
proportion of negative labels that were correctly predicted. The score lies between [0,
1] where a higher score is better. These metrics should be used when comparing model
performance on imbalanced datasets, as a high accuracy might simply be due to the
model learning to always predict the majority class label.
Pearsons Correlation Coeﬀicient (PCC) is a metric for regression tasks that mea-
sures the linear correlation between predictions and labels. The score lies between [-1,
1], where a higher score is better. This metric is not well suited for comparing model
performance on imbalanced datasets.
Matthews Correlation Coeﬀicient (MCC) is a special case of PCC for binary
classification. As such, a threshold must be applied to continuous predictions (usually
at 0.5). The score lies between [-1, 1], where a higher score is better. This metric is well
suited for comparing model performance on imbalanced datasets.
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) is a metric for regression tasks that measures the error
between the label and predictions. The score lies between [0, ∞], where a lower score
is better. For labels with a specific range the upper bound can be reduced (360 in the
case of angles).
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) is a graphical plot for binary classifi-
cation that illustrates the True Positive Rate (Sensitivity) & False Negative Rate (1 -
Specificity) of a model as the discrimination threshold is varied, which creates a curve
showing the models performance. The Receiver Operating Characteristic - Area
Under Curve (ROC-AUC) metric measures the area under this curve, which can
be considered the probability that a randomly chosen positive label will have a higher
prediction score than a randomly chosen negative label. As such, a ROC-AUC score of
0.5 is a random classifier.
Page 12 of 64
==PAGE:20==
1.4.8
Convolutional Neural Networks
While FFNs are useful for many tasks, they have some issues when dealing with variable-
length ordered data such as protein sequences or images. Because their input and output
features are fixed sizes, they can only deal with this type of data by splitting it into
smaller chunks and predicting on them separately. They also ignore the information
brought by the fact that in ordered data the neighborhood around a pixel of amino acid
have semantic meanings.
The Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) network architecture (fig. 1.6) was instead
devised to process these type of variable-length structured arrays of data. Unlike FFN
layers, convolutional layers are not fully connected. Instead they consist of filters which
are applied to sections of the input features at a time and then summed for each output
feature. These can be thought of as kernel functions applied over the input. By varying
parameters such as filter sizes, filter stride and input padding, different types of features
can be extracted from local parts of the input data.
CNNs are often used in image and sequence processing, since they require no pre-
processing of the data and are good at extracting short-to-medium range sequence
information. For protein sequence prediction, CNNs take advantage of the fact that
close-by acids are more strongly correlated, and that proteins are often made up of
smaller domains that carry out individual tasks in the protein.
Figure 1.6: A typical Convolutional Neural Network model.
Page 13 of 64
==PAGE:21==
1.4.9
Recurrent Neural Networks
While CNNs are good at extracting short-to-medium range sequence information, they
lack the ability to retain information over longer stretches of sequential data since they
operate independently on each local section.
To extract features from sequential or
time-data over longer ranges, RNNs were invented. Unlike FFNs or CNNs in which
information is only propagated forward in the network, RNNs are incrementally fed
sequential data, and include cyclical feedback connections where intermediate output is
fed back as input at the next time step. This allows retaining a memory of previous
inputs which can then influence later outputs.
Figure 1.7: Long Short-Term Memory Unit.
One of the most popular RNN architectures is Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) (fig.
1.7), in which a unit is composed of a cell, an input gate, an output gate and a forget gate
[16]. The cell holds memory, while the three gates regulate the flow of information in and
out of the cell. As the LSTM is trained, it learns which information to hold on to, forget
and output depending on the input data. In short, the cell works as a form of attention
mechanism. While this allows keeping track of arbitrarily long-range dependencies in
sequences, it can still only allow access to information from earlier in the sequence. To
solve this, a backwards pass LSTM layer is added, which learns simultaneously with the
forwards pass layer. The outputs of both layers can then be concatenated to form a
Bi-directional Long Short-Term Memory (biLSTM) layer [16].
Page 14 of 64
==PAGE:22==
1.4.10
Transformer Language Models
Figure 1.8: Transformer Network Illustration Draft.
CNNs & RNNs such as biLSTM are good at extracting features from variable-length se-
quential data, but training these architectures to extract features from protein sequences
can be diﬀicult for some tasks such as the lesser studied O-GalNAc glycosylation com-
pared to other types of glycosylation, due to the low amount of high-quality data avail-
able. However, in the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) one particular type of
network architecture has shown very good results on a multitude of different language
processing tasks and is used in state-of-the-art models.
The transformer deep neural network (fig. 1.8) is based on an attention mechanism that
learns which parts of the sequence are related. This is similar to biLSTM, but instead
of using feedback connections, transformers use a decoder-encoder architecture which
has been shown to be more eﬀicient than RNNs [17]. Unlike RNNs which are run in an
iterative manner over the input sequences, transformers can run in a single forward pass
Page 15 of 64
==PAGE:23==
when predicting, which makes them faster and more well suited for parallel processing
on Graphical Processing Units (GPUs) or Tensor Processing Units (TPUs).
Transformers can be trained in an unsupervised manner on large databases of unlabelled
sequences to learn the underlying language, such as the protein language of amino acids.
Training is accomplished through sequence masking, and tasking the transformer to
predict the missing residues. In the encoder, the network learns to create internal em-
beddings for each residue in a sequence containing features necessary to reconstruct the
sequence. In the decoder, it learns to then recreate sequences from these embeddings.
The most important advantage of transformer LMs over other architectures, is that the
learned sequence embeddings are non-task-specific representations of sequence features,
and can therefore be used as a pre-processing step for downstream tasks. These pre-
trained networks are known as ’language models’ and have shown very good performance
for almost any NLP task. Using these embeddings avoids the need for predictors to learn
semantics of a language, and instead they can simply focus on extracting the correct
features from the embeddings. In addition, language models can also be fine-tuned for
specific tasks by training just their last few layers with task-specific data [17].
1.4.11
Multi-task learning for better generalization
It has been shown that deep neural networks generalize better if they are trained on
multiple related tasks at the same time, as the additional target information can help
them to learn a more generalized internal representation of the data [18].
1.4.12
Transfer Learning & ’Soft’ Labels
Multi-task learning can be extended to what is known as ’transfer learning’, where the
output of one network is used as target features for another network to boost perfor-
mance, robustness, and training speed of the network. This could be considered as a
kind of additional regularization for the network. In particular, a technique that has
gained in popularity is ’soft labels’, where for instance, single-label classification output
from the original network are not reduced to the single most probable class label, but
rather all the raw class probabilities are used for transfer learning. This helps the new
network to quickly learn correlations between the different classes [18].
Page 16 of 64
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2
Aims of the Project
If we consider protein sequence structure as a form of language similar to human natural
languages, then amino acids would be the words, and proteins would be the sentences
or paragraphs. To study and learn the protein language presents a huge challenge, since
despite having only about 20 amino acids as vocabulary, protein structure and function
is encoded in interactions much more complex than those between verbs, nouns and
adjectives in a natural language.
Fortunately, studies have found ways to apply the deep learning networks designed for
Natural Language Processing (NLP) to proteins, by utilizing Language Models (LMs)
trained on large unlabelled protein datasets to provide rich representations of protein
sequences.
The aim of this project is applying these LMs to the task of predicting
O-linked GalNAc glycosylation as a new version of the NetOGlyc service. NetOGlyc-
4.0 relies on NetSurfP-1.0 for protein structure predictions such as surface accessibility,
which uses sequence profiles derived from database alignments [19, 20]. The runtime
per sequence is therefore on the order of minutes, which means that it can take days to
predict O-GalNAc glycosylation for large datasets.
The goal of using LM is to reduce the reliance on these external dependencies by learning
and predicting surface accessibility and intrinsic disorder along with other trainable
parameters directly from sequences.
In this project, it is investigated whether this
method will lead to improvements in performance and runtime properties compared to
NetOGlyc-4.0.
Page 17 of 64
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Materials & Methods
This chapter summarizes the workflow of the project, including a data description, ex-
ploratory analysis and augmentation of the dataset, details regarding the library created
to find and correct erroneous glycosylation MS-peptide data, adaption of the NetSurfP
3.0 framework for machine-learning, as well as model training and evaluation.
3.1
Tools
3.1.1
Programming Languages, Libraries & Frameworks
All of the project code was written in Python 3, and Jupyter Notebooks were used
to code and describe the dataflow from raw data to performance comparisons. Conda
environments were used to install tools and keep track of different library versions. Ex-
ploration and analysis of the data was carried out mainly using the Pandas library, and
PyTorch was used as the machine-learning framework. To monitor and visualize model
performance during training, the Tensorboard toolkit was used, and for hyper-parameter
optimization the Optuna library was used [21–26].
3.1.2
Utilized Programs
The following programs were used during the project:
NetOGlyc-4.0.0.11
NetOGlyc predicts O-GalNAc (Mucin type) glycosylation sites in mammalian proteins
using a support vector machine-based architecture, and incorporates secondary structure
predictions from NetSurfP 1.0 which uses sequence profiles obtained by alignment to a
protein BLAST database. [19, 20, 27].
NetSurfP-3.0:
NetSurfP is a tool for predicting local structural features of proteins. In version 3.0,
NetSurfP uses sequence embeddings from the pretrained LM ESM-1b [28], which are
then processed using a deep neural network architecture composed of CNNs and biL-
STM layers. NetSurfP-3.0 predicts absolute and relative solvent accessibility, secondary
structure (Q3 and Q8), structural disorder, psi & phi dihedral angles, and interface
Page 18 of 64
==PAGE:26==
residues. In version 3.0, protein language models were incorporated to replace the mul-
tiple sequence alignment used in version 2.0 [29, 30]. The Python framework created to
train and evaluate neural networks for NetSurfP-3.0 was used as a foundation for the
code written in this project.
Graph-Part-1.0
Graph-Part is a pipeline for homology partitioning of biological sequences. It can use
thresholds based on different homology measures, as well as balance partitions based on
arbitrary labels [31].
CD-HIT-4.8.1
CD-HIT is a program for clustering and comparing protein or nucleotide sequences,
which aggregates proteins into clusters that meet a similarity threshold (usually sequence
identity). [32].
3.2
Datasets
In this section, the features, data selection and encoding of datasets used for training
and testing the models are described in detail.
3.2.1
O-GalNAc Dataset
The main dataset used in this project consists of O-GalNAc glycosylation site (gly-
cosite) information from MS peptide data.
This data was gathered by the Clausen
Research Group at Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, KU from 68 different human
protein datasets (see supplementary table S1 for details) [33]. It consists of 319492 indi-
vidual datapoints and 21 different features, where each datapoint describes the position
of a O-GalNAc glycosylation site. The proteins in the data was obtained from secreted
proteins, total cell lysis or tissue samples from a variety of different cell lines and tissues.
These were then enriched for glycoproteins with lectin chromotography and fragmented
using cleavage proteases into peptides for MS.
3.2.1.1
Features
A description of the relevant features in the O-GalNAc dataset:
• UniProt Accession IDs: The UniProt protein accession (AC) that the site was
mapped to by use of mapping software for MS peptide spectrums. These are stable
identifiers that can usually be used across different versions of UniProt, but with
a large dataset gathered from multiple sources, it is inevitable that some entries
will have sequence revisions, have been merging/de-merging with other entries or
deleted.
Page 19 of 64
==PAGE:27==
• Peptide IDs:
Unique IDs (UUIDs) to differentiate different peptides in the
dataset.
• Peptide sequences & start/end positions: 90% Of the sites in the dataset in-
cluded amino acid sequences for their originating peptide, derived from MS peptide
spectrums, including start/end positions of the peptides in the protein sequence.
• Glycosylation site positions: The position of the glycosylation site in the pro-
tein. For O-GalNAc the possible residues are Serine, Threonine and more rarely
Tyrosine.
• Ambiguous glycosylation site start/end positions: For some sites, the MS
spectrum information is insuﬀicient to identify the exact position of the glycosyla-
tion. For 36% of the sites in the dataset, the exact residue could not be identified
(ambiguous sites), while the remaining 64% had clearly defined site positions (def-
inite sites).
• Site Composition: 87% of the datapoints included the oligo-/poly-saccharide
composition of the site glycan, such as 1xHex3xHexNAc.
• Peptide Composition: All glycans seen on peptide.
• Peptide data source: Information on the originating peptide library:
– Peptide Origin: Secreted, Total Cell Lysis or Tissue
– Enrichment Lectin: From Vicia villosa or Arachis hypogaea
– Cleavage Protease: Trypsin, Chymotrypsin or Glu-C/V-8
• Site Ambiguity: If the glycosite was inferred indirectly from other information:
– Inferred by subtracting known site composition from peptide composition
when there is only one other possible glycosite.
– If multiple fragments could be glycosylated from the MS data, the site or
ambiguous range can be determined from the possible glycosites.
– Include lower quality data that doesn’t pass a filter on the MS data, by cross-
referencing spectrum peaks to get a bimodal distribution from which a more
loose cutoff can be obtained.
• Activation: The MS technique:
– CID - Collision Induced Dissociation (might not have fragmentation informa-
tion for peptides)
– HCD - Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (might not have fragmentation
information for peptides)
– ETD - Electron Transfer Dissociation
• Quantification info: Information regarding quantified measures of glycosylation
site.
• Origin Dataset: The data originates from 68 separate datasets.
Page 20 of 64
==PAGE:28==
3.2.2
MS Peptide Data Standardization Library
As a part of the explorative data analysis of the O-GalNAc dataset, a python library
was developed to do general data cleaning and analysis of MS peptide glycosylation data.
This library consists of several different modules, and is based on config files that can be
adapted to fit specific input data formats. The library is meant to be used interactively
in Jupyter Notebooks since the user may have custom requirements for their data, but
can also be run as scripts. The different modules are presented here:
3.2.2.1
Data Format Standardization
This module handles taking arbitrary data formats and bringing them to a common for-
mat. Different data formats can have different configurations, needs for standardization
and validation. Therefore, the user will likely have to write some custom standardization
functions to fit their data.
There are some essential fields that users need to extract glycosylation data. If the data
is in a different format, it should be converted in its specific standardization pipeline:
• uniprot: Valid UniProt accession string
• peptide_id: Unique UUID for Peptide (or Site if no peptide info) - must be a
valid UUID string
• peptide: Valid AA sequence string w. only 20 basic AA and X (or NA if no
peptide data is available)
• peptide_start: Absolute start position of peptide in protein sequence (or NA if
no peptide data is available, should be 1-indexed)
• peptide_end: Absolute end position of peptide in protein sequence (or NA if no
peptide data is available, should be 1-indexed and end-inclusive)
• single_site: Absolute position of single-site glycosite in protein sequence (or NA
if site is ambiguous or negative data, should be 1-indexed)
• unclear_site_start: Absolute start position of ambiguous glycosite in protein
AA sequence (or NA if site is single-site, should be 1-indexed)
• unclear_site_end: Absolute end position of ambiguous glycosite in protein AA
sequence (or NA if site is single-site, should be 1-indexed and end-inclusive)
3.2.2.2
UniProt Mapping & Reproducibility
The library includes functions for mapping of data to UniProt, with support for choosing
either the current or any specific UniProt releases. If using older versions of UniProt,
their archives are downloaded and relevant information such as entries, mappings and
isoforms are extracted. This makes the data reproducible easily at a later date.
Page 21 of 64
==PAGE:29==
The functions of the module include mapping UniProt accessions and peptide sequences
to newer versions of UniProt, where accessions may have been merged, de-merged or
deleted. There are also functions for mapping to the right isoforms if the canonical
sequences or isoform sequences have changed, and for recovering missing sequence or
position information.
When mapping peptide sequences, multiple isoforms may have matches for it. Therefore,
all peptides in the data are annotated with a list of the isoforms they may originate from.
All isoforms in the dataset are then sorted in order of how many times they are seen,
and for each peptide the most commonly seen isoform in the data is chosen. In case that
multiple isoforms are seen the same number of times in the data, the following order is
used to select the correct isoform:
1. The isoform specified in the original data
2. The canonical isoform
3. The isoform with the lowest number
3.2.2.3
Data Validation
This module is meant to be used interactively in Jupyter Notebooks, where the user
can run different data validation functions to validate and visualize erroneous data. It
contains functions for validating individual features, checking for consistency between
features, and cross-referencing with UniProt sequences. This allows the user to quickly
find and either fix or remove bad data.
3.2.2.4
Sequence Clustering
This module allows the user to cluster their peptide dataset using CD-HIT for checking
the redundancy of the dataset.
3.2.2.5
Peptide Data Annotation Format
To convert the cleaned data into training & testing data, a annotation format was used
to consolidate all the sites and peptides for each protein into a structured format. This
format consists of:
ProteinSet: Contains info on the amino acids allowed to be glycosylated and the
scoring function used to produce glycosylation labels.
Protein: Contains the protein AC, sequence, peptides, sites, and any custom protein
annotations. It keeps track of how many times each residue is seen in the data.
Page 22 of 64
==PAGE:30==
Peptide: Contains the peptide ID, sites found in the peptide and any custom peptide
annotations.
Site: Contains the glycosite or list of possible glycosites in case of an ambiguous site,
as well as any custom site annotations.
3.2.3
Exploratory Analysis of Dataset
For the analysis of the O-GalNAc dataset, the Peptide Data Standardization Library
(glyc_processing) was used to explore and clean the data. The raw dataset contained
319,491 rows of site information from 233,954 unique peptides mapped to 4,858 human
proteins from SwissProt [1].
First, UniProt accessions were mapped to release 2021_01 of UniProt, and the allowed
amino acid residues for O-GalNAc glycosylation were specified to be Serine (S), Threo-
nine (T) and Tyrosine (Y).
The dataset fields were standardized by stripping leading and trailing whitespace. Pep-
tide sequences were converted to uppercase letters with no whitespace. Site compositions
were standardized to always have counts (eg. from ’HexNac’ to ’1xHexNac’). Peptide
sources were standardized to have the format ’origin_lectin_proteases’. Rows with miss-
ing site positions had them recovered from the peptide sequence and position if possible.
Peptide sequences were mapped to UniProt protein sequences, and their correct positions
in the proteins were found. 436 peptides with no sequence matches were discarded. No
non-canonical isoform sites were identified in the data.
In the feature validation, 1,322 rows (0.41% of dataset) with invalid site positions and
amino acids, peptide sequences, or compositions were identified. By cross-referencing
the different data features, 24,851 rows (7.7% of dataset) were found to have inconsistent
combinations of ambiguous and definite site positions or a site position outside of the
peptide. By matching peptide and site info to protein sequences, 18,756 rows (5.8% of
dataset) with non-matching positions or amino acids.
In total, 31,234 invalid rows (9.78% of dataset) were identified and discarded to yield a
clean dataset containing 288,257 rows of site information from 210,026 unique peptides
mapped to 4,684 human proteins from SwissProt [1].
The redundancy of the dataset peptides was then checked using CD-HIT, and it was
found that only 2.9% of peptides had a sequence identity above 90%.
Page 23 of 64
==PAGE:31==
3.2.4
Augmenting with Non-glycosylated Peptide Data
As the O-GalNAc dataset only included glycosylated proteins, it was of importance to
balance out the proportions of glycosylated and non-glycosylated Serine, Threonine and
Tyrosine residues to avoid obtaining a bias in the predictors. For this reason, negative
data was datamined from the PRoteomics IDEntifications (PRIDE) archive database of
MS proteomics data [34].
Firstly, the following filtering was carried out on the protein level utilizing the UniProt
database:
• Must be part of the human reference proteome [UP000005640]
• Must pass through the secretory pathway, which was accomplished by only includ-
ing proteins annotated with the following Swiss-Prot subcellular locations (roughly
in order of the secretory pathway):
– Endoplasmic reticulum [SL-0095]
– COPI-coated vesicle [SL-0075]
– COPII-coated vesicle [SL-0077]
– Endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment [SL-0098]
– Golgi apparatus [SL-0132]
– Secretory vesicle [SL-0244]
– Clathrin-coated vesicle [SL-0070]
– Endosome [SL-0101]
– Cell membrane [SL-0039]
– Cell surface [SL-0310]
– Coated pit [SL-0072]
– Cell junction [SL-0038
– Secreted [SL-0243]
– Microvillus [SL-0293]
– Cell projection [SL-0280]
To filter out peptides that could be O-glycosylated, the UNIMOD database of PTMs
in MS proteome data was downloaded, and all O-linked glycosylation modification IDs
and their possible residues were extracted [35]. All human peptides from proteins that
passed the above were then downloaded from PRIDE, and the following filtering was
performed on each:
• Must be unique to the human proteome
• Must be present in at least 3 different projects
• Must have at least 100 Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs)
• Must have no O-glycosylation PTMs
• Must have at least one O-GalNAc glycosylatable residue (S/T/Y)
The peptides that passed the filtering were then included as non-glycosylated sites in
Page 24 of 64
==PAGE:32==
the dataset. Altogether, 12682 peptides from 1225 proteins passed the filtering and were
included as non-glycosylated sites in the dataset. Of these, 311 of the proteins were not
found in the glycosylated data.
3.2.5
Data Labeling & Encoding
To encode site information from the dataset for training using ANNs, an algorithm must
be chosen to label each possible glycosylation site (S/T/Y) in the data. Ideally, a scoring
algorithm should assign a score from 0 to 1 that reflects the probability or confidence in
the site being glycosylated. In the case of the data used to train NetOGlyc 4.0, a scoring
function was utilized where every residue seen glycosylated in the data was labeled 1,
and all other residues in the protein labeled 0. While this is a simple way to encode site
information, it also throws away a lot of information from the MS data that might be
useful when training and scoring the model.
For the O-GalNAc dataset, two different scoring functions detailed in algorithms 1 and
2 with differing tradeoffs were considered to consolidate the conflicting site information
found in overlapping peptides and sites. We cannot assume that a site not being seen
glycosylated in the data means that it should be assigned a label of 0, as the number of
non-glycosylated (S/T/Y) sites in the data are dependent on the depth of coverage of
the MS peptide data. Therefore, only sites that have been seen in the actual data were
assigned a score from 0 to 1, and all other sites were labeled with -1. For each definite
site, a score of 1 was assigned, and for ambiguous sites where we are not certain of the
exact site position, the score of 1 was instead uniformly distributed across the possible
positions.
The ’max score’ algorithm (1) is intended as a score of whether a residue can be glyco-
sylated or not. It takes the maximum score of all sites that contain the residue. For a
predictor trained on ’max score’ labels, sensitivity on test datasets originating from a
single tissue or state of cell development would be lower than for more diverse datasets.
Since the twenty human GalNAc-Ts have overlapping but separate specificities, and are
expressed to differing degrees in different tissues and stages of cell development, it is
expected that not all of the glycosylation site patterns seen in the O-GalNAc dataset
will be seen in datasets from a single source.
Page 25 of 64
==PAGE:33==
Algorithm 1: Protein max scoring algorithm
Input:
[A], the set of amino acids that can be glycosylated.
[ri] ∈A, i = 1, 2, · · · , N, where each element is an amino acid residue in the protein.
[ci] ∈R : 0 < ci, i = 1, 2, · · · , N, where each element is the count of times the
protein residue has been seen in the data.
[sj] = {k ∈R : 1 ≤k ≤N)}, j = 1, 2, · · · , S, where each element is a list of possible
residues for an ambiguous or definite site in the protein.
Output:
[yi] ∈(0, 1) ∪−1, i = 1, 2, · · · , N, where each element is a score from 0-1 for the
residue, or a label -1 to signify no score.
for i ←1 to N do
if [ai] /∈A ∨ci = 0 then
[yi] = −1;
else
yi ←0;
for j ←1 to S do
if i ∈sj then
yi ←max(yi,
1
|sj|);
end
end
The ’mean counts’ algorithm (2) is intended as a score of the frequency of glycosylation
for a residue. It incorporates inconsistencies in the data by calculating a mean over the
score of all sites and peptides. For each residue, the score for each site that contains
the residue is added together, then divided by the number of times the residue was seen
in both sites and peptides. Thereby, the score for a possible glycosite is lowered if it is
often seen non-glycosylated in the data (has site inconsistencies), or if we are uncertain
whether it is glycosylated or not (has site ambiguities). For a predictor trained on ’mean
counts’ labels, specificity on test datasets originating from a single tissue or state of cell
development would be lower than for more diverse datasets. Since the O-GalNac dataset
is very diverse in peptide sources, GalNAc-T specificities that don’t overlap are scored
as having a lower frequency than would be expected in a single tissue which has higher
expression of some GalNAc-Ts.
Page 26 of 64
==PAGE:34==
Algorithm 2: Protein mean counts scoring algorithm
Input:
[A], the set of amino acids that can be glycosylated.
[ri] ∈A, i = 1, 2, · · · , N, where each element is an amino acid residue in the protein.
[ci] ∈R : 0 < ci, i = 1, 2, · · · , N, where each element is the count of times the
protein residue has been seen in the data.
[sj] = {k ∈R : 1 ≤k ≤N)}, j = 1, 2, · · · , S, where each element is a list of possible
residues for an ambiguous or definite site in the protein.
Output:
[yi] ∈(0, 1) ∪−1, i = 1, 2, · · · , N, where each element is a score from 0-1 for the
residue, or a label -1 to signify no score.
for i ←1 to N do
if [ai] /∈A ∨ci = 0 then
[yi] = −1;
else
X ←0;
for j ←1 to S do
if i ∈sj then
X ←X +
1
|sj|;
end
yi ←X
ci ;
end
For this project, only the ’max score’ algorithm was used to train models, as the main
goal was a global predictor of O-GalNAc glycosylation. As such, users of the final pre-
dictor would likely prioritize knowledge of whether a certain residue can be glycosylated
or not, over how often it is seen glycosylated.
3.2.6
Homology partitioning
To obtain a good estimate of model performance, it’s necessary to partition the data
into training data that is fed to the model, and validation data which is used to prevent
over-fitting of the model to the training data. However, when validation data is used for
model selection, bias is introduced. To obtain a unbiased estimate of model performance,
it is necessary to further partition the dataset into a testing partition, that is only used
to compare model performance once all model selection is finished.
Usually, about 5-10% of data is reserved for validation and testing respectively depending
on the data and task, but simply picking random samples for each partition might
result in unbalanced estimates that don’t correspond to real performance. Instead, the
samples should be partitioned as to minimize the similarity in each partition. To obtain
such partitions from biological sequence datasets, the pipeline Graph-Part was utilized
Page 27 of 64
==PAGE:35==
[31]. Graph-Part ensures minimal homology between different partitions, while balancing
partitions for labels.
For the O-GalNAc data, candidates for the validation and training partitions were chosen
according the the following requirement:
• Glycosylated proteins must have at least one definite glycosylation site and one
non-glycosylated site.
• Non-glycosylated proteins must have at least two non-glycosylated sites.
These requirements were needed to estimate performance for each protein, as some
performance metrics require at least two datapoints.
A maximum sequence identity
threshold between partitions of 30% was specified, and 10% of the full dataset was
allocated for validation and training respectively.
3.2.7
Training Data Format
Training & Testing data was initially saved in Numpy binary format, but due to the
large size of the LM embeddings (e.g. 40GB), the Hierarchical Data Format 5 (HDF5)
binary data format was instead utilized to keep most of the data on disk instead of in
memory. The following standardized format was used for the H5DF files:
• identifiers: UniProt accessions (type: variable-length string, length: n_seqs)
• sequences: Protein sequences (type: variable-length string, length: n_seqs)
• labels (group):
– gly (glycosylation labels): (dimensions: [n_seqs, max_seq_length, 1])
– any additional labels (for NetSurfP: ss8, dis, rsa, phi, psi)
3.3
Language Model
For this project the chosen pre-trained protein language model was ’Evolutionary Scale
Modeling’ Model 1b (ESM-1b) from Meta Research [28]. This LM is based on the Bidi-
rectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) transformer architecture
[36], and contains approximately 650M parameters over 33 layers. It was trained on
high-diversity protein sequences from the non-redundant UniRef Database with maxi-
mum 50% sequence identities. For this project, embeddings were extracted from the
last layer of the LM.
ESM-1b takes as input a protein sequence consisting of the twenty standard amino acids
and X for unknown amino acids. It outputs an embedding consisting of 1280-length
vectors for each amino acid in the input sequence. The maximum length embedding
that ESM-1b can output is 1024 amino acids. Since start and end tokens are added to
Page 28 of 64
==PAGE:36==
input sequences before embedding, the maximum input sequence length is 1022 amino
acids. As such, when training models the dataset protein sequences had to be truncated
to this length.
All proteins in the O-GalNAc dataset were embedded and saved to a HDF5 file along
with the glycosylation labels.
3.4
Data Statistics
In this section, statistics for the dataset before and after truncation are shown, with
both counts and percentages of the dataset. When truncating the proteins, a significant
percentage of (mostly non-glycosylated) sites were lost:
• Proteins in dataset: 4995
• Proteins too long to be fully embedded (>1022 AA): 1266 (25.35%)
• Sites (glycosylated & non-glycosylated) in too long proteins: 34263 (47.38%)
• Sites (glycosylated & non-glycosylated) lost after truncation: 15352 (21.23%)
• Glycosylated sites lost after truncation: 1580 (0.55%)
• Glycosylated proteins with no remaining glycosylated sites after truncation: 260
(5.55%)
For the following statistics, the values to the left of the arrow are before truncation, and
to the right of the arrow are after truncation to 1022 AA:
• Proteins: 4995
– Non-glycosylated proteins: 311 →571 (6.23% →11.43%)
– Glycosylated proteins: 4684 →4424 (93.77% →88.57%)
∗With site compositions: 4191 →3936 (83.90% →78.80%)
∗With definite sites: 2910 →2679 (58.26% →53.63%)
· With site compositions: 2874 →2645 (57.54% →52.95%)
• Sites: 72322 →56970
– Non-glycosylated sites: 38953 →28915 (53.86% →50.75%)
∗In glycosylated proteins: 33594 →22458 (46.45% →39.42%)
∗In non-glycosylated proteins: 5359 →6457 (7.41% →11.33%)
– Glycosylated sites: 33369 →28055 (46.14% →49.25%)
∗With site composition: 24158 →20035 (33.40% →35.17%)
∗Definite sites: 6581 →5535 (9.10% →9.72%)
· With site compositions: 6537 →5494 (9.04% →9.64%)
The effect of truncating proteins to 1022 AA removing 21.23% of sites on the relative
distribution of sites over the length of the dataset proteins can be seen in figure 3.1.
Page 29 of 64
==PAGE:37==
Additional data statistic plots can be found in appendix B.
Figure 3.1: Effect of truncating proteins > 1022 AA on relative site position distribu-
tion. Blue: sites with absolute positions less than or equal to 1022 AA,
which are not effected by truncation. Orange: sites with absolute positions
more than 1022 AA, which are removed by truncation.
3.5
Adaption and Improvement of NetSurfP
3.0 ANN framework
The program NetSurfP-3.0 developed at DTU in 2021 [30] includes a PyTorch framework
for training, hyper-parameter optimization and prediction of neural networks using LM
embeddings. As this framework fit well with the goal of this project, it was adapted and
improved upon with a number of different changes.
3.5.1
Improved Embedding Concatenations for Long
Sequences
LMs such as those based on the BERT architecture are limited in their ability to embed
long sequences, as they have a maximum embedding size usually of 1024 or 2056 tokens
[36]. For protein sequences, these tokens are individual residues, and as such it can be
diﬀicult for the LM to train and predict on these longer sequences. While some LM
Page 30 of 64
==PAGE:38==
architectures such as XLNet [37] don’t have this limitation, they are still limited by the
need for large amounts of memory on the system they are trained and predicted from.
There are, however, ways to get around these limitations to some degree. One of the
simplest methods is to simply split too long sequences into smaller ones, which can then
be concatenated after embedding. The NetSurfP-3.0 framework utilized simple concate-
nations of embeddings by specifying a maximum embedding size and overlap between
splits. However, this method removes information found in the overlap between splits,
and might also result in a sudden change in the embeddings at the overlap boundary.
To solve these issues, an averaging of the overlapping embeddings using discrete sigmoid
was implemented, which allows a smooth transition between embedding splits without
losing information from either split.
3.6
Training Models
Models were trained on a NVIDIA RTX 2060 Super GPU with 8GB of VRAM, and data
was randomly shuffled into mini-batches of 16 proteins at each training epoch. Models
were trained for a maximum of 100 epochs using the AdamW optimization algorithm
with a weight decay regularization of 0.01, and model loss and performance metrics were
calculated and plotted in Tensorboard for each mini-batch. After each epoch, average
model loss and metrics were calculated for both the training and validation sets. Early
stopping was used to halt training after 3 epochs without improvement in validation
loss, and models were evaluated on the test set after finished training.
3.6.1
Splitting up Embedding and Training
In the NetSurfP-3.0 framework, the LM and predictor were coupled as a single module,
with each data batch being re-embedded at each epoch. While this is necessary when
fine-tuning the LM, this is not necessary when training just the predictor. Therefore,
changes were made to enable a two-step process where embeddings are first created
for the full dataset, which can then be used as normal data input for training just the
predictor. When the full model is needed, PyTorch allows loading the weights of the
partial model and thereby using the full model for prediction.
3.6.2
Hyper-parameter Optimization
Deep learning models typically contain multiple different hyper-parameters that can have
a large impact on model performance. To explore the full space of hyper-parameters, a
lot of time and computational resources are necessary, so in this project the focus was
on learning rate, which was optimized using the Optuna library. The learning rate was
Page 31 of 64
==PAGE:39==
optimized by suggesting a value between 1.0e-6 and 1.0e-1, and setting a limit of 10
trials with 2 epochs per trial. Optimal learning rate was found to be around 5.0e-05.
3.6.2.1
Class Weighting
When training ANNs, it’s sometimes necessary to ensure that the training data is not
too imbalanced, as this may cause problems when training the model. In the case of
multi-class or binary classification, the model may simply learn to guess the majority
class each time, and therefore get stuck. While correcting imbalance in the dataset is an
effective solution, this may not always be desired, especially for small datasets. Another
solution is applying class weights or a positive weight in the loss function, to ensure that
the loss is not affected too much by any single class.
The augmentation of the GalNAc dataset with PRIDE peptides improved the balance
of glycosylated and non-glycosylated site labels, but the homology partitioning pipeline
did not account for this when creating the training, validation and testing partitions.
When training the models class weighting was initially not applied, but it was observed
that models converged towards very low TPR and high TNR. As the models were clearly
underpredicting glycosylation, a positive class weight of less than one was applied to the
glycosylation loss. From testing, it was found that a weight of 0.01 resulted in more
balanced TPR and TNR.
3.6.3
Seeding for Reproducibility
Many parts of the model training are influenced by randomness, including the initial
model weights and the randomly sampled mini-batches. To prevent randomness from
influencing the results of hyper-parameter optimization and to ease model comparison,
the same random seed (1234) was used for all model training.
3.7
Evaluating models
All models were evaluated on the test partition consisting of 238 glycosylated and 29
non-glycosylated proteins. Unlike the training partition which was truncated to 1022AA,
the test partition proteins were not truncated and instead used the embedding concate-
nations described in section 3.5.1. The test partition contained 5911 sites, of which 4634
were definite.
3.7.1
Performance metrics
When measuring the performance of predictors, a large number of different metrics are
commonly used, depending on the type of prediction.
For this project, the metrics
Page 32 of 64
==PAGE:40==
used were: Accuracy, TPR & TNR, MCC and ROC-AUC. A threshold of 0.5 was
used for the test partition glycosylation labels to discriminate between glycosylated and
non-glycosylated sites.
3.7.2
Augmentation of Models with NetSurfP-3.0
Predictions
To improve model performance and decrease training time, transfer learning of NetSurfP-
3.0 predictions of relative solvent accessibility, secondary structure (Q8), structural dis-
order, psi & phi dihedral angles was applied to the models. Instead of just a single FFN
predicting glycosylation as the last layer of each model, a separate FFN was included
for each of the NetSurfP-3.0 predicted structural features.
NetSurfp-3.0 was used to predict structural features for all protein sequences in the
O-GalNAc dataset, which were then added as labels to the embeddings along with gly-
cosylation labels. Instead of saving the top class label for secondary structure prediction,
the raw class probabilities were instead used as ’soft labels’ to allow models to faster
learn correlations between different secondary structures.
Including these predictions as separate output tasks should function as a form of regular-
ization for earlier layers of the network to better generalize, as structural protein features
such as solvent accessibility and disorder are strongly correlated with glycosylation.
3.7.2.1
Multi-task Loss Weighting
When training a deep learning model on multiple tasks, the loss functions of the separate
tasks need to be combined into a single loss for the model. If all the loss functions are of
the same type, such as averaged Cross-Entropy (CE), it may be suitable to simply take
the sum or mean of the task losses. However, if multiple types of losses with different
ranges as used, then other methods may be necessary to prevent one task loss from
dominating.
A simple method is weighing each loss by a fixed number. The issues that might result
from this is that the weights only work for specific ranges of task losses since they won’t
decrease at the same rate. A more complex method is described in (L. Liebel, M. Körner
2018) [38], where the uncertainty of each task loss is used to automatically derive loss
weights. These weights are learnable parameters which are added to the optimizer.
This method was implemented and compared to manually set loss weights.
Testing
showed that Automatic weight loss didn’t increase model performance compared to
manually setting weights for each loss component, so manual loss weighting was used for
training the models. Initially, each NetSurfP-3.0 transfer learning task was weighted as
Page 33 of 64
==PAGE:41==
1, while definite glycosylation sites were weighted as 2000, and ambiguous glycosylation
sites as 100. This extreme difference in weights was necessary since each residue in the
training set proteins had NetSurfP protein structure labels, but only those glycosylatable
(S/T/Y) sites seen in the MS-peptide data had glycosylation labels.
Therefore the
weights had to reflect this imbalance in sample points, since the glycosylation output is
much more important for the models to learn.
The difference in weights of definite sites compared to ambiguous sites was needed if
ambiguous sites were to be included in the training, since simply having the same weight
as definite sites would result in models learning to incorporate uncertainty in their pre-
dictions. Since the goal of the training was a global O-GalNAc predictor that predicts
whether residues can be O-GalNAc glycosylated or not, this effect had to be minimized
by weighing definite sites much higher than ambiguous sites. In testing, it was found
that including ambiguous sites in training led to worse model performance, and therefore
ambiguous site data was only used for model evaluation.
3.8
Models
3.8.1
NetOGlyc-4.0
NetOGlyc-4.0.0.11 was used to predict O-GalNAc glycosylation for all proteins in the O-
GalNAc dataset with the exception of Titin (UniProt AC: Q8WZ42) which was too long
(34350 residues). The program ran on a cloud instance with 8 vCPUs, and was slightly
modified to utilize 8 threads instead of the default 5 for faster sequence alignment.
3.8.2
ESM-1b based Models
The following predictor architecture after ESM-1b sequence embedding were trained and
evaluated on the O-GalNAc dataset partitions:
Page 34 of 64
==PAGE:42==
3.8.2.1
Linear (ESM1b-Linear)
Figure 3.2: ESM1b-Linear Model.
To obtain an estimate of the baseline performance when predicting directly from the
ESM-1b embeddings, a simple model with a single FFN linear layer was used.
All
subsequent models were created by adding additional network layers between the ESM-
1b embedding layer and FFN output layers:
1. ESM-1b Embedding
2. Glycosylation FFN layer (1 output feature per residue, Sigmoid output activation)
Page 35 of 64
==PAGE:43==
3.8.2.2
Convolutional + bi-directional LSTM (ESM1b-CNN-biLSTM)
Figure 3.3: ESM1b-CNN-biLSTM Model.
For this model, a combination of CNN layers and a biLSTM layer was used.
CNN
layers are well-suited for learning local glycosylation patterns, while the biLSTM layer
is well-suited for learning dependent glycosylation patterns and long-range correlations
between parts of the protein sequence that are far apart in the sequence but close-by in
the folded protein structure:
1. Two 1D CNN layers with following parameters:
• Kernel Size: 129, Padding: 64, Channels: 32, Dropout: 0.5, Activation: ReLU
• Kernel Size: 257, Padding: 128, Channels: 32, Dropout: 0.5, Activation:
ReLU
2. Batch normalization layer
3. Two-layer biLSTM with Hidden State Size: 1024, Dropout: 0.5
4. Separate FFN layers for each task (N: Output features per residue, O: Output
activation function):
• O-GalNAc Glycosylation - (N: 1, O: Sigmoid)
• Secondary Structure (Q8) - (N: 8, O: SoftMax)
• Structural Disorder - (N: 1, O: Sigmoid)
Page 36 of 64
==PAGE:44==
• Relative Solvent Accessibility - (N: 1, O: Sigmoid)
• Side-chain Phi Dihedral Angle - (N: 1, O: Tanh)
• Side-chain Psi Dihedral Angle - (N: 1, O: Tanh)
3.8.2.3
Convolutional + Transformer (ESM1b-CNN-Trans)
Figure 3.4: ESM1b-CNN-Trans Model.
As transformer networks such as ESM-1b are very effective at extracting protein sequence
information, a model was created combining CNN layers similarly to model ESM1b-CNN-
biLSTM with a transformer encoder layer. The self-attention mechanism of transformers
might improve model performance over biLSTMs when learning multiple glycosylation
patterns, as they are not as limited by sequence length:
1. Two 1D CNN layers with following parameters:
• Kernel Size: 129, Padding: 64, Channels: 32, Dropout: 0.5, Activation: ReLU
• Kernel Size: 257, Padding: 128, Channels: 32, Dropout: 0.5, Activation:
ReLU
2. Batch normalization layer
3. Transformer encoder layer with following parameters:
Page 37 of 64
==PAGE:45==
• Layers: 32
• Attention heads: 21
• Dropout: 0.5
4. Separate FFN layers for each task (N: Output features per residue, O: Output
activation function):
• O-GalNAc Glycosylation - (N: 1, O: Sigmoid)
• Secondary Structure (Q8) - (N: 8, O: SoftMax)
• Structural Disorder - (N: 1, O: Sigmoid)
• Relative Solvent Accessibility - (N: 1, O: Sigmoid)
• Side-chain Phi Dihedral Angle - (N: 1, O: Tanh)
• Side-chain Psi Dihedral Angle - (N: 1, O: Tanh)
Page 38 of 64
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4
Results
In this section, evaluation results for the trained models are presented. All models were
evaluated on the same O-GalNAc test partition with ’max score’ (see algorithm 1 in
section 3.2.5) glycosylation labels.
4.1
Baseline Performance of Majority
Predictor
To more easily compare the performance of each model, a baseline which always predicts
the majority class (non-glycosylated sites) was run on the O-GalNAc test partition to
obtain the following metrics:
• Accuracy: 73.2%
• Accuracy for definite sites: 72.2%
• MCC: 0.0
• ROC-AUC: 0.5
• TPR: 0.00%
• TNR: 100.00%
As the majority of sites are non-glycosylated, the accuracy of the baseline is fairly high.
However, as can be seen by the TPR & TNR, accuracy alone is not a good metric for
model performance on imbalanced datasets such as the O-GalNAc dataset. Models can
simply learn to always guess the majority class and still get high accuracy. Instead,
one should use metrics such as MCC and ROC-AUC which give better performance
estimates for imbalanced datasets.
4.2
Model Performance Evaluation
The evaluation metrics for each tested model was calculated separately for definite sites
(see table 4.1) and ambiguous sites (see table 4.2). NetOGlyc-4.0 was trained solely
on binary glycosite labels, compared to the O-GalNAc dataset labels which uses the
’max score’ algorithm for continuous labels between 0 and 1. While the ESM-1b models
Page 39 of 64
==PAGE:47==
were trained using these continuous labels, they were evaluated on both all sites in
the test partition, as well as solely on the definite sites. This should be kept in mind
when comparing performance on all sites to NetOGlyc-4.0 which only saw definite sites in
training, and therefore has significantly lower performance when evaluated on ambiguous
sites.
ACC
MCC
ROC-AUC
TPR
TNR
NetOGlyc-4.0
61.5
0.236
0.674
67.0
59.4
ESM1b-Linear
51.9
0.105
0.572
64.5
47.1
ESM1b-CNN-biLSTM
44.6
0.207
0.813
92.6
26.2
ESM1b-CNN-Trans
73.2
0.412
0.794
70.3
74.3
Table 4.1: Evaluation metrics for comparing model performance on definite sites. All
models were evaluated on the same test partition, and metrics were calcu-
lated solely for definite sites. The classification threshold for all metrics was
set as 0.5.
ACC
MCC
ROC-AUC
TPR
TNR
NetOGlyc-4.0
48.6
-0.00
0.466
52.2
47.5
ESM1b-Linear
47.0
0.032
0.535
60.9
42.8
ESM1b-CNN-biLSTM
31.2
0.036
0.600
89.2
13.7
ESM1b-CNN-Trans
54.0
0.081
0.563
56.2
53.4
Table 4.2: Evaluation metrics for comparing model performance on ambiguous sites.
All models were evaluated on the same test partition, and metrics were
calculated solely for ambiguous sites. The classification threshold for all
metrics was set as 0.5.
Page 40 of 64
==PAGE:48==
4.3
Model Runtime Evaluation
To benchmark the runtime of the final models compared to NetOGlyc-4.0, predictions
were run on all protein sequences from the O-GalNAc dataset excluding Titin (UniProt
AC: Q8WZ42) which was too long (34350 residues) for NetOGlyc-4.0 to predict. The
size of the protein sequences fasta file was 4.4MB, and all ANN models were run with a
batch size of 1:
• NetOGlyc-4.0: 0.5 MB/h
• ESM1b-Linear: 9.42 MB/h
• ESM1b-CNN-biLSTM: 6.13 MB/h
• ESM1b-CNN-Trans: 9.1 MB/h
Page 41 of 64
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
5.1
Low MCC scores on O-GalNAc Dataset
When evaluating the final models and NetOGlyc-4.0 the MCC on definite sites ranged
from 0.236 to 0.412 (see table 4.1), which in general are fairly low values for predictors.
In the NetOGlyc-4.0 paper, the predictor showed a MCC of around 0.6-0.7 on test
datasets, compared to 0.236 on the O-GalNAc test dataset [19]. This suggests that the
new dataset shows significantly different glycosylation patterns. While the NetOGlyc-
4.0 O-GalNAc dataset contained 476 glycoproteins from 11 different cell lines, the new
O-GalNAc dataset contains 4684 glycoproteins from 21 cell lines. Only 3 (UniProt ACs:
O15027, Q86XX4, A4D997) of the glycoproteins in the old dataset were not found in
the new dataset, as seen in figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Overlap of glycoproteins found in NetOGlyc-5.0 (A) and NetOGlyc-4.0 (B)
O-GalNAc datasets.
While the difference in MCC might simply be due to the new dataset having a much
Page 42 of 64
==PAGE:50==
higher coverage of the glycoproteome, it’s also possible that the new dataset simply
contains a higher diversity of glycosylation patterns which is much harder for models
to learn due to complex interactions between GalNAc-Ts. It could be worthwhile to
investigate the differences between the two datasets and their comprising cell lines, to
gain a better understanding of how O-GalNAc glycosylation differs in them.
5.2
Model Performance on Ambiguous Sites
When comparing model performance on ambiguous sites (see table 4.2), the MCC of
all the models including NetOGlyc-4.0 were around 0, meaning they were randomly
guessing.
As the ’max score’ algorithm used to assign glycosylation labels split the
scores of ambiguous sites uniformly among the possible residues, it is however expected
that models would only be able to guess randomly for these sites without reliable labels.
5.3
Including Inconsistent & Ambiguous
Glycosylation Sites
For this project, about one-third of the sites in the O-GalNAc dataset were ambiguous.
That is, the exact glycosite in the peptide was unable to be determined from the MS
peptide spectrum. As these sites made up a significant part of the dataset, they were
incorporated when preparing the dataset for training. When labeling the dataset with
scores from 0 to 1 for each O-GalNAc glycosylatable residue, two different algorithm
were considered (see algorithms 1 & 2 in section 3.2.5) that respectively maximizes and
averages over all peptides or sites that contain that residue. To account for ambiguous
sites, a score of 1 divided by the number of possible glycosites was used to uniformly
distribute the score over all possible sites. In this way, the uncertainty of unambiguous
sites was encoded, but this also lowers the score for the true glycosite residue while
increasing the score for the incorrect residues. It is possible that this noise in the data
might cause issues when training the models, as it could cause the models to learn
to be more uncertain about true glycosites. If the protein coverage of the dataset is
high enough, then one method of solving this issue is utilizing overlapping peptides to
discriminate the correct glycosite for an ambiguous site. A confidence threshold would
then be used to select which glycosites to include and discard. If the dataset is large
enough, an iterative approach could also be used where the predictor is only trained
on definite sites. Then, scores are predicted for each ambiguous sites, and the highest
scoring residue is labeled as a definite site. The predictor is then trained from scratch
on the modified full dataset. While this method avoids discarding ambiguous sites, it is
a kind of bootstrapping which might induce significant bias in the predictor.
Another issue when scoring glycosites is inconsistent glycosylation.
The O-GalNAc
Page 43 of 64
==PAGE:51==
dataset is a combination of 68 different datasets originating from 21 different cell lines
and 20 different tissues (see supplementary table S1). If the repertoire and expression
of GalNAc-Ts differs according to not only the tissue but also during cell development,
then inconsistent glycosylation of residues in the dataset is expected to some degree.
As the data consist of a mixture of peptides from secreted proteins, total cell lysis and
tissue samples, this might also cause inconsistencies in the extent of glycosylation. While
secreted glycoproteins have passed through the entire secretory pathway, glycoproteins
from total cell lysis might only be partially glycosylated. As GalNAc-Ts have overlapping
specificities, the effects of this inconsistency on the dataset may not be significant, but
including the peptide origin, tissue or other variables could be beneficial when training
predictors.
Another possible way to account for ambiguous and inconsistent glycosites is chang-
ing the scoring algorithm to incorporate uncertainty. For instance, the score would be
weighted to favor sites without ambiguity, or would use the lower or upper bound of a
confidence interval based on how many times a residue is observed in the data. As the
dataset also contained quantification data for some sites, augmenting with this informa-
tion or even the MS peptide spectrums might improve performance. Alternatively, a
mid-point between the mean and maximum scores would be use of a bayesian average
with the maximum residue score as a prior.
5.4
Test Data
One of the biggest issues with training predictors for O-GalNAc glycosylation is the lack
of independent testing datasets. For protein structure prediction, high quality indepen-
dent datasets such as Critical Assessment of protein Structure Prediction (CASP) [39]
exist which makes it easy to test prediction performance, but no such dataset could be
found for O-GalNAc glycosylation. UniProt does have annotations for O-linked glycosy-
lation, but as can be seen from figure 5.2, the number of O-glycosylated proteins in the
human reference proteome is very small compared to the number of glycosylated pro-
teins actually seen in the O-GalNAc dataset. While the dataset used to train NetOGlyc
4.0 is available, it can’t be utilized for evaluation since it was used to train NetOGlyc
4.0, and would therefore be a biased estimator of performance. For this project, it was
therefore necessary to use the same dataset for training and evaluation, but ideally the
models should be evaluated on a completely independent dataset.
Page 44 of 64
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.2: Overlap (C) of O-GalNAc glycosylated proteins in dataset (B) and UniProt
human reference proteome proteins with O-linked glycosylation annota-
tions (A).
5.5
Language Model Selection
To date, multiple efforts have been made to apply transformer LM archtectures from
NLP to protein sequences. A comparison of the different available protein LMs was
made to select a model for this project.
The ProtTrans project from Rost Lab has produced several pre-trained LMs using differ-
ent transformer architectures [40]. The model showing the best performance is ’ProtT5-
XL-BFD’ which is based on the T5 LM architecture [41]. ProtT5-XL-BFD was trained
on BFD, a merger of UniProt and multiple metagenomic sequencing projects. While
this model has shown great performance, it is also very big, with 3 billion parameters.
This complicates training due to the large amounts of computational resources required.
Another model from ProtTrans is ’ProtBert-BFD’, which is based on the BERT archi-
tecture and only has 420 million parameters. It has shown fairly good performance, and
is easier to train than the T5 model [40].
The Evolutionary Scale Modeling (ESM) project from Meta Research has likewise pro-
duced several pre-trained LMs [28]. The ESM-1b model is very similar to ProtTrans
models, in that it is based on the BERT architecture, was trained on UniRef50 and has
650 million parameters. The ESM-MSA-1b model is a Multiple Sequence Alignment
(MSA) Transformer model, which relies on alignment of input sequences to a database
of protein families. The MSA of input matches is used to augment the input sequence
Page 45 of 64
==PAGE:53==
for better performance.
AlphaFold 2 is a protein structure prediction pipeline created by DeepMind [42]. It is
based on a pre-trained protein transformer architecture like the other described models,
but instead of a single model it consists of multiple sub-networks coupled together. As
with ESM-MSA-1b, AlphaFold 2 relies on a protein database and sequence alignments to
improve performance, but details are hard to find due to being produced by a commercial
entity. As AlphaFold 2 is specialized for protein structure prediction rather than general
protein prediction tasks, it might not be as suitable for use in this project.
As one of the goals in this project was to eliminate dependency on external programs and
databases, the models using MSA were not utilized as they require storage and upkeep
of an external database. As such, the models that were compared are the following:
ProtT5-XL-BFD, ProtBert-BFD & ESM-1b.
Task:
Unsupervised contact prediction
SSP
Test set:
Large valid
CASP13-FM
CAMEO
CB513
ESM-1b
41.1
17.0
30.9
71.6 ± 0.1
Prot-T5-XL-BFD
35.6
16.5
25.9
71.4 ± 0.3
ProtBert-BFD
34.1
13.5
23.9
70
Table 5.1: Comparison of protein prediction task performance for LMs on separate
datasets. Higher scores are better. SSP is Q8 Secondary Structure predic-
tion. Adapted from https://github.com/facebookresearch/esm.
Looking at performance between the three considered models ProtT5-XL-BFD, ProtBert-
BFD & ESM-1b (see table 5.1), As ESM-1b shows the best performance of the three, it
was chosen for this project.
5.6
Embedding Length Limits
For this project, the ESM-1b Language Model (LM) was used, which has shown good
performance on tasks such as secondary structure prediction [28]. However, an issue with
this LM is that it is limited to an input sequence length of 1022 residues. It was therefore
necessary to implement a method to get around this limitation by splitting proteins
into overlapping sequences, which were embedded separately and then concatenated by
averaging over the overlaps. However, this method has two major issues. Firstly, long-
range information across protein splits is lost which might cause issues in the embedding
if the LM was only trained on full proteins. Secondly, embedding the middle of a protein
might likewise result in an incorrect embedding if the LM was only trained on protein
Page 46 of 64
==PAGE:54==
sequences starting from the N-terminal residue. Due to these limitations, 25% of the
proteins in the training dataset had to be truncated to 1022 residues, which removed
21.23% of sites. This poses an issue for training on large proteins such as mucins, which
are up to 14,000 residues long in human.
To solve this sequence length limitation while still taking full advantage of LMs, either
the LM needs to be retrained with a higher sequence length limitation, or another type
of LM should be used. This could be architectures such as XLNet, which doesn’t have
length limitations. These types of architectures were however not used in this project
due to their high computational costs.
5.7
Re-training NetSurfP-3.0
When predicting structural protein features using NetSurfP-3.0, I noticed that the last
residue in the ESM-1b embeddings used in NetSurfP was getting truncated. This prob-
lem was fixed by re-writing the problematic code and re-training NetSurfP-3.0 on the
original data, ensuring that similar performance metrics to the original version were
achieved.
5.8
Model Selection
For the model selection, hyper-parameter optimization was used to identify an optimal
range of learning rates for training models. Multiple other parameters such as network
architecture, loss weights and choice of optimizer can also be included in the hyper-
parameter optimization, but was not included in this project due to high computation
time. The training time was cut down drastically by separating LM embedding from
subsequent network layers when training since the sequences did not need to be re-
embedded at each epoch, but this measure also prevents fine-tuning of the LM.
For the multi-task loss, automatic loss weighting was implemented. When examining
the learned weights they seemed to drift towards one for all tasks the longer models
were trained. This might be due to the AdamW optimizer working against the weights,
and a possible solution would be to use a separate optimizer instead of coupling the loss
weights to the model weights.
Page 47 of 64
==PAGE:55==
5.9
Ideas for further studies
5.9.1
Further Hyper-parameter optimization
For complex deep learning models such as the ESM1b-CNN-Trans model, there are a
multitude of different parameters to tune. Both the network architecture itself such as
the number of CNN layers or transformer blocks, as well as weights for the loss functions
and optimizer parameters can all be tuned further to obtain better performance. As a
starting point, one could try to optimize the multi-task loss weights and classification
weights for each model.
5.9.2
Fine-tuning the language model
In this project, the LM was not fine-tuned, mainly due to time and computational
constraints, but also as separating the dataset embedding and training significantly
decreased training time for the models. However, the training framework supports LM
fine-tuning, and the following hyper-parameter suggestions might prove a good starting
point for future studies:
• Optimizer: AdaMax.
• Scheduling: Slanted triangular learning rate to prevent catastrophic forgetting.
• Complete freezing or gradual unfreezing of earlier layers.
• Dropout of protein embeddings before predictor head.
Another avenue for further study of the LM is the effect of utilizing embeddings from
different layers of the transformer. In this project only the last layer embeddings were
used as these likely contain the best set of sequence features for general downstream
tasks, but it might be beneficial to use earlier layer embeddings if these contain specific
sequence features that are more appropriate for a specific downstream prediction task.
5.9.3
GalNAc-T repertoire-specific predictor
While this project focused on developing a general predictor for O-GalNAc glycosylation
encompassing all 20 human GalNAc-Ts, the next step would be a predictor that takes
the GalNAc-T repertoire and/or expression levels into account. A challenge for this
approach is the highly overlapping substrate specificities and expression patterns of
GalNAc-Ts. One approach is training an ensemble of models for each GalNAc-T, and
then post-processing or combining the outputs.
An issue with this approach is the
dependent glycosylation driven by the lectin domain in GalNAc-Ts, which glycosylates
based on existing glycans. With separate models, each GalNAc-T model won’t be able
to predict glycosylation based on other models in the ensemble. Another issue with
this approach is data preparation. Clausen Research Group from Copenhagen Center
Page 48 of 64
==PAGE:56==
for Glycomics at KU provided GalNAc-T-specific datasets for this project consisting of
single GalNAc-T gene knockout data. For this type of data it might be hard to separate
out the overlapping specificities of different transferases, unless the data contains multi-
gene knockouts of all GalNAc-T genes except the one of interest for each model. Due to
these issues, a single integrated model would likely yield better performance.
If the goal is to predict the GalNAc-T repertoire from a glycosylated protein, a pos-
sible predictor architecture for future studies is the Linear-chain Conditional Random
Fields (CRFs), which are probabilistic graph models similar to the well-known Hidden
Markov Models (HMMs). Linear-chain CRFs can encode known relationships between
observations and construct consistent interpretations. This prediction architecture was
successfully used for prediction of signal peptides in SignalP-6.0 [43], and might work
well for O-GalNAc classification when considering dependent glycosylation, as they can
learn sequence context.
5.9.4
Integration with other tools
An existing service for GalNAc-T-specific glycosylation prediction is ’Isoform Specific
O-Glycosylation Prediction’ (ISOGlyP) [44]. This service uses position-specific enhance-
ment values generated based on GalNAc-T isoform-specific amino acid preferences, and
is therefore able to predict glycosylation for custom GalNAc-T repertoires. For in-vivo
data ISOGlyP has shown a prediction accuracy similar to that of NetOGlyc-4.0 [44].
For a GalNAc-T repertoire-specific predictor, it might be useful in a future study to
incorporate data or methods from IsoGlyP into repertoire-specific models to improve
performance.
Page 49 of 64
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this project, it was investigated whether the use of protein Language Models can
replace Multiple Sequence Alignments for prediction of human O-GalNac glycosylation.
A MS-peptide dataset of O-GalNAc glycosylated peptides and glycosites was provided for
training and testing, which was investigated in a exploratory analysis. A python library
(’glyc_processing’) was written for standardization, validation, Uniprot ID mapping,
clustering & consolidation of peptide glycosylation data. This library was used to clean
the dataset, which was then augmented with non-glycosylated peptides from the PRIDE
proteomics database. The data was labeled using a scoring algorithm to consolidate
inconsistent and ambiguous glycosites, and was then homology partitioned to obtain
training, validation and testing datasets. A PyTorch framework for training, evaluation
and hyper-optimization of deep neural network for protein prediction tasks was written
based on code used in NetSurfP-3.0. All dataset protein sequences were embedded using
the pre-trained protein LM ESM-1b to obtain 1280 features for each protein residue.
Multiple different models using these embedding were trained and evaluated: ESM1b-
Linear which predicts directly from the embeddings, ESM1b-CNN-biLSTM which uses
CNN and biLSTM layers, and ESM1b-CNN-Trans which uses CNN and a transformer.
As can be seen from the definite site evaluation table 4.1, the ESM1b-Linear model
performed worse than NetOGlyc-4.0, with all performance metrics being worse. This
suggests that predicting directly from the embeddings without any other network layers
or transfer learning is not comparable in performance to using MSAs as in NetOGlyc-4.0.
To incorporate information from neighboring and distant residues, CNN and biLSTM
layers were added in ESM1b-CNN-biLSTM. In this model, the ROC-AUC was improved
by 21% and TPR by 38% compared to NetOGlyc-4.0, but the TNR also decreased
by 56%, leading to worse MCC and accuracy. In the ESM1b-CNN-Trans model, the
biLSTM layers were instead replaced with a transformer encoder.
This significantly
improved all performance metrics compared to NetOGlyc-4.0, with a 5% higher TPR
and 25% higher TNR resulting in a 19% increase in accuracy, 74% increase in MCC and
18% increase in ROC-AUC.
The well-performing ESM1b-CNN-Trans model was able to achieve better performance
than NetOGlyc-4.0 without relying on external tools for sequence alignment and surface
accessibility prediction, while increasing prediction throughput by 17 times from 0.5
MB/h to 9.1 MB/h.
The model can however still be improved with measures such
as optimization of model architecture and hyper-parameters, as well as potentially fine-
Page 50 of 64
==PAGE:58==
tuning of the language model for better task-specific embeddings. In addition, the models
and considerations discussed in this project can serve as a foundation for developing a
GalNAc-T repertoire-specific predictor for O-GalNAc glycosylation.
Page 51 of 64
==PAGE:59==
References
1.
Bateman, A. et al. UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase in 2021. Nucleic
Acids Research 49, D480–D489. issn: 0305-1048. https://academic.oup.com/
nar/article/49/D1/D480/6006196 (January 2021).
2.
Schjoldager, K. T., Narimatsu, Y., Joshi, H. J. & Clausen, H. Global view of
human protein glycosylation pathways and functions. Nature Reviews Molecular
Cell Biology 2020 21:12 21, 729–749. issn: 1471-0080. https://www- nature-
com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/articles/s41580-020-00294-x (October 2020).
3.
Jayaprakash, N. G. & Surolia, A. Role of glycosylation in nucleating protein folding
and stability. Biochemical Journal 474, 2333–2347. issn: 0264-6021. https://doi.
org/10.1042/BCJ20170111 (July 2017).
4.
Fritz, T. A., Raman, J. & Tabak, L. A. Dynamic Association between the Catalytic
and Lectin Domains of Human UDP-GalNAc:Polypeptide a-N-Acetylgalactosaminyl
transferase-2. Journal of Biological Chemistry 281, 8613–8619. issn: 00219258
(March 2006).
5.
Brockhausen, I., Dowler, T. & Paulsen, H. Site directed processing: Role of amino
acid sequences and glycosylation of acceptor glycopeptides in the assembly of ex-
tended mucin type O-glycan core 2. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - General
Subjects 1790, 1244–1257. issn: 0304-4165 (October 2009).
6.
Tarp, M. A. & Clausen, H. Mucin-type O-glycosylation and its potential use in
drug and vaccine development. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - General
Subjects 1780, 546–563. issn: 0304-4165 (March 2008).
7.
Wandall, H. H., Nielsen, M. A., King-Smith, S., de Haan, N. & Bagdonaite, I. Global
functions of O-glycosylation: promises and challenges in O-glycobiology. The FEBS
Journal 288, 7183–7212. issn: 1742-4658. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/full/10.1111/febs.16148 (December 2021).
8.
Lira-Navarrete, E. et al. Dynamic interplay between catalytic and lectin domains
of GalNAc-transferases modulates protein O-glycosylation. Nature Communica-
tions 2015 6:1 6, 1–12. issn: 2041-1723. https://www.nature.com/articles/
ncomms7937 (May 2015).
9.
Moncada, D. M., Kammanadiminti, S. J. & Chadee, K. Mucin and Toll-like recep-
tors in host defense against intestinal parasites. Trends in parasitology 19, 305–311.
issn: 1471-4922. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12855381/ (July 2003).
Page 52 of 64
==PAGE:60==
10.
Bennett, E. P. et al. Control of mucin-type O-glycosylation: A classification of the
polypeptide GalNAc-transferase gene family. Glycobiology 22, 736–756. issn: 0959-
6658. https://academic.oup.com/glycob/article/22/6/736/1988044 (June
2012).
11.
Schjoldager, K. T. et al. Deconstruction of O-glycosylation—GalNAc-T isoforms
direct distinct subsets of the O-glycoproteome. EMBO reports 16, 1713–1722. issn:
1469-3178. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.15252/embr.
201540796 (December 2015).
12.
Carmicheal, J. et al. Presence and structure-activity relationship of intrinsically
disordered regions across mucins. The FASEB Journal 34, 1939–1957. issn: 1530-
6860. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1096/fj.201901898RR
(February 2020).
13.
Nishikawa, I. et al. Computational Prediction of O-linked Glycosylation Sites That
Preferentially Map on Intrinsically Disordered Regions of Extracellular Proteins.
International Journal of Molecular Sciences 11, 4991. issn: 14220067. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3100847/ (December 2010).
14.
Kingma, D. P. & Ba, J. L. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. 3rd
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 - Conference
Track Proceedings. https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980v9 (December 2014).
15.
Loshchilov, I. & Hutter, F. Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization. 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019. https://arxiv.org/
abs/1711.05101v3 (November 2017).
16.
Hochreiter, S. & Schmidhuber, J. Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation
9, 1735–1780. issn: 0899-7667 (November 1997).
17.
Vaswani, A. et al. Attention Is All You Need. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 2017-December, 5999–6009. issn: 10495258. https://arxiv.
org/abs/1706.03762v5 (June 2017).
18.
Rao, R. et al. Evaluating Protein Transfer Learning with TAPE. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 32. issn: 10495258. https://arxiv.org/abs/
1906.08230v1 (June 2019).
19.
Steentoft, C. et al. Precision mapping of the human O-GalNAc glycoproteome
through SimpleCell technology. The EMBO Journal 32, 1478–1488. issn: 1460-
2075. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1038/emboj.2013.79
(May 2013).
20.
Petersen, B., Petersen, T. N., Andersen, P., Nielsen, M. & Lundegaard, C. A generic
method for assignment of reliability scores applied to solvent accessibility predic-
tions. BMC structural biology 9. issn: 1472-6807. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/19646261/%20https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19646261/?dopt=
Abstract (2009).
Page 53 of 64
==PAGE:61==
21.
Kluyver, T. et al. Jupyter Notebooks - a publishing format for reproducible computa-
tional workflows in Positioning and Power in Academic Publishing: Players, Agents
and Agendas (eds Loizides, F. & Scmidt, B.) (IOS Press, Netherlands, 2016), 87–90.
https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/403913/.
22.
Anaconda Software Distribution 2020. https://docs.anaconda.com/.
23.
Pandas development team, T. pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas February 2020. https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3509134.
24.
Paszke, A. et al. in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 8024–
8035 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2019). http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/9015-
pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.
pdf.
25.
Abadi, M. et al. Tensorflow: A system for large-scale machine learning in 12th
{USENIX} Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation ({OSDI}
16) (2016), 265–283.
26.
Akiba, T., Sano, S., Yanase, T., Ohta, T. & Koyama, M. Optuna: A Next-generation
Hyperparameter Optimization Framework. Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD In-
ternational Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2623–2631 (July
2019).
27.
Altschul, S. F., Gish, W., Miller, W., Myers, E. W. & Lipman, D. J. Basic local
alignment search tool. Journal of Molecular Biology 215, 403–410. issn: 0022-2836
(October 1990).
28.
Rives, A. et al. Biological structure and function emerge from scaling unsupervised
learning to 250 million protein sequences. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 118. issn: 10916490. https://www.pnas.
org/content/118/15/e2016239118%20https://www.pnas.org/content/118/
15/e2016239118.abstract (April 2021).
29.
Klausen, M. S. et al. NetSurfP-2.0: Improved prediction of protein structural fea-
tures by integrated deep learning. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformat-
ics 87, 520–527. issn: 1097-0134. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
full/10.1002/prot.25674 (June 2019).
30.
Høie, M. H. et al. NetSurfP-3.0: fast and reliable prediction of protein local features
using Language Models (unpublished)
31.
Gíslason, M. H., Nielsen, H., Almagro Armenteros, J. J. & Johansen, A. R. Predic-
tion of GPI-anchored proteins with pointer neural networks. Current Research in
Biotechnology 3, 6–13. issn: 2590-2628 (January 2021).
32.
Fu, L., Niu, B., Zhu, Z., Wu, S. & Li, W. CD-HIT: accelerated for clustering the
next-generation sequencing data. Bioinformatics 28, 3150–3152. issn: 1367-4803.
https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/28/23/3150/192160
(December 2012).
Page 54 of 64
==PAGE:62==
33.
Joshi, H. J. et al. GlycoDomainViewer: a bioinformatics tool for contextual ex-
ploration of glycoproteomes. Glycobiology 28, 131–136. issn: 1460-2423. https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29267884/ (March 2018).
34.
Perez-Riverol, Y. et al. The PRIDE database and related tools and resources in
2019: improving support for quantification data. Nucleic Acids Research 47, D442–
D450. issn: 0305-1048. https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/47/D1/D442/
5160986 (January 2019).
35.
Creasy, D. M. & Cottrell, J. S. Unimod: Protein modifications for mass spectrom-
etry. PROTEOMICS 4, 1534–1536. issn: 1615-9861. https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/pmic.200300744 (June 2004).
36.
Devlin, J., Chang, M. W., Lee, K. & Toutanova, K. BERT: Pre-training of Deep
Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. NAACL HLT 2019 - 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies - Proceedings of the Conference 1, 4171–
4186. https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805v2 (October 2018).
37.
Yang, Z. et al. XLNet: Generalized Autoregressive Pretraining for Language Under-
standing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32. issn: 10495258.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08237v2 (June 2019).
38.
Liebel, L. & Körner, M. Auxiliary Tasks in Multi-task Learning. https://arxiv.
org/abs/1805.06334v2 (May 2018).
39.
Kryshtafovych, A., Schwede, T., Topf, M., Fidelis, K. & Moult, J. Critical assess-
ment of methods of protein structure prediction (CASP)—Round XIII. Proteins:
Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics 87, 1011–1020. issn: 1097-0134. https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/prot.25823 (December 2019).
40.
Elnaggar, A. et al. ProtTrans: Towards Cracking the Language of Lifes Code
Through Self-Supervised Deep Learning and High Performance Computing. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. issn: 19393539. https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9477085 (2021).
41.
Raffel, C. et al. Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-
Text Transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research 21, 1–67. issn: 15337928.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683v3 (October 2019).
42.
Jumper, J. et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold.
Nature 2021 596:7873 596, 583–589. issn: 1476-4687. https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41586-021-03819-2 (July 2021).
43.
Teufel, F. et al. SignalP 6.0 predicts all five types of signal peptides using protein
language models. Nature Biotechnology 2022, 1–3. issn: 1546-1696. https://www.
nature.com/articles/s41587-021-01156-3 (January 2022).
44.
Mohl, J. E., Gerken, T. A. & Leung, M. Y. ISOGlyP: de novo prediction of isoform-
specific mucin-type O-glycosylation. Glycobiology 31, 168–172. issn: 14602423. https:
//academic- oup- com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/glycob/article/31/3/168/
5871847 (April 2021).
Page 55 of 64
==PAGE:63==
List of Figures
1.1
Protein glycosylation in Golgi apparatus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
GalNAc-T2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Feed-Forward Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Activation functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Stochastic Gradient Descent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.6
Convolutional Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.7
Long Short-Term Memory Unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.8
Transformer Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1
Effect of truncating proteins > 1022 AA on relative site position distribution
30
3.2
ESM1b-Linear Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
ESM1b-CNN-biLSTM Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.4
ESM1b-CNN-Trans Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1
Overlap of glycoproteins found in NetOGlyc-5.0 and NetOGlyc-4.0 O-GalNAc
datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Overlap of Dataset O-GalNAc & UniProt O-linked proteins
. . . . . . . . .
45
B.1 Effect of removing proteins > 1022 AA on protein length distribution . . . .
61
B.2 Effect of removing proteins > 1022 AA on unique sites distribution by protein
length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.3 Effect of removing proteins > 1022 AA on relative site position distribution .
62
B.4 Overlap of UniProt O-linked & Secretory pathway proteins . . . . . . . . . .
63
B.5 Overlap of Dataset O-GalNAc & UniProt secretory pathway proteins . . . .
63
List of Tables
4.1
Evaluation metrics for comparing model performance on definite sites . . . .
40
4.2
Evaluation metrics for comparing model performance on ambiguous sites . .
40
5.1
LM Performance Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
Page 56 of 64
==PAGE:64==
Abbreviations
ACC Accuracy
Adam Adaptive Moment Estimation
AdamW Adaptive Moment Estimation w. Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization
ANN Artificial Neural Network
ASA Absolute Surface Accesibility
BERT Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
biLSTM Bi-directional Long Short-Term Memory
CASP Critical Assessment of protein Structure Prediction
CE Cross-Entropy
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
CRF Conditional Random Field
DNA DeoxyriboNucleic Acid
DTU Technical University of Denmark
ER Endoplasmic Reticulum
ESM Evolutionary Scale Modeling
FFN Feed-Forward Network
GPI Glycosylphosphatidylinositol
GPU Graphical Processing Unit
HDF5 Hierarchical Data Format 5
HMM Hidden Markov Model
IDP Intrinsically Disordered Protein
IDR Intrinsically Disordered Region
Page 57 of 64
==PAGE:65==
KU University of Copenhagen
LM Language Model
LSTM Long Short-Term Memory
MAE Mean Absolute Error
MCC Matthews Correlation Coeﬀicient
MS Mass-Spectrometry
MSA Multiple Sequence Alignment
NLP Natural Language Processing
PCC Pearsons Correlation Coeﬀicient
PRIDE PRoteomics IDEntifications
PSM Peptide Spectrum Match
PTM Post-Translational Modification
ReLU Rectified Linear Unit
RNN Recurrent Neural Network
ROC Receiver Operating Characteristic
ROC-AUC Receiver Operating Characteristic - Area Under Curve
RSA Relative Surface Accesibility
SGD Stochastic Gradient Descent
Tanh hyperbolic tangent function
TNR True Negative Rate
TPR True Positive Rate
TPU Tensor Processing Unit
Page 58 of 64
==PAGE:66==
APPENDIX A
Project Code
The following Python code was written or modified for the project:
• nog5 - PyTorch-based framework for model training/prediction which was adapted
from NetSurfP-3.0.
• glyc_processing - Pandas-based MS-peptide data cleaning and exploration li-
brary.
• notebooks - The data processing pipeline is self-documented as Jupyter Note-
books, with numbering to show the order in which they were run.
All of the code can be found in the following github repository:
https://github.com/Carbyne/NOG5Thesis/
A short description of the structure of the repository can be found here:
NOG5Thesis/
netoglyc5/ - model training/prediction library based on NetSurfP-3.0
nog5/nog5/
logging.yml - logging configuration
cli.py - command line interface
main.py - main script to start train/test
base/ - abstract base classes
dataloaders/ - anything about data loading goes here
datasets/ - anything about dataset formats goes here
embeddings/ - folder containing the ESM1b model
models/ - models
Page 59 of 64
==PAGE:67==
output/
loss/ - loss functions
metrics/ - performance metric functions
misc/ - masking etc.
saving/ - prediction output savers
predict/ - predictors
train/ - trainers
eval/ - evaluators
utils/ - utilities for logging and tensorboard visualization
data/ - directory for storing input data
study/ - directory for storing optuna studies
models/ - directory for storing pre-trained models
saved/ - directory for checkpoints, logs and evaluation results
notebooks/ - directory of notebooks used for data pipeline
glyc_processing - MS-peptide glycosylation data cleaning library
Page 60 of 64
==PAGE:68==
APPENDIX B
Dataset Statistic Plots
Figure B.1: Effect of removing proteins > 1022 AA on protein length distribution. The
vertical line is set at 1022 AA.
Page 61 of 64
==PAGE:69==
Figure B.2: Effect of removing proteins > 1022 AA on unique sites distribution by
protein length. The vertical line is set at 1022 AA.
Figure B.3: Effect of removing proteins > 1022 AA on relative site position distribu-
tion.
Page 62 of 64
==PAGE:70==
Figure B.4: Overlap (C) of UniProt human reference proteome proteins with O-linked
glycosylation annotations (B) & secretory pathway subcellular localization
annotations (A).
Figure B.5: Overlap (C) of O-GalNAc glycosylated proteins in dataset (B) and
UniProt reference genome proteins with secretory pathway subcellular lo-
calization annotations (A).
Page 63 of 64
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX C
List of Supplementary
Materials
S1: Table of O-GalNAc dataset metadata.
S2: Final models w. config files and Tensorboard training data.
Page 64 of 64
